SPECIAL AND CHOSEN SERMONS OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, COLLECTED OVT OF HIS writings
and preachings for the necessary instruction and edification of such, as hunger
and seek after the perfect knowledge and inestimable glory which is in Christ
Jesus, to the comfort and salvation of their souls.

Englished by VV. G.

Philip. 3.8.9. I think all things but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have counted all things loss,
and do judge them but vile, that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not
having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through
the faith of Christ, even the righteousness which is of God through faith.

printer's or publisher's device of Thomas Vautroullier ANCHORA SPEI

Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautroullier dwelling in the Black Friars by
Ludgate. CVM PRIVILEGIO. 1578.

A CATALOGVE OR Rehearsal of the Sermons contained in this book.
1 A Sermon of the nativity of Christ. page 1. 2 A Sermon of the Epiphanie or
Appearing of Christ. 19. 3 A Sermon of the Genealogy or Pedegre of Christ. 35.
4 A Sermon of the Hymn of Zacharias commonly called Benedictus. 45. 5 A Sermon
of the Meditation of Christ's passion. 67. 6 A Sermon of the fruit and virtue
of Christ his resurrection. 74. 7 A Sermon of the good shepeheard. 79. 8 A
Sermon of the lost sheep. 92. 9 A Sermon of the woman of Canaan. 122. 10 A
Sermon of salvation freely by grace without the works and merits of men. 129.
11 A Sermon of the kingdom of God. 153. 12 A Sermon of Prayer. 161. 13 A Sermon
concerning the bidding of Guests to the great supper. 164. 14 A Sermon of the
works of charity. 170. 15 A Sermon of the sum of Christian life. 182. 16 A
Sermon of the question of the Pharisees and answer of Christ concerning giving
tribute to Caesar. 213. 17 A Sermon of salvation by Christ alone. 225. 18 A
Sermon of good works the fruits of faith. 234. 19 A Sermon of joy in God, and
a patient mind toward men. 254. 20 A Sermon of them that be under the law, and
them that be under grace. 274. 21 A Sermon of faith and diffidence in danger
and trouble. 316. 22 A Sermon of the life of a Christian. 324. 23 A Sermon of
tentation. 336. 24 A Sermon of the leading of a godly life. 351. 25 A Sermon of
Gods providence and care for his children. 463. 26 A Sermon of trust in God in
penury and distress. 371. 27 A Sermon against the contempt of Gods word. 379.
28 A Sermon of the Law and the Gospel. 391. 29 A Sermon of the exercise and
increasing of faith. 406. 30 A Sermon of remission of sins to the contrite
and broken in heart, and terrible judgment to the indurate and obstinate. 418.
31 A Sermon of trust and hope in Christ, that by him we shall obtain all good
things. 431. 32 A Sermon of the works which Christ has wrought for us,
wherein is contained a most sweet consolation against the Law, Sin, Death and
Satan. 446. 33 A Sermon upon the Gospel on S. Matthias day. 456. 34 A Sermon
upon the Gospel on the feast of S. Philip and James. 469.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR THOMAS HENNEAGE KNIGHT, TREASVRER OF HER
Majesty's privy chamber, VV. GACE wishes peace and salvation in Christ.
COnsydering (right Worshipful) that saying of David alleged by the Apostle
Paul, that there is none that understands, none that seeks after God, that
all are gone out of the way and become unprofitable: me thinks it does lively
set forth the blindness of man's understanding, the wickedness of his will,
and his perverseness and vnhabilitie unto that which is good. Whereof if we
had not many testimonies of Scripture, yet common experience were able to
confirm the same, when we daily see men so careful to live, and so
careless to live well. Howbeit this is no meruell: for as a tree whose
root is rotten and infected with venomous sap, brings forth none but
corrupt and naughty fruit: so from man's heart which is corrupt and infected
with the venim of sin, can proceed nothing that is good.

Now man's understanding being blind, he is not able of him self to attain
to the knowledge of God, and consequently without some other means or help
can not be saved: for this, as our Savior in the Gospel says, is life
everlasting, to know one only true God, and him whom he has sent Jesus
Christ. Again, man's will being corrupt, he is not able to serve God as his
duty requires, as to honor him as his Lord, to obey him as his father, to
trust in him as his Protector and preserver, to be thankful to him for his
infinite benefits, etc. Wherefore lest man being ignorant of God should be
excluded from salvation, or lest through the wickedness of his will and
inclination to evil, he should dishonor so high a Lord, disobey so good a
father, distrust so careful a preserver, and be unthankful to so gracious a
giver, who does not see how requisite and needful it is, that he should by
good instructions be brought to the knowledge of the Lord God, and by godly
exhortations and admonitions be reclaimed from his wicked vvayes to the
performance of his duty? Now forasmuch as God has in his word revealed so
much of him self as is expedient for man to know, and has therein also
prescribed that manner of serving him whereof be accepts, man must out of it
learn the true knowledge and right service of God, and therefore most
necessary it is that this word be preached and taught, that thereby man may
learn to know God, and truly to worship and serve him being known. So
shall his mind be enlightened with divine knowledge, and his will reformed
according to Gods vvil, so shall this word be a lantern unto his feet, and a
light unto his paths, whereby he may be directed in all his vvayes. But (alas)
this is a thing to be lamented, that the harvest is great, but the laborers
are fevv. For among them which supply the places of laborers in the Lords
harvest, some there be who do with diligence discharge their duty, many more
there are, who albeit they be able, yet do either quite neglect it, or very
scle^derly execute it, but greatest is the number of them, who for lack of
skill and knowledge are not able at all to perform it. Wherefore there is
great need to pray the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth laborers
into his harvest, whereby many more then do may receive the Gospel of Christ
Jesus even to the salvation of their souls.

The premises well vveyed, I think (right Worshipful) there may a
sufficient reason be gathered, why I did purpose the publishing of these
Sermons of D. Martin Luther in our vulgar tongue, and why at the last I have
by some labor and pains brought the said purposed publishing to pass. I was
in deed at the first procured thereunto by a learned Father of this land,
whose words and judgment I make no small account of, but afterward entering
into deeper consideration of the matter, and vveying on the one side the great
ignorance of many even in matters of salvation, together with the daily
dishonouring of God by ungodly life: and on the other side the divine doctrine
and most vvholsom exhortations which these Sermons contain, I was more
forcibly stirred up thereunto, and thought that the painful perusing of them,
and fruitful follovving of that whereof they entreat, would be a sovereign
salve to help to cure such dangerous diseases. For by them may they learn to
know one only true God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ, and the infinite
riches which are comprised in him, and offered unto us through him of God his
Father: that he humbled him self to exalt us, that he became a servant to set
us at liberty, that he was empouerished to make us rich, that he dyed for our
sins, and rose again for our justification, that through his means mercy
has svvallovved up misery, and bounty has overcome all evil, finally that
without him there is no joy nor consolation, no peace nor quietness, no
felicity nor salvation, but that he is the only means by which all good
things are attained: so that they which enjoy him receive not one gift alone,
as with Solomon wisdoms, with Samson strength, with Job patience, with
Paul zeal, etc: but for poverty they receive riches, for weakness strength,
for folly wisdoms, for servitude freedom, for grief joy, for sin
righteousness, for death life, yea all good things whatsoever.

Wherefore if the faithful man be pressed with poverty, he may here learn
that by Christ he is adopted to be the Son of God, and so may be comforted,
saying to him self: How can he be poor which has God to his Father? who
both is able to give all things necessary, for his is the earth and all that
therein is, and also will give the same, because he is most loving and
gracious to his children. Again, if he feel in him self weakness, he may
learn here that he is not able of him self to attain unto strength, but that
it is the gift of Christ, who strengthens such as believe in him, and so may
be stirred up by hearty prayer to ask the same of him, that he will vouchsafe
by his holy spirit to strengthen and confirm him, that he may be able to
perform that by grace, which by nature and of him self he shall never be
able to do: as mightily to subdue the rebellious flesh, strongly to resist,
and at the last valiauntly to overcome the tentations of Satan, patiently to
bear the troubles of the world, and constantly to contemn the allurements of
the same. Moreover, if he thirst after divine and heavenly wisdoms, (which is
to know God aright, and those things that are necessary to be known to the
attaining of salvation) he may find here largely and lively set forth, that
Christ came his Fathers Ambassador and Messenger to men, that by him they
might be brought to the right knowledge of God, and into all truth, so that by
him we are enlightened with the knowledge of God, by him we are instructed
in all truth, and consequently by him we obtain divine and heavenly wisdoms.
Here also shall he learn that Christ was made under the law, that he might
redeem them which were in bondage under the law, and of servile bondmen
make them free sons, even the children of God.

Furthermore, if grief and heaviness come upon him, he is here taught where
true joy may be had, even in Christ Jesus alone, that in him only he may find
sure comfort, sovereign medicines, present remedy, true joy of heart and
quietness of conscience. Finally, whereas we are synnefull, and have by our
sins justly deserved Gods eternal wrath and most heavy vengeance, he shall
here learn that Christ has paid the ransom for our sins, and pacified
Gods most grievous wrath and displeasure justly conceived against us. And
because it is not sufficient that due satisfaction be made for sins, and Gods
wrath appeased, but we must also appear righteous before God, it is here
shevved, that as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of one, namely of Jesus Christ, as many as believe in him shall be made
righteous, inasmuch as his righteousness is imputed to them as their own,
whereby they appear perfectly righteous before God, and are accepted of him:
so that whereas they had of themselves deserved eternal death, they are
through Christ accounted vvorthie of everlasting life. But what do I go
about to rehearse the infinite treasures which the faithful enjoy through
Christ? it shall be sufficient to conclude with the Apostle Paul, and say: If
God spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all to death, how shall he
not with him give us all things also?

Now forasmuch as these things, and the right means to attain unto them,
are in these Sermons of that most learned Divine Martin Luther most learnedly,
yea even divinely set forth, they may undoubtedly be a singular mean, not only
to instruct them which be ignorant in matters of salvation, but also to
increase and confirm the knowledge of such, as have already well profited in
Christian religion. Howbeit there is annexed hereunto sound and absolute
doctrine concerning good works and godly conversation, as being most
necessary to be of all Christians perfectly known, and effectually follovved.
For Christians through Christ being become the Sons of God, how unmeet, yea
how abominable a thing is it that they should resemble Satan in their
doings? being now made the members of Christ, how detestable a thing is it
that they should be instruments of iniquity? being now the temple of the holy
Ghost, how beastly a thing were it to defyle the same with the filthiness of
sin? Finally having received so many and so great benefits of God through
Christ, how wicked and shameful a thing should it be, to be unthankful to
so gracious a God, to be disobedient to so loving a Father, in any wise to
displease so merciful a Savior? But it shall be needelesse much to stand upon
this point, seeing it is not unknown to the faithful with how great
endeavor they ought to avoid that which is evil, and embrace that which is
good, and therefore shall sincere and perfect doctrine concerning good works
be unto them no less commodious and profitable, then needful and necessary.

For the causes above specified especially among other, I have (right
Worshipful) though not finely, yet faithfully translated these Sermons into
our vulgar tongue, and have done mine endeavor for the publishing of the same,
which I do humbly dedicate to your Worships protection, by your zealous
godliness and godly zeal chiefly moved thereunto, whereby I am induced to
think that you will well accept of them. For as the godly do with David
delight in the Arc of the Covenant, in the Tabernacle of the Lord, in the holy
Mount Sion, that is, in the Church of God: so do they with the same David
desire the building of this house of God, the flourishing of this vine, the
peace and prosperity of this heavenly Jerusalem, and therefore that which is
a mean and furtherance hereunto they do not only love and like, but also
hiely esteem, and heartily pray for. Wherefore (right Worshipful) I think
it altogether superfluous to go about with words to procure your well
liking and accepting of these Sermons, forasmuch as they tend only to this
end, that the Church of God may by them be edified, as in the premises is of
me declared. Whereas in translating them I have used a plain kind of style
(yet such as sufficiently expresses the meaning of the author) and not studied
for curious words and eloque^t phrases, the cause thereof is, for that I
prefer plainness with profit, before much curiosity with smaller
commodity, so that I nothing at all fear that in this respect they shall be
misliked of the godly, whose misliking only I endeavor to avoid.

Thus (as it seems unto me) having entreated sufficiently of those things
which I thought pertinent to my present purpose, I do here conclude, desyring
the Lord God, that he will by his holy Spirit alvvayes govern and direct you
in the true obedience of his blessed word, to the glory of his divine Name,
to the profit of your neighbors, and comfort of your conscience, so shall you
assuredly have prosperous success in all your affairs, and at the last
obtain everlasting joys and endless felicity, by the only means of Christ
Jesus our Savior.

Your Worships humbly at commandment W. GACE.

AN ADMONITION TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
FOR the commendation of this work, and the Author thereof, there shall not
need I trust at this present any great discourse to be made, forasmuch as so
many good books of the same writer be already set abroad, whereby may
sufficiently be coniectured what is to be thought of this also. Again because
the work it self is such, containing such matter of heavenly consolation,
that without any further commendation of other, it yeldeth cause sufficient to
commend it self. Only this then remains, to entreat and exhort the reader,
but to peruse and read the same, who in so doing shall find I doubt not,
neither to lack great cause in us to set forth these Sermons, nor less
necessity in the readers to bestow pains in perusing and reading them, for
the dignity of the matter, and singular fruit therein to be found. For what
more worthy matter can be, the^ to set forth Christ in his right glory, in
his full riches and royal estate to the hearts and souls of men, especially
such as are heavy laden and distressed in spirit? what more comfortable
hearing, or doctrine more true, then of forgiveness and remission of sins, so
graciously purchased, so freely offered by our Savior, so clearly preached by
his ministers? or what riches more excellent, then faith fixed in Christ, and
hope stablished in the promises of life? or what study more fruitful, then to
seek the kingdom of God? For where the fruit of all other studies decays
and has his end, the fruit of this study abides for ever. And therefore not
without cause we be so willed by our Savior him self, first to seek for this
kingdom and righteousness thereof, promising withal in an other place, that he
which seeks shall find. In the seeking of which kingdom two special notes we
have to learn and search, first the glory and grace of the King, secondly the
wealth and felicity of the subjects. In which two parts as the whole sum of
all our spiritual comfort most principally consists, grounded in the holy
Scriptures: so of all expositors of the same Scriptures, I know none or few,
in these our days, more lively to open these comforts unto us out of Gods
word, then this Doctor and Preacher of these Sermons here following: which as
he has done most effectually first in his own tongue to his contry people,
then in Latin to the learned: so this translator has no less plainly and
faithfully englished the same for the commodity and use of our contryfolke of
England. By whose means and industry this vantage we have now gained, that we
have gotten unto us one good preacher in England more then we had before, to
the comfort and edification of all such as be disposed to read and learn. So
that in such towns and villages, wherein before were mute ministers, (...),
this Preacher now may supply the lack, and there be received as their person,
if they please, preaching now in their own speech unto them, and putting them
to no charges of any tithes. And in other places where more plenty of learned
teachers is, yet notwithstanding no hurt shall come to admit this stranger as a
coadiutor, or fellow helper unto them. Whereby I nothing dout, but in so doing,
all such as shall be willing to give ear to this Preacher, as well they that be
learned, shall find wherein to grow in more perfection, as also the unlearned
wherein to be instructed sufficiently to their souls health in Christ Jesus. In
whom I wish to thee and to all true Christian readers all spiritual grace and
heavenly wisdom, to bless thy studies, to prosper thy labors, to stablish
thy faith, to multiply thy consolations, to direct thy ways, and finally to
glorify thee both body and soul in his blessed kingdom for ever. Amen.

I. FOX.

T. V.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, OF THE NATIVITIE OF CHRIST.
Luke 2. Verse. 1. ANd it came to pass in those days, that there came a
decree from Augustus Caesar, that all the world should be taxed.

2. (This first taxing was made, when Cyrenius was governor of Syria.)

3. Therefore went all to be taxed every man to his own city.

4. And Joseph also went up from Galile out of a city called Nazareth, into
Judea, unto the city of David, which is called Bethlehem (because he was of
the house and lineage of David,)

5. To be taxed with Marie, that was given him to wife, which was with child.

6. And so it was, that while they were there, the days were accomplished that
she should be delivered,

7. And she brought forth her first begotten son, and wrapped him in swaddling
clothes, and laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the
Inn.

8. And there were in the same country shepeheards, abiding in the field, and
watching their flock by night.

9. And lo, the Angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord
shone about them, and they were sore afraid.

10. Then the Angel said unto them, Be not afraid: for behold, I bring you
glad tydinges of great joy, that shall be to all people.

11. That is, that unto you is borne this day in the city of David, a Savior,
which is Christ the Lord.

12. And this shall be a sign to you: ye shall find the babe swadled and laid
in a maunger.

13. And straight way there was with the Angella multitude of heavenly
soldiers praising God, and saying:

14. Glory be to God on high, and peace in earth, and toward men goodwill.


The sum of this text.
1 WHereas the Evangelist here describes the time and place of the nativity
of Christ, first herein is required faith of us, to wit, that we believe this
to be the same Christ, of whom these things be recorded. Moreover the house and
stock of David is here notified and showed forth, whereof our Messiah should
rise.

2 The shepeheardes which are here mentioned, are the first fruits of those
Jews, which come unto Christ, as the Wisemen from the East are the first
fruits of the Gentiles, and the innocent infants of all them, which must bear
the cross for Christ's sake.

3 Whereas the Angel of the Lord appears to the shepeheards in great glory,
it signifies, that the Gospel comes unto men with the glory of God. First
in deed it makes us afraid, for it condemns our darkness and whatsoever is
in us, until we hear the comfort, which is here declared unto the shepeheards
in these comfortable words: Be not afraid, behold, I bring you tidinges of
great joy, which shall be to all people, because unto you is borne this day a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord.

4 Moreover, whereas one Angel first preaches unto the shepeheards, that
notes to us the Prince of all preachers Christ him self. Secondly, whereas
many Angels are gathered together, it signifies the multitude of preachers,
who all say with one mouth: Glory be to God, and peace unto men.

5 The fruit and profit wherefore Christ took flesh upon him, is here
expressed to be Evangelical peace and good will to men, whereof the hymn of
the Angels makes mention: Glory be to God on high, and in earth peace, good
will toward men.

The exposition of the text.
YE have often times heard this history before, and must hear it still both
this year, and every year, though to sluggish and drousie Christians, that
are soon weary and cloyed with good things, the same peradventure may seem
tedious. But to them that are endued with true faith, it always comes again
as new. For the holy Ghost can speak so diversely of one thing, that to them
which be his, it always seems new. Moreover we might speak at large of
this history, for it is very full of matter, if we should not want time, and
if it were not perilous least we should somewhere straye from the purpose:
Nevertheless we will entreat somewhat thereof, as God shall permit. Ye have
already heard in the text, how the Angel him self expresses all this
history, giving us to understand, that the same is published for our cause: and
that the fruit thereof does redounde and appertain to us only, and is wrought
to our salvation. And therefore the Angel speaking to the shepeheards, says
in these words: Be not afraid, behold, I bring you tidings of great joy
which shall be unto all people, that is, that unto you is borne this day in the
city of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Christ came not for his
own cause, but to work our salvation
Here is declared first, that his nativity does pertain unto us, when he
says: unto you is borne a Savior. For the Lord Christ came not for his own
cause only, but that he might help and succor us. Wherefore let us most
diligently endeavor, that we believe the Angel, and we shall enjoy the whole
benefit. I have heretofore oftentimes said, that the Gospel preaches nothing
else but faith, that the Angel also here does, and this must all preachers
do, otherwise they be not true ministers. For the Angel was here a beginning
and example to all preachers. Now we must in this place speak of a double
nativity, namely of our own and of Christ's. But before I begin to entreat
hereof, I will handle the historye briefly, that ye may lay it up in your heart,
and may be partakers of the joy which the Angel here brings. First therefore
the Evangelist says:

And it came to pass in those days, that there came a decree from Augustus
Caesar, that all the world should be taxed. This first taxing was made when
Cyrenius was governor of Syria. Therefore went all to be taxed every man to
his own city.

The time of ye coming of the Messiah foretold by the Patriarch Jacob. Genesis
49.10.
Ye know right well, that the Jews had a promise made of the Patriarch Jacob,
that a Prince, lawgiuer or ruler, of the house of Judah, should not be wanting
in Judea, until the Messiah which was promised them did come. For the words of
Jacob to Judah are plain after this sort: The scepter shall not depart from
Judah, and a lawgiuer from between his feet, until Silo come. Now at this time
the case was so, that the Romans possessed Judea, and had set a Liuetenant
over it, whom the Evangelist here calls Cyrenius. The Jews before for a long
time had used priests for Kings, when as the Machabees had obtained the
kingdom, so that the dominion of the house of Judah was already taken away and
suppressed, neither was there any Prince or ruler, of the stock and blood of
Judah, governor over the people. But that Christ or the Messiah should now
come, that was a great sign, that the prophecy at that time especially might
be fulfilled. Wherefore the Evangelist says here, that at the time when Christ
was borne, Augustus Caesar had set a Liuetenaunt over Judea, under whom the
Jews should offer them selves to be taxed. As if he said: Even at that time at
which he should be borne, he is borne. All that lived under the Roman Emperor
were compelled to pay tax, for a testimony that they were subject unto him.
This the Jews knew, but they did not understand the Prophecy. Jacob had said
thus: The scepter shall not depart from Judah, and a lawgiuer from between his
feet, until Silo come: That is, a Prince and ruler of the stock of Judah
shall not be wanting in Judea, until Christ come. Jacob did sufficiently show
in these words, The Jews misinterpret the prophecy of Jacob concerning the
coming of the Messiah.
that he should be wanting at the coming of Christ. Moreover, whereas they
understood it so, as though such a Silo should come, as should bear rule
with the sword, it is a false understanding thereof, neither can it be gathered
out of that text. For he says thus, that at the coming of Christ the
temporal kingdom of the Jews should end. So Luke also here shows that
very time, when it behooved this to be done. It follows moreover in the text:

And Joseph also went up from Galile out of a city called Nazareth, into
Judea, unto the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, (because he was of
the house and lineage of David) to be taxed with Marie that was given him to
wife, which was with child.

Joseph also and Marie obeyed this commandment of Caesar, and submitted them
selves as other honest and obedient men, and went to Bethlehem, which was the
chief and head city of the house of Judah, and suffered themselves to be
taxed. Marie, inasmuch as she was with child, and near her delivery, might
have excused her self, that she should not take this journey upon her, but she
does not so, they will not be an offense to others. Moreover it ought thus to
be that they should come to Bethlehem, because of the prophecy of the Prophet
Micheas chap. 5. which foretold that Christ should be borne in Bethlehem of
Judah. Mark I pray you, how that tax must serve hereunto, which neither Caesar
nor his Lieuetenant did know. Thus God deals in his works, in which he
uses the means of heathen and evil men, whereby he may make us, which are
miserable and wretched men, and so deeply drowned in flesh and blood, certain
of our faith, which the Evangelist Luke here specially sets forth, inasmuch
as he eftsoons declares in the history, the places and times, least that we
should be deceived concerning this Christ. The manner of his birth the
Evangelist shows moreover, saying:

And so it was, that while they were there, the days were accomplished, that
she should be delivered: and she brought forth her first begotten son, and
wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger, because there was no
room for them in the Inn.

Let it nothing move us, or be any offense unto us, that the Lord comes into
the world in so great poverty and misery. For it ought to be a great joy and
comfort unto us, rather then in any wise to discomfort and discourage us. It
may seem a strange thing, and hard and strait dealing, that a Virgin which
was new married, and that year joined to her husband, might not be permitted to
bring forth her child at Nazareth in her own house, but was enforced in poor
estate to go almost three days journey being great with child? And when she
came at her iorneyes end, she had not so much place in the Inn, as that she
might be delivered in some parlour or chamber. The Inn being full, there was
none that would vouchsafe to give place to this woman being great with child,
that she might have the use of their chamber, but she was enforced to go into a
stable, that there she might bring forth the Creator of all creatures. Here may
be plainly perceived what is the knowledge and wisdom of the world concerning
divine matters, namely, that it is blind, and vain in understanding, that it
sees not the works of God, and if it be so that it sees them, that it knows
not what they mean.

Comfort against worldly misery and contempt.
Hereof let us learn, not to be moved or discouraged, if we be poor and
miserable, and forsaken of the world, for we have here great comfort. If Christ
the maker of all things, with his beloved mother, was cast into so great
misery, and so contemned of the world, why may not the same also come unto
us? or why should not we being in misery, and compassed about with all
calamities, bear them patiently, yea if God will at any time kill us with
adversity and distres? But this thing is to be lamented, that we do exclude
such an example from our eyes, but much farther from our heart. We should easily
suffer adversity and contempt, if so be that we believed, and had a sure trust
and confidence in God, when as we see that the Lord Christ suffered this
misery, poverty, and calamity. Wherefore this is first thoroughly to be
marked and considered of us, how Christ came into the world in so great
poverty, and found not so much as one in so great a city, which was dutiful
and beneficial toward him. Thus this nativity was received in the earth, over
which notwithstanding all the heavenly soldiers did exceedingly rejoice, as it
follows:

And there were in the same country shepeheards, abiding in the field and
watching their flock by night. And lo, the Angel of the Lord came upon them,
and the glory of the Lord shone about them, and they were sore afraid.

Here is declared, How God sets forth the nativity of his son.
how God in heaven sets forth this nativity, which the world contemns,
yea knows not, neither sees. This joy is so great in heaven, that it can not
be contained therein, but bursteth forth, that it may be declared and
communicated to the world. For the Angel here brings tidings of great joy to
the shepeheardes, which to them is great comfort, which the world
notwithstanding contemns and rejects, but is of the Angels had in great
admiration, yea and if they might, they would with greater praises, and more
goodly pomp have set forth so wonderful a thing. But it was not meet it
should be so. For God would set forth an example in this his Son, that the
oste^tatio^ and glorying of the world might at the last be neglected, and that
it might be known what the world is. Man's reason seems always very wise unto
it self, it always looks unto things that are aloft, it considers only
high matters, it humbles not it self to those things that are below. This
now is an excellent comfort, that the Angels and all the heavenly soldiers do
esteem him so much, whom the world contemns, whereby we may learn that
albeit we be outcasts in the world, there be notwithstanding that have regard
and care of us. Howbeit we do hardly believe this, we do not fasten our eyes
thereupon, but look unto great, precious, and high things, according to the
example of the world, and are dismayed, as soon as a little misfortune comes,
neither thinking nor knowing, if any adversity assaileth us, that it is done by
the will of God. Believe thou this undoubtedly, if it had not so pleased God, he
would not have suffered this his beloved son to be laid in a manger, he would
not have permitted him to be borne in so great poverty, misery, and contempt.
But the poorer and more despised that he is before the world, so much greater
care and regard God and all the heavenly soldiers have of him, so that we may
conceive comfort hereby, and believe assuredly, that the more we are rejected
of the world, the more we are esteemed before God.

The blind and vain devotion of many
Thou may find many which do here think thus, and are touched with such
devotion as this: O, if I had been there then, with how great diligence would
I have served this child and done for him? yea I would have washed even his
swaddling clothes. O, if I had been so happy as the shepeheards, that I also
might have seen the Lord lying in a maunger. Now in deed thou would be
ready to do those duties, when thou know Christ to be so high and noble.
Surely thou would have been as slack in thy duty at that time as the
Citizens of Bethlehem were. Thou reuoluest in thy mind childish and altogether
foolish cogitations. Why do thou not perform the like duties now? Behold
Christ walking before thee in thy neighbor, do for him, and bestow benefits
upon him, whatsoever thou shall bestow upon thy neighbor which is needy and
destitute of help, that thou shall bestow upon Christ him self, as he shall
say in the last day to the elect: Matthew. 25.40
Whatsoever ye have done to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have
done it to me. Wherefore it is a vain and very foolish thing to admit such
childish cogitations. Let us therefore at the last open our eyes, let us not
hear examples of so great importance in vain, otherwise the time will come
when we shall be grievously punished. But with what words did the Angel
speak unto the shepeheards? the Evangelist says after this sort:

Then the Angel said unto them: Be not afraid: for behold, I bring you glad
tidings of great joy, that shall be to all people, that is, that unto you is
borne this day in the city of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. And
this shall be a sign to you: Ye shall find the babe svvadled, and laid in a
maunger.

Learn by these words of the Angel, how to use rightly the nativity of ye
Lord Christ, neither let it suffice you to hear them only. A great treasure
hidden in the earth or some other where, is to no use, but if it be opened, and
occupied, then is it profitable and precious. Wherefore give heed hereunto,
that thou may use this nativity, otherwise it shall be no commodity and
comfort unto thee. For whereas thou know the bare history only, to wit,
what came to pass in his nativity, and that he was borne needy and poor,
thou shall take no greater commodity hereby, then if thou hear a history
written of the king of France, or of some other puissant Prince, whereby no
commodity or comfort should come unto thee.

But how must we use this nativity rightly and with fruit? What it is to use
the nativity of christ aright.

Our own nativity of what sort it is.


Even as I have said, if we be thus persuaded that he was borne for us, that
his nativity is ours. Our nativity is such, that it altogether abounds with
sin, as David says Psalm. 51: Behold I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin
has my mother conceived me. As if he would say: here is nothing but sin, as
well in the conception as in the birth, whatsoever I bring with me from my
mothers womb, it is wholly damnable, it is due to death, Satan, and hell.
Forasmuch then as our nativity, skin and hear are defiled, what good can come
thereof? This is our title which we have received from Adam, in this one thing
we may glory and in nothing else at all, namely, that every infant that is
borne into this world, is wholly in the power of sin, death, Satan, hell, and
eternal damnation: our nativity is altogether miserable, and on every side to
be lamented. To deliver us from this nativity, God sent an other nativity,
which it behooved to be pure and without all spot, that it might make this
unclean and sinful nativity pure. This is that nativity of the Lord
Christ his only begotten son. The nativity of Christ.
Wherefore he would not have him borne of flesh and blood infected with sin,
but it behooved that he should be borne of a pure Virgin. He suffered no spot
at all or sin in his flesh, but replenished it with the holy Ghost, and
permitted nothing to stick therein, but those miseries which proceed of flesh
and blood, as hunger, thirst, adversity, and death, sin excepted, as the
Epistle to the Heb. chap. 4. witnesses, that he was in all things tempted in
like sort, yet without sin. This is that most excellent thing, which the Lord
our God has done for us, whereof none takes any fruit, but he that believes.
And none will easily believe this, but he that feels of what sort his own
nativity is. He that has no feeling of his own misery, tastes not of this
nativity of Christ. But if we feel our misery, it follows forthwith that
we cry with the Prophet David and say: Behold I was shapen in wickedness, and in
sin has my mother conceived me: for we feel our sin and our evil
nativity.

When death shall come upon us, and our heart shall be touched with anguish and
grief, the^ at the last it may be, that we would cast of this happy and pure
nativity, and will excedingly thirst after it to enjoy it. But now when as we
feel not our sins, neither do as yet taste of the bitterness of sin, it
stideth coldly to the heart, we hear it in deed, but truly it does not
thoroughly enter unto the heart. For if a man did believe, that this nativity was
for his commodity, he would fear neither sin, nor death. Wherefore I have
said that a Christian must believe, and dout nothing, that the nativity of
Christ is as well his, as it is the Lord Christ's. And as he has of the virgin
pure blood and flesh, so that he him self also is pure, and that this virgin
is his mother spiritually, as she was the mother of Christ carnally. Let the
heart have sure confidence in this persuasion, otherwise it will be in an evil
case. This the Angel signifies in these words when he says: Unto you he is
borne, Christ is borne unto us, and is made wholly ours.
as if he said, what soever he is and has, ye may challenge it to your selves.
Also he is your Savior, not that ye should only look upon him, but which is
able to deliver you from the tyranny of sin, death, Satan, and all evil:
yea and how great soever he be, he is borne unto you, and is yours with all
that he has. Now forasmuch as he is mine, and has changed his nativity
into mine, his flesh and blood also is mine, he him self is mine with all
wherewith he is endued, so that I dare say unto his mother: Behold, that
child which thou have brought forth, is mine, his flesh and blood are my flesh
and blood, yea and thou art my mother, and I will be counted of thee for thy
son, for whatsoever Christ brings with him, it must be mine, even as he
himself is mine. If so be that his nativity be mine, being of a virgin, and
without sin, replenished with the holy Ghost, my nativity also must be of a
virgin, and pure from sin.

Here now Eve the first mother is no more my mother, for it must needs be that
that nativity do utterly die and perish, that there may be no sin
remaining. Here this mother Marie is to be set against that mother, of whom I
was borne in sin. And thus the Angel brings with him great joy, for it can
not be, but that the heart should be made glad, when it enjoys this Savior as
his own. When we come to hand strokes, that is, when we feel our misery and
calamity, there remains no comfort or help, then my heart can not lift it
self above the heavy burden, wherewith it is pressed down, but it must needs
faint and be discouraged. But if I conceive a trust, and doubt nothing that
Christ's nativity is mine, that my sins be taken away by him. I become
exceeding joyful, and am confirmed with comfort, whereby all heaviness and
sorrow is shaken of. True comfort and joy.
This only is that comfort, and no other, which makes a good conscience,
which fears neither death nor hell, for it always rests upon the word of
God, which gives Christ unto us. Wherefore it is a thing altogether miserable
and lamentable, if such a good conscience be sought in any other things then
here. Thou shall find no joy, no peace of conscience, neither in heaven, nor in
earth, but in this Christ, be thou certain and sure thereof. Wherefore let all
other things pass, and cleave unto him only, if thou desire to be bold and
courageous against sin, death, the devil, hell, and all things that are
against thee. He is the Lord and Savior. Ye understand I trust, this right
well, forasmuch as ye have now heard it so often. But I do with so great
earnestnes as it were beat it into your minds, that ye may see, that there is
but one thing taught in the whole Scripture, which I would have to stick
firmly and undoubtedly in you, this is that which I have said, that the use of
this nativity be known.

They which seek any other thing, and use not this nativity, are in a
desperate case, as ye have heard. Which ye have very well expressed in this
song, the author whereof whosoever he was, did nothing err from the purpose,
to wit, that the only child Christ is our comfort. Which words surely are
of very great importance, and deserve most diligently to be weyed. For ye did
sing after this sort: A child highly to be praised is borne unto us this day of
a chaste virgin, to the comfort of us wretches. If that child had not bin borne,
we had perished all. Is it not said here, that there is no comfort beside only
Christ? which in deed is most true. Without dout the holy Ghost taught him that
made this song to singe after this sort. If the case stand thus, it follows
that Monks, Nuns, Sacrificing Priests, and all which leave this child, and
seek to come to heaven by other ways and works, be condemned. For such say
that they need not this child, otherwise they would confess, that their own
works be nothing worth. These therefore do nothing but deceive and seduce, of
whom men's hearts are procured to depart from Christ, and are led away unto
Satan. In the aforesaid song is contained moreover: He is the salvation of us
all, oh sweet Jesus Christ, forasmuch as thou art borne man, defend us from
hell. I greatly desire that ye did well understand this. It is soong abroad
every where, but there is none that thoroughly believes it. Whereupon it comes
that some do oppugn these things, especially they, which know, sing, and
babble very much of them, that truly I fear, that Christ is never more
blasphemed, then at this feast of his nativity, and at other great feasts,
that it should be no marvel, if, when he is so blasphemed, he should suffer the
whole world to be swallowed up: but the last day is at hand. Wherefore endeavor
that ye may sound this excellent song in your heart, and as ye sing it in mouth,
so ye may also believe it.

If the case stand thus, that all things without this child are vain, No
means but by Christ to come unto heaven.
what need is there then of much business? why do thou run this way and
that way, and endeuorest to do works, whereby thou may prepare thee a seat
in heaven? which they especially do, that murmr up many Rosaries, and do
continually extol the mother of God in mouth only, but in heart think more
evil of her then of all others: and not only of her, but of Christ him self
also the Lord and Savior. Wherefore commit this so to memory, that ye may be
certainly persuaded, that whatsoever depends of any other then of that child,
it is all damnable, otherwise the Angel had lied. This must be compted for
most certain without any addition, neither are these trifles to be weied, to
wit, that this suffices not that thou do believe, more things are to be
added. Forasmuch then as the Angel says, that this child does all, and that
he is the Savior, and if he be not, that all labor is lost, tell me, how can
it follow, that some thing is to be done of thee, when it is already done
before? Do thou go about to do any thing that thou may obtain him?
That child suffers not him self to be apprehended and obtained by works,
for albeit thou heap together works, notwithstanding thou do not yet enjoy
the child. Moreover thy works be unclean, by which such a great treasure can
not be gotten, no though they were even holy. But he is to be apprehended in
heart, so that thou believe, and say to the Angel: I believe that it is true
which thou say, and nothing at all douting I count this child for a Savior
borne unto me. And this part whereof we have now spoken, pertains to faith.

Now we have here also an other part pertaining to Christian life, namely
charity, that works may not be rejected. If thou will do works, do them
not in that respect, that thou persuade thy self that thou do obtain any
thing of God by them. A most excellent example to be followed of all Christians
in doing of good works.
But follow this example: such a one as Christ has showed him self to thee be
thou also toward thy neighbor. If thou do more nearely consider the example
of Christ, thou shall find nothing but mere love. Whereas he humbles him
self and is borne in so great poverty, that declares nothing, but love
toward thee, which moved him to become a servant for thy sake, as Paul
Philip. 2. says, who knew that he might remain in divine glory. Now this he
did for thy commodity, he bowed his eyes to thy misery and calamity, which
art so miserable a man, wholly damnable and abounding with sin, thy nativity
is unclean, thy misery is on every side most great, thou have deserved nothing
but the wrath of God and eternal damnation. If thou had been a Carthusian
Monk a thousand years, thou could not deliver thy self from this miserye
and damnation. But Christ is able to help thee, he is rich and has strength
sufficient: seeing therefore he can do such things, he does them willingly
and with pleasure. Love enforces him so far, that he employeth all things
for thy sake, and bestows whatsoever he has for thee. Forasmuch then as
Christ shows so great love toward thee, and gives unto thee whatsoever he is
able, do thou likewise to thy neighbor. Will thou work works? derive them to
thy neighbor, who is compassed with troubles and miseries. Thou must do
nothing for this cause, that Christ has need thereof, whereby thou may
enrich him, for neither was he bountiful to this end, that he might any thing
profit his father thereby, or that he might receive any commodity of him, but
he did it only for this cause, that therein the father might be well pleased,
inasmuch as he submits him self wholly to his fathers will, and loves us
with so great affection?

After the same sort we also must do in our works toward our neighbor, which
we ought therefore only to do, that we may give thanks to the father, that he
shows his favor unto us, for that he has given his beloved son unto me,
to bestow upon me whatsoever he has. When I believe this undoubtedly, I burst
forth and say: If God shows unto me so great benefits and favor in his
beloved son, yt he suffers him to bestow all things upon me, I also will
do the like again, and bestow all things whereby I may do good to my
neighbor and love him. And so I do not lift up mine eyes unto heaven, but I
go thither, where my neighbor is oppressed with adversity, poverty, sickness,
sin, or error, and I help him wherein soever I am able. Thus do thou
whosoever thou art, which mindest to do true good works: as thou would have
done to thy self, if thou were troubled with poverty, so do thou to thy
neighbor being poor. Again, if thy neighbor be a sinner, and thou see it,
but thou thy self art without sin, and have a holy nativity, go, preach
unto him, whereby he also may be delivered. But thou must do all these things
freely in every respect, as Christ has done for thee without all works and
merits, of pure grace, love, and mercy. Such works see thou do, if thou will
do good and Christian works in deed. God has no need of them, nevertheless
thou must do them in respect of him, inasmuch as it so pleases him, and he
will have it to be so. This only is rightly to do good works, which those
hypocrites do not, which will merit heaven by their chastity, poverty, and
obedience. Unto whom I pray you are such works of theirs good? I my self need
them not, neither do they profit my neighbor, wherefore it is mere deceit,
whereas a name is given to works as though they did merit heaven, when as they
are nothing worth, neither profitable to others. Lay up these things in
your hearts, and do also according to them. In all this text being discussed
from the beginning to the ending, ye have these two things, namely faith and
love. If ye shall keep these, then both the holy nativity of Christ shall be
a help, commodity, and comfort unto you, and also ye shall be spiritually the
children of his mother, as Christ Jesus is her child carnally.

An exposition of the song of the Angels, Glory be to God on high, etc.
Glory be to God on high, and in earth peace, good will toward men. Forasmuch
as this song is very common, and there be few that rightly understand it,
when as notwithstanding it contains many things in it, I think good to
handle it somewhat at large. The Angels in this hymn apply three things to
three: glory to God, peace to the earth, and good will unto men. The first is
the honor or glory of God, Glory due to God alone.
with which we must begin, that in all things praise and glory may be
asscribed to God, as to him which does, gives, and has all things, so that
none may challenge any good thing at all unto him self, neither ought to count
it his own. Glory is so due to God only, that no part thereof may be derived
to any other. Adam being persuaded of Satan, went about to take this glory to
him self, whereby all men fell into the displeasure of God, and have that vice
so thoroughly fixed in their mind, that no other thing can be so hardly plucked
away from them. Every man pleases him self, no man can abide to seem that he
is nothing, or is able to do nothing, whereof come almost all evils, so many
contentions, wars, and innumerable other discommodities. This glory Christ
gave to God his father, teaching that all our things are nothing before God
but sins, which deserve his wrath and indignation, and nothing less then
glory. Wherefore there is no cause, that we should even never so little please
our selves or glory in them, but rather that we should be ashamed and fear,
being set in so great peril and confusion, that so all our glory and pleasing
of our selves may pass away and come to nothing, and we may rejoice being
destitute of our own glory, that we may be found and saved in Christ alone.

The second is peace in earth. For, Where true peace is, and where it is not.
as where the glory of God is not, and where every one seeks his own glory,
there can not be peace, according as Solomon says Proverb. 13. Among the
proud there is ever strife: so contrariwise, where the glory of God is known,
there true peace also must needs be. For why should they contend? why should
they disagree, which do know every one of them, that they have no good thing
of their own, but that all things which are, which they have, and which they
are able to do, come from God, to whose power also they commit all things,
they in the mean season being very well content, that they have God favorable
unto them? How also can it be, that when one counts nothing of him self and
the things that be his, he should be so careful of him self and his things,
that he should move contention with any because of them? Such believe that
Christ only is made all things unto them, him they think on, and for him
alone they contend. Hereupon it certainly follows, that there can be no
contention or discord at al among true Christians: The peace of Christians
described by Esai. Esai. 11.9.
which manner of peace of Christians Esaias declares, and says: No man shall do
evil unto an other, no man shall destroy an other in my holy hill, that is, in
the Church of Christ. The cause hereof he adds next after: The earth is full
of the knowledge of God, that is, for all know God, as to whom all good things
do belong, and all their own things they confess to be nothing but sins,
they may easily therefore have peace among them selves. Esai. 2.4.
Wherefore the same Esaias says in an other place: They shall break their
swords into mattocks, and their spears to make sythes, and one shall not lift
up a weapon against an other, neither shall they learn to fight from thence
forth. Hereupon Christ is called the king of peace, or the prince of peace, of
whom Solomon was a figure, who is called peaceable. For Christ is truly called
our king Salomo^, that is, peaceable, which has restored peace unto us
inwardly with God through faith in him, and outwardly with our neighbors through
love, whereby we live friendly with all men: and so by him we have peace every
where both inwardly, and outwardly in the earth.

Good will.
The third is good will of men. Not that good will, whereby we work good
works, but whereby we take in good part all things that happen, whether they
be good or evil, sweet or sower, and do receive them with a quiet heart. The
Angels knew that the peace which they did sing of, should be only among
Christians, which in all things do depend upon Christ, and usurp nothing to
them selves as their own. But in the mean season the world and Satan, which
do exceedingly envy them, do on every side procure trouble unto them, and
persecute them even unto the death, so that they may look for no peace or
quietness at all of these, for Christ says Ioh. 16. In me ye shall have peace,
but in the world ye shall have affliction. Therefore it was not enough for the
Angels to have soong, peace in earth, but it was to be added: and good will
toward men, that when they, as much as they are able, have peace with all
men, and nevertheless are continually hated of all men, and do suffer
persecution, they may always keep a good will, whereby they may take all things
in good part, and give thanks to God, Christians must bear persecution and
trouble patiently.
howesoeuer he deals with them, or suffers them to be dealt with, they may
not murmr, but resign and commit them selves wholly to the will of God, yea
(forasmuch as they know that God does dispose and govern all things, whom
they are sure, that they have a merciful and most favorable father unto them
through Christ) they may even rejoice and be glad in persecutions, according to
that saying of Paul in the Epistle to the Romans: We rejoice in afflictions
and persecutions. For inasmuch as they have a joyful conscience and a sure
trust of the favor of God, they can not but count all things for the best,
whatsoever happen.

Behold what kind of good will it is in all things, whether they be
prosperous or unprosperous, which the Angels do here wish unto men, and sing
to be propper to the beleuers. Where good will is not, there peace can not
continue.
Where such good will is wanting, there peace can not long be. Men take all
things in the worse part, they take nothing in good part, but do always
increase and double the evil. Hereupon howsoever God deals with them, they
like it not, but require that they may be dealt otherwise with, and so it
falls out as it is in Psalm. 18. with the pure thou shall be pure, and with
the froward thou shall be froward, that is, with him that counts all things
pure to him self, and has that good will in all things, whereof we have
spoken, thou also do well agree, inasmuch as he pleases thee and all good
men. But he that is froward, so that neither thou, nor those things that are
thine do like him, can not but displease both thee and all good men. Of this
well pleasing one an other Paul speaks 1. Cor. 10. Endeavor to please all
men, even as I please all. By what means shall this be done? If thou take all
things in good part, and suffer others to please thee, thou also again shall
please others. The matter may be comprehended in one word: If thou will be
liked of none, nothing shall be liked of thee: If thou will be liked of all,
How far we may please men and submit our selves unto them.
suffer that all things may be also liked of thee, but so, that thou do not
neglect the word of the Lord. For that ought to be preferred before all,
without any regard had of all me^, what pleases them, or what displeases
them. But whatsoever may be done without transgressing the word of God, give
place to all, and submit thy judgment to the judgment of others, that thou
may take every thing in good part, which shall chance unto thee, and so thou
shall have the good will, whereof the Angels did sing.

By this song it may be understood, what nature the Angels have. I omit those
things which the Philosophers have dreamed hereof: here is so described what
the Angels are, that it can not be more fully done, their heart and cogitations
being declared. The first thing to be considered in the Angels.
First with great joy they sing praises to God, acknowledging all things to be
due unto him, and therefore do with an ardent mind, and singing glorify him.
As therefore thou would think of a right lowly, pure, and obedient heart,
praising God, and always enjoying perpetual gladness in him, so think also of
the Angels: and thou have now the nature of Angels, as much as they have to
do with God. The second thing which we ought to mark in the Angels.
The second thing to be considered in them is their love toward us. Think
that they are most loving toward us, which desire that it may go as well with
us as with them selves, they do no less rejoice for our safety then for
their own, and even in this hymn full of love to us ward, they declare them
selves so affected toward us, that surely, we may think and rejoice of them,
as of most loving friends. This is to know the Angels truly, not according
to their essence, whereof the Philosophers do foolishly and without fruit
babble many things, but according to their heart and mind, so that albeit I
know not, what their nature is in it self, yet I know what is their chief
desire, and their continual work. Thus much shall suffice at this time
concerning the song of the Angels, and the fruit of the nativity of the child
Jesus Christ. God grant us his grace, that we may print these things in our
heart, and according unto them also amend our life. Amen.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, OF THE EPIPHANIE OR APPEARING OF CHRIST.
Matthew. 2. Verse. 1. WHen Jesus then was borne at Bethlehem in Judea, in the
days of Herod the King, behold there came wise men from the East to
Jerusalem,

2. Saying, where is that king of the Jews that is borne? for we have seen
his star in the East, and are come to worship him.

3. When king Herod heard this, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him:

4. And gathering together all the chief Priests and Scribes of the people,
he asked of them, where Christ should be borne.

5. And they said unto him, at Bethlehem in Judea: for so it is written by the
Prophet,

6. And thou Bethlehem in the land of Judah, art not the least among the
Princes of Judah: For out of thee shall come the governor, that shall feed that
my people Israel.

7. Then Herod privily called the wise men, and diligently inquired of them the
time of the star that appeared.

8. And sent them to Bethlehem, saying: Go and search diligently for the
child, and when ye have found him, bring me word again, that I may come also
and worship him.

9. So when they had heard the king, they departed: and lo, the star which
they had seen in the East, went before them, till it came and stood over the
place, where the child was.

10. And when they saw the star, they rejoiced with an exceeding great joy.

11. And went into the house, and found the child with Marie his mother, and
fell down, and worshipped him, and opened their treasures and presented unto
him gifts, even gold, and frankincense, and myrrh.


WE celebrate this day a noble, and most comfortable feast, concerning the
appearing of the Lord Jesus, who appeared, a special comfort to al them which
seek him with a strong faith: first to the wise men which came from the East:
secondly to John the Baptist, when being about thirty years of age he was
baptized of him in Iordane, and the holy Ghost and voice of the father gave
testimony of him, that he is the son of God: thirdly, when he showed his
glory and power in a miracle, wherein he turned water into wine at a marriage,
whereby he would procure reverence and estimation to matrimony, which now
(Alas) is after a shameful sort torn, contemned, and rejected of the Pope and
his adherents as a certain miserable and wretched state. For whatsoever God
has ordained, that of the world is contemned: whereof at convenient time we
will speak more, and we have already as I think written sufficient thereof.
Now we will speak in few words of the first appearance.

The wise men of Arabia, which were industrious men, and without all dout
governors of that country (as it was at that time the manner in those parts)
when they had seen the star in the East, breaking of all delay, made haste
to Jerusalem, diligently seeking for the king of the Jews being new borne.
Where we ought to mark, that they could neither ^eeke nor find out this king,
the Lord Christ, but by the star going before them, which at the last led
them so far, that by the word of God they were certified, where this king was
to be found. Without the word of God received by faith, we can not find Christ.
So also is it with us: we can not find Christ without the Gospel, without
the word of God. That must show him unto us, and bring us thither, where we
may find him: which then only is done, when we receive the same Gospel by
faith, otherwise, although we have it, hear it, and know it, it profits us
nothing at all, we shall not therefore find him, no more surely then the
Scribes found him, who notwithstanding had the Scriptures readily, and showed
the way to other, not coming into it them selves, for the thing did not touch
their hearts. They did drousily neglect that king, whom with great sighs they
had looked for many ages. Wherefore it is not enough that we have the Gospel,
or that we hear it, but we must believe it, and lay it up in the secrets of our
heart, otherwise we shall never find Christ. Here also you see, that it does
not skill, whether one be learned or unlearned, instructed in many places of
Scripture, or in few, unto whom God gives the grace, he enjoys Christ. He
respects not the person, but whom he draws he is drawn, although in the
mean season he provides that the Gospel be always preached.

After therefore that these wise men had found the child Christ, the king of the
Jews at Bethlehem, together with Joseph and Marie, by the showing of the
Scripture and guiding of the star, The wise men are not offended at the poor
and miserable estate of Christ.
they were nothing offended at the poor estate of the child, but being taught
by the word, acknowledged that Child for the Messiah and king of the Jews,
whom the Jews had looked for so many years, and opened their treasures before
him, offering unto him gold, frankincense and myrrh. Wherein again we ought
to mark the nature of faith, that it is offended at nothing, but cleaves to
the word only, and nothing esteems those things that shine outwardly. These
wise men do not therefore disdain neither turn back, because the child
together with his parents were without all pomp in poverty and misery, and
nothing less then a kingly child appears unto them, but they go on, and
undoubtedly acknowledge him for a king, as they had learned concerning him out
of the Scriptures. Moreover they give unto him the honor meet for a king,
they offer most precious gifts, which they had brought, being even of the best
sort, out of their own country. Now the world would have done no such thing,
but according to the manner thereof, would have looked for garments of purple,
and resort of servant, and handmaydens. In such places it is wont to bestow
his gifts, to wit, where there is great plenty and abundance of things
before: yea it is of that quality, How the world deals with the poor and
afflicted.
that it depriueth the poor and afflicted of those things that they have, it
takes bread out of the mouth of the hungry and needy, which have nothing,
but as they get it hardly, by laboring sore all that they are able.

Whereof we have to learn, that if we will honor Christ with these wise men,
We must not esteem those things which seem precious to the world, but those
which to the world seem contemptible and of no value.
we must shut our eyes, and turn them from all that which seems fair,
goodly and noble before the world: Neither must thou be offended or abhor it,
if any thing seem vile, contemptible and ridiculous unto the world: let this
suffize thee, that thou know that it pleases God, which is in heaven. Take
heed unto thy self concerning those things, which shine before the world,
exercise thy self in those works, which seem unto reason foolish and light,
as are, to help the needy, to comfort the afflicted, and to count the
calamity of thy neighbor, thine own. If thou shall be diligently exercised
in these, and faith being thy guide, shall endeavor rightly to apply thy self
unto them, then other works which have a fair show, as to institute masses,
to be occupied in vigils and years minds, to build temples, and such like
follies, shall by them selves be plucked out of thy heart and vanish away, unto
which works, surely now almost the whole world is addicted: they are in deed
fair in the very outward show, and seem to be very precious, when as
notwithstanding they are an abomination unto God. But whatsoever God has
commanded, as to do good to our neighbor, and to be touched with his
adversities no less then with our own, to bear a friendly and well willing
mind toward him, these are neglected, and in the eyes of the world appear
trifling and foolish: whereupon we do greatly abhor them. How comes this
to pass? Even therefore, because they have no goodly show outwardly. And the
common people of Germany are wont to say: That which shines not, or has not
a fair show, is nothing set by.

Moreover God does sooner suffer him self to lack his own honor and due
service, then that he would have us to leave of from doing our duty toward
our neighbor, as Christ witnesses Matthew. 5. If thou bring thy gift to the
altar, God does not accept the service which we offer him, if we neglect
charity toward our neighbor.
and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave there
thine offering before the altar, and go thy way: first be reconciled to thy
brother, and then come, and offer thy gift. Here ye do most plainly both hear
and see, that God will not be served, unless we first go to our neighbor, and
be reconciled to him. For the same cause also God rejects the sacrifices of
the Jews, as it is in ye Prophecy of Esaias chap. 1 for that they did neglect
those things which were more necessary, namely mercy and faith: for thus he
says: Why offer ye so many sacrifices unto me? I am full of the burnt
offerings of weathers, and of the fat of fed beasts, I have no pleasure in the
blood of bullocks, lammes, and goats. When ye come to appear before me
treading in my courts, who has required this at your hands? Offer me no mo
oblations, for it is but lost labor: incense is an abominable thing unto me.
I may not away with your new moons, your sabbathes, and solemn meetings,
your solemn assemblies are wicked. I hate your new moons and appointed
feasts even from my very heart, they make me weary, I can not abide them. When
ye hold out your hands, I will turn mine eyes from you: and though ye make
many prayers, yet I will hear nothing at all, seeing your hands are full of
blood. Wash you, make you clean, put away your evil thoughts out of my
sight, cease from doing of evil. Learn to do well, apply your selves to
equity, deliver the oppressed, help the fatherles to his right, defend the
widow, and so forth as is there rehearsed of Esaias. By these words of Esaias ye
see what God requires, and what he allows. When we neglect those works, by
which our neighbor is served, he again will neglect us. For whatsoever
benefit we bestow upon our neighbor, that we bestow upon God and Christ him
self, as he shall pronounce in the last judgment: Matthew. 25 40
Whatsoever ye have done to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have
done it unto me.

When thou hear this, thou will not glory much, God will accept, not the
works which we have invented, but which he him self has commanded.
of the temples which thou have builded, or masses which thou have founded. For
then he will say: what have I to do with thy temples and Masses? what with
thine altar and bells? think thou that I am delighted with stones, and wood,
with bells and banners? Are not all things mine first? Heaven is my seat, and
the earth is my footestoole. Who commanded thee to build temples? I have set
living temples before thee, these are to be edified, nourished, and relieved,
but thou have been occupied with other triflles, which I have not commanded. I
know thee not, away with thy temples and masses: ye ought to have put your
trust in me only, but all your delight consisted in such works, as though it
had been your purpose by so doing to wrest heaven from me, and that I may
comprehend all in a brief sum: whatsoever I have commanded, that has been
of you neglected: and whatsoever I have detested and abhorred, that ye have
diligently done: this therefore I will requite you with again, I know you not,
ye may resort unto that god which has commanded you to do these things.

Here therefore let us learn, how the wise men did nothing abhor the poor
and on every side miserable appearance of this infant and his parents, that we
also may be so affected toward the miserable and pitiful estate of our
neighbors, and may be persuaded that we do find Christ in them, and that
whatsoever is bestowed upon them, Christ does acknowledge it as bestowed upon
him self. The kingdom of Christ wherein it consists. Psalm. 44.20. 2. Cor.
4.11. 1. Cor. 4.13.
His kingdom consists in the poor, despised and abiects, yea in the holy
cross, in contempt, in persecution, in affliction and misery, as Paul says
out of the Psalm: for thy sake we are killed all the day long, and are counted
as sheep appointed to be slain. In an other place also he says: we are made
as the filth of the world, the ofskowring of all things. Wherefore Christ said
to his disciples, when he sent them forth to preach in Judea: Behold I send you
forth as sheep in the mids of the wolves. Matthew. 10.16
They now that seek Christ any other where then in such a conte^ptible form,
in ye cross, and in persecution, do not find him. The wise me^ did find ye
king Christ being newly borne, not in Herod's court, not among the Princes and
priests, not at Jerusalem, in so noble and famous a city, but at Bethlehem in
a stable, with poor and despised creatures, namely Joseph and Marie. In a
sum, Christ will there be found, where a man would least seek for him.

But we must diligently consider also, what these wise men signified by their
gifts. What the wise men signified by their offering of gold.
For assuredly they showed by them, that this child is a king, and not a king
only, but also God, and man. In offering gold they acknowledged him for a
king, as if they would say: We bring unto thee gold, not that we would thereby
enrich thee. For gold, silver, and whatsoever is made is thine before, but
hereby we acknowledge thee to be a most mighty king over all things. So we
also offer gold unto Christ, How and when we offer gold unto Christ.
when we acknowledge him for our king and Lord: but unto this is required a
very strong faith. For if I ought to acknowledge him for my king and Lord, all
mine own will must be extinguished, that it reign nothing at all in me: for
Christ only must reign and rule in me, that he may do whatsoever it pleases
him in me, and concerning me, all things must be committed unto him. So the
leper in Matthew did, which said unto Christ: Lord, if thou vvilt thou can
make me clean. Therefore my will must be utterly extinguished in me, if yt I
will have Christ to reign in me. Christ also suffered not his own will to
rule, but he always submitted him self to the will of his father, which he
testifies in the sixth chapter of the Gospel by S. John: I came down from
heaven, not to do mine own will, but his will which has sent me. Yea he
obeyed his father even unto death, and submitted him self wholly to his will.
We imitating this example, which is written for our singular consolation, ought
to submit our will to God and his Christ, and to rest confidently upon him. He
knows how to bring the matter notably well to pass, as it is said Psalm.
37. Commit thy way unto God, and put thy trust in him, and he shall bring it
to pass. And a little after: Hold thee still in God, and suffer him to work
with thee. Such sentences ought to provoke us, patiently to suffer the will of
God in us, whether sweet things or sour, commodities or discommodities come
unto us: for he knows with what temperature to lay them upon us. Blessed is
he that believes these things from his heart. Who being such a one, can be
troubled with sorrow? Such a man howsoever he be handled, whether he be burned
or drowned, cast into prison, or otherwise grievously dealt with, he takes all
in good part. For he knows that these things shall turn to his commodity.
After this sort do we also offer gold with the wise men, when we take away
rule from our own will, and do suffer Christ to work in us according to his
will and pleasure. Wherefore they are hypocrites, which know not to suffer the
will of God, but howsoever he deals with them, have always, whereof they do
complain. They forsooth suppose, that whatsoever they think, it shall have
success according to their thinking, If it fall out otherwise, they are
angry, they do not patiently suffer persecution and contempt: they murmr,
they find fault, and vex when those things happen, no otherwise then horses
being stirred up with fury or rage. So therefore by resisting they stay the
kingdom of Christ from them, and deprive Christ of gold, which notwithstanding
they ought to offer and present unto him, that is, they them selves will bear
rule, and do not vouchsafe to acknowledge Christ for their king and Lord.

Frankince^se what it signified, and when we offer the same unto Christ.
By frankincense they resembled divine honor, which we the^ offer unto him,
when we confess, that whatsoever we have, we must acknowledge it to have come
from God, and that we have it freely, and without any merit of ours: Wherefore
all these things are to be ascribed unto him, as to the true Lord, neither
must we glory one whitte in the good things received, but his glory is to be
sought in them. And if he take them from us again, we ought to suffer him with
quiet minds, and to bless him with the beloved Job in these words: Job. 1.21.
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither again:
the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord.
And so we ought to suffer all misfortunes and adversities, as if God him self
did cast them upon our neck, so that none shall be able to offend us, unless
he take away Christ from us. Not so much as a hear of our heads shall perish,
as Christ says to his Disciples Luke 21. Wherefore whatsoever shall molest us,
what adversity soever shall come unto us, we ought never to seek any other God,
we ought no where to seek any other help and comfort, then of Christ alone.
This is he which is made unto us of God the father, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption. Then only we offer unto Christ that right
frankincense of Arabia, when we fly unto him alone in our calamities,
afflictions, and anguishes. But they that seek after strange helps and
comforts, as of Sorcerers, Witches, and such like, they do not offer
frankincense unto Christ, but stinking brimstone, wherein they shall be burned
for ever, for that they have not believed and trusted in Christ.

Myrrh what it signified.
By myrrh they signified a mortal man: for with myrrh dead bodies were
anointed, that for certain years they should not putrify. Now myrrh is a
strong and bitter juice, which distilleth from the trees of Arabia, like unto
gum, or as with us rosen issues out of the pine tree, the fur tree, etc.
But then we offer myrrh unto Christ, When we offer myrrh unto Christ.
when we firmly believe that he by his death has overcome sin, Satan and
hell. And this is a special faith. If we do but a little dout here, it is not
well with us. But if I believe from my heart, that death, sin, the devil, and
hell are swallowed up in and by the death of Christ, I shall not be afraid of
them all. I shall easily be preserved from rottennes which death brings, when
I have myrrh, that is, the death of my Lord Christ in my body and soul, this
will not suffer me to perish. So strong and valiant a thing is faith, unto
which even all things are possible, as Christ says Mar. 9. Here must we
learn daily with our Lord Christ to bring under our old Adam, and to mortify
his concupiscences, by the cross, and tentations, not that cross which we do
chose, but which Christ lays on us, let us bear it patiently and with a
willing mind, that so our body may be subdued, and made subject to the spirit,
that being so buried with Christ through baptism, we may be raised up again
with him, and he alone may reign and live in us. Hereunto vehement sighing is
required, which the holy Ghost does make in us for our sake, as Paul says
Romans 8. that Christ will help us, to keep under this unruly and obstinate
flesh, that it presume not too licentiously, and thrust the noble soul into
the mire. This our baptism does signify, to wit, no other thing then that
that old and stinking Adam be mortified, and buried, which we always ought to
reuolue in our mind, seeing that as long as we live here, sins do remain
in us. Wherefore always some thing must be repaired in us without all
intermission, through the cogitation of baptism, as it were in a house decayed
through oldnes, even until such time as we depart this life. Whereof S. Paul
entreats in very goodly words Romans 6. which are diligently to be marked of
us, now he says thus: Know ye not that all we, which have been baptized
into Jesus Christ, have been baptized into his death? We are buried then with
him by baptism into his death, that like as Christ was raised up from the
dead to the glory of the Father, so we also should walk in nevvnes of
life. For if we be planted with him, to the similitude of his death: even so
shall we be to the similitude of his resurrection, knovving this, that our old
man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve sin. For he that is dead, is freed from
sin. Wherefore, if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall live also
with him, knovving that Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more: death
has no more dominion over him. For in that he died, he died once to sin, but
in that he lives, he lives to God. Likewise think ye also that ye are dead
to sin, but are alive to God in Jesus Christ our Lord. Thus much concerning
the first appearance.

Now we will speak somewhat of the second, that is of the baptism of Christ.
Three things to be considered in Christ's Baptism.
In the baptism of Christ three things are to be considered: The first, that
the heavens were opened, when he was baptized. The second, that the holy Ghost
was seen in the likeness of a dove. The third, that the voice of the father was
heard, which said: This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased.
Whereas Christ vouchsaued to be baptized with water, he has hallowed baptism,
and made the water thereof holy, yt he which is baptized in his name, might
become likewise holy and clean from sin, and might have the heavens open.
Now Christ was not baptized for him self, for he was not infected with the
spot of any sin, as S. Peter says 1. Pet. 2. He behaved him self like unto
a good Physician, which before the sick does first drink some bitter potion,
that the sick may more gladly and boldly do the same afterward. For we in
baptism drink a bitter potion, namely, the mortification of the old Adam,
which with the bitterness thereof does greatly trouble us. For that dipping into
the water or sprinkling with it does signify nothing else, but that that old
Adam should perish and die. This is greatly furthered by the cross, which God
according to his divine will lays upon us, which we ought not to cast from
us, but bear it willingly and with a patient mind. But that this might be
easier for us to do, even Christ has taken it upon him self, he suffered him
self to be baptized, and took his cross and carried it nothing resisting or
gaynesaying, and so was obedient to his father unto the death, even the death
of the cross, as Paul says Philip. 2. that he might deliver us from sins,
and might again appease his heavenly father, which surely he did of his mere
grace without any desert of ours: whereof we have baptism a sign and pledge,
as Paul says unto Titus: But when that bountifulnes and that love of God our
Savior tovvard man appeared, not by the works of righteousness, which we had
done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of the nevve
birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly,
through Jesus Christ our Savior, that we being justified by his grace, should
be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life.

Secondly the holy Ghost appears here in the likeness of a dove, when Christ
is baptized, The second thing to be considered in the baptism of Christ.
whereby is signified that we also do receive the holy Ghost in our baptism,
which rules and guides us according to the will of God, which is present with
us, and helps us in bearing the burden of the holy cross, which exhorts
us, is instant upon us, enforces us, and when we yield to the burden of the
cross, is present and helps us: if we fall, rayseth us up again, and is
with us as a certain faithful companion in our journey. He also makes the
burden of the cross light, which we were very unable to bear, if he did not
put to his help. If so be that thou fall into sin, remember to go back
unto thy Baptism, for this is the only ship, wherein we pass over. Wherefore
take heed of them which make two tables, whereby we pass over the sea of
sins, namely baptism and repentance. Believe them not, whatsoever they
handle, it is mere delusion: baptism is the beginning of repentance. As often
therefore as thou fallest into sin, have recourse unto thy baptism, there
thou shall again obtain the holy Ghost, who may be present with thee. For
repentance is nothing else, but a displeasing of him self, a detesting of his
wicked life, and a renewing of the man, which is represented in baptism. After
such a renewing of the life, follows the praise of God, and thanksgiving unto
him for the grace received, then such a man bursteth forth, and behaueth him
self friendly toward his neighbor, and does good to him in all things. This
is signified by that, that the holy Ghost appeared upon Christ in the likeness
of a dove: for a dove wants the gall. Such they also become, which receive
the holy Ghost in baptism, to wit, they are gentle and without all bitterness
toward all.

Thirdly, The third thing to be considered in the baptism of Christ.
the voice of the father is heard in the baptism of Christ, which says: This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. This is that Savior, which
delivers us from the tyranny of sin, death, Satan, and hell. And here we
must learn, how we must come unto God. He that desires to be the grations and
dear child of God the father, must attain unto this through Christ, through
him alone the beloved son, who sits in the bosom of his father: unto whom
alone the father looks, without whom he allows nothing, and whatsoever
pleases the father, it pleases him in respect of this his son. Wherefore he
that desires to go to ye father, must cleave to this beloved son, must lay
him self upon his back. For by this voice all titles albeit they seem very
goodly and holy, are taken away, nothing is of value or estimation with the
father but only this his beloved son, he is in his especial favor. Now he
that desires to be in favor with the father, and to be beloved of him, let
him fly into the bosom of the son, by whom afterward he finds access to
the father, as Paul says Ephe. 1. that through Christ we are adopted, without
this Christ we are the enemies of God. Whosoever therefore cleaves to Christ
through faith, he abides in the favor of God, he also shall be made beloved
and acceptable, as Christ is, and shall have fellowship with the father and the
son. But where this is not done, there is nothing but wrath, there no
honesty, no virtue, no free will, neither prayer, nor fasting, nor other
works shall profit, thou shall but trifle with all these. For this is a most
mighty, and most excellent voice: This is my beloved son, in whom all things
consist and are comprehended, which are extant in the whole Scripture. Even as
all things are delivered into the hands of Christ, and gathered into one, that
they may obey him, as S. Paul says. For when God says: This is my beloved
son, by showing Christ only, and showing and naming no other, he makes it
plain enough, that none is his beloved son beside him. If so be that other
are not beloved sons, it is certain that they are the children of wrath and
indignation. For if there were more beloved sons, he would not so set forth
and show this son alone, saying: This is my beloved son, neither would
turn his eyes unto him only, and glory of him alone, as though he knew no
other. For the words seem to show, that he did diligently look about, and yet
found none, beside him, of whom he says: this is he, as if he said: Here at
the last I have found such a one as pleases me, and is my beloved son, all
other generally are not such.

Moreover, these words are not so only to be understood, that it is showed by
them that Christ is very God, as the Epistle to the Hebrews says: Unto which
of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day begat I thee?
and again, I will be his father, and he shall be my son, etc. For it is most
certain that Christ in these words is declared to be the true and natural
son of God, seeing that this word was never said to any creature. Howbeit he
had been as well the son of God, and had so remained for ever, as he has
been from everlasting, although this had not been spoken unto us from heaven,
neither is any thing added or taken away from him by this name, but we must
thus think and persuade our selves, that so excellent a praise, and so noble
honor of Christ was spoken for our cause. For he him self witnesses in John,
Ioh. 12.30.
that this came not because of him self, but for our sakes. He has no need
that it should be said unto him, that he is the son of God. He knew this
before, and has from everlasting and by his nature, that which he hears.
Wherefore when that is conceived by voice and word, it pertains to us, and
not unto Christ. Christ without the word, is such as he is said to be. We have
the word without him, of whom it is spoken. Wherefore we must lay fast hold
upon the word without the essence, even as he has the essence without the
word.

But what does this word? it teaches us to know Christ, in which knowledge our
salvation consists, as Esaias, Paul, and Peter do witness. But how does it
teach us to know him? so, that he is the son of God, and does especially
please God his father, by which words God cheereth the hearts of all the
faithful, and greatly delights them with mere comfort, and heavenly
sweetness. How is this done? When I know, and am sure, that this man Christ is
the son of God, and does in all things please the father, whereof I must be
most fully persuaded: forasmuch as the divine majesty does confirm this by
his voice from heaven, which can not lie, whereby I am certain, that
whatsoever that man does speak and work, they are the mere words and works
of the beloved son, which are above measure approved of God. This therefore I
do singularly well mark, and lay up in the bottom of my heart. When as
therefore I do hereafter hear Christ speak, or see him do any thing, and
that for my commodity, which surely he every where does, (for he says, that
he does and suffers all things for us, that he came to serve and not that he
should be served,) then I remember these words of the father, that he is the
beloved son, then I am enforced to think, that all that Christ speaks,
does, and suffers, and that for my sake, does singularly well please God.

Now how can God pour out him self more liberally, or show him self more
lovingly and sweetly, then by saying, that it does please him from ye heart,
that Christ his son does speak so gently with me, does with so great
affection look unto my commodity, and with such unusual love suffer, dye,
and do whatsoever for my sake. Do thou dout, that if man's heart did with due
sense feel such favor of God in Christ, to wit that he does so much for our
sakes, it would not for joy burst into most small pieces? for then it would
look into the depth of the divine breast, yea and into the exceeding and
eternal goodness and love of God, which he bears toward us, and has borne
toward us from everlasting. But we are too hard hearted and cold, the flesh does
lie more heavy upon us, then that we are able to comprehend such words, we
do not well consider of them with our selves, neither does our heart come near
to feel how marvelous and unspeakable love and joy they contain in them,
otherwise without dout we should perceive, that heaven and earth are full of
the fire of the divine love, of life and righteousness, full of honor and
praise, whereunto the fire of hell, whereunto sin, and death being compared,
are nothing but as it were a thing painted or pictured. But we are cold,
sluggish, and unthankful wretches, for we pass over such precious words, as
things of no importance, and as uttered of man, as being contained in a book,
or written in paper, as things utterly decayed, and now long since grown out
of use by long custom, as though they pertayne only to Christ, and to us
nothing at all: And being dull and senseles, we do not see that they belong
nothing to Christ, but were committed to writing and are extant only for our
sake.

Seeing therefore that Christ the beloved son, being in so great favor with
God in all things that he does, is thine, and does in the same, serve thee, as
he him self witnesses, without dout thou art in the same favor and love of
God that Christ him self is in. And again, the favor and love of God are
insinuated to thee as deeply, as to Christ, that now God together with his
beloved son, does wholly possess thee, and thou have him again wholly, that
so God, Christ, and thou do become as one certain thing. Hereunto make many
sentences of the Gospel, but especially in John, as this: If any man love me,
John 14.23.
my father will love him, and we will come unto him, and will dwell with him.
Also: Where I am, there shall also my servant be. Again: John 12.26. John 17.
I pray that they may be one in us as thou and I are one, I in thee, and thou
in me, and they in me. But where is Christ? In the favor of God, in the depth
of his heart, there also are we, if so be that we know and love Christ, there I
think we are sure enough, there our refuge is placed high enough, whither no
evil can come, as it is in the 91. Psalm.

But thou see that faith is required hereunto, and that unto these things no
law, no work, no merit does prevail. Hereupo^ it comes to pass, that so
precious words are so abstruse and unknown to reason. For it has bin
governed of Satan from ye creation of the world, when as in Paradise it would
be as God, and presumed after honor, which God here attributes to Christ
alone, forasmuch as he is his son, whereunto it is yet also prone and
inclined, and sets it self against these words, and the words again are
against it. For because Christ is here declared the only son of God, it is
mightily overthrown, whatsoever makes it self god. But who be they that make
them selves god? surely Satan and man, which please them selves, and love them
selves, they seek not after God, but strive to attain unto this, that they
also may become gods. But what will God say unto these: Truly a certain
contrary thing to that which he said unto Christ: Christ is my beloved son,
in whom I am well pleased, seeing that he glorifieth not him self, and makes
not him self God, although he be God. But ye are wretches, in whom I allow
nothing, seeing that ye glorify your selves, and make your selves gods, albeit
ye be creatures and men, and not God. So this sentence given of Christ does
humble the whole world, does show them to be all void of divinity, and
ascribes it to Christ, and that all for our commodity, if we will, and do
admit this sentence: or to our condemnation, if we will not, and do contemn
this sentence, so that I may say at once: without Christ there is no favor,
nor any beloved son, but very wrath and sore displeasure of God.

Certain sentences out of the Scripture concerning Christ, whereby is
declared that through him we are loved of the Father, and without him are
refused.
Ioh. 1.16.17. Of his fulness, (to wit Christ's) have all we received, and grace
for grace. For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ.

Ioh. 3.13. No man ascends up to heaven, but he that has descended from
heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven.

Ioh. 3.16.17.18. God so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten
son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting
life. For God sent not his son into the world, that he should condemn the
world, but that the world through him might be saved. He that believes in him,
is not condemned, but he that believes not, is condemned already, because he
has not believed in the name of that only begotten Son of God.

Ioh. 3.35.36. The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his
hand. He that believes in the Son, has everlasting life, and he that
obeys not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.

Ioh. 6.40. This is the will of him that sent me, that every man which sees
the Son, and believes in him, should have everlasting life, and I will raise
him up at the last day.

Ioh. 7.37.38. Now in the last great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried,
saying: If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. He that believes
in me, as says the Scripture, out of his belly shall flow rivers of water of
life.

Tit. 3.4.5.6.7. But when that bountifulnes and that love of God our Savior
toward man appeared, not by the works of righteousness, which we had done, but
according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and the
renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus
Christ our Savior, that we being justified by his grace, should be made heirs
according to the hope of eternal life. Many other such sentences there be,
especially out of the Epistles of Paul, which every one may gather by him
self.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, OF THE GENEALOGY OR PEDIGREE OF CHRIST.
Matthew. 1. Verse 1. THis is the book of the generation of Jesus Christ the
son of David, the son of Abraham.

2. Abraham begat Isaac, Isaac begat Jacob, Jacob begat Judas and his brethren.

3. Judas begat Phares and Zara of Thamar, Phares begat Esrom, Esrom begat Aram.

4. Aram begat Aminadab, Aminadab begat Naasson, Naasson begat Salmon.

5. Salmon begat Booz of Rachab, Booz begat Obed of Ruth, Obed begat Iesse.

6. Iesse begat David the king, David the king begat Solomon of her that was
the wife of Vrias.

7. Solomon begat Roboam, Roboam begat Abia, Abia begat Asa.

8. Asa begat Iosaphat, Iosaphat begat Ioram, Ioram begat Hozias.

9. Hozias begat Ioatham, Ioatham begat Achaz, Achaz begat Ezekias.

10. Ezekias begat Manasses, Manasses begat Amon, Amon begat Josias.

11. Josias begat Iechonias and his brethren, about the time they were carried
away to Babylon.

12. And after they were brought to Babylon, Iechonias begat Salathiel,
Salathiel begat Zorobabel.

13. Zorobabel begat Abiud, Abiud begat Eliacim, Eliacim begat Azor.

14. Azor begat Sadoc, Sadoc begat Achim, Achim begat Eliud.

15. Eliud begat Eleazar, Eleazar begat Matthan Matthan begat Jacob.

16. Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Marie, of whom was borne Jesus that is
called Christ.


The sum of this text.
1 MAtthew begins his book with a title or inscription, by which the
beleuer is provoked with greater pleasure to hear and read it. For he says
thus much in effect: Whom the Law and Prophets have hitherto promised and
preached, Jesus, that is, a Savior, and Christ, that is an eternal king, that
he according to the promise of God, should spring and come of the seed of
Abraham and David, even him do I describe in this book, to wit, that he is
now borne, and made man, and already come into the world. This I handle through
this whole book.

2 Three lines or degrees are here rehearsed. In the first is contained the
stock of the fathers, in the second of the kings, in the third is contained
the decaying stock of David: after the decay whereof it behooved that Christ
should come. For so the goodness of God is wont to do, when all things seem
even past hope and recovery, then at the last he comes.

3 Matthew omitteth one in his rehearsal, but that makes no matter, seeing
that he observes this one thing, that he counts by the right line from David
by Solomon to Joseph the husband of Marie. Luke counts otherwise, and uses
an other order.

The exposition of the text.
WHen Adam our first father having fallen by a notable offense, was gilty of
death with all his children, as well in body as in soul, it was
notwithstanding promised unto him, although obscurely, that both he and his
posterity should be delivered, in those words which God spoke to the Serpent:
Genesis 3.15.
I will put enmity between thee and the woman, between thy seed and her
seed, and it shall tread down thy head. Of these words Adam took comfort,
that a woman should come, by whose fruit such guile and sutteltie of the
Serpent should be again amended, and Adam redeemed. This comfort did uphold
Adam with his posterity until Noe. For then the promise was renewed, when God
made a covenant with the sons of Noe, and set the rainebowe for a sign of
the covenant, whereby men might conceive a trust and confidence, that God is
yet favorable unto them, and does not purpose their destruction: whereby
mankind was again vpheld and comforted even until Abraham.

In the time of Abraham God did somewhat show forth his mercy, he declared
that he would send a Savior, who should deliver us again from death both of
body and soul: for albeit the body should dye, yet it should not always
remain in death, but rise again with the Lord Christ: The words which God
spoke to Abraham Genesis 22. are thus: In thy seed shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed. Here miserable men had a cause to hope and look for a
Savior which should deliver them. From that time all the Prophets did diversely
foretell of this above measure flowing fountain of all mercy, that is, of this
seed, of the Lord Christ, how that he at the last should come, that all which
believed in him, might obtain salvation by that promise which can not be
revoked. If so be that men would now open their eyes, they must needs confess
and say, that a strange and incredible thing is done with us, that man being
in the state of damnation, cursed, and desperate, should be restored by the
nativity of one man. Hereupon the Prophets cried out with ardent prayers and
unspeakable groaning, that God would vouchsafe to send the Savior whom he had
promised. By faith in this Savior the Israelites afterward obtained the law,
and this honor before all people, that they were called the elect people of
God. By which ordinances written of Moses the anointed was plainly figured and
signified, whom this text which we have now in hand sets forth, what he is,
from whence he is, and by the before said faith all obtained salvation from
Abraham unto David, even as many as were saved.

In the time of David God made the coming of the Messiah to be more manifestly
declared, that it might be certainly known of what stock he should come:
namely, of the stock of David, as when God said unto David: 2. Sam. 7.12.
When thy days be fulfilled, thou shall sleep with thy fathers, and I will
set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy body, and will
stablish his kingdom. He shall build an house for my name, and I will stablish
the throne of his kingdom for ever. I will be his father, and he shall be my
son. And yet more plainly in the Psalm: The Lord has made a faithful oath
unto David, Psalm. 132.11.
and he shall not shrink from it: Of the fruit of thy body shall I set upon
thy seat. Here Christ is described, that he shall be a king, and an eternal
king, Psalm. 45.6.
as it is mentioned of him in an other Psalm: Thy throne, O Lord endures for
ever, the scepter of righteousness is the scepter of thy kingdom. Who
pertains to the kingdom of Christ, and who to the kingdom of Satan.
Howebeit he is a spiritual king, which rules the world by his word: and
whosoever receives his word, pertains to his kingdom. But he that is not
under this scepter, neither hears his word, is not of God, neither
pertains to his kingdom, but is subject to the kingdom of Satan, under whose
tyranny we all are, until the Lord does deliver us from it, and defend us
with his scepter, which is then done when we believe in him. Forasmuch
therefore as our salvation does come merely by the promise of God, let every
one assuredly persuade him self, yt he shall never obtain salvation without this
promise: although he should do the works of all Saints, yet they should
profit him nothing hereunto. Contrariwise, if we lay hold on the scepter of
this king, that is, of the promise of God, we shall not perish, although the
sins of the whole world should lie upon us, they shall be all swallowed up in
him, albeit no good work be done of us. As we see in the thief, which hong by
the Lord on the cross, who laid hold on the word of God, and believed in
Christ, and therefore he obtained the promised Paradise. Here is no dout left,
let us only believe that it is so, and it is so in deed, all things which men
teach, or which we have done or can do, being set aside. Here all things must
give place, at the coming of this new king, that he alone may rule and reign
in us. Let a man intermedle with those things that are written of this king,
as being his own matters, and as pertaining all unto him. Whatsoever is
written of Christ, it is written for our comfort.
For whatsoever is written any where of Christ, it is written for our comfort,
that we may thereby feed and cherish our faith. To the establishing of such
faith God has mercifully left unto us his promise written, and has suffered
to be published, that he will perform that which he has promised. Whosoever
apprehends this in his heart, it must needs be that with sighing he thirst
for such Scripture and promise of God, who of his grace being not provoked of
us, offers unto us and bestows upon us such goodness and mercy.

But let us now come to our present text, which not with words only, but also
with a certain force pearseth the heart, and pours into it love, pleasure,
joy, gladness, etc. As if an Angel should now come from heaven, and say unto us
miserable and condemned wretches, after this sort: Behold O man, thou have
sinned, wherefore thou have deserved to be condemned for ever. (This being heard
the heart must needs tremble.) Now although all this be true, yet nevertheless
God of his grace has mercy upon thee, and sends to thee a Savior, as he
promised to Abraham and his seed. Be of a good cheer, and give thanks to
God. Lo, here is the book of the generation of Jesus Christ, who is the son
of David, the son of Abraham, so that this is not only done, but also
written, that thou may be certain thereof: Neither will he, neither can he
deceive: believe only, and thou shall have all things. Now it is to be noted
that Matthew sets David before Abraham, although the promise was first made
to Abraham, and came afterward to David, which promise made to David the
Prophets did afterward publish more abroad, and did by it comfort the people.
As in the 11. chapter of Esai, where the Prophet says thus: There shall come a
rod forth of the stock of Iesse, and a graffe shall grow out of his root.
Jeremy likewise says thus chap. 23. Behold the time comes, says the Lord,
that I will raise up the righteous branch of David, which king shall bear
rule, and he shall prosper with wisdom, and shall set up equity and
righteousness again in the earth. And many other such prophecies there are to
be found in the writings of the Prophets, which they foretold of David, that
his kingdom should be raised up, as yt Angel also declared unto Marie, when he
said: Luke 1.32.
The Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David, Why Matthew
sets David before Abraham. Luke. 1.54.
and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom
shall be none end. Wherefore Matthew thought good here to set David first as
the better known, and next unto him, Abraham, unto whom the promise was first
made, as Marie in her song says: He remembering his mercy has helped his
servant Israel, as he promised to our fathers, Abraham and his seed for
ever. And that promise is now performed, and in this our text described, as we
shall see hereafter. S. Matthew makes a triple difference of fathers, of whom
Christ came, fourteen Patriarchs, fourteen Kings, and fourteen Princes.
For it behooved that the scepter and kingdom should be taken from Judah, Genesis
49.10.
according to ye prophecy of Jacob, which is thus: The scepter shall not
depart from Judah, and a lawegiuer from between his feet, until Silo come: and
unto him shall the gathering of the people be. Here all things must be
fulfilled: and there are thrice fourteen generations, even as Matthew
rehearses them: from Abraham to David fourteen generations, from David til
they were carried away into Babylon likewise fourteen generatio^s. Howbeit
there is a person omitted in Matthew, that is Iakim, and it ought thus to be
written: Josias begat Iakim, and Iakim begat Iechonias and his brethren, this
the Chronicles witness. And after they were carried away into Babylon until
Christ, fourteen generations. Which triple distinction has a great mystery
as we shall see.

The Jews among other laws were commanded to observe these three precepts,
namely, to worship that God whom their fathers had worshipped. Secondly to
choose no Priest of any other stock then of their own, that is, of ye tribe
of Leui. Thirdly to choose no king but of their own people. These three
precepts did very well agree in our Lord Christ, to wit, that he is that one
God, that he is an eternal Priest, of our flesh and blood, and a King, our
brother, who has taken our nature upon him: Who by his divine power is able to
help and save us, and being an eternal Priest, continually makes intercession
for us. He is a King also, that he may defend and preserve us, who is not to be
feared of us, seeing that he is a man as we are, yea and was made a most
contemptible man, that our heart might be wholly quieted and appeased in him our
Savior, who can never forsake us. Who were able to stand in the sight of God,
and not be terrified, if that Priest did not stand before God? Who should
defend us, if he were not a King? Who should save us, if he were not God? How
should he have care of us, if he were not a man, and our brother? with whom we
may speak as well as we may one with an other among our selves. O most gracious
Savior, how wisely have thou done all things? I know that thou art my
brother, as it is in the Psalm: Psalm. 22.21.
I will declare thy name unto my brethren, as it is alleged in the Epistle to
the Hebr. Albeit thou art God, my Lord Christ, and king of heaven and earth,
yet I can not be afraid of thee: for thou art my friend and brother. This is
no hinderance unto me, that I am a sinner, and thou holy. For if I had not been
a sinner, there had been no need that thou should suffer punishment for me.
Why both good and evil are rehearsed in the genealogy of Christ.
I see also in thy genealogy that both good and evil are rehearsed, of whose
posterity thou would come, that thou might comfort timorous and weak
consciences, that they should confidently and cheerfully put their trust in
thee, which have taken away our sins. And that we might be certain hereof,
thou have left unto us thy word, which assuredly declares it unto us.

Among ye Kings and Princes which Matthew rehearses, some were exceeding evil,
as we may read in the books of the Kings. Yet God suffers them to be
rehearsed in his genealogy, as if they were worthy, that he should come of
them. But he suffered not so much as one honest woman to be rehearsed therein.
Four women are named, which all had an evil report, and were counted lewd.
Genesis 38.
As Thamar, of whom Judas the father of her husband, begat Phares and Zara,
Ios. 2.1.
as in the first book of Moses it is mentioned. Rahab is called an harlot in
the book of Joshua. Ruth was a heathen woman, of whom although we read no evil
written, yet forasmuch as she was a heathen, she was despised of the Jews as a
dog, and was detested of them. Bethsabe the wife of Vrias was an adulteress
before she was married to David, and of her he begat Solomon. Which women are
undoubtedly therefore rehearsed, that we may see how God has set forth as it
were a certain glass unto all sinners, wherein they may see that he would be
borne of the posterity of sinners, that the greater sinners we be, so much
more certain and greater refuge we might have to so gracious a God, Priest,
and King, who is our brother, in whom only and in none other we are able to
fulfill the law, and obtain the grace of God: he came down from heaven
therefore, neither does he require any thing of us, but that we assuredly
believe that he is our God, By faith in Christ we become the sons of God, and
heirs of the heavenly kingdom. Gal. 3.26.
Priest and King, and then all things shall be well with us. By him alone we
become the sons of God, and heirs of the heavenly kingdom, as S. Paul says
to the Galathians: Ye are all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus. Here
the hearts of all sinners may leap for joy, that they are counted worthy of
such a Savior. Must not he needs be regenerate, whose heart understands and
feels this? yea he is carried with a most ardent love to lead a new life,
for he is inspired with the grace of God, inasmuch as he lays hold of the
promise of remission of all his sins.

If we will count upon our fingers the persons rehearsed in this text, we
shall find them to be forty and two, which were in time past figured by the
two and forty mansion places, which the children of Israel had, before they
came into the promised land, as it is written in ye fourth book of Moses. If
we also will come into the promised land, which our Lord Jesus Christ has
prepared for us by his nativity, we must also occupy two and forty mansion
places, that is, we must cease from our own purpose, and be regenerate man by
man, until we come to Marie and Jesus, there at the last we shall find rest
unto our souls. But this nativity is hard: for our evil and corrupt nature
is very loath to leave her own will and purpose. And again the case of nature
is such, that no nativity can be without grief, yet one has more grief,
tentation and affliction then an other. The thief on the cross leapt at one
leap two and forty degrees, and came suddenly to Christ. So did many Martyrs
also, and other holy men. Notwithstanding none can go so great a journey with
small grief, unless he be carried with a great wind, that is by the holy
Ghost. We must go fair and softly from Abraham to Isaac, from Isaac to Jacob,
and so forth. But we must begin at Abraham, that we may be found endued with
like faith as he was, and obtain the blessing promised unto him, then we shall
more easily and cheerfully go from one Patriarch to an other. That is, we
shall pass over one affliction after an other, until we be called out of this
travel and journey unto our rest. Why the godly must suffer afflictions in this
world.
For a man must be so long exercised with afflictions, and so often renounce his
own will, until at the last he be brought under, and his flesh by this means
be subdued, that it may obey the spirit, and walk joyfully in the will and
obedience of God. Wherefore let no man purpose with him self to come unto
heaven by leading a quiet life, Luke 18.25.
and following pleasure, thus Christ says in Luke: It is easier for a camel
to go through a needles eye, Act. 14.22.
then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. And in the Acts of the
Apostles Paul teaches that we must through many tribulations enter into the
kingdom of God. Again, Luke 16.25.
in Luke Abraham said to the rich glutton: Son, remember that thou in thy
life time receiuedst thy pleasures, and likewise Lazarus pains: now therefore
he is comforted, and thou art tormented. So it behooved Christ also to suffer
and by the cross to enter into his glory. 2. Tim. 3.12.
And S. Paul says: All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution.

Hereupon we may learn, that all that is poison which is according to the lust
of the flesh. Romans 8.13.
Wherefore Paul says to ye Romans If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die, but
if ye mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit, ye shall live. The flesh
strives against the spirit.
The spirit which is of God, is ready to suffer, but the flesh resists. This
Jesus signified by his answer unto Peter: when he showed unto his Disciples,
that he must go unto Jerusalem, Matthew. 16.21
and suffer many things of the Jews, and be slain also, Peter took him
aside, and said unto him: Master, pity thy self, this shall not be unto
thee. But Christ turned him back, and said unto Peter: Get thee behind me,
Satan: for thou sauerest not the things that are of God, but the things that
are of men. Here it is manifest that the reason of man does flatly strive
against the will of God. God will have us enter into glory by the cross and
persecution, but the flesh resists, and is troubled in afflictions. Moreover
they that are endued with the spirit of God, do rejoice, if they be afflicted
for God his sake, Act. 5.41.
as it is written of the Apostles: They departed, as Luke says, from the
council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for his
name. Iam. 1.2.
Wherefore James says in his Epistle: My brethren, count it exceeding joy,
when ye fall into diverse tentations, knowing that the trying of your faith
brings forth patience: And let patience have her perfect work, that ye may
be perfect and entier, lacking nothing. O how necessary is patience for a
Christian man? that we may possess our souls by patience, Luke 21.19.
as Christ says in Luke, otherwise we shall lose them. Wherefore we must enter
into a new kind of life, and if at any time calamity comes, we must not by
and by burst forth into evil speeches, and take it impatiently, but we must
always lift up our heart to God, and bear his will with a patient mind, he
will well deliver us in his time, when it seems good to him, God even when he
chasteneth and corrects us, does love us, and care for us. Heb. 12.5.
and we must always think, that he bears a fatherly affection toward us,
even when he sends persecutions, anguishes, afflictions, and adversities, as
the Epistle to the Hebrews says: Ye have forgotten the exhortation, which
speaks unto you as unto children: My son, despise not the chastening of the
Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loves, he
chasteneth: and he scourges every son that he receives. If ye endure
chastening, God offers him self unto you as unto sons: for what son is
it, whom the father chasteneth not? If therefore ye be without correction,
whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons. God give us
his divine grace, that we may courageously pass these two and forty degrees,
and with the Lord Christ be regenerate into a new life. Amen.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER UPON THE HYMN OF ZACHARIAS, COMMONLY CALLED
BENEDICTVS.
Luke 1. Verse 68. BLessed be the Lord God of Israel, because he has visited
and redeemed his people.


THat godly man Zacharias speaks here of things as already done, when he
says: he has visited and redeemed his people, etc. For he was certain of
them: now the child John was come, being about to begin to preach of our
redemption, as the Angel had foretold of him, that he should go before the
Lord in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to
the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just men, to make ready
a people prepared for the Lord: this promise he knew should assuredly come to
pass.

Wherein this redemption consists, I think it is already sufficiently known
unto you, namely in this, that God visits and delivers us. Which visitation
and deliverance is accomplished neither by sword nor violence, but by the
word alone wherein consists more, then in the blood and death on the cross.
That the word and promises of God might be accomplished and fulfilled.
For because of the word Christ shed his blood on the cross. It was the word
that John preached, when he showed the Lamb of God which takes away the
sins of the world, that is, when he declared our visitation and redemption,
which Christ has purchased with his blood. This John was the first Messenger
which preached the Gospel. Wherefore to us, to whom the Gospel was not before
preached, it is, as if John him self did now preach it, for now is first set
forth unto us redemption, sweet consolation, deliverance from sins, death,
hell, and all evil. To visit is nothing else, then to come unto us, to bring
and declare unto us the word of salvation, by which we are saved.

Zacharias conceived so great joy and pleasure in his heart, that he could not
co^taine him self, but he must needs burst forth into those words which in
this Hymn he utters, not only because of the infant newly borne, although
even this brought great joy unto him, but also for that by the birth of this
child he beholds a far greater joy, forasmuch as he was a Messenger sent of
God to preach his word to the world. He rejoices therefore because of such a
word which he should hear, and for that he should be as it were altered from
an old man to a young man, and should become a scholar of an infant now lying
in the cradle, whom he confesses to be a Prophet better learned then him
self. Zacharias conceived both natural and spiritual joy at the birth of his
son John.
Manifest natural joy is here, for that that infant was borne after a
marvelous sort. Moreover here is joy of the spirit, inasmuch as that infant
should become a Preacher of the word of God. And I am of that mind that I
think that there was never any father, which conceived so great joy of his
child, as this Zacharias did of his son being so meruelously borne by the
power of God, and for that especially in the time of old age, when he was now
near unto death, he is made a father of so great a Saint, which should be a
master and teacher of the world. It is a delight and pleasure unto us, if we
beget a child that is sound, fair, and well proportioned in body, that I may
say nothing, what joy it would bring, if our child should be an Apostle and
Preacher of ye word of God to the world. Whatsoever ignominy therefore and
contempt he did suffer before when he was barren together with his wife
Elisabet, he is now most abundantly recompensed with ple^tifull honor and joy,
so great blessings does God bestow, if we patiently abide his leisure. For if
he at any time come, he comes very rich and plentiful in gifts, and does
give much more then we ever either wished or hoped for.

Verse 69. And has raised up the horn of salvation unto us, in the house of
his servant David.
These words are not spoken of John, for that he is not an horn raised up in
the house of David, for he was borne of the tribe of Leui: but Christ our Lord
is of the house, and of the royal stock and blood of David. Wherefore
Zacharias does not singe here, in the house of Leui, but that in the house of
David an horn is raised and lifted up: and when Christ was not yet borne, he
nevertheless sings so, as if he were borne, neither was the horn of salvation
yet come, notwithstanding he knew by the revelation of the holy Ghost, that it
should forthwith come. An horn what it signifies among the Hebrews.
An horn among the Hebrews signifies power, confidence, dominion, and that
whatsoever, wherein any man may trust, etc. As we read in Daniel chap. 7.
where the Prophet first sees kingdoms, then beholds beasts, some having one
horn, some two horns. And he afterward interpreting him self, expounds them
for kingdoms and Kings: and this is a phrase and manner of speaking peculiar to
this language. Now Zacharias signifies that Christ is our head, yea our God,
whose kingdom is his horn.

He adds: the horn of salvation, or blessedness. What difference there is
between other kingdoms and the kingdom of salvation which God has raised up.
Some kingdoms are famous in name and power, other are large, abounding with
plenty of great treasures, much people, honors, and all temporal things:
But this is called a kingdom of salvation, grace, life, righteousness, truth,
and of every thing that pertayneth to salvation, whereby it differs from all
other kingdoms. For albeit they be large, rich or mighty, yet are they
counted the kingdoms of death, for they that govern them must at the last
fall, dye, perish, and leave their power and riches behind them. Neither was
there ever any worldely kingdom which might be called a kingdom of life,
wherein is life, peace, and salvation, for only the kingdom of Christ does
glory and triumph in this title, inasmuch as God has raised it up, that
there may be nothing in it but salvation and felicity. Moreover I find
nothing here spoken of manners and trades of life, or of works: For this
kingdom consists neither in outward life nor works, but in the horn, in
Christ, and his Gospel. This kingdom is ours, whereof ye have heard, that it
is a kingdom of grace, life, righteousness, salvation and mercy, so that
whosoever is in it, although he be inferior to John in holiness, and far
unlike Christ in perfection, yet he lives in a kingdom wherein is nothing but
salvation and blessedness, whereof also it has and reserueth the name.

It is said moreover that this kingdom is raised up in ye house of David: but
by what means was it raised up? even by the holy Ghost, and by his word. He
says, in the house of David. for it must be a kingdom in the earth, and yet a
kingdom of salvation. Now confer these two one with an other. The house of
David is the tribe and stock of David, who was a man, as the subjects of his
kingdom. So that thou can not say, that he does here make mention of an
heavenly kingdom among the Angels, when as he does nothing less, but he
speaks of a certain kingdom which is among men, which live clothed with
flesh. David was a man, the subjects of his kingdom also were men, subject to
death. For as the Scripture witnesses, man that is borne of a woman lives but
a small time, he can not pass the bounds appointed him. How is it then that
honor and dishonor come together in this kingdom? What agreement and consent
appears here, where mortal men are delivered from the power of death, where
they that are worthy of death, enjoy life, the unhappy are happy, and they that
are subject to Satan, become the sons of God? In the reason hereof I hope
that ye are sufficiently instructed, yea I think that ye understand it as well
as I my self. But because the text so requires, it must be eftsoons repeated.

A Christian is delivered from death, sin, and Satan.
We have affirmed therefore, that a Christian which lives in this kingdom,
shall never dye, forasmuch as he can not dye. For Christ has therefore
suffered death, that he might overcome death, and deliver us from it. He took
our sins also upon him self, that we might not need to bear them. Moreover
he subdued and overthrew Satan, that we might not be subject unto him.
Wherefore it is given to a Christian that he can never dye, he can never be
subject to sin and the devil. For that must needs be true which he says,
that he has raised up an horn of blessedness or salvation. And in whatsoever
place that horn shall be, there is no access neither for death, neither for
sin, nor the devil. And that in the house of David. Wherefore a Christian is
both defiled and yet without sin, A Christian after a sort subject to death,
sin, and Satan, and why.
and free from Satan. How comes this to pass? After this sort. Your
brotherly charity has oftentimes heard heretofore, that God leaves in us an
appearance and feeling of death and the devil, so that my sin disquieteth me
and troubles my conscience, and would drive me unto desperation. Moreover the
judgment of God terrifieth me, death assaileth me, as if it would devour me.
Satan is at hand and seeks to suppress me. God suffers these to remain
and takes them not quite away. For this appearance must continue, that we may
perceive and feel that we are nothing else of our selves but sinners, subject
to sin and Satan. And yet under this appearance lies hid, life, innocence,
and dominion and victory over sin, Satan, hell, etc, as Christ him self
says Matthew. 16. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church,
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, he says not, they shall
not assail it, nor fight against it: for these two remain to sin and death.

Now it is also expedient that I feel the biting of sin, the terror of the
wrath of God, the horror of death, yea and death it self. But all this is a
certain outward appearance before my sight and the sight of the world, The
comfort of Christians against sin death, and Satan.
which know and judge none otherwise, but that sin, death, and Satan are
present. Notwithstanding in the mean season under that assault and terror the
word and spirit are, encouraging me, preserving me, and assuring me, that God
is not angry with me, that my sin is forgiven me, that I shall neither dye,
nor be forsaken: Upon this foundation and hope my heart does wholly rest. And no
man having such a confidence in God, remains under sin, neither is drowned
in death, but is made a conqueror of sin and death. This is, not to prevail
or overcome, for that albeit Satan attempteth, yet he does not get the
victory. We call the house of David, a mortal house, sinful, and subject to
the devil, according to the manner of all flesh and blood, and yet
notwithstanding the horn of salvation is raised up in the same, The kingdom of
faith
that men of that kingdom may enjoy salvation and felicity. Hereby ye see that
this kingdom is the kingdom of faith, which can not be touched nor outwardly
perceived of any, which one can not show to an other, but every one must have
it in him self, that when he shall draw near unto death, shall feel sin, or
even see death before him, he may then in faith lay hold on this kingdom, and
believe that his sins are forgiven him. For Christ therefore died, that thou
might be in this kingdom of faith. Wherefore sin shall encounter with thee
in vain, death is taken away, Christ is with thee, who can hurt thee, who can
do any evil unto thee? Here life and death, sin and innocence, Christ and
Satan do fight one with an other, but Christ, life, and innocence do
overcome and conquer. This is soon spoken, but not so easily felt, yea the
contrary surely is rather felt. Wherefore if thou will esteem and consider
this kingdom according to the judgment of the world, thou shall utterly err
and be deceived. The world calls that a good and peaceable kingdom, where all
things are quiet, prosperous and go well forward, where is safety, peace,
and innocence outwardly. But here is the kingdom of salvation and grace,
although it always appear otherwise. Wherefore all these things are to be
understood in spirit and faith, and not to be judged according to the person or
outward appearance.

Neither ought it to seem strange that this kingdom does flourish in the
mids of sins, the force of Satan and death, whereof Zacharias here sings
even from the bottom of his heart, and knows well how it comes to pass,
faith and the spirit revealing it. Concerning sin I have seen or known none
in whom it is not. Even ye most holy are not free from sin. Romans 7.18.
Whomsoever thou set before thee, sin will by and by appear. Paul a
most holy Apostle affirms of him self, that he feels sin in his members.
Will, says he, is present with me, but I find no means to perform that
which is good. For I do not the good thing which I would, but the evil which I
would not, that do I. He wished in deed to be free from sins, but yet he
could not but live in them. And I and such like are also desirous to be
exempted from sins: but that can by no means be brought to pass, we do
only repress and keep them under: when we have fallen into sin, we rise
again. But as long as we are clothed with this flesh, and bear the burden
thereof about with us, so long sin is not extinguished nor can be wholly
subdued. We may well go about and endeavor to subdue it, notwithstanding old
Adam will lead his life also, until he shall dye and come unto the grave.
What shall I need to say any more? The kingdom of Christ is a certain
special kingdom, wherein every one of the Saints is compelled to make this
confession: Almighty God, unto whose power all things acknowledge them selves
subject, I confess my self to be a miserable sinner, revenge not, I beseech
thee my old iniquities. Al also must sing this song: Our father, etc. forgive
us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. Other
righteous and holy ones, which know no measure or end of their righteousness
and holiness, do understand nothing hereof, and therefore this Gospel is not
preached unto them, seeing that they think the kingdom of Christ to be such,
that there is no sin at all in it, but that all things in it are clean and
pure: they require such a Christian as is wholly clean from all filth of sin,
and without sin as Christ him self, such a one they shall never be able to
find.

Now he is a Christian, who being a sinner, confesses him self a sinner, who
hates the feeling of sin, striving against it from his heart. He is not a
Christian which thinks that he has no sin, neither feels any. But if
thou know any such, he is an Antichristian, and not a true Christian. The
kingdom of Christ therefore consists among sins, it is established there
where he has set it, that is, in the house of David. Yea set David him self
before your eyes, and ye shall find him to have been a sinner: who
notwithstanding is bold to glory, that he is a servant acceptable to his Lord.
There is none of ye faithful which ought to be ashamed of this manner of
praying unto God, or of any other not much unlike unto it: Lord forgive us our
sin: is it therefore true that they have sin, because they say so? yea
truly, for if they should lie, they should be the children of Satan. But godly
Christians are weary of this life, greatly desiring the life to come. Now it is
not given unto them in this earth to go so far, that they may say: We are
subject to no vices, we are clean from all sin: if they shall go so far,
it is Satan that deceives them. Notwithstanding they are sorry for their
sins, and do lament them, yea it grieueth them to the heart, that they must
bear the miserable burden of this flesh, and they cry out together with S.
Paul Romans 7. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? This shrite and cry all the faithful do give, for that feeling
sin, they do most earnestly desire to be delivered from it. And in this
feeling and knowledge of sin, the kingdom of Christ consists, so, that even
in sin there is no sin. That is, albeit I do both acknowledge and feel
sin, Though the godly have sin in the^ and feel the grieuousnes thereof,
yet it does not hurt them.
yet salvation and the kingdom do so firmly abide in my conscience, that God
says unto me: I will forgive thee thy sin, for that thou have faith, and
beleeuest in Christ my especially beloved son, who was delivered to death for
thee, neither shall thy sins hurt thee. Others, which feel not their sins,
but trust in their works, and complain nothing of their faults and offenses,
thinking them selves clean: such are given to Satan, and not received or
admitted into the kingdom of Christ: for they which are partakers of this
kingdom can not be without conflicts and tribulation.

Death, Satan and the world do somewhat trouble the godly, but the godly at
the last overcome them. Psalm. 118.18.
And that I may speak more plainly, reckon I pray thee, any of the Saints,
whom death does not trouble: yea I know thou shall not find one, which is not
afraid, and trembles not at the horrible sight of death. But the conscience
takes comfort here by the Prophet David, who says: The Lord has chastened
and corrected me, but he has not given me over unto death: it fights against
us in deed, but it prevails not. Thus a Christian wrapped in sins, is both
under sins and above sins, and at the last notwithstanding obtains the
victory. After the same sort also must he have to do with Satan, with whom he
must wrestle all his life, and at the last overcome him. So in the world also
he must suffer many conflicts and troubles, and yet at length become victor.
For although it be a kingdom of salvation, which has neither rest nor
quietness, but suffers the force of hell, death, the devil, sin, and all
manner of adversity and tribulation, yet they which be in it, do with an
invincible courage endure, and at length overcome all evils. But God therefore
permits these things, that our faith may be exercised, and show forth it
self. Moreover that is a pleasure to the conscience, and brings unto it
comfort and joy, that it has such a kingdom, that it may say: Blessed be the
Lord God, who has visited and redeemed us, and has raised up a kingdom in the
house of David. That is, for that he visits us by his word, delivers us
from sins, and makes us conquerours over death and Satan.

Thus he have heard both that a kingdom is raised up in the house of David, and
also that a Christian is both dead and yet alive, is innocent in the mids of
sins, and although he be subject to Satan, yet notwithstanding has dominion
over Satan. For both are true, for that sin, death, hell do assail the
flesh, but do not overcome, forasmuch as this kingdom of salvation triumphs
over them all. Wherefore as it were with a certain great boldness or confidence
he calls it a horn, that is a strong and puissant kingdom: Which has no
rest or truce, but being assailed of many and strong enemies, is always
diligently occupied in defense of it self, and does notably repel the force
of ye enemy. So a Christian laying hold on this horn, overthrows sin,
death, and Satan. Neither consists this horn in our strength, neither are we
makers thereof: for God has made and raised it up by the ministry of his
word, whereby we are saved. Wherefore Zacharias so sings, that his song has
respect not to his own son, but to Christ. Yea he celebrateth this kingdom as
pertaining to the Jews only, and declares that it shall be glorious, and
makes no mention of the Gentiles, how they also should come unto it, as beside
others, Simeon in his song, the beginning whereof is, Lord now let thou,
etc. did prophecy, that we Gentiles also are chosen into that kingdom. But
here he foretells of a kingdom raised up of God to the Jews, even a kingdom
of salvation and blessedness, and that in the house of his servant David.
Wherefore he says moreover:

Verse 70. As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets: which have been since
the world began.
Therefore he has raised up this kingdom, that he might confirm his promise,
whereby he had foretold that he would sometime raise up a kingdom, etc. And now
that time is come, wherein he will fulfill that his promise. So Zacharias
reduces ye horn of salvation, the kingdom of Christ, to the old Testament,
that out of it he may bring witnesses of so strong and puissant a kingdom. The
Prophets foretold of the kingdom yt should be raised up in the house of David.
For the Prophets from the time of David did all prophecy, that the seed of
David should have a kingdom in the earth, yet a spiritual kingdom: and above
the rest Esai and Jeremy foretold, that it should be such a kingdom, that the
government thereof should consist in the spirit and word, to these especially
Zacharias has here respect. The other as Osee, Micheas, and the rest, do
speak of the same kingdom, but not so manifestly.

Verse 71. That he would deliver us from our enemies, and from the hands of
all that hate us.
The Evangelist has hitherto generally rehearsed, what that kingdom of Christ
is, whereof the Prophets prophesied. Wherein this kingdom of salvation
consists.
Now he speaks of it also, but particularly, declaring wherein it
consists. First in this, that he delivers us from the hands of our
enemies, yea and from all them that hate us. Ye see here and understand, most
dearly beloved, that this verse does witness and most plainly declare, that we
which are his people and kingdom, do live amongst enemies, and that no other
is to be looked for of us but to be hated of them: That also the force,
quality, and nature of this kingdom consists in this, that it delivers us
out of the hands of all them that hate us, as the Prophet David says Psalm.
110. The Lord shall send the rod of thy power out of Sion: be thou ruler in the
mids of thine enemies. And Psalm. 45. Thine arrows are very sharp, even in
the mids of the Kings enemies. It is a delight unto Christ that his kingdom
is set in the mids of the fight, yea and in the mids of the haters thereof.
These things are written for our comfort, that we which mind to serve under the
Prince of this kingdom, be so instructed, that we look for no other then is
here prescribed and set forth unto us: The godly must look for no peace or
quietness in the world.
that we seek not here to get unto us the favor of the world, neither that we
serve the world, and labor to have no enemies therein. For the words of
Zacharias declare that it is the quality of this kingdom to deliver from
enemies. Now if it delivers us from enemies, and as it were draws us out of
the hands of them that hate us, surely it can not be a kingdom of peace, but
such a kingdom as is subject to the hatred and malice of the world. As ye see
at this day, that our enemies bear a deadly hatred unto the light, which has
a little shined forth, thanks be to Christ therefore. No man is any where so
hated as a Christian. Both the Pope, and the furious Bishops with their false
Apostles, also the raging Princes, moreover the holy, learned, and wise of the
world, all at this day do most bitterly hate Christians. Neither are they
content, that they be killed and slain, but they would have them extinguished
and utterly rooted out, that there may be no memory of them, as they think,
left among men. And this is the state, these are the badges, and cognisances of
Christians: that when Satan by his ministers persecuteth us, he thinks quite
to root us out. This verse also gives us to understand, that Christ is our
King, that he may save and deliver us out of the hands of our enemies: which
he notably performs, and shows his power in the mids of the world, in
the mids of the force of flesh and Satan, when as peace and quietness is no
where left to a Christian, but in his Christ alone. This also we must mark,
that there is not one but many, which assail and persecute Christians: but yet
that we shall not therefore be destroyed, forasmuch as we have one, which is
stronger both then the world and the Prince thereof as John says. Now whereas
he promises us, we know certainly, that he both will and is able to perform:
we shall in deed feel the assault, but he will not suffer us to be destroyed
or overcome, so that we hope and trust in him. It follows moreover:

Verse 72. That he might show mercy toward our fathers, and remember his holy
covenant.

Verse 73. That is, the oath which he swear to our father Abraham that he would
give us.


He will deliver us, not only from all evil both of body and especially of
soul, but also from our enemies, Satan, and men, and as a Christian must be as
it were overwhelmed with all evils together, so also he shall be again wholly
delivered from all evils. And he shows that this grace and blessing was
promised to their fathers. Such is the manner of the Apostles also, that they
often times have recourse to the old Testament, as I have said before, that God
spoke and promised by the mouth of the Prophets, etc. even as Zacharias does in
this place. An objection.
Some man may now say: They are dead, how therefore will he show mercy unto
them? Again, what need is there to rehearse, that he would show mercy to the
fathers, when as it is declared in ye Prophets? But this is therefore done, The
au^swer.
that the truth of God may be showed forth, and may be also approved unto us,
that we should not be ignorant, that those things are not due to our merits.
In the first book of Moses is mentioned, how God promised to Abraham, Genesis
22.18.
that in his seed all ye nations of the earth should be blessed. That is, that
by Christ should come peace, grace, and blessing to all nations. Which promise
was differred so long a time, that it appeared, that it was in vain and
abolished. So unwise, as it seems to the world, does God show him self in
his matters, as though all things went backward. Notwithstanding howsoever it
was delayed and seemed, yet it is fulfilled and performed whatsoever was
promised to Abraham, and God has not only delivered him from his enemies, but
has bestowed upon him all good things, yea has given him self unto him, and
all that he has. And all this is therefore done, for that (as Zacharias here
says) this mercy and goodness was before promised and confirmed by an oath unto
them, which are long since dead, when as we yet were not. He is merciful
therefore and favorable, not because of our merits, as though he did owe it
unto our righteousness, but of his only grace, favor, and mercy.

God both promised, and fulfilled his promise, not moved through any works or
merits of men, but of his mere grace and mercy.
These are horrible thundrings against our merits and works, that we can not
glory, that we have delivered our selves from sins, or that we have deserved
his goodness, and the preaching of the Gospel. No, it is not so. Here is no
place for boasting: but this text says, that thou, O Lord, did promise
certain thowsands of years before I was borne, that thou would do it. Who
did then desire him, that he would give us those things, when he had
determined with him self to give them? And upon this promise the Prophets are
bold and do stay them selves, for by it we attain unto true goodness, that the
mouth of every one may be stopped, that he that will glory, may glory in ye
Lord. For thus the Lord may say: that thou live in my kingdom, that thou
enioyest my goodness and grace, it is not to be imputed to thee, but unto me: I
promised, and determined with my self to fulfill my promises, thou being
ignorant thereof. And here the mouth of every one is stopped. So at this day
also none of us, unto whom, thanks be to God, the Gospel has shined, can
glory that we obtained it by our own means, labor, endeavor, or good
conversation. For those which were counted the best works, and the most
excellent studies are disallowed and overthrown, as to celebrate Mass, to
join him self to this or that hypocritical sect, which they call an order,
etc. These the Gospel condemns and rejects, and how can I attain to the
Gospel by that which it rejects? Wherefore this stands sure and certain,
that all that we have, is of the mere grace and goodness of God, so that with
his honor and praise we may confess, that we have deserved far otherwise,
namely hell fire, if besides this he bestows any thing upon us, it is the
gift of his grace and goodness. And this is that which Zacharias says, that is
was foretold by the Prophets, and both promised and confirmed by an oath to the
fathers, Genesis 22.16.
that he would perform unto us the covenant made to Abraham. Thus he says to
Abraham: By my self have I sworn, says the Lord, that in blessing I will
bless thee. And in thy seed, etc. Which words the Prophets diligently held,
marked, handled, and always trusted unto them, for that he does here solemnly
swear, that he might wholly assure us, that he would pour forth his blessing
upon us. And now the time is present, the hour is come, wherein, he has
sworn, that salvation should come unto us, as it is declared Mar. 16. Go ye
into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature: he that shall
believe and be baptized, shall be saved: but he that will not believe, Abraham
merited not the promise.
shall be damned. Men surely have not merited it, no not Abraham him self, who
was not made partaker of the promise, seeing that he died long before the
fulfilling thereof. In spirit in deed and faith he was partaker of it, but he
lived not so long, til the Gospel was revealed to ye whole world The promise
therefore was made unto him, although, as I have said, he looked not for ye
fulfilling thereof in this life. That is, his life was not prolonged until the
preaching of the Gospel in the whole world, although in faith he obtained the
Gospel for him self. Wherefore it can not be said, that that promise was due
to his merits, otherwise he must have lived in the earth until the fulfilling
thereof, and a due price or reward must have been paid unto him. But now the
performing of the promise was after his death, so that every one must needs
confess, that that promise was not made to Abraham because of his merits.

Again, it can not be said, The Gentiles merited not the enjoying of the
promise.
that the Gentiles which enjoy this promise, have obtained it by their merits,
which then were not. God promises to the fathers and performs not, he
performs to the Gentiles, to whom notwithstanding no promise was made, who
all at that time were not. God will always retain to him self his honor, and
be the same God, although the wicked world can not be so persuaded. He
chasteneth, reproves, rebukes, provoke, stirs, allureth, does whatsoever
is to be done, but the worldlings rob him of his honor, and attribute it to
them selves, that is, they will not acknowledge, that whatsoever they possess
or have, it comes unto them by the only grace of God. When therefore we glory
of such good things, and acknowledge not God to be the author and giver of
them, we make our selves as God, and him as our servant. So he is dishonored,
and the honor attributed unto us. But albeit we make merchandise of his
honor, yet he has affirmed in the Scriptures, that he will keep his honor
and glory only to him self, that so he may be acknowledged to give all
things of his mere and only grace. These things he that believes, does also
receive them: he that does not believe, shall at the length receive his due
reward. Zacharias says moreover:

Verse 74. That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve
him without fear,

Verse 75. All the days of our life, in holiness and righteousness before him.


He has defined the nature and property of this kingdom: that is, the
covenant made with Abraham, that in his seed all the nations of the earth
should be blessed, etc. Which words of blessing, thus says he, I will
interpret unto you, that being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we
may serve him without fear all our life long in holiness and righteousness
before him. Which to the world and our flesh sauoureth not well. For the world
thus murmureth here: I had thought that he would have given us some precious
thing, as a purse well stuffed with money, a rich wife, fair and bewtifull
children, goodly houses, and whatsoever the world is delighted in. But now I
perceive it to be otherwise, I hear that we must without fear serve him in
holiness and righteousness, and so please him. Wherefore it shall be meet that
we apply hereunto spiritual eyes and ears, that we may more rightly consider
and understand the words. Whereas he says, that he will deliver us from all
our enemies, it is again thus to be understood, that this kingdom is placed in
the mids of enemies, and notwithstanding that it is not therefore destroyed,
but that always all the enemies and adversaries thereof are overcome. We must
understand also that the deliverance from our enemies tends hereunto, that we
should always obey him that delivers us, without any fear. And this is a
Christian thing, and an amiable kingdom, that a Christian shall lead his life
without fear. Howbeit God has bestowed this upon us, that we should hereafter
serve him alone.

The words without fear, include in them, that we shall quietly enjoy the good
things of this present world, A Christian how he lives without fear.
and of the world to come. For a Christian is sure and certain of the
forgiveness of his sins, although he as yet feels them, as we have said a
little before. He is certain that death has no power in him: that Satan does
not overcome him: that the world can not prevail against him. Such a heart is
without all peril and fear, and plainly free from them. Which do not thou so
understand, as though we do not feel sin at all, but that we are greatly
grieved when sins trouble us, when the image or sight of death terrifieth us,
when as being reproched and sclaundered of the world, we stand as destitute,
and have none in this earth, to whom we may turn us or resort for succor, but
God alone. These things in deed are felt, but they do not prevail nor
overcome us: for the heart notwithstanding remains safe and quiet in God. So
poverty also is felt, when thou art pinched with hunger, and have not
wherewithal to fill thy belly, to maintain thy wife and bring up thy
children, nor any certain place where to dwell and abide, but all these
things shall not hurt thee: thou must ask of God whatsoever thou need, and
serve him without fear, as our present text declares. But herein we do for
the most part behave our selves not as Christians, we judge after our own
affection and sense, according as the world does blame us, or report evil of
us. Also when our fields have no corn, no money is in our purse, we think
our selves utterly destitute and forsaken. But a true Christian with shut eyes
and ears says with Paul speaking to the Galathians: O flesh, sin, death,
ye are dead unto me: Gal. 2. and 6.
and I again am dead unto you, that Christ may live in me. The world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world. That is, the world has no care or
regard of me, and my preaching and life is mocked and scorned of it. But with
the same measure that thou measurest unto me, I will measure to thee again: if
thou despisest me, I also will despise thee: if thou make no account of me, I
again will make small account of thee.

What care I, if the world hate me, when as I displease not him that dwells
in heaven? if this hatred continue even daily, if sin rage, and the world
talk and prate many things, what then? let it do so until it be weary, I will
pass over these things as if I heard them not. This is in deed to forsake the
world, and to die unto it, to live without fear, to be occupied about no other
thing, but that which is according to Gods will, to speak nothing at all but
that which shall please him, and which I shall know to be agreeable to his
word: that I may live so, and do those works, which I know certainly are
acceptable before him, that in my whole life whatsoever I do either outwardly,
or inwardely, I may be certain that I seek his glory, and endeavor to
fulfill his will. So I am separated from the world, and notwithstanding do
still live in the world. No man is less in the world then a sincere
Christian: and again, no man is more occupied and has to do with the world
then an entire Christian. That is, the world does more intentiuely look unto
him, and Satan more often and vehemently assaileth him, then him that is
ignorant of Christ, of grace, and of faith. Christ and Paul had experience
hereof: they had combats and conflicts with the world: they were troubled and
molested, yea the whole world was against them. Again, a true Christian is not
in the world, albeit the world rage and fret cruelly against him: for he
always trusts in God, and says: Lord, I am thine, thou shall deal well with
me, grant thou that my matters may go forward according to thy will, only be
thou on my side, and I shall be in safety.

All the days of our life. All our life long, that is continually, without
ceasing.

In holiness and righteousness before him. Here S. Luke divides righteousness and
holiness into two sorts: of which one is acceptable before God: ye other before
him is of no value: whereby we have to understand, that both the righteousness
and holiness of God are in no estimation before the world, even as the world is
wont nothing to esteem God, and again God little to esteem the world. For
that which God calls just, the world calls unjust: and that which it
calls right, God calls crooked: and so these two Champions are continually
at variance between them selves. That which God calls holy, seems to the
world deuilish and unrighteous. Wherefore he comfort us here, declaring that
there be two sorts of righteousness and holiness: One, which we ought to observe
diligently: An other which we ought to avoid. Hypocritical holiness and
righteousness
Hitherto it has been the chief holiness and righteousness of all, which could
be invented, to run into Monasteries, to put on monkish apparel, to be
shaven, to wear a hempten girdle, to give him self to fasting and prayer, to
be clothed with hear cloth, to lie in woollen garments, to observe an austere
manner of living: and in a sum, to take upon him monkish holiness and religion.
And thus sticking in a colorable show of good works, we knew none other but
that we were holy from top to toe: having regard only to works and the body,
and not to the heart, where we were full of hatred, fear, and incredulity,
troubled with an evil conscience, knowing almost nothing rightly of God. The^
the world cried openly: O that holy man: O holy and chaste woman, which have
included them selves within the walls of Monasteries, which day and night
kneeling upon their knees say many rosaries, as they call them. O, what holiness
is there, where even God him self dwells, where the holy Ghost the comforter
abides present? These things the world boasts of, and greatly esteems.
But beside these they do not mark, how they pray with no earnestnes of heart,
how they teach and instruct no man, how they give nothing to any, but catch
unto them selves both the blood and sweat of the poor, and leave true sincere
works undone. This righteousness and holiness the world extolleth, which
notwithstanding stincketh and is wholly unclean before God, which he will have
even to be unknown unto us, yet the world refuses to admit any other.

But there is an other manner of righteousness then this whereof God esteems
and accepts, which also we must consider, The righteousness whereof God
accepts, of what sort it is.
now it is of this sort: It consists not in a graye garment, not in a black
or white coule, but in a pure conscience. To wit, when I believe, that Christ
is my salvation, and that my works can prevail nothing hereunto: but that he
does all things which God has regard unto. Then I say no more: a gray
garment is holy, a red garment is profane, forasmuch as I know, that not in a
gray or any other garment, but in Christ all things consist. For no man can
attain to this, that a gray garment may cleanse his heart from f^lth, or that a
monastery may purify it: for it is necessary that God only purify the heart
by faith, and the holy Ghost, as Peter witnesses Act. 15. When the heart is now
pure, the house is unto it as the field, and the field as the house: The
market is as much esteemed of it as the Monastery, and contrariwise. Neither
remains there unto me any work, place, or garment, which I count profane:
for all things are alike unto me, after that holiness has fully possessed my
heart. That even God says unto me: Thou art godly, I am thy father, thou art my
son. And herein we ought to persist, that we be holy, and without fear do
obey and serve him. Here the title and badges of a Christian are seen, and
this is his cognizance, to wit, that being holy, he is the Minister of God
without fear. But what sinner is there which dares challenge to him self
this title? Let one come forth, which dares avouch him self to be godly,
righteous, holy, and the servant of God, destitute of no good things either
of mind or body. Now he that ca^ not glory of these things, is not a Christian.
For of these things must a sincere Christian be partaker. But what lets
that one dares not challenge to him self this title? Even a timorous
conscience: for we always feel sin, and our life is ever frail. I see
nothing but an honest life, although God require this also of us, yet he will
not be content therewith, but there is need that there be yet a certain higher
thing, that I dare be bold to say: Lord God maker of the whole word, I am
certain that I am holy before thee, and am thy servant, not for mine own
sake, who do as yet feel sins in my self, but through Christ, who has
taken away my sin, and made satisfaction for me. These things surely I ought
to glory of, if I be a true Christian.

But this seems difficult and hard: God admits no sin, my fearful and
weak conscience is against me. How am I his servant, when as notwithstanding
I feel in my self, that I serve the devil, and do not know that I am holy?
I speak not here of the common sort of Christians, such as I, and such like
are: but of sincere Christians, which have a good conscience, and in whose
hearts the spirit of God abides, whose conscience albeit it be frail and
weak, and they feel their sins, yet they are enforced to say: Howsoever
sin is, yet I know no sin by my self, neither am I subject to death and
hell, and for this cause they strive, and at the last overcome, that therefore
they would even die, in that confidence. But I find it far otherwise, if I
set my life before my sight. Here life and the word must be separated far
asunder. If thou will consider life, I will set also before thee the lives of
S. Peter, Paul, or John, thou shall find even them not to have lived without
sin. When thou desire to be holy before God, We must trust, not to our life
and works, but to the mere mercy and grace of God
trust not to thy life, unless thou will perish for ever. For thou must trust
to only mercy and grace, and not to life or works, otherwise thy case will be
very ill. Wherefore our heart must be so affected that it say: Lord, if thou
should call me to an account, I should not be able either by life or works
to stand in thy sight, no although I were even John the Baptist. Nevertheless
therefore I glory that I am godly, and thy servant, for that thou do give
unto me continually, and also for that, as thou have promised to Abraham, thou
do for thy Christ's sake, vouchsafe to show thy mercy unto me: if so be that
I of my self be not godly and righteous, yet he is godly and righteous for me:
If I be profane, he is holy: if I be not ye servant of God, he is the
servant of God: if I be not without fear and carefulnes, yet he is void of
all fear and carefulnes: that so I may as it were transfer my self from my
self, and perse into him, and glory, that in Christ and by Christ I am good.
Thus he will have us to glory, that we are godly and holy, but not by our own
merit: for we must glory of our selves, as of most desperate wretches.

And that this may be plain, mark our life, consider our good conversation
and manners, weye how foolishly men apply them selves to the Gospel, that I am
almost in dout, whether I should preach any more or no. For as soon as these
things are taught in a sermon, that salvation consists not in our works or
life, but in the gifts of God, every one is slow to do good, no man will live
an honest life, and be any more obedient, they falsely affirm every where, that
good works are inhibited. Nevertheless God requires of us, that we lead an
honest life outwardly, and he that does not so, shall at length find his due
punishment. Now if it happen that we live godlily and honestly outwardly,
Satan by and by frames his wickedness. Neither do I know at this day how to
order my self in this matter, not because of my own person, but because of
life. For if we preach of an honest and godly life, the world by and by
furiously attempteth without judgment, They endeavor by their good works to
attain to salvation.

We must neither presume of good works, nor neglect to lead a godly life.


to build ladders to heaven: which God neither can, neither will by any means
suffer: Again, a dishonest and ignominious life does not become Christians,
neither does a delicate life become them. What therefore must we then do? They
which have respect only to an honest and fair life, it were better for them
to be adulterers and adulteresses, and altogether to wallow in the mire. And
yet notwithstanding God will not have us to lead our life filthily and
dishonestly. For neither can he suffer that, adiudging thee even unto hell
therefore, if thou so do. And if thou lead an honest life, thou will stick in
it, and arrogate unto thy self, which again he can not suffer. Thou must
therefore so provide that thou remain in the middle pathe, declining neither
to the right hand, nor to the left, and that thou lead a quiet, fair, and
amiable life in the sight of the world: which also may be acceptable before
God, and yet that thou do not therefore so greatly esteem it, nor count so of
it, as though thou do merit any thing of God thereby.

Thus a Christian continues the holy servant of God without fear, not by his
good works and holy life, but by the grace of Christ. Blasphemous to affirm
our selves holy by our works
But he that affirms that he is holy by his works, is blasphemous against
God, robs God of his honor, and denies Christ, for whom it were better,
that he were ten times an homicide, or an adulterer, then that he should
thereby affirm him self to be a Christian, yea godly and holy: for he does
plainly dishonor Christ, and it is as much as to affirm that there is no
Christ: for he is therefore called Christ, for that he is our grace, mercy,
redemption, and holiness. If I should not attribute to the divine mercy, that
God him self does save me, what should this be else, but to say, that he is
neither holy nor blessed? Wherefore if I be a Christian, I must confess, that
I am holy and a Christian for this cause, for that Christ him self is holy.
And albeit my conscience does reprove me of sin, yet I must still persevere in
this, that his holiness is greater then my sins. Thus I must live honestly
outwardly, but inwardly rest and trust in him alone. It follows moreover how
Zacharias turns his speech to the child, and says:

Verse 76. And thou child shall be called the Prophet of the most High: for
thou shall go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways.
This shall be thy office: Thou shall be the first, and shall first begin: that
is, thou shall be the Prophet of the most High: But what manner of prophecy
shall that be, how shall it be done: After this sort: John the forerunner of
Christ.
Thou shall be the forerunner of the Lord, and shall prepare his ways. When
any Prince comes, certain go before him, to prepare way and place for him,
and say: Give place, depart out of the way: John doing the like, runs before
and cries unto the people: Go aside, turn out of the way, give place, the
Lord him self comes. Such a servant is John, whom the Lord by and by
follows. Such things no Prophet at any time has spoken, but they have
prophesied of these things, that a Prophet should sometime come, which should
erect a kingdom that should continue for ever, etc. But all dyed, not one
remained, which did behold this being alive. But this Prophet does live even at
that time, when the Lord him self comes, and by and by follows him. For
the Gospel was begone to be preached, Baptism was begone to be ministered, by
the coming and ministry of John, who ceassing, Christ began, both almost in
the same year. Now what shall be his office? This truly, The office of John.
to prepare a way for the Lord. Which preparation is nothing else, but to bring
people to ye Lord the Savior. Christ is the grace, gift, King and horn of
our salvation. This Lord and King no man receives, unless he be first humbled,
that he think nothing of him self. For he can not otherwise attain unto
Christ, neither can stand together, to receive the grace of God by gift, and
also to merit the same. John therefore in this part teaches men nothing else,
but that they are sinners and altogether nothing. He now which acknowledges
him self, and feels him self a sinner before, yea and to be nothing, well
understands the voice of John, which is, prepare ye a way for the Lord: Give
place to him: He is at hand that follows me, who is greater then I, him ye
shall hear, him ye shall obey. The other office of John which follows, is,
that he brings men to the knowledge of salvation, and shows with his finger
that pascall Lamb, that takes away our sins, that he may fasten them to the
cross with him self and abolish them. Whereof Zacharias now goes on to
speak.

Verse 77. To give knowledge of salvation unto his people, by the remission of
their sins.
That is, thou shall begin the office and ministry of the word, whereby is
taught and learned how one is saved. Wherein blessedness consists.
Which salvation or blessedness consists in this, not how we may be famous
through great abundance of riches, glory, and power in earth, as the Jews
have hitherto understood it: but that we may obtain remission of sins, and
be made partakers of the grace of God. Now where remission of sins is, there
is no merit, no reward or satisfaction, otherwise it could not be called
remission of sins. So that this knowledge is, to understand, how God
forgiueth us our sins without works and merits, and saves us by mere grace
and mercy, as it follows:

Verse 78. Through the tender mercy of our God, whereby the day spring from an
high has visited us.
Here it appears that they which teach and observe laws, works, and merits,
do strive against both the mercy of God and knowledge of salvation. Forgiveness
of sins comes not by any merit or work of ours, but through the tender
mercy of God.
For he says not yt forgiveness of sins has come by the prayers or works of
the fathers, or of any of the Saints, but through the bottomless mercy of God,
which Luke calls the tender mercy, and such mercy as comes from the most
inward affection and bowels. Notwithstanding this forgiveness of sin, which
comes unto us by mercy, is not without merit, although it comes to pass
without our merit: but a Mediator comes between, who has in our steed
deserved it for us, which is Christ our Lord. For God would that satisfaction
should be made unto him for our sins, and that his honor and law should be
performed, here we were able to do nothing. But Christ alone both was able,
and satisfied for us who of the infinite mercy of the father, was sent for ye
same cause, and that to us, that he might dispatche it. Therefore he says,
Through which infinite and bottomless mercy the day spring from an high has
visited us. Without all dout it was no merit, but only unmeasurable mercy, that
Christ came to us, and merited and obtained for us such remission of sins
unto eternal salvation. Now he calls him, the day spring from an hie, which
signifies unto us his divinity. And this is his meaning: on hie, that is,
above all creatures, where nothing is hier, but height alone, there is Christ
in his divinity, as the morning or day spring. For he proceeds from the
father, as the beams do from the sun, whereof we have elsewhere spoken at
large.

Verse 79. To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of
death, and to guide our feet into the way of peace.
Many of the fathers understood this of Lymbus, as they call it: but Luke
agrees here with ye saying of Esai, where he says: The people that walked in
darkness, have seen a great light, Esai. 9.1. How Christ is the light of the
world.
etc. His meaning therefore is this: Christ therefore came, that he might be
the light of the world, and by the Gospel might enlighten men's hearts, and
allure them to him self, which were held captive under Satan in the blindness
and darkness of incredulity, that so he might guide our feet into the way of
peace, How Christ guides our feet into the way of peace.
that is, he might govern our conscience well, quietly and cherefully in the
kingdom of grace, that we may be afraid neither of Satan, neither of sin,
death, hell, nor of any adversity, who heretofore have rested, part of us in
filthy vices, part in good works, notwithstanding we could on neither side
enjoy any quietness or peace, but were compelled to despeire under Satan, and
the fear of death, neither did we know how to find that way which leads
unto peace, according to the saying of the foureteenth Psalm: The way of peace
have they not known, etc. Thus ye have heard how Zacharias does in most goodly
and fit words most lively paint out the Gospel and kingdom of Christ, with all
the fruits, colors and conditions thereof, that it is a word and kingdom of
grace, of forgiveness of sins, also a kingdom of peace, joy, quietness,
salvation and all goodness. God grant, that we may thoroughly know and feel the
same. Amen.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER OF THE MEDITATION OF CHRIST HIS PASSION.
FIrst, some do so think upon ye passion of Christ, that they are incensed
with anger against the Jews, and do inueigh against wretched Judas in songs
and reproachful words: and thus they are content, and think this to be
sufficient, even as they are wont in lamenting the case of other, to take pity
on them, and to accuse and condemn their adversaries. But that can not be
called a remembering of the passion of Christ, but rather of Judas and Judas his
wickedness.

Secondly, some have noted in their minds diverse commodities and fruits
proceeding of the meditation of Christ's passion, that saying which is ascribed
to Albertus being commonly in their remembrance, that it is better to think
upon the passion of Christ superficially or once, then if one should fast the
space of a whole year, and daily in praying go over the whole Psalter, etc.
That they follow hitherto, being blind and justly stumbling, contrary to the
true fruit of the Lords passion. Moreover they seek their own things
therein, and therefore they bring with them images, books, letters and
crosses. Some also go so far, that they think they shall make them selves
safe from waters, terrors, fire, and from all danger, as though the Lords
suffering should be without suffering in them, contrary to the quality and
nature thereof.

Thirdly, some have compassion of Christ, lamenting and weeping for him as
being an innocent man, like unto the women which followed Christ from
Jerusalem, who were reprehended and admonished of him, that they should weep
for them selves and for their children.

Fourthly, some so call to mind the passion of the Lord, and so consider
Christ, that inwardly they are sore afraid, yea their reason also or
understanding is turned into a certain astoniednes or bashfulnes. How the
passion of Christ ought to terrify us.
Which fear notwithstanding ought to proceed from hence especially, in that
we should be put in mind thereby of the wrath and immutable severity of God
prepared for sins and sinners, forasmuch as he would not grant to his only
begotten and beloved son that sinners should be absolved and pardoned, vules
he did make so great a satisfaction for them, as he speaks by Esaias chap. 53:
For the transgression of my people have I smitten him. What shall come unto the
sinner, when a son so exceedingly beloved is smitten? It must needs be that
there is an unspeakable and a most serious and earnest matter, where so great
and excellent a person does descend to do good unto him, and suffers and
dies for him.

Fifthly, reuolue deeply in thy mind, and dout not a whit, that thou art he
which so tormented Christ, forasmuch as thy sins were most certainly the
cause thereof. Thus S. Peter in the second of the Acts, did strike and
terrify the Jews as it were with a certain lightning, when as he said unto
them generally: whom you have crucified, so that the very same day three
thousand me^ were greatly terrified, and being pricked in their hearts said
unto the Apostles: Men and brethren, what shall we do? Wherefore when thou
considerest that his hands were pearsed with nails, think that it was thy
work: when thou remembrest his crown of thorns, persuade thy self that it
was thy wicked cogitations, which caused it, etc.

Sixthly, think with thy self, that whereas one thorn pricked Christ, thou
ought worthily to be pricked with an hundred thousand thorns, and that
without intermission, yea and much more grievously: and that whereas one nail
pearsed the hands and feet of Christ, thou ought to be grieved and molested
with many more and far more sharp nails continually, even as it shall come
at the last unto those, in whom the passion of Christ has not been effectual
but frustrat. For Christ who is the truth it self, will lie to no man, will
delude no man, and that which he attempteth must needs be a matter of
exceeding great importance and wonderful high.

Seventhly, such fear Bernard had conceived hereof when he said: I did play
abroad in the street, and in the Kings privy chamber sentence of death was
given upon me. The Kings only begotten son hearing this, laid of his
diadem and came forth, clothed in sackcloth, his head sprinkeled with ashes,
and bare foot, weeping and crying out that his servant was condemned to
death. I beholding him suddenly coming forth, am amassed at the straungenes
thereof, I ask and harken after the cause. What shall I do? shall I play
still and delude his tears? Alas (says he) it is no time now to play, it is
no time to be secure, when so weightye a matter is in hand. So he bad the
women that they should not weep for him, but for them selves and for their
children, and he adioyneth the cause: For if they do these things to a green
tree, what shall be done to the dry? as if he said: learn what ye obtain by
my passion, and howsoever things fall out, yet this is true and known among
you, that the whelpe is sometime smitten, that the bandogge or mastiue may be
terrified. So also the Prophet has spoken: All kinreds of the earth shall
wail before him. He said not, they shall bewail him, but, they shall wail
before him. Moreover they were sore afraid, of whom it is before spoken, so
that they said unto the Apostles Act. 2: Men and brethren, what shall we do?

Eighthly, that this affection may be wrought in us, the Lords passion is very
diligently to be considered of and meditated upon, By consideration of Christ's
passion we ought to come to the knowledge of our selves
forasmuch as the most certain profit thereof does much consist herein, that a
man may come to the knowledge of him self, and tremble and be troubled before
him self: whereunto he that does not come, has not yet attained unto the due
profit of the Lords passion. For the passion of Christ has this proper and
natural virtue, to make a man like unto him, that even as he was grievously
tormented both in body and mind for our sins: so we also to imitat him must
be afflicted in the knowledge of our sins. Howbeit the matter is not here
done in many words, but in depecogitation and earnest weying of sins. A
similitude.
Take a similitude: as thou have great cause to fear and tremble, if, when
some malefactor is condemned, for that he has killed the son of the King or
Prince, thou in the mean season, singing and playing securely as being
innocent, art terribly apprehended and convicted, that thou did suborne the
homicide: So thou ought to become much more fearful when thou do
reuolue in thy mind the passion of Christ. For albeit the wicked Jews be now
judged of God and dispersed, yet were they Ministers of thy transgressions, and
thou for a certainty art he, which with thy sins have crucified and slain
the son of God, as it has been said.

Ninethly, he that feels him self so hardened and dull, that the passion of
Christ does not terrify him, neither bring him unto the knowledge of him
self, is in an ill and lamentable case: for Christ's passion is not effectual
in him. But now it is a hard thing for thee to be occupied in these things,
What we must do that our meditation upon Christ's passion may be fruitful.
and earnestly bent to the meditation of them: wherefore thou shall pray God
that he will mollify thy heart, and give thee grace profitably to meditate upon
the passion of Christ, because it can not in any wise be, that the passion of
Christ should be inwardly and rightly thought upon and considered of us, unless
God inspire it into our hearts. Yea, neither this meditation nor any other
doctrine is therefore set forth unto thee, that thou should boldly rushe
upon it of thy self to fulfill it, but that thou should first ask and
desire the grace of God, that thou may fulfill it, not by thine own strength,
but by Gods grace. For hereof it comes, that they of whom it is before
spoken, do not meditate on the passion of Christ aright, because they desire
not help of God thereunto, but rather trusting unto their own strength, and
following their own invention, meditate upon it altogether after the fashion
of men, and after a sclender and unfruitful manner.

Tenthly, if one should through ye grace of God meditate rightly upon the
passion of Christ, by the space of one day, or of one hour, yea or the space
of a quarter of an hour, we would faithfully pronounce of him, that he has
done better, then if he had pined him self with fasting the space of a whole
year, or had run over the Psalter every day. For this manner of meditation
does as it were change a man, and almost regenerate him a new like unto
baptism. Then in deed the Lords passion does his natural, due and noble
office, it kills the old Adam, it drives away all pleasure, joy and
confidence, which may be had of creatures, even as Christ was forsaken of all,
yea even of his father.

Eleuenthly, We must not despeire or cease, though at the first we obtain not
that we pray for.
seeing that such a thing is not in our own power, it comes to pass that we
do often times ask it, and yet do not by and by obtain it, notwithstanding
we must not therefore dispeire or cease. For that is sometimes given for which
we have not prayed, and that sometimes is not granted for which we have
prayed, even as it is the pleasure of God, and as he knows to be best for us,
for God will have this gift to be free and without constraint.

Twelfthly, when as a man thus knowing his sin does wholly tremble in him
self, he must especially endeavor, that sins do not still remain in his
conscience, otherwise mere desperation will come thereupon, but he must shake
them of and cast them upon Christ, and so unburden his conscience. Therefore
see again and again that thou do not that which perverse men do, which
within the secrets of their heart do vex and disquiet them selves because of
their sins, and strive with them, that by good works or satisfactions, by
far going on pilgrimage, or else by pardons they may become safe, and may be
made free from sins, which can not be. And (alas) such a false confidence in
satisfactions and pardons has prevailed very far.

Moreover, then thou do cast thy sins from thee upon Christ, What it is
to cast our sins upon Christ.
when thou firmly beleuest that he suffered and was wounded for thy sins,
and that he has paid the full ransom and satisfaction for the^, as Esaias says
chap. 53. The Lord has thrown upon him all our sins. 1. Pet. 2.24. 2. Cor.
5.21.
And S. Peter says: who his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree.
S. Paul says: He has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, that
we should be made the righteousness of God in him. In these and such like
authorities thou must repose thy hope with all boldness, and that so much the
more, as thy conscience does more grievously vex and trouble thee. But if thou
shall not do this, but presumest that thou shall be quiet by thy contrition
and satisfaction, then thou shall never come unto quietness, but at the last
shall fall even into desperation. For our sins kept and meddled with within
our conscience, and set before the eyes of our heart, are far stronger then
we, and do live immortally. But when as we see them laid upon Christ, and to
be victoriously conquered of him by his resurrection, and do confidently
believe this, then they are dead and brought unto nothing. And yet being laid
upon Christ, they must not remain so: for they are swallowed up in the
triumph of his resurrection. So says Saint Paul: Christ was delivered to
death for our sins, and is risen again for our justification, that is, he
has taken upon him our sins in his passion, and has thereby paid the
ransom for them, but by his resurrection he justifies us, and makes us free
from all sin, if so be that we do believe this.

If thou can not attain unto this faith, thou must as it is a little before
said, What we must do when we can not attain unto this faith, to believe that
Christ died for our sins and rose again for our justification.
resort unto God by prayer, forasmuch as this gift is in the hand of God only,
who bestows it when and upon whom it pleases him. Thou may also stir
up thy self hereunto: first, not now considering the passion of Christ
outwardly, (for that has now fulfilled his function and has terrified thee)
but rather by pearsing inwardly and contemplating his most loving heart, with
how great love toward thee it is replenished, which brought him hereunto, that
he did bear thy conscience together with thy sins with so great and
painful difficulty. So thy heart shall wax sweet toward him, and the
strength and boldness of thy faith shall be increased. Then having entered unto
the heart of Christ, ascend higher even unto the heart of God, and consider that
the love of Christ could not have been showed unto thee, except the will of God
by his eternal love had so appointed, whereunto Christ by his love toward thee
did obey. There thou shall find a divine heart, a good heart, a fatherly heart,
and (as Christ says) thou shall be drawn unto ye father by Christ. There thou
shall understand this saying of Christ: John. 3.16.
So God loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. For this is to
know God aright, when he is understood of us, not under the name of power or
wisdom (which is a terror unto us) but under the name of goodness and love.
Then faith and confidence may stand constantly, and man him self is as it were
regenerate a new in God.

When thy heart is thus established in Christ, so that thou art now become an
enemy of sin, and that by love and not through fear of punishment, then
afterward the passion of Christ ought to be an example unto thee in thy whole
life, and is now to be considered of in thy mind after a far other manner then
before. For hitherto we have considered it as an outward thing which should
work in us, but now we will wey it so, that something is to be done of us
also. For examples sake: In the meditation of Christ's passion we may find
remedy against grief, pride, lust, anger, envy, sorrow, trouble, etc.
when grief or infirmity does molest thee, think how light these are being
compared to the crown of thorns and the nails of Christ. When thou must
either do or leave of that which is grievous unto thee to do or leave of,
think how Christ was taken and bound, and led up and down. When pride
tempts thee, consider with thy self how thy Lord was mocked, and reputed
among thieves. When lust and pleasure prick thee, think with how great
sharpenes the tender flesh of Christ was torn with whippes, and pearsed
through. When anger, envy, desire of revenge move thee, think with how great
tears and cries Christ did pray even for his enemies, toward whom he might
more justly have showed him self sharp and rigorous. When sadness or any
adversity whatsoever either corporal or spiritual troubles thee, strengthen
thy heart, and say: well, why should not I also suffer a little sorrowfulnes,
when as my Lord did sweat blood in the garden for anguish and heaviness. Surely
he were a sluggish and an ignominious servant, who, his master lying at the
point of death, would be held from him with a soft and easy bed.

Lo, thus a man may find strength and remedy in Christ against all crimes and
offenses. This is truly in deed to meditate upon the passion of Christ: these
are the fruits of the Lords passion, in which he that does after this sort
exercise him self, does surely without comparison better then if he heard all
passions or all superstitious Masses. Such also are called true Christians,
which do so represent the life and name of Christ in their life, as S. Paul
says: Gal. 5.24.
They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts with Christ. For the passion of Christ is not to be handled in words
and outward show, but in deed and verity. Heb. 12.3.
So S. Paul admonishes us: Consider him that endured such speaking against of
sinners, least ye should be wearied and fainte in your minds. And S. Peter
says: 1. Pet. 4.1.
Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm yourselues
likewise with the same mind. But such meditation is now grown out of use and
begone to wax rare, wherewith notwithstanding the Epistles of Peter and Paul
are most abundantly replenished.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER OF THE FRVTE AND VERTVE OF CHRIST HIS
RESVRRECTION.
WE have heard in the treatise of the Lords passion, It is not enough to know
the history of Christ's passion and resurrection, but the use and fruit of
them must be preached and known
that it is not sufficient to know only the bare history thereof. After the
same manner it is not enough here to know, how and when Christ rose again, but
both the use and the profit as well of his passion as of his resurrection must
be preached and known, to wit, what Christ obtained for us by them. For where
the only deed of the history is preached, it is a frivolous preaching and
without all fruit, which both Satan and the wicked do as well know, read, and
understand, as we do. But when as the use of them is preached, and whereunto
they profit, that in deed is a fruitful and wholesome Sermon, and full of
sweet consolation. Wherefore Christ him self has declared the use and profit
of his passion and resurrection, when he thus talked with the women Matthew. 28:
Be not afraid: Go and tell my brethren that they go into Galile, and there
shall they see me. And this is the first word, which they hear of Christ after
his resurrection from the dead, whereby he confirms all his sayings, also
all his benefits showed unto them before, to wit that they should come unto us
also that should believe in him, and pertain only to the beleuers, for that
here he calls not only the Apostles his brethren, but also all them which
believe in him, although they do not see him visibly as the Apostles did. He
does not differ until we pray unto him and call upon him, that we may be
made his brethren. Let any of us now come forth, and boast of his merit, or of
the strength, whereby he is able to merit any thing. The Apostles merited
nothing at all, that Christ should call them his brethren.
What had the Apostles merited? Peter denied Christ thrice. All the rest of the
Disciples did fly away from him, they did persevere and stand by him, even as
the hare tarieth with her young ones, he might have called them runawayes, and
forsakers of their standing in the midst of their conflict, yea traitors and
wicked men, rather then brethren. Wherefore of mere grace and mercy this word
was brought unto them of the Matrones, which the Apostles themselves did then
well perceive, and we also do thoroughly feel, when we are set in the mids
of sins, and are overcome of damnation.

This word therefore is full of all consolation and comfort, that Christ cares
for such wretched men as we are, yea and that he does call us his brethren. If
so be that Christ be our brother, surely I would feign know what good thing we
shall want. As therefore the case stands among carnal brethren, so does it
stand here. They that are germane brethren by consanguinitie, do use goods
common among them selves, having the same father, the same inheritance,
otherwise they were not brethren. So we also possess common good things with
Christ, enjoying the same father, the same inheritance, which inheritance is
not diminished by parting it, as worldly inheritances are, but is always made
more abundant: for it is a spiritual inheritance. A corporal inheritance,
when it is distributed into diverse parts, is made smaller, but in this portion
of the spirit, the case is such, that he that has gotten part thereof has
obtained the whole. The inheritance of Christ.
What is therefore the inheritance of Christ? In his power are life and death,
sin and grace, and whatsoever is contained in heaven and in earth, his are
eternal verity, strength, wisdom, righteousness. All power is given unto him,
he has rule over all things, over hunger and thirst, prosperity and
adversity, etc. he reigns over all things that can be thought, whether they
be in heaven or in earth, spiritual or corporal, and that I may speak at
once: all things are in his power, as well eternal things as temporal. Now
if I shall cleave unto him by faith, What they enjoy that cleave to Christ by
faith.
I shall be made partaker of all his good things, and shall not obtain a part
of the inheritance only, but I shall possess even with him everlasting
wisdom, eternal strength. My belly shall not be grieved with hunger, sins
shall not oppress me, neither shall I be afraid of the face of death, neither
shall I dread the sight of Satan, neither shall I want the plenty of any thing
that is good, even as he wants it not. Hereby now we may easily understand
the sayings uttered commonly in the Prophets, and especially in the Psalms,
as where David says Psalm. 34: The Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they
that fear the Lord shall want no manner of thing that is good: and where he
says in an other place: The Lord knows the ways of the righteous, and their
inheritance shall endure for ever. They shall not be confounded in the perilous
time, and in the days of dearth they shall have enough. And again: I have
been young and now am old, and yet saw I never the righteous forsaken, nor his
seed begging bread. All which things Christ brings with him, for that we
are, and are called his brethren, not because of any merit but of mere grace.
If we would print these things in our heart, yt we might thoroughly feel them,
it should go well with us, but they go in at one ear and out at an other.
This is that whereof S. Paul so greatly glories Romans 8. As many as are led by
the spirit of God, they are the sons of God. For ye have not received the
spirit of bondage to fear again: but ye have received the spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry Abba, Father: The same spirit bears witness with our spirit,
that we are the children of God: if we be children, we are also heirs, even
the heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ, if so be that we suffer with
him, that we may also be glorified with him.

Moreover this title ascends so high, that man's mind is not able to
comprehend it. For unless the spirit the comforter did impart this grace unto
us, no man should ever be able to say: Christ is my brother. For reason can not
be bold so to say, albeit one repeat it in words very often, as the new
spirits do. It is a higher thing then that it can be so spoken, for except the
heart feel it, as it is requisite it should, it shall be nothing but only
flattery. But if thou feel it inwardly in thy heart, it will be so excellent a
thing unto thee, that thou will much rather say nothing of it, then speak and
talk of it, yea by reason of the greatness of so good a thing, thou will
perhaps dout as yet and be in an vncertaintye whether it be so or not. They
which only cry out thus: Christ is my brother, are fanatical spirits, who
vainly pronounce words without any fruit. The case stands far otherwise and
far more maruelously with a true Christian, so that he is thereby enforced to
be amassed, neither dares he either say or confess any thing sufficiently
thereof. Wherefore we must endeavor, that we do not hear this only with
fleshly ears, but that we feel it in our heart, for then we will not be so
rash, but we shall be forthwith carried into an admiration thereof. True and
sincere Christians enter into the viewing and fear of them selves, thinking
thus: O wretched and defiled creature, which am drowned in sins, am I now
made worthy, that the son of God should be my brother? how do I miserable
wretch attain to such a thing? Thus he is by and by astonished, and does not
well understand the thing. But a great study and endeavor surely is required,
that a man may believe this, yea if it were felt, as it ought in very deed, a
man should forthwith dye thereupon. For he can not understand it according to
his flesh and blood, and the heart of man in this life is more narrow and
straight, then that it is able to comprehend so great things. But in death,
when the heart shall be stretched out, then I say we shall try what we have
heard by the word.

In the Gospel of John chap. 20. Christ does far more plainly declare unto
Marie Magdalen this use and fruit both of his death and also of his
resurrection, when he says: Go unto my brethren and tell them: I ascend unto
my father and your father, unto my God and your God, this is one of the most
comfortable places whereof we may glory and boast. As though Christ should say:
Marie, get thee hence and declare unto my Disciples which did flee from me,
which have thoroughly deserved punishment and eternal condemnation, that this
resurrection of mine is for their good, that is, yt I have by my resurrection
brought the matter to that pass, that my father is their father, and my God is
their God. They are but a few and very short words in deed but they
contain great matter in them, namely, that we have as great hope and
confidence reposed in God, as his own son him self. Who can comprehend such
exceeding joy, I will not say, utter it? that a wretched and defiled sinner
may be bold to call God his father and his God even as Christ him self. The
author of the Epistle to the Hebrews chap. 2. did well remember the words of
the Psalm, and weied with him self how it speaks of Christ, who, as he
says, is not ashamed to call the believers, brethren, saying: I will declare
thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the Church or congregation will I
sing praises to thee.

If any worldly Prince or noble man should humble him self so low, that he
would say to a thief or robber, or to one that is infected with the french
pocks: thou art my brother, it would be a certain notable thing which every
one would marvel at. But whereas this king which sits in glory at the right
hand of his father, says of some poor man: this is my brother, that no man
lays up in the bosom of his breast, neither does any man consider of it in
his mind, wherein notwithstanding our chief comfort and confidence consists
against sin, death, the devils, hell, the law, and against all sinister
success of things as well of the body as of the mind. Moreover, forasmuch as
we are flesh and blood, and therefore subject to all kinds of adversity, it
follows, that the case should stand so also with our brother, otherwise he
should not be like unto us in all things. Wherefore, that he might be made
conformable and like unto us, Christ like unto us in all things except sin
he tasted and had experience of all things even as we have, sin only
excepted, that he might be our true brother, and exhibit him self openly unto
us. Which the Epistle to the Hebrews does lively set forth chap. 2. where it
says: Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also
him self likewise took part with them, that he might destroy through death,
him that had the power of death, that is, the devil, and that he might deliver
all the^, which for fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage.
For he took not on him the Angels nature, but he took on him the seed of
Abraham. Wherefore in all things it behooved him, to be made like unto his
brethren, that he might be merciful, and a faithful hie Priest in things
concerning God, that he might make reconciliation for the sins of the people.
For in that he suffered and was tempted, he is able to succor them that are
tempted. The profit, The fruit of Christ's passion and resurrection.
use and fruit of the Lords passion and resurrection S. Paul has gathered
very briefly and as it were into one short sum, when he says Romans 4: Christ
was delivered to death for our sins, and is risen again for our
justification. Whereof thus much at this time shall suffize.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER OF THE GOOD SHEPEHEARD.
John 10. Verse 11. Jesus said unto the Jews: I am that good shepeheard: that
good shepeheard gives his life for his sheep.

12. But an hyreling, and he which is not the shepeheard, neither the sheep
are his own, sees the woulfe coming, and leaves the sheep, and flees, and
the woulfe catches them, and scatters the sheep.

13. So the hyerling flees, because he is an hyerling, and cares not for the
sheep.

14. I am that good shepeheard, and know mine, and am known of mine.

15. As the Father knows me, so know I the Father: and I lay down my life
for my sheep.

16. Other sheep I have also which are not of this fold: them also must I
bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one sheepefold, and
one shepeheard.


THis text is full of consolation, which in a goodly parable sets forth
Christ our Lord, and teaches what manner of person he is, what be his works,
and of what affection he is toward men. Nevertheless it can not be understood,
but by comparing together light and darkness, day and night, that is, a good
and an evil shepeheard, as the Lord also does in this place.

Ye have now oftentimes heard, that God has instituted and ordained in the
world two manner of preachings: The preaching of the law.
One is, when the word of God is preached, which says Exodus 20: Thou shall
have none other gods before me. Also: Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not
commit adultery, Thou shall not steal, and does also threaten, that he which
does not keep those precepts shall dye. But that preaching does justify no
man. For although a man be thereby compelled to show him self godly outwardly
before men, notwithstanding inwardly his heart is offended at the law, The
preaching of the Gospel.
and had lever there were no law. The other ministry of the word is the
Gospel, which shows where that is to be received, which the law requires,
it neither urges nor threatens, but allureth men gentlely, it says not: do
this or that, but it says thus: Go too, I will show where thou may receive
and take, whereby thou may become righteous: Behold, here is Jesus Christ, he
will give it thee. Wherefore these two disagree one with an other, as much as to
receive and give, to exact and reward. And this difference is to be well
understood and marked. To hardened and intractable men, To whom the law must be
preached
which feel not the Gospel, the law is to be preached, and they are so long
to be urged, till they begin to be mollified and humbled, and do acknowledge
their disease, which when it is done, there is then place to begin to preach
the Gospel. These two sorts of preachinges were instituted and ordained of
God, besides these there are other which were not ordained of God, but are
traditions invented by men, ordained of the Pope and his Prelates, wherewith
they have perverted the Gospel. These are not worthy to be called either
shepeherds or hirelings, but they are those which Christ calls thieves,
robbers and wolves. For if we will rule and guide men rightly and well, that
must needs be done by the word of God: whereby if it be not done, we surely
labor in vain. Furthermore Christ entreats here of that second ministry
of ye word, and describes of what sort it is: he makes him self the chief,
yea the only shepeheard, for that which he does not feed, does surely remain
unfed.

Ye have heard that our Lord Jesus Christ after his passion and death was
raised from the dead, is entered into, and placed in immortality, not that he
might sit idle in heaven, and rejoice with him self, but that he might receive
a kingdom, might execute the function of a governor and king, of whom all the
Prophets, yea and the whole Scripture do speak very much. Wherefore he is to
be acknowledged to be unto us continually a present governor and ruler,
neither must we think that he is idle in heaven, but that he does from above
both fill and govern all things as Paul says Ephesians. 4. who has an
especial care of his kingdom, which is the Christian faith, hereupon it must
needs be, that his kingdom do flourish among us here in earth. Of this
kingdom we have elsewhere said, that it is so ordained, The kingdom of Christ
increases, not by force and power, but by preaching of the Gospel.
that we all increase every day and become purer, and that it is not governed
at all by any force or power, but by outward preaching alone, that is, by the
Gospel. And this Gospel comes not from man, but Jesus Christ him self
brought it, and afterward put it into the hearts of the Apostles, and their
successors, that they might comprehend it, and into their mouths that they
might speak and publish it. Hereby is his kingdom governed, wherein he so
reigns, that all the power thereof consists in the word of God. Now
whosoever shall hear and believe this, The force and efficacy of the word of
God.
do pertain to this kingdom. Moreover this word is afterward made so
effectual, that it gives all things which are necessary to man, and brings
a certain abundance of all good things which may be had. For it is the power of
God which is able to save every one that believes, as Paul witnesses Romans 1:
When thou beleuest that Christ died for thee, to deliver thee from all evil,
and so cleauest unto the word, it is sure and certain that no creature is
able to overthrow thee. For as none is able to overthrow the word, so none is
able to hurt thee, when thou stickest unto it. By the word therefore thou do
overcome sin, death, Satan, hell, and thither thou must resort and fly,
where the word is, that is, to eternal peace, joy, and life, and briefly, thou
shall be made partaker of all such good things as are promised in ye word.
Wherefore the government of this kingdom is marvelous: the word is published and
preached through the whole world, but the power thereof is very secret, neither
does any man mark that it is so effectual, and that it so much profits them
that believe: howbeit it must be felt and tasted in the heart. We therefore of the
ministry are able to perform no more, then that we are the mouth of our
Lord Christ, and the instrument whereby he openly preaches ye word. For he
suffers the word to be published abroad, that every one may hear it. But
faith makes that it is felt inwardly in ye heart, yea and it is the secret
work of Christ, whenever any knows that it is his duty, and is also
willing to do according to his divine will and good pleasure.

But that this may be the better perceived, we will now entreat of our text,
wherein Christ first says: I am the good shepeherd. And what is a good
shepeheard? A good shepeherd, says Christ, gives his life for his sheep. And
I leave my life for my sheep. Here the Lord declares what his kingdom is,
bringing a goodly parable of the sheep. Ye know that it is a beast of all
living creatures most foolish and most simple, so that thereupon it is commonly
spoken as a proverb, if we have to speak of a simple one: He is a sheep.
Nevertheless it is of that nature more then other living creatures, that it
quickly knows the voice of his shepeheard, neither follows it any beside
his own shepeheard, being always of that quality that it cleaves to him,
and seeks for help of him alone, being not able to help it self, neither
to feed it self, neither to heal it self, nor keep it self from the
wolves, but does wholly consist in the help of an other. Christ therefore
brings the quality and nature of the sheep in manner of a parable, and
transformeth him self into a sheepeheard, whereby he does very well show,
what his kingdom is, and wherein it consists, and his meaning is this: My
kingdom is nothing else, but that I may feed sheep, that is, miserable, needy,
and wretched men in the earth, which do well perceive and feel, that they
have no help or counsel any other where, but in me alone.

But that we may declare this more plainly, we will add hereunto a place out
of Ezechiel chap. 34. which speaks of evil shepeheards that do contrary
unto Christ, and says: Ought not the flocks suffer them selves to be fed of
the shepeheards? Why therefore do you feed yourselues? Evil shepeheards how
they behave them selves and govern their flock.
Ye have eaten the milk of the sheep, ye have clothed your selves with the
woll, the best fed ye have slain, but my flock have ye not fed. The weak
have ye not strengthened, the sick have ye not healed, the broken have ye not
bound together, the driven away have ye not brought again, the lost have ye
not sought, but with force and cruelty have ye ruled them. And now my sheep
are scattered, for that they are destitute of shepeheards, yea all the beasts
of the field devour them, and they are dispersed over all mountains, and over
the whole earth. That which he here says is well to be marked: his very
meaning in this place is, that he will have the weak, sick, broken, abiects,
and lost, to be strengthened, healed, cured, sought, not spoiled and destroyed.
These things ye ought to do, says he to the shepeheards, but ye have do^^
none of them. Wherefore I my self (as he afterward says) will deal thus with
my sheep: That which is lost will I seek again, that which is driven away
will I bring again, and to that which is not well will I give a remedy and
heal it. Here thou see that the kingdom of Christ is such as has to do
with those that be weak, diseased and broken, and has care of them to help
them. The preaching whereof in deed is very full of comfort, but this is
wanting in us, that we do not thoroughly feel our misery and weakness, which
if we felt, we would forthwith run unto him. But how did those shepeheards
behave them selves? They ruled in rigor and straightly exacted obedience of
the law. Moreover, they added their own traditions, as they do also at this
day, which if they be not kept, they cry out, and condemn him that
transgresses them, so that they do nothing else, but urge more and more and
command their own inventions. But this is not to feed well or to govern a
soul, as Christ says, who him self is not such a shepeheard, for by such
manner of feeding none is helped, but the sheep are utterly lost as we shall
understand.

Now we will handle the place of the Prophet in order. First he says that the
weak sheep are to be strengthened, Weak consciences how they must be handled.
that is, the consciences which are weak in faith, and have a sorrowful
spirit, and are of a faint courage, are not to be enforced, that it should be
said unto them: This thou must do, thou must be strong. For if thou be so
weak, thou art ordained to eternal punishment: This is not to strengthen ye
weak. Thus says Paul Romans 14: Him that is weak in the faith receive unto
you, and entangle not consciences. And by and by after he adds Romans 15: We
which are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak. Wherefore they
are not to be severely compelled, but to be comforted, that although they be
weak, they may not therefore despeire, for after^ards they shall become
stronger. Esaias the Prophet did thus forespeake of Christ cap. 42: A broosed
reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he not quench. The
broosed reed signifies miserable, weak, and broosed consciences, which are
easily so shaken, that they tremble, and lose hope and trust in God. With these
God does not forthwith deal rigorously and after a violent manner, but he
deals gentely with them, lest he break them. Moreover the smoking flax,
which does as yet burn a little, and nourishes more smoke then fire, ^^e the
same consciences, which ought not again to despeire, for he will not utterly
extinguish them, but always kindle them, and more and more strengthen them.
Which truly to him that knows it, is a great comfort. Wherefore he which
does not gentlely handle weak consciences after this sort, does not without
dout execute the office of a true shepeheard.

Afterward the Prophet says: That which was diseased, ye ought to have
succored. Who are those diseased ones? They which in their manner of living,
and in their outward works have certain diseases, and vices. The first
pertains to the conscience when as it is weak: the other to the manners or
conditions of life, when as any being carried with a wilful mind and wayward
brain, does offend here and there, to wit by wrath and other foolish doings,
as even the Apostles fell sometimes grievously. Such as are so vicious in the
sight of men, that they are an offense to others, and are judged obstinate and
wayward, God will not have to be rejected and despeired of. For his kingdom is
not ordered after such a manner, that the strong and whole only should live
therein (which pertains to the life to come) but Christ is therefore set in
it, that he may have a care of such and help them. Wherefore albeit we are so
weak and sick, notwithstanding we must not so despeire, that we should say,
that we are not in the kingdom of Christ, but ye more we feel our disease, The
more we feel our selves diseased, the greater cause we have to fly unto
Christ.
so much the more we must come unto him, for he therefore is at hand that he
may remedy and heal us. Now if thou be weak and oppressed with faintnes,
feeling great affliction, hereby thou have gotten a greater occasion to go
unto him, and to say on this manner: Most sweet Christ, I therefore come unto
thee because I am a sinner, that thou may help and justify me: yea very
necessity does compel thee hereunto. For the greater thy disease is, so much
more needful is it for thee to be healed. And Christ him self requires the
same of us, and does allure us to come unto him boldly and cherefully. But
others which are not such shepeheards, do think that they shall make men
righteous, if they exact much of them and urge them much, whereby they only
make that which is evil worse, as we see it to be done at this day, whereas it
is come to that disorder, that all things are most miserably brought out of
course, as in this place the Prophet says.

The broken have ye not bound together. To be broken is, as when ones leg is
broken, or a wound some where else given him. That is, when as a Christian is
not only weak and diseased, that he stumbleth sometime, but also runs into
so great tentations, that he breaks some part, They which fall so grievously
that they even deny the Gospel, must not be utterly despeired of.
and so is brought to that pass, that he falls and denies the Gospel,
after the manner of Peter, who did forswear Christ. Now if any should so
stumble, that he should be compelled to go back, and be utterly cast down in
mind, nevertheless we must not as yet cast him of, as though he did never any
more pertain to the kingdom of Christ: for we must leave Christ's property to
him self, that his kingdom may remain unto him self mere grace and mercy,
whose desire is to help them only, which are grieved with their calamity and
misery, and do greatly desire to be delivered from it. That his kingdom may
altogether abound with comfort, and he him self be the comfortable and gentle
shepeheard, which provoke and allureth every one to come unto him. And all
this is done by the Gospel, whereby the weak are to be strengthened, the sick
to be healed. For it is such a word as is fit for all distres of consciences,
giving abundant comfort to all, that none dispeire although he be a great
sinner. Christ therefore alone is yt good shepeheard, which heals all sorts
of diseases, and helps them that are fallen: which he that does not, is not a
shepeheard.

The Prophet thus goes forward: That which was driven away, ye have not
brought again. What is that that is driven away? The despised soul, which is
so scorned and contemned, that it is thought to be done in vain, whatsoever
Christian doctrine is bestowed upon it. Notwithstanding Christ does not yet
suffer, that it should be dealt roughly with. His kingdom is not compassed with
so straight bounds, that only the strong, whole and perfect do flourish
therein, for this pertains to the heavenly life to come, now in this his
kingdom only grace and sweetness must abound. As God promised to ye children of
Israel Exodus 3. that yt appointed land of Canaan should flow only with milk and
honey, even as Paul 1. Cor. 12. affirms, that upon those members of the body,
which we think more dishonest, we put more honesty on.

He concludes: The lost have ye not sought. That is lost which seems to be
condemned, They which seem even past hope must not be quite cast of.
of the return whereof there is scarce any hope. Of which sort in the Gospel
were Publicanes and harlots, and at this day they, who have not so much as a
spark of godliness, but are intractable and unruly. Neither are they
notwithstanding to be left, but all means are to be assayed that at the last
they may be reclaimed and brought again into the right way. Which S. Paul
eftsoons did, as when he delivered two of this sort unto Satan, 1. Tim. 1. I
have delivered them unto Satan that they might learn not to blaspheme. And 1.
Cor. 5. I have determined, says he, to deliver them to Satan for the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus. Them he cast of as condemned, and yet notwithstanding did not despeire
of them. Christ therefore is so to be preached, that he rejects no man
although he be weak, but that he willingly receives, comfort and
strengthens every man, so that he always appears to be the good shepeheard.
Hereupon it comes to pass, that men willingly resort unto him, and that it
is no need any more to compel them. The Gospel so allureth, and makes them
willing, The Gospel allureth us with love and pleasure to come unto Christ.
that they come with a certain love and pleasure, and with all boldness,
Whereupon a desire and love unto Christ is increased in them, so that they do
any thing willingly, who before were to be urged and compelled. If we be
constrained, we do grudgingly and unwillingly, which God plainly abhors.
But when as I shall perceive that God deals so lovingly and gentlely with me,
my heart is as it were ravished, so that I can not stay my self, but I must
even run unto him, leaving all other things, whereupon afterward all pleasure
and joy ensues unto me.

Now consider how great an evil it is, when one judges an other. The kingdom
of Christ, as we have heard, is so ordained, that it heals and justifies
only sick and miserable consciences, wherefore all they are far deceived,
which have regard only to the strong and whole. It is great therefore and very
effectual knowledge whereby Christ is well known. It is graffed in us by
nature to be altogether evil and wicked, and yet notwithstanding we would have
every one to be honest, we earnestly regard strong Christians, not looking
therewithal to the sick and weak, thinking them not to be Christians, if
they are not strong, and judge others evil, if they be not altogether holy,
when as we our selves in the mean season exceed the rest in naughtines. Now
the cause hereof is our most corrupt nature, Our corrupt nature and blind
reason cause us to err and judge amiss.
and our blind reason, which will measure the kingdom of God according to her
own opinion, whereby it thinks that those things are unclean before God,
which seem unclean unto it self, wherefore that opinion must be removed out of
our mind. For if thou have very much regard thereunto, thou shall at the last
come into the mind to think: alas, what shall become of me, if all Christians
must be such, namely, strong, whole, and godly? When shall I once attain so
far? And so thou shall bring thy self into such a perplexity, that thou
shall hardely ever attain unto true comfort and joy. Thou therefore must be
so affected, that thou say: Most gracious Jesus, although I find my self
altogether weak, diseased, and in a wretched state, yet I will not therefore
cast of all hope, but will fly unto thee, that thou may succor me, For thou
only art the shepeheard, and the good shepeheard, such a one I am persuaded
that thou art, wherefore I will not despeire or be discouraged, although I come
unto thee being void of works. We must therefore bestow our diligence that we
may wisely and well know Christ, that in his kingdom only the weak and
diseased are conversant, and that it is nothing else, but as it were an
hospital, wherein only the sick and feeble do lie, of whom a care must be
had. But few men have this knowledge, for this wisdom is exceeding hard to be
attained unto, so that it is wanting even unto them sometime, who have the
Gospel and the spirit, neither can any wisdom come unto men which is greater
then it. Wherefore, albeit men look into the Scripture, which sets forth the
kingdom of Christ, affirming it to be most precious, nevertheless they have not
such a care what the words signify, neither do they mark that true wisdom
is hidden therein, which excels our wisdom by many degrees. For it is not
Christian wisdom to have to do with men which are accounted wise, and
skillful, and to make mention, and talk of them, Christian wisdom is occupied
among the unwise.
but to be occupied among the unwise and them that lack understanding, not that
delight and pleasure should be taken thereof, but that they may come from sin
and foolishnes to righteousness and sound understanding. Hereof it appears
that Christian wisdom does consist in this, not that we look aloft, and
consider those things which are high and wise, and behold and see our selves
in the^ as it were in a glass, but that we look to those things that are
below, and mark that which is humble and foolish. He which knows this, let
him give thanks unto God. For by this knowledge he becomes such a one as is
able to prepare and apply him self to every thing which is in the world. But
ye shall find many, yea even among them that preach the Gospel, which are not
yet come thus far. Hitherto we have been so instructed and accustomed, that
none must come unto Christ, before he be altogether clean, thou must therefore
forsake that opinion, that thou may attain to true understanding, that thou
may know Christ aright, how he is the true and good shepeheard, whereof we
have heard sufficient.

Now he compares the good shepeheard with the evil, or hireling, and says:
A good shepeheard gives his life for the sheep: but an hireling, and he which
is not the shepeheard, neither the sheep are his own, sees the wolf
coming, and leaves the sheep, and the wolf catches and scatters the
sheep. So the hireling flees because he is an hireling, and cares not for
the sheep. It is true in deed that Christ is properly the only shepeheard,
even as ye name of Christ does belong to him alone. yet he communicates the
same unto us, that we also may be called Christians. So although he be the
only shepeheard, yet he imparteth the same name to them that be of the
ministry. After the same manner Matthew. 23. he forbids, that we call no man
father upon the earth, forasmuch as there is one only our father, which is in
heaven, notwithstanding Paul calls him self the father of the Corinthians
1. Cor. 4. when he says: In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the
Gospel. So therefore it seems as though God alone would have the name of a
father, and in the mean season notwithstanding he grants the same name to
men, that they also may be fathers, howbeit that they have not of them selves
but by Christ. Even as we are called Christians, because we have nothing of our
selves, but for that all things are given unto us through Christ.

Moreover, the hireling, says Christ, which is not the shepeheard, neither the
sheep are his own, when he sees the wolf coming, leaves the sheep and
fleth, etc. The hireling when the wolf comes leaves the sheep.
This surely is a hard saying, that they which truly preach the Gospel, and
strengthen and heal the sheep, nevertheless at the last do suffer the sheep
to be caught and torn in pieces, and do then fly away, when the sheep have
need of greatest help. As long as the wolves do not appear, they do their
duty carefully and diligently, but as soon as they see the wolf break in,
they forthwith leave the sheep. If they then have fed them well, that they be
fat, strong, and whole, they are the better liked of the wolves, for whom they
have fed them. But what is the hidden meaning of this parable? The meaning of
Christ is this: In my kingdom (which consists in nothing else, but that the
weak be strengthened, the sick healed, the faint hearted encouraged) the holy
cross shall not be wanting. The cross accompanies the preaching of the
Gospel.
For when it is preached, that Christ only, whose silly sheep we are, has
care of us, strengthens, heals, and helps us, and that our own strength
and our own works are of no importance at all, (whereby all works of the
world, and the diverse sorts of worshipping God which it inuenteth are utterly
disallowed) the world ca^ not abide such manner of preaching, so that it is a
natural property of ye Gospel, to bring ye cross with it as unseparably
acco^panying it, and he that will unfeignedly profes it before the world, must
needs yield him self to bear persecution. Forasmuch as the case stands
thus, it is not hard to perceive how great difference there is between the true
shepeheards and the hirelinges. He that is an hireling preaches the Gospel as
long as he is reported among men to be a learned, The hireling how he behaueth
him self.
godly and holy man. But when as he is reproved or set upon as an heretic and
wicked fellow, or moved to make a recantation, then he either recanteth, or
takes him self to his feet, leaving the miserable sheep alone without a
shepeheard, then their case becomes worse then it was before. What does it
then avail the sheep if they were well fed before? What the true shepeheard
does,
If they were true shepeheardes, they would spend their life before they would
so leave the sheep to the jaws of the wolves, and would be ready always to
offer their neck to the axe for the Gospells sake. They therefore are never
good shepeheards, which so preach the Gospel, that they may thereby get unto
them selves honor, riches, and profit, without all dout they are hirelings,
who seek after their own things even in sound doctrine, yea and in the word
of God. Wherefore they abide no longer, then while they may have honor, praise
and commiditie thereby, but as soon as the wolf comes, go back, deny the
word, and get them selves away, leaving the sheep, which very earnestly seek
for pasture and their shepeheard, who may keep them from the injury of the
wolves, but that good shepeheard can no where be found, who flies away even at
that time, when the sheep have most need of a defender and strengthner.

The same shall happen to us in time to come, when we shall once begin to be
touched in deed. Then the Preachers will shut their mouths, and provide for
their safety by flying, and the sheep shall be miserably dispersed, so that
one shall be carried this way, an other that way. God grant that some of them
may stand valiantly in defense of the Gospel, and spend their blood, if the
case so require in delivering their sheep. Thus Christ has painted forth ye
hirelings in their colors, who thus says moreover: I am that good shepeheard,
and know mine, and am known of mine. These words do contain much, I
should spend over much time, if I should handle them severally. He speaks
here of the peculiar duty that belongs to him self. I know my sheep, says
he, and they again know me. Now the sum is this: Christ knows us to be
his sheep, and we again know him to be our shepeheard. He knows us to be
such sheep as are weak and diseased, which he does not cast of, but has a
care of them, and heals them, although they be so diseased, that all the
world thinks that they are not his sheep, and this in deed is the
knowledge of ye world. But Christ does not so know them, neither does he
greatly regard what manner of ones they be, but considers whether they be
sheep. They therefore are the true shepeheards, who following Christ, do so
know their sheep, that they look unto the persons, not to the disease.

My father knows me, says Christ, The world knows not Christ.
but the world knows me not. When as therefore the hour shall come, that I
shall die an ignominious death upon the cross, all with one voice will cry out:
was this the son of God? he must needs be a condemned man, and given up unto
Satan, both in soul and also in body. So the world will consider and know me.
But my father will say in this sort: this is my well-beloved son, my king and
Savior. He beholds not my affliction, my wounds, my cross and death, but
he considers my person, that is, me very self. Wherefore if I were in the
midst of hell, or in the jaws of Satan, yet I should come out again, for
the father will not forsake me. Likewise I know my sheep, and they know me.
They are certain that I am a good shepeheard, they know me, therefore they
come to me for succor, and cleave unto me, neither does it any thing fear
them, that they are subject to manifold infirmities and diseases, they know
very well that I would have such manner of sheep to resort unto me. Other
sheep I have also, which are not of this fold: them also must I bring and
they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one shepefold, and one
shepeheard. Some have so handled this place, that they affirm it shall be
fulfilled before the latter day, when Antichrist, John, and Helias shall come.
Which is flatly against the truth, and forged of Satan, that men might believe,
that the whole world shall at the last become Christian. Which Satan therefore
did that he might darken the sound doctrine, that we might never rightly
understand it. Beware therefore of this delusion. For by and by after the
ascension of Christ this was done and fulfilled, and is yet at this day
fulfilled. As soon as the Gospel was published, it was preached to the Jews,
and this people was the shepefold. Now he says, that he has certain other
sheep also, which are not of this fold, which also he must gather together,
whereby he shows, that the Gospel must be preached to the Gentiles that they
also may believe in Christ, that of the Jews and Gentiles may be made one
Church. Which he performed afterward by the Apostles, who preached the Gospel
to the Gentiles, and brought them to the faith. So there is now one body, one
Church, one faith, one hope, one love, one baptism, and so of the like, which
continues at this day, and shall so continue even to the end of the world.
Wherefore do not so understand it as though all men shall believe in Christ, for
the cross must always be borne of us, forasmuch as the greatest part is
always of that faction, which persecuteth Christians. The Gospel also must be
continually preached, that always some may be brought to Christianity. And
thus much for a compendious exposition of this text.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER OF THE LOST SHEEP.
Luke 15. Verse 1. THen resorted unto him all the Publicans and sinners to
hear him.

2. Therefore the Pharisees and Scribes murmured, saying: He receives sinners
and eats with them.

3. Then spoke he this parable to them saying:

4. What man of you having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, does not
leave ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until
he find it?

5. And when he has found it, he lays it on his shoulders with joy.

6. And when he comes home, he calls together his friends and neighbors,
saying unto them: Rejoice with me: for I have found my sheep which was lost.

7. I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven for one sinner that
repents, more then for ninety and nine just men, which need none amendment
of life.


IN this text, dearly beloved, What kind of doctrine this text contains.
even that doctrine is contained, which we are persuaded, and glory to be our
chief doctrine, and which by best right deserves to be called christian
doctrine, to wit of grace and forgiveness of sins, set down against the
doctrine of the law, and of works. But it is a very shameful thing, that a
sermon so excellent, and replenished with so great comfort and joy, should be
heard of a man that is wicked and a contemner of the word of God. This is much
more miserable, that all think they have so soon thoroughly learned it, to the
knowledge whereof every one will seem to have attained, thinking that there is
nothing in it, which he does not perfectly understand, and that there is no
need to spend any more study in learning it. Although it be not grievous to
God him self, neither does it yrke or weary him, every year repeating it, or
rather every day exercising it, as though he knew to preach nothing else,
being unskillful and ignorant of all other kind of doctrine. And we miserable
and wretched men do so soon as we think attain to the knowledge of the
chiefest doctrine, that forthwith it is wearisom and tedious unto us to repeat
it, whereby all pleasure and love of the word of God dies and is extinguished
in us.

But before I declare the article or chief point here taught, I think it
good, that the beginning of this chapter be diligently considered, which S.
Luke sets in steed of a preface, and shows what gave Christ cause to make
this sermon, where he says: Then resorted unto him all the Publicans and
sinners to hear him. In which words he plainly signifies with what me^
Christ kept company, With what kind of men Christ was conversant.
namely with them, which in the sight of all men lived as it did not become
them, and were openly called sinners and evil persons. Whereby it appears
that the Pharisees seemed to have sufficient cause to find fault with Christ,
for that he, which would be counted holy, did familiarly keep company with
such men. Publicans what they were.
For they were commonly called Publicans at that time, to whom the Romans did
let out some city or custom, or some charge or oversight in matters, for a
certain sum of money: as the Turk or Venetians do now commit to some one
some city or office, for which a certain sum of money is yearly to be paid,
and what soever they shall scrape together by unjust exactions above this
sum, that is their own. So also the aforesaid Publicans did, which so
gathered those tributes and money wherewith they were charged, that they
themselves also might have some gain thereby. And seeing that a sum of money
to be paid for some city or office was not small, they desirous to gain
thereby, did by all means deal unjustly, and used extortion in all things,
in all places, and with all persons. For the Lords and masters held them so
hardly and straightly, that they could not get much thereby, if they would
deal rightly and justly, and oppress no man with unjust exactions. Whereupon
they had a very evil report abroad, that they were most unjust exactors, and
endued with small honesty and integrity of life. Likewise the rest in
general were called sinners, which otherwise lived dishonestly and wretchedly,
and were defiled with filthy offenses, as with covetousness, with whoredom,
with surfeiting and drunkenness, and such like. Such resort here unto Christ,
and come to hear him, when as before they had known him by report to be
excellent and famous both in words and deeds.

Howbeit it is certain that in them although they seemed even desperate, there
was a spark of virtue and honesty, in as much as they longed after Christ,
both covering to hear his doctrine, and also earnestly desiring to see the
works which he did, when before they knew him to be a good man, and heard no
ill report either of his doctrine or works, so that their life did far
differ from his. Nevertheless they are so well disposed, that they are not his
enemies, neither refuse or fly his company, but run unto him, not of any
evil purpose or intent, but to see and hear some good thing, whereby they may
amend their life. The malicious dealing of ye Scribes and Pharisees.
Contrariwise the Pharisees and Scribes, which were counted most righteous and
holy, are such poysonfull beasts, that they are not only sore displeased at
Christ, whom they ca^ abide neither to see nor hear, but also they can not be
content, that miserable sinners should come unto him, and hear him, whereby
they being led by repentance might amend: Yea they do also beside this, murmur,
and reprove Christ, for that he admitted unto him, and received Publica^s and
sinners, saying: Behold, is this that holy and famous man? Who will now say
that he is of God, when as he has society with so wicked wretches? yea rather
he is a drinker of wine and a glutton, as they say elsewhere, Luke 7.34.
a friend to Publicans and sinners.

Such a report he is constrained to bear of the holy Pharisees, not for that he
giving himself to gluttony and surfeiting, accustomed to feed excessiuely
and follow riotous pleasure together with them, but only because he admitted
such into his company, and did not contemptuously reject them. For in their
opinion he should have gone with a sad and austere countenance, in base
apparel, and have remained severed from the conversation and company of men,
and refused their fellowship, lest that by familiar custom with them, he
should be defiled, and should have done as they were accustomed to do after ye
manner of holy men. Of whom Esaie writes, that they studied for such purity,
that they did fear and suffer against their will even the touching of a
sinner. Which in deed plainly appears Luke 7. in the Pharise murmuring
against Christ, because he suffered himself to be touched of the sinful woman.
And it was they, that would always be his masters, and prescribe unto him rules
whereby to live, and behave himself in this life. Therefore in this place they
murmur, for that he did not apply himself unto the^, neither did disdain ye
company and conversation of such sinners according to their example.

Now Christ also is somewhat stout, plainly showing here, The stoutne of Christ.
that he can suffer ye maistership of none, but that he is altogether free and
exempt from the commandments of all, as commonly in the Gospels we see him to
be at his own will and pleasure, who nevertheless otherwise was both ge^tler
and also more serviceable then all the rest. But when as they would deal with
him by laws, and be his masters, the^ all friendship ceased, for he did not
otherwise leap back, then the adamant laid upon ye anuyle and stricken,
speaking and doing only the contrary of that which they require of him,
although they seem to speak even rightly and well, alleging thereunto also
the word of God. As they do here, where they come and say: thou must do
thus, thou must follow the conversation of honest men, thou must flee the
company of wicked men. This truly is a substantial doctrine, and confirmed by
testimony of the Scripture. For Moses him self commands the Jews, to avoid
evil men, and take away evil from among them. By this text they confirm
their sayings, and come with their Moses, Christ compared to the Unicorn.
and would make Christ subject to their laws, and have him ruled by them.

But Christ nevertheless will be at his own liberty. And he is not unlike the
Unicorn, which beast men deny that he can be taken alive, with what kind of
hunting soever he be assailed. He suffers him self to be wounded, to be
stricken with darts, and to be slain, Christ is impatient of laws.
to be taken he does not suffer him self. No otherwise does Christ also, who
although he be set upon by laws, yet does he not suffer them, but breaks
through as through a spiders web, rebuking them most sharply. As Matthew. 12.
where they found fault with his Disciples, because they had plucked ye ears of
corn on the Sabbath day, alleging the commandment of God that the Sabbath
was to be kept holy, etc. he avouches the clean contrary, tearing in sunder
ye commandment, affirming the contrary both in words, and also by examples.
Also Matthew. 16, where he declares to his Apostles that he shall suffer and be
crucified, but Peter admonishes him to be of a good there, and sets before
him the precept of charity, saying: Master, pity thy self, there again he
does earnestly and sharply blame and rebuke his admonisher, and says: Get
thee behind me, Satan: thou understand not the things that are of God, but
the things that are of men.

And in a sum, he is most impatient of all laws wherewith they deal with
him, he will be most free from all commandments, and acknowledged to be the
Lord of them. He always gives such aunswers, as with which he represseth the
exactors, neither will he keep any law as though he were compelled to do it.
Contrariwise, when he does any thing of his own accord, then no law is so
little or so light, whereunto he does not willingly obey, and does much more
then it requires. Wherefore there can none be found more gentle and
serviceable then he, if he be urged with the controlement or exaction of none.
Moreover he does so far humble him self, Christ humble and serviceable.
Matthew. 20.28
that he washes the feet of Judas which betrayed him, according as he him
self speaks of him self: I came not to be served, but to serve others, etc.
which is manifest to them that consider his life, how he walked abroad in
Judea, Samaria, Galile, and in the night stepped on the ground, fasted forty
days, and took no rest at all, but patiently sustained so much labor, that
they feared lest he should be ravished in mind, or finally bring some hurt to
his body. He does all things that he can, but that he refuses to be
compelled, and suffers no laws to be prescribed unto him, which if any set
before him, he most stoutely resists and strives against them. So he is both
of a most stout and of a most mild spirit, Christ both of a most stout and
also of a most mild spirit.
neither is there any more stout, nor more serviceable then he, who can abide
to do none of those things that are exacted of him, and nevertheless does all
things even most abundantly, and as it were ouerfloweth with a flood of good
works, and waters all things, no man commanding him, or by way of
controlement exacting and requiring any thing of him, but he being permitted
to do voluntarily and of his own accord.

These things are done for our example, that we may learn what a true
Christian man is after the spirit, lest we judge him according to the law, and
according to our own wisdom and understanding. For Christ is therefore our
Lord, that he may make such men of us, as he is him self. And as he can not
suffer him self to be tied and bound with laws, but will be Lord of laws,
yea and of all things, so also ought not the conscience of a Christian to
suffer them. For we are so much made free by Christ, The conscience of a
Christian must not be bound with laws.
that our conscience may know nothing concerning any law, whose judgment and
controlement it may abide to suffer. Neither ought we any otherwise to be
affected according to the state of ye inward conscience, then if no law had
been given or made: yea as if neither x. commandments, nor one, either of
God, or of Bishop, or of Caesar were given to us, that we may plainly say: I
know nothing of any law, neither will I know any thing. For in that state and
condition, wherein we Christians are, our works, and the works of all men do
cease, yea and all laws also. For where there is no work, neither can there
be any law, requiring a work and saying: this thing was to be done of thee,
this to be left undone. But we through Christ are wholly free from all works,
and righteous by mere grace and mercy, whereby we live only before God. And
this is our treasure, whereby we are Christians, and live and stand before God.
For how we ought to live in outward conversation, to wit in flesh and blood
before the world, it does nothing pertain unto this place.

A Christian must not suffer his conscience to be held captive of any law.
Wherefore a Christian must learn so to rule his conscience, that he suffer it
not to be held captive or entangled with any law. But whosoever will bind and
hold it with any law, let him stoutly and boldly strive there against, and do
as he sees Christ do here and else where, where he uses so great stoutnes
and earnestnes of mind, that no Moses or Exactor of the law can prevail any
thing with him, although otherwise he be most humble, most sweet and gentle
of all men. Howbeit this art is above measure high and excellent, which none
but he understands, whereof he is the Master, who knows how to appease
all laws and teachers of laws. We of our selves are not able to pacify and
appease the law.
We are not able to do so: For the Devil mightily assaileth us, and as often
as he sets upon the conscience of man, he drives him to that point, that he
enters disputation with him, what he has done or not done. Then such a
disputation begins, as wherein is debated of our sin and righteousness,
even then man is brought into a dangerous case and into the mire, where be
sticks, neither can he escape or rid him self out, but is forthwith deeper
and deeper plunged in. For he is laden with a heavy burden, which he is not
able to bear, wherefore he walks musing, gnawing and consuming his mind,
neither can he get any quietness thereof. Which I do plainly feel in my
self, neither can I wrestle out, and deliver my self by any travel, although
I labor always, assaying all means to escape out of this goulfe, that I may
answer the law, and obtain so much, that it may keep silence, and say, now
at length thou have done so much, wherewith I am constrained to be content. But
all endeavor and study is in vain: for such a deep pit and dangerous goulfe
it is, out of which no man is able to escape, although he join the helps of
all men to him self, as they can bear me witness which have made trial hereof,
and do as yet daily try it.

The cause is our nature, which will have to do with works and laws, and
hear what they say, and follow them that say: Why does he eat with
Publicanes and sinners? if he did eat and drink with us, he should do well.
Also: why do thy Disciples pluck the ears of corn on the Sabbath day? etc.
with whom it will have to do so long, til the law says: now thou art
righteous. For it can attain to no higher understanding, then that the
doctrine of the law is the chiefest doctrine, and that the righteousness thereof
is the best life before God. In it it continually remains so captive yea and
bound, neither can it by any means deliver it self out of this prison, being
not able to pacify and appease the law, that it do not exact any thing of
it, or reprehend it in any thing, but it is compelled to be captive therein as
in a perpetual prison, and the longer it strives and fights with the law,
into so much worse case does it always come, until at the last it be wholly
subdued.

What therefore must I do, What a Christian must do when the law urges his
conscience.
the law assailing and urging my conscience, especially when I perceive my
self not to do that which it requires? I answer, even that which Christ
does here, who admits or acknowledges no law, although brought out of the
law of God. So learn thou also to do, that thou may boldly say to the
law, leave of law to dispute with me, I have nothing to do with thee. And
for that very same cause, for which thou come to dispute with me, and to
enquire of me, how good and righteous I am, I will not hear thee. For it here
makes no matter, what I am, or what I ought to do, and what not to do, but
what Christ him self is, ought to do, and does. For now we are in the
bridechamber, where only the bridegroom and the bride must have to do, and it
behooves not thee to come thither, nor to intermeddle any thing there.

But nevertheless it now and then knocks and says: in the mean season
notwithstanding good works must be done of thee, the commandments of God
must be kept, How we must answer the law when it is instant upon us.
if thou will obtain salvation. Answer again: but thou hear that it is
not now time to speak of them: for now I have obtained my righteousness and
the sum of all my salvation without my works in Christ my Lord, and am
already saved before thou came, therefore I have no need of thy presence.
For as I have said, where works prevail nothing, neither is the law there of
any importance or weight, and where there is no law, neither is there any
sin. The bride therefore alone, all the rest being excluded, must reign in
the bridechamber with Christ, in whom she has all things at once, neither
needs she any thing more, which is necessary to salvation. Wherefore the
law must be excluded and utterly rejected, yea and cast of, as often as it
will invade and set upon the conscience. For surely it ought not to meddle
therewith, neither comes it in time, when it will have much to do there,
where it ought to have nothing to do, and whither it ought in no wise to come.
For the conscience rests in this article of our Christian faith, I believe in
Jesus Christ my Lord, which suffered, died, and was buried for me, etc. unto
whom both Moses law, and Cesars, and divine laws ought to give place. All that
therefore is boldly to be chased from me, whatsoever will dispute with me of
sins, righteousness, and such like things.

Behold, Christ would in this place resemble this liberty unto us, that as
Christians we suffer no master in our conscience, trusting most constantly to
this one thing, that we are baptized, and called unto Christ, and by him
justified and sanctified, whereupon we may say: He is my righteousness, my
treasure, my work, and in a sum, what not? against sin and unrighteousness
(whereof the law indeuoureth to accuse me) If it please you to have other
righteousness, works, law, etc. then may ye take them from whence ye will,
surely ye shall find no place for them in me. Thus may a man defend him self,
and stand against the suggestions and tentations of the Devil, and of sins
either past or present. Wherefore Moses and Christ are far to be separated
asunder, as also works and faith, the conscience and the outward life, so that
if the law will set upon me, and make my heart afraid, then is it time to
send it away, and if it will not give place, to thrust it out by force, and to
say: I will willingly do good works, and will go forward as much as I am
able for that time that I live among men, but here I will know nothing at al of
them in my conscience, and therefore let me alone, and prate nothing of them.
For here I will vouchsafe to hear neither Moses nor the Pharisees, but Christ
alone does obtain place to reign here. I will like unto Marie, sit at his
feet to hear his word, but let Martha carry abroad, and busy her self in
the kitchen and about the household affairs. And in a sum, I will not trouble
the quietness of my conscience.

But what shall I say, An objection
whereas in the mean season I do daily sin, which surely is evil? I
answer, in deed it is true, The answer
I am a sinner, and I do unjustly, but I must not therefore despeire, as though
I were subject to condemnation, yea or tremble because of the rigor of the
law. For by faith I apprehend him, which has apprehended me, and apply my
self unto him, which has embraced me in baptism, and has put me in his
bosom, and by the preaching of the Gospel has called me to the communion of
all his good things, bidding me to believe in him. Now when as I have
apprehended him by faith, then may I be bold to bid the Pharisees, and Moses
with his tables, all Lawyers with their books, all men with their works hold
their peace and give place. No law has then any power to convince or accuse
me: for in this Christ I have all things abundantly, whatsoever can be
required in me.

This, I say, is the doctrine and art of Christians, the scope and end
whereof is this, even to reign with Christ. But blockish men do not
understand it, taking hereupon occasion to live more freely, as they list,
saying: what need is there that I should do good works, forasmuch as Christ
has abrogated the law, etc. Albeit we be free from the law, we must
nevertheless do good works after the example of Christ.
There foolish babbling is in no wise to be borne, for Christ is on the other
part also to be considered of thee, and thou must mark what he does more. For
here he him self says: that he is that man which seeks the miserable and
lost sheep, which also he witnesses by his present deed, by receiving
sinners and Publicanes, and by preaching unto them. Whereby thou see that he
does fulfill much more then the law commands to be done, and teaches thee
to do the same by his example. He is of such an heroical stomach, that he
will not be under the law, yet does he of his own accord more things then
the law requires. Do thou so also, neither look when thou shall be forced
and driven on by the law, but without the law and of thine own accord do
that which is needful to be done, as Peter 1. Pet. 2 admonishes saying: as
free, and not as having the liberty for a cloak of malitiousnes, but as the
servant of God. And Paul Romans 6: Being made free from sin, ye are made the
servant of righteousness. These are they, which do all things with a free
conscience without the law, and unconstrained.

For where the Gospel is truly in the heart, it makes a man to be such a one,
as does not look while the law comes, but is so full of joy in Christ, that
he is with speed carried unto good works, doing well to all men, as much as he
is able, and that of his own accord, before the law comes into his mind.
Moreover he bestows both body and life, having no regard, what he must
therefore suffer, and so he is full of good works which voluntarily flowing as
it were out of a continual fountain are derived unto many: As Christ being
compelled, does not abide to take up so much as a straw, but uncompelled
gives him self to be crucified for me, and for the whole world, dying for
the lost sheep.

Howebeit it is very necessary to discern these things well, when it is come
to hand strokes and within the throwing of the dart, as it is said, the law and
sins disputing now with thy conscience, then see that thou do boldly
repress Moses, and bid him keep silence, The old man must be driven into
Moses schole.
sending him abroad to the old man. Drive him into Moses schole, that he may
dispute with him and say: Do thou hear? thou art too slow and sluggish in
giving and serving thy neighbor. When Christ is to be served of thee, thou will more willingly serve thy belly: thou will come in no peril for Christ's
sake, thou do deceitfully rob thy neighbor circu^uenting him by what
means soever thou can. For that sluggish ass flying labor, and following
only idleness and wantonness, use the tables of stone, whom even against his
will, constrayne to go on in his duty.

Wherefore when thou shall set upon me, in that thing which is right and meet
(thou must say unto Moses) I will willingly hear thee, We must admit Moses to
deal with the outward man, but not with the conscience.
and follow thy admonitions, namely according to the outward man, and in
outward life, where thou may bear rule like a scholemaister, and as one
governing a family: Where thou have power to command me, to be obedient,
modest, patient, good to my neighbor, dutiful and liberal toward the poor,
and to celebrate God with praises poured forth to his glory: moreover to be
content for his words sake to abide the contumelies and sclaunders of all
persons, and to suffer every kind of injury of the world. With all which I am
not greatly moved, yea I would do more things then I am able to do according
to the outward man. For the spirit, by the testimonye of Christ, is willing,
and ready, although the flesh be weak.

But if thou will go so far, whither it is unlawful for thee to come, that
is, into my heart and conscience, there will I neither see thee, nor vouchsafe
to hear thee. For there I have an other both great and unspeakable treasure,
whose name is Christ. And in a sum, whatsoever pertains to bridle ye
outward man, thou can not lay on a sufficient burden thereof: but thou must
burden the conscience nothing at all. For he that enjoys Christ, is above all
laws, as Paul says: the law is not given for the just, who notwithstanding
in the mean time does more things, then he is able to fulfill in the flesh.
For according to the law we are sinners, and concerning our person we must
abide under it. But through Christ we are far above the law.

So Moses without Christ must exercise his gross works, whereby he may compel
men which are not yet Christians, to be honest ciuely before the world: for he
does not make Christians righteous and honest. Howbeit I will not deny yt he
does this, that he shows unto them their duties, which otherwise they would
willingly fulfill and satisfy, yea and do more things also, but that the flesh
does not so willingly and with that readiness wherewith it ought, follow the
spirit. In which respect they are to be admonished and urged, the conscience
nevertheless remaining free, so that the law have no power to accuse them.
Wherefore such doctrine and admonition ought to be among Christians (as it is
certain yt among the Apostles there was) whereby every man may be admonished
of his state and office. As for the rest which are not Christians, Who they be
which must be under the discipline of Moses.
they must be ruled by Moses laws, and burdened with them both outwardly and
inwardly, whereby they may be forced and afflicted, that they may do that which
is right, forsaking that which is evil, although they do it not with a patient
and willing mind. Of which kind ye rash multitude of ye unruly common sort and
ye obstinat people is, who do not regard or understand ye liberty of Christ,
although they can babble and glory of many things concerning the Gospel, and
they notwithstanding do abuse it only to ye lust of their mind: let them know
that they are under the discipline and correction of Moses.

For they are not such men, as are capable of this doctrine, which live with
such a secure mind, that they think, they have no need of the Gospel, or that
they otherwise do sufficiently know it. But they only are capable hereof,
which are busied with the disputation of the conscience and the law, of sins
and of the wrath of God, by consideration whereof they become astonished, feeling
the words of the heart speaking thus: Alas, how wretchedly have I led my life?
what account shall I make unto God? and so they be too much fearful and amassed,
the rest being more then is meet secure and presumptuous, feeling no law nor
sin, no nor any trouble at all. And the case stands very unequally with
both, for they which should have nothing to do with the law, do most of all
wrestle with it, and alone feel it. But others of whom only ye law should be
felt, are nothing moved with it: yea the more grievously they are terrified by
the law and the wrath of God, by so much they become more indurate. There must
therefore be an other master to amend these, namely, the slayer and tormentor,
who may teach the^, being unwilling to do well in the name of the Lord and with
favor, in the name of an other to do that that becomes them, with no favor,
the reward also of hell fire and of all miseries being set before them.

Howbeit Christ both here and every where else (as it is said) both by doctrine
and also by his own example teaches us, which feel our sins and the burden
of the law, and would willingly be Christians, to accustom our selves to
fight against it, and drive it from us unto others, to give no place to the
Devil, who would by the law break up the bridechamber of Christ, and thrust
him self into his place, that is, take away from the conscience her joy and
comfort, whereby he may draw man into desperation, that he may not be able
cheerfully to lift up his heart and head before God. For this is the art of
Christians whom it behooves to know and learn more things, Christians must
know how to fight against the devil and to bear his assaults.
then that profane and blockishe common sort knows and understands, that
we may know well the manner how to fight with the devil, and to bear his
assault, as often as he shall set upon us, and dispute with us out of Moses.
With whom when he goes about such things, we must not dispute in many words,
but must forthwith appeal from Moses to Christ, and cleave to him. For all his
trauaills and deceits tend unto this end, that he may craftily pluck us from
Christ, and draw us unto Moses. For he knows full well, the matter being
brought to that point, the victory shall be on his side.

Wherefore thou must again and again take heed that thou suffer not thy
self to be plucked out of this haven, We must take most diligent heed that
the deuell pluck us not from Christ to Moses.
neither to be entised out of this circle. And although he shall lay many
things against thee out of the law, even inasmuch as it is the word of God,
whereunto it is meet that thou do obey, yet may thou answer him and say:
do thou not hear, that I will now know or hear nothing concerning the
law? for we are now in that circle and haven, wherein it is not enquired what
I must do; or leave undone, but by what means we obtain to have God gentle and
favorable unto us, and how we get remission of sins. Here I will abide in
the arms of Christ, cleaving unseparably about his neck, and creeping into
his bosom, whatsoever the law shall say, and my heart shall feel:
nevertheless, so that we keep the principal part of our faith sincere, and the
chief point safe, outwardly I will willingly do and suffer, what burden soever
it shall lay upon me. Behold, he that understood this art well, should be a
right and perfect man, as Christ was, so far above all laws, that he might
be bold to call Peter Satan, and the Pharisees fools, and leaders of the
blind, and put Moses himself to silence, and so live altogether without the
law, and yet in the mean season fulfill all laws: furthermore be obstinate
and stout against all that will enforce and constrain him, and yet
notwithstanding of his own accord profit and obey all. But truly herein
consists all the defect, that we do never fully and perfectly learn this
art, the deuell so letting and hindering us, that we go preposterously to
work, being too ready and willing to hear all things whatsoever the law
says. At whose threatenings also we are not a little astonished, which it had bin
better for us not to have heard. Again in outward things also we give our
selves to liberty more then is convenient, whereas the body should be kept
under and bridled with works, whereby it might be compelled to bear what
soever should be grievous unto it, when as yet it oftentimes sins, yet so,
that sin abide without, where it must abide, and have his Moses, who always
may be nere unto it with his exactio^s. Howbeit inwardly let no sin or law
bear rule, or reign, but let Christ alone rule and reign by mere grace, joy
and comfort. So all things should be done rightly, and man should be apt and
fit to all good things, both to do, and also to suffer, with a glad and
obedient heart by faith not feyned in the grace of God through Christ.
Wherefore let the conscience bear rule over all laws, let the flesh be
subject to every law.

Now he that is skillful of this art, let him give thanks to God, and take
heed that he be not too wise in it, and that he conceive not a false
persuasion of knowledge. For I and my like do not yet understand it, as we
ought to understand it, although we be most expert of all, and have bin longest
exercised therein. For (as I have said) it is such an art, as no man knows,
but they which are Christians, to ye learning whereof notwithstanding they are
compelled to be scholars all there life long. Wherefore most far of from the
knowing hereof are those secure spirits, who alone know all things, but who in
very deed beside that false persuasion of knowledge, know nothing at all, and
by this very persuasion they are farthest of all drawn from this art and from
the whole Gospel. Neither is there any thing more grievous, no nor a greater
hurt can be brought unto Christianity, then by these petty doctors and
masters, which seem unto themselves to have some wisdom. For they fill all
corners of the world with sects and factions, being such men, as serve neither
God nor men, hear neither the law nor the Gospel, but contemn the law with
a secure mind, and loath the Gospel with hearing it, always seeking after
new doctrine. But truly we teach nothing for their sakes, inasmuch as they are
not worthy of our doctrine, and are so punished of God, that they can never
learn it, and bring forth any fruit thereby, although they hear it. Therefore
let us only keep it, whereof they do take away nothing at all from us, but
that they hear a vain noise and sound of it.

And thus much for the first part of this sermon, in which Christ teaches by
his own example, how every man ought to keep his conscience free from all
disputation of the law, and terror of the wrath of God and of sins. Now
consequently I think it good diligently to consider this excellent and goodly
parable of Christ, Luke 15.3.
where he begins and says: What man of you having an hundredth sheep, if he
lose one of them, does not leave ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go
after that which is lost until he find it? Christ is not only of a stout
mind, who will not follow the words and maistership of them, but he brings
probable causes also of his stoutnes, with great cunning refelling their
objections, and stopping their mouths, so, that they can murmr nothing
against him. Moreover he conuinceth them by their own example and deed, and
concludes, that they ought for good cause to be utterly ashamed, being bold to
speak unto him, and reprehe^d that in him in so great a matter, which they
themselves do in a much less. For by what means could he better and more
readily answer them, then if he should say: How Christ answered the Scribes
and Pharisees when they murmured for that he received sinners unto him.
Will you, O excellent and most wise masters, command this thing, and teach
me to drive away and alienate from me miserable sinners, which long after me,
and come to hear me, when as there is nothing that you your selves do not for
one lost shepes sake, who leaving ninety and nine in the wilderness (that is in
the field and at the fold) do run to seek that which is lost, neither do ye
leave of seeking, until such time, as ye have found it, and brought it home?
And you count it to be well and commendably done, for which if any should find
fault with you, without dout ye would reprove him as mad and beside himself.
And should not I as a Savior of souls do likewise with men, as you do with a
lost sheep? seeing there is no comparison even of one soul to all the creatures
living and breathing in the earth. Why therefore are you not utterly ashamed of
your doings, presuming to reprehend me in this work, which you your selves
commend, and are forced to commend? Wherefore if ye reprove and find fault
with me, you your selves are first to be reproved and found fault with. This is
rightly to have answered, and with honor to have stopped the mouths of these
controllers and fault finders, the causes being sufficiently showed, why they
ought not here to find fault with him or controlle him. They have well surely
yielded unto him with shame enough, as it is meet, and have gained nothing else
by their maistership and controllement then utter shame and ignominy. For it
is a shame to such masters, yea and an exceeding great abomination, that they
stick not to arrogate so much unto themselves, as to teach that man, and
admonish him of his duty, who of God is appointed a master over all. But it
ought so to fall out, as I have said, that he which will rule and judge a
Christian by his maistership, and endeavors to bring him from his baptism
and the article of Christ, to be ruled by his wisdom or law, does not only
become a fool, but is also the author of extreme abomination and homicide. For
he works shame to the temple and sanctuary of God, and with deuelish rashness
inuadeth his kingdom, where he alone with the holy Ghost must reign. Wherefore
he very well deserves, that God again bring him to shame and ignominy
before the whole world, seeing that he takes to himself maistership in that
place, where only Christ ought to be master, and not unworthily to his great
evil he kicketh against the prick.

Wherefore it is not good to jest with Christians, for they are Sainces, and
let him that is wise, not be too busy with that man, whose name is Christ, for
he can get no gain thereby, for Christ is most impatient of all their
maistership and doctrine. So also a Christian must by no means suffer them, or
if he suffer them, giving place to such suggestions, to wit, thou ought to
have done this or that, or as yet thou ought to do it, then is his case
become exceeding ill, We must in any wise cleave fast unto Christ.
inasmuch as he has fallen from Christ. Therefore we must endeavor, to hold
Christ fast, having no regard, although all the world shall teach us. For if we
shall abide with him, and hold the true understanding of the article concerning
him, we shall easily overcome all such masters and teachers. For this Christ
will be most free from all controlement and maistership, contending to be the
only master and controller of all men, that either in favor they may
reverently acknowledge him for the Lord and master, and themselves for fools,
or in fury and indignation being subject to the reproach of all men, may
utterly perish.

But I have said before, that the present doctrine for the very exceeding
goodness, sweetness and consolation thereof, is not to be set forth to the rude,
blockish, and vnrulely common sort, to whom we do not preach it, but to those
only, which strive with terror and anguish of conscience, or stand in peril
and danger of death, and dispute with the deuell concerning their sins
committed, whereby he would drive them unto desperation. Before these this
amiable image is to be set, whereby they may receive comfort and cheerefulnes
of mind. As for others which live with a secure mind, and do little know what
anguish and spiritual sorowfulnes is, they are to be led to Moses to the
tormentour. For it is an image most pleasant and amiable, and more
artificially painted, then any Apelles is able to paint with his pensill.
Neither does any man excel in such eloquence of speech, that he is able
sufficiently to declare and comprehend it in words. Wherefore it is to be
apprehended in the heart by faith, as much as may be. Nevertheless we must
speak something of it, that we may give cause and occasion to other to think
and consider more earnestly thereof.

I also, says he, have an hundred sheep, that is, that little flock of all
Christiandom, of which number one is lost, and fallen from the communion of
Christians. Now therefore do thou desire to know the affection of my mind?
then must thou bestow thy diligence, to paint out well and cunningly both the
shepeheard and the lost sheep. For that shepeheard, which is but a man, and
guides the flock, which is created to be slain, has great regard to
preserve it in safety, and is not a little careful, how he may find the
sheep when it is lost, and bring it home again, How the sheep is affected
toward his shepeheard.
and with no less desire the sheep longs after the shepehearde. Whom if it
understand to be his own shepeheard (as by nature it does understand) it
fears him not, but runs unto him with great confidence, and being full of
good hope, goes before him, Yea as soon as ever it hears his voice, it
answers by bleating. The affection of the shepeheard toward his sheep.
On the otherside also the shepeheard has great care and desire to find
again the lost sheep, which has strayed from him. Both he himself seeks,
and sends forth seruau^ts to seek there, whithersoeuer he thinks it is
strayed, neither does he leave seeking, until having found it, he has brought
it home. For he is not ignorant how miserable a living creature a solitary
sheep is, whose life consists only in the help and safe keeping of the
shepeheard, inasmuch as it can nothing at all help it self, but being
destitute of a shepeheard, is constrained to perish. Moreover, it is also
fearful and ready to go stray, and as soon as it has wandered out of the
way, and from the shepeheard, forthewith comes into peril of life, and can
not tarry, although being brought, it comes to an other flock, and a strange
shepeheard calls it, nevertheless it goes on through thornie and sedgie
places, through waters and fennes, until it come in danger of ye woulfe, or
wasted by some other mischief utterly perishes. And although it be brought
into by ways and deserts, and is now thought to be lost, notwithstanding it
has this hope, as much as nature has put into it, that if it might hear his
shepeheard, it should forthwith exceedingly rejoice being delivered from all
evil. Moreover neither does the shepeheard therefore seek it, that when he
has found it, he may wrathfully fight with it, or handle it ill for that it
has gone astray, or cast it to the woulfe to be torn in pieces, but all his
care and thought is, that he may most gentlely allure it to himself, and may
deal with it most lovingly, to wit, lay it on his shoulders and carry it,
until he has brought it unto the rest of the flock.

This is that picture, resembled in this creature and silly beast, whereby
Christ shows unto us, what affection of mind he bears, and what he does
toward us, and also what we ought to promise our selves concerning him. For
seeing this is manifestly true in nature, the same is much more true in the
kingdom of Christ, which is the kingdom of grace, love, and consolation.
Therefore see that thou also do set before thy self the sheep pertaining to
this shepeheard, then shall thou truly understand, how much greater and
vehementer care he has taken to preserve it, also with how great study and
diligence, yea and from the heart he is careful for it, that he may find it
and bring it home again. For he will have his marvelous and continual
kindenes, and the unspeakable flames of his most fervent love to be showed, or
rather poured forth upon miserable, fearful and trembling consciences, which
unfeignedly lament their sins, and desire to be delivered from them, and such
are his true sheep.

The parable of the shepeheard and the lost sheep resembles Christ, and the
Christian that is strayed out of the way.
For with a man that has lost this shepeheard, and hears him not, the case
stands as with the lost sheep, which being estraunged from his shepeheard,
strayeth more and more from him. And although it be called by the voices of
others, and runs unto them, thinking that it shall find his own shepeheard,
yet failing of his purpose it finds him not, but always runs from corner to
corner, straying up and down, and still wandreth farther out of the way.
Neither it is succored with any comfort or help, before it hear the voice of
the true shepeheard sounding again in his ears: even as we learn the same to
be true by daily experience, and every man tries it in his own heart. For
the Gospel of Christ being taken away or not exercised, here some false
master, or author of some sect, in an other place some fanaticall fellow
thrusts in himself, one peruerteth the Supper of the Lord, the other
baptism, one teaches this, the other that, of a singular holiness of life,
both which allureth to himself the miserable and straying sheep, and shows
himself so, as though he were he true shepeheard. But by the means of these
the sheep is entangled only with greater errors, until it wandreth quite
and altogether out of the way. To these comes the devil also with his
cogitations, which he craftily puts into the heart: Alas, if thou had done
this or that, or had not done, etc. with all which he practizeth nothing else,
but that he may make it fall into greater errors, that it may not know where
to abide. And this truly falls out, Christ being removed out of sight, and
the article of him being extinguished. Whatsoever moreover shall be taught,
counseled, and showed, by what means soever, all things nevertheless become
worse and draw nere unto destruction, unless the true shepeheard come with his
voice, and call back and bring again the straying sheep.

Hereupon it appears that it is exceeding necessary and convenient, that we
learn to know Christ well, It is very necessary to learn to know Christ a
right.
that we do not behold him as a cruel tyranne or as an angry judge (as the
preachers hitherto have set him forth to the people, and the deuel himself
shows him to the hearts of me^ no otherwise to be thought upon and
considered) who has drawn his sword already against us: But as the sheep
does naturally look on the shepeheard, not as on him, of whom it shall be
terrified, chased, and slain, but so soon as it beholds him, is cheered and
put in hope of help, and is no more in fear or solitarines, but forthwith
speedely goes to him with all boldness: So also when we desire to conceive a
trust and hope of help, and to be strengthened and eased with comfort, then
the voice of our shepeheard, that is of Christ, must be known and learned well
of us, all voices of other shepeheards not regarded, which draw us only into
errors, and toss us up and down, and that only article must be heard and
comprehended in mind, which Christ so lovingly and comfortably painteth in our
heart, as by any means it can be painted, that I may with all confidence and
boldness say: The Lord Jesus Christ is my only shepeheard, and I (alas) the
lost sheep, which has strayed in the desert, but am troubled with no small
anguish of mind for my wretched life, desyring with most fervent affection,
both to have God favorable unto me, and also to have peace in my conscience.
But truly I understand here, that he is no less desirous of me, then I am of
him. I labor with great carefullnes to come unto him, and he is careful and
desires greatly that he may bring me again unto himself.

If we were certainly thus persuaded of his affection toward us, and did grave
in our mind that it so greatly desires after us, and is so sweetly poured
forth upon us, it can not be, that we should abhor and fear him, but we
would with a cheerful mind run unto him, and tarry only with him, abiding
to hear the doctrine or voice of no other. For the doctrine of an other
coming between, either of Moses or of any one what soever, does nothing else
but trouble and disquiet the conscience, No peace or quietness but in Christ
alone.
so that it can never find any peace or quietness. Therefore Christ says
Matthew. 11. Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you.
Take my yoke on you, and ye shall find rest unto your souls, etc. As though
he said: run and seek in what places soever ye will, hear and learn what
soever can be preached unto you, yet shall ye find no quietness of heart, ye
shall find no peace but in me alone. We will easily permit good works to be
preached, a righteous life to be taught, the ten commandments to be delivered
by instruction, and all things else which serve to the amendment of life, but
so far only, as they are taught to the vnrulely and intractable common sort,
also to force and bridle the wantonness of our old Adam. But they which preach
to the conscience wrapped in anguishes and terrors because of sin, ought to
preach no other word then of Christ. For this is that lost and miserable sheep,
of whom no other master is to be borne or had, but that only shepeheard
Christ, who neither urges it with the law, nor is eger upon it, but most
sweetly and gently handles it, and lays the miserable and sinful sheep
upon his shoulders, doing that of his own accord, which was to be done of the
sheep, as we shall hear by and by more at large.

But surely in this place the doctrine of both (as is before also said at
large) or the voice of Moses and of Christ, must be well discerned. The
difference between the doctrine of Moses and of Christ must be thoroughly known
of Christians.
For Moses ought to have no entrance to the lost sheep, no nor by any means
is to be admitted to it, although he preach best of all other. For if
confounding these, we will comfort and erect the troubled conscience by the
law after this sort: be of a good cheer, for thou have not committed
homicide, neither have thou defiled thy self with adultery, neither have thou
perpetrated any other heinous offense, or done it with a good will, etc. This
also is a comfort, but which can endure a very small time, neither can it
sustain the assaults and violence of the enemy, neither brings it or
contains any thing else but confidence of it self, wherewith the miserable
sheep is helped nothing. For it remains as much wandering and lost as before,
neither can it help it self, or come to his own shepeheard. But if we will
help and succor it, we must show unto it the true shepeheard, who comes to
seek it, that having found it he may bring it home again, and exhibit his
voice unto it to be heard. Hereby it may obtain true and effectual
consolation, and be bold to answer Moses, and say: Now truly I have not any
care either of thy comfort or terror, and if it please thee, amplify my
sins as much as possibly thou can, make me a manslayer and parricide, or
the worst man of all men. For now I will neither hear thee with an astonished
mind, nor follow thee. But this is the sum of my comfort and salvation,
whereunto also I do confidently trust, that I have such a shepeheard as seeks
me of his own accord, and having laid me on his shoulders carries me. Let us
enter disputation hereof if thou art so disposed, not how righteous or
unrighteous I am, but how I have come unto Christ.

Wherefore we must always preach according to the capacity and quality of
the hearers. For I have said that this doctrine is not fit for a blockish and
intractable man. As it is not meet yt a laborious thresher should be fed with
delicates, wherewith the sick are to be strengthened and refreshed, but the
hyreling is to be fed with broune bread and chese, and with water. The other
dainty meats and easy of digestion thou must reserve for the sick or
children, which are able to digest no gross meat: Unto whom Moses law must be
preached.
So in this thing also thou must observe the same difference, that thou do
rightly distribute these things, and give unto every one his portion as a
prudent householder. For thou must keep the doctrine of Moses and of the Law,
until thou light upon unruly, hardened, and intractable men, which lead their
life securely and without fear, set before these only strong and common
meats of threshers to be eaten, that is, offer angry Moses unto them to be
heard, who lighteneth and thundreth from the mount Sina, who terrifieth the
people of Israel, brings them into the desert, and drowneth king Pharao in
the red sea. How weak and afflicted consciences must be preached unto.
But when thou shall light upon troubled hearts, and weak and afflicted
consciences, which are now become lost sheep, then speak not a word
concerning Moses and all the works of God done in the law, but let thy talk
be only of the works done by Christ in the time of grace, and well and
diligently repeat to the miserable conscience, how he shows himself toward
the lost sheep, to wit, that he is the gentle and good shepeheard, which is
exceeding careful for the lost sheep, so that leaving all the rest, he
traueleth to find that one, and to bring it again into the way, neither does
he leave of till he has brought it home. For it is a very great grief unto
him, that any man should be in sin, and therefore be troubled and fear,
neither would he that any should remain therein, and so perish. Wherefore he
does most lovingly allure and provoke thee by his sweet Gospel to come unto
him, and suffer thy self to be laid upon his shoulders and carried, and to be
called his well-beloved sheep.

As for them that live securely and pleasauntly, and have no regard whether God
be angry or pleased, they are not to be called lost sheep, The lost sheep.
but rather wild goats, which suffer not themselves either to be fed or ruled.
But he, to whom his sins are a burden, and who fights in the fight of
faith, where he is not in danger to lose Moses, but Christ himself, and the
principal article, that is, where the conscience is in anguish, and fear,
whether it has God gentle and favorable, this is that very man, who with
groaning and sighs seeks out and cries for his shepeheard, and desires to
be helped, as David does Psalm. 119. I have gone astray like a sheep that is
lost: oh seek thy servant, etc. In the mouth of these this sugar and these
pleasant delicates have a good taste, with which the heart is refreshed, that
it fall not into desperation, but being again recreated with such a
consolation, is lifted up, not by Moses but by Christ. Not that it has Moses a
friend or is able to pacify him, but because it has God favorable through
Christ, wheresoever Moses remains with his comfort. Although it be very well,
as also it is meet, that we do not contrary to the law practice theuerie,
that we steal not, that we commit not homicide, or otherwise do injury and
hurt to our neighbor. Howbeit that is not the right comfort of the heart, No
true comfort of conscience to be had by the law.
but only a momentane tickling of the utmost skin, not during and pearsing.
For the deuell coming and setting upon the heart, all comfort is utterly taken
away. And although in some point thou have done well and rightly, he
nevertheless again brings ten fold more, wherein thou have done amiss, yea
even in the most pure works he can find much impuritie, and turn all into
sin.

Wherefore we must in no wise trust unto such comfort, We must not trust to the
comfort of ye law, but must resort and cleave fast unto Christ.
but must rather refuse it and say: whether I be good or evil at this present
I do not dispute, but will reserve it rather unto that place, where it shall be
taught and entreated concerning works. But in this circle wherein I now stand,
there is no place to entreat of works and integrity of life, but of Christ and
his works, which he does toward me a lost sheep. Wherefore if thou demand
whether I be good or honest, I answer plainly, no, but if thou demand
whether Christ be good and righteous, that undoubtedly I am able to confirm,
and him I set for my goodness and righteousness, unto whom also alone I
courageously appeal. For in his name I am baptized, of which thing I have a
seal and testimony, to wit, that I am his sheep, and that he is that good
shepeheard, seeking his lost sheep, and dealing with me without all law,
exacting nothing of me, neither as Moses urges, troubles, and forces me, but
shows unto me his mere and most sweet grace, while he submits himself
to me, and lays me on his shoulders, and carries me. Why therefore should I
fear the thundrings of Moses and of the deuell, when as I rest in his safe
custody, which has given unto me his righteousness and all other things, which
holds and carries me, so that there is now no more danger lest I perish, I
remaining a sheep and denying not my shepeheard, but reposing my self wholly
in him?

Thus have thou Christ most lovingly set forth, unto thee. Now only faith is
required, whereof there is great need. A hard thing to feel true comfort of
conscience.
For this doctrine is excellent, and replenished with most sweet consolation
and comfort, but this is wanting, that the use thereof is not felt, where it
ought to be felt. For when the sheep goes astray, that is, when a man feels
himself grieved with his sins, and can not tell where to abide, and is cast
of the deuell into a great fear of mind, then he always runs unto the
contrary, neither can he comprehend or conceive in mind, that this is true,
all things falling out of his mind, which he heard here, because of the
present feeling and fear. For the deuell has daseled his eyes, neither can he
perceive any thing else but the wrath and indignation of God. Wherewith his
heart is so burdened, that he is not able to raise up himself in mind, and to
turn his eyes any other where. Nay he lies so drowned in it, that Christ
appears no otherwise unto him but as an angry judge, as he has hitherto
been painted out, and is so beaten into the hearts of all by the wicked
Papists, sitting on the rain bow, with a sword coming out of his mouth. For
this is one of the most decietfull crafts of the deuell, yea and of his
mischiefs which he practizeth against the miserable sheep, to dasle his eyes,
that he may not know any more his own shepeheard, and under a pretense of
Christ to lead a man to Moses, disputing as much of Christ, as he had
accustomed to do before of Moses. Wherefore we have need of a strong and firm
faith, that we may believe these things to be true, when a man himself must
dispute even against himself. For the sense is vehement of it self, whereunto
the devil also comes maruelously amplifying sin and terror, the greatness
and anguish whereof is able to consume even the marrow in the bones, yea and
the heart in the body. It can not therefore be perfectly learned so soon as
some think. In prosperity it is easily believed that Christ is sweet and
amiable, but anguish and terror coming upon and over whelming the mind, man
is blind and without good understanding, and will judge only according to the
sense and understanding of his own heart, which he follows, and confirms
himself in his own error. For he is taken therein, and can think no
otherwise, but that it is true, and nevertheless it is not true.

Now it were a point of this art, for a man thus to say unto his heart, How a
Christian must speak unto his own heart.
if thou confess thy self to be a lost sheep, thou say right: but that thou will therefore run from Christ, and so think of him in thy mind, as though
he were a man, which would chase and terrify thee, it is a suggestion and
tentation of the deuel. For if thou did rightly consider him, and confess him
as thy true shepeheard, then would thou not fly from his sight, neither
would conceive terror in thy mind, but with all cheerefulnes and boldness
would run unto him. For surely he is not therefore ready at hand that he
may condemn thee, but he comes to thee, seeking thee, that having laid thee
on his shoulders, he may carry thee, and exempt and deliver thee from sins,
errors, the devil and his power, yea and from all peril. Thou perceiuest
therefore that thou art a sinner, and have deserved indignation, so much more
earnestly is that shepeheard to be sought and called for of thee, that he may
deliver thee from it: of whom consider no otherwise in thy mind, then the
sheep does of his own shepeheard, whom it can not fear, but seeing and
hearing him becomes glad and cheereful, although it has run from him, so
that for this deed it has a sufficient cause to fear. The whole matter
therefore consists only in this, that thou do perfectly learn Christ
aright, We must consider Christ according to the word of God.
and consider him according to the word of God, and not according to the proper
cogitatio^s of thy mind, and thine own senses. For the cogitations of men are
false and lying, but his words are true and can not deceive. Wherefore the
word alone is to be engraven in our heart, and we must cleave unto it with a
constant mind, whereby we may reprove our own heart of lying. For it alone
must be true, and all things else that are contrary to it, false and vain. But
truly this is an art, whereof I am ignorant, but much more those other light
spirits, who boaste many things of it, as they that know all things, when as
they have even once heard any thing thereof, and nevertheless they do not a
little perceive or try so much as any whit of it. For it is an easy thing to
speak and preach of it, but how hard a thing it is to prove it in deed, they
only have experience, who earnestly make trial thereof.

This is a most amiable demonstration of our Christ, described by himself in
this Gospel, wherein he has most abundantly poured forth the flames of his
most fervent heart, and affection toward us, showing that he has exceeding
great care and regard to recover his sheep, which alone leaving ninety and nine
he seeks and enquireth diligently for, not to terrify it and beat it, but
that he may help it, and having found it, may bring it home, and with his
loving and sweet voice and speaking unto it may chere it being miserable and
afflicted in conscience. By all which thou see, how acceptable a thing thou
shall do unto him, if thou trust and cleave unto him with thy whole heart, and
promise to thy self from him all goodness and love.

Secondly thou plainly see this also, how by all manner of outward signs and
means he pours forth his joy and unspeakable goodness, and also having found
his sheep how loving he shows himself. For surely he deals not with it by
any law, as by his right he might deal, and drive it before him as he does the
rest, or suffer it to go by him. Howbeit he does none of these, but lays it
upon his shoulders, and all the iourny carries it through the desert, taking
all the labor and trouble upon himself, that at the lest wise the sheep may
rest. Neither does he it grudginly but willingly, for he is full of joy for his
sheep recovered. Now mark this also, how well it goes with the sheep, with
how great quietness and ease it lies on his shepeheards shoulders, neither does
it unwillingly see it self resting so sweetly being delivered from the
difficulty of the journey, as also void of all fear both of dogs and woulues,
that is, of all errors and lies, yea and of all perils and mischiefs. And
this surely deserves to be called a very pleasant picture, exceeding amiable
and comfortable to be looked upon.

No otherwise does our Lord Jesus Christ deal with us, whiles he delivers
us, which he has once done corporally by his passion and death, but now does
eftsoons the same by his power, and spiritually by the preaching of his word.
Wherefore he lays us upon his shoulders, carries, and defends us, so that
we are safe from all perils of death and the deuell, which albeit they terrify
us, and show themselves so, as though they would denour us, yet prevail they
nothing. For whereas we are carried, it is a safeguard unto us, and the same
exempteth us from all dangers, and puts away all fear. As the sheep lying
upon the shepeheards shoulders is little careful, though the dogs bark much,
and the woulfe craftily goes up and down, but rather hanging down the head
is quiet and sleeps soundly. If we believe assuredly in Christ Jesus, we need
not fear the deuell, rage he never so sore.
So we also, if we stand and abide immovably in this article, I believe in
Jesus Christ our Lord, who suffered, died, rose again for us, etc. there is no
cause why we should be careful lest we perish, or be devoured of the deuell,
though he open his iaws never so wide. For we are not then in our own way,
neither walk we upon our own feet, but we hang upon the neck of our
shepeheard, and lie upon his shoulders, where we are safe enough. For sin,
death, and hell, although in deed they be terrible, yet dare they not set upon
him, otherwise if it were not for this, we should be miserable sheep, which
should forthwith be brought into a lamentable and wretched case. For even as a
sheep can not take heed and foresee to it self, that it stray not out of the
way, unless it be led of the shepeheard, and when it has strayed and is lost,
can not by it self come again to the shepeheard, but must be sought and
enquired for of him, until he has found it, and so must be laid upon his
shoulders and brought home again, lest that it be again frayed and chased
from him, or caught of the woulfe and rent in pieces: So we also our selves can
profit our selves neither by help, nor counsel, that we might obtain peace
and quietness of conscience, and escape out of the hands of the deuell, death,
and hell, except Christ himself repeat his word unto us, and call us again
unto him. And although we come unto him, and now stand in faith, yet is it not
in our power to keep our selves therein, or to stand by our own strength,
unless he eftsoons by the power of his Word, hold, lift up, and carry us, for
that the deuell always imagines and purposes deceit and destruction toward
us, and goes about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour, as S. Peter
witnesses. Wherefore here is no place to boast of free will, or of our own
strength, which is none, neither in beginning any thing, neither in going
forward therein, much less in perseuering or continuing in it, but Christ our
shepeheard alone does all things.

Howbeit we are sure hereof, that whiles we lie upon the shoulders of Christ,
we shall remain safe from all terror and misfortune. For he will not suffer
us to be plucked or taken from his neck, neither will he himself cast us of,
being so glad and joyful, that he has found his lost sheep, and brought it
again to the rest of the flock. And in a sum, here is no terror, or
trouble, or exaction, but mere life and grace, whereby he handles his sheep
most lovingly and gently. But on the contrary Moses, not as a shepeheard of
miserable and weak sheep, but as a master of stronger cattle, drives his
herds with a staff and a rod three days journey through the desert, until
they be tired and weary with walking: of this shepeheard those hardedened and
wild ones are to be tamed and bridled. And we also, when we shall be under
Moses, to wit, according to the flesh and the outward life, must go, and do
that which the law requires. But in that we are, and are called Christians, we
must by no means suffer, that any work be laid upon us, yea or exacted of
us, but must give our selves only to Christ to be carried and gentlely lifted
up, not upon horses and charrets, but even upon his only shoulders. When
Christ carries us upon his shoulders.
Which comes to pass, as I have said, when he suffers the word to be
preached unto us, and we also believe the same, that he died for us, that on
the cross he bare our sins in his body, that he has overthrown the deuell,
death, and sins, and put them under his feet, and has made and opened unto
us entrance to eternal life. Wherefore we must not have respect to our own
life, how righteous and strong we are, but we must study upon his one thing,
that we may rest lying upon his shoulders. In this circle we must have no care
of sin, death, life, or pensiuenes, inasmuch as we have all things to the
full in Christ, who bears and keeps us.

Now he is not content with all these things, both that with such great travel
he seeks his sheep, and also that having found it, Exceeding joy because of
the sheep which was lost and is found again.
he carries it with incredible joy, but it being brought again, he makes
festiual days, and exceedingly rejoices, calling together his neighbors and
friends that they may rejoice with him. Yea he affirms, that God also in
heaven with the whole heavenly host do rejoice over one sinner that repents.
In which words he shows and declares, who he is, which deserves to be
called his lost sheep, namely such a sinner, as being led by repentance of his
former life, does amend, most fervently desyring to be delivered from sins,
and earnestly endeavoring to come unto Christ: such a one has a miserable and
troubled, yea and a contrite and humbled heart, and an afflicted conscience,
which the deuell by all means fights against, and so presses it, that it is
almost overcome with distresses, etc. But Christ assisteth and comfort him,
for he is such a man, as seeks no sheep but that which is lost, and can not
help it self.

How may Christ be preached with greater gentleness, and more effectual
consolation of words? or what think thou should he do more to cheer the
mind of a sinner, and to confirm in him a sure confidence toward himself? For
we see him set forth by himself to us miserable sinners as a most loving
shepeheard, who most sorrowfully seeks his sheep being lost, and most
joyfully brings them again being found, and takes so great joy, that with
him all the Angels also and Saints do rejoice over us.

Now he that could firmly believe these things, should without dout through
Christ receive true comfort and joy, forasmuch as here he has a certain
promise, that if he surely cleave unto Christ, and rest upon his shoulders, he
shall be an acceptable and welcome guest in the kingdom of heaven, and shall be
received with exceeding great joy. But we being troubled with sorrow and
anguish of conscience, have a far other feeling and affection, when as the
heart can think nothing else, but that all the Angels do stand behind us with
a drawn sword, which fear so troubles us, that we can conceive no
cheerefulnes in our mind, neither of God, nor of the Angels. And there are
some also, which can behold no creature with a glad mind, fearing the
beholding of the sun, yea being sore afraid at the noise of a leaf. All
which proceed from hence, for that they trouble and vex them selves with
their own thoughts, out of which they would willingly wrestle, sparing no
labor, that they might feel that vprightnes and integrity in them, which
would be abashed with no fear. But if thou be desirous to conceive true
comfort and joy in thy heart, then see that thou do diligently and well print
and fasten therein this amiable image of the most loving shepeheard, and the
word of the Gospel, and seek it, where it is to be sought, that is, in Christ
and no where else: In Christ true joy is to be found, and without him can be
found no true joy at all.
for in this man thou shall find all things, so that thou abide in his safe
custody and upon his shoulders. But whatsoever comfort can be obtained without
him, it comes not from the heart, although thou call to help thee all the
creatures, and should also be partaker of the pleasure and joy of the whole
world.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER OF THE WOMAN OF CANAAN.
Matthew. 15. Verse. 21. ANd Jesus went thence, and departed into the parts of
Tyrus and Sidon.

22. And behold, a woman a Cananite came out of the same coasts, and cried,
saying unto him, Have mercy on me, O Lord, the son of David: my daughter is
miserably vexed with a Devil.

23. But he answered her not a word. Then came to him his Disciples and
besought him, saying: Send her away, for she cries after us.

24. But he answered and said: I am not sent but vnot the lost sheep of the
house of Israel.

25. Yet she came and worshipped him, saying, Lord help me.

26. And he answered and said, it is not good to take the childrens bread, and
to cast it to whelps.

27. But she said, truth Lord: yet in deed the welps eat of the crommes, which
fall from their masters table.

28. Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O woman, great is thy faith: be
it to thee as thou desire. And her daughter was made whole at that hour.


IN this text is set forth unto us an example of a constant and steadfast faith.
For this woman did so persevere, that she overcame three most sharp conflicts,
and notably teaches us, what is the quality and proper virtue of a true and
right faith. Faith what it is.
Which in deed is a certain trust, and most deeply settled in the mind, of
the divine goodness and grace, known and made manifest by the word of God. For
Mark mentions that she heard the report of Jesus, without dout good and
joyful, that he is a bountiful man, and marvelous ready to help every one.
That report was good tidings and the word of grace unto her, whereupon also
this her faith did begin. For unless she had believed that she also might be made
partaker of Christ's bountifulnes and goodness, she would not have so followed
him, or cried after him. Which is that whereof we have often admonished, Faith
comes by hearing.
and which we are taught Romans 10. that faith is by hearing. Wherefore the word
ought always to go before, and give the beginning of salvation. But how came
it to pass, whereas many other also heard the same report of our Savior
Jesus, yet they followed him not, yea they quite despised that report? I
answer. They that are not sick, as they have no need of the Physician, so
neither are they desirous of him. But this woman was afflicted and felt her
necessity, yea that report was so joyful unto her, that she being stirred up
thereby, did follow Christ, running after such a pleasant savor. Cant. 1. We
must first by the law come to the knowledge and feeling of sin, before we ca^
taste how sweet Christ is.
Wherefore Moses must always go before, who may teach us to feel sin, whereby
grace may be wished for and desired of us. It is in vain therefore, although
Christ be preached to be loving, and to be desired and longed for, if a man be
not before humbled through knowledge of him self, and made desirous of Christ,
according to the song of Marie: The Lord has filled the hungry with good
things, and the rich he has sent empty away. Now all these things are
written for the consolation and lifting up of them which be miserable, poor,
needy, oppressed with sins, and abiects, that they may know to whom they
may fly in all distres, and where they may seek for help and safety.

But see how Christ urges and inflameth faith in them that be his, whereby
they may become stronger and more confirmed. For first, whereas this woman
being encouraged with that alluring fame of his, goes after him, and cries
for help, douting nothing but she should try him to be such a one, as she had
heard him reported to be, and that she should forthwith entreat him for the
recovery of her daughter: Christ in all respects shows him self unto her
so, as though he would deceive all her trust, and make his report false so that
she might think with her self: Is this that man which is so bountiful and
ready to help all? Does he so fulfill the most commendable report which goes
of him? Where does there appear so much as any thing like unto those things,
which men have told me of him? They were deceived them selves and deceived me
also. He shows him self an enemy rather then a friend. Why does he not so
much as speak a word, and friendly deny me help, if I be unworthy thereof?
He holds his peace like unto a block, and vouchsafes not to speak a word,
neither offers his help. Here surely Christ gave a grievous blow to the mind
of the silly woman. So it is an incomparable torment to them that believe,
being in distres, when God shows him self such a one at their prayers, like
unto one that is angry, and whom they pray unto in vain, hiding so deeply
his grace, that they now perceive nothing else, but that he will not perform
those things which he has promised, and that so he will show his own words
to be false. That truly happened to the Israelites at the red sea, and to many
other excellent holy men. The consta^cie of this woman of Canaan.
But what does this woman to these things? She remoueth out of her sight and
mind, that Christ showed him self so ungentle and hard to be entreated, she
being constant and nothing moved hereat, perseuereth in the trust of his
goodness, whereof she had heard, and which she had conceived in her mind,
suffering her self in no wise to be turned from it. We must not cease to
trust in God, though he seems at the first not to hear our prayers, nor to
fulfill his promise.
So also must we do, we must trust unto the word alone, although God him self
and all creatures pretend otherwise then the word preaches. But this is
thrice most hard to nature and reason, to be so utterly destitute, and to
depend on the word of God without any feeling of comfort, even when a man
feels and tries all things to be contrary. God give unto us such a mind and
faith, that we may so do, especially at the point of death and in extreme
necessities.

Secondly, whereas the cry and faith of this woman seems to have suffered
repulse, the disciples come with their faith, douting not but that they shall
entreat the Lord, but when they think that they shall make him more easy to
be entreated, they find him to be much more hard, repelling as it appeared,
and as they thought, the faith and prayers both of the woman and also of them
selves. Neither does Christ here hold his peace, and leave them in doubt, as
before, but he seems plainly to deny that which they ask, saying: I am not
sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. This stroke is much more
grievous then that former, where not only the person of the intreater is
repelled, but al hope also which is wont to be left, is cut of, namely the
comfort of the intercession of all the other Saints and elect. For it is
almost the last refuge to them that suffer distres and feel the indignation of
God, to get them selves to godly and holy men, seeking for comfort and help,
whereunto, as charity requires, they find them ready and willing, but even
they also some time do in vain ask help and succor, for neither are they
heard, and so the case of them that be in distres becomes worse and more
lamentable. So the afflicted and desolate may truly object unto Christ all
those words, wherein he has promised that he will hear his Saints, as:
Matthew. 18.19
If two of you shall agree in earth upon any thing whatsoever they shall
desire, it shall be given them of my Father which is in heaven. Again,
Whatsoever ye shall ask, Mark 11.24
believe, and ye shall receive it. And many such like. But if to him that
obiecteth these things, and asks him how he can go from his words and
promises, he answer thus: I go not from my promises, I have not promised
that I will hear all prayers, but the prayers of them that be mine, which are
of the house of Israel, not of all whatsoever. What think thou may the heart
then think having taken such a repulse? Such an answer is as it were a flash
of lightning, wherewith the heart and all trust is severed and broken in a
thousand pieces. For what trust can there be left, when he hears that that
does not pertain unto him, which because of the word of God he trusted to have
obtained, but unto others. Here not so much as a word can be left, if one do
according as he feels. But what does this woman? She does not so fall from
hope, The great constancy and faith of this woman of Canaan.
she still sticks to the words which she had heard of Christ, albeit he went
about by this other repulse as with a certain force to wrest them out of her
heart, she suffers not her self to be fraied away neither with that ungentle
silence, neither with this hard answer, she continues steadfastly in a sure
confidence, believing that under this difficulty which Christ did pretend,
that grace was as yet hidden and laid up for her, which she had heard reported
of him, she can not be brought as yet to judge Christ not to be bountiful and
gracious, and that he can deny the help which she desires. This was to
persevere strongly in faith.

Moreover she follows Jesus even into the house, as Mark writes, she is
instant upon him, falls down before him, and says: Lord help me. Here the
Lord gives a deadly and the last blow saying unto her face, that she is a
dog, and unworthy to be partaker of the bread of the children. What may she
answer hereunto? For he seemed to signify in these words that she is of the
number of the damned and desperate, which can look for no part with the elect.
This word seems eternal and that can not be gainesayd: For he which does not
pertain to the company of the elect by the ordinance of God, what may he
hope to be left for him? This woman is not yet discouraged and past hope, but
yeldeth to this judgment of the Lord, she confesses of her own accord, that
she is a dog, neither desires she any thing but that which is wont to be
given to dogs, namely the crummes which fall from their masters table.
Seems she not to have used marvelous cunning? She takes Christ in his own
words. He had made her like unto a dog, she acknowledges it, and desires
that he will only suffer her to be a dog according to his own saying: what
should he here do? how should he escape? he was now as it were even taken. For
the crummes under the table are granted to the dog, for unto dogs they are
said to be due. The fruit of constant perseverance and trust in Christ.
Here therefore Christ being as it were overcome, does open him self wholly,
and grants the desires of the woman, and makes that she is not now a dog,
but a true Israelite.

These things are written for the instruction and comfort of all us, whereby we
ought to learn, how deeply sometime Christ hides his grace from us, and how
we must not judge of God according to our own sense and opinion, but only
according to his words. For we see here, that albeit Christ showed him self
very hard to this woman, yet he did not plainly deny to help her, but
whatsoever he answered, howsoever it seemed to pretend a denial, yet was it
not a denial, but did hang in dout, and left an entrance for faith, although
but small. For he said not at her first petition: I will not hear her, but he
held his peace, neither promising nor denying help. So to the second petition,
which the Apostles made, he says not: she is not of the house of Israel, I can
not therefore perform that which she desires, but he only says: I am not
sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, leaving all things in
doubt, and in the midst between a plain grant and a denial. So when she
had the third time desired him, he says not: thou art a dog, get thee hence,
the bread of the children is not due unto thee, but he says: It is not good to
take the childrens bread, etc. again leaving in dout, whether she was a dog
or no. Nevertheless all these sayings do pretend outwardly rather a denial
of help, then provoke her to hope, but in very deed they did contain in them
rather a promise and hope, then a denial. Yea there was nothing but a promise
and a certain expectation of help, (howbeit most deeply hid and altogether
secret) under that silence and aunswers, although they were hard, and a denial
only sounded outwardly. By these it is showed how our heart is wont to be
affected in tentation. For according as that feels in tentation, so Christ
here behaueth him self. It feels all things to be denied, when as it is
far otherwise. Wherefore it is requisite, that leaving it own feeling, by a
sure faith in the word of God it conceive and hold fast the promise of help,
deeply hidden under the denial, and yield unto the sentence of God toward us,
as this woman did, so shall we overcome and take the Lord in his words, that
he can not but help us. So that if we feel in our conscience at any time God
rebuking us, pronouncing us sinners, and unworthy of the kingdom of heaven,
then we feel as it were hell, and it seems unto us that we are past all hope
and recovery for ever: When God pronounces us sinners, we ought to
acknowledge and confess our sins, and pray former eye, which God has
promised to them that be penitent for their sins.
then if any had the skill of this woman, that he could take the Lord in his
own judgment and say: yea Lord, I am a sinner, and altogether unworthy of thy
grace, but thou have promised forgiveness to sinners, neither did thou come to
call the righteous, but as Paul says, to save sinners: he truly should
bring to pass that the Lord should be enforced, even by his own judgment
to have mercy upon him. So did Manasses, when being penitent he prayed for
pardon, as we read in his prayer: He yielded to the judgment of God,
acknowledging him self a most grievous sinner, and so he bound God with his
promise, which had promised forgiveness of sin to sinners, not to the
righteous. The same also did David observe Psalm. 51. Against thee only, says
he, have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, that thou might be
justified in thy saying, and found pure when thou art judged. For that does
purchase unto us all displeasure, that we disdain to suffer the judgment of
the Lord, and do against our wills yield unto his sentence, when he
pronounces us sinners. Such a great thing is it to acknowledge sins, and to
embrace the judgment of God. We all confess our selves sinners in words, but
as soon as the Lord speaks that in our heart, and pronounces us sinners, we
do not abide by that which before we confessed, we had lever be counted
righteous and free from that judgment. But it must needs be, if God must be
just in his words, that thou be a sinner, then also may thou use the right
of sinners, which God him self has given unto them, namely to pray with a
sure expectation of forgiveness of sins. Then is it not permitted unto thee
only to feed under the table of crummes after the manner of dogs, but being
a child of the household, thou shall sit at the very table, having God now how
great soever he be, given unto thee according to thy desire. Hereof also we
have an historical exposition of this text according to ye allegories. For as
it chances to this woman her daughter being sick, for whom through faith she
obtained health by a miracle: so also falls it out with us, when we are
delivered from ye spiritual sickness to wit sins, which truly are a most
grievous and troublesome Devil unto us. For as she acknowledged her self a
dog, so must we acknowledge our selves sinners and judged unto hell, the Lord
pronouncing it, which if we can do as she could, we shall be safe. We have
already spoken elsewhere of other things, whereof there might be occasion to
speak out of this text, as how one may obtain grace and safety by the faith
of an other, as here it fell out to the daughter of this woman. Christ, the
Disciples, and the woman in this place are examples of love.
This thing also (that Christ, his Disciples, and the woman are here examples
of love, forasmuch as none of them pray for, seek or do those things that
are their own, but every one that which is an others) is very manifest by it
self, and easily acknowledged of every one, especially seeing that we have so
largely entreated hereof in an other place.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, WHEREIN IS TAVGHT THAT WE ARE SAVED freely by
grace, without the works and merits of men.
Tit. 3. Verse. 4. WHen that bountifulnes and that love of God our Savior
toward men appeared,

5. Not by the works of righteousness, which we had done, but according to his
mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the
holy Ghost,

6. Which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior,

7. That we, being justified by his grace, should be made heirs according to
the hope of eternal life.


PAVLE having willed before that all should be put in mind to be obedient to
such as be in authority, and ready to every good work, to speak evil of no
man, to be no fighters, but gentle, showing all meekenes unto all men, etc:
these few words being put between, that we our selves were in times past
unwise, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and voluptuousnes, etc: he
added those words which we have already mentioned, as if he should say: A most
weighty cause to move us to do good to our neighbors.
Wherefore should it grieve us to deserve so well of all men, when as God has
before dealt so bountifully, kindly, and gently with us, with whom without
comparison, we are less, and have less of him deserved, then any being
compared to us can be, or can deserve of us? As therefore God has with
exceeding bountifulnes and kindenes most gently behaved him self toward us, of
his mercy granting and giving unto us all things: so ought we to do all
things with all charity and good will toward our neighbors, albeit they have
otherwise deserved, forasmuch as we were like unto them, subject to all sins
and evil desires. Here we see how the Apostle will have us to be affected
toward men: How we must behave our selves toward men.
He will have us subject to them that be in authority, kind unto others, and
ready to do well unto them with all gentleness, although they be evil,
blind, and in error, that we grudge not to bear these things, and as much
as lies in us, endeavor to do them good, taking all things in good part,
considering that God has so dealt with us, when we were evil and wicked, like
unto them.

This word, appeared, we have elsewhere declared to signify the revelation of
the Gospel, whereby Christ appeared in the world: Albeit the unskillfulness of
Ministers has wrested it to the carnal nativity of Christ. He uses not here
the word grace, which he used before, Tit. 2.11.
but has set in steed thereof two other words of marvelous comfort,
[bountifulnes, and love toward men] which he attributes to our God. The first
is called of the Grecians Chrestotes, Bountifulnes
and is that kindness, gentleness and sweetenes of conditions, wherewith they
that be endued, with them all of us are with pleasure conversant, and
maruelously delighted with their company, so that they do with this their
gentleness and kindness allure and greatly provoke all men to love them. For such
can suffer all without grief: they contemn no man: they repel or put none
from them with bitter, hard, and disordered conditions: access unto them is
not hard, but they are so open, and ready for all, that every one dare resort
unto them, and desire their help. And to conclude: they are such men as the
Gospells describe Christ unto us, whom they declare to be gentle to all, a
despiser of none, which denies no benefit to any, pliant, prepared and ready
to do good to all. So God also by the Gospel is preached and offered unto us
wholly good, bountiful and sweet, open to all, rejecting none, bearing all our
sins and offenses, repelling no man from him with excessive severity. For we
read and hear nothing to be declared in the Gospel but mere grace, and mere
goodness, whereby he does most mercifully bear us, and most gently handle us,
and not any man according to his deserts. This is the time of grace, wherein it
is granted to all to go with great boldness unto the throne of grace, as it is
written Heb. 4. and Psalm. 34: Come unto him, and be enlightened, and your faces
shall not be ashamed, that is, he will not suffer you to pray and come in
vain, neither to return with confusion being frustrate.

The other word is Philanthropia, love of men, Love toward men.
as covetousness may be called love of money, as David 2. Sam. 1. calls the
desire of women, the love of women. And the Philosophers call certain living
creatures Philanthropa, that is loving toward men, as are horses, dogs,
dolphins. For these creatures are by nature delighted with man, they desire his
company, and do willingly serve him, as though they were moved with some reason
and sense of humanity. This name, and such love the Apostle here attributes to
our God, which Moses also did before him, Deuteronomy. 33: where he speaks thus of
God: The Lord appeared having in his right hand a law of fire, and he loved the
people. The meaning therefore of the Apostle is this: Our God has in the
Gospel showed him self unto us not only bountiful, kind, gentle, and
sweet, which can bear, and will receive all, but also he so loves us, that
of his own accord he adioyneth him self unto us, seeks to have to do with
us, voluntarily shows and offers his grace and bountifulnes unto us, and
most gently embraces as many as only do not refuse his grace and love, and
desire to draw nie unto him. What should he do more? Who can not see hereby,
why we count the Gospel a preaching, joyful and full of all consolation of
God in Christ? For what can be spoken more lovingly and sweetly to a sinful
and afflicted conscience, then these words? O lamentable case, how miserably
has Satan by the laws of his Pope oppressed and obscured this sovereign
synceritie of the word of God.

Now let no man restrain these two words [bountifulnes, and love toward men]
to the persons, No respect of persons with God.
for God is plainly without respect of persons bountiful to all, and a lover
of all, otherwise if we should here make a difference between men, we should
acknowledge that some thing is received through our merits, and not all things
through his mercy. Where it must be well marked, that God is said to be a lover
of men, not of this or that nature only, not held with love of the person, and
therefore these two, bountifulnes, and love toward men, must be taken after a
general sort, that in all things the chief praise may be attributed to his
mercy, that no man trust in his own merits, neither be terrified with sins,
but that all together do trust to his grace, which he voluntarily offers
unto us with so great kindness and love toward us. For if any respect of person
might be had here, it should surely be had of them, which are rich in the works
of righteousness, but Paul expressly rejects these, saying: Not by the works
of righteousness, which we had done. How much less then shall this
bountifulnes and love of our God toward men appear, because of any man's
wisdom, power, nobility, riches or any such thing, when as no respect is had
of works of righteousness? Great is the grace of God toward us, which appears
in the Gospel, yea and nothing but grace, which admits no merit at all of
ours, utterly takes away all boasting and glorying, and sets forth the
glory of God alone, who freely gives it unto us being unworthy. So in this
text these two, faith and love, are taught to receive benefits of God, and
bestow them on our neighbors, which the Scripture does very often repeat, so
that even the doctrine of salvation consists wholly in them, The doctrine of
our salvation consists in faith and love.
neither can one be separated from the other. For he that does not firmly
trust in the divine grace, can not but be remiss and slow to do well to his
neighbor, and so witness the faintnes and weakness of faith, which is the
fountain of all duties and benefits: As contrariwise the stronger faith that
one is endued with, so much more dutifully and with readier mind he
endeavors to deserve well of his neighbors.

All both doctrine and life worthy of Christ, (that all things may be declared
most briefly, manifestly and sufficiently) consist of these two, By faith and
love man is made as it were a mean between God and his neighbors.
faith and love. Whereby man is made as it were a mean between God and his
neighbors, that he may receive of God from above, and may give to his
neighbors beneath, and be as it were a conduit pipe, through which the
fountain of the divine goodness does continually flow to his neighbors. And
such men are like unto God, which in Christ receive of God whatsoever he has,
and do again by their good deeds declare them selves as it were the gods of
other, and fulfill the prophecy of the Prophet Psalm 82: I have said, ye
are gods, and ye all are children of the most high. We are children of the most
high by faith, whereby of nothing we are made the heirs of God. And we are
gods by love, which makes us beneficial to our neighbor: forasmuch as the
nature of God is nothing but bountifulnes, and Paul here says: the
bountifulnes and love of God toward men, The means to be partaker of the
bountifulnes and love of God is to believe.
which he does with incomparable plenty daily pour forth upon every one, as
we see. We must only endeavor, that every one do nothing doubt that these
things are spoken to him, that the bountifulnes and love of God to manward is
revealed and offered to every one, that by these words he may establish,
exercise, and strengthen his faith, being certain that they are most true, and
that God both undoubtedly is, and always will be bountiful and loving toward
him. If thou can believe this, it will assuredly so come unto thee: thou
may then with a full confidence pray and desire of him whatsoever thou will,
and complain unto him of whatsoever does grieve thee or other. But if thou
want this faith, it had been better for thee never to have heard any thing
hereof, for that by thy infidelity thou reprouest of falsehood these words so
precious and full of consolation and grace, making so light account of them, as
not believing that they be true. Which surely is a great contempt and dishonor
of God, that scarce a more grievous sin can be committed of thee.
Contrariwise if thou be endued with this faith, it can not be, but that thy
heart being thereby cheered, should even as it were laughe and leap for holy
joy in God, being void of all care and trouble, and be made above measure
confident. For how can any discouragement, any whit of sorrow remain in that
heart, which douteth not that God is gracious and bountiful unto it, and
bears a singular affection of love toward it, that it is a delight and
pleasure unto him to do it good, and enjoy it as a friend? Surely the heart is
necessarily delighted with this spiritual joy and pleasure, or undoubtedly it
wants faith. Paul in the Epistle to the Gal. calls this, to receive the
holy Ghost by the Gospel. For the Gospel is so pleasant a preaching of the
grace and goodness of God, that while it is preached and heard, it brings the
holy Ghost with it, no otherwise then the beams of the sun do naturally
bring heat with them.

How could the Apostle use more pleasant and sweet words? I dare say that I
have in the whole Scripture read none more pleasant, and so sweet words of
the grace of God, as these two, Chrestotes, and Philanthropia, that is,
bountifulnes, and love toward men, How loving God is toward us.
in which ye grace of God is so described, as whereby he does not only forgive
our sins, but does also desire to be conuersaunt with us, and is ready to do
the part of a very friend toward us, voluntarily offering him self to help us
in all things, also to bestow more benefits upon us then we can desire or
ask, that we may presume of him no otherwise then of a most near and familiar
friend, of whom we may obtain all things, in whose eyes we are most dear,
and even delightful. Think in thy mind of a most perfect friend, which has
fulfilled all the parts of friendship toward thee, and thou shall have after a
sort a form, although yet far unlike, of the divine goodness and kindenes,
which is here attributed to our God, by the name of bountifulnes and love
toward men. But when thou have a sound faith in this bountifulnes and love to
manward, and thereby do live in thy God, so bountiful, gracious, and gentle
to thee, reioycest, and art full of all good things, being certain of his
continual grace, what should thou do any longer in earth? what in this
life?

He that is partaker of the bountifulnes and love of God can not be idle.
Thou can not in this case be idle, as surely that love of God and pleasure
which thou enioyest in him will not suffer thee to be idle. Thou shall be
enflamed with a marvelous study and desire to do what things soever thou
can know will be an honor unto thy God, so loving and bountiful unto thee,
and will turn to praise, glory, and thanks giving unto him. Thou shall have
no choice of works, thou shall pass for no precept, thou shall feel no
compulsion of the law, having a most ready will and pleasure to do, whatsoever
things thou shall know to be acceptable unto God, whether they be contemptible
or noble, small or great, thou shall count them alike. But first of all it
shall be thy desire, that this blessed knowledge of God may be common also to
the rest, whereupon by and by thy love will here show it self, and will assay
all means, to make this truth of salvation manifest unto all, it will publish
and repete it, wheresoever it shall be able, rejecting and condemning
whatsoever other either teach or say, that agrees not with this truth. Satan
and the world can not abide falsehood to be reproved and the truth to be
preached, and therefore they persecute them which preach the truth.
Whereby it will come to pass, that Satan and the world, which hear nothing
so unwillingly as this truth, and can not abide that their things should be
condemned, will rise against thee with all their might, will by and by trouble
thee, all the great, learned, rich and mighty of the world will condemn thee
of heresy and madness, and will leave no mean unattempted until if they be
able they have dispatched thee of thy life. Thus with Christ thy Lord thou shall
be persecuted, and suffer extreme ignominy, thy body, life, goods, name,
friends, and all things being brought into peril, until they have thrust
thee from them out of this life into the eternal and blessed life: In the mean
season thou must suffer all these things with a patient mind, and take them in
good part, losing none of ye spiritual joy, which thou have of Christ in thy
God, and for thy part showing to thy persecutors all kindness and love, being
always mindful, that thou a little before wast not much unlike them before God.
All which things thou shall do through faith and love, albeit they exceed
the strength of nature. And this in deed is a true Christian life, wherein
thou do endeavor to do so to other, as God has done to thee.

Not by the works of righteousness which we had done. In these words the
Apostle signifies that which we have now said, and proves it as it were by
rendering a reason. We must do well unto men, yea even though they have not so
deserved of us.
For if the bountifulnes and love of God to manward has appeared, and he has
saved us of his mercy, and not because of our own righteousness, yea we being
by all means unworthy, and subject to innumerable sins, it is meet that we
also do good to them that have not deserved so much of us, and are unworthy
thereof. For we which are become the sons of God, must resemble God our
father, and bestow benefits according to our ability as well upon our enemies
and persecutours, as upon our friends and them that do good unto us. Whereof
Christ also has admonished us Matthew. 5: Love your enemies, that ye may be the
children of your Father which is in heaven, who makes his sun to shine upon
the good and evil, and sends rain on the just and unjust. For if ye love
them which love you, what revvard shall ye have? when as even the heathen and
Publicans do the same. Now the Apostle does not only expressly condemn us
for evil works, but says: Not by the works of righteousness, or, which we
have done in righteousness. Where he also rejects those works, which we
counted righteous, and were thought both of us and others to have bin done in
righteousness, when as they were so far from being righteous, that they made
us more unworthy of the grace of God, and more unfit to receive it, for they
are deceitful works, whereunto we add this sin, that we think them
righteous, and trust in them, whereby God is provoked to anger more then can be
said, even as our enemies are wont to move us to anger, when as they will
avouch those things to be just, We ought to be beneficial to others of mere
love, having no respect to good or evil deserts.
wherein they sin and do unjustly. But even as God, when we being unwise, by
error moved him to anger, counting our sins works of righteousness, did not
therefore reject us, but of his mercy delivered us from this error and
sins: so we neglecting the foolishnes and dotage of our adversaries, whereby
they contend that sins are to be counted for righteousness, ought nevertheless
of mere love, having no respect of evil or good deserts, to be beneficial
unto them, and endeavor to do them good in all things, looking for fruit of
our benefits not of the^, but of God alone. Let these things suffize to have
been spoken for a compendious and general exposition of this text.

Now let us also briefly wey the words, wherein he sets forth and
commends the grace of God. First he so greatly extolleth it, The good works
and righteousness of men how they are esteemed of.
that in respect of it he condemns all our good works and righteousness:
neither does he condemn a small thing, when he condemns our righteousness or
righteous works, the most excellent thing that man can have in earth. For if
all men with all their might should labor and endeavor to attain to most
exact prudence, wisdom, and liberty of mind and will, which we read that
some Philosophers and Princes have done, as Socrates, Traianus, and many other,
whose same the whole world has long since spread abroad both by words and
writings: nevertheless all such wisdom, and all such virtues are nothing
but sins before God, forasmuch as they be not done in and by the grace of
God. Doers of such virtues are ignorant of God, and therefore they can not
honor him by their studies and endeavors, they think they have all thinks of
them selves, when as no man can have any good thing at all, but of this grace
alone, which the Gospel preaches. So Paul glories, that he, before he knew
Christ, lived a blameless life, and was more zealous toward the law then
those of his age, that he also thought, that he did a thing acceptable to God
by persecuting the Christians, which condemned that blameles life which he
led, but afterward when he had learned Christ, he says, that he cou^teth
that righteousness to be but dounge, that he might be found not in such
righteousness, but in Christ by faith. Philip. 3. The same thing he witnesses
and entreats of at large in the Epistles to the Galathians and Colossians.
Here therefore is condemned all boasting of free will, man's strength,
righteousness, and good works, and it is concluded, that they are all nothing
but sins, and certain destruction, although they have a fair show: that we
are saved by the only grace of God, as many of us as believe, and call for it,
with acknowledging of our own vanity and perdition.

Now we must accustom our selves to the Scripture, Tow sorts of righteousness.
which makes mention of two sorts of rigteousnes, one humane, which Paul here
and in many other places has mentioned, the other divine, even that grace of
salvation, which justifies us by faith, Divine righteousness whereby we are
justified.
whereof he speaks in the end of this text: That being justified by grace,
we should be heirs of eternal life. Here thou see plainly that the grace of
God is our true righteousness, whereby we are justified, which is therefore
called ye righteousness of God, for that it is given unto us of God, and is made
ours, when we are made partakers thereof by faith. Of this he speaks also
Romans 1: In the Gospel is revealed the righteousness of God from faith to faith,
as it is written: The just shall live by faith. And Genesis 15: Abraham believed,
and it was counted to him for righteousness. Whereupon the Scripture concludes,
that no man is counted righteous before God, but he that believes, as the
Apostle testifies, where he recites that saying of Abacuc: The just shall live
by faith. So it appears that faith, grace, mercy, truth, righteousness, that
all these are that same which God works in us by Christ and the Gospel.
Whereupon it is said Psalm. 25: All the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth.
For those are the ways of the Lord in which we observing his commandments,
do walk, and he again in us, now those ways must be directed by his mercy
and truth alone, not by our strength and industry, forasmuch as our ways
being ordered hereby, are nothing but vanity before God, and do deserve his
wrath. According to that which the Lord says Esai 55: As far as the heaven
is higher then the earth, so far do my ways exceed yours. As if he should
say: Your righteousness is earthly and of no value, wherefore ye must bid it
farewell and walk in mine, if ye hope for salvation.

But according to his mercy he saved us. It is marvel how the credit of these
words can stand, wherein the Apostle affirms that we are already saved,
although living yet in earth, and therefore in continual misery. But he did
so speak, that he might more fully express the power of the divine grace, and
the nature of faith against hypocrites, who as though salvation were yet far
of, do in vain endeavor to get and obtain it by their works. We are already
saved by Christ.
For Christ has already saved us: he has performed all things which are
required hereunto, that we may be saved: he has overcome and subdued sin,
death, hell, etc. so that he has left nothing, for any man to care for, he
has also given all these things unto us in Baptism, that who soever believes
in Christ, that he has performed them, has them together in the same moment,
so that he has need of nothing more unto salvation, but faith alone, that he
may firmly believe that these things are so performed. But mark how
incomparable riches of his grace God has poured upon us in Baptism, who has
delivered us even from those works, whereby those foolish holy ones go about
to merit heaven, and to be saved. For we must have heaven, and be saved before
we can do any good works, for that works can not merit heaven, but heaven
being before given of mere grace; causes us to do good works, and that for
no hope of merit or reward, but only to the commodity of our neighbors, and
the glory of God, until this body also be delivered from sin and death.

What the life of a Christian is after baptism.
Wherefore all the life of a Christian after Baptism is nothing else, but an
expectation of salvation and felicity to be revealed, which they that believe
in Christ do now possess, although hidden. They have all things now
certainly, but they are yet hid in faith, which when as it is changed,
knowledge being revealed, all things as they now have them, shall appear,
which shall come to pass, when pleasant and wished death comes, 1. Ioh. 3.2.
according to that saying of John: Dearly beloved, now are we the sons of
God, and yet it does not appear what we shall be: But we know that when he
shall appear, we shall be like him. And every man that has this hope in him,
purges himself, even as he is pure. Wherefore suffer not thy self to be
deceived, and to be seduced from this truth by those hypocrites, which
contemning faith, do falsely affirm that salvation is far from thee, and
teach thee to endeavor in vain to attain unto it by thy works. It is in thy
self, if thou believe that all things are performed by Christ, even as he
himself witnesses: The kingdom of God is within you, Luke 17. So that all
our life after Baptism ought to be nothing else but an expectation, that that
should be revealed which is already in us, and that we may comprehend, as we
are comprehended, as Paul says Philip. 3. I follow, if that I may comprehend
that, for whose sake also I am comprehended of Christ, that is, that I may at
length see those things which are given me, being as yet in the shut closet of
faith. He coueteth, and burns with desire to see the treasure which by faith
he received both given and sealed in Baptism. Whereupon he adds in the same
place: Our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for our Savior
Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body. Herewith also agrees that which he says Gal. 4: Ye
know God, and by and by he does as it were correct that which he had said, Yea,
says he, rather are ye known, both which are true, although not after the
like sort: We are now known of God, so that he comprehends us, and we in
deed know God, but we do not yet comprehend, for that our knowledge is as yet
hidden and closed up in faith. He says moreover Romans 8: We are saved by hope,
that is, we are saved, although we yet see it not, for that which one sees, he
hops not for, but if we hope for those things which we see not, we do with
patience abide for them. Christ confirms this Luke 12: Let your loins be
gird about, and your lights burning, and ye your selves like unto men that wait
for their master, when he will return from the wedding, that when he comes,
and knocks, they may open unto him immediately. In which words he only
bids them that be his to be ready to look for him the bridegroom, as which
are already saved being admitted into the number of his ministers. Hereunto
also pertains that which the Apostle says Tit. 2: Let us live soberly, and
righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for that blessed hope,
and appearing of the glory of that mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus
Christ. In these and such like places whereof thou may read many here and
there in the holy Scriptures, he witnesses that we are already saved, and that
it does not behoue, that a Christian man should first seek to attain to
salvation by his works. This opinion and deuelish doctrine blyndeth the eyes
of Christians, extinguisheth the knowledge of faith, and carries men from the
way of truth and salvation. We must cleave unto that which the Apostle here
says: He has saved us according to his mercy, and that which he adds in
the end of this text, that we are heirs according to the hope of eternal
life. We are now heirs, but that is hidden in faith, Why God will have us to
look for the revelation of our inheritance a certain time.
but we look with a certain hope, that hereafter it shall be revealed. And God
will have us so to look for the revelation of this inheritance, and to live a
certain time after Baptism, that he may chastise our body by our ministry,
and declare the power of his grace in fight against the flesh, the world and
the devil, but especially for this cause, that by us he may help our
neighbors, and both by doctrine, and also by our life which he lives in us,
may bring them to the communion of faith. And albeit he can do this by Angels,
yet it pleases him rather that it should be done by us men, that both the
manner of faith may be the better known, and that all things may be done
sweetly and lovingly. For if Angels should always have to do with us, there
should not be so much faith, neither should it be so pleasant, as when we are
taught and guided by them that are partakers of our nature, whom we do better
know, and with whom we do more familiarly associat our selves. And so, that
there may be some, by whom other also may be converted both by doctrine, and
good examples, it is not meet that we should by and by after Baptism be taken
into heaven, wherein notwithstanding we are already admitted citizens.

A practice of Satan and Antichrist to delude me^ with Purgatory.
Hereupon if one weye all things rightly, it can not be douted, that it is a
practice and miracle of Satan and Antichrist, that so much is spent for
Purgatories sake, such faith as this being put quite out of men's minds. For
men are taught by their works to save themselves from Purgatory, or at the
least to deliver themselves out from thence, as though salvation were not yet
given us, and it were necessary to come unto it by other means then by faith
alone, which how it disagreeth with the Scripture and a Christian life, there
is no man that does not see, but he that sees nothing in the Scripture. For
thus the holy Scriptures do teach every where, that who soever does not
receive salvation by mere grace, through faith before all works, he shall
never be partaker thereof. And that who soever refer their good works, not
to the profit of their neighbors, but to their own commodity, being more
careful of their own salvation then of their neighbors, have no good works
at all. All the works of these are void of faith, and infected with
pernicious error. It had bin greatly to be wished that Purgatory had never
bin invented, and never mention made thereof in the pulpit, for it has bin
cause of such hinderance to Christian verity and sincere truth, as can not be
recovered. For we see it now brought to pass by the means of Satan, that
almost al prayers are directed to only Purgatory, with this ungodly and
pestilent opinion, whereby miserable men think that they shall be redeemed from
thence, and obtain salvation by the works of men. Whereby the riches of
Baptism and faith are had in no reputation, and they at the last of Christians
become Heathen. O most pernicious abomination. Christians should be taught as
Christ and Paul teach them, that after Baptism and absolution from sins they
should so live, that they should be ready every hour to receive death, with
desire looking for the revelation of salvation already received. Now by the
opinion of Purgatory they are made secure and slothful, so that they differ
the study of godliness even to their death, and think by contrition and
confession they shall amend all things, as though there were some sins
remaining for which they must go into Purgatory, they hope that by Masses for
the departed, and other bequests that they are persuaded to make in their
testame^ts or last wills, they shall be redeemed out of purgatory, but these
miserable men are in these things utterly deceived, and shall at length try
them to be far otherwise.

By the washing of the new birth. He sets forth the grace of God given to us
in Baptism, with words very full of praise and commendation. He calls
Baptism a washing, whereby not the feet and hands, but the whole man is at
once washed, purified and saved, so that to the sum and inheritance of
salvation there is need of nothing but only faith in this grace of God, that
it may remain and be acknowledged the work of grace alone, that we are saved
without all our works and merits, and so also there may remain in us pure
love, praise, giving of thanks, and glory of the divine mercy, without all
glory and pleasing of our selves in our own strength and endeavor, as it has
bin already said often and at large. Humane righteousness is also a washing, but
not whereby the whole man is so washed, but that Pharisaicall washing, whereby
only the apparel and vessels which are outward, are made clean, whereof it
is spoken Matthew. 23. Whereby it comes to pass that men seem unto themselves
pure, but inwardly nevertheless they remain full of filthiness. Baptism what
manner of washing it is.
Therefore he called Baptism not a corporal or outward washing, but the
washing of regeneration or new birth, by which not those things that are
outward, are washed, and only the outward man made clean, but the whole
nature of man is altered and changed into an other nature, that is, the carnal
nativity is thereby destroyed, with all the inheritance of sins and
perdition. Salvation comes not by works.
Whereby he again witnesses, that our salvation is given us at once, so that
it is not to be gotten by works. For not one or two members are wont to be
borne, as the hands or feet, but the whole man, which can not work this that
he may be borne a man, but is first borne that he may work: Likewise our
works do not purify or save us, but when as before we are pure, justified,
and saved, we work freely those things, which may be profit to our neighbor,
and honor to God. And this is the simple and pure knowledge of the divine
grace, whereby a man learneth to know both God and himself: to praise God
alone, to humble and cast down himself: to trust in God, to despeire of
himself. This doctrine of salvation they maruelously hinder, which urge men
with laws, precepts, and works, and teach them to seek thereby to be saved.

He that is truly baptized is become a new creature.
And the renewing. That this washing and new birth may be more fully
understood, he has added, the renewing, that thou may understand, that he
that is truly baptized, is become a new man, and a new creature, endued with a
new disposition, which now is far otherwise affected, loves, lives,
speaks and does far otherwise, the^ he was wont or could before. So the
Apostle says, Gal. 6: In Christ neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, that is, no works of the Law are of any value or importance,
but a new creature. As if he should say: Salvation can not be perfected by
joining together certain good works, but the whole man must be at once
renewed, and his nature changed, whereupon true good works will follow of
themselves, not by peecemeale, but together with great plenty. Of this new
birth, whereby the whole man is renewed, Christ speaks Ioh. 3: He that is not
borne again, can not see the kingdom of God. Here again it manifestly
appears, that nothing is here done by our works, but that it behooves, that
man, how great soever he be, must die, and be changed into an other, which is
done in Baptism, if we believe. The condemned shall be borne again, but not
renewed.
The condemned also shall be borne again in the last day, but they shall not be
renewed, they shall remain unclean, as they were here, and as they were borne
of Adam. Therefore that he might speak rightly of Baptism, he calls it the
washing of the new birth, whereby they that are borne again are also renewed.
Of this new birth many things are to be found here and there in the Scripture,
because of which also God calls his word and Gospel a womb and matrix, as
Esai 46: Hearken all ye that remain of the house of Israel, whom I have borne
in my womb, as mothers are wont to speak of their children. He therefore that
believes the Gospel, is as it were conceived in the womb of God, and from
thence borne a new man, and like unto God: Whereof we will in an other place
speak more. Now it shall be sufficient, to have learned by these words, how our
works are nothing in fulfilling the commandments of God, and that it is a
mad thing to attribute here never so little to our own strength, seeing that
it is faith alone, whereby man is at once borne again, and renewed. Wherefore
understand this, that good works must follow a new creature, but to attain
unto righteousness, and that new creature they are able to help nothing at all.

No otherwise is the grace of God wont to renew man, How the grace of God
renews man.
then as if God should turn some dry and withered block into a new, green,
and flourishing tree, which may afterward bring forth fruit plentifully. For
the grace of God is a great, strong, very mighty, and marvelous effectual
thing, it lies not in the mind, The grace of God exceeding effectual and
mighty in operation.
as the Schoolmen dreamed: it sleeps not, or is borne, as a painted table
bears a picture: it self bears, guides, urges, draws, changes, and
works all things in men, so, that every one may feel and have experience
of it. It self in deed is hyd, but the works of it can not be hyd, but do
witness of it, as the leaves and fruits do of the tree, of what nature it is.
Wherefore the Scholemen Thomas and Scotus do ungodly detract from it, who
attribute no more unto it, then that it does adorn the works of nature, and
is a help that they be brought to perfection. For it does not adorn or help
only, but it alone works those things that be good, neither does it work
them only, but does rather change and renew the person. For it exhibiteth the
washing of the new birth, and of renewing, not of works only, but much rather
of the whole man. He that shall preach these things of grace, shall truly and
fully commend it. Which Paul endeavored to do when he said: He has saved us by
the washing of the new birth, and renewing of the holy Ghost. Nothing can be
done here by joining of works together, the nature must needs be changed,
whereupon it comes to pass, that they that truly believe must suffer many
things: for grace works in them, and declares it self present. Hereunto
pertains that saying of the 111. Psalm. The works of the Lord are great,
sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. What are these works? We
are they, by grace in Baptism made the great, new, and regenerate works of
God. Is it not a great thing for a man by and by to be saved, and delivered
from sins, death, and hell? therefore he says: sought out of all them that
have pleasure therein. For by this new birth God has found out, and done what
soever men can desire. For what else do men covet and desire, but to obtain
salvation, to be delivered from sin, death, and hell?

Of the holy Ghost. Lastly, that he may the more express the greatness and
virtue of grace, he attributes this washing of the new birth, and renewing, to
the holy Ghost. For this washing is so great, and of so weighty importance,
that no creature but the holy Ghost alone is able to perform it. But how
much, most excellent Paul, do thou condemn free will, the great good works
of the proud holy ones, that is, the merits of hypocrites? In how hie a place
do thou set our salvation, and again, how do thou bring it down to us,
and place^ it near us, yea even within us? Only the washing of ye new birth
and renewing
how purely and syncerely do thou set forth grace in these words? Wherefore
work what soever and how much soever thou will, it is impossible for a man to
be renewed, and the person changed (without which no works acceptable to God
can be done) but by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the holy
Ghost. That we may plainly see in those hypocritical counterfaitours of
works. For thou shall find none harder, none prouder, none so rash and hasty
spirits. For they are broken, and not renewed, indurate, obstinate, confirmed
by continuance, covering in deed and some what adorning that old Adam by those
their counterfaite good works, but in the mean season there does not any whit
appear any change of nature in them, they continue still in the oldnes of
their corrupt flesh. O, what a pestilent people is this, and in how great
indignation of God are they, when as in the mean time they think that they
sit in Gods lap? Washing of the new birth and renewing attributed to the holy
Ghost.
Now whereas the Apostle attributes this washing of the new birth, and
renewing to the holy Ghost, he says the same which Christ does John 3, where
he says: Except a man be borne again of water and of the Spirit, he can not
enter into the kingdom of God. For that which Christ signified by water, the
Apostle calls the washing, so both made mention of new birth and of the holy
Ghost. And we must mark that that which is spoken here of the holy Ghost both
by Christ, and the Apostle, must not be referred to that Papisticall
confirmation, as they call it, for both of them referred to Baptism that which
is here mentioned concerning the holy Ghost, who when the body is washed with
water, does himself work the new birth, and renewing by faith, which Christ
called, to be borne again of the spirit. We read in the Acts of the Apostles,
that the Apostles did eftsoons lay their hands on them that were baptized,
and that so the holy Ghost came upon them by a visible sign, which the
Papists also snatch to their confirmation. But as that was done, that the
believers might by a visible sign be endued with the holy Ghost, to preach the
Gospel in diverse languages, so it continued only the time thereof, until the
doctrine of the Gospel was commended to the world by sufficient signs,
wherefore it is now long since worn out of use: but that a certain ceremony
has come from thence even unto us, of laying hands on them, which are
ordained Ministers or Preachers, which is now brought into an ungodly and
pernicious use: but of these things in an other place.

Which he shed on us abundantly. See how notably the Apostle sets forth
grace. He says not that the holy Ghost was given, but shed, and not that
only, but shed abundantly. For he can not sufficiently extol and magnify
grace, and the work thereof, and we, alas, count it so vile in respect of our
works. The works of the divine grace sufficient for our salvation without any
addition of our own works.
It were a dishonor to God and to his holy Spirit, if when he has plentifully
shed it upon us, there should as yet be some thing wanting, necessary to
righteousness and salvation, which we are able to perform, as though the
works of so incomparable grace could not be sufficient. And Paul surely might
be reproved of lying, which had not spoken all things whereby we must be
justified and saved, when he affirms that he does it. But as he writes, so
it is: no man can attribute so great things to this washing and regeneration,
no man can so much presume of them, but greater things may be attributed unto
them, and thou ought to promise to thy self more things of them: no man
shall believe so great things, but he shall receive greater. Forasmuch as
those good things which God has given, are so great and so unspeakable, he
would have them here come unto us being included and hyd in his words and
faith. For the nature of our present life can not bear them being manifest,
and therefore it must perish, when they begin to be revealed, that man may
by these inestimable riches, which he now possesses by faith, be as it were
swallowed up, and vanish away. We are already abundantly justified by faith
without all our own merit, therefore Christ says, Ioh. 3: God so loved the
world, that he has given his only begotten Son, that who soever believes in
him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. Behold, they that believe,
have already everlasting life, and therefore undoubtedly are justified and holy
without all their own labor or means: that thou may see, that nothing but
grace and mercy is plentifully powered upon us, and that our works could
avail nothing hereunto.

Thou will perhaps say: Thou can not preach sufficiently, that the grace and
mercy of God does work all things in us, An objection.
and that no respect is to be had of our works, to the attaining of salvation,
but how comes it to pass then, that the Scripture so often witnesses that
they shall be saved which have wrought good works? As John. 5: They shall come
forth, that have done good, unto the resurrection of life, but they that have
done evil unto the resurrection of condemnation. And Romans 2: Honor and glory
to them that do well, wrath and indignation to them that do ill. We read many
sentences here and there in the Scripture like unto these. I answer: The
answer.
As the words sound, so take them without all gloss, for it is even so, they
that do well shall be saved, they which do otherwise, shall be condemned. But
herein many err from the truth of the Scripture, in that they judge works
according the outward appearance, Works must not be judged good according to
the outward appearance.
contrary to the Scripture, which teaches that no man can do good, who is
not himself good before, and by works no man can become good, but works take
their goodness of the worker, and he becomes good by the washing of the new
birth, and by nothing else. This Christ meant Matthew. 7. sayng: A corrupt tree
can not bring forth good fruit, neither a good tree evil fruit. Wherefore make
the tree either good or evil, and it will bring forth like fruits. Hypocrites
oftentimes do works like to the works of the Godly, yea sometime having a
goodlier show, for they diligently pray, fast, give alms, and pretend a
marvelous holiness, but Christ calls these sheep clothing, wherewith most
hurtful wolves are clothed and hidden. For none of them is of a true humble,
meek, and bountiful heart, which they chiefly declare when they are rebuked,
when their holiness is reproved: for then bring they forth their natural
fruits, whereby they are known. Those are, rash judgments, impatiencie,
stubburnnes, obstinacy, sclaundering, and such like. It is true therefore, he
that does well, shall be saved, that is, his salvation shall be manifest, but he
can do no good at all, if he be not before regenerate by the washing of the
new birth. For what good works can one work in the oldenes of the flesh,
and by the strength proceeded from Adam, they are the good works which Paul
here condemns, saying: Not by the works of righteousness which we had done.
They are in deed good works done in righteousness, but not before God, who
first has respect to the person, and then to the works, as we read Genesis 4.
that he had respect first to Abel, then to his sacrifice, as he first turns
himself from Cain, and then from his sacrifice, although according to the
outward appearaunce it was as good a sacrifice and work, as the sacrifice of
Abel.

Through Jesus Christ our Savior. This he added that he may keep us under the
wings of Christ, as chickens are wont to be preserved under the wings of the
hen: for thus Christ says Matthew. 23: Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I
have gathered thy children together, as the hen gathers her chickens under
her wings, and ye would not? And hereby the nature of a true and right faith
is taught. For it is nothing which some say: I believe in God almighty, as the
Jews and many other are wont, and do therefore receive corporal benefits of
God. It is a true and lively faith, What a true and lively faith believes.
whereby thou beleeuest in God, howbeit by Jesus Christ. First that thou dout
not that God is become a merciful father unto thee, which has pardoned all thy
sins, and in Baptism has adopted thee for his son and heir, that thou
may certainly know that thou art saved. Again, thou must also know this,
that that was not done freely, neither without satisfaction made to the divine
justice. For there can be no place in thee for the divine grace and mercy to
work salvation, and to give thee eternal good things, unless the justice of
God be before most fully satisfied. For Christ witnesses Matthew. 5: One jot,
or one title of the Law shall not escape, till all things be fulfilled. That
which is spoken of the grace and goodness of God, can not come but to them which
do most purely and exactly observe his commandments, according to that saying
Mich. 2: When as the Jews did presume of the goodness of God toward them, and
did always promise unto them selves peace, saying: How can God be always
angry, is the spirit of the Lord shortened? It is answered them: Are not my
words good unto him that walks uprightly? Wherefore it shall be lawful for
none to attain unto the abundance of grace, unless he has before most exactly
satisfied the commaundeme^ts of God. Though we could and should fulfill the
commandments of God, yet should we merit nothing of him.
Now it has bin spoken at large, that our works are nothing before God,
whereby we can not fulfill so much as the least commandment of God, how much
less shall we be able so to satisfy the justice of God, that we may become
worthy of his grace? Moreover, if we were able to fulfill all the
commandments of God, and in all things to satisfy his justice,
notwithstanding we had not as yet deserved grace and salvation, neither should
he therefore owe it unto us, for that he may by the right of creation require
as due service, all those things of us his creatures, created to live unto him.
Wherefore it should yet come of grace and mercy, what soever should come from
him to us. This Christ declared very well Luke 17. speaking in a parable:
Which of you having a servant plowing or feeding cattle, would say unto him
by and by, when he were come from the field: Go, and sit down at the table?
and would not rather say to him, dress wherewith I may suppe, and girde thy
self, and serve me, till I have eaten and dronken, and afterward eat thou and
drink thou? Does he thank that servant, because he did that which was
commanded unto him? I trow not. So likewise ye, when ye have done all those
things which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servant: we have
done that which was our duty to do.

Seeing then that heaven is given of grace, and for no merit, eue^ unto those,
if there were any such, which have done all things that were commanded them,
according to that promise: If thou will enter into life, keep the
commandments: what shall we boast of our good works, which although they
were most absolute, yet should they be unworthy of heaven, but inasmuch as it
is given us by the free and merciful promise? We had need of one who should
satisfy the divine justice for us.
Hereupon (for that we must so satisfy the divine justice, and yet
notwithstanding our works are not able to attain thereunto, whereunto if they
should attain, yet should they deserve no grace or salvation, for that they
are before due) God first gave unto us a man, which should satisfy the divine
justice for us in all things. Again, he has by the same man bestowed this
grace and bountifulnes upon us, that albeit we without our own merit and
worthiness, Not by our owen merit, but by ye merit of Christ are we saved.
yea having euel deserved and being unworthy, do receive grace, yet it comes
not unto us altogether freely and without all merit, for we have it through the
merit and satisfaction of Christ. Whereupon Paul says Romans 5: As by the
offense of one sin came on all men to condemnation: so by the justifying of
one, that is, of Jesus Christ, the benefit abou^ded toward all men to the
justification of life. That is: As without all our merit, and own work we
fell into sin, being borne sinners, so again without all our merit and
means, we are redeemed from sins, by the washing of the spirit borne again
the sons of God, partakers of grace and salvation. And this is the cause why
the Apostle where he speaks of faith and grace, is wont to add, by Jesus
Christ: whereby surely he would give us to understand, that none should count
it sufficient, if he say: I believe in God, Christ being neglected. He that
truly believes, must acknowledge, that his faith can not be acceptable to God,
yea that it can be no faith at all, if all the commandments of God be not
before fulfilled, which seeing it is above thy ability, (and if it were not,
yet notwithstanding thou had performed nothing, but that thou ought, and
had as yet merited nothing, having fulfilled even all the commandments of
God) thou have need of an other, which in all things may satisfy the divine
justice for thee, and may also merit heaven for thee. Now this other is our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who has for thee fulfilled the whole Law, and
merited for thee, that God now according to his justice can not but give heaven
unto thee, and in all things acknowledge thee for his son and heir. And
this is a true and sound faith, which trusts in God by Christ, and is
certain that by his merit it has already received of God salvation, which
shortly after shall be revealed with blessed abundance of felicity.

Christian faith.
Neither can any other be called Christian faith, but that, whereby it is
believed, that by Christ do come unto us both satisfaction, which we owe to the
justice of God, and the gift of salvation, which we our selves by no means, if
the Law could even be fulfilled of us, can merit. Whereupon Paul Romans 4.
says: We have all things necessary to salvation, not by any merit of our owen,
but by the merit and means of Jesus Christ.
Christ was delivered to death for our sins, and rose again for our
justification. That is, by Christ we have received, not only remission of
sins, but moreover also, that before God we are accounted righteous, and the
sons of his grace. To the same effect also tends that which he says Romans
3: Whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood.
Where again we learn, that it is true faith, which trusts in the blood of
Christ, and believes that thereby it shall obtain grace. Whereas thou
beleeuest that he has shed his blood for thee, thou receiuest satisfaction: in
that thou acknowledgest him the reconciliation, thou confessest that by his
merit the divine grace and salvation do come unto thee. We have all things
without our own merit and means, but not without the merit and means of
Christ, who has for this cause shed his blood. Wherefore that we may allude
unto ye parable of Christ, we must contain our selves under his wings, and
not upon trust in our selves fly out, and contend to come unto God, otherwise
we shall be a pray to the hellish kite. For as it has bin often said, our
righteousness, our merits, yea and our faith shall prevail nothing, without
this our mediator Christ. And therefore he says Ioh. 14: No man comes unto
the Father, but by me. And in the whole Gospel what other thing does he, but
endeavor to take us out of our selves, and to transfer us to himself under
his wings, that we may trust only in his satisfaction and merit? The same the
Apostle also teaches in the words following.

That we being justified by his grace, should be made heirs according to the
hope of eternal life. We are justified by the grace of Christ Jesus.
He says that we are justified, not by our own works, but by the grace of
the same Jesus Christ. That is, we are therefore justified, for that Christ
has the grace of the Father, having fulfilled his will in all things, and
thereby merited eternal life. For seeing that he has no need of this merit,
he gives it unto us which believe in him, that before God all his things may
be imputed to us, and by them we may receive salvation. See, how rich a thing
sound faith is, and how great good things it brings with it. See also how
precious a thing the Gospel is, and how great a treasure it is to have it
purely preached: and contrariwise, how great a discommoditie there is, where it
is not preached, or not rightly preached, the inventions of men being mingled
with it, or thrust instead of it. Take heed therefore of such deceivers, and
of their counterfeit faith, rest not in thy self, but get thee under ye wings
of Christ, keep thy self under his protection, trust that thou art heir of
eternal life, not by thy own righteousness, or grace which thou have received,
but whereby he is righteous and acceptable before God. Hereunto pertains this
saying Psalm. 91. He will cover thee under his wings, and thou shall be safe
under his feathers. And in the Song of Solomon it is said: My spouse is a dove,
building her neast in the caves of the rocks, and in the holes of the wall,
that is, in the wounds of Christ. And this in deed is a true Christian faith,
which rests not in it self as the Scholemen dreamed, but reposeth it self
wholly in Christ, and as it trusts in him, so it rests in him, having
received eternal salvation. Whereas he says that we are made heirs of
eternal life according to hope, beside that he proves, that we without all
our own merits, by only hope of grace are borne again heirs of eternal
life, and do not become heirs by working, whereof we have already spoken at
large, he also teaches this, that our salvation and eternal life is as yet
hid, although, if we believe, we do verily possess it, and this body being put
of, and the kingdom of Christ revealed, all things shall appear manifestly.

The weapons of this text.
Our own righteousness and good works are of no power to save us.
This text fights most mightily, and with most plain words against all
righteousness and good works of man's reason and free will. For the words are
plain. Not by the works of righteousness, which we had done, but according to
his mercy he saved us, by the washing, etc. All which words do utterly
overthrow our righteousness, attributing all things to ye washing of the new
birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost, to Christ and his grace. How can
there notwithstanding any presumption as yet remain in us? Wherefore let all
sacred and profane laws have a fair show: let all sacrificing priests,
monks, and nuns boast of themselves: let all religious and honest men and
women seem goodly in outward appearaunce: let them even raise the dead: if
faith in Christ be absent, whereof we have now spoken so much, all these things
are to no purpose. These most false shows do as yet deceive the whole world,
and seduce almost every one. They make the Gospel obscure, and extinguish the
faith of Christ: All their works and orders, although they appear goodly, and
they think them to have merited never so much, do avail no more unto
salvation, then the works of beasts, or of artificers, whereby they do
maintain themselves and theirs, yea they do most hurtfully hinder it.
Therefore that I may conclude, take heed as much as thou art able, of these
wolves, which under a fair pretense counterfeit themselves sheep, and learn
and accustom thy self with a sound faith to cleave unto Christ alone.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER OF THE KINGDOM OF GOD.
FOrasmuch as there is often mention made in the new Testament of these words,
the kingdom of heaven, the kingdom of God, ye kingdom of Christ, and it is very
profitable and expedient for a Christian to know these, to wit, that they are
nothing else, but remission of sins, and grace preached and offered by the
Gospel. For in this kingdom thou shall find nothing but grace and goodness,
pardon and forgiveness of sins, love and gentleness: I therefore think it good
to entreat somewhat at large of the state of this kingdom, and of forgiveness
of sins. The kingdom of God, whereby he reigns over all the faithful, and
as a faithful king defends, punishes, rewards, guides, and directs
them, etc. they again from their heart trust in him, suffer his fatherly
chastisement and correction with a patient mind, and always serve him through
obedience, is not worldly or temporal, but spiritual. Neither consists it in
meat and drink, The kingdom of God wherein it consists.
or in any outward thing, but only in justification, quieting and consolation
of the heart and conscience of man. Wherefore it is nothing else, but forgiveness
and taking away of sins, by which consciences are defiled, troubled, and
disquieted. A similitude.
For even as a worldly and temporal kingdom is ordained to this end, that men
may live quietly and peaceably one with an other: So the kingdom of God gives
these things spiritually, and destroys the kingdom of sin, and is nothing
else, but an abolishing and pardoning of offenses. God reigns in the hearts,
inasmuch as he works in them by his word, peace quietness and consolation:
even as sin works the contrary, namely, unquietness, anguish, and all kind
of evils. Herein God shows his majesty and grace in this life, that he
takes away and pardons men's sins: and this is the kingdom of grace. Now
when as sin with his guard, that is Satan, death, and hell, shall trouble man
no more, then at the last the kingdom of glory, and absolute felicity shall be.

The kingdom of God is governed, not by the law, but by the Gospel.
Hereupon it follows: first, that the kingdom of God is ruled or governed by
no law, no not by the law of God, much less by the laws of men, but only by
the Gospel, and faith in God, by which hearts are purified, comforted, and
quieted, whiles that the holy Ghost pours love and the knowledge of God into
them, and makes man as it were one thing and one spirit with God: so that his
affection is set upon the same thing, he wills and desires the same thing,
he seeks and loves the same thing, that God does. Neither stands the case
otherwise here, then it does between two friends, which bear good will one to
an other, and agree one with an other in all things. Hereof it comes, that a
man in this kingdom of God is perfect, merciful, pitiful and bountiful
toward his neighbor, seeing that he knows by the instinct of the holy Ghost,
that God is of ye same affection toward him, and toward all men, and does pour
forth his goodness plentifully. Such affection of God no man can know by the
law, but only by the spirit, and word of the Gospel. None therefore shall
obtain quietness, comfort, and peace of the heart, or attain unto the kingdom
of God by any law. And they which prescribe many laws, do withdraw men from
the kingdom of God, to the kingdom of sin, wherein is nothing else, but
unquietness, anguish, affliction, adversity, and all kind of evils tormenting
the conscience. Like as on the contrary, in the kingdom and knowledge of God,
there is mere joy, peace, and consolation of hearts.

How Christ reigns in the kingdom of God.
Secondly: In this kingdom of God the Lord Christ reigns no otherwise, then as
a Master of an Hospital among the sick, poor, and diseased. For unto this
kingdom none pertain, but sinful and miserable men, unto whom their
sins are forgiven. Hereupon Christ says in the Gospel Luke 6: VVo be to you
that are rich, which have received your consolation. But contrariwise, the
poor, miserable, and succourles receive comfort and joy by the Gospel: for
Christ came to call sinners only, and not the righteous, that all glory may be
referred to God alone, Christ puts away sin after two sorts.
for that he forgiueth sins of his grace and mere mercy. Such abolishing or
putting away of sin, wherein Christ reigns as King of the kingdom of God,
is done of him after two sorts: first thus, in that he remitteth, pardons
and covers sins, so that God will not regard, remember or revenge them
although they be in a man. As it is in the 32 Psalm: Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to
whom the Lord will not impute sin, in whose spirit there is no guile. And in
Esaias cap. 43 God says: I am, even I am he, that for mine own selfs sake do
away thine offenses, and forget thy sins, so that I will never think upon
them. Secondely thus, in that he purges or rather scoureth sins by diverse
crosses and afflictions. For they are two things, to remit sins, and to
weaken the body of sin that it may not reign in us. If a man believe, and is
baptized, then all his sins are forgiven him. But afterward sin must be
scoured or abated by manifold affliction and mortification, as long as he shall
live. Sin sticks in us, as long as the mortal body remains, but for
Christ's sake it is not imputed in the wrath of God, but freely remitted, True
Christians rejoice in affliction.
and the force thereof diminished by his fatherly chastisement. In such
chastisement for their amendment, true Christians have had great comfort,
peace, and joy, as Paul says Romans 5: Then being justified by faith, we have
peace toward God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by vvho^ also through faith,
we have had this access into this grace, wherein we stand, and rejoice under
the hope of the glory of God. Neither that only, but also we rejoice in
tribulations, knovving that tribulation brings forth patience, and patience
experience, and experience hope. And hope makes not ashamed, because the love
of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given unto us.
So thou have two things to be considered: The first, that in this kingdom of
God we are justified. The second, that by tribulation and affliction we are
glorified, without which we can not attain unto glory.

Thirdly, good Christians are not known by this, when any suffer manifold
tribulation and chastisement, that the body of sin may be weakened, and they
brought to amendment. For herein they do altogether differ among them
selves, one suffers this, an other that: one is chastised thus, an other
otherwise, so that even they very Apostles did not love and suffer alike: But
they are known in forgiveness of sins, or justification by faith, wherein God
turns his anger from them, and receives them unto grace, and counts them
for his dear children, and imputes no sin to them unto condemnation. Herein
are all alike, even as all live under one heaven. Wherefore they do most
grossly err and stumble, which measure Christians by manners, works, and the
outward manner of living, even as the Pharisees were wont to do, and did
therefore find fault with Christ, for that he did not observe their
ceremonies, but was a friend of Publicanes and sinners. As that Pharise said
within him self Luke 7: If this man were a Prophet, he would surely have
known who, and what manner of woman this is, which touches him: for she is
a sinner. A similitude
Hear now an example of those things which are before said: A Physician
which goes about to cure the sick, does first promise him health by the
assistance and help of God, whereby he puts him in great hope and comfort.
Afterward he begins to purge, to cleanse and strengthen, and such like
things, which make to the recovering of health: So God also, when he has
remitted sins, and received man into the bosom of grace, does lay on him all
kind of afflictions, and does scour him, and renew him from day to day, in the
knowledge and love of God, until he become safe, pure and renewed, which then at
the last comes to pass, when this mortal body dies.

Fourthly in these two partitions of the kingdom of God, two sorts of men are
found, Two sorts of men abuse the kingdom of grace.
which abuse the same kingdom of the grace of God, and the Gospel. Some
become sluggish and slothful, saying: Well, if sins be pardoned freely of
mere grace, and be washed away in baptism, there is no need that I should
add any thing of mine own. Other think contrariwise, that they shall put
away their sins by works, and so trusting to their own merits, they are
proud and arrogant, and in respect of them selves contemn other, which do not
so. The first of these contemn Gods grace: the other oppugn it, as not
sufficient, and so they represent swine and dogs. Now all this appears by
the Gospel, by which Christ reigns in the kingdom of God. For some abuse it
unto carnal liberty: other contrariwise are persuaded, that it is not
sufficient to salvation, but that their works also do help somewhat, and by
this they deny and contemn the grace of God. Hereof thou may read more in
the Epistle to the Romans, wherein these two sorts of men are plainly set
forth.

Fifthly, this kingdom of God, or remission of sins has no bound or measure,
Matthew. 18.21.22.
as that place of the Gospel does very well show, where Peter asks the Lord:
Lord, how often shall my brother sin against me, and I shall forgive him? unto
seven times? Jesus said unto him, I say not to thee, unto seven times, but unto
seventy times seven times, that is, as often as shall be needful. After this
follows a parable, We must forgive our neighbor, if we will have God to
forgive us.
which the Lord there puts forth, wherein he most severely admonishes us,
if we will not fall out of the favor of God, that we forgive our neighbor his
offenses without all delay or grudging. Forasmuch as God always forgiueth us
innumerable sins. Our debt, whereby we are bound unto God, is ten thousand
talents, that is, so unmeasurable and great, that we are not able to pay it
with all our substance, all our strength and works. For we can put away no one
sin, although it be even very little. Seeing therefore that God does remit so
many sins of his grace in his kingdom, it is meet, that we should forgive
our neighbor a few offenses. Of this kingdom of God, wherein sins are
forgiven, the Scripture every where makes mention, and says, that the kingdom
and dominion of Christ does extend from one end of the land to the other. So
says David Psalm. 72: His dominion shall be from the one sea to the other, and
from the fludde unto the end of the earth. And a little after he says: All
nations shall serve him. This also the Angel Gabriell declared to the Virgin
Marie Luke 1. where he says thus of Christ: The Lord shall give unto him the
throne of his father David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for
ever, and of his kingdom shall be no end. These and such like places do show
that the forgiveness of sins, wherein the kingdom of God does especially
consist, has no measure or bound.

Sixthly, hereof we may see, how unchristianly they do, An unchristian thing
to prescribe a measure to forgiveness of sins.
which bring forgiveness of sins to a certain measure, as they do, which
measure out their indulgences for prescribed years, with forgiveness of the
third, fourth, or half part. For hereby they bring the kingdom of God into a
narrow and strait room, and are injurious to his mercy, forasmuch as there is
no end of his kingdom, nor measure of his mercy. But whosoever shall in faith
call upon the name of God, shall be saved, as often as he does it. Moreover,
when the sinner shall be sorry for his sins, the Lord will no more remember
them, as it is in the Prophecy of Ezechiel, chap. 18.

Seventhly, as this kingdom of God has no measure or limits of forgiveness of
sins, so also it has no end, but endures continually without ceassing:
albeit the subjects of this kingdom do not abide in it continually, firmly
and faithfully, but do often times forsake it. So the favor and grace of God
were continually with Peter, although he denied the Lord, and revolted from
him. To the same effect tends the parable in the Gospel whereof we have now
spoken. For the servant, which would not have pity of his fellow servant, did
make him self unworthy of the mercy of God, did deprive him self of the
kingdom of God, which consists in pardoning of offenses, as it is above
mentioned. Here University Divines of a pregnant wit, as they seem unto them
selves, and puffed up with knowledge, have disputed, whether, and how
forgiveness of sins does come again, when man iterateth or renueth his sin,
not knowing what they say. But follow thou the plain and simple words of the
Gospel, to wit, that thy sins are so often forgiven thee, as thou do
forgive thy brother, whom thou must so often forgive as he shall offend against
thee. We must forgive our brethren when they offend against us.
Wherefore in this parable, whereof I have even now made mention, Christ does
admonish us all, that we pardon and forgive all them that have offended us. As
if he would say: As in man's affairs, he which is beneficial to an other, has
other also beneficial unto him again, so says Christ, in ye kingdom of
heaven, which consists specially in forgiveness of sins, that is in
Christianity or among Christians, he which pardons an other his offenses, I
also will pardon him his. And on the contrary, he that is not merciful toward
an other, to him I also will deny grace. I am over you as Lord and King, and ye
are fellow servant and companions one with an other. Seeing therefore that I
your Lord do readily forgive you, you also ought more readily to forgive one
an other. After the same sort also he has commanded us to pray in the Lords
prayer, Matthew. 6: Forgive us our dettes: which he would not have done, if he
did not promise and would not mercifully forgive us. But nevertheless he added a
condition or sign to this promise, when he says: If ye forgive men their
trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you. The first is a sign,
ye other a promise. Mark that it is here enjoined us, to forgive one an other
his sins and offenses, so, that we must be merciful and bountiful toward
our neighbors, if we will have the heavenly father gentle and appeased toward
us. And let us be most certainly persuaded hereof, when we shall interpret at
the best, and excuse, as much as equity does suffer, the offenses and
trespasses of other, although they be even great and grievous, that we also
shall have a bountiful and merciful father toward us in heaven. A most
unchristian thing not to forgive our brethren, but to bear malice in our heart
and seek to be revenged.
Wherefore it is a thing most abhorring from Christianity, and even
blasphemous, when it is said: I can not, neither will I forgive him that which
he has committed against me, I will be revenged, etc. Surely those blind me^
are ignorant, that they do take from God his glory, to whom alone vengeance
belongs, and challenge it to them selves, and so they give up to the devil
their own souls, which they have received of God, and ought to render them
unto him again, whereunto they are perhaps provoked even with some small or
trifleling matter. Such kind of men as these ought to set before the eyes of
their heart, these words of the Gospel, Matthew. 18: O evil servant, I forgave
thee all that debt, because thou prayedst me: ought not thou also to have
had pity on thy fellow servant, even as I had pity on thee? So his Lord was
wrath, and delivered him to the tormentors, til he should pay all that was due
to him: So likewise shall mine heavenly Father do unto you, except ye forgive
from your ha^^ each one to his brother their trespasses. Neither is it
sufficient, if in gestures, signs, mouth or tongue thou show thy self a friend
unto him, and forgive him, but thou must do it from thy heart, otherwise God
will not forgive thee, yea thou shall be driven out of the kingdom of grace.
Wherefore if at any time we have tried the mercy of God toward us, we must also
readily pardon our fellow brethren, which have offended us. For in that respect
the merciful Father forgiueth us our sins, that we also should forgive our
brethren, and show mercy toward them, even as he is merciful toward us, and
remitteth sin, death, the fault and the punishment. When we shall do this,
then are we received into the kingdom of God. For the goodness of God lives in
our hearts, and makes us also good. Christ sits at the right hand of the
Father, yet nevertheless he reigns in the hearts and consciences of the
faithful, so that they love, fear, reverence, and diligently obey him, no
otherwise then obedient subjects do their King, and in all their doings are
made like to him, even as he him self says, Matthew. 5: Be ye perfect, as your
Father which is in heaven, is perfect. Now God is perfect in this, that he
takes away and pardons our wickedness, defect, sin, and imperfection, that
we also may do the like to our brethren. But when as we shall not do the
like, we are driven out of his kingdom, and are made subject to the kingdom of
sin, death, and the devil, as disloyal and disobedient inhabitants of some
country, are thrust out. Which God of his mercy turn from us, Amen.

All these things may be comprehended in the principal points follovving.
1 Christ reigns, when by faith of the Gospel, he works the goodness and
grace of God in our hearts, and makes them like unto God. 2 In such a kingdom
the conscience enjoys peace, consolation and rest, when it understands and
knows that God is merciful unto it, and imputes not sins. 3 Therefore man
bears all kind of tribulation and affliction, by which sin is scoured, and
the force thereof abated. He also endeavors to be beneficial unto other, as
he him self has been as it were overwhelmed of the benefits of God. 4 And so
the Lord reigns after two sorts: First, for that he makes the faithful
certain of the grace of God, and remission of sins. Secondly, for that he
lays the cross upon them, that the body of sin may be weakened, and they
brought to amendment. 5 He that forgiueth his detters pertains to the
kingdom of God, but he that does not forgive them, remains under the kingdom
of sin.
These things I thought good to speak in this present place concerning the
kingdom of heaven, the kingdom of God, or the kingdom of Christ, which is the
same: to wit, that it is nothing else but a kingdom, in which thou shall find
nothing but forgiveness of sins. Which kingdom is preached and offered unto us
by the Gospel, God grant that we may so receive it. Amen.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER OF PRAYER.
THat prayer may be good in deed, and may also be heard, we must first
consider that two things are necessary thereunto: one, The promise of God is
first to be considered of in prayer.
that we first meditate upon the promise of God, and do as it were aduertize
God thereof, and trusting unto it, be emboldned and made cheerful to pray:
for unless God had commanded us to pray, and had promised also that he will
hear us, even all creatures could not obtain so much as a grain by their
petitions. Whereupon it follows, that no man does obtain any thing of God
for his own worthiness, or the worthiness of his prayer, but by the only
goodness of God, who preventing all our petitions and desires, provoke us to
pray and desire of him, by his gentle and bounteous promise and commandment,
that we may learn how great care he has over us, and is ready to give us more
things, then we durst enterprise to ask, and that we may also learn to pray
boldly, inasmuch as he gives us all things even in more ample manner then we
do ask them. We must no thing doubt of the promise of God in prayer.
It is necessary that we do no whit doubt of the promise of the true and
faithful God, for therefore he has promised that he will hear us, yea and
has commanded us to pray, that we might have a sure and strong faith, that
our prayer shall be so heard, as he says Matthew. 21. and Mark 11: Whatsoever
ye shall ask in prayer, if ye believe, ye shall receive it. And in Luke chapt.
11: And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall
find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every one that asks,
receives: and he that seeks, finds: and to him that knocks it shall be
opened. If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will ye
give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will ye for a fish, give him a serpent?
or if he ask an egg, will ye give him a scorpion? If ye then which are
evil, can give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your
heavenly Father give the holy Ghost to them that desire him? We must boldly
trust to these, and such like promises and commandments, and pray with true
confidence.

He that douteth of the promises of God in prayer, commits a double sin.
If one so prays, that he dout whether God hear him, and makes his prayer
only at adventure, caring not greatly whether it be heard or not heard: he
commits a double offense: One, for that he him self makes his prayer
frustrate, and labors in vain. For so James says chap. 1: He that will
ask of the Lord let him ask in faith, and waver not: for he that vvauereth,
is like a vvaue of the sea, tossed of the vvinde, and carried away, let not that
man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. Such a man's heart is
not quiet and settled, wherefore God can give him nothing. But faith makes the
heart quiet, and capable of the gifts of God. The other offense is, that he
counts the most faithful and true God, as a lying, vain, and unconstant
man, as he which neither is able, neither will fulfill his promises, so by his
douting he robs God of his honor, and name of faithfulness, and truth.
Whereby it is so grievously offended, that even that offense being committed, a
Christian is plainly changed into an Heathen, and denies and loses his true
God, so that if he continue therein, he is damned for ever without all comfort.
And if any thing be given unto him, which he asks, it is given him not to
good, but to evil, as well temporal as eternal, not for his prayers sake,
but from the wrath of God, that he may recompense those goodly words, which
are uttered in sins, unbelief, and to the dishonor of God.

We must not therefore dout in our prayers for that we be unworthy.
Some say: I would trust in deed that my prayers should be heard, if I were
worthy, or if I could pray well. Then, say I, if thou will not pray, before
thou shall know and find thy self fit to pray, that thou shall never pray.
For as it is before said, our prayer must not rest upon our worthiness, or the
worthiness of it self, or be grounded thereon, but upon the immutable truth of
the promise of God. If so be that it trust to it self or any other thing, and
ground it self thereon, it is false, and deceives thee, albeit thy heart
should even be burst by reason of the ardent affection of godliness, and thou
should weep nothing but dropps of blood. For therefore we pray, because we
are unworthy to pray, and hereby surely we are made worthy to pray, and fit to
be heard, inasmuch as we think that we are unworthy, How we are made worthy to
be heard in prayer.
and do boldly and cheerfully trust to the faithfulness and truth of God.
Although thou be unworthy, yet have regard hereunto, and mark most diligently,
that a thousand times more consists in this, that thou honor the truth of
God, and not with thy doutfulnes accuse his faithful promise of falsehood. For
thy own worthiness does not further thee, neither thy unworthiness hinder thee:
but infidelity does condemn thee, trust and confidence makes thee worthy and
preserves thee. Wherefore so behave thy self all thy life long, that thou do
not at any time esteem thy self either worthy or fit to pray or receive,
unless thou find thy self to be such a one, as dares enterprise the matter
freely, trusting to the true and certain promise of thy merciful God, which
will so show both his mercy and goodness unto thee, that as he promised to
hear thee being unworthy, and having not deserved it, of his mere grace,
moved with no prayers: so he will hear thee being an unworthy asker, of his
only grace, to the honor of his truth and promise, that so thou may give
thanks, not to thy own worthiness, but to his truth, whereby he has fulfilled
his promise, and to his mercy, whereby he has made and set forth his promise.
And this the 25 Psalm confirms, where David says: Gracious and righteous is
the Lord, therefore will he teach sinners in the way. He will guide the
meek in judgment, and teach the humble his way. All the paths of the Lord
are mercy and truth, unto such as keep his covenant, and his testimonies.
Grace and mercy are in his promise, faithfulness or truth in fulfilling and
hearing. And in the 85 Psalm he says: Mercy and truth are met together,
righteousness and peace have kissed each other, that is, they come together in
every work and gift, which we obtain of the Lord by praying.

In this trust and confidence thou must so behave thy self, We must not
appoint unto God how, when, or where he shall hear our prayers.
that thou do not limit to the Lord any bound or end, day or place, neither
appoint any manner or measure of hearing, but that thou do commit all those
things to his divine will, wisdom, and omnipotency, that thou boldly and
cheerfully look to be heard, and yet not desire to know, how, and where, how
soon, and how long, and by what means. For his divine wisdom, shall find a
better manner and measure, time and place, then we can think, even although
that should be done by miracles. Even as in the old Testament, Exodus 14, when
the children of Israel trusted that God would deliver them, and yet no
possible means were before their eyes, or in all their thoughts, then the red
sea opened it self, and gave them passage, drowning all their enemies at once.
The holy woman Judith, when she heard that the Citizens of Bethulia would after
the space of five days give up the city, if God in the mean time did not
help them, rebuked them saying: What are ye, that ye tempt the Lord? these
are not devises and purposes, whereby we obtain mercy of God, but rather
whereby we provoke him unto wrath and displeasure. Will ye set the mercy of
the Lord a time, and appoint him a day after your will? Hereupon God did help
her after a marvelous sort, that at the last she five Holofernes, and put the
enemies to flight, Judith 13: So S. Paul also says, Ephesians. 3: that the power
of God is such and so great, that it does far greater and better things then
we either ask or think. Wherefore we ought to think our selves more vile,
then that we may name, appoint, or prescribe the time, place, manner, measure,
and other circumstances of that which we ask of God, but we must leave all
things wholly unto him, constantly and boldly believing that he will hear us.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, CONCERNING THE BIDDING OF GVESTS TO THE great
supper.
Luke 14. Verse 16. A Certain man made a great supper, and bad many.

17. And sent his servant at supper time to say to them that were bidden:
Come, for all things are now ready.

18. But they all with one mind began to make excuse: The first said unto him,
I have bought a farm, and I must needs go out and see it: I pray thee have
me excused.

19. And an other said, I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to prove
them: I pray thee have me excused.

20. And an other said, I have married a wife, and therefore I can not come.

21. So that servant returned, and showed his master these things: Then was
the good man of the house angry, and said to his servant: Go out quickly into
the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor, and the
maimed, and the halt, and the blind.

22. And the servant said, Lord it is done as thou have commanded, and yet
there is room.

23. Then the master said to the servant: Go out into the hie ways and
hedges, and compel them to come in, that mine house may be filled.

24. For I say unto you, that none of those men which were bidden, shall taste
of my supper.


AS in the whole Scripture, so in this text also we must endeavor, that
according to our ability (as ye have often times heard heretofore) we may
understand the true and simple meaning, and thereupon settle our heart and
conscience. For he that shall encounter with Satan, must not waver and stagger
this way and that way, but must be certain of his cause, and instructed with
manifest places of Scripture, otherwise when the Devil shall by an uncertain
place of Scripture draw him to his forke, he will toss him this way and that
way, as the wind does a dry leaf. Wherefore out of this text we must gather
a certain meaning, whereby we may persist and stand sure. Howbeit it is not to
be understood of the reverend Eucharistie, or the bread of the Lords table,
although our Papists have miserably wrested it, as they have done many other
authorities of Scripture. The sum of the text.
But this is the scope, this is ye sum of this text: that the Gospel is
preached and published through the whole world, but few receive and embrace it.
And it is therefore here called a supper, for that ye Gospel must be the last
word, which shall continue to the end of the world. Wherefore the supper here
is nothing else, but a very rich and sumptuous feast, which God has made
through Christ by the Gospel, which sets before us great good things and
rich treasures. And he sent his servant to bid men to this sumptuous supper.
That is: The Apostles were altogether sent with one word into ye whole world,
that they might bid and call men to this supper, with one voice, with one
Gospel, with one ambassade: after such sort, that if S. Peter had come, and
preached the Gospel of God in that place where Paul had preached it before,
yet had it been one word, and the same preaching, that the hearers should have
been compelled to say: Behold he preaches the same that we heard before of the
other, they wholly consent and agree, and the thing that they publish is all
one. That the Evangelist might insinuate this consent and agreement in
preaching, he says: He sent his servant, he says not, his servant, as of
many. Now this message the servant must do to the bidden guests: The message
which the servant does to the guests bidden to the great supper.
Come, for all things are now ready. For Christ had suffered death, and in his
death had slain sin and death, also was risen again from death, the holy
Ghost was given: and briefly all things were prepared which pertained unto
that great supper. All things were ready without al our cost. For the Father by
Christ has paid the price of all things, that without all our merit and labor
we might enjoy his goodness, and be nourished and enriched. He sends his
servant therefore first to the Jews, to bid them to this great supper, unto
whom the promise was made of God. For the law and all the Prophets were
directed hereunto, that they might prepare the people of God. As the Angel
Gabriel declared of John the Baptist to his father Zacharias Luke 1: He shall
be filled with the holy Ghost even from his mothers womb, and many of the
children of Israel shall he turn to their Lord God. For he shall go before
him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the
children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just men, to make ready a
people prepared for the Lord. But what did the guests answer to the message
of the servant? the text following declares.

But they all with one mind began to make excuse. This is that whereof the
Lord speaks Matthew. 10: He that loves father or mother more then me, is not
worthy of me. And he that loves son or daughter more then me, is not worthy
of me. And he that takes not his cross, and follows after me, What they
must do that will be partakers of this great supper.
is not worthy of me. For he that will be partaker of this supper, must put all
things into danger for the Gospells sake, body, goods, wife, children,
friends, etc. Moreover he must leave all things whatsoever they be, that
separate him from the Gospel, albeit they seem good, just, right, and holy.
Neither think ye that these me^ which here excuse them selves, were gilty of
grievous sins, or occupied about unjust matters and works. For it is not
unjust to bie, to use trade of merchandise, to maintain him self honestly, to
marie a wife, to be joined in matrimony. But therefore can they not come to
this supper, for that they will not forsake these things, but will rather
cleave to them in their heart. Now they must be utterly forsaken and left, when
the Gospel so requires. Thou will perhaps say: I would in deed willingly
follow the Gospel, I would cleave unto it, and do all other things
whatsoever, but to forsake goods, houses, family, wife, children, etc: surely
this is a hard matter. God has commanded me to labor, to maintain my wife
and children, etc. Behold therefore this is the scope and sum, that the
Gospel is the word of faith and offense, because of which every faithful man
does bear offense willingly. In deed God has willed thee to do these
things, howbeit he has also commanded, that thou prefer him before all
creatures, and love him above all things, and think him higher then all
things which thou can know, even as the chief and greatest commandment
gives us to understand: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
with all thy soul, with all thy mind, Deuteronomy. 6. Wherefore thou must forsake
all things before thou suffer thy self to be plucked away from the love of
him, or his word: although in deed he loses nothing, which forsakes any
thing for the Gospells sake. If for the Gospells sake thou lose this temporal
life, God will give thee an other far better, to wit, eternal life, as
Christ says Matthew. 10: He that will find his life, shall lose it, and he that
loses his life for my sake, shall find it. If thou be compelled to forsake
thy wife together with thy children, remember that God has a care of them, he
will be a better father unto them then thy self, which undoubtedly comes to
pass, if so be thou believe. For we have very great and rich promises that he
will not suffer his word to fail, but will always fulfill it, if we can freely
and confidently trust in him, and commit our selves wholly unto him. Christ
says after this sort Matthew. 19: Whosoever shall forsake houses, or brethren,
or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my names
sake, he shall receive an hundredth fold more, and shall inherit everlasting
life. We have here his words and promise: what would we have more? or what can
we desire more? wherein therefore do we fail? only in our faith. Wherefore no
man comes to this supper, A sound faith required in the guests of this supper.
but he that brings with him a sincere faith, which God prefers and loves
above all creatures. But how does the Lord recompense them which excused them
selves that they could not come to the supper? The text it self declares.

Then was the good man of the house angry, and said to his servant: Go out
quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the
poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind. The Gospel was first to be
preached to the Jews who because they refused it, the Apostles turned to the
Gentiles.
To go into the streets and lanes is nothing else, but that whereas the Jews
made themselves unworthy of the Gospel, and did refuse it, the Disciples
turned to the Gentiles. For it was enjoined them of Christ, that they should
not turn them selves to the Gentiles, nor preach the kingdom of God in the
cities of the Samaritanes, but should go only to the sheep of the house of
Israel, and should feed them only, as they did. Now the Jews striving
against this word, and by no means receiving it, the Disciples said, Act. 13:
It was necessary that the word of God should first have bin spoken unto you:
but seeing ye put it from you and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting
life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles: for so has the Lord commanded us, saying:
I have made thee a light of the Gentiles, that thou should be the salvation
unto the end of the world. But what means that which he says moreover to ye
servant?

Go out into the hie ways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that mine
house may be filled. This is to be understood of desperate and weak
consciences, which also pertain unto this supper, and are compelled unto it,
What it is to compel to come in.
but this compulsion is not outward, but inward and spiritual, and is done
after this sort. When the law is preached, sin is set before our eyes and
revealed, that a man may come to knowledge of him self, so that to compel, to
enter or come in, does rightly signify, to drive sin into the conscience,
whereby a man may know that he is nothing, that all his works are sins, and
subject to damnation, and so suddenly his conscience may become desperate, and
his heart faint and terrified, that all that confidence and opinion of help may
depart, and man him self be able no where to comfort him self in any thing,
and at the last be driven to despeire of him self. If so be that one be once
after this sort compelled, then do not long delay to let him come in, but
deliver the man out of desperation. That comes to pass, when thou comfortest
him by the Gospel, and declarest that he is delivered from his sins, saying:
Believe in Christ, that he has made thee free from thy sins, then shall thou
be delivered and free from sin. And this is the meaning of that which he
says: Compel them to come in. It is not to be understood of outward
compulsion, as some interpret it, that wicked and ungodly ones should be
violently driven to the supper, for this preuayleth nothing, neither is it so
meant in this place. Wherefore it is to be referred only to the conscience,
and is inward and spiritual. Now he goes on to speak to the servant and
the rest.

For I say unto you, that none of those men which were bidden, shall taste of my
supper. This is the conclusion, that they which think themselves most certain
that they shall come to the supper, and taste of it, shall not taste of it: The
reason ye have heard. Now briefly the guests that are bidden and do not come,
are they, which think that they shall obtain the supper by their own works,
very much wearying themselves, thinking assuredly, that they shall taste of it.
Why they that were bidden shall not taste of the supper.
But the Lord mightily concludes and says: Not one of these men shall taste of
my supper. Wherefore most gentle Lord? They have committed no wicked thing,
neither have bin occupied about unjust matters. Behold, this is the reason, for
that they have forsaken faith, and have not confessed it freely before every
one, neither have preferred that rich and sumptuous supper before all
creatures. For seeing it is sumptuous, it requires those men that do judge it
to be so, and do put any thing in danger, what soever it be, that they may be
partakers of it. Thus ye have the compendious meaning of this text, which I
have only briefly run over, if any will expound it more at large, I am well
content he so do.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER OF THE WORKS OF CHARITY.
Luke 6. Verse. 36. Jesus said unto his disciples: Be ye merciful as your
father also is merciful.

37. Judge not, and ye shall not be judged: condemn not, and ye shall not be
condemned: forgive, and ye shall be forgiven.

38. Give and it shall be given unto you: a good measure, pressed down, shaken
together, and running over shall men give into your bosom: for with what
measure ye meat, with the same shall men meat to you again.

39. And he spoke a parable unto them: Can the blind lead the blind? shall
they not both fall into the ditch?

40. The disciple is not above his master: but whosoever will be a perfect
disciple, shall be as his master.

41. And why see thou a mote in thy brothers eye, and considerest not the
beam that is in thine own eye?

42. Either how can thou say to thy brother, Brother, let me pull out the
mote that is in thine eye, when thou see not the beam that is in thine own
eye? Hypocrite, cast out the beam out of thine own eye first, and then shall
thou see perfectly to pull out the mote that is in thy brothers eye.


THE works of charity which we must do to our neighbors in temporal things
and in corporal necessity, are discribed unto us in this text: which the
Lord then declared, when he said a little before in the same chapter, that we
must do well unto our enemies, and bestow benefits upon them which hate us:
that we must bless them that curse us: that we must pray for them which
persecute us: if any man smite us on the one cheek, we must offer unto him
also the other: and if any man take away our cloak, we must not forbid him to
take away our coat also. etc. All which he comprehending in a brief sum,
says: Be ye merciful, as your Father also is merciful. Here ye see all good
works summarily described which we must exercise among our selves, as our
heavenly father has exercised them toward us. Ye have oftentimes heard, that
it is not needful to do good works toward God, but toward our neighbor
only. God can be made neither stronger nor richer by our works: but man may
be strengthened and enriched by them, unto whom also they are necessary, unto
whom only they are to be directed, and not unto God, which ye have very often
heard, and which is now in your ears: but would to God it would at the last
burst forth both into your hands and works. We must deal with God by faith
and with our neighbors by good works.
Mark therefore how perverse an order it is, when any deal with God by
works, with whom notwithstanding they must deal by only faith, and when
faith is directed unto man, whereas it is to be placed in God alone. Turn
these contrariwise, and they shall be right, after this sort: let us first repose
faith in God alone, and let us then give our selves to serve our neighbors,
and to direct all our works so, that they may turn to their commodity. We
must deal before God by no other thing but by faith alone, because none is
able to help us but God only, and whatsoever we possess either in mind or
body, that comes wholly to us from God alone, in whom we ought to trust, upon
whom we ought to set our heart. Now some use such a preposterous order, that
they repose faith, which ought to have respect unto God only, in them selves
and others, they rest upon their traditions, and whatsoever their great
masters have invented, in that they put their trust. Of such God says in
Jeremy? Ier. 2.
My people has done two evils: one, for that they have forsaken me the well
of the water of life, and dug them pitts, yea vile and broken pitts that can
hold no water: An other, for that thou dare say: I am without sin and
giltles, tush, his wrath can not come upon me: behold I will reason with thee,
because thou dare say, I have not offended.

First he says, that his spouse is turned into an harlot, and has estraunged
her self from God the fountain of life, from whom life, salvation and every
good thing flows, him they have forsaken. Secondly they set up their own
traditions, and dig unto them selves a fountain of their own, which can
hold no water. So our Papists trust to their own inventions, to their
founding of Masses, to their fastinges, prayers, and such like things. Which
appear to be as a fountain, out of which they would draw life, and blessedness
or salvation, when as notwithstanding it is able to hold no water: they forsake
God the fountain of life. Afterward he says: they dare rise against me, that
I should not be angry with them, alleging that their works be just, and they
will go to law with me. Behold this is an other sin, that they go about to
defend their works. Whereupon God also says: I will contend with thee in
judgment, and will show how thou gaddest hither and thither to change thy ways.
So faith pertains to God alone, Faith obtains all good things of God.
whereunto it belongs to obtain all whatsoever things are necessary, as
well temporal things as eternal, and so to obtain them, that it think not
that it has merited in any thing. Also it must again apply it self downward
toward our neighbor, with out looking for any recompense, not that blessedness
consists in that deriuing of faith, to wit charity, for neither does God
require that, who will have the conscience to rest only in him: even as the
spouse must cleave only to her husband and to no other: so also God requires
of us that we trust in him alone. These things Christ declares when he says:
Be ye merciful as your father is merciful. Wherefore I must so order my
conscience toward God, that I undoubtedly believe, that I have him a bountiful
and merciful father, as I will afterward declare, and that I also do show
mercy toward my neighbor. Which faith must be inward, and carried upward unto
God, but works must be without, and derived downward to our neighbor. After
this sort Abraham did, when at the mountain in the country of Moria he
ascended to God, he left his servant and asses below at the bottom of the
mountain, taking only Isaac with him. The same must be done of us if we will
ascend unto God, that we may come to him with Isaac only, that is, with faith,
servant and asses, that is works, are to be left below. Thus much for the
entrance of this text concerning faith and works, to wit that faith must
pearce inward and upward, but works must go without and downward, whereby at
the length it comes to pass, that we are righteous before God and men, for
that we give due honor unto God, and believe according to his word, and
satisfy our neighbor in the duty of love. Now let us see the very words of
the text in order.

Be ye merciful as your Father is merciful. How our heavenly Father is
merciful toward us.
How therefore is our heavenly father merciful? after that sort, that he
gives us all good things, corporal and spiritual, transitory and eternal,
freely and of his mercy. For if he should give unto us according to our desert,
he should give unto us nothing but hell fire and eternal damnation. What
soever therefore good things he bestows upon us, he bestows them of his
mere mercy. He sees us stick fast in death, therefore he has mercy upon us
and gives us life: he sees us to be the children of hell, therefore he taking
pity upon us, gives unto us heaven: He sees us to be miserable and naked,
hungerie and thirsty, it pitying him hereof, he clotheth us, and refreshes us
with meat and drink, and makes us full of all good things: So what soever we
have either in body or in spirit, he gives it us of his mere mercy, without
any merit or desert of ours. Whereupon Christ here says: Imitate your father,
and be ye merciful like unto him. This is not simple mercy, What kind of
mercy reason teaches us to use.
such as reason teaches, for that is greedy of her own commodity, which
gives only to great and learned men, and to them that deserve it: it loves
them that be fair and beautiful: it gives unto them, of whom it looks for
profit and commodity again, which is a mercy divided, begging, and as it were
torn and broken in pieces. For if I shall give to him that has deserved, or
if I shall regard fayrenes or friendship, it is a bargain or det, and not
mercy. Hereof Christ speaks in the same chapter before this text in this
wise: Luke 6.
If ye love them which love you, what thank shall ye have? and if ye do good
for them which do good for you, what thank shall ye have? for even the sinners
do the same: and if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank
shall ye have? for even the sinners lend to sinners to receive the like. But
the mercy of Christians must not seek her own, but so behave it self, that
it be indifferent, that it regard all alike with open eyes, both friends and
foes, even as our heavenly father does.

Where true mercy is not, neither is there any true faith.
And where soever this mercy is not, neither is there faith also. For thy heart
being settled in faith, so that thou know God to have showed himself thy
God, so gentle and bountiful, without thy desert and of mere grace, when thou
wast as yet his enemy, and the child of everlasting malediction, thy heart I
say being settled in this faith, thou can not contain thy self, but that
thou show thy self again so to thy neighbor, and that wholly for the love of
God, and for thy neighbors commodities sake. Take heed therefore what
difference thou make between a friend and an enemy, between the worthy and
unworthy: for ye see all which are in this text rehearsed, to have otherwise
deserved of us, then that we should love them, or do well unto them. And the
same thing the Lord means when he says Luke 6: But love your enemies, do
well unto them, lend, looking for nothing again, and your reward shall be great,
and ye shall be the children of the most High: for he is kind unto the unkind,
and to the evil.

An objection.
But how comes it to pass that a certain contrary thing to yt which we have
taught seems to appear in this text, where he says? Be ye merciful, as your
heavenly Father is merciful: again, Judge not, and ye shall not be judged:
condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned: forgive and it shall be forgiven
you. All which authorities sound so, that we must deal before God with our
works, and by them deserve the mercy of God, when as notwithstanding ye have
very often heard, that faith alone does all? and both Paul and the whole
Scripture do commonly say and affirm, that we must believe in God alone, and
deal by only mere faith before him. The answer.
It is requisite here to understand that good works are only a setting forth
and commendation of faith, so that if I believe, I must be merciful, I must
not judge nor condemn my neighbor, I must forgive, and give unto my
neighbor. Whereof set an example before your selves. What did Abraham being
commanded to offer his son? Genesis 22.
he obeyed the commandment, and drew forth the sword to kill his son: what
ensued thereupon? the Angel of the Lord stayed him, saying: lay not thy hand
upon the child, neither do any thing unto him: for now I know that thou fear
God, forasmuch as for my sake thou have not spared thine only son.

Howbeit this is here to be known and marked of us, We must receive mercy
before we show mercy.
that we must first receive, before we give: before we show mercy, we must
receive mercy of God: we do not lay the first stone, neither does the sheep
seek the shepeheard, but the shepeheard the sheep. Wherefore so bestow thy
works in every respect, that thou look for nothing at Gods hand because of
them: We obtain all good things of god through his mere mercy.
for we obtain even every thing of God without merit or desert: so God says
Esaias 65: I am found of them that seek not for me, I have appeared to them that
ask not for me. And in the end of the same chapter: The time shall come
(says God) that or ever they call I will answer them, and while they are yet
but thinking how to speak, I will hear them. For in deed before we seek
him, he fyndeth us, before we ask him, he hears us. Likewise S. Paul says
Romans 3: There is no difference: for all have sinned, and are deprived of the
glory of God, and are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption
that is in Christ Jesus: whom God has set forth to be a reco^ciliatio^ through
faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness, in that he forgiueth the
sins that are past, through the patience of God, to show at this time his
righteousness, that he might be just, and a iustifier of him which is of the
faith of Jesus. And in the chapter following he says: Now to him that works
the wages is not counted by favor but by debt: but to him that works not,
but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness. For if it be of Grace, it is no more of works, or else were grace
no more grace, as he says afterward in the eleventh chapter.

Our good works must be signs and testimonies of our sincere faith.
Again, I must bestow my works so, that they may be a certain sign, and as
it were a seal graven with letters, whereby I may be assured that my faith is
sincere. For if I feel in my heart, that my work proceeds from love, I am
sure concerning the integrity and soundnes of my faith. If I forgive, the same
forgiveness does assure me concerning the sincerity of my faith, does declare
my faith, and certify me, that God has also pardoned my sin, and does daily
more and more pardon me. So it fell out with Abraham, his work made his faith
known unto him. God in deed knew that he did believe, but it behooved that
Abraham also should know, and show forth his faith. Wherefore works following
only freely as fruits of faith, are declarations of such a faith. For what
should it profit me, if I had even a strong faith, but unknown unto me? even
as if I should have a chest full of gold, yet I being ignorant thereof, should
take no commodity thereby. But if any would show it unto me, he should do me
as great a pleasure, as if he gave it me. So if I have faith and yet be
ignorant thereof, it is no profit unto me. Wherefore it must burst forth, and
be showed by the works that ensue, which are both signs and seals of the
present faith. 2. Pet. 1.18.19
So Saint Peter means, when speaking of the works of charity, and the
virtues of faith, he concludes thus: ^^^^^fore brethren, give rather
diligence, to make your calling and election sure, which if ye do, ye shall not
fall. For by this means an entering shall be ministered unto you abundantly into
the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. He says not,
do good works, that by them ye may be called, but that ye may more assure your
selves of your calling. Accustom your selves therefore well unto the phrases
and manner of speakinges used in the Scripture, that ye rush not upon them like
blind moules, and confirm works in such places as this: for herein works
are rejected if we think, that we are justified by them: but herein they are
extolled and commended, in that they are profitable to our neighbor and fruits
and signs of faith. Behold, it was meet that I should make this digression,
least I should confirm the meaning of ye Papists.

Now if it should be demanded why God oftentimes sets down such contrary
sentences, Why God will have sentences in the Scriptures which seem contrary.
and disagreeing one with an other, as it seems to us and our reason, I
answer, that he may exercise us in reading, and that we should not think
that we understand the whole Scripture, when we scarce understand one place.
Some sayings do guide the spirit, how we ought to behave our selves toward
God, only by faith, as this: Romans 3.24.
We are justified freely. Again lest the body should be sluggish outwardly,
there are sentences also set forth unto us, which do guide and exercise the
body, as these which we have heard here rehearsed: Forgive, and ye shall be
forgiven: also where as Christ affirms, that he will require works in the
last day, and will say after this sort unto the condemned, Matthew 25: I was an
hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I thirsted, and ye gave me no drink: I was
astraunger, and ye took me not in unto you: I was naked and ye clothed me not,
etc. Which sentences, whiles ignorant and light spirits labor to wrest and
apply to works, they see not how great evil they commit. But spiritual men
refer them to the very body only, they them selves standing naked before God
in spirit, which is both just and necessary. For there are two things in man,
the Spirit and the Flesh. Hereupon there are some places which do guide only
faith in the spirit: some, which do direct only works in the body: for one
place can not direct both the body and the spirit together. We must so do with
our substance, that we be willing to part from it, to lend, and to give to our
neighbor, when it shall be requisite. And if we see any not to have, wherewith
to make restitution, we must release him, and forgive the debt according to
the example of Nehemias, as we read in Esdras. 1. Esd. 5. For God has given
many things unto us, who is able to give us more things also if we believe. And
thus we hear that if we will be Christians, we ought to lend, give, and to be
willing to part from that which we have, otherwise we shall not show the fruits
of a lively faith. Wherefore lay up this text inwardly in your minds, that ye
deal by no other thing before God, but by only faith, and refer and bestow
your works to the only service and profit of your neighbor. Thus much shall
suffice to have bin spoken concerning the former part. Now what is to be said
moreover of this text, or what does follow we will afterward consider. In the
words following the Lord interprets himself, what kind of mercy he
understands, saying after this sort.

Judge not, and ye shall not be judged: condemn not, and ye shall not be
condemned: forgive, and ye shall be forgiven: Give, and it shall be given unto you.
In this place the Lord divides mercy into three parts, Three parts of mercy.
that we may not be ignorant, what manner of mercy that ought to be, which it
behooves us to show to our neighbors. First judgment and condemnation is
taken from us. Then thou must forgive thy neighbor if he has committed any
thing against thee. Lastly thou must help the needy. These things this word
(Mercy) signifies, where soever it comes in the Scriptures. And all these
must proceed from a sincere heart, all coloring and flattery being taken
away, that there be no respect had of the person. For if thou desire to will
well and to wish well to them, which will well to thee: or to do well to them,
which do well to thee: or to hurt them, which hurt thee, thou art utterly
deceived. But thou must do so, as Christ says a little before: Imitate thy
heavenly father, love thine enemy: do well to him, which does euel to thee:
forgive him that hurts thee: The first part of mercy not to judge or condemn
an other.
lend to the needy, and so of the rest. That therefore we may speak of the
former part, that we must not judge or condemn, we must mark, that God has
ordained the sword of the magistrate, to the punishing of public offenses, so
that it be provided that it be not done against the precept and commandment
of God, as that the innocent be not executed: for whereas the judge deals
unjustly, he is as well an homicide as an other, of which judgment Christ
says nothing here. Else where he makes mention thereof, when as he said to
him, which desired, that he would bid his brother divide the inheritance with
him: Luke 12.14.
Who made me a judge or a diuider over you? For the care and governing of
outward things do not belong to the kingdom of Christ.

Of what judgment Christ speaks in this place.
But Christ speaks here of an other judgment, namely of that whereby one
reputeth and compteth an other good or evil, when as notwithstanding he sees
no good or evil to be done of him. Which judgment belongs only unto God.
For it may be that thou see thy brother offend to day, whom notwithstanding to
morrow God does receive, the^ may he both be, and also seem unto thee to be
good, neither must thou remember his sins, for that Christ has forbidden.
For there can not be either any love, or concord, where this judgment and
condemnation is usual amongst men. To judge and condemn an other is nothing
else, then to have a beam in his own eye, which all hypocrites do without dout
bear in their eyes. For they that judge themselves good, are offended at their
brother, what soever others do, it displeases them, forasmuch as they will not
acknowledge their own sin. But it comes to pass, that when thou see
many sins in others, thou see not the beam that is in thine own eye, and
so fallest into the judgment of God. Hereof it comes, that thou which
iudgest an other, are made worse the^ yt most wicked baude, or the most unchaste
harlot, before God, who alone knows who is to be saved, and who to be
condemned. Iudgers of other.
Such hypocrites are of that nature, that it is a pleasure unto them, and they
take no small delight thereof, if they reason and talk either of the adultery
or fault of an other man, yea they increase a small thing or trifle in their
neighbor, and what soever others do, they interpret it at the worst, so that
no man is able to do that which pleases or likes them. And although they
themselves do not such things, yet they willingly here that other men do them,
whereas a godly man helps as much as he is able, that these things may be
covered and amended. But it many times falls out that they are most filthy
adulterers even according to the flesh, which do so judge and condemn others,
howbeit they do not judge man only, but even God himself. Wherefore if thy
brother be a sinner, co^ceale his sin, and pray for him to the Lord: if thou
reveal his sin and rejoice thereat, surely thou art not the child of the
merciful father, for if thou were, thou would be merciful according as he
is. This is a thing most certain, that we are not able to show so great mercy
to our neighbor, as God both has and does show to us. But that is the
practice of Satan, that we do those things which are quite contrary unto
mercy, which is an undoubted sign, that there is no mercy at all in us.

Of these iudgers of other Christ speaks in the Gospel when he says: Can
the blind lead the blind? Luke 6.39.
shall they not both fall into the ditch? The disciple is not above his
master: but who soever will be a perfect disciple, shall be as his master. And
why see thou a mote in thy brothers eye, and considerest not the beam, that
is in thine own eye? either how can thou say to thy brother, Brother, let me
pull out the mote that is in thine eye, when thou see not the beam that is in
thine own eye? Hypocrite, cast out the beam that is in thine own eye first,
and the^ shall thou see perfectly to pull out the mote that is in thy brothers
eye. As if he said: thou think that thy brother is blind, and in thy mind
do find fault with an other, that is, thou will guide an other, when
notwithstanding thou thy self art blind. Thou iudgest him a sinner, and thy
self an honest and just man. What other thing is this, the^ for thy heart to
be so affected, that thou count thy self better? Which is nothing else, then
that thou will lead and guide other, when thou thy self art blinder the^ a
moule, so that he which follows thee, does fall with thee into the ditch. Of
such as judge themselves to excel others, and think themselves to be followed
more the^ ye word of God, S. Paul speaks Romans 2: Behold (says he) thou art
called a Jew, and restest in the law, and gloriest in God, and know his
will, and triest the things that dissent from it, in that thou art instructed
by the law, and perswadest thy self, that thou art a guide of the blind, a
light of them which are in darkness, an instructor of them which lack
discretion, a teacher of the unlearned, which have the form of knowledge, and
of the truth in the law. Thou therefore which teach an other teach thou
not thy self? thou that preachest, A man should not steal, do thou steal?
thou that say, A man should not commit adultery, do thou commit
adultery? thou that abhorrest idols, co^mittest thou sacrilege? thou that
gloriest in the law through breaking the law, dishonourest thou God? Whereupon
he also says in the beginning of the same chapter to hypocrites: Therefore
thou art inexcusable, O man, who soever thou art, that co^demnest: for in that
that thou condemnest an other, thou condemnest thy self: for thou that
condemnest do the same things. But we know that the judgment of God is
according to truth, against them which commit such things. And think thou
this, O thou man, that co^demnest the^ which do such things, and do the
same, that thou shall escape the judgment of God? Lo, this is to speak ye
truth to hypocrites, who go about to show ye way to other, which they
themselves know not, leading so other me^ into ye ditch with the^. Therefore ye
Lord says: The disciple is not above his master, but who soever will be a
perfect disciple, shall be as his master. This is a common proverb: I can
learn no more of my master then he knows himself. Wherefore does the Lord
speak this proverb? because of two sorts of masters: the one is blind,
whom if I shall follow, I also my self shall become blind: he himself
falls into the ditch, and I follow. The other master is the merciful
father, of whom we must learn mercy: whom if we follow, we also do become
merciful like as he is: if we were merciful daily, we should also become
perfect, as he is perfect, but that comes not to pass, as long as we are in
this life.

The second part of mercy is, The second part of mercy, to forgive.
that we forgive them which have endamaged us, or hurt us by any means. A
Christian can never be so hurt, but he ought to forgive, not only seven times,
but seventy times seven times, as the Lord said unto Peter. Matthew. 18.
Wherefore God forgiueth a Christian his sin or infirmity, that he also may
forgive other their infirmity: which Christ sets forth else where in a most
goodly parable, which he concludes in these words: Matthew. 18.35.
So likewise shall mine heavenly Father do unto you, except ye forgive from
your hearts, each one to his brother their trespasses. And so we pray daily in
the Lords prayer, with an addition saying: forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us. Is this a hard matter, if I a wretched
sinner, do forgive my neighbor his trespasses and his infirmity, whereas the
Lord will forgive me my sins and my infirmities? If one had killed my father,
what were this being compared to my sin, wherewith I have offended God, and
provoked him to anger?

The third part of mercy is, The third part of mercy, to give to the poor and
needy.
that we give to them that be in misery and need, and that we help them.
Whereof John speaks thus 1. John 3: Whosoever has this worlds good, and
sees his brother have need, and shuts up his compassion from him, how
dwells the love of God in him? For where the love of God is, it is moved to
show it self eue^ in outward works. Hereunto also pertains the saying of
Christ Matthew. 5: Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.
Wherefore the Lord adds a promise in the Gospel, saying: Give and it shall be
given unto you: a good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running
over shall men give into your bosom. And continuing on his speech he says:
For with what measure ye meat, with the same shall men meat to you again. Thus
much shall suffice concerning the parts of mercy which we ought to show to our
neighbors. Matthew. 7.12.
Unto which the special words of Christ ought to exhort us, who when in the
Gospel of Matthew he had spoken much of a Christian life, and of love to be
showed to our brethren, thus concludes saying: What soever ye would that men
should do to you, even so do ye to them: for this is the Law and the Prophets.
Now every one is so affected, that being cast down, and in distres, he would
wish all the world to help him. If I be a miserable sinner, drowned in sins,
bearing a burdened and troubled conscience, I would that the whole world should
comfort me, should help and succor me, should cover my sin and shame. So I
also ought to behave my self toward my neighbor, not to judge him, not to
condemn him, but to forgive him his offenses, to help him, to provide for
him, to lend unto him, and give him, even as I would wish to be done unto my
self if I were driven into distres, necessity, exile, or poverty. And herein
truly Christians are known, if they love one an other, if one do such works
of mercy unto an other, as Christ said unto his disciples at his last Supper: I
give you a new commandment, that ye love one an other, as I have loved you.
By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to an
other. Thus ye have the meaning of this text, it remains that we call upon
God for grace.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, OF THE SVMME OF CHRISTIAN LIFE.
1. Tim. 1. Verse. 5. THE end of the commandment is love out of a pure
heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.

6. From the which things some have erred, and have turned unto vain iangling.

7. They would be doctors of the Law, and yet understand not what they
speak, neither whereof they affirm.


IT is well known unto you dearly beloved brethren, Gods word must be heard
and learned.
with how great severity God has commanded his word to be heard and
learned. For he most highly esteems it, and has bestowed much labor in
defending it, and publishing it to the world. He has suffered all the Prophets
to come into perils and dangers, at the last also he sent his own son
because of his word, whom he suffered to die even the death of the cross. And
what persecutions have not the Apostles themselves abode for the words sake?
what afflictions have not all Christians suffered? unto some of which he has
committed the ministry of his word faithfully to be executed, and to other
some has enjoined the charge of hearing the same. If there were no other cause
beside this, whereby we might be moved to hear and learn Gods word, but for
that it is the good pleasure, will, and commandment of God, yet this one
ought to be sufficient great and weighty. For it is our duty as creatures to
obey our Lord and Creator, and that with all readiness of mind, inasmuch as he
has given us so many good things, and does as yet daily give us more, for
which we shall never be able to give him sufficient worthy thanks.

Howbeit he is not content, only to have commanded us to do this, or to
require it of us as bounden duty, but promises also that great fruits and
commodities shall redound to us thereby, affirming that by this means his
greatest and highest worship is given unto him. For he is the great Lord, whom
we serve, God is served diverse ways, but especially by preaching and hearing
his word.
who has many and diverse kinds of service, and manifold manners of worship,
and whom we may serve diverse ways. But this only service which is given to
him by hearing the word, does excel all the rest. For if any where a faithful
man of the country, or a citizen, or any which is otherwise in subjection does
serve his Lord or master, he does by the same service also serve God.
Likewise a child, a manseruaunt or a maydseruaunt, if they be obedient, and do
diligently that which belongs to their duty: also a Prince and parents if
they govern well, and do their duty faithfully: they all do serve God. For it
is his will and commandment which he requires to be fulfilled of us. Of such
services and kinds of worship the world is full. For to every one in his
state his works are committed and enjoined of God, whereby he daily both ought
and may serve him: that there may be left no place for excuse unto any man, as
though he were ignorant how, and wherefore he must serve God, neither that any
seek after other things, and invent peculiar manners of serving God, which he
has neither ordained nor commanded, and in the mean season neglect that
which he has commanded, as we have hitherto done in our blindenes.

But before all other services and doings of duties, he has most highly
esteemed and extolled this service both of them that hear, God has appointed
time, place, person and what so ever is requisite that his word may be preached
and heard.
and them that preach his word: And therefore has ordained also a special day
thereunto every week, in which we must apply our selves to no other business:
Albeit we serve God also by other labors all the week, which he has bound to
no time or certain day. But he has chosen this day specially, which he has
severely commanded to be kept, whereby men may have time and leisure to
perform this service, lest any might fly unto this complaint, that he has no
leisure by reason of his labors and business. Moreover he has appointed
special places also for this service, as among us temples and houses, where we
do come together. Yea he has instituted and kept the whole order of ministers
hereunto, giving also other things which pertain to the performing of the
charge of this office, as the knowledge of many tounges, and diverse gifts
beside. And briefly he has commanded the whole world by a certain special
precept, that it think this worship or service holy, and far more excellent
then the rest. Which he will have so to be delighted in of all Christians, that
it may be manifest, how much he does esteem it, and how acceptable unto
him the exercise and handlyng of his word is.

Most weighty causes which ought to me to hear Gods word.
These things I speak to stir you up, and to admonish you, why ye ought
willingly to hear the word of God, because it is not only the commandment of
God, whereunto we must obey, but we have also most ample promises, that it is a
thing acceptable to God, and the greatest worship, whereby we can do honor
unto him. And it so far exceeds other kinds of worship, as the brightness
of the sun exceeds the brightness of the other stars, and the Sabbath day
the other days, and in a sum, as much as the heavenly kingdom excels the
kingdoms of the world. For here all things are holy and specially chosen, the
time, place, person, and that because of the word, which sanctifies all
things unto us. Wherefore we must earnestly endeavor, that we take heed unto
our selves, that we fall not into sluggishnes, and slothfulnes, neither that we
be carried away with contempt and lothsomnes of hearing the word, as those
delicate and cloyed spirits, which seem unto them selves already to be
Masters, and exactly to know all things, yea far more perfectly then any
can teach them. Or as others also, which are soon cloyed with it, thinking,
why I have heard this very often, wherefore should I eftsoons hear the same
song? They know not how great and marvelous a thing it is, also how great
worship of God, which they do so greatly contemn, and neglect with so great
slothfulnes. Wherefore they do after unspeakable means provoke God to wrath,
having his commandment so in contempt, and suffering his promise to be made
void in them, and as much as is in them impayring and hindering by their
example so commendable a worship and service of God.

But admit it to be true, which notwithstanding is not, that thou do
understand all things perfectly, and as cunningly and skilfully as Christ him
self: yet thou see how earnestly he performs the office of preaching, and
applies him self unto this work, whereof notwithstanding he was most skilful
before, and had not any whit need thereof, as we do greatly need it. So
Paul also a Prince of Apostles, albeit he was exceedingly well learned, and so
excellent a Doctor, yet going through many countries did eftsoons and every
where preach, neither was he wearied or cloyed. We must not be weary of
hearing the word of God.
Wherefore it is meet that thou be nothing at all weary of hearing this
word, inasmuch as the aid and help thereof is exceeding necessary for thee,
both against the devil and all other tentations. And although for thy
instruction thou should not need it, yet ought thou not to be wearied or
cloyed, yt thou should not bestow a few hours in a day every week upon
this worship and service of God: seeing that before, applying thy self to
false worship, when thou did pass the whole day in temples, and did run
from temple to temple, from altar to altar, thou felst no tediousnes or
wearines, neither did say as thou do at this day: O, I have heard no new
thing, I have heard these things before: But did think thus: this day and
yesterday I went to hear Mass, and to morrow I mind to go to hear it again.
How much more ought thou to do this now, knowing assuredly that this is the
right service and worship of God, and to say? Albeit I knew most perfectly, as
I do not know, yet to give honor and show obedience unto God, I will do this
service, and because of his love and praise I will hear his word, that my Lord
may see by this chief worship, wherewith I am especially delighted, that I am
willing to serve him. For although no other fruit or profit come unto me
thereby, yet I may rejoice that I have performed a most holy and acceptable
work unto him, whereunto other kinds of worships and services being compared,
are of small importance.

Now, he that does not care for these things, neither is moved with them,
reverently to think and highly to esteem of the word of God, willingly and
earnestly to hear and learn it, whenever opportunity and means shall be
offered, I will have nothing to do with him. For neither may I, neither will I
draw any man hereunto violently. He that contemns, let him contemn still,
and remain a swine as he is, even until that day, when God will kill him, and
throw him down hedlong to hell. For such a one can not be a good man, neither
is it a humane sin, but a certain deuilish obstinacy, A deuilish obstinacy
to contemn the hearing of Gods word.
so greatly to contemn that, whereunto God has appointed a place, person,
time, etc. Whereunto moreover he moves us by his commandment, lovingly
provoke us by his promises, stirs us up, and admonishes us by words, and
offers all these of his own accord, and to be bought with no price or
treasure, which is to be far fetched, or hardly come by, the excellency
whereof can in deed be counteruailed with no gold. Add hereunto moreover that
it is a worship or service very easy to be done, which may be performed
without all labor or grief, but that thou must attentively hear the
Preacher, or apply thy mouth to speak and read, then which labor none surely
is more easy. And albeit it is to be feared, that thou shall therefore bear
the cross, and suffer persecution, yet the work it self is so joined with no
difficulty, as no other labor is, no not even that that is most easy. If so
be that it be not grievous unto thee, to sit the whole day in a tavern or an
alehouse, or otherwise with thy companions to trifle and sport thy self with
filthy and unseemly gestes and pastimes, also to singe and prate, and yet art
not weary, neither feel any labor: thou may with as little pain sit in
the temple, and hear the Preacher, whereby thou seruest God, and do that
which is acceptable unto him. What would thou do, if thou should at his
commandment carry stones in quarries, or go armed on pilgrimage to S. James?
or if some other laborious and painful work should be enjoined thee? as
hitherto it has been the custom among us, when as we would do all things
willingly, whatsoever was enjoined us, when we were deceived with mere
trifles, and most impudent delusions.

But so does the Devil blind men: in whom also he works a satietie and
lothing of the word of God, whereby it comes to pass that they have no
regard, what a treasure the word of God is, but live after a beastly sort,
contemning all good doctrine. Let us therefore at the last delight in these
things, thinking thus with our selves, that as often as we read or hear the
word of God either privately or publicly, of whom soever it be preached, we
apply our selves to the chief service of God, which pleases God exceedingly
well. After this sort thou may inflame thy self to hear, and God will
inspire thee with his grace, God makes the seed of his word fruitful in the
diligent hearers thereof.
that the seed of his word be not sown in vain, but may bring forth
plentiful fruit. For the word is never taught without fruit, whenever it
shall be diligently and attentively heard, neither can it be, but that by
eftsoons hearing it, thou should become better. And albeit for the present
time thou see or feel no fruit, yet in process of time thou shall plainly
perceive and feel it. But it were long here to rehearse the fruits proceeding
of the word, nay, in deed they can not be all rehearsed.

These things I thought good to speak in steed of a preface before the
words of S. Paul, Exhortation to ye hearing of Gods word very needful.
to the intent to stir us up more diligently to hear the word of God: and
surely there is great need of such an exhortation daily in every sermon, which
also is much pertinent unto the text which we presently have in hand. For
Paul in this place reprehendeth curious spirits, which go about by their own
wisdom to be masters of the word of God, and do by and by falsely persuade
them selves, that they know it well, and that they need not any more the help
of any teacher: but turn them selves to trifleling and vain iangling, that
they may bring forth some new thing, which the common sort may be desirous to
hear, presuming also to be Masters of the Scripture and of all men, laboring
to teach every one, and yet not understanding what they speak, or whereof
they affirm. For this is a plague and calamity that follows, where the word
of God is not handled diligently and seriously, the learners being weary of
hearing, and the teachers slothful in preaching. Hereof it comes that so
great companies of hearers slide away, and Churches become desolate. Of which
calamity vain talking spirits are the cause, which promise new things, that
they may win the hearts of the multitude unto them selves, boasting that they
are Masters of the Scripture, and yet are always such men, as are ignorant,
forasmuch as they have never tried, what it is to teach other: which we do
now plainly fee, and the wrath of God is at hand ready to punish our contempt
and unthankfulness. Therefore Paul begins his Epistle to his Disciple
Timothe so, Vain and curious teachers.
that he should take heed, that such teachers do not arise, which can talk
many things of the law, bringing many new questions and doctrines, what is to
be done, how righteousness is to be obtained, all which they do for ostentations
sake, that they may be seen and praised, and seem to be more learned then
other, and yet they never came so far as to teach any certain thing, or
that which might be counted to be of any importance, but do all things
confusedly and out of good order. Such bablers use only these words, that we
must be honest, that good works must be done, and God must be served, etc. but
they understand not the sense of those words, what they mean. And being asked
how we must do good works, now they teach this particular work to be done,
an other time an other work, as, offer so much sacrifice at this altar, get
thee into this or that Monastery, run unto this Saint, here erect a
chapel to the honor of such a Saint, in an other place found a Mass,
light tapers, eat fish, buy indulgences, etc. Which being done, they by and
by bring an other work, and forthwith after that an other. So they know not
how to instruct any after a constant and certain manner of teaching, much less
can they say, this is, or in this does the sum of Christian life consist,
etc. And yet in the mean season those things must be counted very excellent
that they teach, so much do they boast, and promise almost golden mountains,
as though they alone were Doctors that might not be gainsayd, and controulers
and Masters of all other.

But he is to be counted an excellent Master, and highly to be esteemed, which
teaches the chief point and whole sum of doctrine, to wit, how the heart and
conscience, yea and the whole man must live. They know nothing of that thing,
although they be very full of words, but do altogether err from the sum
and principal point of the law. In the mean season they entangle the minds
of ye hearers with such a confused company of words, that they know neither how
to make a beginning nor end of speaking, and it is uncertain whereunto that
disordered company of words does serve, whereby no man can be made better,
much less can he confirm his conscience thereby, as we hitherto have enough
and too much seen and tried in the Papacy among our Preachers of dreams.
What therefore is the sum of that doctrine, which is to be taught to the
people? Saint Paul answers: The end of the commandment is love out of a
pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.

This is that Helen, The sum of Christian life.
here thou have the sum of Christian life most excellently and fully
comprehended, compendiously and briefly uttered, and which may be not unfitly
printed in thy memory. Thou must endeavor, if thou will not err from the
law, but attain to the chief point thereof (that thou may know what is to
be done and what to be left undone) to have love proceeding out of a pure heart,
from a good conscience, and faith unfeigned. If thy love be of this sort, the^
is it right, otherwise thou errest from the meaning of the whole law. Now these
words are profound, and comprehend much matter in them: Wherefore we must
partly expound them, that they may be the better understood, and that we may
accustom our selves to Paul's manner of speech. First he attributes to love the
sum of the whole law, wherein it wholly consists. What it is love.
And to love is nothing else (as I think it is known to all) but to favor and
embrace one from the heart, and to show and perform unto him all the duties of
friendship and good will. Now those iangling Doctors also use such words,
preaching and boasting many things of love, but all by peece-meale and
particularly applied to their own trifles and follies. Even as heretics,
wicked men, and ungracious wretches have love also, but that which consists
only among them selves, and them that are of the same sort with them, in the
mean season they hate and persecute all good Christians, whom they would
willingly accuse of murder, if they could, etc. But this does not yet deserve
to be called true love, if I choose one or two, whose conditions like and
please me, whom I do friendly and lovingly embrace, and no man beside them. It
is called a particular love, which proceeds not out of a pure heart, Love
flowing out of a pure heart.
but from an infected and filthy heart. For true love flows out of a pure
heart, when I endeavor as God has commanded me, to pour forth my love toward
my neighbor, and to favor all without difference, whether they be friends or
enemies, even as our heavenly father him self does, who suffers his Sun to
arise on the good and evil, and sends his rain to the thankful and
unthankful, makes the earth to bring forth many good things, gives money,
riches, fruits, cattle, and many times especially unto them that are the
worst of all other. But from whence comes yt doing of these things? truly
from pure love, whereof his heart is most full. This he pours forth abundantly
upon all, omitting no man, whether he be good or evil, worthy or unworthy. And
this is called true, divine, entire, and perfect love, which loves no one,
neglecting the rest, neither cutteth or divides it self, but imbraceth all
indifferently. Love that proceeds not from a pure heart of what sort it is.
The other is love of thieves and Publicanes, if I love him, which is for my
turn, and may do me a pleasure, and which esteems well of me, and despise
him that contemns me, and which is not on my side. For that does not proceed
from the heart which ought wholly to be good and pure, indifferently toward al,
but he that is endued with such love, seeks his own things, and is full of
love of him self, and not of love toward others. Neither does he love any man,
but for his own commodities sake, regarding only that, which may serve for
his own use, seeking his own profit by every man, and not the profit of his
neighbor. If he be praised and honored, he laugheth, but being looked upon
with sower countenance, or an unthankful word being spoken unto him, he
stomacketh, curses and finds fault, so that all friendship forthwith
ceasseth. Contrariwise he that has a pure heart must be so affected according
to the word of God, and his example, that he favor every one, and bestow
liberal and friendly benefits upon them, even as God has favored him, and of
his divine love has bestowed benefits upon him.

But some man will say, he is mine enemy, We must not therefore abstain from
doing well to any because he is our enemy or evil.
and does evil unto me. Surely he is an enemy also to God, unto whom he does
many more things displeasant unto him, then he can do either to me or thee.
But therefore my love ought not to be extinguished or cease, because he is
evil, and altogether unworthy thereof. If he be evil, he shall at the last
suffer punishment according to his deeds, but his wickedness must not overcome
me. But if I can through love rebuke and admonish him, or pray for him, that he
may amend, and escape punishment, I must do it readily: I must not be an enemy
unto him, or do evil unto him in any wise. For what profit should redound
unto me thereby? neither am I made better thereby, and I make him so much the
worse. This therefore ought to delight me, if I shall favor him, and bestow
benefits upon him, if so be that he will suffer them to be bestowed on him, and
pray unto God for him, so I may enjoy peace, and have no trouble or contention
with any man, and perhaps I may so profit him, that he will change his life unto
the better, and amend. Otherwise surely love being divided or separated, I have
more bitterness and sorrow by them, whom I hate, then I have joy and profit by
them, whom I love and keep company with. And this is said to trouble the
fountain or water, from whence pure love can not flow. As it is certain that
the Jews also did, against whom Paul speaks in this place: for they loved
them only of whom they were loved, whereby they defiled the synceritie of love
with man's affections, and therefore their heart could not be pure.

But whereby is the heart purified? I answer, Whereby the heart is purified.
it can not be purified by any other thing better, then by that sovereign
purity, which is the word of God. Receive that into thy mind, and order thy
life according to the rule thereof, and thy heart is purified. As in this place,
see thou set the word before thee, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self,
and follow that which it commands, and by and by thou shall see whether it
purges and cleanses whatsoever desire there is in thee of thine own profit,
or whatsoever love of thy self. For commanding thee to love thy neighbor, it
makes exception of none, either friend, or foe. Albeit some man be evil, and
has been oftentimes injurious unto thee, notwithstanding he does not therefore
lose this name, that he is not to be called thy neighbor, but nevertheless
remains thy flesh and blood, and is comprehended in these words, thou shall
love thy neighbor etc. Therefore I say, if thou shall consider him and so
behave thy self toward him, as the word teaches thee, then is thy heart made
pure, and love sincere, so that thou make no false difference of persons,
neither otherwise considerest him, then an other, which is good, and one of thy
familiars. In deed we can not deny this to be true, that an honest man is more
worthy to be loved, unto whom also every one does more willingly apply him
self by nature, then unto the conversation of wicked men, whose familiarity
there is no good man that does not abhor, howbeit flesh and blood is the
cause that true and Christian love is not among us. For a Christian must not
derive his love from the person, as the world does: as some young man seeing a
maid, is in love with her because of her fayrenes and beauty, and a covetous
man takes his love and desire of his money, a Lord or Prince of honor and
power, etc. For all such love is said to be feyned and proceeding not from
whence it ought, cleaving to the good things, wherewith he sees the person
adorned, neither does it continue any longer, then that which he loves,
continues, and as long as he may enjoy it.

True love.
But true love ought to be such as flows out of a continual fountain, and
proceeds from the bottom of the heart, as a fresh and continual water always
springing forth, which can not be stopped, and is never dried up. This love
says after this sort: I love thee, not for thy honesty or dishonestie, for I
do not derive my love from thy honesty, as from a strange fountain, but out
of mine own fountain, that is, out of the word of God which is planted in my
heart, which commands me to love my neighbor. From hence love plentifully
flows, open to al, which have need thereof, watering all both friends and
foes: yea chiefly prepared and ready for foes, inasmuch as they have more
need, that they may by my means be brought to amendment, I praying for them,
and doing according to my ability that which I am able, that they also leaving
their evil ways, may be delivered from sins, and the snares of the Devil.
And this is said to be love flowing from the heart, and not derived from
without: for he that is endued with such love, finds no such thing in him
whom he loves, from whence he should derive it: But because he is a Christian,
because he lays hold on the word, which is altogether pure by it self, by
the power of it his heart also is made pure, and replenished with true love.
Whereupon he pours for^h the treasures of his love toward every man, neither
is he moved or turned away with the person of any, whether he be good or
evil. Behold, thus should they preach, which will rightly teach love required
of the law, whereof our bablers know nothing, neither have any regard
thereof, albeit they talk many things of the law, and dispute much of love.
They do not see, no they do not so much as once think, that love must be
such, that it flow out of the heart, and that the fountain must be first pure
and clear. This never descends into their heart, although they hear, read,
and teach many things of it. They are occupied with very uncertain, and
unprofitable cogitations, yea rather with dead dreams.

Wherefore whatsoever is preached of works and of a good life, True good
works.
that only is well done which proceeds from the word of God, a pure heart,
and a true faith. This thou may see in all states, how every one ought in his
calling to do the office enjoined him, and exercise the works of love. A
servant laboring, and thinking no more then thus: My Lord or Master pays
me my wages, for which only I serve him, otherwise I would not vouchsafe to
look upon him, etc: has not a pure heart, for he does not serve, but for a
piece of bread, or for his hyre, which being taken away, his service also
ceasseth. How a good servant ought to be affected.
But if he were a right and true Christian, he would rather be thus affected: I
will not therefore serve, because my Master pays me wages, because he is
honest or dishonest, etc: but therefore, Ephesians. 6.5.
because the word of God does thus speak unto me: Servant be obedient unto
your Masters as unto Christ, etc. This service proceeds of it own accord
out of the heart, which lays hold on the word and greatly esteems it,
saying: I will serve my Master, and take my wages, but this shall be the
chiefest thing, for which I do this service, that I may serve my God and Lord
Jesus Christ, who has laid the condition and state of a servant upon me,
which I know does please him in me, etc. Here thou see a true work
proceeding out of a pure heart. So also let a Lord or Prince, and they which
have the charge of governing ye common weal, think thus: God has committed
unto me the office of a Magistrate, that I should be a ruler: now if I will
have regard unto this only, that I may enjoy my dignity, riches, and power,
it is certain that my heart is not pure, and yet in the mean season I do the
works of a ruler, so, that the world can not complain of me, neither Caesar, or
the Lawyers can blame or find fault with me by their laws. Even as neither a
servant serving only for wages can be reprehended of the world, whether he
seeks his own things or not. Surely the word of God is not regarded in the
office of a ruler that does so, but his own idol, his own glory, money and
power etc. But if this affection be in his heart: How ye heart of a godly
Magistrate ought to be affected.
because I am occupied in this office, wherein God has placed me, and the word
commands him that bears rule to be careful, it is meet that I do
execute the same with all faithfulness and diligence, to the praise and glory of
my God: The execution of the office of such a ruler endued with such a mind,
comes out of a pure and sincere heart, wherewith both God and good men are
delighted. There is moreover in him love, which does not cleave to ye person or
outward things, but begins in the heart, which the word of God makes
manifest, which forasmuch as it is pure and clean, does also purify the heart.
And so his government and works are the mere services of God, and most
acceptable sacrifices unto him, seeing that they are done only according to
the word of God, and for God his sake. But our talkers can not teach this,
neither are able to judge of it, only crying out when they teach best of all,
that we must be honest. They bring a certain iuridiciall sermon out of the
laws of men, as Caesar and his Clerks teach. But how the heart is purified,
they have never so much as understood or thought any thing thereof, or how
love is to be derived to all states and conditions of men according to the word
of God.

Thus must thou say moreover even in spiritual offices and states also: If I or
any other shall preach to get some good benefice, whereas otherwise I would
easily cease from doing this office, I may preach the Gospel, but my heart is
not pure, but most plainly polluted. Therefore although I do long and much
affirm, that it is a good work and a weighty office, yet do I not perform
it aright, forasmuch as I do it not from the heart. How ye heart of a true
Preacher and Minister ought to be affected.
But then only it is rightly done when the heart has this affection: albeit I
must get my living thereby, yet this ought not to be the chief end thereof,
but because God has called me unto it, and has committed it unto me
diligently to be done, it remains, that I do with all diligence labor
therein to the glory of God, and salvation of souls, which I do otherwise
also for the love of the word, willingly and from my heart. Hereby I seek
neither love or friendship, nor honors, nor thankefulnes of men, but my works
come from the heart, which I first do, before I obtain any honor, glory,
reward, money, or favor, although if those come and follow, I may have and
receive them without sin.

Lo, thus the word is the cause, foundation, ground, fountain and spring of
love coming out of the heart, and of all good works that please God, which he
can by no means away with, God requires the heart.
if the heart be not pure before: for neither are works acceptable to men,
which are done without the heart by dissimulation. Now it Caesar and men require
the heart, although they can not see it, of how much greater estimation is
that heart before God, which does all things for the words sake? Therefore he
also suffers his word to be preached, that we may order all our life
according to the prescription thereof. And let not us suffer our selves to be
hindered, frayed from it, or discouraged with the let or hinderance of any
thing, although for it we shall suffer all kind of losses, unthankfulness,
contempt, etc: but let us break and go through all brunts with a boulde and
manly courage, and say thus: we began nothing for any man's sake, neither
will we leave of any thing because of any man, but that we may do that which
is acceptable to God, we will go on still, howsoever things fall out with us.
They which do thus, become men excellent and most highly to be esteemed, who
are ready to do all duties, and serve God with all readiness of mind and love
not feyned. For the fountain and spring is good, not derived and brought in
from without.

These things I thought good briefly to speak of the first part, how the
heart is purified by the word alone, and not as the Munkes have dreamed, by a
fight taken upon them against evil cogitations, and by feyning of good
thoughts. For what thoughts soever thou shall feyne, the heart shall remain
unclean, if the word of God be not in it, although it pretend a great show
of a godly life, as Paul witnesses. But this pureness, whereof he speaks,
does extend farther then outward and corporal pureness does, which the Jews did
use, eating and drinking their hands being oftenwashed, which our religious men
also use in their fasting, diversity of apparel, orders and rites, etc: for
this is called pureness of the spirit, which we then have, when being instructed
by the word of God, we know thereby how he is to be served in every state and
calling, and endeavor to frame our lives according thereunto.

The second part.
Now follows the second part concerning a good conscience, whereof also we
must entreat, to wit, that love must come from such a heart, as has a joyful
and quiet conscience, both toward God, A good and quiet conscience toward men.
and also toward men. Toward men so, as Paul glories of him self, that he
lived so, that he offended no man, troubled no man, was an evil example and
burden to no man, but all that did see and hear him, must needs witness, that
he indifferently served all, helped all, counseled all, and dealt friendly and
gently with all. Such a conscience Moses also glories of against ye seditious,
Numb. 16: Thou know that I have not taken so much as an ass from them,
neither have I hurt any of them. And Jeremy chap. 18: Remember, O Lord, how
that I stood before thee to speak good for them, and to turn away thy wrath
from them. Likewise does Samuel 1. King. 12: I have walked before you from my
childhood unto this day: behold here I am bear record of me before the Lord,
and before his anointed: whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken?
whom have I done wrong to? whom have I hurt? or of whose hand have I received
any brybe? and so forth as follows in the same place. Such boasting and glory
every Christian must attain unto, that he do so live toward every man, and so
exercise and show his love, that no man can worthily complain any whit of him,
whereby he shall trouble or dismay his conscience, but that all that will confess
ye truth, may be enforced to say, that he has so lived, yt he has bin an
example to every man of living well, which will only but follow him. And this
is called a good conscience before men, or against ye complaints and
reprehensions of men. And albeit such a conscience is not able to stand before
the judgment of God, no nor any pureness of the heart in the outward life and
works of love (we continuing in sinning often times before God) yet we must
attain unto such a heart, that we may comfort our selves before him also, and
say: this God has bidden and commanded to be done, therefore I do it with a
pure heart and a good conscience, neither would I willingly do otherwise,
neither of purpose hurt or trouble any man, but whatsoever I say and do, that
is willed and commanded of God. Let no Christian suffer such a confidence to
be wrested from him, that he may boast him self by the word of God against
the whole world. For he that has no regard how he leads his life, that he
may stop the mouths of all blamers and accusers, and clear him self before
all, and testify that he has lived, spoken, and done well, he I say is not
yet a Christian, having not in him self a pure heart and love. For we will not
presume of the doctrine of faith, as though that being had, every man may do
what he list, whether it be profitable or unprofitable to his neighbor, that
we must in no case do. Otherwise that doctrine should have the name to give
license and free liberty for every one to do what he will. But we must so
behave our selves, that we may obtain love out of a pure heart and a good
conscience, that no man may accuse us of any crime.

And although these things be spoken of our life and works, and a Christian is
an other manner of man before God, as we shall hear, yet we must earnestly
endeavor our selves in this also, that we may be without blame before God. And
when we shall not attain thereunto, we must fly to prayer, and say before God
and men: forgive us our trespasses, etc: that at the least wise, our life may
remain without blame, What we must do when we fail in our duty toward our
neighbor.
and we may obtain a good conscience before me^. And if this can not be
brought to pass by perfect love and pureness of the heart, yet let it be done by
humility, that we may pray for, and desire of all men pardon of our offenses,
when as we have not purely and perfectly done our duty, or are not able to do
it, so that thy neighbor may be enforced to say, albeit thou have greatly hurt
me, or have not done thy duty toward me, as it was meet, yet forasmuch as
thou humblest thy self, I will willingly forgive thee, and take it in the best
part. And for this humilities sake I say that thou art a good man, which do
not stand obstinatly, as though thou would advisedly and of purpose offend
against me, but do turn thy self unto love. Therefore that life is as yet
said to be without blame, which albeit it was subject to reprehension, is with
humility covered, and reformed, that no man can worthily complain thereof.
Thus the law should be expounded and handeled, that both love toward every man
may rightly proceed out of a pure heart for God his sake, and the conscience
may stand before the world. And this ought to have been practiced of those
vain talkers in their Sermons, their cold trifles and vain follies being
neglected and left of. But that all these things may stand and be of force
before God also, there yet remains one thing, which pertayneth hereunto,
which is that that follows.

And of faith unfeigned.
For as I have said, albeit I have a good conscience before men, Our old Adam
does hinder us that we can not attain to perfect purity and holiness.
and do exercise love out of a pure heart, yet the old Adam, that is, flesh
and blood remain in me subject to sins, whereby it comes to pass that I
am not altogether holy and pure. And as Paul says Gal. 5: The flesh lusts
against the spirit, etc. And Romans 7. he affirms that he must fight a daily
fight against him self, because he can not do that which is good, and yet he
would willingly do it. The spirit in deed would very willingly live purely and
perfectly according to the word of God, but the rebellious flesh resists the
desire thereof, assailing us with many and great tentations, that we should
seek honor, wealth, riches, pleasure, and should become slothful and
negligent in our state and duty. So there remains a continual fight in us,
because of the vnpurenes of our person, Although we have a good conscience, and
do exercise love out of a pure heart before men, yet the same can not stand
before God.
wherein there is not yet sincere pureness, nor a good conscience and perfect
love, unless there be perhaps somewhat before men. But before God many things
are found lacking in us, many things are worthy of blame, although all things
be perfect before men. For examples sake: although David can obtain that
confidence before men, that he can be reprehended of no man, and the holy
Prophets Esaias, Jeremy, etc: do glory and are sure, whatsoever they have done
according to their duty, is right and well done, seeing it is the word and
commandment of God, wherein they have exercised them selves with a pure heart
and a good conscience, yet can they not stand by this confidence before the
judgment of God, but are compelled to say: if we should strive with thee in
judgment, then no man shall have so good a conscience or so pure a heart, which
does not dread thy judgment, and acknowledge him self to be worthy of
reprehension and blame. For God has reserved that prerogative unto him self,
that he may contend in judgment with every one, albeit he be holy, and accuse
him of deadly sin: neither is there any so holy, whom he may not judge and
condemn as worthy of destruction. Wherefore although both the heart be pure and
the conscience good before men, yet must thou endeavor to attain unto this
also, that the same may be likewise good before God, that he may not find fault
with them, but that they may be safe and quiet from his judgment, as they are
before men.

Hereunto now pertayneth the third part, that is faith. The third part.
And this is the principal part and chief precept, containing all the rest in
it, that we may know, that where love is not yet perfect, the heart not
sufficiently pure, and the conscience not quiet, and God does yet find some
thing which is worthy blame, where the world can find fault with nothing,
faith must moreover come, and such a faith, which is not feigned, and defiled
with confidence of a man's own holiness. For wheresoever this is not, there the
heart is never purified before God, neither shall the conscience be able to
stand, if they be examined by severe judgment, and exact censure. Men in
deed shall not justly blame me, albeit I glory, that I have served them by
preaching, helping, governing, and by doing the duty of an ouerseer or ruler,
etc: with all faithfulness. And if I have done any thing more or less then I
ought, I am sorry at my heart, for I would very willingly have done all things
that I ought. Wherefore I am quiet and already excused, neither have they any
more, which they may rightly require of me, but are enforced to acquit and
discharge me. But here I must attain unto this also, that my heart be so pure,
and my conscience so good before God, that he may not by any means accuse and
condemn me. Howbeit we find not this in ourselves, We can not of our selves
attain to a pure heart and a good conscience before God.
although we may glory somewhat thereof before the world. I must therefore
obtain some other thing whereunto I may trust, if I shall come into peril,
and within the throwing of the dart, as it is commonly said, and I must say to
my fearful and terrified conscience, I have done that which I have been able,
and who knows how often I have done less then I ought? for I could not see
and mark all things, as David also says Psalm. 19: Who can understand his
faltes? Therefore I can lay no foundation of trust upon my own holiness and
pureness. Well, I have the word, so live, love, and have a good conscience, which
is pure and holy. But this I want, that I can not conclude, that that is in my
heart, neither do I find so good a conscience in me, as the law requires of
me. For there is no man living in the earth, which can say this truly, I know
that I have done all things, and that I do owe nothing before God. But the
most holy ones must say thus: I have done surely according to my ability that
which I have been able, but I have offended much oftener then I know.
Wherefore our own conscience does witness against us, accusing and conuincing
us, although before the world we are most free from reprehension or blame. For
it must follow the word which says: this thou should have done, this thou
should have left undone. It can not avoid the judgment of this, nor
answer to the accusation thereof, but is at the least wise enforced to stand
in an uncertainty, being wholly wrapped in douting. But if it dout, then is it
by and by convinced: for it stands not before God, but flies and trembles.

By what means we attain to such pureness and a good conscience as can stand
before God.
Wherefore the principal part of our doctrine must here help us, to wit, that
our Lord Jesus Christ being sent of the father, did come into the world and
has suffered and died for us. Whereby he has reconciled the good will and
favor of the father to us, his wrath being appeased, and does now sit at
the right hand of the father, having regard of us as our Savior, and as a
continual Mediator and Intercessour for us, making intercession for us, as
for them which can not have and obtain of them selves such pureness and a good
conscience. Therefore by his help and benefit we may say before God:
although I am not pure, neither have a good conscience, yet I cleave to him by
faith, which has perfect pureness and a good conscience, which he gageth for
me, or rather which he gives unto me. For he alone is he, of whom we read
written, as Peter, and Esaie chapt. 53 say: who did no sin, neither was
there guile found in his mouth. And this praise belongs only unto him,
neither has he any need to pray, forgive us our dettes, neither of that
article of the Creed, I believe the forgiveness of sins, etc: but he is free
and quiet in perpetual, pure and perfect righteousness and pureness, unto whose
charge none can lay any thing, nor accuse his conscience of any crime, not man,
not the deuell, no not God himself: for he himself is God, who himself can
not accuse himself.

And this is called faith neither colored nor fained, which, the conscience
striving and trembling, dares come forth in the sight of God, and say:
Almighty God, I am innocent before the world and quiet in mind, so that noe
man can lay any thing to my charge, or find fault with me. For albeit I have
not done all things, yet I ask pardon of every one, that he will forgive me
for God his sake, eue^ as I again forgive all. By this means I have cut of
the complaints of all, who have no more which they may rightly lay against me.
But before thee I must lay aside this trust and confidence, and must wholly
acknowledge the guiltines of innumerable sins, and say as David said Psalm.
143: Lord enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified. Wherefore I can not contend with thee, if thou
requirest an account of my life. We must appeal from the judgment seat to the
mercy seat.
But I appeal from ye judgment seat to the mercy seat, I do easily suffer,
that I be dealt with according to law and right before the judgment seat of
the world, and I will willingly answer, and will do what I am able: Howbeit
before thee I will not come into judgment, but I desire grace, which I take
hold of on every side. The judgment seat.
For thus the Scripture teaches me, that God has set two seats before men:
the one a judgment seat, for them which are yet secure and intractable, and
acknowledge not their sins, neither will confess and acknowledge them: the
other a mercy seat, The mercy seat.
for miserable and fearful consciences, which feel their sins, dread the
judgment of God, and do earnestly make request for grace. And this mercy seat
is Christ himself, as Paul witnesses Romans 3. whom God has set forth unto us,
that we might have refuge unto him, being not able to stand before God by our
own power. Unto him I will apply my self, if I have done or do less the^ is
meet: and how great pureness and goodness soever my heart and conscience have
before men, I will have it here to be altogether nothing, and hidden, and
covered as it were with a ^ant, yea with a fair heaven, which may mightily
defend it, which is called grace and remission of sins. Under the defense
thereof my heart and conscience must creep, and remain safe and quiet. For so
he commanded his Apostles to preach and publish, that through his name all
that believe in him, shall receive remisson of sins. Again, He that shall
believe and be baptized, shall be saved. And Ioh. 3. he says: God so loved the
world, that he has given his only begotten Son, that who soever believes
in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. Therefore God has set
forth the mercy seat unto us, whereunto he leads us from the judgment seat.
Let us leave other before the judgment seat, namely those proud holy ones,
contemners and persecuters of the word of God, where they shall hear sentence
according to their deeds. We will suffer these to abide in their circle,
until they have humbled themselves: but we will not abide in this circle, but
will depart from it as far as we shall be able, into the circle of the mercy
feat, unto which we do appeal. Neither have we invented this of our own
brain, but it is the word of God himself, which threatens horrible judgment
to them, which come with their own holiness, and trusting thereunto, do hope
that they shall be able to stand before God the judge, neglecting the mercy seat
of Christ. For the sentence stands, that they shall be set before the judgment
seat, as Christ says Ioh. 3: He that believes not is condemned already,
because he has not believed in the name of that only begotten Son of God.
He that believes in him is not condemned, that is, shall not come to the
judgment seat, but to the mercy seat, where there is no wrath or rigor, but
grace and forgiveness of sins, all things being remitted which be not pure,
yea being blotted out and so consumed, as a drop of water is consumed of the
heat of the sun. For where the mercy seat reigns, there is nothing else, but
mere forgeuenes and remission of sins.

This therefore being known, we must exactly understand the difference
between the Law and the Gospel, whereof we often teach. The office of the
Law.
The law draws us to the judgment seat, requiring of us integrity of life,
love out of a pure heart and a good conscience, it makes us also to exercise
our selves therein, and must go no further. But when it shall come and accuse
thee, and will reason with thee, and have those things to be performed which it
requires, then shall thou be greatly troubled. For albeit thou have done them,
yet art thou not able to stand before God, before whose judgment seat, many
things are yet found wanting in thee, which should have bin done of thee, and
thou have left them undone, neither are they known unto thy self. The Law will
drive us unto desperation, vnl^^s we can appeal from ye judgment seat to the
mercy seat.
Whither then will thou turn thee? Here the Law urges thee by all means,
and thine own conscience being witness, accuses thee, requiring the sentence
of the judge against thee. Then must thou despeire, there is no counsel or
help to be had, except thou know to fly from the judgment seat to the
mercy seat, as for example: Admit some Bishop die in his own holiness, who
while he lived was as it seemed, of a good life, and acknowledged Christ no
otherwise then a cruel judge (as it has bin hitherto preached of him, neither
has he bin otherwise set forth, as he is also wont to be unto such, not of his
own nature, for in deed he is most gracious and comfortable, but because they
esteem him for no other in their heart) behold this man is a hinderaunce unto
himself, that he can not obtain any grace. For he knows no difference of
the judgment seat and the mercy seat, yea he is altogether ignorant, whether
there be a mercy seat, from which he so erreth, and must be bound to the
judgment seat.

But we teach thus, How Christ must be learned and considered of.
that Christ is so to be learned and considered, that we be most certainly
persuaded that he sits before miserable and trembling consciences, that
believe in him, not as an angry judge, which commands forthwith to carry
violently them that be guilty unto punishment, but as a gentle, loving, and
comfortable Mediator, between my fearful conscience and God, which says
unto me: If thou be a sinner, and astonished, and the deuell labors to draw
thee to the judgment seat, then see that thou fly unto me, and fear no wrath
or anger. Wherefore? Even because I sit here, that, if thou believe in me, I
may make intercession for thee to my father, that no anger and severity may
hurt thee: for all anger and punishment shall be sooner laid upon me, then be
borne of thee. Howbeit that can not be: for he is the only beloved son, in
whom all grace and favor dwells, whom as often as the father does behold, he
can not but replenish both heaven and earth with grace and favor, and forget
all wrath and displeasure. And what soever he shall ask of his father, that he
shall forthwith obtain with out all repulse or denial. So by faith we are
made wholly blessed and safe, subject no more to any damnation, yet not for our
own holiness and pureness, but for Christ's sake, to whom we cleave by faith as
to our mercy seat, being assuredly persuaded, that with him there remains no
anger, but mere love, and pardon and forgiveness of sins. Thus the heart is
purified before God, and the conscience made good and quiet, not in respect had
of mine own pureness of life led before the world, but by trust and confidence
of that excellent treasure, which my heart apprehends, which is unto me in
steed of a pledge and fulness, when as before God I am not able to pay.

We must especially take heed, that our faith be not false or feyned.
But herein the whole force of the matter consists, that we do again and
again take heed, that our faith be not false, or as Paul speaks, fained.
For if this err, and deceive us, all things deceive us. For there have bin
many in all ages, as there be also at this day, which can speak many things
of faith, and will be masters not only of the law, but even of the Gospel
also. Who say the same that we do, that faith performs and does all things,
but that the Law and good works are also to be joined unto it, and that
otherwise, if these be not added, faith avails nothing. In which words they
mix and mingle together our life and works, and Christ. But this is not
purely and syncerely to have taught faith, but to have colored, defiled and
corrupted faith, so that it can no more be called faith, but a feined color
and counterfecting of faith, the trust and confidence of the heart standing not
purely toward Christ, as the only mercy seat, but being grounded upon our one
holiness, as being able to stand before the judgment seat. Wherefore doing
thus, we are most rightly cast of before God, and condemned unto destruction
whereof we are most worthy. For if faith must be pure and void of all
counterfecting and faining, then these two things, Christ and my works must
be rightly discerned and severed one from the other. For this is plain even to
him that is blind, that Christ and his works are not my life and my works,
but are separated from the Law and from the works of all men, yea and that by
a greater distaunce, then man is unlike or differs from man. For neither can
I say, that I and Caesar or the Bishop of Rome are the same thing, yet I am much
nearer and liker unto either of them, then a mortal man and a sinner is unto
Christ the Lord, who is not only a pure and holy man, free from all spot and
blot, but is moreover God also. Therefore let the Law and the pureness of thy
heart, yea and thy good conscience avail in earth only toward men: But where
the mercy seat is, to wit at the right hand of the father, and the Mediator
between thee and God, thither no man's works and merits ought to have access,
much less be they there of any force or value. Wherefore Christ is purely to
be separated from all my life, deeds and works, and we must without exception
conclude, that he is an other thing then our life led before men with a pure
heart and a good conscience, albeit it be led even perfectly and without blame.
For it being presented before God, and by the law brought to the judgment
seat, I am condemned and lost. But Christ is the mercy seat, and all that
cleave unto him by faith, can not be condemned and judged. So the judgment
seat together with the law and all my life go into one part: but my faith
must fly and lep far unto an other part, and join it self unto him which
is pure, and has no sin, of whom the Scripture speaks: he that believes
in him shall not be confounded. Because he is present in the sight of the
father, and makes intercession for me. Moreover he gives me his own pureness
and holiness, that being clothed and adorned therewith, I may be able to stand
before God, and all wrath and displeasure may be taken away, in steed whereof
I may enjoy mere love and favor.

Lo, thus faith remains pure and free from counterfecting, for it rests
not upon my works, that because of them it should behoue God to be gentle and
favorable unto me, as a false and fained faith does, which mingleth together
man's merits and the grace of God, and although it hold the words of Christ, yet
has it the confidence and trust of the heart reposed in it self, so, A fained
faith is no sure foundation, but fails the^ that trust unto it.
that it is certain, that it is only a color which can not long continue.
For the matter comes at the last to this point, that believing that God is
favorable unto thee because of thy life led without fault or blame, thou must
despeire and say: who knows what I have done? whereby am I certain that I
have neglected nothing through carele^nes, or that nothing is wanting in me? In
this doutfulnes of mind the foundation fails, slideing away under thee like
unto sand moved or stirred, and so faith is of no force or value at all.
Wherefore it is not unfitly called fained and painted faith, through which one
sees as it were through a lattis or painted glass, through which the thing
that is seen represents the color of the glass, and yet is not in deed of
that color. So they also believe that that affection is in God, that he
vouchsaueth to regard our works and merits. Which they paint forth according
to their own opinion and dreams, which are utterly false, rash and unadvised.
And so iudgeing God and all things according to them, they see only as it were
through a lattis or painted glass. But so only thou shall behold him with
pure and clear eyes, if thou do well separate the judgment seat and the mercy
seat one from the other, that heaven with the stars thereof may remain pure
to grace and remission of sins obtained by the Mediator, where Christ
reigns with his works, and the earth also with her trees and herbs, whither
we must be referred with our works. The matter I say must be brought of us to
that pass, if we will stand with a right and an unfeigned faith before God,
that we do purely distinguish and sever our selves, our life, and Christ or the
mercy seat: and he that will not do this, but presents himself before the
judgment seat with a bold courage, shall feel the reward of his rashness. I my
self have bin in that danger, and as it were a mouse having tasted pitch have
run away, rejoicing greatly that liberty was given me to attain to the
mercy seat, and now I am enforced to say, that albeit I have lived very well
before men, yet all things committed of me contrariwise, do remain beneath
under the judgment seat, to be punished according to the sentence and
judgment of God. Only Christ is our comfort and means whereby we attain
salvation.
Now I have no other comfort, nor no other help and counsel of my salvation,
then that Christ is my mercy seat, who has never offended, has defiled
himself with no sin, who died and rose again for me, and sits now at the
right hand of the father, and defends me under his shadow and protection,
that I need not doubt, that I am by his benefit and intercession safe before
God from all wrath and terror of judgment. Thus faith remains in all
things pure, setting no other thing before it self, whereunto it may boldly
trust, but Christ alone.

Now he that knew this well, should be a man of a resolute mind. For all other
have to do with a fained faith, boasting many things of faith, but mingling
all things together, like as vintners mix wine with water, by this that they
say, if thou live thus, God will be favorable unto thee, and they make the
judgment seat of the mercy seat, and the mercy seat of the judgment seat,
which by no means can be, for the judgment seat shall remain, etc. Wherefore
separate these two one from the other as far as thou shall be able, that they
come not together, namely, thy life and holiness together with the judgment
seat into one place, which may drive and enforce thee to have a good
conscience, and to lead an upright life before men. But offer thy sins to the
mercy seat to be transferred into an other place, where God lovingly receiving
thee, will embrace thee as a beloved son, and will never remember more any
wrath or sins. If such doctrine of faith were set forth unto men, then should
it be excellently well done, and all other things should follow of their own
accord, as pureness of heart and goodness of conscience, through right and
perfect love. For who soever is by faith quiet in his heart, and assured that
he has God favorable unto him, who is not angry with him, albeit he has
deserved his wrath diverse ways, he does all things with a glad and cherefull
mind. Moreover he lives so also toward men, that he is loving and beneficial
toward all, although they be not worthy of love. He is quiet toward God
through Christ the Mediator, who will not throw him down hedlong into hell,
but does lovingly favor him, and lifts him up into heaven. And this is the
chief quietness, and principal point and foundation of our salvation.
Afterward he does in his life show himself dutyfull also toward his
neighbor, doing all the best things he is able unto him, what soever his
state or duty commands or requires. And when he does less then is meet,
he asks pardon of his negligence before God and men, so that there is left
occasion neither to him, nor to the world afterward to rebuke him, power also
to devour him is taken from hell, and to tear him in pieces, from the deuell.
Thus a man is said to be in all things perfect, How we become perfect.
toward men by love, and toward God not by the law, but by Christ, whom he
apprehends by his faith, as the mercy seat: Which gageth his holiness for the
believers, or rather gives it to them, so, that in him they have all things
that are necessary to salvation.

Now this is right and pure doctrine, which should be exercised, and taught
unto men distinctly, that they might know how they may be able to stand both
before God and men, that faith and love be not mingled together, or life
referred both to God and men. This ought to have bin performed of those
glorious and arrogant teachers, seeing that they will be counted masters of the
law, that the difference of the law and faith might be well known unto all.
Very hard to learn ye true doctrine of faith.
For although it be taught and repeted with never so great diligence, yet
notwithstanding it is very hard to be well and thoroughly learned, especially to
us which have bin instructed and trained up in the doctrine of works, and led
only to the law and our own works. To these may be added our nature also,
very prone and ready by it self hereunto, and now brought into a custom,
whereby it is confirmed, and in continuance of time turns the heart also
into exercise and use, so, that we can not abstain, nor think otherwise, but,
that God will be favorable unto us, which have done so great works, and have
led our life so without blame or fault. Therefore we must strive against both
our nature and custom. For surely it is a very hard thing to think or be
persuaded otherwise, and so purely to put a difference between faith and love,
the filth still hanging upon us and cleaving unto us, albeit we be now in
faith, so that our heart can scarce rule it self, that it say not: so long
time have I taught the Gospel, so have I lived, such great works have I done,
etc. And we would very willingly have God to regard our life, and turn his
mercy seat for our cause into a judgment seat. Thou may use this boasting
toward men, I have done well to all as I have bin able, and if any thing be
wanting, I as yet will endeavor to make a recompense. But if thou be minded to
go unto God, I advise thee to cease from such arrogant boasting, and think to
appeal from judgment to grace.

Let who will begin and prove this thing, he shall at length see and try, A
hard thing to trust nothing to our own works and holiness.
how grievous and heard it is, for a man that has bin occupied all his life
time in the works of his own holiness, to escape out, and with all his heart
by faith to cleave to this one Mediator. I my self have now preached the
Gospel almost twenty years, and have bin exercised in the same daily by
reading and writing, so that I may well seem to be ryd of this wicked opinion.
Notwithstanding I yet now and then feel the same old filth to cleave to my
heart, whereby it comes to pass that I would willingly so have to do with
God, that I might bring some thing with my self, because of which he should
for my holiness sake give me his grace. And I can scarce be brought to commit my
self with all confidence to mere grace, which I should do: for we ought to
fly only to the mercy seat, forasmuch as God has set it before us for a
sanctuary, which must be the refuge of all them that shall be saved. Wherefore
it is not to be merueled at, if it be grievous unto others, so purely to
apprehend and lay hold of faith: but especially to such as be yet hindered and
entangled of deuelish preachers, of whom Paul speaks, which cry out against
the doctrine of faith, and in these words urge the works of the Law, Do
this and thou shall live: Also, if thou will enter into life, keep the
commandments, etc. Which in deed are true and right, if thou did also
rightly understand them. Declare unto me the true meaning of these words,
otherwise I know sufficiently already, that I ought to be righteous and keep
the commandments. But how must I attain hereunto? or what is it to be
righteous? If thou say that it is, to have a good conscience and a pure
heart, and to do all things, that God has commanded: Well, be it so, but
hear ye then, go to, perform me that, or at least show one, that dares say
that he has performed it. For thou shall not yet so purify my heart and
conscience with thy doctrine, that God can not accuse and condemn me. But now
the Law (as it has bin sufficiently declared) requires such a heart, as has
a good conscience before God. How therefore do we obtain such a conscience?
This is the question and the cause, whereof the controversy is. Truly it
comes not hereof, How we obtain a good conscience.
because thou teach the judgment seat, that is, the Law, but from hence,
for that we have a pure and unfeigned faith, which lays hold of Christ, in
whom it most fully obtains all things which the Law requires. So at length
all things are brought to pass in me having a good conscience, inasmuch as I
am now made righteous and justified before God. For although that many things
be as yet found wanting in me, yet he stands on my side, who has so much
righteousness, as wherewith he is able to supply both mine and all men's defects.

Thus we show the way whereby we are made righteous before God, when as they,
when they teach best of all, Teachers and vrgers of the Law.
show only the way to attain to honesty and righteousness which is of force
and value before men, contending that it ought to be of force before God also,
mingling together all things in one, inasmuch as they have no certain
knowledge thereof, understanding not what they say or what they affirm. For,
to what end tends this thy immoderate cry? He that will enter into life, let
him keep the commandments, etc. in which words thou shall not show the way
to attain righteousness: for descend a little into thy self, and examine thy
self diligently, then shall thou find thy self to have bin in time past
conceived and borne in sins, and to live in the same now, and not to be able
to perform that which the law requires. Why therefore do thou seduce
other with vain words, saying? be thou righteous and thou shall be saved,
which is to no purpose, neither follows there any fruit thereof, the way
being not showed by which we attain to justification? I hear the words well,
what things the law requires, but how shall we attain unto ability to
fulfill them? Then speak thou to me again and say, thou must do good
works. But how shall I stand before the judgment of God, if I have long and
much wrought good works, and am righteous before men, as thou teach me?
how shall I be certain, that I seem such a one to God also? For here my
heart and conscience be ready to witness the contrary against me.

True doctrine concerning Christian righteousness
Howbeit I should have bin thus taught of thee, as Paul commonly teaches, that
righteousness must proceed from faith unfeigned, and before all things the
mercy seat must be laid hold of, from whence all things that are wanting in
us are to be taken. And so in deed these words, keep the commandments of
God, are rightly understood. For the law, requires perfect righteousness in
thee, being of force as well before God as before men: thou having obtained
this, go forth into the company and assembly of men, and exercise love, and
do good works. By this order and means something is brought to pass, and
such sayings of the Scripture are fulfilled. For so man does that which the
law requires, first before God, not by his own strength or virtues, How a
Christian is perfectly righteous.
but by Christ, without whom we can do nothing before God, and secondly by his
own endeavor before men. And he is now perfectly righteous, inwardly by faith
in Christ, and outwardly also by his works, yet so, that there is place among
men for mutual pardoning of offenses. Therefore the righteousness of Christians
does much more consist in forgiueing, then in their own works. Those vain
praters do pervert the order of this doctrine, and without preaching of
forgiveness, do teach that works only are to be urged.

Lo, thus Saint Paul reprehendeth the error and ignorance of them, which
speak much of the law, and repete it in daily sermons, Vain teachers.
and yet they themselves do not understand or show the way, how the law must
be fulfilled, knowing nothing so well as to babble forth and often to repete
these words, that the law, the commandments are to be kept, if thou will be
saved, good works must be done, etc. As they do at this day fill all books
with such confusion of words, and in all their sermons utter nothing else, then
such vain babbling, which they themselves understand not. But they never say
word of those things whereof Paul here speaks, namely of the sum of
Christian doctrine, how love must flow out of a pure heart, a good conscience,
and faith unfeigned, they say no more, but keep the commandments. They
leueling at the true mark do never hit it: therefore they corrupt and fulsifie
all things, love, the heart, the conscience etc. For the head of the fountain
is wanting, that is, sincere faith, which if it be not right and sound, all
things must needs be corrupt, which shall flow and proceed from it. And what
soever they teach, it is a conceit of their own imagination, and like to
delusions, not unlike also to those things, that are seen through a lattis or
glass, which resemble the color of the clear glass, and yet in deed are
not of that color. They think that God will regard them, when they live so
before men, as it seems good to their obscure opinion. But if God were of
that opinion, he might then have well kept still Christ and the Gospel. For
what need or necessity should move him, to send Christ from heaven, who
should purchase that unto us with his precious blood, which we our selves have
before with us? He surely should be the foolishest of all men, which would
pour forth a precious treasure, which no man needs.

Thus thou see how these men teach their own dreams, whereof they
themselves know or have tried no certainty, neither do any thing else but fill
men with errors, being not able to declare, how that which they teach is to be
attained unto. They draw men unto works, whereby they confirm them in their
old nature and custom, out of which they were to be drawn. These truly are
grievous and odious men, and not unworthily very sharply accused and
reprehended of Paul: and it appears that they were of no small authority and
estimation, seeing that he pronounces of them, that they were called and would
be counted doctors of the Law, and far greater and worthier then the
Apostles themselves.

Wherefore we must endeavor to lay up and print this text even in the bottom of
our heart: for it is excellently well ordered, and is pure and perfect
doctrine, teaching how we must be righteous before God and men, as the Law
requires, that these three may be as it were conioine in us, namely, a pure
heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned: and that our life may flow out of
all these, and be occupied and led in them: then have we attained, and
fulfilled the meaning of the Law. Howbeit we must most diligently take heed,
and endeavor to draw Christ unto the Law, who is the end and fullfilling of
the Law, and our righteousness and fulness before God, which we find not in our
selves, and without faith shall never find, albeit the Law be taught and
often repeted without understanding and knowledge. And these things may
suffize to have bin spoken at this present for the exposition of this place.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, OF THE QVESTION OF THE PHARISEES, AND answer
of Christ concerning giving tribute to Caesar.
Matthew. 22. Verse 15. THen went the Pharisees, and took counsel how they
might tangle him in talk.

16. And they sent unto him their disciples with the Herodians, saying:
Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God truly,
neither carest for any man: for thou considerest not the person of men.

17. Tell us therefore, how think thou? Is it lawful to give tribute unto
Caesar or not?

18. But Jesus perceived their wickedness and said: Why tempt ye me, ye
hypocrites?

19. Show me the tribute money. And they brought him a penie.

20. And he said unto them: Whose is this image and superscription?

21. They said unto him, Cesars, Then said he unto them: Give therefore to
Caesar the things which are Cesars, and give unto God, those things which are
Gods.

22. And when they heard it, they merueiled, and left him, and went their way.


Man's wisdom and reason is not able to prevail against the wisdom of God.
IN this text is set forth unto us, how subtle reason and man's wisdom agree
with the wisdom of God, and how foully reason stumbleth, when it strives to
be even most subtle and wise, as it here falls out with the Pharisees, who
notwithstanding were the best and most wise of the Jews, which even by this
their subtlety they declare: nevertheless their wisdom is here proved to be
foolishnes. They could blame Christ neither for his preaching nor for his
works, and yet would they willingly have had occasion to put him to death,
wherefore they thought to set upon him most craftily and wilely, propounding a
subtle question unto him, the subtlety whereof was such, that man's reason was
not able to comprehend it, then which also a subtiller could not be invented:
and thus they speak unto him:

The subtle question of the Pharisees propounded unto Christ.
Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God truly,
neither carest for any man: for thou considerest not the person of men. Tell
us therefore, how think thou? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar or
not. Here think they, we shall entrappe him. For he shall be compelled to
answer that tribute is either to be given, or not to be given. If he affirm
that it is to be given, we have overcome him: but if he deny that it is to be
given, then is he guilty of death. Whereas they say, Master, they will thereby
move him, and as it were constrain him to answer the truth. But whereas they
say, We know that thou art true, they do thereby put him in mind of his duty.
Whither therefore should Christ turn himself? for there seems to be no way
for him to escape, yet he would not for all that fall into their net. Was not
this a subtle question? Do they not show themselves to have bin sufficient
crafty and wily ones? for which way soever the Lord had answered, he had bin
taken. Was not this done also full warely and circumspectly? for they associate
to themselves the ministers of Herod, thinking no other but to entrappe him
with deceit, that he should not by any means escape, thus casting in their
minds: Now we will meet with him well enough, if he deny that tribute is to
be given, the Herodians are present, which shall forth with put him to death as
a seditious fellow, and one that resists the Roman Empire. But if he affirm
that tribute is to be given, he speaks against the liberty of the Jews,
then will we stir up the people against him. For the Jewish people would be
free, and have their king of their own stock, even as it was promised them
both of Moses and God, that their kingdom should continue until the time of
the true king, that is, of Christ. Even as the Patriarch did prophecy thereof:
Genesis 49 10.
The scepter shall not depart from Judah and a law giver from between his feet,
until Silo come. And therefore God did choose this people specially to
himself, and made a kingdom of them, only for Christ's cause. Moreover there
were many sentences in the Scripture which declared that they should serve
none, For they should be the chiefest and not the lowest, etc. Deuteronomy. 28.13.
This and such like sayings the Scribes had beaten into the peoples heads,
wherewith they were greatly disturbed: even as at this day it is put into the
peoples mind, that the Church cannot err. Hereupon the Pharisees thought
thus: If he affirm that tribute must be given, he blasphemeth G^d, he shall be
guilty of death, as one injurious to God, and then shall be stoned of the people.
For God has granted and promised liberty unto this people, and they were all
even in the midst of captivity the people of God. Howbeit at that time they
wanted a king, as they do at this day. Wherefore diverse tumults, seditions, and
vprores were stirred up among them. For they were taught by the law, that they
should have a king of their own flesh and stock, as it is said before,
wherefore they did incessantly strive against strange kings and governments,
until not a few of them at times were beaten and slain. Neither did this
happen seldom times, for they were a stiffenecked, obstinate, and unruly
nation, and therefore the Romans which at that time did bear rule over them,
did very circumspectly govern them, and divided the land into four charges
of government, that being on every side kept in awe by the gouerners and
presidents, they might not so soon flock together and move sedition, and that
they might also be more easily resisted if at any time they should rise against
the Roman Empire. Wherefore Pilate was appointed of the Romans lieftenant of
Judea, Herod Tetrarch of Galile, his brother Philip Tetrarch of Iturea, and of
the country of Trachonitis, and Lysanias the Tetrarch of Abilene, as Luke
rehearses them. And all this was done that they might keep the Jews under,
whereupon the Jews were inflamed with anger, and in a rage and fury, but
specially in the time of Christ they would willingly have had a king.

The subtle imaginations of the Pharisees against Christ.
Wherefore the Pharisees having found out this devise, thought thus with
themselves: Well, we have the matter now at a good stay. The Romans challenge
to themselves the government, now if he answer unto the question that tribute
is not to be given, the lieftenant is at hand and ready to put him to death: if
he answer that it must be given, he shall stir up the people against
himself, and so we shall assuredly by this means entrappe him: thus they
supposed that either they should find cause of death in the Lord, or at the
least make his doctrine to be nothing set by of the people. As the Jews here
do, so also do we, the chief and necessary things being left, we are
occupied about other matters not necessary. The Pharisees here move a
question, whether they be free or otherwise: forasmuch as they had the Law and
the word of God, they supposed that they ought to be subject to none, but to
their own King, yet they were now compelled to obey Caesar Emperor of Rome.
They had Scripture concerning the love of God and their neighbor, but that
being left, they are occupied about other matters. It was promised unto them,
if they obeyed the precepts and commandments of God, that they should then be
a free people, they disobey and neglect Gods commandments, and yet
notwithstanding they will be free, and have their own king. In like manner
falls it out with us, we earnestly challenge to our selves Christian liberty,
and yet we think, that if we do those things that seem good in our own
brain and fantasy, we are thereby Christians, both faith and charity being
of us neglected. But what does Christ, the Pharisees so subtly setting upon
him? he strikes them with their own sword, and entrappeth them in their own
devise, whereby they thought to have entrapped him, aunswering neither of those
things which they hoped he would, as the Evangelist does more at large
describe, saying:

But Jesus perceived their wickedness and said: Why tempt ye me, The wisdom of
Christ in confounding the craft and subtilty of the Pharisees
ye hypocrites? Show me the tribute money. And they brought him a penny. And he
said unto the^: Whose is this image and superscriptio^? They said unto him,
Cesars. Here thou plainly see the wisdom and marvelous dexterity of Christ,
he wills the tribute money to be showed unto him, and asks of the image and
superscription thereof. They aunswering that it is Cesars, he very well and most
freely infers, that they are under Caesar, unto whom they were compelled to
pay tribute. As if he said: If ye have so let in Caesar, that his money is
coined with you, surely he bears rule over you, as though he should say: It
is come to pass through your own fault that Caesar rules over you. What
should they say or do unto this question? They merueiled and went their ways,
they thought that they should notably have overcome him, but for all their
subtlety and wisdom they were deceived.

This is written for our comfort, The wisdom and strength of Christians
that we which are Christians may know that we have such wisdom, as exceeds
all wisdom, such strength and righteousness, as whereunto no strength and
righteousness of man is like. For against the holy Ghost there is no counsel:
this power and strength we obtain through Christ, that we may tread sin
under foot, and triumph over death. When Christ dwells in us by faith, we
have him which brings to pass such things, howbeit they are not thoroughly
felt but in time of tentation. Wherefore when I stand in need, he is present,
and gives unto me strength, that I may courageously pass through. We must not
therefore be afraid that our doctrine shall perish and be put to ignominy and
shame. For let all the wise men of the world rise against the word of God, yea
and be never so circumspect, and set them selves against it, yet shall they
have the foil and be overcome. It may be that they bark and bite, so that it
seems unto men, as though they would destroy the Gospel, but when they have
set them selves against it to extinguish it, they shall no whit prevail, but
in the snare that they have laid for others, they themselves shall at length be
taken. As we see here in this text, and commonly in Paul, but specially in the
history of S. Steven, where we read how vainly his adversaries used ye
Scriptures, yea those that they used were against them selves. For the Jews
did accuse Steven, that he had spoken both against the temple, and against God
which commanded the temple to be builded, bringing and alleging Scriptures,
whereby they thought to convince and condemn him. But Steven being full of the
holy Ghost, showed them in order out of the Scripture, how that God dwells
not in temples made with hands: David would have built him an house, but God
refused it. What was the cause hereof? A long time before David was borne, God
dwelt among his people. He surely should be a miserable God which should need
a house. And so he confirms by many histories that God does not dwell in
houses or temples made with hands. What should the Jews do here? they did
manifestly acknowledge their own Scripture, which they had brought against
Steven. So all they shall be put to shame and overthrown, which set them
selves against the wisdom and word of God.

The wisedo^ and power of ye world shall never be able to extinguish or
suppress the Gospel.
Wherefore let no man be afraid, albeit all the wisdom and power of the world
strive against the Gospel, although it would extinguish it even by sheding of
blood. For the more blood that is shed, so much more is the number of
Christians increased. The blood of Christians says Tertullian, is seed
whereof Christians grow. Satan must be drowned in the blood of Christians.
Wherefore it is not violence and force that is able to suppress the Gospel:
for it is like unto a palm tree, which has this nature and quality, that
albeit a weight be laid upon it, yet it always rises and lifts up it self
against the weight. Such a nature also has the Gospel, for the more it is
striuen against, so much more are the roots thereof spread abroad, and the
more mightily that it is oppressed, by so much does it more and more grow and
increase. Wherefore there is no cause that we should be afraid of power, Not
persecution and trouble, but too much prosperity is to be feared of Christians
but rather that we should fear prosperity and merry days, which are able to
hurt us more then anguish and persecution. Neither let us be afraid of the
subtlety and wisdom of the world, for they can not hurt us, yea the more that
they strive against the truth, so much more pure and clear is the truth made.
Nothing therefore can come better to the Gospel, then when the world with his
force and wisdom sets it self against it. The more vehemently sin and
Satan do fight against my conscience, so much stronger is my righteousness
made. For if sins do urge and disquiet me, I do then more ardently pray and
cry unto God, and so my faith is more and more increased and strengthened. 2.
Cor. 12.9.
This is that which S. Paul means when he says: Power is made perfect
through weakness. Forasmuch therefore as we have so great a treasure, which is
increased and strengthened by persecutions and adversity, there is no cause
that we should be afraid, but rather that we should with a cheerful mind
rejoice in tribulation, as S. Paul says Romans 5. according as the Apostles
did, who with great joy departing from the counsels, Act. 5.41.
gave God thanks, that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for the name
of Jesus.

If the devil were endued with such wisdom, that he would be quiet, and
suffer the Gospel to have free course, he should not suffer so much loss. For
when the Gospel is not impugned, it is as it were wasted with rust, neither
has it occasion to show forth the virtue and power thereof. We live therefore
here secure as yet, for no man strives against us, wherefore we continue still
as we were before, yea (alas) we become worse and worse. Whereas some of our
adversaries have set upon us by writing, that pertains to a few. For inasmuch
as they have written against us, they have thereby done nothing else, but as it
were blown the fire, but if we had been thrown into the fire, or slain with
the sword, the number of Christians would be greater among us. Wherefore this
is a comfort unto us, The comfort of Christians in tentation.
if we at any time be tempted, that Christ is ready to help us, and reigns
among us, yea he is so near unto us, that always through him we may overcome,
as long as we believe and trust in him: Howbeit when we are touched with no
adversity, he does little or nothing, but when we are fought against and
oppressed, he is present, and brings all our enemies to confusion.

We have moreover to learn here that they which are wise and mightier then
other, The most wise and mighty of the world do oftentimes strive most against
God.
which are endued with the chief gifts of understanding and nature more then
other, which excel in greater industry, learning and readier ca^^citie then
other, which are fit to ouersee other, and can govern all things best, that
they I say, do many times most of all other resist God and faith, and trust
more to their own strength and reason then to God. For they are carried so
far by their venomous nature, that they neither can nor will use those things
to the commodity and profit of their neighbor: but trusting to their own
gifts and ability, they hope that now they shall obtain this, now that,
neither do they think that they shall have need of Gods help also
thereunto: As it appears here in the Pharisees and Scribes, who were
certain, as they supposed, that if they so set upon the Lord, it could not
be, but that they should then entangle him. For it is impossible, thought they,
that he should here escape us, we shall here hold him as it were fallen into a
net, whether he affirm or deny that tribute must be given. Mark moreover how
subtle and perverse yt wit of man's nature is, The nature of man until he be
regenerate by ye spirit of God is wholly corrupt and vnpure.
which is here very lively set forth. There is nothing else in man but
wickedness, delusion, guile, deceits, lying, fraud, and all kind of evil, yea
of nature man is but lies and vanity as the 116 Psalm says. We must not
trust any man in any thing, do not persuade thy self, that any man speaks
the truth unto thee, for whatsoever man speaks it is a lie. Why so? The
fountain or spring head, that is, the heart is not sincere, wherefore neither
can the rivers be pure. And for this cause the Lord does commonly call men the
generation of vipers and brood of serpents. Is not this a goodly title of man?

Let any man now go, and glory of his own righteousness, strength or free
will. Before the world in deed some man may be, and gloriously appear goodly,
righteous, and holy, but there is nothing else, but a generation of vipers and
brood of serpents, and that especially in those that seem most excellent,
most precious, most wise, and of greatest understanding. If thou go through
even all the histories of the Greeks, Jews, and Romans, thou shall find the
best and wisest Princes of all, which have governed the affairs of their
Empire prosperously, thou shall find them I say to have thought nothing of God,
but only trusting to them selves, to have acknowledged nothing as received
from God. Hereupon it is gathered, that the less a man excels in wisdom
before the world, so much less does he commit against God. For they that
excel in counsel and authority before the sight of the world, do for the
most part deceive and lie more then others. thinking, that if they dealt by
delusions and deceit, their fraud and iniquity is not perceived: for they can
after a pretty sort cloak their craft and subtlety. But the holy Ghost has a
most clear and bright sight, which they can not avoid, but they shall be
espied. The Scripture does often times call such, lions, wolves, bears, swine,
and cruel beasts, inasmuch as they rage, and devour and consume all things
with their fraud and deceit. Wherefore in the old Testament the Jews were
forbidden to eat of certain beasts, as of those already rehearsed, and of
others, for this one cause especially, that it should be a type and example to
us, whereby we might perceive, that there are some me^, which are strong,
mighty, rich, witty, learned, skillful, and wise, which are to be avoided and
eschewed as a certain unclean thing, and as such as seduce and deceive others
with their fair show, might, and wisdom. For neither shall they be counted
for such, neither will any man think them to be such, as do so much as think
any evil in their heart, much less do it. Wherefore thou must put no trust
and confidence in any man, trust not unto him, for he will deceive thee wherein
soever he is able. Again if thou trustest man, thou art against God, in whom
thou put not thy trust. It is written in the 17 chapter of Jeremy: Cursed
be the man that puts his trust in man, and, Blessed is the man that puts
his trust in the Lord.

Some man may now say: How shall we do then? An objection
One man must have dealing with an other, otherwise how can the life of man
continue? We must buy, we must sell, we must utter and change our wares with
men: Now if one should not trust an other, the whole trade of man's affairs
should be in peril, yea and perish. I say that no man can deny, The answer
but that there must be mutual dealings among men, and that one does need the
help and travel of an other. But this I will have, that whatsoever dealing
thou have with men, either in buying or selling, thou count it for a thing
uncertain, which thou must neither trust, nor build upon it. For this is
certain, as soon as thou shall trust to man he will seek to deceive thee,
forasmuch as the nature of man, as it is of it self, can do nothing but lie
and deceive. Yea all things in man are uncertain, both his works and words,
there is nothing in him, but lightness and inconstancy, We must put all our
hope and trust in God only.
which thou may boldly believe to be true. Wherefore all our hope and
confidence must be reposed in God alone, and after this sort we must say:
Lord, give thou me grace that I may direct and order my life, my soul, my
body, my substance and goods, and whatsoever is mine, according to thy divine
will, for I believe in thee, I trust in thee, do not thou forsake me in so
perilous dealing with this or that man: I put no trust in man. If thou know
that it is good for me, make him to deal faithfully with me: if thou know
that it will be to my hinderance and hurt, help me to avoid it, for thy will
only pleases me, which I wish always to be done.

As soon as thou think in thy mind: He is a good man, and one that will
keep his promise, I am sure that he will not deceive me, but will deal
faithfully, even then have thou fallen from God, and worshipped an idol,
putting thy trust in a liar. Wherefore when thou have any dealing with man,
think boldly: If he deal faithfully, it is well, if he do otherwise, in the
name of God, let him go, I will commit all things to the will of God, he
shall prosperously bring them to pass. Of such a false and ungodly confidence
reposed in men, How ye worshipping of Saints crept in among Christians.
that evil crept in among Christians, namely the worshipping of Saints,
whereby the Christian Church, that is, the true congregation of the faithful,
has suffered exceeding great hurt and incomparable ruin. For what other was
the service and worshipping of Saints but a deuilish thing? When as men used
to reason after this sort: This man was very holy, that which he taught, he
did, whom we will follow, and do the like. Hierome, Augustine, Gregory said
this, therefore is it true, and therefore will I believe it. Frauncis,
Benedict, Dominicke, Bartholomewe lived thus, they did this and that, I will
imitate their life and works. Moreover Augustine was saved by this rule,
wherefore I also shall be saved by it. Fie, how unstable and miserable a thing
is this, they are only lies and dreams of men, there is not in one word
mention made here of Christ and his word, but they are only the vain
inventions and trifles of men. I would utterly break the rule of Augustine, if
he therefore ordained it, thinking to be saved thereby. So blind and without
understanding is reason, that it receives the dotages and vain inventions of
men, when as notwithstanding the word of God only is to be received in
matters of salvation, as if Herod, Pilate, Caiphas, and Hannas should preach
the Gospel, I ought to receive it. Again, if those that are counted holy,
should rise and preach lies, also rules, habits, shauings, ceremonies, and such
like vain inventions of men, I ought in no wise to receive them, for we must
here have respect, not to the persons, but to that which they preach.

Do thou presume to be wiser then all the fathers and saints, then all the
Bishops and Princes of the whole world? Thus may some man object against me.
Far be that from me. For I do not contend to be wiser then they. But this
without controversy is thus, that whatsoever is wise, great, liberal, mighty
and strong before the world, does seldom or never agree with ye word of God.
For so it falls out, that they that are such do for the most part persecute
the Gospel, and if they were not so great, the Gospel should not so greatly
shine forth and triumph. The Roman Emperors Hadrian, Traian, Diocletian were
the most wise Cesars of all, whose government was so liked of, that it was
praised of the whole world, yet they persecuted the Gospel, and could not
abide the truth. The same we find written of the Kings of the Jews, as of
Achas and others, which governed their kingdom very well, yet despised the word
of God and disobeyed his commandments. We in our time had never such
Emperors or Princes, as are comparable to them. But it ought to be verified in
these, that God would by foolish preaching confound the wisdom of this world,
as Paul says 1. Cor. 1. All these things are showed unto us in this text
which we have in hand, which has a simple and a sclender show and appearance
of it self, but yet contains many things in it most worthy the noting. Now
how the Lord concluded with the Pharisees, when they had showed him the tribute
money, and had answered that it was Cesars image and superscription, the
Evangelist declares, saying:

Give therefore to Caesar the things which are Cesars, and give unto God those
things which are Gods. Although they had deserved no such thing of the Lord,
The sword and office of the Magistrate confirmed by Christ.
nevertheless he teaches them the right way. And in these words he confirms
the sword and office of the Magistrate: they hoped that he would condemn and
resist him, but he does nothing less, for he commends and prayseth him,
commanding that they give unto him those things that are his. Whereby he
plainly will have, that there be Magistrates, Princes, and Rulers, under whose
government we must live. Neither must we care whether they use and exercise
their rule and authority well or ill, we must have regard only to their power
and office, for their power and authority is good inasmuch as it is ordained
and instituted of God. Neither is there any cause why thou should find fault
with power, if at any time thou be oppressed by Princes and tyrannes: for
whereas they abuse the power given unto them of God, they shall surely be
compelled to give an account thereof. The abuse of a thing does not make that
thing evil, which is in it self good. A chain of gold is good, A similitude.
neither is it therefore made worse, for that a harlot wears it about her
neck, or if one should put out mine eye with it, should I find fault in the
chain therefore? In like manner the power of the Prince must be borne, for if
he abuse his office, he is not to be counted of me as noe Prince, neither
belongs it unto me to revenge or punish it in him. I must obey him for God
his cause only, for he represents the place of God. How grievous things
soever therefore Magistrates shall exact, I must for God his cause bear them
all, and obey them, so far as they be not contrary to Gods commandments. If
they do justly or unjustly, it shall in due time appear. Wherefore if thy
substance, life and body, and whatsoever thou have should be taken from thee by
the Magistrates, thou may say thus: I willingly yield them unto you, and
acknowledge you for Rulers over me, I will obey you, but whether ye use your
power and authority well or ill, see you to that.

Moreover whereas Christ says: Give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, and
unto God those things that are Gods. We must understand that unto God
pertains honor, What things must be given unto God, and what unto Caesar.
we must acknowledge him for the living, omnipotent, and wise God, and ascribe
unto him what good thing soever can be named. And albeit we do not give him
this honor, he notwithstanding easily keeps it, for nothing is either added
to, or taken from him by our honoring. Howbeit in us he is true, omnipotent,
and wise, when as we count him so, and believe that he is such a one, as he
suffers him self to be said to be. Now unto Caesar and the Magistrate fear,
custom, tribute, obedience, etc: are due. God requires especially the heart,
the Magistrate the body and goods, over which he executes his office in ye
place of God, which S. Paul does most notably in plain and manifest words
declare Romans 13: Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers: for there
is no power but of God: and the powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever
therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God: and they that
resist, shall receive to them selves condemnation. For Magistrates are not to
be feared for good works, but for evil. VVilt thou then be without fear of
the power? do well: so shall thou have praise of the same. For he is the
Minister of God for thy wealth, but if thou do evil, fear: for he bears
not the sword for naught: for he is the minister of God to take vengeance on
him that does evil. Wherefore ye must be subject, not because of wrath only,
but also for conscience sake. For, for this cause ye pay also tribute: for they
are Gods Ministers, applying them selves for the same thing. Give to all men
therefore their duty: tribute, to whom ye owe tribute: custom, to whom
custom: fear, to whom fear: honor, to whom ye owe honor. And therefore
also are Magistrates ordained of God, that they may defend and maintain
public peace, which alone exceeds all worldly good things: we felt a little
in the last co^motion of the common people, what loss, misery, calamity and
grievous sorrow conspiracy and sedition brings in the world. God grant that
it may so continue, that we try it no more. Thus much shall suffize to have
been spoken for the exposition of this text.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, TEACHING THAT SALVATION COMES by Christ alone.
Ioh. 6. Verse 44. NO man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me,
draw him: and I will raise him up at the last day.

45. It is written in the Prophets: And they shall be all taught of God. Every
man therefore that has heard, and has learned of the Father, comes unto me.

46. Not that any man has seen the Father, save he which is of God, he has
seen the Father.

47. Verily, verily I say unto you, He that believes in me, has everlasting
life.

48. I am the bread of life.

49. Your fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness, and are dead.

50. This is that bread which comes down from heaven, that he which eats
of it, should not die.

51. I am that living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of
this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give, is my
flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.


The sum of this text.
1 CHrist is known of none, but of him whom the Father draws, that is,
except the Father teach us that knowledge inwardly in the heart. Therefore
Christ says to Peter Matthew. 16: Flesh and blood has not revealed it unto
thee, but my Father which is in heaven.

2 Christ is the wisdom of God, which is of more price then precious stones,
and whatsoever can be wished, is not to be compared unto it, Pro. 8.11.
as Solomon says in the Proverbs.

3 The old heavenly bread, that is, the righteousness of the law does not
justify: But Christ, if we believe in him, justifies for ever.

The exposition of the text.
THis text teaches us nothing else but christian faith, and stirs it up in
us, as surely John through his Gospel, does almost no other thing but instruct
us, how we must believe in the Lord Christ. And such a faith as is grounded on
the true promise of God made unto us in Christ, Only faith in Christ saves us.
shall save us, as this text plainly declares. Also they are here all proved
fools, which have taught us an other way and means to obtain righteousness.
Whatsoever ma^s mind ca^ inue^t, although it be holy, although it have a fair
show before men, it must needs utterly fall, if that he will have salvation to
come thereby. For albeit that man is exercised with the duties of godliness, he
shall not be able to attain unto heaven, unless God prevent him with his word,
which may offer his divine grace unto him, and lighten his heart, that he may
walk in the right way. Now this way is the Lord Jesus Christ, Christ the right
way.
he that will seek an other way, as the most part of men with their outward
works commonly do, has now erred from the right and high way. For Paul
says Gal. 2: If righteousness be by the law, that is, by the works of the
law, then Christ died without a cause. Therefore I say, that a man must by
the Gospel be as it were bruised and broken, and humbled even from the bottom
of his heart, as being frail and weak, which can move neither hands nor feet,
but only lies prostrate and cries: Help me O omnipotent God, merciful
Father, I am not able to help my self: Help O Lord Christ, mine own help
is nothing. That so against this corner stone which is Christ al may be broken,
as he says of him self in Luke, when he asked the Pharisees and Scribes: Luke
20.17.
What means this then that is written: The stone that the builders refused,
that is made the head of the corner? Whosoever shall fall upon that stone,
shall be broken: and on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.
Wherefore either let us fall upon it by our imbecillitie and weakness, by
denying our selves, and so be broken, or else he will break us for ever in his
strait judgment. But it is better that we fall upon it, then that it fall
upon us. Upon this foundation Christ says here in this text.

No man can come unto me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him: and I
will raise him up at the last day. Now he whom the Father draws not, shall
surely perish. It is also concluded that he which comes not to this son,
shall be damned for ever. He is the only Son given unto us, which may save
us, without him there is no salvation: if he help not, Without Christ there is
no salvation.
our case is most miserable: Of him Peter also speaks to the same effect in
the Acts of the Apostles chap. 4: This is the stone cast aside of you builders,
which is become the head of the corner, neither is there salvation in any
other: for among men there is given none other name under heaven, whereby we
must be saved. Whither would our Divines and Scholemen turn them selves here,
which have taught us that by many works we must attain unto righteousness?
Here is that high Master Aristotle confounded, who has taught us, that reason
endeavors to do the best things, and is always ready to the better. But
this Christ does here deny: for unless the Father possess and draw us, we
shall perish for ever. Here all men must confess their imbecility and slownes
to good things. If so be that any persuade him self that he is able to do any
good thing by his own strength, truly he has reproved Christ of falsehood,
and with great arrogancy presumes to come to heaven, albeit he is not drawn
of ye Father. Wherefore where the word of God is in his course, and soundly
preached, whatsoever things are high and great, it casts them down, it
makes all mountains even with the valleies, and overthrows all hills, as
the Prophet Esai says, that all hearts hearing the word may despeire of them
selves, otherwise they can not come unto Christ. The works of God are such,
that while they kill, they make alive, while they condemn, they save: as Hanna
the mother of Samuel sings of the Lord: 1. Sam. 2.6.
The Lord kills, and makes alive, brings down to the grave, and fetches
up again. The Lord makes poor, and makes rich, brings lovv, How the
Father draws us unto Christ.
and heaueth up on hie. Wherefore if a man be thus stricken of God in his heart,
that he acknowledges him self such a one as ought for his sins to be
condemned, he surely is even that very man, whom God by his word has stricken,
and by this stroke has fastened upon him the bond of his divine grace, whereby
he draws him, that he may provide for his soul, and have care of him. He
could first find with him self no help nor counsel, neither did he wish for
any, but now he has found the special consolation and promise of God, which
is after this sort: He that asks receives, he that seeks finds, and to
him that knocks it is opened. By such a promise man is more and more lifted
up in mind, and conceiueth a greater trust and confidence in God. For as soon
as he hears that this is the work of God alone, he desires of God, as at
the hand of his merciful father, that he will vouchsafe to draw him. If so be
that he be drawn of God unto Christ, undoubtedly that also shall come unto him,
whereof the Lord makes mention here, namely that he will raise him up at the
last day. For he lays hold on the word of God, and trusts in God, whereby
he has a certain testimony, that he is he, whom God has drawn: As John
says in his first Epistle: 1. Ioh. 5.10.
He that believes in that Son of God has the witness in him self. Hereupon
it must needs follow, that he is taught of God, and in verity now knows God
to be no other, but a helper, a comforter, and a Savior. Hereby it is now
manifest, that if we believe, God will be no other toward us but a Savior,
helper, and giver of all felicity, who requires and asks nothing of us, but
will only give and offer unto us, as he him self says unto Israel Psalm. 81: I
am God thy Lord, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt: open thy mouth
wide, and I will fill it. Who would not love such a God, which shows him self
so gentle and loving unto us, and offers so readily his grace and goodness?

They shall not be able to escape the severe and eternal judgment of God,
which do unadvisedly neglect so great grace, as the Epistle to the Hebrews
says: If they that transgressed the law of Moses, escaped not unpunished, but
dyed without mercy, how much more grievously shall God punish them, which count
ye blood of the Testament as an unholy thing, and tread under foot the son
of God? The knowledge of God.
O how diligent is Paul in all his Epistles to teach how the knowledge of God
may rightly be conceived? O how often does he wish increase in the knowledge of
God? As if he would say: If ye only knew and understood what God is, ye should
then be safe. Then ye would love him, and do all things yt are approved of
him. Thus he says Colos. 1: We cease not to pray for you, and to desire that
ye might be fulfilled with knowledge of his will, in all wisdom, and spiritual
understanding: that ye might walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in all
things, being fruteful in all good works, and increasing in the knowledge of
God, stre^gthened with all might through his glorious power, unto all patience,
and long suffering with ioyfulnes: giving thanks unto the Father, which has
made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. And
Psalm. 119 David says: Instruct me, and I will keep thy law, yea I will
observe it with my whole heart. And thus ye have out of the first sentence of
this text, that the knowledge of God does come from ye father. It is needeful
that he lay the first stone in our building, otherwise we shall labor in vain.
But that is done thus: God sends unto us Preachers, whom he has taught, and
provides that his will be preached unto us. First that all our life and
condition, The preaching of the law.
although it have a fair show and be holy outwardly, is of no estimation
before him, yea is abhorred and lothed of him. And this is called the preaching
of the law. The preaching of the Gospel.
Afterward he makes grace to be preached unto us, to wit, that he will not
have us utterly condemned and cast of, but that he will receive us in his
beloved son, and not simply receive us, but also make us heirs in his
kingdom, yea and Lords over all things which are in heaven and earth. This
now is called the preaching of grace or of the Gospel. And all this is of
God, which rayseth up and sends forth Preachers. This S. Paul signifies
when he says thus Romans 10: Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of
God. This also the words of the Lord mean here in the Gospel, when he says:

It is written in the Prophets: And they shall be all taught of God. Every man
therefore that has heard, and has learned of the Father, comes unto me: Not
that any man has seen the Father, save he which is of God, he has seen the
Father. When as we hear the first preaching, that is the preaching of the law,
how we are condemned with all our works, then man sigheth unto God, What the
preaching of the law works in man.
and knows not what to do, his conscience is evil and fearful, and except
help should come in time, he should despeire for ever. Wherefore the other
preaching must not be long differred, the Gospel must be preached unto him,
and the way unto Christ must be showed, whom God has given unto us a
Mediator, that through him alone we may be saved, by mere grace and mercy,
without all our own works and merits. Then the heart is made joyful, The
preaching of the Gospel what it works in us.
and hastes unto such grace, as the thirsty heart runs unto ye water. David
had a notable feeling hereof, when he said thus Psalm. 42: Like as the heart
desires the water brooks, so longs my soul after thee, O God: My soul
thirsts for God, yea even for the living God. When therefore a man comes to
Christ, through the Gospel, then hears he the voice of the Lord Christ,
which strengthens the knowledge that God has taught him: to wit, that God is
nothing else but a Savior abounding with grace, who will be favorable and
merciful to all them, which call upon him in this his Son. Therefore the
Lord says moreover:

Verily, verily I say unto you, He that believes in me, has everlasting life.
I am that bread of life. Your Fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness, and
are dead. This is that bread which comes down from heaven, that he which
eats of it should not die. I am that living bread, which came down from
heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread
that I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.
In these words the soul finds a table daintily furnished, whereby it may
stake all hunger. For it knows assuredly that he that speaks these words
can not lie. Wherefore if it commit it self confidently unto him, and cleave
to the word, it rests upon him, and so departs not from this goodly table.
This is that supper, to the preparing whereof the heavenly Father killed his
oxen and fatlings, and has bidden us all unto it. The living bread whereof
the Lord here makes mention, Christ the living bread, whereon we must feed
by faith.
is Christ him self, whereby we are so fed. If we lay hold but of a morsel
of this bread in our hearts, and keep it, we shall be satisfied for ever,
neither can we ever be plucked from God. Moreover such an eating is nothing
else, but to believe in ye Lord Christ, that he is made unto us of God, as Paul
says 1. Cor 1. wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. He that
eats this meat, lives for ever. Wherefore by and by after this text, when
the Jews were at contention about these his words, he says: Verily, verily I
say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his
blood, ye have no life in you. Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Manna which
the fathers did eat in the desert (as Christ here says) could not save from
death: but this bread makes us immortal. If we believe in Christ, death shall
not hurt us any thing at all, yea there is no more death. This the Lord means
by these words in an other place, where he says to ye Jews: Verily, verily I
say unto you, Ioh. 8.51.
if a man keep my word, he shall never see death: where it is certain that he
speaks of the word of faith, and of the Gospel.

But some man may say that holy men die notwithstanding, An objection.
for Abraham and the holy Prophets are dead, as the Jews said unto him. I
answer: The death of Christians is only a sleep, The answer
as the Scripture also commonly calls it: for a Christian tastes and sees
no death, that is, he has the feeling of no death. For this Savior Christ
Jesus, in whom he believes, has overcome death, yt afterward he should not
feel or taste it, but death is unto him only a passage and gate to life, as
Christ him self witnesses Ioh. 5: Verily, verily I say unto you, he that
hears my word, and believes in him that sent me, has everlasting life, and
shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from death to life. Wherefore
the life of a Christian is merry, and on every side replenished with joy, and
the yoke of Christ is easy and sweet. But that it seems heavy and grievous
unto us, this is the cause, for that the Father has not yet drawn us:
hereupon it comes to pass that we take no pleasure thereof, neither is the
Gospel comfortable unto us. If so be that we would lay up the words of Christ
well in our heart, they would be unto us an exceeding comfort. And thus ye have
heard how we must feed on this bread which came down from heaven, that is,
on the Lord Christ, to wit by faith, which we then do when we believe in him,
that he is our Savior.

The whole chapter out of which this text is taken, commends unto us nothing
else but spiritual meat. For when the multitude followed Christ, that they
might again eat and drink, which the Lord him self signifies, he takes
occasion of the corporal meat which they sought, and almost through the whole
chapter speaks of spiritual meat, as he said: The words which I speak are
spirit and life. Whereby he would signify, that he therefore fed them, that they
should believe in him: and as they did eat the bodily meat, so they ought also
to feed of the spiritual. Here let us weie and mark this, that the Lord does
so gently and graciously apply him self to us, and offer him self in such
gentle words, that it ought worthily to move our hearts to believe in him, to
wit, that that bread, was therefore given for us, inasmuch as it was behouefull
that he should taste death and suffer hellish pains: Also should bear sins
which he never had committed, as though he had committed them, and had been his
own: and he did also the same willingly for our sakes, and took us as
brethren and sisters. The will of the heavenly Father.
This if we believe, we do the will of the heavenly Father, which is nothing
else but to believe in his Son, and so be saved. As Christ him self says a
little before: This is the will of him that sent me, that every man which sees
the Son, and believes in him, should have everlasting life. It now therefore
appears that he that has faith does the will of God, and eats of this
heavenly bread. As Augustine says: What do thou prepare thy mouth, believe,
and thou have eaten. Of this spiritual supper the whole new Testament
speaks, but especially in this place of John. The Sacrament of Christ's body
and blood is a certain testimony and pledge of this true supper, whereby we
ought to strengthen our faith, and to be assured, that this body and this
blood, whereof we feed in the Sacrament, delivers us from sin, death,
Satan, and all evil.

But how may a man perceive and know, How a man may know whether he be called
to this spiritual supper.
that he also does pertain to this heavenly bread, and is called to this
spiritual supper? let him consider the case in his own heart, which if he
find so affected, that it does as it were feel a sweetenes in the promise of
God, and is undoubtedly persuaded, that he is of the company of them which
pertain to his supper, he is assuredly such a one in deed. For as we belteue,
so comes it unto us. Such a man has also by and by a regard of his
neighbor, Charity toward our neighbor the fruit of true faith.
and helps him as his brother, cares for him, gives unto him, lends him,
comfort him, briefly does no otherwise to him then he desires to be done
unto himself. And all this proceeds from hence, for that the bountifullnes
and goodness of Christ has replenished his heart with sweetness and love, that
it is a pleasure and joy unto him to do good to his neighbor, yea and he is
grieved if there be none toward whom he may be serviceable. And beside all
this, he is tractable and lowly toward all men, he does not esteem the
temporal pleasure and pride of life, he judges no man, he defameeh no man, he
interprets all things in the better part. When as he sees that the matter
goes not well with his neighbor, as that he faints in faith, waxes cold
in love, and that his life is not on every side approueable, he prays for
him, and is sore grieved if any commit any thing against God and his
neighbor. In a sum, the root and sap are sound, for they are in a
flourishing vine, to wit, Christ, and therefore such fruits come forth. But if
any be void of faith, and not taught of God, such a one does not feed on this
heavenly bread, neither brings forth these fruits. For where a right faith is
not, there such fruits are always wanting. And therefore S. Peter teaches us
to make our calling unto salvation, sure by good works, where he speaks
properly of the works of love, namely, that we do good to our neighbor, and
be affected toward him, as toward our own flesh and blood. Thus much shall
suffize concerning this text. Let us call to God for his grace.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, CONCERNING GOOD WORKS THE FRVTES OF FAITH.
Romans 13. Verse 11. THis also we know the season, how that it is time that we
should now arise from sleep: for now is our salvation nerer, then when we
believed.

12. The night is past, and the day is at hand, let us therefore cast away the
works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light.

13. Let us walk honestly, as in the day: not in gluttony and dronkennes,
neither in chambering and wantonness, nor in strife and enuiyng:

14. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the flesh, to
fulfill the lusts of it.


Whereof the present text entreats.
THE Apostle in this text teaches, not of faith, but of works the fruits of
faith, showing how the life of a Christian ought to be ordered and framed
according to the flesh outwardly among men. For how we must live in the spirit
and before God, faith does teach, whereof Paul a little before this place has
at large and even apostolikely entreated. Yea if we consider this text well, it
does not so much teach, as provoke, exhort, move, and stir up them which are
already taught, what they must do. The office of preaching di^^d^d into parts.
For Paul divides the office of preaching into two parts, into doctrine and
exhortation, Romans 12. Doctrine is, when one teaches that which was not known
before, whereby men are instructed and come to understanding. Exhortation is,
when ye preacher moves and provoke unto yt which is already known. Either
is necessary to be done of him, who will christianly perform the duty of
preaching, wherefore Paul does very earnestly apply himself to both, and that
his exhortation may be more effectual, and may more acceptably enter into the
minds of them whom he has purposed to exhort, he uses certain elegant and
figurative speches, and does with an adorned manner of speaking allure their
minds unto him. For the words, sleep, darkness, light, waking, armor,
works, the day, the night, which he here uses, are all spoken figuratively,
by which other things are signified, then their nature and propriety do
bear: for he speaks not of the natural night, day, darkness, armor,
waking, sleep, etc: but he resembles by these natural things a certain
likeness to our mind, whereby he may more forcibly provoke and bring us to
those spiritual things. As if he said, ye see how men to get the riches of
the present time, which do soon perish, rise early, and laying aside the
works of darkness, apply themselves to the works of the day, after the night
is passed, and the day is come: with how much greater diligence ought we,
shaking of our sleep, to rise early, and casting away the works which we did
while it was yet dark, to apply our selves now to those works which are
agreeable to our light, forasmuch as the night is now passed, and the day of
our salvation has appeared?

By sleep he signifies euel works which are void of faith: What the Apostle
means by the words, sleep, to rise, etc.
for sleep is a work properly meet for the night, and that he means thus,
he sufficiently declares, when he by and by after adds: Let us cast away
the works of darkness. So contrariwise, to wake and to rise signify good
works which come of faith. For as sleep pertains properly to the night, so
to rise is properly agreeable to the morning and day. Whereupon it is said 1 Thessalonians. 5: Beloved brethren, ye are not in darkness, but ye are all the children
of light and of the day: we are not of the night, neither of darkness,
wherefore let us not sleep as do other, but let us watch and be sober. For
they that sleep, sleep in the night, and they that be dronken, are dronken in
the night. But let us which are of the day, be sober, putting on the breast
plate of faith and love, and the hope of salvation for an helmet. For God has
not appointed us unto wrath, but to obtain salvation by the means of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which died for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should live
together with him. It is sufficiently manifest, that the Apostle does not in
these words forbid us the sleep of nature, nevertheless he draws a
similitude from natural sleep and waking, to spiritual, that is, to a good
and evil life. And to be brief, to rise out of sleep is here the very same
thing that the Apostle writes, Tit. 2: That grace of God, that brings
salvation unto all men, has appeared, and teaches us that we should deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we should live soberly and righteously,
and godly in this present world: looking for that blessed hope and appearing of
the glory of that mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ. For that which
he calls in these words, to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, he calls
in the text which we have in hand, to arise from sleep, and that which he
terms to live soberly, and righteously, and godly, that he calls in our
present text, to watch, and to put on the armor of light, and whereas he
says: the grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared, that he calls
here the day and light, of which we will hereafter speak more at large.

Natural and spiritual sleep compared together.
Now let us see what likeness there is between natural and spiritual sleep.
He that sleeps naturally, neither sees, nor feels any of those good
things that are in the world, but lies among those things which are even
next adjoining unto him, as it were dead, serving to no use, neither regarding
any thing at all. For albeit he live in himself, yet is he as dead to all
other. Again, instead of true things, he is in dreams wholly occupied with
vain images and forms of things, which appear true, and is so foolish that
he embraces those vain forms, and thinks them to be true things. But when
he waketh, those images do together vanish away, and the man begins to be
occupied with true things. After the same manner almost it is, when one is as
it were swallowed up of ungodliness, for he sleeps, and is like a dead man
before God, neither sees he, neither feels any of the good things, which
are good things in deed, namely, those spiritual good things, which are
promised and offered him by the Gospel, albeit they be just by him. For those
things are seen and felt by faith alone, otherwise they are removed from all
sight and feeling. Wherefore as long as by reason of the sleep of his
unbelief, he can have neither any regard or sense of true good things, which
are very near him through the Gospel, he busieth himself with the false
good things of this world, as riches, promotions, and pleasures, which being
compared unto eternal life, unto heavenly joy, and that perfect salvation
which comes to the godly, are altogether as dreams, and as those vain
visions compared to natural things, whereof they are only representations.
But when man awaketh, and has received faith, all regard and desire of those
false good things of this present life vanishes away, and he acknowledges
that they are nothing else but mere vanity and falsehood, even as those visions
do quite fade away as soon as a man awaketh out of natural sleep. Hereof the
76. Psalm speaks? They have slept their sleep, and they whose hands were
mighty, have found nothing. And Psalm. 73: Like as a dream when one awaketh,
so shall thou make their image to vanish out of the city. And Esaias 29: As when
a hungry man dreameth that he is eating, and yet when he awaketh his soul is
empty: or as when a thirsty man dreameth that he is drinking, and when he
awaketh he is yet faint, and his soul has appetite: even so shall the
multitude of all nations be, that fights against mount Sion. See how
contemptuously and disdainfully the Prophet speaks of the chief power,
riches, pleasures and promotions of the world, and likeneth them to dreams and
most vain visions wherewith they which are asleep are deluded. What other
durst say, that the good things, riches and power of these Kings, Princes, and
rich men, are nothing else but dreams, when as for them men mingle earth with
heaven, fire with water, raging without measure and end in the world? But the
cause hereof is, for that they yet sleep, therefore they do yet see nothing
hereof, as they want faith, so also are they destitute of this light.

For now is our salvation nearer, then when we believed. What mean these
words? did we believe before, The promise of God concerning salvation by his
Son.
and do we not believe now? Here we must call to mind that which Paul writes
Romans 1: that God promised the Gospel by his Prophets in the holy Scriptures,
concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, that all should by him be saved,
according to that which was said unto Abraham Genesis 22: In thy seed shall all
the nations of the earth be blessed. This blessing promised to Abraham in his
seed, is nothing else, but grace and salvation in Christ offered to the whole
world by the Gospel, which Paul so interprets Romans 4. and Gal. 3. For
Christ is that seed of Abraham, that is, as he is man, his flesh and blood, by
whom and in whom shall be blessed, as many as believe in him, and call upon him.
This promise was afterward by the Prophets continually more and more declared
and preached, for they did all write of the coming of Christ, of the grace
which he should bring, and of the Gospel, which Peter also witnesses Act. 4.
This promise of God all the faithful believed which died before Christ was
borne, who by this faith were saved, and obtained salvation in Christ and
through Christ. Hereunto Paul now had respect when he said: Our salvation is
now nearer, then when we believed. For that which he says is thus much in
effect: We believed in time past that the promise made unto Abraham, should be
fulfilled, now is it fulfilled, and those things that we believed should come
to pass, are now present: Christ is come, the Gospel is revealed and
published, and the blessing which we looked for, is spread over the world, all
things which we tarried for, and believed being promised, are come. And hereby
the Apostle signified the spiritual day, whereof he speaks afterward, which
is properly the beginning and manifestation of the Gospel, whereof we will
hereafter speak.

Now by this, that those things which we believed should be fulfilled, are now
fulfilled, our faith is not any whit made void or frustrate, but much more
sound and perfect. For as they of the old time before Christ's incarnation
believed the promise of God which should be fulfilled, so do we believe that
the same is fulfilled, The faith of them which lived before Christ's
incarnation and theirs which live after it, all one in it self.
and the faith is altogether the same in it self, but that our faith followed
theirs, as the fulfilling follows also the promise. For either faith trusts
in the seed of Abraham, that is in Christ, theirs before his incarnation, ours
after it. Wherefore he that should at this day believe with the Jews that
Christ is to come, should make God a liar, as though he had not yet fulfilled
his promise, which he has fulfilled, and being fulfilled would have it
published and preached. So also should salvation be yet far from the
believers, which we should look for being as yet to come, in the time that
shall hereafter follow. Of this double faith Paul speaks Romans 1: By the
Gospel righteousness, which God gives, is revealed from faith to faith. What
means this, from faith to faith? nothing else, but that albeit the faith of
the Fathers and our faith is the same, whereby it is believed in Christ either
to come, or which has already appeared: yet the Gospel does lead from their
faith to ours, so that it is now necessary not only to believe the promise
that was to be fulfilled, but also that it is fulfilled, which it did not
behoue Abraham and the other Fathers to believe, although they had the same
Christ which we have. For there is one faith, one spirit, one Christ, one
communion of all Saints, this difference only there is between us, that they
went before Christ, we follow him.

We have therefore believed, and we do also believe, to wit the Fathers and we,
with a like and common faith in the same Christ, although not after the same
manner, as it is said. And as by reason of this communion of faith which we
have a like in the same Christ, we say: we have believed, or we did believe,
when as not we, but the Fathers have believed or did believe: so they again
did say, that they should hear, see, and believe in Christ, when as not they,
but we do live in that time. We read not in a few places of the Scriptures,
that they which were before the incarnation of Christ, took upon them the
person of them which are after it, and they which are after it, of them which
were before it, because of the communion of faith, and the same Christ, which
they have in common, and so there is as it were one company of believers. Now
whereas the Apostle says, How salvation is nearer unto us then it was to the
beleuers before Christ's incarnation.
that salvation is now nearer unto us then when we believed, that is, when our
Fathers those ancient believers did look for it to come, we must not
understand it of the neerenes of possession, as though we now had it nearer and
more certainly then they, for the Fathers had altogether the same faith, as it
is said, and the same Christ, wherefore salvation was as near unto them as
unto us. For Christ yesterday, and to day, the same also is for ever. Heb. 13.
Christ continues the same from the beginning of the world even unto the end,
by whom all are saved alike. But Paul speaks of the neerenes of revealing,
that what soever things were said before concerning Christ, they were now
fulfilles, death being overcome, the Lord did sit at the right hand of the
Father, the Gospel was preached abroad in the world, by which Christ did come
unto all in the whole world, for this cause Paul says that our salvation is
nearer then when it was hidden, and known unto few men: because that Christ
being not yet glorified, it was not meet that the preaching of salvation
should be made public or common.

Whereas therefore the Apostle says here, Our salvation is now nearer us, he
says the same thing in the Epistle to Titus in other words: The grace of God,
which brings salvation, has appeared, that is, has sprung forth, and is
every where commonly preached: although it was not hid before in any of the
Saints, notwithstanding it was not yet commonly known unto the world. After
the same sort the Scripture speaks in many places, when it sometime says
that Christ is to come, sometime, that he is come, although he always has
bin, and is in all the elect. Howbeit because he had not before his
resurrection come to all by public preaching, the Scripture speaks diversely
of his coming. For because of this public preaching he came in the flesh,
being made man, for his incarnation had not bin profitable to any, The coming
of Christ by ye preaching of the Gospel.
if the Gospel had not thereupon bin preached, by which he came into the whole
world, and whereby it is commonly known, why he was made man, whereby that
blessing promised to Abraham, is now published, and made common to all which by
the Gospel believe in Christ. Hereupon Paul says very well, Romans 1. that the
Gospel was promised of God, etc. as though he would say, although God has
promised every where in the writings of the Prophets his son in the flesh,
yet forasmuch as all that should be done, that the Gospel might be preached
abroad in the world, whereby he comes spiritually to the minds of the
believers, (which coming only brings salvation, and is far to be
preferred before that coming in the flesh, inasmuch as it was done because of
this) I say rather that God promised by the Prophets in the Scriptures the
Gospel concerning his son. For God considered the Gospel and our faith in
all these things, for which he would also have him to be made man, that the
Gospel might be preached of him, that being made man, he has saved us by his
death, and that the salvation which he has wrought, might go into the whole
world, and be made near unto all. Some have taught four comminges of Christ,
according to the four sundays in Aduent as they call it, but this coming of
Christ by the Gospel, which is most necessary of all, and of which all do
depend, of which Paul here speaks, this coming I say, they could not see,
inasmuch as they are ignorant, both what the Gospel is, and to what end it
was given. They babbie many things of the coming of Christ, and nevertheless
they drive him further from themselves, the^ heaven is distaunt from the earth.
For what can Christ profit any man, which does not possess him by faith? or
how can any man possess him by faith, where the Gospel is not preached?

The night is passed and the day is at hand: By the day what is signified.
His meaning in effect is, that salvation is at hand. For by the day Paul
understands the Gospel, namely, that it is that day, whereby our hearts and
minds are enlightened, therefore such a day being sprung, our salvation is
certainly at hand, that is, Christ and his grace promised in time past to
Abraham, has shined forth by preaching in the whole world, gives light unto
all men, raises all out of sleep, shows true and eternal good things,
wherein we may be hereafter occupied, What is here meant by the night.
and may walk honestly in this day. Contrariwise, by the night all doctrine is
to be understood, which is not the Gospel, beside which none can bring
salvation. But if thou do a little more exactly wey the words, thou shall see
that Paul describes that part of the day, which is most delectable of all,
and most full of all pleasauntnes, namely the joyful and amiable morning, and
the rising of the sun. For it is the morning when the night is gone and
ended, and the day is now come, whereupon all things are meruelously cheered
and recreated, the birds sing, other living creatures do stir up with
alacrity and ioyfulnes: men being as it were made alive again, do go forth
to their labors: all things, the day springing, and the morning shining, are
so affected, as though the world were renewed, and all things restored to life
again.

Wherefore in many places of the Scripture, the joyful, The preaching of the
Gospel likened to the morning.
prosperous, and quickening preaching of the Gospel is likened to the morning
and the rising of the sun, as it is here of Paul who calls the Gospel the
day sprinking or arising. Also Psalm. 110: In the day of thy power shall the
people offer thee free will offeringes, of the womb of the morning shall the
dew of thy children spring. Here also the Gospel is plainly called the womb
of the morning, and the day of the power of Christ, wherein we are conceived
and borne the children of God as deaw, to wit, without the labor of men, by
the only grace of the holy Ghost from heaven. The most pleasant and
comfortable sun Jesus Christ makes this day, whom the Scripture hereupon
calls the sun of righteousness. Christ the sun of righteousness.
God says Mala. 4: To you that fear my name, shall that sun of righteousness
arise, and health shall be under this wings. For as many as believe in Christ, do
receive of him the beams of his grace and righteousness, and do obtain
salvation under his wings. Whereupon it is said Psalm. 118: This is the day
which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it, as though he
said: This corporal sun makes the corporal day, but God himself makes
this day, even he is that sun, from whence those beams and that day come,
wherewith the whole world is enlightened. Finally, hereupon he calls himself
the light of the world, Ioh. 9. And Psalm. 19: The heavens declare the glory of
God, that is, even as these bodily heavens do bring the sun and the day, and
the sun is carried in them, so the Apostles have in themselves, and bring by
preaching, the true sun, which is Christ, etc: Whereupon it follows: In the
heavens he has set a tabernacle for the sun, which comes forth as a
bridegroom out of his chamber, and reioiceth as a giant to run his course.
His setting forth is from the utmost part of heaven, and his circuit unto the
utmost part thereof: and there is nothing hid from his heat. All this is said
of the exceeding pleasant beginning or rising of this day, that is of the
Gospel, which the Scripture every where meruelously sets forth. For it is a
word which quickneth, makes glad, willing, cheerful, and ready to do good
works, and finally it brings with it all good things. Wherefore it is
called the Gospel or glad tydinges, for that it is a pleasant, and prosperous
message of the grace of God, and of all good things.

The Gospel reuealeth unto us all things that are needful for us to know.
But who is able to rehearse all those things, which this day reuealeth and
makes manifest unto us? For it teaches all things, what God is, what we are,
whatsoever is past, and to come, of heaven, hell, the earth, Angels and Deuels.
By this lamp is showed unto us, how we ought to behave our selves in all these
things, and toward all, from whence we are, and whither we go. Yet nevertheless
Satan has deceived us miserable creatures, that neglecting such a day, whereby
all things might be clear and manifest unto us, we seek the truth of
Philosophers and heathen men, who have not so much as by a dream known any
whit of these things, and so we have suffered our selves to be blinded with
men's traditions, and to be thrust back again into the night. For it is not
light, whatsoever is not this day, otherwise Paul and the whole Scripture
should in vain extol this day alone, and call all other beside it the night.
Surely the burden of Gods displeasure must needs be most grievous, for that
contrary to so plain and manifest places of Scripture, we have sought an
other light, although the Lord himself calls himself the light and sun of
the world. And if other proofs were wantinge, this one is sufficient, that
universities do so impudently both set up and glory of Aristotle as a light
unto them, in whom they exercise themselves much more then in Christ, yea
nothing in Christ, but altogether in Aristotle.

Let us therefore cast away the works of darkness, and let us put on the
armor of light. As Christ is the sun, By light is here signified and meant
faith.
and the Gospel the day, so faith is the light whereby to see and watch in
this day. For it would not profit, albeit the sun did shine, and make the
day, if the eyes did not perceive the light. Wherefore although the Gospel be
begone and preached in the whole world, yet none are lightened, but they that
receive it, and by faith being made capable of the light, do arise out of
sleep. But to them that as yet sleep this sun and day bring no profit, of
which they receive no light, no more then if no sun or day had shined. And
this is that season and hour, whereof he speaks: Well-beloved brethren,
forasmuch as we know this, that it is now time that we should arise out of
sleep, etc. It is a spiritual time and season, although begun in this outward
time, as it does daily also come, wherein we ought to arise out of sleep, and
lay aside the works of darkness. Whereby Paul shows that he does not speak
to them, which are yet void of faith: for as it is said, he teaches not
faith here, but the works and fruits of faith, when as he says: We know that
the time is come, and that the night being passed, the day is at hand: they
which believe not can not know these things. Now if thou object and say, what
reason or cause is there that he should write these things to the faithful,
inasmuch as they know that it is time? etc. Thou must call to mind that in the
beginning of the exposition of this text of the Apostle, we have said that the
office of preaching is of two sorts, one of teaching, We have need of
continual exhortation.
an other of exhorting and moving. Now a man can not attain unto that
knowledge, that it should not be needful that he be always moved, and kept
in a continual and fresh meditation of those things which he has learned,
least the deuell, the world, and the flesh (which are enemies that never
grant truce, neither slack their assault) do make him weary and slothful,
that he may at the last sleep, and become altogether negligent in good
things. For the deuell, says Peter, is such an enemy, as goes about
continually like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour: Wherefore he
says: VVatch and be sober. Paul also will have us do the same thing here.
For seeinge that the Deuell, the flesh, and the world keep no mean, nor
make no end of fightinge against us, neither must there be any mean kept or
end made of exhortinge, prouokinge, and mouinge us to watch and work.
Hereupon the holy Ghost is called an exhorter, inasmuch as he inuiteth and
moves us unto good.

Paul calls the works of light armor, and why.
For the same cause Paul also uses here chosen words: the works of darkness
he calls not armor, but the works of light he calls armor, not works:
undoubtedly that he might show, that there is a fight, that labor and travel
is required, and that it can not be obtained without peril, to watch and live
well, forasmuch as so mighty enemies, the deuell, the flesh, and the world do
without ceassing fight against us, wherefore Job says chapter 7: The life of
man upon earth is a fight and tentation. Now it is not a small matter to stand
all our life long in the battaill, wherefore there is need of very shrill
trumpets and warlike drums, that is of earnest admonitions and exhortations,
whereby we may be stirred up and encouraged to persevere valliauntly in the
fight. Hereupon now it appears, why he calls good works armor or
weapons, and calls not the works of darkness so, which notwithstanding, if
we consent unto them are also weapons, Romans 6: Give not your members as weapons
of unrighteousness. Again, it is before said, that by light is here signified
faith, which from the day of the Gospel by the sun Christ, The armor of
light what it is.
shines into our hearts, and enlightneth them, therefore the armor or
weapons of light are nothing else but the works of this faith. Contrariwise,
darkness is infidelity or unbelief, which is by reason of the absence of the
Gospel as of the day, and of Christ as of the sun. This darkness the deuell
does rule, which comes from the doctrine of men, and the judgment of man's
own reason: wherefore the works of darkness, The works of darkness what they
are.
are the works of infidelity. For as Christ is the Lord and gouerner of the
light, which we said to be faith: so Paul Ephesians. 6. calls Satan the prince
of darkness, that is, of them which are without faith, and refuse to be
obedient to God, as the same Apostle witnesses 2. Corinthians. 4: If our Gospel
be then hyd, it is hyd to them that are lost, in whom the god of this world
(namely the deuell) has blinded the minds, that is, of the infidels, that the
light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should not shine unto them. But what
both this armor or weapons of light, and works of darkness are, it is now
taught of the Apostle.

Let us walk honestly as in the day. No man works those things in the day,
which he is wont to work in darkness, every one fears an other, and
endeavors himself to live honestly. It is commonly said: The night is void
of shame, which is true, and therefore men do those things in the night,
which they would be ashamed to do in the day, but the day is notwithout
shame, and requires an honest conversation. After the same sort ought a
Christian life to be: The life of a Christian.
a Christian ought to commit nothing, whereof he may be ashamed, although the
whole world should see his works and doings. For he that lives and works
so, that he is unwilling that all his works and doings should be seen and
heard of all men, and his whole life be manifestly known unto all, lives a
live unworthy of Christ, according to that which our Savior himself says
Ioh. 3: Every man that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to light,
least his deeds should be reproved. But he that does truth, comes to the
light, that his deeds might be made manifest, that they are wrought according
to God. Hereby it appears how necessary it is, that we should be provoked
and exhorted to watch and to put on the armor of light. For what one is there
at this day among Christians, which can abide, that all his works should be
published openly in the light. Now what a Christian life is this, how
hypocritically do we live, when as we can not suffer our life so much as to be
disclosed before men, which now is disclosed before God and all his Angels, and
in the last day shall be disclosed before all creatures? Wherefore it behooves a
Christian to live so, as he desires to appear in the last day, and before
all. Ephesians. 5.8.9.
Hereupon Paul says: Walk as the children of light: the fruit of the Spirit
is goodness, and righteousness, and truth. And Romans 12: Procure things honest,
not only in the sight of God, but also in the sight of all men. And 2. Cor. 1:
Our reioicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity
and godly purches, and not in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God we have
had our conversation in the world. Howbeit such a life shall nothing at all
appear, where faith is not, but where a lively, a cheerful and a strong
faith is, there such a life can not be wanting, forasmuch as such a faith is
not wearied, with well doing, Preaching and exhortation necessary for them that
do already believe.
neither sleeps. Wherefore it is no less necessary, to preach to them that
have received the doctrine of faith, whereby they may be provoked and stirred
up to go on in the good life which they have embraced, and that they suffer not
themselves to be overcome by the assaults of the raging flesh, the crafty
world, and most subtle Satan, then it is meet that the doctrine of faith be
preached to them that be as yet ignorant of Christ.

Not in gluttony and drunkenness, neither in chambering and wantonness, nor in
strife and envying. Here he rehearses the works of darkness by name, one of
which he named also before, to wit, sleep, according to that saying 1.
Thessal. 5: Let us not sleep as do other, but let us watch and be sober. Not
that he forbids natural sleep, but spiritual, which is infidelity,
whereof those works of the flesh proceed: howbeit natural sleep also is a
work of darkness, if it be used for pleasure, and through immoderate filling
of the belly, Paul by six works of darkness co^prehendeth all the rest.
so that it is a hinderance to the light, that is, faith, and to the armor
thereof. Moreover these six works of darkness which he here rehearses, do
comprehend all the rest. For Gal. 5. and Coloss. 3. he reckneth up more of them.
But we will divide those, which he here rehearses, into two sides, the right
and the left. On the right side these four fight with the spirit, gluttony,
drunkenness, chambering and wantonness: on the left side (forasmuch as the left
side in the Scriptures signifies adversity) those things which proceed from
thence do fight, as are wrath, contention and such like: but the right side
signifies prosperity, and those things which ensue thereof, as delights,
gluttony, drunkenness, and overmuch sleep, etc. Now it is sufficiently
manifest, that Paul under two works of darkness here rehearsed, namely,
contention and envying, does comprehend the rest also of that sort, among which
are bitterness, anger, wrath, crying, and evil speaking. Ephe. 4. And those
which he rehearses in the Epistle to the Galathians: Hatred, debate,
emulations, seditions, heresies, murders, etc. In a sum, hereunto pertain
whatsoever come of evil anger, either in words or deeds, all which can not
be numbered. After the same sort under those four, gluttony, drunkenness,
chambering and wantonness, he comprehends the vices of lust, which are wont to
be committed as well in words as works, which also no man is able to number.
And so the present words of the Apostle do show, neither needs it any
further declaration, that by these six works all things are to be understood,
whereby they that are void of faith, and are yet in darkness, do live vnpurely
as concerning themselves, and unjustly toward their neighbors, whose whole
life is disordered and out course both toward themselves and toward other. For
there is no man that knows not what it is to be gluttonous and dronken, that
is, either to eat or drink above a measure necessary for the body, it is as
well known, what it is to sleep in chambers, and to be wanton, that is, to
follow the pleasure of the body, both with sleeping above measure, and with
other lewd and unchaste gestures and works, which are wont to be committed in
chambers of full fed, well tipled, idle and slothful bellies, as well in
the day, as in the night, as well when they are alone, as in the resort and
company of others. All which things do require even natural darkness, and
secret places, and are signified of Paul by chambering and wantonness.

But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ. In these words as it were in a sum, he
shows all the armor of light, when as he exhorts us to put on Christ.
Christ is put on two manner of ways.
Now Christ is put on of us after two sorts: first when we are clothed with
his righteousness, which is done by faith, wherewith he that is endued,
believes that Christ for him died, and fulfilled all things. For not ours,
but Christ's righteousness has reconciled us to the Father, and delivered us
from sins. And so to put on Christ pertains to the doctrine of faith, which
teaches that Christ was given unto us, and is unto us instead of a pledge.
Whereof Paul speaks Galat. 3: All ye that are baptized into Christ, have put
on Christ. The other manner of putting on Christ is, when we wey and consider,
that he is given unto us also in steed of an example, that we should show our
selves serviceable toward our neighbors, being endued with the same virtues,
with which we by faith acknowledge that he being adorned, did serve us, that so
we may resemble him in all points: and of this manner of putting on Christ Paul
speaks here. The same also he wills us to do 1. Corinthians. 15. when he
says: As we have borne the image of the earthly, so let us now bear the image
of the heavenly. And Ephesians. 4: Cast ye of, concerning the conversation in time
past, that old man, which is corrupt through the deceiuable lusts, and be
renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put on the new man, which after God is
created unto righteousness, and true holiness. Now in Christ we see nothing but
the armor of light, no gluttony, no drunkenness, but fasting, temperancie,
keeping under of the flesh by diverse labors, traueling, preaching, praying,
and doing well to all men, in him was no place for slouthfulnes or superfluous
sleep, much less for wantonness, but a marvelous chastity and purity: he
accustomed himself to watch, to rise early, to lie on the ground in the
field, having neither house, neither chamber, nor bed: in him was noe wrath,
contention or brauling, but altogether goodness, sweetness, meekenes, charity,
mercy, patience, etc. Wherefore where as Paul says here briefly: Put ye on
the Lord Jesus Christ, it is as much as that we should set him before us as an
example to follow.

Colos. 3.12.
He teaches the Colossians the same thing in somewhat more words after this
sort: Now therefore as the elect of God holy and beloved, put on the bowels of
mercy, kindness, humblenes of mind, meekenes, long suffering: forbearing one
an other and forgiving one an other, if any man have a quarrel to an other:
even as Christ forgave, even so do ye. And above all these things put on love
which is the bond of perfectnes: and let the peace of God rule in your hearts,
to the which ye are called in one body, and be ye thankful. And Philip. 2,
after that he had exhorted them to love one an other, and that every man
should esteem other better then him self, and seek to pleasure and do for
other, he also sets Christ before them as an example, who showed him self
to us our servant, and says: Let the same mind be in you that was even in
Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God thought it no robbery to be equal
with God: But he made him self of no reputation, and took on him the form of
a servant, and was made like unto men, and was found in shape as a man. The
sum therefore is this: The armor of light.
the armor or weapons of light are good works, contrary to those works of
darkness, gluttony, drunkenness, chambering, wantonness, contention, and
envying, such works are, to fast, to watch to pray, to labor, to suffer
hunger, thirst, cold, heat, to be chaste, to use modesty, temperancie,
goodness, and that I do not thrust in too many of mine own words, let us
hear Paul him self rehearsing them in order Gal. 5: The fruit of the spirit
is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekenes,
temperancie. But he rehearses them far more at large 2. Cor. 6, saying: We
beseech you that ye receive not the grace of God in vain: for he says, I have
heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I succored
thee: behold now the accepted time, behold now the day of salvation, as if he
said: Our salvation is now nearer unto us then when we believed, to wit, that
it would come to pass, that these days of salvation, in which the Gospel is
preached abroad to the whole world, should appear. It is time therefore to
arise out of sleep: Let us give no occasion of offense in any thing, that our
ministry be not reprehended. But in all things, let us approve our selves as
the Ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in
distresses, in stripes, in prisons, in tumults, in labors: by watchings, by
fastings, by purity, by knowledge, by long suffering, by kindness, by the holy
Ghost, by love unfeigned: By the word of truth, by the power of God, by the
armor of righteousness on the right hand and on the left, By honor, and
dishonor, by evil report and good report, as deceivers, and yet true: as
unknown, and yet known: as dying, and behold we live: as chastened, and yet
not killed: as sorrowing, and yet always rejoicing: as poor, and yet making
many rich: as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. See what a
plentiful and very golden stream flows out of ye mouth of Paul. Hereof I
think we most plainly perceive, what is the armor of light, wherewith we must
be fenced and fortified both on the right hand, and on the left.

A most excellent and perfect example for all Christians to follow.
Now this most fitly agrees with the matter, whereas he sets before us a
most excellent and perfect example, namely the Lord him self, saying: Put ye
on the Lord Jesus Christ. For he is a sluggish beast and not a man, who when he
sees his Lord fast, suffer hunger, labor, watch and to be weary, yet gives
him self to gluttony, sleep, and pleasures. What Lord could take these
things at his servant hand, nay what servant durst presume to do these
things? So it can not be that a Christian man should not be ashamed, when he
beholds Christ, and sees him self so unlike unto him, yea occupied in quite
contrary things. For whom the example of Christ him self does not stir up,
exhort, and move, who can bring or stir him up unto goodness? What would the
leaves of words do with their small noyce, if these thundrings of the example
of Christ do not move? And surely for this cause Paul of purpose adjoined
this word, Lord, saying: Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, as if he said: count
it no great nor burdenous thing, to stand and fight in this armor of light,
ye that are servant, behold your Lord, who when he had no need, did
notwithstanding so well and valiantly use this armor, and fought in it for you.

And take no thought for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it. The Apostle in
these few words has noted two cares of the flesh: One is natural, Lawful
care for the flesh.
whereby necessary food and apparel is provided for the body, that it may
live, and be able to sustain his labor, lest that it be by overmuch
abstinence weakened, and made unprofitable to work. Unlawful provision and
care for the flesh.
The other care is joined with sin, when the body is provided for to fulfill
the lusts thereof, and that it may be delighted: this care the Apostle here
forbids, for it ingendreth the works of darkness, so to pamper and make of
the flesh, which is continually to be chastised, that it may be obedient to the
spirit, and may not shake of the sitter, like unto an untamed horse, albeit
that chastising is so to be tempered, that the body notwithstanding may do his
duty, and bear the sitter. For as the fodder, the whippe and the burden
belongs unto the ass: so meat, correction, and work unto the servant.
Ecclesiastic. 33. He does not say that thou shall flea or slay the ass,
neither that thou shall kill the servant, or cast him into prison: so unto the
body the chastising and labor thereof is due, and necessary food is not to be
withheld from it. Paul him self says: 1. Cor. 9.27.
I tame my body, and bring it into subjection. He says not, I cast it into
sickness, or I kill it, but I subdue it to the spirit, that it may serve, and be
obedient thereunto.

Moreover these words, to fulfill the lusts thereof, Paul added because of
two sorts of men, whereof the first under a pretense of natural necessity,
do satisfy their pleasure, We are prone and ready to fulfill the lusts of
the flesh.
and cover that practice under this false pretense. We are so prone and ready
unto this, that even many of the Saints have very much complained of this
evil, and because of it, have oftentimes above measure afflicted their bodies:
for the flesh is so crafty and marvelous sutle to prepare delights for it
self, that no man can sufficiently taken heed of it, yea it is needful that
a man here do never leave to care and fear. The other sort of men are those
blind holy ones, which think that the kingdom of God and the righteousness
thereof consists in meats and drink, and in chosen apparel, and do beside
their own work regard nothing: when they have so fasted, that they have made
their head diseased, and their stomach distempered, Superstitious fasting and
abstinence from meats. 1. Cor. 8.8.
and do bring unto their body some great infirmity or sickness, they then
think that they have been marvelous holy, and have wrought incomparable good
works. But Paul says: Meat makes not us acceptable to God, for neither if
we eat, have we the more neither if we eat not, have we the less. And Colos.
2. he writes thus much in effect: Beware of the worshipping of Angels, which
has a show of wisdom because of humblenes and superstition, whereby they
spare not the body, while they withdraw from it the measure of food due unto
it, bestowing nothing upon it whereby it may be fed. This preposterous
worshipping of Angels, yea in deed superstition, did so deceive Gerson,
otherwise a notable man, that he praised the Charterhouse Monks, for that they
did so constantly abstain from flesh, that even when they were sick they
would eat none, although they might preserve them selves even from death
thereby. But what, if God shall judge them as killers of their own body? For
there can be none at all either ordinance or order, yea or vow contrary to the
commandment of God, and if there be any such, surely it ought to be of no
force, eue^ as if thou had vowed adultery.

Necessary provision must be made for the body.
Now God both here by Paul, and elsewhere has commanded, that necessary
provision should be made for the body, and has forbidden that we should
procure the death of it: wherefore those things that are profitable to
preserve it, whether they be flesh or eggs, or any thing else, must be given
unto it, in what day or time soever, whether it be the sixth or first day of the
week, whether it be Lent or after Easter, in the mean season whatsoever
orders, laws, and vows, yea even of the Pope being neglected. For it is not
lawful for any man, no not for the Angels to forbid any thing against the
commandment of God. Howbeit this madness proceeds from that darkness and
blindness, whereby miserable men do regard the work only, and think that
they shall obtain salvation through the greatness and multitude of works. The
true end of fasting.
But Paul wills that our fastings and other chastisings of the flesh be the
weapons of light, whereby the works of darkness may be overcome, and not the
body destroyed: wherefore there ought to be no other use among Christians of
fastings, watchings and labors. As it is al one before God, whether thou eat
fish or flesh: whether thou drink wine or water: whether thou wear read or
green garments: all these are the good creatures of God, made unto this end,
that we may use them: have regard only to this, that thou may use them with a
mean, and may abstain thy self so much from them, as shall suffize to
overcome the works of darkness. Wherefore it is impossible that a common manner
of this abstinence should be appointed indifferently to all: One common manner
of fasting cannot be appointed to all.
for the constitution of all men's bodies is not alike, it is above measure to
one, which to an other is under measure: one has need of much, an other of
little, and therefore is it meet that every one have regard of him self, and
govern his own body, according to the present doctrine of Paul, whereas he
says: Take no thought for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, that is,
obey the wisdom thereof so far that ye deny not ye necessary things which it
requires, but grant it not those things, which it requires to the fulfilling
of ye lusts thereof, more then necessity, to pleasure only. If a better rule
of moderation could have been given beside this, Paul would not have concealed
it.

Hereby thou see, that the popish ordinances, Popish ordinances forbidding
the eating of flesh contrary to the Gospel.
which forbid the eating of flesh and certain meats, are quite contrary to
the Gospel: Which Paul has plainly foretold 1. Tim. 4: The Spirit, says
he, speaks evidently, that in the latter times some shall depart from the
faith, and shall give heed unto spirits of error and doctrines of devils,
which speak lies through hypocrisy, forbidding to mary, and commanding to
abstain from meats, which God has created to be received with giving
thanks. No man surely can deny that these words do briefly reprove the
orders of Monks and sacrificing Priests, so clear and manifest are both
these words, and also their preposterous religion. Moreover thou see here
also, godly Reader, that Paul does not teach that dotage and womanly holiness of
certain, which choose unto them selves certain days, wherein to fast to
certain Saints, one to this, an other to that, all which are blind
proceedings, and builded upon their own works. True religion is, without
choice of meats and days, all the life long to use modesty and sobriety.
For seeing that these must be the armor of light, and it is requisite that all
our life be undefiled and chaste, it behooves us surely never to put of this
armor, but we must be found always sober, temperate, watching, laboring and
praying. But those doting holy ones one day taste nothing but bread and water,
and afterward, three whole months they daily be drunken and eat excessiuely,
even until they be not well in their wits. Others fast so, that at ye evening
they eat no meat, but in ye mean season they make them selves drunk with
drinking. Who is able to rehearse all their dotages and all their works of
darkness? all which proceed from hence, for that foolish men consider and
regard the work, and not the use of the work, they make of armor a glass,
they are altogether ignorant, whereunto it is profitable to fast and abstain:
they are like unto him which carried a sword to this end, that he might look
upon it, and knew not how to use it, when he was beaten. These things may
suffize to have been spoken for the exposition of this text.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, WHEREIN IS TAVGHT HOW THE FAITHFVLL ought to
rejoice in God, and let their patient mind be known unto men.
Philip. 4. Verse 4. Rejoice in the Lord always, again I say, rejoice.

5. Let your patient mind be known unto all men. The Lord is at hand.

6. Be nothing careful, but in all things let your requests be showed unto
God in prayer and supplication with giving of thanks.

7. And the peace of God which passes all understanding, shall preserve your
hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.


THis text in deed is but short, nevertheless it does most plentifully abound
with right Christian doctrine, instructing first, how we ought to behave our
selves toward God, secondly, how toward our neighbors, saying first: Rejoice
in the Lord always. Joy in the Lord a fruit of faith, without which there is no
true joy but sadness and fear.
This joy is a fruit of faith, most certainly following it, as Paul witnesses
Gal. 5 where he says: The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long
suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekenes, temperancie, etc. Neither can
it be that that heart should rejoice in the Lord, which has not yet believed
in him. Whereupon it comes to pass, that where no faith is, there can be
nothing but fear, trembling, horror, and sadness, as often as such either
remember God, or hear him named: yea hatred and enmity of God remains in
such hearts, the cause whereof is, for that ye heart void of faith, finds it
self defiled with sins, whereby it douteth not but that it has deserved the
vengeance of God, that sins can not but be hated of God which is just, and
so, when it does not believe that God will be merciful and favorable unto it,
how can it not but detest all memory of him? so far is it of that it can
rejoice in the Lord, the revenger of sins. These two things, the knowledge of
sin, and of the vengeance of God prepared for sins are in the heart of the
unbeliever, which heart as it is unbelieving, so has it no hope of pardon, and
therefore what other thing can these things work in it, but cause it to be
troubled, cast down and always fearful, and greatly terrified, and to
think that ye vengeance of God does every moment hang over it, that so that
may be verified which Solomon says: Pro. 28.1.
The ungodly flees when no man pursues him. And that which is said Deuteronomy. 28:
The Lord shall give thee a fearful heart, and thy life shall hang in dout
before thee. If a man will much persuade such a heart, to have joy in the Lord,
he shall do even as if he persuaded the water that it should burn like unto
the fire, for it can cast none of this joy, it always feels in conscience,
that the revenging hand of God is heavy upon it. Whereupon the Prophet says
Psalm. 32. Be glad O ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord: and be joyful all
ye that are true of heart: for this joy in the Lord can not be but in the
righteous and them that are upright in heart. And therefore it is manifest that
this part of Scripture was written not to sinners, but to the righteous and
Saints. Sinners must first be showed, how they may be delivered from sins,
and may obtain God to be favorable unto them, which when they have learned and
so obtained, it follows that they do of their own accord rejoice in the
Lord, being delivered from remorse of conscience.

But if any demand, how one may be delivered from remorse of conscience, and
have God merciful unto him, that is declared before at large, and shall
hereafter be copiously spoken of. How a man may be delivered from remorse of
conscience, and be assured of Gods favor.
He which seeks to have a free and glad conscience, and God gentle and
favorable, let him not begin at his own works, as the deceitful Papists
teach, only tormenting consciences, and increasing the wrath of God, but let
him despeire of him self and of all his own works, let him embrace God in
Christ, having a sure faith in the Gospel, that he shall receive whatsoever it
promises. But the Gospel promises that Christ is given to us, that he may
take away our sins, and be our high Priest, Mediator and Advocate before
God, that so we may nothing dout, but that our sins through Christ only and
his works are forgiven us, and that we are reconciled to God, and that by this
means our conscience is delivered and comforted.

The believing heart rejoices in the Lord.
When such a faith possesses the heart, and the Gospel is so received in deed,
then God appears sweet and altogether loving, neither feels the heart any
thing but the favor and grace of God, it stands with a strong and bold
confidence, it fears not lest any evil come unto it, it being quiet from all
fear of vengeance and displeasure, is merry, and glad of so incomparable grace
and goodness of God given unto it freely and most abundantly in Christ.
Wherefore there must needs forthwith proceed from such a faith, love, joy,
peace, gladness, giving of thanks, praise, and a certain marvelous delight in
God, as in a most dear and favorable father, which deals so fatherly with
us, and pours forth his gifts so plentifully and in so great a measure, upon
them that do not deserve them. Behold of such joy Paul speaks here, which
truly where it is, there can be no place for sin, or fear of death or hell,
yea nothing is there but a joyful, quiet and omnipotent trust in God and in
his favor. Wherefore it is called joy in the Lord, not in gold or silver,
gluttony or drunkenness, in delicates or singing, health, knowledge, wisdom,
power, glory, friendship, favor, no nor in good works, holiness, or whatsoever
is without God. Of these thou shall take but a deceitful and vain joy, Vain
joy.
which can not pearse the heart, or enter unto the bottom thereof, whereof thou
may rightly say that which is wont to be spoken as a proverb among the
Germans: This man rejoices, but he feels not any joy in his heart. There is
one full and perfect joy, which the believers take of and in the Lord, which is
nothing else, then to commit them selves unto him, and of him alone to rejoice,
trust and presume, as of a most favorable and loving father. Whatsoever joy is
not after this sort, the Lord does contemn and reject it, whereof Jeremy
speaks chap. 9: Let not the wise man rejoice in his wisdom, nor the strong
man in his strength, neither the rich man in his riches: but whosoever will
rejoice, let him rejoice in this, that he understands and knows me. And
Paul 2. Cor. 10. says: Let him that rejoices rejoice in the Lord.

He adds, that we must rejoice always, We must always rejoice in the Lord.
where he touches them, which only half the time do rejoice in the Lord,
and praise him that is, when all things fall out according to their desire,
but when adversity comes, they change joy with sadness and sorrow, of whom
the 48 Psalm speaks: So long as thou do well unto him, he will speak
good of thee. But the Prophet him self says not so: I will always bless God,
his praise shall ever be in my mouth. Psalm. 34, And he has a just cause so to
do, for who shall hurt him, unto whom God is merciful, surely sin shall not
hurt him, neither death nor hell, wherefore the Prophet says in an other place:
Yea though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no
evil. Psalm. 23. And Paul says Romans 8: Who shall separate us from the love
of Christ? shall tribulation or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness,
or peril, or sword? I am persuaded that neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height
nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of
God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Again I say rejoice. This repetition of ye Apostle confirms his
exhortation, and truly not without a cause, forasmuch as we live in the mids
of sins, and therefore in the mids of tribulations, both which do move us
unto sadness and heaviness. Wherefore the Apostle purposing to comfort us against
these, exhorts us that we should always rejoice in ye Lord, Though the
faithful sometime fall into sin, yet they must not therefore cease to
rejoice in the Lord.
albeit we sometime fall into sins. For it is meet, the more God with his
goodness exceeds the evil of sin: so much more always to rejoice in him,
when we are sorrowful because of our sins, which albeit by nature they bring
sadness and sorrow with them, yet forasmuch as they can not bring so much hurt,
as Christ, if we believe in him, brings profit and safety, joy in the Lord
ought always to have the first place with us, and far to overcome the sorrow
and sadness yt comes by reason of our sins. For we must always think on
that which John writes: If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the reconciliation for our sins. 1.
Ioh. 2.

Let your patient mind be known unto all men. He has already taught, how
men ought to behave them selves toward God, namely that they must serve him
with a cheerful heart and continual joy: now he declares in few words, how
the believers ought to behave them selves toward men, saying: Let your patient
mind be known unto all men. Which words are thus much in effect: Be joyful
toward God, always rejoicing in and of him, What it is to let our patient mind
be known unto all men.
but toward men be of a patie^t mind, and pliant, applying your selves to all,
and so behauing your selves, that ye be ready to do and suffer all things, and
to yield in every thing, as much as may be by any means without transgressing
the commandment of God, whereby ye may approve your selves to all men, and
please all in that which is good: not only hurting none, but also taking in
good worth all things of al men, interpreting aright the sayings of al men, and
accepting them in ye better part, that me^ may plainly see you to be them, unto
whom all things are alike, which take in good part whatsoever betideth you,
which stick in nothing, which would not disagree with any man for any cause,
which be rich with the rich, poor with the poor, rejoicing with them that
rejoice, weeping with them that weep, and to be brief, which be made all
things to all men, that all men must needs acknowledge that ye are grievous to
none, but agreeable, of a patient mind, pliant, and obedient toward all in all
things. The Greek word epieices which the Apostle here uses, means the
same, which signifies in our tongue a patient and pliant mind, whereby one
does so apply and show him self indifferent to others, that he is the same to
one that he is to an other, applying him self indifferently to the will of
all, not requiring him self to be counted for a rule, whereunto the rest ought
to apply and order them selves.

An old Interpreter translateth it modesty, which, if thou understand it
aright, and not for the only moderation and temperancie of meat and apparel,
as it is wont commonly to be taken, is not altogether unfitly translated,
namely, if thou understand it to be a virtue, whereby one thinking modestly of
him self, endeavors to order and apply him self unto all, according to the
capacity and ability of every one, ready to permit, to take in good part, to
obey, to give place, to do, to omit, to suffer all things, as he shall see it
will profit his neighbor, albeit he must suffer hinderance and loss of his
substance, name, and body thereby. That these things may be made more plain,
it shall be good to declare them by examples. An example of a patient mind in
Paul.
Paul 1. Cor. 9 writes thus of him self: Unto the Jews I become as a Jew,
that I may win the Jews: to them that are under the law, as though I were
under the law: to them that are without law, as though I were without law
(when I am not without law as pertaining to God, but am in the law through
Christ) I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save some.
Behold, thou see here the patient and pliant mind rightly observing those
things which are here commanded. For those things that he writes of him self
have this meaning: Sometimes he did eat, drink, and do all things as a
Jew, albeit it was not necessary that he should so do: sometimes he did eat
and drink with the Gentiles, and did all things as free from the law. For
only faith in God, and love toward our neighbor, are necessarily required,
all other things are free, so that we may freely observe them for one man's
sake, and omit them for an other man's sake, as we shall perceive it to be
profitable to every one.

Now it is contrary to this modesty or meekenes, if one having an impatient
mind, trusts to his own wit, An impatient mind what it does.
and contendeth that one thing among ye rest is necessary, which thou must
either omit or observe, and so applying him self unto none, but contending to
have all other to apply them selves unto him, he neglects and peruerteth the
softnes and meekenes which is here taught, yea and the liberty of faith also:
such some of the Jews were, unto whom we must give no place, even as Paul
yielded not unto them. We see the same example commonly in Christ, but
specially Matthew. 12, and Mar. 2. where we read that he suffered his Disciples
to break the Sabbath, and he him self also, when the case so required, did
break it, when it was otherwise, he did keep it, whereof he gave this reason:
The Son of man is Lord, even of the Sabbath. Which is as much to say as: the
Sabbath is free, that thou may break it for one man's sake and commodity,
and for the sake and commodity of an other thou may keep it. So Paul
caused Timothe to be circumcised because of the Jews, for that they thought
that it was of importance to their salvation: again he would not have Titus
circumcised, because certain Jews did unjustly urge it, so that ye
circumcision of Titus would have been rather a confirmation of error unto
them, then have profited them any thing. Paul therefore would keep
circumcision free, that he might sometime use it, and sometime not use it, as
he should perceive it to be commodious and profitable to every one.

How the ordinances and decrees of men must be observed or not observed
So, to come to other matters, when the Pope commands to make confession, to
fast, to abstain from, or use this or that kind of meat, etc: and exacteth
these things as necessary to salvation, they are to be utterly contemned, and
those things that are contrary to these, are most freely to be done: but if he
should not command them as necessary, if any man might be helped or edified in
any thing by the observation of them, surely they were to be observed, but
freely, and of love only, as also they are to be omitted, if the omitting of
them may be profitable to any. The reason of this liberty is this: The Son
of man is Lord of the Sabbath: if of the Sabbath, how much more of the
traditions of men? Whatsoever thou shall observe upon this liberty, it can not
hurt any, but to observe them of necessity, it extinguisheth faith and the
Gospel. Likewise, if one live as yet in a Monastery, if he observe the vows
and ordinances of that life upon Christian liberty, and of love to his
brethren that he may edify them, and of no necessity, neither with the
hinderance of his own or other men's salvation, he shall do godly, for he is
free: but if those things be straightly required as necessary to salvation, then
before thou suffer thy self to be brought into this error, Monasteries,
shauings, hoods, vows, rules, ordinances, and all such like must be left, and
the contrary must be done, to witness, that only faith and love are necessary
for a Christian, and that all other things are free, so that he may either
omit or do them for the edifying and cause of them with whom he lives.
Whatsoever thou shall observe upon liberty and of love, is godly: but if thou
observe any thing of necessity it is ungodly. The same is to be said of all
other ordinances and decrees of men, which are wont to be observed in
Monasteries, that whatsoever does not disagree with the word of God, thou
may being free either observe or omit it, according as thou shall know it to
be profitable and acceptable to them, with whom thou art conversant: but if
they be required as necessary, reject them all utterly, and tread them under
thy feet.

Hereupon thou now see, what a deuilish thing the Papacy and Monasteries be.
For whatsoever things be fre and to be permitted to free love only, they make
them necessary, Christian liberty turned of the Papists into mere necessity.
and say the keeping of them is of importance to salvation, whereby truly as
much as is in them, they together pervert and extinguish the Gospel and faith.
I pass over with silence, that they hereupon set and sell the care of the
belly in steed of the service of God. For how many among them at this day do
for Gods cause, and not rather for the bellies sake, take upon them to be
Monks or Clerks, do frequent the quier, sing, pray, say Mass, or do any
such thing, wherein they counterfeit and corrupt the true worship and service
of God? The common subversion of all Monasteries were the best reformation of
all these things, from which so much discommoditie and no whit of profit may
be looked for. Before one Monastery could be persuaded concerning true
Christian liberty, infinite thousands of souls in others should perish,
wherefore forasmuch as they bring no commodity at all, neither is there any
need of them, and they are cause of greater hinderance to a Christian common
weal, then can be thought, and can not by any means be reformed, what can be
more profitable, then that they be utterly overthrown and abolished?

Moreover that we may admonish here concerning the civil Magistrate, when he
commands or requires any thing, Obedience to the civil Magistrate does not
hinder Christian liberty.
yea if he compel thereunto, we must obey, for there comes no loss of
Christian liberty or of faith hereby, forasmuch as they do not contend that
those things are necessary to salvation which they do ordain or require, but
only to maintain outward rule, public tranquillity and government, and so
the conscience remains free. Wherefore, forasmuch as it does nothing hinder
faith to do those things which the civil Magistrate commands, but does also
profit the common weal, it shall be without dout a point of Christian
obedience to endeavor to do them with a willing mind, that we may be such as
are pliant and agreeable to all men, willing to do all things, ready to
deserve well of every one, and to gratify all. Howbeit if any should contend
that those commandments of the civil Magistrate be necessary to salvation,
then, as it is said of the traditions of the Papists, the contrary rather were
to be done, or at the lest it were to be witnessed, that thou do them only
for the commonweals sake, because so it is profitable to others, and not,
that thou may obtain salvation by them, which we have gotten by Christ Jesus
alone, as many of us as believe in him. According to this doctrine and the
examples before mentioned every one ought to behave him self in every thing
and toward all men, as Paul here teaches, that he stick not to his own
judgment or right, but that he show him self pliant unto others, and have
regard of those things, which he shall know will be acceptable and profitable
to his neighbors.

When therefore it does nothing hinder thy faith, and profits thy neighbor
to yield somewhat of thine own right, if thou do it not, thou art without
charity, and neglectest that Christian softnes and patient mind that Paul
here speaks of: Yea if thou have regard hereof, as he that truly believes in
Christ ought to have, thou must take it patiently even when any man does
injury unto thee, or endamage thee, and so interpret it in the better part,
and always think on that, A most worthy saying of a right Christian Martyr.
which that Martyr when all his substance was taken from him, said: But they
shall not take away Christ from me. So whatsoever chances unto thee, say
thou: I have as yet suffered no loss of my faith, why should I not take it in
good part, which my neighbor has done? why should I not yield unto him, and
apply my self to his will? Thou can scarce find a more manifest example
hereof, An example which Christians ought to follow in behauing them selves
toward their neighbors.
then between two unfeigned friends: for as they behave them selves one toward
an other, so ought a Christian to behave him self toward every one. Either of
them endeuoreth to gratify other, either of them gives place to other,
suffers, does, and omitteth whatsoever he sees to be for the profit and
commodity of the other, and that freely without all constraint. Either of them
does diligently apply him self to the will of the other, neither of them
compels other to follow his mind, and if one should use the goods of an
other, yt other would not be offended, but would take it in good part, and
would not grudge rather to give more, and that I may speak briefly, between
such there is no exaction of law, no grudging, no constraint, no necessity,
but liberty, favor and good will.

Contrariwise, such as be impatient and obstinate, which take nothing in good
part of any man, but go about to make all things subject to their own will,
and to order all things according to their own judgment, The impatient and
obstinate are cause of much evil.
such I say trouble the world, and are the cause of all discordes, contentions,
wars, and whatsoever discommoditie there is, they say afterward, that they
did those things for the love of justice, and for that they endeavored to
defend that which is right. So that that heathen man said not amiss Extreme
rigor is extreme injury. And Solomon also says Eccles. 7. Be thou neither
too righteous nor over wise. For as extreme rigor is extreme injury, so too
great wisdom is extreme folly. Which also is meant by this common saying: when
wise men dote they dote beyond measure. Surely if God should deal with us
according to right, we should perish in a moment, wherefore as Paul prayseth
in him this moderation of right, and incomparable patience and gentleness saying
2. Cor. 10: I beseech you by the meekenes and gentleness of Christ, so is it
also meet that we do observe a measure of our judgment, right, wisdom,
prudence, and in all things apply our selves to the profit and commodity of
others.

But let us weie the words of the Apostle, for they are placed not without a
spiritual skilfulnes, he says: Let your patient mind or softnes be known
unto all men. Where thou must not think that he commands thee to be made
known unto all men, How our patient mind must be made known unto all men
or that thou ought to tell thy patient mind or softnes before all men. For
he says not, tell it forth, but let it be known, that is, endeavor to
practice it toward men, I do not command that ye should think or speak of
it, but that ye labor that it may be known in deed, while all men do try
and feel it, that no man may say any other thing of you, then that ye be of a
patient mind, and pliant, applying your selves to all men, being enforced so
to say even by manifest experience. So that if any man were never so much bent
to speak otherwise of you, his mouth might be stopped by yt testimony of all
other, witnessing of your patient mind and meekenes. So says Christ Matthew. 5.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven. And Peter says: 1. Pet. 2.
Have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they which speak evil
of you as of evil doers, may by your good works, which they shall see,
glorify God in the day of visitation. It is not surely in our power, that our
patient mind should be known and acknowledged of all men, but it shall be
sufficient for us, if we endeavor that all men may have trial thereof in us,
and that no man may find it wanting in our life.

Moreover [all men] is not so to be taken, that thou should understand
thereby all men which are in the world, but rather all sorts of men, that we
have regard to be of a patient mind as well toward enemies as friends, as well
toward servant as Masters, small as great, poor as rich, strangers as them
at home, toward them that we know not, as toward them with whom we are
familiar. For there are some, which behave them selves very gentlely and
patiently toward strangers, but toward them that are in the house with them,
or with whom they always keep company, there are none more obstinate or
froward then they. And how many are there, The most part are ready to make
their patient mind known to the rich and their friends, but not to the poor
and their enemies.
which at great and rich men's hands take all things in good part, interpret
every thing at the best, and most gently bear, whatsoever they say or do,
but toward the poor and abiects they show no gentleness or meekenes, neither
take any thing of them in good part. So we are all ready to do for our
children, parents, friends, and kinsmen, and most favorably interpret and
willingly bear whatsoever they have committed. How often do we even praise
the manifest vices of our friend, or at the least wink at them, and apply our
selves most fitly unto them? but to our enemies and adversaries we impart none
of this favor, in them we can find nothing that is good, nothing that is to be
borne, nothing that can be interpreted in the better part, but we disprayse
every thing, and take it at the worst. Against such parted and imperfect
patient minds Paul here speaks saying: Let your patient mind be known unto
all men: he will have our patient mind and right Christian meekenes to be
perfect and entire toward all, whether they be enemies or friends, he will
have us suffer and take in good part all things of all men, without all respect
either of persons or deserts. And such without dout will our patient mind be,
if it be true and not counterfeit: no otherwise then gold remains gold,
whether a godly or ungodly man possess it, and the silver, which Judas, who
betrayed the Lord, had, was not turned into ashes, but remained that which it
was, as truly all the good creatures of God, whosoever have them, do continue
toward all things, that which they are: So a patient mind which is sincere
coming of the spirit, continues like it self, whether it light upon enemies
or friends, poor men or rich. But our nature which is full of deceit and
plainly corrupt, does so behave it self, as if that which is gold in the hand
of Peter, were turned into a cole in the hand of Judas, and it is wont to be
patient and plyant toward rich men, great personages, strangers, friends, and
not toward every one, wherefore it is false, vain, lying, hypocritical, and
nothing but deceit and mockery before God. Hereof now learn how impossible
sound and entire, that is, spiritual meeknes and a patient mind is unto
nature, and how few there be which mark this evil, by reason of that
deceitful meekenes and patient mind, though in outward show very goodly,
which they show unto certain, thinking that they do well and justly, in that
they are more hard and impatient toward some. For so their defiled and filthy
nature teaches them, by her goodly reason, which always judges and does
against the spirit and those things that are of the spirit, because as Paul
says: Romans 8: They that are after the flesh, savor the things of the flesh.

But to conclude, it is manifest that the Apostle has comprehended in these
few words the whole life worthy of a Christian, which he ought to lead toward
his neighbor. For he that is of a patient mind, pliant and meek in deed,
studieth to deserve well of all men, as well concerning the body as concerning
the soul, as well in deed as in words, and does also bear with a most
patient mind, the offenses and malice of others. Where such a mind is, there
is also love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, and what soever
is the fruit of the spirit Gal. 5. But here flesh murmureth: If we should
endeavor to be so meek and patient, says the flesh, that we should take all
things in good part of all men, it would come to pass, that no man should be
able to keep a piece of bread safely and in peace for the unjust which would
abuse our meekenes and patie^t mind, they would take away all things, yea they
would not suffer us to live. Mark how comfortably and abounda^tly the Apostle
does satisfy this distrusting and foolish cogitation, even from this place
unto the end of this text.

The Lord is at hand. As though he said: We must make our patient mind known
unto all without fear least any abuse it to our hurt and hinderance.
if there were no Lord or no God, one might fear, when by his meekenes and
patient mind he compteth all things alike, and takes all things in good
part, that that would be damage and hurt unto him, but now there not only is a
Lord, which governs all things most justly, but he is also at hand, he can
not forget or forsake thee, be thou only of a patient mind and gentle toward
all, let him have the care of thee, nourish, and preserve thee. He has given
Christ the eternal good, how should not he also give things necessary for
the belly? He has far more, then can be taken away from thee, and thou
forasmuch as thou have Christ, have much more then the whole world. Hereunto
pertains that which is said Psalm. 55: Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he
shall nourish thee. And 1. Pet. 5: Cast all your care on him: for he cares for
you. And Christ says Matthew. 6: Behold the fowls of the aier and lilies of the
field, etc. all which agree with the present consolation of the Apostle, and
have the same meaning which these words here have: The Lord is at hand.

Christians must not be careful, but must cast their care on God who cares
for them.
Be nothing careful. That is, take no care at all for your selves, let God
care for you, who knows and is able to do it, whom ye have now known that
he is good and gracious. The heathen have not without a cause care of this
present life, inasmuch as they are ignorant and do not believe that they have a
God who has care of all, as Christ Matthew. 6. said: Be not careful for your
life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink: nor yet for your body, what
ye shall put on: for after all these things seek the Gentiles, but your
heavenly Father knows, that ye have need of all these things. Wherefore let
the whole world take from thee, and do thee injury, thou shall always have
sufficient, and it can not be that thou should perish with any adversity,
unless they have first taken from thee thy God, but who can take him from thee,
if thou thy self do not cast him of? There is no cause therefore that we
should be careful, seeing that he is our father and provides for us, which
has all things in his own hand, even those, which seem to take away those
things that be ours from us, and to endamage and hurt us wherein soever they
are able. But we have exceeding great cause always to rejoice in the Lord,
when we are of a patient mind toward all men, forasmuch as we are certain, if
so be that we believe, that it can by no means come to pass, that good
things should be wanting unto us, having Almighty God our favorable and
careful father: whom they that have not, let us suffer them to be troubled
with carke and care. It ought to be our only care, how we may be void of
care, and be found always joyful in God, and meek and of a patient mind
toward men. So without dout we shall try that which David tried saying: I have
been young and now am old, Psalm. 37.25.
and yet saw I never the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread.
And that which he says Psalm. 40: The Lord cares for me.

But in all things let your requests be showed unto God in prayer and
supplication with giving of thanks. In these words the Apostle teaches, how
our care is to be cast upon God, and the meaning of that which he says is
this: How ye godly must cast their care upon God.
Only be not careful, but if any thing chance, which may make you careful
(as in deed innumerable such are wont to come unto those that live in the
world) so behave your selves, that ye attempt nothing at all with your care,
what soever that shall be which chances unto you, but casting of care, turn
your selves with prayer and supplication unto God, and desire him that he will
bring to pass and finish that which your selves otherwise should in vain have
attempted with your care to accomplish. Howbeit desire this with giving of
thanks, forasmuch as ye have such a God as has care of you, and unto whom ye
may safely commit all carke and care for you. But he that will not so behave
himself when any thing happens, but will first weye all things by his own
reason, and order them according to his own judgment, and so take to himself
the care of his things, he shall wrap himself in innumerable discommodities,
he shall loze all joy and quietness thereby, and yet shall prevail nothing, but
labor in vain, and plunge himself so much more in troubles and miseries,
that he shall not be able to escape out of them again, which we learn daily
both by our own and by other men's experience. Now that which Paul here
admonishes concerning prayer tends unto this end, lest that any man should
neglect all things and commit them to God, and he himself sleep and do
nothing at all, no not so much as once pray for them: for he that should use
this slouthfulnes, albeit he were now quiet, shall easily be wrapped in cares,
whereof he shall not be able to rid himself: we must do our endeavor and not
sleep, and therefore it is that many things be incident, which are wont to
bring carefulnes, whereby we might be as it were compelled to pray unto God.
Wherefore Paul has not in vain joined together these two: Be nothing
careful, and: In all things let your requests be showed unto God in prayer
and supplication with giving of thanks. Nothing and All do in deed greatly
differ, howbeit the Apostle therefore put them together, that he might signify
that it can not be, but that many and innumerable things be incident, which
are wont to bring carke and care, but that in all them we ought to admit no
carefulnes, but always fly unto prayer, and commit them all unto God, and
desire of him those things whereof we have need.

Now we must here see how our prayer must be framed, and what is the true manner
of praying. The Apostle sets down four things, prayer, supplication,
giving of thinks, and requests or petitions. Prayer.
Prayer is those words or speech, wherein as sometimes some thing is desired,
so also other things are declared, as is the Lords Prayer and the Psalms.
Supplication.
Supplication is, when the petition is urged or made more earnest by some
thing, as when one prays for his father, or for some other thing which is
dear and excellent unto him, as when we pray unto God by his mercy, by his
son, by his promise, by his name, etc. As Solomon Psalm. 132: Lord remember
David, and all his trouble. And Paul Romans 12: I beseech you by the mercies of
God. And 2. Cor. 10: I beseech you by the mekenes and gentleness of Christ, A
petition or request.
etc. A petition or request is, when we name that which is desired, and for
which prayer and supplication is made, as in the Lords Prayer, all that
composition of words is called prayer, but those seven things for which we
pray, as, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, etc. are petitions. According
to that saying Matthew. 7: Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall
find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For whosoever asks, receives:
and he that seeks fyndeth: and to him that knocks, it shall be opened. Giving
of thanks is when the benefits of God are rehearsed, Giving of thanks.
whereby faith in God is strengthened, and stirred up so much more confidently
to look for that which is desired, and for which we do pray. Wherefore prayer
urges or earnestly asks by supplication, but is strengthened and made sweet
and acceptable by giving of thanks, and so by this strength and sweetness it
prevails, and obtains, what soever it asks. This manner of prayer we read
to have bin used in the Church, and among the holy fathers of the old
Testament, which were wont always in their prayers to ask with supplication
and giving of thanks. The same also we see in the Lords Prayer, which
begins with giving of thanks and with praise, when as even in the beginning
thereof we confess God a father, unto whom the godly mind has access by his
fatherly love and by the love of his son, unto which supplication nothing may
be compared, wherefore it is both the best and most excellent prayer of all
which may be had.

Moreover in these words Paul has very well expressed the mystery of the
golden censer of the old Testament, The mystery of the golden censer declared.
whereof we read many things in the books of Moses. It was lawful for the
Priests only to burn incense, now all we which believe in Christ, are
Priests, wherefore it is lawful for all us, and for us only to burn the
incense of prayers. The censer that golden vessel, is the words which we utter
in prayer, surely golden and precious, as those are, whereof the Lords prayer
consists, the Psalms and other prayers of the Scripture. For commonly in the
Scripture vessels signify words, for that our meaninges are contained in
words as in a vessel, and by words are uttered and received as out of a
vessel, as wine, water, burning coals, and such like, are contained in
vessels, and taken out of vessels. So by the cup of Babylon Apoc. 17. the
doctrine of men is understood, and by the cup wherein the blood of Christ is
drunk the Gospel.

Furthermore burning coals, What is signified by the burning coals, whereon the
ince^se was laid.
whereupon the frankincense was laid, signify giving of thanks, and
rehearsing of benefits in prayer, which we are wont to do in making
supplication. For, that by fiery coals benefits are signified it is manifest
even out of the 12. to the Romans where the Apostle recites the saying of
Solomon Proverb. 25: If thine enemy hunger, feed him: if he thirst, give him
drink: for in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire on his head. And
benefits may be rightly called coals of fire, forasmuch as they inflame the
heart with love, although it be cold. In the Law it was prohibited to lay the
frankincense upon any other coals, but them that were of the altar of ye Lord,
which signifies, that we must not rehearse our own good deeds in prayer, as
that Pharise did, Luc. 15: but only the benefits of God bestowed upon us in
Christ. He is our altar, We must give thanks to God by Christ.
by him we must offer, for the benefits received by him we must give thanks,
and make mention of them in prayer for the increasing of our faith. This Paul
teaches Coloss. 3. where he says: Do all things in the name of the Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father by him. For God can not suffer, that
thou should glory of any thing else in his sight, which he declared in a
type or figure Leuit. 10, where we read that Nadah and Abihu the sons of
Aaron were taken and consumed of the flame from the altar of God, because they
burned incense taking other fire then of the altar of the Lord. The works of
Christ only are acceptable to God, wherefore for these only we must both give
thanks and rejoice in prayer.

The petitio^s made in prayer signified by the ince^se laid on the burning
coals.
The incense signifies the petitions made in prayer. For petitions are, whereof
prayer consists, and which ascend unto God, according as Paul says: Let your
petitions be showed unto God, wherein he seems to have considered and
interpreted them as a savor ascending from the censer. As though he had said:
when ye will burn incense sweet and acceptable unto the Lord, make, that your
petitions be showed unto God with supplication and giving of thanks, this
incense and this savor as it is most sweet unto God, so does it ascend
straight unto heaven, like vapoures of smoke, and enters even unto the throne
of God. And as burning coals do give a strong savor and make it ascend upward:
so the memory of the benefits of God, which we rehearse by giving of thanks,
and whereof we do as it were aduertize God and our selves, does make prayer
steadfast and bold, which cheerfully and gladly ascends into heaven, without
which truly prayer faints, is cold and of no force. Wherefore whosoever thou
art, before thou pray with faith and effectually, they heart must be inflamed
with the memory of the benefits, which God has bestowed upon us in Christ.

But perhaps some man will demand, how our petitions be showed or become
manifest unto God, seeing that they be not only known unto him before we
pray, but he also does send us that, which we ask? Whereunto I answer: the
Apostle adjoined this, that he might teach, of what sort true prayer ought to
be, We must not pray at adventure but be certainly persuaded that we shall be
heard of God.
to wit, assured and having confidence and trust in God, which passes not away
into the wind, neither is made at adventure, as their prayer is, which pray,
and have no regard, whether God hears or not, yea rather believe that he does
not hear, which undoubtedly is not to pray or to ask of God, but to tempt and
mock God. For if any man did desire money of me, whom I certainly knew, not to
persuade himself that he should receive it, I could not suffer such an asker,
of whom I might assure my self to be mocked: how much more is God offended at
our much crying out and babbling, when we do continually babble much and cry
out, and do not think at all whether he hears us. Learn therefore here, How
our petitions are showed unto God.
that they petitions must be showed unto God, that is, that thou must so ask,
that thou dout not, that they petitions be known and accepted of God, and
believe certainly, that thou shall obtain what soever thou do ask, with
which faith if thou be endued, it shall so come unto thee in deed. For as we
belteue, so it comes unto us. Wherefore, as the smoke carries the savor
upward from the censer: so faith carries the petitions of the believers into
the sight of God, whereby we assuredly believe, that our petitions shall come
unto God, and that we shall undoubtedly obtain those things that we ask. Paul
by these words [be shewed] did undoubtedly mean that, which is eftsoons in
the Psalms: God has heard my petition, Give ear Lord unto my prayer, and
such like. Hereof Christ speaks Matthew, 21, and Mar. 11. Whatsoever ye shall
ask in prayer, if ye believe, ye shall receive it. And James says chap. 1:
Ask in faith and waver not, for he that wauereth shall receive nothing of the
Lord. Who may not now hereof perceive, that that much babbling and crying out,
which is made commonly through the world in monasteries, is a mocking and
deluding of God? The prayers of these, if they may be called prayers, are
abundantly showed before men, for they cry out and babble too much, but there
is no regard of them with God, they are not known of him, neither come they
unto his ears, that is, he does by no means hear them, for that they do not
believe, or are assured, that their crying out or much babbling is heard of
God, wherefore as they believe, so do they receive. It was time therefore long
since, that those mockinges and blasphemies of God should be abolished. But if
we pray as we are here taught, there shall be nothing surely which we may not
obtain. Why we oftentimes pray and receive not.
Now we pray for many things continually, and receive nothing, neither is it
any meruell, seeing we pray so, that our petitions be not showed unto God, for
that we do not believe that they be manifest unto him. Woe to our diffidence and
incredulity.

And the peace of God which passes all understanding, shall preserve your
hearts and minds in Christ Jesus. In how goodly an order does Paul here
instruct a Christian man? First he teaches him to be glad and joyful in the
Lord by faith: secondly to show himself meek and gentle to all his
neighbors. And if thou say, how can I do that without loss or hinderance? he
answers: The Lord is at hand. If thou again object: But what if men
persecute me, and even bereue me of that I have? He adds: be nothing
careful, but let thy petitions be showed unto God. Where if the flesh again
murmur, what if in the mean season I be oppressed and spoiled? he concludes
that there shall be nothing less, the peace of God shall preserve and keep
thee, whereof I must now entreat somewhat. The peace of God.
By the peace of God is not meant here that peace, whereby God is peaceable and
quiet in himself, but that which he gives unto us, and pours into our
hearts, even as also it is called the word of God which he gives us, that we
may preach it and believe it. So when he gives this peace unto us, it is
called the peace of God, even because we have the same with him, when in the
world notwithstanding we suffer affliction.

Now this peace passes all understanding, reason, and knowledge of man: which
is not so to be understood, as though man can not at all perceive or know it,
for if we have peace with God, truly it must be felt in our heart and
conscience, otherwise our hearts and minds could not be preserved by it, but
it is thus to be understood* When tribulation comes upon them, which know not
to fly unto God with prayer and supplication, but trust to their own wisdom
and care, whereby they seek peace, but that which reason is able to know,
which is that, whereby tribulation takes an end, and is changed with outward
tranquillicie: this peace does not pass reason, but is agreeable unto it,
inasmuch as it is sought and found out of it. Wherefore they that are void of
faith are exceedingly disquieted, and troubled until according to the reason
of the flesh they obtain this peace by heardly delivering or ridding
themselves of adversity, not regarding whether they bring that to pass by
force or by craft, as he that has received a wound seeks to have it healed,
The peace which the faithful enjoy.
etc. But they that rejoice syncerely in the Lord, it is sufficient for them,
that they know that they have God favorable unto them, and have assured peace
with him, they abide willingly in tribulation, being nothing careful for that
peace of reason by the removing of outward troubles, but they endure them
valiantly, looking to be strengthened inwardly by faith, taking no care whether
the adversities which they suffer, shall remain a short or a long time,
whether they shall be temporal or continuing, neither are disquieted with caring
what end they shall have. They commit all things to God, seeking not to know,
when, how, where, or by whom he will give them quietness. Wherefore God again
shows them this favor, that he makes the end of their trial to be such,
and with so great commodity, as no man could either suspect or wish for. Lo,
this is that peace of the cross, the peace of God, the peace of conscience,
true Christian peace, which makes that a man outwardly also, as much as is in
him, lives quietly and peaceably with all men, and troubles no man. This
peace reason is not able by any means to know or comprehend, that a man under
the cross may have quietness of mind and joy of heart, and peace even in the
very invasion of his enemies: this is the gift and work of God, known to
none, but to him that has it, and has tried it.

Whereas Paul said: Romans 15.13.
Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that which
he calls in these words, peace in believing, he calls in our present text
ye peace of God. Moreover Paul signifies in these words, that whosoever will
rejoice in the Lord by faith, and be meek and of a patient mind toward all by
love, the Deuell undoubtedly is against him, The Deuell labors to hinder and
stay the godly proceedings of the faithful.
and will raise up some cross, that he may drive him from so Christian a
purpose, wherefore the Apostle will have every one to be prepared against this
assault of Satan, and to place his peace there where Satan can not trouble it,
namely in God, and not think how he may cast of the cross, but suffer the
adversary to take on, and rage as he list, he in the mean season patiently
looking for the Lord, that he coming may make an end of adversity and
trouble: for by this means his mind, heart and conscience are preserved and
kept in peace. Neither can patience endure, where the heart is not confirmed
with this peace, for that he only which has this peace does thoroughly persuade
himself that God is favorable unto him, and careful for him, and makes no
account what chances unto him from creatures. Moreover let no man understand
here the hearts and minds to be the will and knowledge of nature, but as
Paul himself interprets, the hearts and minds in Christ Jesus, that is,
such as we have in Christ, of Christ, and under Christ. These are the hearts
and minds which faith and love cause, with which they that be endued, do
behave themselves most godly toward God, and most lovingly and gently toward
their neighbor. Toward God they so behave themselves, that they believe in
him, and love him with their whole heart, and are also most ready, with their
whole heart and with all their cogitations to do those things which shall be
acceptable to God and their neighbors, as much as, yea more then they are
able. Such hearts and minds the Deuell goes about with the fear of death
and other troubles to terrify and drive from this godliness, erecting a false
hope there against by the devises and imaginations of men, wherewith the mind
is seduced, that it may seek to be comforted and helped of it self or other
creatures, which if it do, surely he has drawn such a man from the care of
God, and wrapped him in his own vain care.

Thus have thou godly reader, out of this short text a most plentiful
instruction of Christian life, how thou must live toward God and thy neighbor,
namely that thou must believe that God is all things unto thee, and thou
again must be all things unto thy neighbors, that thou must show thy self
such a one to thy neighbor, as God has showed himself to thee, that thou
must receive of God and give to thy neighbor: All which are contained in faith
and love, the whole sum of all Christianity.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, CONCERNING THEM THAT BE UNDER THE Law, and them
that be under Grace.
Gal. 4. Verse 1. THen I say, that the heir as long as he is a child,
differs nothing from a servant, though he be Lord of all,

2. But is under tuters and gouerners, until the time appointed of the father.

3. Even so, we when we were children, were in bondage under the rudiments of
the world.

4. But when the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a
woman, and made under the Law,

5. That he might redeem them which were under the Law, that we might receive
the adoption of the sons.

6. And because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into
your hearts, which cries, Abba, Father.

7. Wherefore now thou art not a servant, but a son: if thou be a son,
thou art also an heir of God through Christ.


THis text touches the very pith of Paul's chief doctrine, the cause why it
is well understood of so few, is not, for that it is so obscure and hard, but
because there is almost no knowledge of faith left in the world, without which
it can not be that one should rightly understand Paul, who every where
entreats of faith with such force of the spirit as he is able. I must
therefore speak somewhat, that this text may be made plain, and that I may
more conveniently bring light unto it in expounding it, I will speak a few
words in manner of a preface. First therefore we must understand that that
treatise, wherein is entreated of good works, does far differ from that
wherein is entreated of justification, as there is very great difference
between the substance and the working, between a man and his work. Now
justification is of man, and not of works: for man is either justified and
saved, or judged and condemned, and not works. Neither is it in controversy
among the godly, that man is justified by no work, but righteousness must come
unto him from some other where, then from his own works. For Moses writes of
Abel after this sort: The Lord had respect unto Abel, and to his oblation. God
first regards the man, and the^ the work.
First he had respect to Abel himself, then to his oblation, because that Abel
was first counted righteous, entire, and acceptable unto God, and then for his
sake his oblation also was allowed, and not he because of his oblation. Again,
God had no respect to Cain, and therefore neither to his oblation: where again
thou see, that regard is had first of the worker the^ of the work. Of this
place it is very plainly gathered, that no work can be allowed of God,
whereas he which works that work, was not first acceptable to him: and
again, that no work is disalowed of him, unless the author thereof be
disallowed before. I think that these things will be sufficient concerning this
matter in this place, of which it is easy to understand, that there are two
sorts of works: some going before justification, and some following it, and
that these last are good works in deed, but that those other do only appear
to be good. Hereof comes such disagreeme^t between God, and those
counterfect holy ones, for this cause nature and reason rise and rage against
the holy Ghost, this is that whereof almost all the whole Scripture entreats.
The Lord in his word defines, that all works that go before justification,
are evil, and of no importance, and requires that man himself before all
things be justified. Again, Man before he is regenerate can do nothing that
is good.
he pronounces all men, which are not yet regenerate, and have not changed
that nature, which they received of their parents, with the new creature of
Christ, to be unrighteous and wicked, according to that saying Psalm. 116: All
men are liars, that is, unable to perform their duty, and to do those
things, which by right they ought. And Genesis 6: The heart of man is always
ready unto evil, whereby undoubtedly it comes to pass, that he is able to do
nothing that is good, which has the fountain of actions, that is his heart,
corrupted. And if he do many works which in outward show seem good, God has
regard first to ye worker then to ye work, reason does quite contrary,
affirming that by his works the worker is justified.
they are no better then the oblation of Cain.

Here against comes forth reason our reverend maistres seeming to her self
marvelous wise, yet in deed is unwise and blind, and is not ashamed to
gainsay her God, and to reprove him of lying, she being furnished with her
follies and very strawie armor, to wit, the light of nature, free will, the
strength of nature, also with the books of the heathen and with the doctrines
of men. She dares with her evil sounding stringes make a noyce against God,
that the works of a man even not yet justified, are good works, and not
works like unto Cains, (which God pronounces) yea and so good, that he that
works them is justified by them. For so Aristotle has taught, that he that
works well is made good. Unto this saying she leaves and sticks
immovably, and wresteth the Scripture clean contrary, contending that God
will have respect first to the works, the^ to the worker. Such very deuelish
doctrine bears the sway now every where in schools, colleges and
monasteries, wherein no other saints, then Cain was, have rule and authority.
Now of this error an other immediately springs. They which attribute so much
to works, and do not accordingly esteem the worker and sound justification,
go so far, that they ascribe all merit and sovereign righteousness to works
done before justification, making almost no account of faith, alleging that
which James says, that without works it is dead. Which sentence of the
Apostle when they little understand, they attribute almost nothing to faith,
they always stick to works, whereby they think they do merit exceedingly of
God, and are persuaded that for their works sake they shall obtain the favor
of God, and by this means do they continually disagree with God, showing
themselves to be the right posterity of Cain. God has respect unto man, these
to the works of man: God aloweth the works for his sake that works, these
require that for the works sake the worker may be crowned. Now God goes not
from his sentence, as it is meet and just, and these will seem nothing less
the^ to err in any respect. They will not have their good works contemned,
reason to be nothing esteemed, free will to be counted ineffectual, or surely,
if thou do here strive against them, they begin to be angry with God, and
count it a small matter to kill their brother Abel.

But here perhaps thou will say: what is needful to be done? by what means
shall I first of all become righteous, and acceptable to God? How shall I
attain to this perfect justification? The Gospel answers, preaching that
it is necessary that thou hear Christ, and repose thy self wholly in him,
denying thy self, and distrusting all thine own strength. By this means thou
shall be changed from Cain to Abel, and being thy self acceptable, shall
offer acceptable gifts to the Lord. This faith, as it is preached unto thee
for no merit of thine own, so is it given unto thee for no deserving of thine,
but of mere grace. And this faith justifies thee, thou being endued herewith
the Lord remitteth all thy sins, and that by the contemplation of Christ his
son, in whom this faith believes and trusts. Moreover he gives unto such
a faith his spirit, which does thoroughly change a man and make him new, so
that now he has other reason, and an other will, then before, namely that
which is ready unto good. Such a one works nothing but good works, neither
can it be but good, which he being good before, shall do, whereof I have spoken
somewhat before. Wherefore nothing else is required unto justification, What is
required to justification.
then to hear Jesus Christ our Savior, and to believe in him, howbeit neither
of these is the work of nature, but both of only grace. He therefore that
goes about to attain hereunto by works, shuts the way to the Gospel, to
faith, grace, Christ, God, and all things that help unto salvation. Again,
unto good works there is need only of justification, which he that has
attained, does work only good works, and beside such a one none. Hereof it
sufficiently appears, that the beginning, the things following, and the
order of man's salvation are after this sort. First of all is required, that
thou hear the word of God, next that thou believe, then that thou do work,
and so at the last become saved and happy. He which changes this order,
without doubt is not of God. Paul also describes this order Romans 10, saying:
Whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord, shall be saved. But how shall
they call on him, in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in
him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher?
and how shall they preach, except they be sent? Therefore Christ teaches us to
pray the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth laborers into his
harvest, that is, sincere preachers. When we hear these preach the true word
of God, we may believe, which faith justifies a man, and makes him godly in
deed, that he now calls upon God in the spirit of the sons, and works
nothing but that which is good, and thus becomes a man saved. Which is no
other thing, then if I say: He that believes shall be saved. Again, he that
works without faith is condemned, as Christ says: He that does not believe
shall be condemned, from which no works shall deliver him.

Confer now herewith those things which are wont commonly to be spoken of
honesty and righteousness. Are they not wont thus to say? I will endeavor, that
I may yet become honest. It is meet surely that we study to lead an honest
life and to do good works. Well, admit this to be so. But if one the^ ask
them how we may apply our selves unto honesty, and by what means we may
attain unto it: they answer, that we must fast, pray, frequent temples,
avoid sins etc. Hypocritical and counterfeit holiness.
Hereupon one becomes a Charterhouse Monk, an other choseth some other order
of monks: an other is consecrated a Priest: some torment their flesh by
wearing hear cloth: other scourge their bodies with whipps, other afflict
themselves after other sorts. But these are even of Cains brood, and their
works are no whit better then ye works of Cain. For the man himself
continues the same that he was before, ungodly, and without all justification:
there is a certain change made only of outward works, of apparel, of places
etc. Neither are these any other the^ very apes of saints, for they do
preposterously imitate the manners and works of saints, when as they
themselves are nothing less the^ saints. They scarce think of faith, they
presume only of such works as seem good unto themselves, thinking by the^ to
come unto heaven. Of whom Christ said: Enter in at the straight gate: for I say
unto you, many seek to enter in at it, and can not. Why is this? because they
know not what this narrow gate is. For it is faith, which does altogether
annihilate or make a man nothing in his own eyes, and requires yt he put no
trust in any of his own works, but that he lean only to ye grace of God, and
be prepared for it to leave and suffer all things. But those holy ones of Cains
brood think their good works to be the narrow gate, and are not therefore
extenuated, or made less, whereby they might enter: they do not leave
confidence in their works, but gathering them together in great coules, they
hang them about them, and so go about to enter in being burdened, and as it
were swollen big, which is as possible for them, as for a camel with his
bounched back to go through ye eye of a needle.

When thou shall begin to preach unto these of faith, they laugh and hiss at
thee: Do thou count us, say they, for Turks and Heathen, whom it behooves
now first to learn faith? Is there such a company of Priests, Monks and
Nuns, and is not faith known? Who knows not what he ought to believe? even
manifest sinners know that. And being after this sort animated and stirred up,
they think that they be abou^dantly endued with faith, and that the rest is
now to be finished and made perfect by works. Whereupon they make too small
and sclender account of faith, as I have said, because they are ignorant both
what faith is, and that it alone does justify. They call it faith, when they
believe those things which they have heard of Christ, which kind of faith the
Deuels also have, and yet are nothing therefore justified: but this deserves
to be called rather an opinion of men then faith. For as we do oftentimes
admonish, it is not sufficient, that thou may worthily be called a
Christian, to believe those things to be true, which are preached of Christ,
which kind of faith they of Cains brood also have: A true faith.
but thou must also nothing doubt, that thou art of the number of them, unto
whom all those benefits of Christ are given and exhibited. Which he that
believes, must plainly confess, that he is holy, godly, righteous, the son of
God, and certain of salvation, and that by no merit of his own, but by the
only mercy of God poured forth upon him for Christ's sake. Which he beleeeueth
to be so rich and plentiful, as it is in deed, that although he be as it were
drowned in sins, he is notwithstanding thereby made holy and the son of
God. Whereof if he should any thing dout, he should procure exceeding ignominy
and reproach to baptism which he has received, and to ye Lords supper, and
also reprove ye word and grace of God of falsehood. Wherefore take heed that
thou nothing dout, that thou art ye son of God, and therefore righteous, by
his grace, let all fear and care be here away. Howbeit thou must fear and
tremble that thou may persevere such a one unto ye end: Thou must not being in
this case, be careful that thou may become righteous and saved, but that thou
may persevere and continue. Neither must thou do this, as though it co^sisted
in thine own strength, for all thy righteousness and salvation is of only grace,
whereunto only thou must trust: But when thou know that it is of grace
alone, and that they faith also is the gift of God, thou shall for good cause
live in fear and care, lest that any te^tatio^ do violently move thee from
this faith. Hereunto pertains that which is written in the 9. chap. of
Ecclesiastes: The righteous and wise, yea and their servant also are in the
hand of God, and there is no man that knows either love or hate, but all
things are before the^. It happens unto one as unto an other, etc. For ye
present time every one by faith is certain of his salvation, but constantly to
stand and persevere, as it is the gift of the Lord, and not in our own
strength, so ought we always to have a care and fear thereof.

When they of Cains brood hear faith to be entreated of after this sort, they
can not sufficiently marvel at our madness, as it seems unto them. God turn
this away from me, say they, that I should affirm my self holy and godly,
far be this arrogancy and rashness from me. I am many ways a miserable
sinner, I should be mad, if I should arrogate holiness unto my self. And thus
they mock at true faith, and count such doctrine as this for execrable error,
and go about with might and main to extinguish the Gospel. These are they
that deny the faith of Christ, Denyers of the faith of Christ.
and persecute it in the whole world, of whom Paul speaks 1. Tim. 4: In the
latter times many shall depart from the faith, etc. For we see it brought to
pass by the means of these, that true faith lies every where oppressed, is
not only not preached, but also commonly disallowed and condemned, with all
them that either teach or profes it. The Pope, Bishops, Colleges, Monasteries,
and Universities have now above five hundred years persecuted it with one mind
and consent, yea and that marvelous stiffely and obstinately, and have done no
other thing unto the world, but every where as much as they were able driven
many unto hell. Which truly both has been and is that last and most hurtful
persecution of Antichrist: The Lord at the last bring it to an end.

If any object against the admiration or rather mad senslesnes of these men,
that we do nothing but that that is meet, if we count our selves even holy,
trusting to the goodness of God justifying us, seeing that David prayed thus:
Preserve thou me, Psalm 86.2. Romans 8.16.
O Lord, for I am holy. And for that Paul says* The Spirit of God bears
witness with our Spirit that we are the children of God; They answer that the
Prophet and Apostle would not teach us in these words, or give us an example,
which we should follow, but that they being peculiarly and special
enlightened, received such revelation of them selves that they were holy. And
after this sort they misinterpret and wrest whatsoever place of the Scriptures
affirms that we are holy, saying that such doctrines are not written for us,
but that they are rather peculiar miracles and prerogatives as they call them,
which do not belong to all. Which forged imagination we account of, as having
come from their sick brain, who when as they be them selves void of faith, and
savor nothing of the spirit, think and contend, that there be none which have
sound faith and the spirit, whereby surely they believe them selves to be
thorns and thistles, not Christians, but rather enemies and destroyers of
Christians, and persecutours of the Christian faith.

Again, they are of this belief, that they shall be righteous and holy by
their own works, and that because of them God will give unto them salvation
and eternal blessedness. The Papists attribute more to their own works then
to God his grace.
But here see the madness of men: in their opinion and judgment it is a
Christian thing, to think that we shall be righteous and saved because of our
works, and to believe that these things are given by the grace of God, they
condemn as heretical. They attribute that to their own works which they
attribute not to the grace of God: they affirm that they do save us, and not
this: they trust to works, they can not trust to Gods grace: which blindness
worthily comes unto them, inasmuch as they will not build upon the rock, let
them build upon the sand, and so be drowned by their own means, that by their
own works and satisfactions they may torment them selves even unto death,
gratifying Satan herein, for that they will not rest upon the grace of God, and
serve the Lord with a gentle and sweet service. They that are endued with a
true faith, are both joyful in God, and dutiful toward their neighbors.
For they that are endued with true faith, and do rest upon the grace of the
Lord, it is marvelous, how they are in God, by his goodness, of most quiet
minds, and greatly rejoicing with holy joy: whereupon they do also with
pleasure apply them selves to good works, not to such as these of Cains brood
do, as to feigned prayers, fasting, base and filthy apparel, and such like
trifles, but to true and right good works, whereby their neighbor is
profited, and from whence no small commodity redoundeth unto men. Moreover,
they are of most ready minds to suffer whatsoever things, inasmuch as they
are certain that God does favor them, and has a care of them. These are
right honest and profitable men, of whom both God is glorified, and men much
profited. When as those of Cains brood serve to no use, either before God or
before men, no, they do not so much as profit them selves, but are only an
unprofitable lump of earth, yea not only unprofitable, but exceeding
pernicious and hurtful also both to them selves, and to others. For inasmuch
as they are destitute of true faith, they can not give unto God his due glory,
Where true faith is wanting, there neither God can be duly glorified, not true
good works done
nor do those good works which may truly profit their neighbor. For those
works that they apply them selves unto, are their own inventions, consisting
in gestures, apparel, places, times, meats and such like trifles, whereby
their neighbor can be helped neither in body, nor mind, nor in any thing
else. For what can it profit me that thy crown is shaven very broad: that thou
wearest a gray coule: what profit brings it, that thou fastest to day, and
keep holy day to morrow: that thou abstainest from this meat, and eatest
that: that thou remainest in this place: that thou read and mumblest up
daily so many words? Surely thou do nothing else by these, but torment thy
self to please Satan, and to be a pernicious and hurtful example to thy
neighbors: for there is no Christianity in thy life being such. Thou
beleeuest not as it behooves a Christian to believe, and therefore neither
do thou pray Christianly: Thy fasting also is not true chastising of thy
body, but rashly taken upon thee in steed of a good work: In a sum, this
thy service and study of religion is no other thing, then in time past among
the Jews was the religion of Moloch and Baal, in the honor of whom they did
kill and burn even their own children. So pernicious and pestilent an example
is this thy holiness, which seems so goodly unto thee, which when it
meruelously counterfaiteth a show of godliness, it draws miserable men to the
following thereof, and utterly extinguisheth true religion.

Here perhaps some godly man will think: If the matter be so, and our works
do not save us, but only to hear Christ and believe in him, who is given unto
us of the Father to be our righteousness and salvation, to what end then are so
many precepts given unto us, and why does God so severely require that they be
obeyed? The present text of the Apostle shall give unto us the solution of this
question, and upon this fit occasion we will now enter into the exposition
thereof. The Galathians being taught of Paul the faith of Christ, but
afterward seduced by false Apostles, thought that the matter of our salvation
must be finished and made perfect by the works of the law, and that only
faith does not suffize. These Paul calls back again from works unto faith
with great diligence, and words marvelous effectual, plainly proving that the
works of the law which go before says, do make us only servant, and be
of no importance to godliness and salvation: but that faith does make us the
sons of God, and that from thence true good works do without constraint
forth with most plentifully flow. But here we must accustom our selves to the
words of the Apostle: Whom Paul calls a servant, and whom a son in the
text which is here entreated of.
He calls him a servant that is occupied in works without faith, whereof we
have already entreated at large: he calls him a son, which is righteous and
lives by faith alone, without works. The reason hereof is this: this
servant, although he apply him self to good works, yet he does it not with
that mind, with which a son does, that is with a mind that is free,
willing, and certain that the inheritance and all the good things of the
Father are his: but does it as he that is hired with a stipend in an other man's
house, who hops not that the inheritance shall come unto him. The works in
deed of the son and the servant are like, and almost all one according to
the outward appearance, but their minds do differ exceeding much, and their
hope is nothing like, even as Christ him self says: The servant abides not
in the house for ever: but the son abides for ever. Ioh. 8. These of Cains
brood want the faith of sons, which they them selves confess for they
think it a most absurd thing, and wicked arrogancy, to affirm them selves to
be the sons of God and holy, therefore as they believe, even so are they
counted before God, they never become the sons of God, or holy, nevertheless
they are exercised with the works of the law, and are well wearied, wherefore
they are and remain servant for ever. And they receive no other reward, but
these temporal things, namely, quietness of life, abundance of goods, dignity
and honors, etc. Which we see to be usual among the followers of Popish
religion, then whom there is none at this day that lives more pleasauntly,
more welthily, more gloriously and honorably. But this is their reward, they
are servant and not sons, wherefore in death they shall be thrust from all
good things, neither shall any portion of eternal inheritance come unto them,
who in this present life would believe nothing thereof. So therefore it is that
servant and sons are not much unlike in works, but in mind and faith they
are most unlike.

Now the Apostle endeavors here to prove, (which in deed is the very matter)
that the law with all the works thereof does make us no other then servant,
if this faith in Christ, whereof we have spoken, be away. For that alone does
make us the sons of God. Neither the law nor nature can give it, only the
Gospel brings it, when it is heard with an holy silence of mind. It is the
word of grace, which the holy Ghost does forthwith follow, as it is showed in
very many places, and specially Act. 10: where we read, that the holy Ghost did
by and by fall on Cornelius and his family hearing the preaching of Peter. The
law why it was given.
Moreover the law was given for this, that we might learn by it, how void we
are of grace, and how far from being of the mind of sons, yea that we are
plainly of a servile mind. For we being left to our selves, can in no wise be
free from the law, neither if we do any good thing, do we it willingly,
forasmuch as that faith of sons is wanting, wherewith he that is endued,
knows assuredly, that the eternal inheritance shall come unto him, and is of
his own accord inclined and bent, with a willing and ready spirit to do those
things that are good. Now these men do willingly confess that they are void
of this faith, and if they would confess the truth in deed, they should also
plainly confess, that they had far rather be without all law, and that they
are against their wills subject thereunto. Wherefore all things are among them
constrained, and void of faith, and they are in very deed compelled to
confess that by the law they can not attain any further. Which one thing
they ought to learn by the law, and know, that they are servant, and have
nothing belonging to sons, whereby they might be enflamed with desire to come
from servitude to the state and condition of sons: and might make no account
of their own things, as in deed they ought to do, that God of his grace
might advance them unto an other state by faith. Now this were a sound
understanding of the law, and the true use thereof, whereof this is the office,
The office of the law.
to reprove and convince men hereof, that they are servant and not sons, as
many as follow the law without faith, and that they do exercise themselves
therein plainly against their wills, and with no confidence of grace. For it
causes and makes such to be offended at it, and learn by it, how unprepared
and unwilling they are to that which is good, inasmuch as they are void of
faith, whereby it moves them to seek help some other where, and not to
presume of their own strength to satisfy it. For it requires a ready will,
and hearts of sons, which alone can satisfy it: it utterly refuses
servant, and them that be unwilling.

But these of Cains brood do not only of their own accord confess, that
they want this faith, which makes the sons of God, but also they persecute
it: they feel and know also full well, how unwillingly they bear the law, and
had rather to be free from it, nevertheless they think that they shall become
righteous by these their unwilling and constrained works. They will continue
servant, and will not be changed into sons, and yet they would enjoy the
goods of a strange father. They do all things clean out of order: whereas by
the law they ought to learn, that they are servant, and unwilling to do
that which is good, and therefore should by faith aspire to the state of
sons, notwithstanding they go so far that they seek to satisfy and
fulfill it by their own works only. And thereby they do altogether hinder
the end of the law, and strive against faith and grace, whereunto if they were
not blind, the law would direct and drive them: And so they continue always, a
blind, blockish, and miserable people. These things Paul teaches Romans 3.
and 7. and does freely pronounce that no man is justified before God by ye
works of the law, No man is justified by the law.
adding no other cause hereof, then this, for that the knowledge of sin only
comes by the law. If thou will know how this comes to pass, consider well
some one of Cains brood, and thou shall by and by see it verified. First he
works his works according to the law, with great grief and labor, and yet
he therewith confesses, that he is uncertain whether he be the son of God,
and holy. Yea he condemns and curses this faith, as the most pernicious
arrogancy and error of all other, and will continue in his douting, until he
be made certain by his works. Here thou see plainly that such a man is not
good or righteous, seeing that he wants this faith and belief, that he is
counted acceptable before God, and his son, yea he is an enemy of this
faith, and therefore of righteousness also: Wherefore neither can his works be
counted good, although they pretend a fair show of fulfilling the law. And
thus is it easy to understand that which Paul says: that no man is justified
before God by the works of the law. For the worker must be justified before
God, before he works any good thing, although before men, which esteem a man
by outward things, and not by the mind, they are counted righteous which apply
them selves to the doing of good works. For men judge the worker by the works,
God judges the works by the worker. Now the first precept requires, that we
acknowledge and worship one God, that is, that we trust and rest in him alone,
which in deed is the true faith, whereby we become the sons of God. But how
easy is it by this precept to know, that sin is both in him of Cains brood,
and in thy self, inasmuch as both of you want such a faith, even by your own
nature? which thou could not know but by means of this law. And this is
that which Paul means when he says: That by the law comes the knowledge of
sin. Romans 3.20.
Now thou can be delivered from this evil of infidelity, neither by thine
own power, nor by the power of the law, wherefore all thy works whereby thou
go about to satisfy the law, can be nothing but works of the law, of
far less importance, then that they are able to justify thee before God:
who counts them only righteous, which truly believe in him, for they only
acknowledge him the true God, are his sons, and do truly fulfill the law.
But if thou should even kill thy self with works, yet is it so far of,
that thy heart can obtain this faith thereby, that thy works are even a
hinderance that thou can not know it, yea they are a cause that thou do
persecute it.

Hereupon it is, that he that studieth to fulfill the law without faith, is
afflicted for the devils sake, and not for Gods sake, and continues a
persecutour both of faith and of the law, until he come to him self, and
does plainly cease to trust in him self and in his own works, does give
this glory unto God, who justifies the ungodly, acknowledges him self to be
nothing, and figheth for God his grace, whereof he does now know, being taught
by the law, that he has need. Then faith and grace come, and fill him being
empty, satisfy him being hungry, by and by follow good works, which are
truly good: Neither are they now the works of the law, but of the spirit, of
faith and grace, and they are called in the Scriptures the works of God, which
he works in us. For whatsoever we do of our own power and strength, All that
we do of our selves being not assisted by the grace of God, is evil.
and is not wrought in us by his grace, without dout it is a work of the law,
and avails nothing to justification, but is both evil and hated of God,
because of the infidelity wherein it is done. Again, whatsoever he of Cains
brood works, he does nothing from his heart, nothing freely and with a willing
mind, except he be as it were hired with some reward, or be commanded to do
some such thing, whereunto he ought otherwise to be ready of him self: Even
as an evil and unthrifty servant suffers him self to be brought to no
work, unless he be hired with a reward, or commanded, whereunto he ought
otherwise to be willing of himself. Now how unpleasant is it to a man to
have such servant? But they of Cains brood be plainly such, they would do no
good work at all, if they were not either compelled by ye fear of hell, or
allured by the hope of present good things. Whereby again thou see, that
these have no mind to ye law, they gape only for gain, or are moved with
fear, whereby they bewray them selves, that they do rather hate the law from
their heart, and had lever that there were no law at all: Wherefore it is
plainly manifest, that they are not good, and consequently that neither their
works be good: for how should evil men work good works? Moreover those
their works, which in appearance and show seem to be good, are either wrested
from them by fear, or are bought with promises. An evil heart can do nothing
that is good. But this naughtines of the heart and unwillingness to do good, the
law bewrays when it teaches, that God does not greatly esteem, what the
hand does, but what the heart does: which, seeing it hates the law that is
good, who will deny it to be most evil. Surely it is a sin to be against the
law, which is very good. Thus therefore sin is known by the law, according
as Paul teaches, forasmuch as we learn thereby, how our affection is not
set on that which is good, What the knowledge of sin which comes by the
law, ought to work in us.
which ought to terrify us, and drive us to cease to trust in our selves, and
to long after the grace of God, whereby this naughtines of the heart may be
taken away, and our mind may become such, as is of it self ready to good
things, and loves the law, which voluntarily, not for any fear of
punishment, or respect of reward, but because it does of it own accord like
well of the law, and love righteousness, works those things which are truly
good: By this means only one is made of a servant a son, of a slave an
heir. Which mind and spirit thou shall receive by no other means, then by
faith in Christ, as it is before spoken at large. Now let us come to entreat of
the text of Paul.

Verse 1. The heir as long as he is a child, differs nothing from a servant,
though he be Lord of all.
He propounds a similitude taken of the custom of men. For we see that the
children, unto whom their parents have left some substance, be brought up no
otherwise then if they were servants. They are fed and clothed with their
goods, but they are not permitted to do with them, nor to use them according
to their own mind, but are ruled with fear and discipline of manners, that so
even in their own inheritance they live no otherwise then as servant. After
the same sort is it also in spiritual things. The similitude of Paul applied.
God made unto the elect a covenant, when he promised that it should come to
pass that in the seed of Abraham, that is in Christ, all nations should be
blessed, Genesis 22. That covenant was afterward confirmed by the death of Christ,
and revealed and published abroad by the preaching of the Gospel. What the
Gospel is.
For the Gospel is no other thing, then an open and general preaching of
this grace, that in Christ blessing and grace is laid up for all men, which so
many only shall receive as shall believe. Now before that this covenant is
truly opened and made manifest to men, the sons of God live after the manner
of servant under the law, and are exercised with the works of the law,
although they can not be justified by them, inasmuch as they are servile, and
do nothing avail to justification as it is said before: Notwithstanding,
because they are even then predestinate to life, when they are after the manner
of servant held under the law, they are true heirs of heavenly good
things, that is, of this blessing and grace of this covenant: albeit they as
yet do not know, or enjoy it, but are wearied with works no otherwise then
other that are void of faith. So at this day thou may find not a few,
which now having faith, as they are the sons of God, so do they also enjoy
the grace of God in the liberty of the sons, when as a little before being
drowned in works, they knew nothing at all of faith, being in all things
like unto other hypocrites. Nevertheless, because they were before the
foundation of the world appointed of God unto this faith and state of sons,
they were even then the sons of God before, when they were as yet altogether
ignorant of faith. There are some also which being as yet as it were drowned in
works, are like to servant and those of Cains brood, who notwithstanding
before God are sons and heirs, which shall be brought unto the faith of
sons, leaving the state of servant, and shall embrace the liberty and
right of sons, shall cease from the works of the law, and come unto the
inheritance of justification, that being justified by grace, they may work
freely those things that be good, to the glory of God, and commodity of their
neighbors, being far from all fear, or hope, as well of justification, as
of all other good things. For they shall then have and possess it by the
covenant of the Father confirmed by Christ, and revealed, published, and as it
were delivered into their hands by the Gospel, through the only grace and
mercy of the Father.

The faithful before Christ's coming had the same covenant which we have.
This covenant both Abraham and all the fathers, which were endued with true
faith, had no otherwise then we have, although before Christ was glorified,
this grace was not openly published and preached. They lived in like faith, and
therefore they obtained also like good things. They had the same grace,
blessing and covenant with us, for there is one Father, and the same God of
all. Thou see therefore that Paul, as almost in all other places, so here
also does entreat much of faith, that we are not justified by our works, but by
faith alone, whereby not certain good things by peecemeale, but all good
things at once do come unto us. For there is no good thing, which this
covenant of God does not contain in it, it gives and brings righteousness,
salvation, and God him self. Works can not be done at once, but by faith the
whole inheritance of God is together received. From thence also good works do
come, howbeit not meritorious, whereby thou may seek salvation, but which
with a mind already possessing righteousness, thou must do with great pleasure
to the profit of thy neighbors. For thou shall now have need of nothing,
being endued with faith, which brings all things, yea surely more things
then one dare wish, much less can deserve: wherefore it is no meruell if such
work all things freely, and so do unto their neighbor, as they both believe
and rejoice, that God of his goodness and by ye merit of Christ has done unto
them. What reward should they hope for, which already have all things? the
shadow whereof those most miserable ones of Cains brood seek by their works,
but they shall never find it, they follow it, but they shall never come unto it.

Verse 2. But is under Tuters and Gouerners, until the time appointed of the
father.
Tuters and Gouerners are they which do bring up the heir, and so rule
him, and order his goods, that neither he wast his inheritance by riotous
living, neither his goods otherwise perish or be consumed. They permit him not
to use his goods at his own will or pleasure, but suffer him to enjoy them as
they shall be needful and profitable unto him. First, whereas they keep him
at home, and inform him with good manners, what do they else but prepare and
instruct him, whereby he may most commodiously and long enjoy his
inheritance? Again, the more straitely and severely they bring him up, so
much greater desire they stir up and inflame in him to come to, and enjoy
his inheritance. For as soon as he begins to be of any discretion and
judgment, it can not be but grievous unto him, to live at the commandment
and will of an other. After the same sort stands the case of the elect, The
elect are for a time under the law as under a Tuter or Gouerner.
which are brought up and instructed under the law, as under a Master, to
the liberty of the sons. First the law profits them in this, that by the
fear of it, and of the punishment which it threatens, they are driven from
sin, at the least from the outward work, least that the liberty of sinning
increase ouermuche, and remove them from all religion of God, that hope of
salvation being paste, and God quite contemned, they should run headlonge
without all fear into all kinds of evil, as some desperate persons are wont
to do. Again, the law is profitable to them in this, that by it they are
brought unto knowledge of them selves, and learn how unwillingly they live
under the law, and that they do no good at all with a willing and ready
mind as it becomes sons, but with a servile and unwilling mind: whereby
they may easily see, what is the root of this evil, and what is especially
needful unto salvation, to wit a new and a willing spirit to that which is
good. Which surely neither the law, nor the works of the law are able to
give, yea the longer and the more that they apply them selves unto them, so
much more unwilling shall they find them selves, and with so much more grief
to work those things that are good. Hereupon now they learn, that they do
not satisfy the law, although outwardly they live according to the prescript
rule thereof: for as they do pretend to obey it in work, so in mind they
do hate it, wherefore in mind also they remain sinners, although they
pretend them selves righteous by works, that is, they are like unto those of
Cains brood, and to hypocrites, whose hand in deed is compelled to good, but
they have a heart, which as it is an enemy to the law, so does it verily
consent unto sins, and is miserably subject unto them. To know this
concerning them selves is not the lowest degree to salvation.

Hereof also we may see, how fitly Paul calls such constrained works the
works of the law. The works of the law.
For they flow not from a ready and willing heart, but are enforced by the
law, the heart declyning an other way. Howebeit the law does not require
works alone, but much rather the heart it self, so that we might say, not
only the works, but rather the heart of the law: not only the hands of the
law, but rather the mind, will, and all the strength of the law. Whereupon
it is said in the first Psalm of the blessed man: But his delight is in the
law of God, and in his law does he exercise him self day and night. Such a
mind the law requires in deed, but it gives it not, neither can it give it
of it own nature, whereby it comes to pass that while the law continues
to exact it of a man, and to condemn him as long as he has not such a
mind, as disobedient to God, he is in anguish on every side, his conscience is
grievously terrified and without all counsel and help. Then in deed he is
most ready for grace, and this is that time appointed of the Father, The time
appointed of the Father.
when his servitude should end, and he should enter into the state of the
sons. For being thus in distress and terrified, seeing that by no other
means he can avoid the condemnation of the law, he turns him self wholly
to pray to the Father for grace, he acknowledges his frayltie, he confesses
his sin, he ceasseth to trust in works, and does altogether, as it is meet,
humble him self, perceiving now full well, that between him and a manifest
sinner there is no difference at all but of works, that he has a wicked
heart, even as every other sinner has. Yea it may be that such hypocrites do
far more hate the law in their heart, then those famous sinners, which are
even as it were drowned in sins. For while these are even wearyed with the
works of sins, and do try the filthiness of them, it often times comes to
pass, that they do in some part loath and detest them, when as those
righteous ones do always think those things that they have not tried, to be
more sweet, neither can they believe yt there is so much gall in sins,
whereof they are by nature inflamed with such a desire, and therefore as they
do more earnestly love sin, so consequently they do much worse hate the
law, which as a certain scholemaister, is always against their desire.

Moreover forasmuch as the condition of man's nature is such, that it is able to
give to the law works only, and not the heart, who does not see how greatly
it is contemned of us? Hypocritical dealing.
An unequal division truly, to dedicate the heart, which does incomparably
excel all other things, to sin, and the brutish hand to the law: which is
nothing else, but to offer chafe to the law, and the wheat to sin: the shell
to God, and the kernel to Satan. So that comes to pass which is in the
Gospel, that the wickednesses of him, which is in thy judgment a desperate
sinner, are counted as a mote, and thine, which so playest the hypocrite are
counted as a beam. If this evil be added hereunto, that such hypocrites do
not see a beam in their eye, but being blinded do persevere in their
accustomed works, not marking this their inward abomination of the heart, they
by and by burst forth to judge and condemn others, they despise sinners, as he
did in the Gospel, they think them selves not like unto them, they are not as
other men are, they think them selves alone godly and righteous. Whose
ungodliness if one reprove, and as it is meet, bewray, they by and by are in a
rage and fury, and stick not to kill innocent Abel, and to persecute all
those that follow the truth. And they will seem to do that to defend good
works, and to obtain righteousness, neither do they promise to them selves a
small reward for this, inasmuch as they do, as they say, persecute heretics,
blasphemers, them which be seduced and do seduce with mischievous error,
which labor to seduce and pluck even them from good works. Here thou may
see that that shows it self, whatsoever the Scriptures attribute to these
men being surely most pestilent spirits, to wit, that they are a generation of
vipers, and serpents. They are no other but of Cains brood, and so they do
continue, servant they are, and servant they do remain.

But they whom God has chosen Abels and sons, What the law works in the
elect.
do learn by the law, how unwilling a heart they have unto the law, they
fall from their arrogancy, and are by this knowledge of them selves which he
law brings, brought even unto nothing in their own eyes. Then by and by
comes the Gospel, and lifts them up being humbled, whereby the Lord gives
his grace unto them thus casting down them selves, and endueth them with
faith, Hereby they receive that covenant of the eternal blessing, and the holy
Ghost, which renueth their heart, that now it is delighted with the law,
hates sin, and is willing and ready to do those things that are good* And
here now thou may see not the works, but the heart of the law. And this is
the very time appointed to the heir of the Father, when he must be no longer a
servant but a son, and does now begin to be led by a free spirit, being no
more kept in subjection under Tuters and Gouerners, after the manner of a
servant. Which is even that that Paul teaches in the words following.

Verse 3. Even so, we when we were children, were in bondage under the
rudiments of the world.
What is to be understood by this word, rudiments.
By the word rudiments thou may understand here the first principles or law
written, which are as it were the first exercises and instructions of holy
erudition, whereof it is spoken also Heb. 5: As concerning the time ye ought to
be teachers, yet have ye need again that we teach you what are the first
principles or rudiments of the word of God. And Colos. 2: Beware least there be
any that spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, through the
traditions of men, according to the rudiments of the world. Again Gal. 4. How
turn ye again unto impotent and beggarly rudiments, whereunto as from the
beginning ye will be in bondage again? ye observe days and months, etc. Here
as it were in contempt he calls the law rudiments, he adds also, The law
called beggarly rudiments, and why.
impotent, and beggarly, both because it is not able to perform that
righteousness which it requires, and also for that it makes men in deed poor
and impotent. For whereas it earnestly requires a heart and mind given to
godliness, and nature is not able to satisfy it herein, it plainly makes man
to feel his poverty, and to acknowledge his infirmity, that that is by right
required of him, which he not only has not but also is not able to have*
Hereunto pertains that which Paul has left written 2. Cor. 3: The letter
kills, but the spirit gives life.

Moreover Paul calls them the rudiments of the world, The rudiments of the
world why so called.
for that all that observing of the law, which men not yet renewed by the
spirit do perform, does consist in worldly things, to wit, in places, times,
apparel, persons, vessels, and such like. But faith rests in no worldly
thing, but in the only grace, word, and mercy of God, neither does it make a
man righteous and safe by any outward thing, but only by the invisible and
eternal grace of God: Wherefore it counts a like, days, meats, persons,
apparel, and all things of this world. For none of these by it self does
either further or hinder godliness and salvation, as it does the righteousness of
those of Cains brood, which is as it were tied to these outward things. Faith
therefore deserves nothing less then to be called the rudiments of the
world, by which we obtain the fulness of heavenly good things: and albeit it
be occupied also in outward things, yet is it addicted to no outward thing,
but does freely in all things that which it sees may be done to the glory of
God, and profit of our neighbors, always continuing free and the same, and
yet is made all things to all men, that so the conversation thereof may want
all peculiar respect and difference. With those of Cains brood it agrees
neither in name, nor in any thing: one of them eats flesh, an other
abstayneth from it: one wears black apparel, an other white: one keeps
this day holy, an other that: every one has his rudiments, under which he is
in bondage: all of them are addicted to the things of the world, which are
frail and perish in an hour. Wherefore they are no other but servant of the
rudiments of the world, which they call holy orders, godly ordinances, and
ways to go to heaven. Against these Paul speaks Colos. 2: Wherefore if ye
be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why as though ye lived
in the world, are ye burdened with traditions? As, Touch not, Taste not, Handle
not: which all perish with the using, and are after the commandments and
doctrines of men. Which things have in deed a show of godliness, when as
they are mere superstition, whereby the mind is in vain pressed down to
these outward things, etc. By this and other places above mentioned it is
plain, that all Monasteries and Colleges, whereby we measure the state of
spiritual men as we call them, do plainly disagree with the Gospel and
Christian liberty, and that therefore it is much more dangerous to live in
these kinds of life, then among most profane men. For all their things are
nothing but rudiments and ordinances of the world, consisting in the
difference and use of apparel, places, times, and other present things,
whereunto seeing they are so addicted, that they hope by them to attain
righteousness and salvation, faith is made no account of amongst them, neither
are they Christians, but in name, wherefore all their life and holiness is mere
sin, and most detestable hypocrisy.

They that are under the rudime^ts of the world, ought most diligently to look
to them selves.
It is needeful therefore, that they that are occupied in such ordinances,
should above all other men most diligently look unto them selves, that they
trust not to these ordinances, that they be not too much addicted unto them,
but that they do persevere in a free faith, which is tied to none of those
outward things, but rests in the only grace of God. For the fair show of
life and feigned holiness, which is in those ordinances, does with a marvelous
and secret force withdraw from faith, more then those manifest and gross
sins, whereof open sinners are gilty, and does easily make men such as Paul
here speaks of: When we were children* we were in bondage under the
rudime^ts of the world, that is, when we were as yet ignorant of faith, and
were exercised only with the works of the law, we did those outward works of
the law, consisting in worldly things, but with an unwilling mind, and with no
faith, hoping that by these rudiments of the world we should obtain
salvation, wherefore we were no other then servant. Now this false and
servile opinion faith alone takes away, and teaches us to trust unto, and
rest upon the only grace of God, whereby at once is given freely that which is
needful to work all things. For these works of the law, if that false
opinion were away, were not ill of them selves.

Verse 4. But when the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made
of a woman, and made under the law.

Verse 5. That he might redeem them which were under the law, that we might
receive the adoption of the sons.


After Paul has taught, that righteousness and faith can not come to us by the
Law, neither that we can deserve it by nature, he shows him by whom we
obtain true righteousness and faith, and which is the author of our
justification. Now this could not come unto us without any price, for it cost a
very great price, even the son of God: The Apostle therefore says: The
fulness of time how it is to be understood.
When the fulness of time was come, that is, when the time was ended, that time,
I say, wherein it behooved us to live children and servant under the
discipline of the Law. Wherefore the Master of sentences has erred here, who
interpreted the fulness of time, the time of grace, which began at the birth of
Christ, plain contrary to the Apostle, who whereas he has written, the
fulness of time, this man has interpreted it, the time of fulness. For Paul
speaks of the time, which was appointed of the father to the son, wherein
he should live under tuters. Now as this time was full come to the Jews and
ended, when Christ came in the flesh, so is it daily fulfilled to others, when
they come unto the knowledge of Christ, and do change the servitude of the
Law with the faith of the sons. And this in deed is that coming, whereby
alone we obtain the liberty of sons, without which that corporal coming
would avail nothing. For Christ even for this cause has come unto us, that
believing in him, we may be restored to true liberty, by which faith they of
the ancient time also obtained the liberty of the spirit. And so, whereas he
should come to the holy men of old time, he came even then, forasmuch as by
faith they felt him to be their true Savior and deliverer, howbeit he is not
yet come to our Jews, although he is gone away again in body long since: for
they do not believe in him. All from the beginning of the world to the end must
trust unto the coming of Christ, whereby alone servitude is changed with
liberty, but yet by faith, either in Christ being to come, as it was before he
was borne: or in him being come, as it is now. Wherefore as soon as thou
beginnest to believe in Christ, he comes unto thee a deliverer and Savior,
and now the time of bondage is ended, that is, as the Apostle speaks, the
fulness thereof is come.

This place surely is very copious, and contains in it diverse things most
worthy to be known, so that I greatly fear, that it shall not be handled of
us according to the worthiness thereof. For it teaches that it is not
sufficient to believe that Christ is come, but that we must also believe that
he was sent of God, is the son of God, and also very man, borne of a
Virgin, who alone has fulfilled the Law, and that not for himself, but for
us, that is, for our saluations sake. Let us wey and consider these things in
order. First it is sufficiently taught in the Gospel of John, that Christ is
the son of God, and was sent of God, which he that believes not is in a most
miserable case, as Christ himself pronounces Ioh. 8: Except ye believe that I
am he, ye shall dye in your sins. And Ioh. 1: In it was life, and that life
was the light of men. For this cause the mind of man neither may nor ought to
enjoy any other thing then that sovereign good, so, that it should be
satisfied with any other then with it, whereof it was made, and which is the
fountain of all good things: wherefore it is not the will of God that we
should believe or repose our trust in any other thing, neither does this honor
belong to any other. And therefore God himself joined himself to man, Why it
was requisite that God should be made man.
being made man, that he might more forcibly allure men into him, and stir
them up to believe in him. No good could come unto God hereby, but it was
necessary for us that he should be made man, lest that we should believe in
any other thing the^ in God alone. For if we should believe in Christ, and not
in God, as God should be deprived of his honor, so should we be deprived of
life and salvation. For we must believe in one God, who is the very truth, and
we without him can neither live, nor obtain salvation. Whereas therefore the
Apostle says: God sent forth his Son, it is thereby manifest, that he was,
before he came and was made man. Now if he be a son, he is more then a man or
an Angel, which seeing they are the highest creatures, surely he is also true
God. For to be the son of God is more then to be an Angel, as it is else
where declared. Again, Christ a distinct person from the Father.
seeing that he is sent of God, and is his son, he must needs be an other
person. And so the Apostle teaches here, that the Father and the Son are one
God, and two persons. Of the holy Ghost it shall be spoken hereafter.

The second thing which ought here to be considered, is, that Christ is very
man and the son of man. This Paul teaches, when he says: Christ very man.
made of a woman. For surely that that is made or borne of a woman, is man: A
woman by nature brings forth nothing but very man. This it is necessary
that we believe as the Lord himself declares Ioh. 6, in these words: Except
ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in
you. But to eat and drink his flesh and blood, What it is to eat and drink
the flesh and blood of Christ.
is nothing else but to believe, that Christ took these upon him in deed, and
did also yield them to death for our sake. This is that covenant which was
promised to Abraham: In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed. Genesis 22. Christ is this seed, and therefore the true son of
Abraham, his flesh and blood. Hereupon it appears that they prevail nothing,
We must come unto God by Christ.
which make a proper way unto themselves to God, by their own works and
godliness, and neglecting Christ strive to come directly unto God, as the Turks
and Jews do. This Christ alone is the mediator and blessed seed, by whom
thou must receive blessing, otherwise thou shall continue for ever in
malediction. This covenant of God shall not be violated of because any. Thus
Christ himself says, Ioh. 6: No man comes to the Father, but by me. The
nature of God is otherwise higher, then that we are able to attain unto it,
wherefore he has humbled himself to us, and taken upon him that nature, which
is best known and most familiar unto us, to wit, even our own. Here he
looks for us: here he will receive us: he that will seek him here, shall
find: he that will ask here shall be heard: here is the throne of grace and
the true mercy seat, from which none is driven or thrust which with true faith
resorteth unto it. They which do here neglect him, as though he were made man
for naught, and in the mean season do without a mediator pray unto God, who
has created heaven and earth, they shall pray in deed, but none shall help
them: they shall cry, but none shall hear them.

The third thing which is here set forth unto us to believe, is, that Marie the
mother of Jesus is a virgin. The mother of Jesus a Virgin.
This Paul affirms when he says, that he was made of a woman, not of a man,
as other are wont. This is that one man, which was borne only of a woman. He
would not say, of a virgin, Why Paul rather said that Christ was made of a
woman, the^ of a virgin.
for that a virgin is not a name of nature, but a woman signifies a sex and
certain condition, whereunto it belongs to be with child, and to bring
forth, that is, to do the parts of a mother. Seeing therefore that Marie was a
mother in deed, she is rightly called a woman. For she brought forth fruit
unto us, which belongs to a mother, and not to a virgin, although she brought
it forth alone, without the means of man, wherein she was declared both a
singular virgin and woman. But because it is of greater importance to the
Apostle, and unto all us, that Marie is a woman, and thereby the mother of
Christ, then that she is a virgin, for that this is only an ornament unto
her, but in that she was a woman she brought forth him which is salvation unto
all, for this cause I say, the Apostle calls her rather a woman then a
virgin. Neither was it considered in choosing her, that she was a virgin, but
that she was a woman: for that she being a virgin became a mother, Why it
behooved that ye mother of Christ should be a virgin.
the cause was, for that it behooved that Christ should be borne without sin,
and therefore without the commixtion of man. For of the seed of a sinful man,
nothing could be borne, but that which is defiled with sin: but it behooved
that Christ should be that blessed seed, whose blessing should be poured forth
upon all, as the manner of the divine covenant required. Whereupon it is
gathered, that Christ could not be borne of the seed of man, for that all men
are by nature under the curse. For how should blessing be promised to come unto
all by Christ, if all were not subject to the curse?

Forasmuch then as the covenant of God promised to Abraham, did require these
two things, both that Christ should be the true son of Abraham, that is, his
seed, his true flesh and blood, and that also he should be borne pure from
sin: this mean was invented, that he should of Marie being very woman and
the daughter of Abraham, be borne very man, and the right offspring of Abraham:
and also that he should be borne without the commixtion of man, a virgin being
conceived with child by the only means of the holy Ghost, that being full of
blessing, he might derive the same unto all believers. So was the covenant of
God fulfilled on either side: and it came to pass, that Christ became both the
true seed of Abraham, and yet free from all contagion of Adam, and is also the
author of eternal blessing to the^ that believe. Wherefore although Marie be
holily to be reverenced by the name of virgin, yet by no comparison greater
reverence is due unto her then by the name of woman, for that her most holy
members, inasmuch as she was a woman, were aduau^ced unto this dignity, that
they were as means toward the fulfilling of the holy covenant of God, and by
them he was brought forth, which was to put away all curse from them that
believe in him, that so he might be both the blessed seed of Abraham, and the
blessed fruit of the womb of Marie. Unto which benefit the only virginity
had not bin sufficient, yea it had bin even unprofitable.

The fourth thing whereof the present place of the Apostle does admonish us,
is, that Christ has satisfied the Law for us. Which he also witnesses of
himself Matthew. 5: I am not come to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. It
was needful that christ should fulfill the Law for us.
This also the reason of the covenant requires: for if by this seed of
Abraham all men must be delivered from the curse, it is necessary that by it
the Law be fulfilled. For as men are by nature the children of wrath, and
subject to the curse, so it must needs be accursed, whatsoever they do, for
it is before proved at large, that he which is evil himself, can work
nothing that is good: likewise that we can do nothing that God will approve,
unless we our selves be approved of him before: and seeing that the Law
requires the heart, which can not be performed of them, which are not as yet
regenerate by the spirit, it must needs be, that all the sons of Adam are
guilty of transgressing the Law, and unless, whereas they themselves are not
able, an other, to wit Christ, should perform that which the Law requires,
and so satisfy the Law for them, they should altogether perish by the curse of
the Law. But when as Christ, going about to show, that the heart is required
of the Law, did condemn the works which proceeded not from a heart that is
godly and consenting unto the Law, he was accused of the Pharisees that he was
come to destroy the Law. Because therefore he would take away this false
opinion of himself, he said: Think not that I am come to destroy the Law,
for I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill the Law: yea and I will give a
spirit unto them that be mine, which shall justify their heart by faith, and
incline it unto true good works. The same is usual with Paul also, who, Romans
3, when he had rejected the works of the Law, and extolled faith, aunswering
such an objection, says: Do we then make the Law of none effect? God forbid:
yea we establish the Law. For we teach that the true fulfilling of the Law is
by Christ. The like also is wont to be objected to us, as though we did forbid
good works, when we disallow monasteries with their works, and teach that
they must first by faith become good and approved of God, whereby they may
afterward do true good works, by which both their flesh may be chastised, and
their neighbors edified.

Here we must note moreover, that the Law can be fulfilled of no man, but of
him which being free from the Law, is no more under it. We must accustom our
selves also to the manner of Paul's speech, that we may know assuredly who is
under the Law, Who be under the Law.
and who is not under the Law. As many therefore as work good works, because
the Law has so commanded, being brought thereunto either with fear of
punishment, or hope of reward, are under the Law, and are compelled to do good
things and to be honest, being not brought hereunto of their own voluntary
will. Wherefore the Law has dominion over them, whose servant and captives
they are. Now such are all men, that are not yet regenerate by Christ, which
every one may easily learn with himself by experience, every man's own
conscience showing it unto him. We all find our selves so affected, that if no
Law did urge us, and both the fear of punishment, and hope of reward were
away, and it were plainly free for us to do what we list, we would do
altogether those things that are evil, and omit the things that are good,
especially either tentation moving us, or occasion provoking us. But now,
forasmuch as the Law stays us with the threatninges and promises thereof, we
do oftentimes abstain from evil things, and do those things that be good,
howbeit we do them not for the love of goodness, and hatred of euel, but only
for fear of punishment, and respect of reward: wherefore being left wholly to
our selves, we are servant of the Law, neither do we hear it any otherwise,
then servant do their hard and cruel master.

They which are not under the Law described, of what sort they be.
But they that are not under the Law, that is, are not so against their wills
in subjection under the dominion thereof, they of their own accord do good
works, and abstain from evil, being neither terrified with ye threatninges
of the Law, nor allured with the promises thereof, but even for that they do of
their voluntary will bear a love to honesty, and hate that which is
dishonest, and are also from their heart delighted with the Law of God, so
that if there were no Law made, notwithstanding they would desire to live no
otherwise then the Law commands: as, to shun those things that be evil,
and apply themselves to honest studies and exercises. They that are such, are
sons, whom not nature, but that only blessed seed of Abraham, that is,
Christ, could make such, renewing by his grace and spirit the hearts of them
that believe in him. What it is, not to be under the Law.
Wherefore not to be under the Law, is not, to be free from the Law, that
they may do those things that are contrary thereunto, and omit those things
that are good, but it is to do good things and abstain from wicked things,
not through compulsion or necessity of the Law, but by free love and with
pleasure, even as if no Law commanded them, and their own nature brought them
hereunto, as in deed it does, howbeit the new nature of the spirit, A
similitude.
not that old nature of the flesh. For as there is need of no Law for the
body, which may compel it to eat, to drink, to digest, A similitude.
to sleep; to go, to stand, to sit, and to do the other works of nature, for
that it is ready to do them of it own nature, when the case so requires, and
when it is meet, without all respect either of reward or punishment: and may
not unfitly be said, as concerning these things, not to be under a law,
notwithstanding thereupon nothing less follows, then that it does therefore
abstain from such works, unto which in deed it so much more applies if
self as they are less commanded, and are more natural unto it: After the
same sort altogether does the godly man behave himself concerning the works
of godliness, he is carried to the doing of them by that his new nature of the
spirit, albeit there were no law at all, and all both hope of reward, and
fear of punishment were away. This only is the true liberty of a Christian
man, and the deliverance of him from the law, whereof Paul speaks 1. Tim.
1: The Law is not given unto a righteous man. Which is as much as if he had
said: A righteous man of his own accord does good things, and abstaineth from
evil, having no regard either of reward or of punishment. The same thing also
he means by that saying Romans 6: Ye are not under the Law, but under Grace,
that is, ye are sons, not servant: Ye live holily, being compelled or
enforced with nothing, but of your free and of it self ready will. To the same
effect pertains that saying also Romans 8: Ye have not received the spirit of
bondage to fear again, but ye have received the Spirit of adoption of the
sons. The Law makes a fearful, that is, a right servile and cainish
spirit, but Grace gives the free spirit of sons, like unto Abels, by Christ
the blessed seed of Abraham. Whereof the 51. Psalm speaks: Stablish me with
thy free spirit. Whereupon in the 118. Psalm Christian people are said to be
of a free will.

Moreover Christ has so fulfilled the Law, that he only of all mankind has
of his own accord satisfied it, being with no thing compelled or enforced
thereunto, neither is any other able to do the same, unless he receive it of
him, and by him: And therefore Paul says here: He was made under the Law,
that he might redeem them, which were under the Law. The fifte thing
therefore that Paul here commends unto us to be believed, Why Christ was made
under the Law.
is, that Christ for our sake was made under the Law, that he might deliver us
from the bondage of the Law, and of unwilling servant make us free sons:
whereupon he says: That he might redeem them which were under the Law, that
is, might deliver them from the Law* Now he delivers from the Law by the
means aforesaid, not by destroying or utterly abolishing the Law, How Christ
delivers from the Law.
but by fulfilling it, and giving a free spirit, which shall do all things
willingly, without any respect either of the threatninges or the promises of
the Law, no otherwise then if there were no law at all given, and is carried
thereunto of his own nature. After which sort Adam and Eve were effected
before they had sinned. How the spirit of liberty is obtained.
But by what means is this spirit given and liberty gotten? No otherwise then
by faith. For he that truly believes, that Christ came for this cause, that he
might deliver us from the Law, and that he has delivered him already, he, I
say, has in deed received the spirit of liberty, and does verily obtain
that which he believes: for both faith and this spirit of sons come
together. Whereupon Paul says here: that Christ has delivered us from the
Law, for this, that we might receive the adoption of the sons: both which
come unto us by faith. Thus therefore we have those five things, whereof Paul
admonished us in this so plentiful and fruitful a place.

A question.
But here rises a question: Forasmuch as to be under the Law, is to be subject
to the Law by compulsion, and to obey the Law no otherwise then unwillingly,
so that none of them which are under the Law, are able to satisfy the Law,
why Paul says, that Christ was made under the Law. The answer.
I answer, that the Apostle makes a very great difference between Christ,
who was made under the Law, Great difference between Christ's being under the
Law and ours.
and other men which are borne under the Law. For whereas he says that Christ
was made under the Law, he would signify, that Christ did put himself under
the Law of his own accord, and was with his will made subject unto it of the
Father, when as he might not have bin under the Law. But we were under the
Law, being the servant of the Law by nature, and bearing the dominion
thereof unwillingly: as Christ was willingly, not by nature, and against his
will. Wherefore there is as great difference between, It is one thing, to be
made under the Law, and an other to be under the Law by nature.
To be made under the Law, and, To be under the Law by nature, as between
these, To be subject to the Law of free will, and, To be subject to the Law
by servile constraint. It was free unto Christ, to be under the Law, or not to
be under it, and he made himself subject to it of his own accord, that he
might most diligently do all things that the Law requires: but we were under
the Law, even against our will.

Thou may see a resemblaunce hereof in Peter, Ours, and Christ's being under
ye Law, and our deliverance from ye same most excellently resembled.
and the Angel which came into the prison to Peter to deliver him. Both of
them were then in the prison, but Peter was there being cast into it of Herod,
not of his own accord, wherein he was also to abide, for he could not go forth
when he would. But the Angel went into the prison of his own accord,
whereupon it was free for him also to go forth when he would: he was there
only for Peter's sake and not for his own, and freely even at his own will,
whom when Peter heard and followed, it was free for him also to go forth of the
prison, whereas before it was not. This prison is the Law: Peter is our
conscience: The Angel is Christ. Christ being absent, our conscience is held
captive of the Law, and being unwilling of it self, is moved unto good
things by the threatninges and promises thereof, and is tied and bound unto
honest things with these, as with two chains. The keepers of this prison are
the teachers of the Law, which declare the force of the Law unto us. So we
being bound in the prison of the Law, Christ comes unto us, and willingly
makes himself subject to the Law, and does the works of the Law of his
own accord, which we did bend our selves to do against our wills, yea and does
them for our sake, that he may join us unto him, and also bring us out
together with himself. For he may easily go forth, who is held in the prison
by no necessity. If now we cleave unto him, and follow him, we also do go
forth. But this cleaving to him and following him is nothing else, then to
believe in him, and not to dout that he became man, and was made subject to the
law for thy saluations sake. Together with this faith comes the spirit, he
by and by makes thee ready and willing to do with pleasure all things that
the Law requires: and so truly delivers thee from the captivity of the
Law, those chains of threatninges and promises fall of from thee, and thou
may now go whither thou list, that is, thou may live according to thine
own will, or rather according to the will of the holy Ghost ruling all things
in thee: finally what good things soever thou do, thou do them from the
heart, and with great pleasure.

Christ made under ye Law after two sorts.
Moreover, that it may be made more plain, after what sort Christ made himself
subject to the Law, we must understand that he was made under the Law after
two sorts: both for that he did perfectly perform the works of the Law, and
also for that he suffered and overcame the curse and punishment thereof for our
sake. For he was circumcised, presented in the temple, and the time of the
purification being finished, was obedient to his parents. All which things he
might have omitted, being Lord of the Law, and over all: Howbeit he applied
himself to these things freely of his own will, not being either compelled
by any fear, or allured by any hope. In outward works he was in the mean
season altogether like unto them which were under the Law, that is, which did
the works of the Law against their wills, inasmuch as his free spirit was
hidden from others, even as also the servile and constrained will of others is
hidden. And so he both was under the Law, and not under the Law. He behaved
himself outwardly in works as they which are unwillingly held under the Law,
whereas notwithstanding he was not under the Law as they, but of his own free
will: Wherefore in respect of his work he was under the Law, but in respect
of his will he was free from the Law. How we are under ye Law.
But we as well by will as by works are under the Law by nature, for that we
do works according to the rule of the Law, of necessity, yea and we do them
with that will which the Law constrains and urges, in as much as we do not
endeavor to do them of our own accord. Christ made himself subject to the
punishment of the Law also for our sakes of his own will. He did not only
perform those works which the Law commands, but he suffered the
punishment also which was due to us being transgressors thereof. The Law
condemns to death and the eternal curse all those that continue not in all
things that are written in the book of the Law to do them, as Paul Gal. 3.
recites out of Moses Leuit. 18. Now it is declared at large before, that the
Law is fulfilled of no man, but that all men are against their wills held
captives of the Law, wherefore every one is subject to death and to the curse,
so that there is no man subject to the Law in respect of works, and will,
which is not also subject to it in respect of the curse. For it curses and
condemns all that do not perform it with their whole heart. But here Christ
makes intercession for them that be his, and the judgment which we have
deserved, he takes upon himself, he suffered the punishment due unto us,
willingly making himself subject to death and the curse, that is, to eternal
damnation, no otherwise then if he had transgressed the whole Law, and had
more then all, deserved the sentence thereof against transgressors, when as he
did not only not break the Law, but himself alone fulfilled it, yea and
fulfilled it when as he ought nothing to it, so that he suffered otherwise then
he deserved in two respects: both for that he had ought nothing to the Law, if
he had not observed it, and also for that moreover he most diligently observed
it, so that if the Law had had especial dominion over him, yet had he come in
no danger thereof. But on the other side whereas we suffer, we suffer by
double right: both for that by the transgression of the Law we have deserved
all the punishment thereof, and also for that, if we had deserved nothing, yet
being creatures we ought to be obedient to the will of our Creator.

Hereof it now plainly appears, what this means, that Christ was made under
the Law, Why Christ was made under the Law.
that he might redeem them which live under the law: for our sakes, for our
sakes, I say, and not for his own he performed that, and that of no
necessity, but of his great love toward us: and thereby he has declared his
unspeakable both goodness and mercy toward us, being made accursed for us, that
he might deliver us from the curse of the law. He willingly made himself
subject to the judgment of the law, and did himself bear the sentence
pronounced against us, that as many of us as do believe in him, might be free
for ever. Whereby mark what an incomparable treasure faith brings unto thee,
By faith we enjoy an incomparable treasure.
whereby thou enioyest Christ and all his works, that thou may trust unto
them no otherwise then if thou thy self had done them. For Christ did them
not for himself, whom surely they could profit nothing, he having no need of
any thing, but by them he laid up the treasure of salvation for us, whereunto
we should trust, and being made blessed might enjoy it: With which faith also
the spirit of the sons comes, which bears witness with our spirit, that we
are the sons and heirs of God. What should God now add unto these? How can
a mind hearing these things contain it self, that it should not love God
again with a most ardent affection, and be most sweetly delighted in him?
What in any wise may come to be done or suffered, which thou would not
willingly take upon thee with exceeding joy, and most high praise of God, with
a rejoicing and triumphing mind? Which mind if thou want, it is a certain
argument of a faint or surely a dead faith: for the greater thy faith is, so
much more ready also and willinge is thy mind to those things, which God
either sends or commands. This in deed is the true deliverance from the
Law, and the damnation of the Law, that is, from sin and death, which
deliverance comes to us by Christ. Yet not so, that there is now no law or
death, but that they do not now trouble the believers any thing, that is, they
are as though they were not. For the Law can not convince them of sin,
neither can death confound them: but by faith they most happily pass from
sin and death to righteousness and life.

Here Munkes, Nuns etc: were to be exhorted if there were as yet left any
place with them for counsel and admonition, that they would observe their
ordinances, How men's ordinances, ceremonies etc. are to be observed.
ceremonies, prayers, apparel, and such like, as Christ observed the law, by
which means surely they should bring unto them no damnation: That is, that
they would set the faith of Christ in the first place, and commit the rule of
their heart unto him, acknowledgeing that by that faith only they do obtain
righteousness and salvation: and that all their ordinances and works do avail
nothing hereunto. Again that they would make themselves subject to them of
their own accord, in no other respect, then that by them they might serve
their neighbors, and subdue the arrogancy of the flesh. But now seeing they
are occupied in them with this double erroneous opinion, as though they were
necessary to salvation and righteousness, and if they did not observe them,
they should grievously sin, they are unto them a most certain destruction,
nothing but delusion and sin, whereby with their great affliction they draw
unto hell, where they shall fully suffer the vexations and torments under the
Abbat the deuell, which being miserable and foolish men they have here begone.
For all their life does utterly disagree with the faith of the sons, and that
which belongs only to faith, to wit to justify and save us, they attribute
to their works. Wherefore these men can not both thus stick unto their
ordinances, and therewithal have faith, which suffers it self to be
addicted to no certain works, but what things soever the Lord either sends
or commands, or the necessity and need of our neighbor requires, it
suffers and does them with great willingness and joy. These he that is endued
with faith, counts his works, having in the mean season no regard of
Masses, or fasting, which some appoint to certain days, of choice of
apparel, of meats, of persons, of places and such like, yea he greatly
disalloweth of these, inasmuch as they trouble Christian liberty. These
things shall suffize to have bin spoken concerning the exposition of this
place of Paul, where about the matter it self required to spend so many
words, forasmuch as the nature of faith is so unknown. For unless thou do well
understand the nature of faith, thou shall perceive nothing or very little in
the writings of Paul.

Verse 6. And because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his
Son into your hearts, which cries, Abba, Father.
Here we see very plainly that the holy Ghost comes unto the Saints by no
works but by faith alone, for Paul says: And because ye are sons, God has
sent forth the Spirit, (...) Sons believe, when servant only work:
sonn^es are free from the Law, servant are held under the Law, as appears
plainly by those things that are before spoken. But how comes it to pass
that he says: Because ye are sons; A question.
God has sent forth the Spirit, etc. seeing it is before said: that by the
coming of the spirit we are changed from servant unto the state of sons,
so that the spirit must be first sent unto us, before we are sons? But here
as though we could be sons before the coming of the spirit, The answer.
he says: Because ye are sons, etc. To this question we must answer, that
Paul speaks here after the same sort that he spoke before: Before the fulness
of time came, we wear in bondage under the rudime^ts of the world. All the
elect, which are predestinate of the Lord that they shall become sons, are
counted in yt place of sons with God. Therefore he says rightly: Because ye
are sons, that is, because the state of sons is appointed unto you from
everlasting, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son, to wit, that he might
finish it in you, and make you such, as he has long since of his goodness
determined that he should make you. Moreover he calls him the spirit of yt
Son of God, that he might continue in commending unto us this benefit of God,
that he has chosen us to be sons. For Christ is the Son of God, and that
most beloved. Now if the father give unto us his spirit, he will make us like
to his only begotten son, his true sons and heirs, that we may with
certain confidence cry with Christ, Abba, Father, being his brethren, and
fellow heirs with him. Wherein yt Apostle surely has notable set forth the
goodness of God, which makes us partakers with Christ, and causes us to have
all things common with him, so that we live, and are led by the same spirit.
Moreover these words of the Apostle do show, both that the holy Ghost is an
other from Christ, and yet does proceed from him, when as he calls him his
spirit. The spirit in deed dwells in the godly, and no man will say that he
is their spirit, as here Paul makes him the holy spirit of Christ, saying: God
has sent forth yt spirit of his Son, that is of Christ. For he is the spirit
of God, and comes from God to us, and is not ours; unless one will say after
this sort: my holy spirit, as we say my God, my Lord. Wherefore whereas he is
here said to be holy spirit of Christ, it proves him to be God, as of whom
that spirit is sent, and is peculiarly counted his spirit.

Furthermore, Christians may perceive by this place, whether they have in
themselves the holy Ghost, How we may know whether ye holy Ghost dwell in us or
not.
to wit, this spirit of the son, whether they hear his voice in themselves.
For Paul says, that he cries in the hears which he possesses, Abba, Father
a according as he says also Romans 8: We have received the Spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry Abba, Father. Now thou hear this voice, when thou fyndest so
much faith in thy self, that thou do assuredly without any doutinge
presume, not only that thy sins be forgiven thee, but also that thou art the
beloved son of God, which being certain of eternal salvation, dare both
call him father, and be delighted in him with a joyful and most confident
heart. Thou must be so certain hereof, that thou can not be more certain of
thy life, and must sooner suffer death, and hellish torments, then suffer this
trust and confidence to be taken from thee. For to dout any thing herein were
no small reproach and contumely to the death of Christ, as though that had not
obtained all things for us, and ought not far more effectually to provoke
and encourage us to have a good trust in God, then all our sins and
tentations are able to put us out of hope and fray us from it. It may be in
deed that thou shall be so tempted, that thou shall fear and doubt of thine
adoption, and think plainly that God is not a favorable father, but a
wrathful reue^ger of sinners, as it fell out with Job and many other saints,
but in such a conflict this trust and confidence that thou art a son ought to
prevail and overcome, or else thou shall come into a miserable and desperate
case.

When one of Cains brood hears these things, he is as it were beside
himself by reason of admiration and astonishment. Fie, says he, away with
this arrogancy, and this most pernicious error. God turn this mind from me,
that I do not presume to think that I am the son of God: I am a sinner, most
miserable and wretched, and I will never esteem more of my self. But thou
which desire to belong unto Christ, fly this kind of men, no otherwise then
most hurtful enemies of Christian faith, and of thy salvation. Though of our
selves we be miserable sinners, yet we may assuredly persuade our selves, that
through Christ we are the sons of God.
We also know that we are sinners, and very miserable and wretched: but here
we must not weye or consider, what we either do, or are, but what Christ is,
and what he has done for our sake. It is not spoken here of our nature, but of
the grace of God, which so far exceeds our sins, as heaven is higher then
the earth, and the east is distant from the west, as the 103. Psalm says: Now
if it seem unto thee a great honor that thou art the son of God, as in
deed it is very great, consider that it is no less marvelous, that the son
of God for this cause did come, was borne of a woman, and made under the Law,
that thou might become the son of God. These are great benefits of God,
and do cause in the elect a great trust and confidence in the goodness of God,
and a spirit which is afraid of nothing, but is bold and able to do all
things. Contrariwise the religion of those of Cains brood, as it is a thing
marvelous strait and careful, so does it make hearts exceeding fearful,
which serve to no use, but are unapt to all things, fit neither to suffer or
do any thing, which tremble and are afraid even at the shaking of the lease of
a tree, as it was before spoken of them Leuit. 26.

Wherefore thou must lay up these words of the Apostle well in thy mind, thou
must feel this cry of the spirit, which cries so in the hearts of al ye
faithful. For how should thou not hear the cry of thine own heart?
Neither does the Apostle say that he does whisper, speak, yea or sing, it is
greater then all these which the spirit does in thy heart, he cries out a
maine, that is, with all the heart. Whereupon it is said Romans 8, that he
makes request for us with sighs that can not be expressed, and that he
bears witness with our spirit that we are the children of God: how therefore
can it be, that our heart should not hear this cry, sighs, Adversity
stirs up the spirit.
and testimony of the spirit? Howbeit hereunto tentations and adversity are
very profitable, they move to cry, and do exceedingly stir up the spirit.
Notwithstanding we foolish men do greatly fear and fly the cross, wherefore
it is no meruell if we do never feel the cry of the spirit, and do
continually remain like them of Cains brood. But if thou do not feel this
cry, take heed that thou be not idle and flothfull, neither secure, pray
instantly, for thou art in an evil case. And yet do not desire, that thou
may feel nothing but this cry of the spirit, thou must feel also an other
terrible cry made, whereby thou may be provoked and urged to this cry of
the spirit, which happens to all the saints: That is the cry of sins,
which call most strongly and instantly unto desperation, but this cry must be
overcome of the spirit of Christ, by godly calling upon the Father, and crying
for his grace, that the trust and confidence of grace may become greater then
desperation. The cry of the spirit.
Wherefore this cry of the spirit is nothing else, but to be with all our heart
touched with a very strong, firm, and immovable trust of most dear sons
toward God, as our most tender and favorable Father.

Hereby we may see how far a Christian life exceeds nature, which can do
nothing less then trust so in God, A Christian life far exceeds nature.
The cry of them which trust in their own works, and not in Christ.
and call upon him as a Father, but is always afraid, and utters a voice
which is a witness of exceeding fear: Woe is me, how cruel and intolerable a
Judge art thou, O God? how heavy is thy judgment unto me? As Cain said Genesis
4: My iniquity is more then that it may be forgiven. Thou have cast me out
this day from the upper face of the earth, and from thy face shall I be hid,
yea it shall come to pass that every one that finds me shall slay me, etc.
This is a terrible and dreadful cry, which is necessarily heard of all such
as be of Cains brood, forasmuch as they trust to them selves and their own
works, and put not their trust in the son of God, neither were and consider
that he was sent of the Father, made of a woman, made under the law, much
less that all these things were done for their salvation. They are
continually tormented in their own works, the miserable men do in vain go
about by them to help them selves, and to obtain the grace of God. And while
their ungodliness is not herewith content, it begins to persecute even the
sons of God, as it is always wont to do, yea at the last they grow unto
such cruelty, that after the example of their father Cain they can not rest,
until they slay their righteous brother Abell, in whom they do also kill unto
them selves Christ. Then the blood of righteous Abel cries unto heaven
against unrighteous Cain, neither ceasseth it to cry until the Lord has
revenged it. He asks those Cains of their brother Abel yea of Christ: but
they deny all knowledge of Christ, which labor not to become the sons of God
and heirs by Christ, but to become righteous by their own works. In the
mean season the blood of Christ continually cries out against them, even
nothing but punishment and vengeance, when as for the elect, it cries by the
spirit of Christ for nothing but grace and reconciliation.

The Apostle uses here a Sirian, and a Greek word, saying: Abba, Pater. For
this word Abba in the Syrian tongue signifies a Father, by which name at this
day the chief of Monasteries are wont to be called, and by the same name
Heremites in time past being holy men, did call their Presidents, at the last
by use it was also made a Latin word. Wherefore that which Paul says is as
much as: Father, Father, or if thou had rather, as, My father. Why the
Apostle doubled the word, Father
But what is the cause why the Apostle does double the word, Father, that is,
the cry of the spirit? I will by your leave bring forth my judgment and
opinion hereof. First I think that he would hereby show the force and
straining of this holy cry. For when as we call any with great affection, and
through no small necessity, we are wont eftsoons to double his name. Now
because that sin, and Cain do always go about with desperation to stop
this cry of the spirit for the grace of the father it is need surely to cry
most strongly, and with a voice both doubled, and exceedingly strained forth,
that is, the trust of the grace of the Father ought to be most strong and not
able to be overcome. Again such is the manner of the Scripture, to witness the
certainty of a thing, sometime to double or iterate the words, as Joseph did
to Pharao Genesis 41. So here also the spirit twice calls upon the Father,
whereby it may show the certainty of his fatherly favor and grace. For the
trust hereof ought to be no less certain, then great and immovable. Finally
it is meet also to persevere, which again this doubling of the name of father
does note unto us. For as soon as we begin to call God Father, Satan with all
his band moves war against us, and omitteth no means to wrest from us this
trust of sons toward God our Father, wherefore the other Father must be
diligently doubled, that is, our trust and confidence must be confirmed,
neither must we ever cease from calling upon this Father, but must most
earnestly continue in this cry of the spirit, whereby we may obtain a certain
sure experience of his fatherly goodness, by which our trust in him may be made
most certain and safe. And perhaps Paul had respect hereunto, when he first
set down Abba, which is a word strange to them, to whom he wrote, after
adding Pater, that is Father, a familiar word and of their own language,
meaning to signify hereby, that the beginning of so great trust in God is
unaccustomed and even strange unto men, but that when the mind has a while
exercised it, and continued in it although assailed with tentations, it
becomes even familiar and almost natural, that we now enjoy God as a
domestical Father, and do in every thing most confidently call upon him.

Verse 7. Wherefore now thou art not a servant, but a son: if thou be a
son, thou art also an heir of God through Christ.
Now, says he, that is after the coming of the spirit of the sons, after
the knowledge of Christ, thou art not a servant. For as it is said, a son
and a servant are so contrary one to an other, that the same man can not be
both a son and a servant. A son and a servant do greatly differ. We can
not obtain salvation by works.
A son is free and willing, a servant is compelled and unwilling: a son
lives, and rests in faith: a servant in works. And so by this place also it
appears, that we can obtain no salvation of God by works, but before thou
workest that which is acceptable unto him, it is necessary that thou have
received of him and possess salvation and all things, that thereupon works may
freely flow forth, to the honor of so gracious a father, and to the profit of
thy neighbors, without any fear of punishment, or loking for reward. This,
that which Paul says, proves: If thou be a son, thou art also an heir.
For it is said before, that we become the sons of God by faith, without any
works, and therefore heirs also, as this place witnesses: for by nature they
that are sons, the same also are heirs. But if this inheritance of the
Father be now thine by faith, surely thou art rich in all good things, before
thou have wrought any thing. For how should it be, yt by faith thou art the
heir of God, without any works through only grace, and that thou may again
first merit it by works? Wherefore the case stands, as I often times say: To
a man that is baptized and believes in Christ, the heavenly inheritance of the
Father is already given at once, that is, all good things, they are only hid
as yet by faith, for that the manner of the present life can not suffer, that he
should enjoy them being revealed. Whereupon Paul says Romans 8: Ye are saved,
but by hope, for ye do not as yet see it, but do yet wait, when the
possession of your good things shall be revealed. And 1. Pet. 1. it is said:
Your salvation is reserved in heaven and prepared for you, to be showed in the
last time. Whereunto the works of a Christian ought to be referred.
Wherefore the works of a Christian ought not to have regard of merit, which
is the manner of servant, but only of the use and commodity of his
neighbors, that he do not live and work to him self, but to his neighbor,
whereby he may truly live to the glory of God. For by faith he is rich in all
good things, and truly blessed. Now the Apostle adds, through Christ, lest
that any think that so great inheritance comes unto us freely, Although we
are saved freely and with out all merit in respect of our selves yet Christ has
merited and with a dear price purchased salvation for us.
and without al cost. For although it be given unto us without our cost, and
without all our merit, yet it cost Christ a dear price, who, that he might
purchase it for us, was made under the law, and satisfied it for us both by
life and also by death. So those benefits which of love we bestow upon our
neighbor, do come unto him freely, and without any charges or labor unto
him, notwithstanding they cost us some thing, inasmuch as we bestow upon him,
although freely and of mere goodness, yet those things that are our own,
whether it be labor or part of our substance, even as Christ has bestowed
those things that be his upon us.

And thus has Paul called back his Galathians from the teachers of works,
which preached nothing but the law, perverting the Gospel of Christ. All which
things are very necessary to be marked of us also. For the Pope with his
Prelates and Monks, has now too long a time with intruding and urging his
laws, which are foolish and most pernicious, inasmuch as they do every where
disagree with the word of God, seduced almost the whole world from the Gospel
of Christ, and plainly extinguished the faith of sons, according as the
Scripture has in diverse places very manifestly prophesied of his kingdom.
Wherefore let every one that desires to obtain salvation, most diligently
take heed of him and all his Apostles, no otherwise then of Satan him self,
and his chief and most pernicious Apostles.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, CONCERNING FAITH AND DIFFIDENCE IN danger and
trouble.
Matthew. 8. Verse 23. WHen Jesus was entered into the ship, his Disciples
followed him.

24. And behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, so that the ship was
covered with waves, but he was asleep.

25. Then his Disciples came, and awoke him, saying, Master, save us, we
perish.

26. And he said unto them: Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? Then he
arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea: and so there was a great calm.

27. And the men merueiled, saying: What man is this, that both the winds and
the sea obey him?


ACcording to the history this text sets before us an example of faith and
diffidence: whereof we may learn both what a strong and invincible thing
faith is, and that it must be exercised and tried even in great matters, and
full of peril: and also how desperate a thing on the other side diffidence
is, and how full of fear and trembling, which can never do any thing
rightly or well. This does experience most lively set forth in the Disciples.
How desperate and fearful a thing diffidence is, it appears by the example
of Christ's Disciples.
They, when they entered into the ship with Christ, and whilst there was
calmnes in the lake, were nothing disquieted in mind, neither felt any fear.
Then if one should have asked them whether they believed, they would have
answered without dout that they did believe. For they did not know that their
heart did trust in that quietness, for that all troubles were absent, and
therefore did rest upon a thing visible, and not upon the invisible grace of
God. Which then was made manifest, as soon as the tempest was risen, and the
waves did cover the ship: for by and by all their trust and confidence ceased,
for that the quietness and calmnes whereunto they trusted was taken away, and
diffidence, which before when al things were prosperous did lurk in their
minds, did then appear. For this is the nature of diffidence, that it
believes or knows no more then it feels. Forasmuch therefore as it had
possessed the breasts of the Apostles, they felt nothing now but the fearful
tempest, and the waves covering the ship, they saw the sea swelling and greatly
raging to threaten nothing but death. These things only did they think upon,
these only did they consider, and therefore could there be no measure or end
of fear and trembling in their minds: the more they weyed in their mind the
peril, so much more were they terrified, and seemed even now to stick in the
very jaws of death, hoping for no life or deliverance. And as they could not
so much as think any thing else because of their unbelief, so all comfort also
was far from them. For diffidence or unbelief has nothing whereunto it may
trust or flee, wherefore when outward adversity comes, it admits nothing
into the mind but it, and therefore it can never feel any peace or quietness
while this remains. So in hell, where diffidence exercises full tyranny,
there can never be any intermission of desperation, trembling and terror.

What faith does in trouble and danger.
But if the Disciples had been then endued with a sound faith, and if it had
ruled in this danger, it would have removed from the mind the wind and all
this tempest, and in steed of these would wholly have thought upon the power of
God and his grace promised, whereunto it would no otherwise have trusted, then
if it had sat upon a most strong rock far from the sea and from al
tempest. For this is the chief virtue and cunning of faith, that it sees
those things which are not seen or felt, and sees not those things which
are felt, yea which are now sore upon us, and do press and urge us. As on the
contrary side diffidence sees nothing but that which it feels, neither can
it rest upon any other thing but that which it feels. For this cause those
things are of God laid upon faith, which the whole world is not able to bear,
as sins, death, the world, and the devil: neither suffers he it to be
occupied with small matters. For who flies not death? who is not terrified and
overcome of it? The force of faith, whereby death, the world, Satan and sin
are overcome.
Against this invincible faith stands, yea it courageously sets upon it,
which otherwise tameth all things, and overcomes and swalloweth up that
insatiable deuourer of life. So even the whole world is not able to bring under
and subdue the flesh, but it rather brings under and makes the world subject
unto it, and bears rule over it, so that he lives carnally whosoever is of
the world. But faith subdueth this subduer of all other, holds it in
subjection, and teaches it not only to be ruled, but also to obey. Likewise
who is able to bear the hatred and fury, ignominy and persecution of the
world? who does not yield unto it and is oppressed with it? But faith even
laugheth at all the iniquity, rage, and fury thereof, and makes that unto it
self matter of spiritual joy, wherewith other are even killed. It does no
otherwise behave it self against Satan also. Who is able to overcome him,
which practizeth so many crafts and wiles, whereby he stays and hinders the
truth, the word of God, faith, and hope, and sows against them innumerable
errors, sects, delusions, heresies, desperations, superstitions, and such kind
of abominations without number? All the world is to him as a spark of fire to
a fountain of water, it is wholly subdued unto him in these evils, as (alas)
we both see and try. But it is faith which troubles him, for it is not only
not made subject to his delusions, but it also discovers and confounds
them, that they be no more of any importance, that they are able to do nothing
but do vanish away, as we have experience at this day by the decaying and
vanishing of the Papacy and indulgences. Finally, sin has that force, that
that which is even the least, can not be appeased or extinguished of any
creature, that it does not gnawe and tear the conscience, yea if all men
should go about together to comfort the conscience wherein sin has begun to
live, they should go about it in vain. But faith is that noble Champion,
which overcomes and extinguisheth every sin, yea if all the sins which
the whole world has committed from the beginning were laid upon one heap, it
would extinguish and abolish them all together. Is not faith therefore most
mighty and of incomparable strength, which dares encounter with so many and
so mighty enemies, and bears away the certain victory? Wherefore John
says in his first Epistle chap. 5: This is that victory that has overcome
this world, even our faith.

Howbeit this victory comes not with rest and quietness, Faith obtayneth not
the victory over the enemies of our souls without sore fight and conflicts.
we must try the fight, not without blood and wounds, that is, we must needs
feel sin, death, the flesh, the devil, and the world, yea and that
assayling us so grievously and with so great force, that the heart of man do
think that he is past all hope, that sin has overcome, and the devil
gotten the upper hand, and on the contrary side very little feel the force of
faith. We see an example of this fight here in the Disciples, for the waves did
not only strike the ship, but did even cover it, that nothing could be now
looked for, but that it should be drowned, especially Christ being asleep, and
knowing not of this peril: all hope was then past, life seemed to be overcome,
and death appeared to have the victory. But as it fell out with the Disciples
in this tentation, so also does it fall out, and must fall out with all the
godly in all kind of tentations, which are of sin, the devil, and the world.
In the tentation of sin we must needs feel the conscience thrall unto
sins, the wrath of God and hellish pains to hang over us, and all things
to be in that case, as though we were past all recovery. Likewise when we have
conflict with the devil, it must appear, as though truth should give place
to error, and Satan should drive the word of God out of the whole world,
and he him self reign for a God with his delusions and deceits. Neither
stands the case any otherwise, when it comes to pass that we are tried of
the world, it must needs be, that it should greatly rage and cruelly persecute
us, so that it shall seem that no man at all is able to stand, that no man is
able to obtain safety, or profes his faith: that Cain only shall bear rule,
and suffer his brother in no place.

Albeit we be in danger and great distres, yet must we not be discouraged, but
believe that we shall be delivered
But we must not judge according to such feeling and outward appearance of
things, but according to faith. The present example ought to stir us up
hereunto, and to be received of us in steed of special comfort. For we learn
hereof, that albeit sins do urge us, death disquiet us, the world rage
against us, and the devil lay snares for us, that is, although the waves do
cover the ship, yet we must not be discouraged. For although thy conscience
being wounded does feel sin, and the wrath and indignation of God, yet shall
thou not therefore be plunged in hell. Neither shall thou therefore die,
although even the whole world hate and persecute thee, and gape so wide to
devour thee, as the morning spreads forth it self: They are only waves,
which falling upon thy ship do terrify thee, and compel thee to cry out, we
perish, Lord save us. Thou have therefore in the former part of this text, the
nature of faith set forth, how it is wont and ought to behave it self in
tentation, also how desperate a thing diffidence is, and nothing to be
counted of. The other part commends unto us love in Christ, whereby he was
brought so far, that he brake of his sleep, arose, and counted the danger
that his Disciples were in for his own, and helped them freely, asking or
looking for nothing of them therefore. Even as it is the nature of Christian
love to do all things freely and of good will to the glory of God, and profit
of our neighbors, The nature of Christian love.
seeking to it self nothing thereby. For the exercising of which love man
adopted of God, is left in the earth, even as Christ being made man lived in
the earth that he might do for us, as he witnesses of him self: I came not to
be served, but to serve, Matthew. 20.28
and to give my life for the ransom of many.

The Allegories of this deed.
In this deed Christ has set forth the life of Christians, and the state of
such as preach and teach the word of God. The ship signifies the Church, the
sea the world, the wind the devil, the Disciples of Christ are the Preachers
and godly Christians: Christ the truth, the Gospel and faith. Now, before that
Christ and his Disciples enter into the ship, the sea is calm, and the wind
quiet, but when Christ with his Disciples are entered in, by and by arises a
tempest. This is that which he said: Matthew. 10.34 The world can not abide the
sound and sincere preaching of the Gospel.
I came not to send peace but the sword. For if Christ would suffer the world
to live after his own manner, and would not reprove the works thereof, it
would be quiet enough. But now seeing that he preaches that they which are
counted wise men, are fools: they that are counted righteous, are sinners:
they that are counted rich, are not blessed, but miserable, it rages and is in
great fury. So thou may at this day find wise men of this world, which in
deed would suffer the Gospel to be preached, if the words of the Scripture
should be simply declared, and in the mean season the state of
Ecclesiastical persons not reproved: but as soon as thou shall begin to
condemn by the Scriptures all those things which have been hitherto brought
in under a false name of religion, and to teach that they are to be rejected as
being of no importance, thou preachest seditiously, and troublest the world
with unchristian doctrine.

But how does the present text pertain unto us? A great tempest did arise,
where that ship went, wherein Christ and his Disciples were. Other ships did
pass the sea quietly, nothing tossed of the winds, this ship only must be
tossed and covered with waves, because Christ was carried in it. For the world
can suffer any kind of preaching beside the preaching of Christ: the cause is,
for that he condemns all things of the world, Why the world can not abide ye
preaching of Christ. Matthew. 12.30. Ioh. 16.8.
and chalengeth all righteousness to him self, according to that which he
says: He that is not with me, is against me: and again: The Spirit will
reprove the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. He says not:
will preach, but, will reprove, and not this or that man, but, the world, and
whatsoever is in the world. Against this ship of Christ all this tempest is
raised, and it is brought into danger. For the world does not suffer his own
things to be condemned, but Christ can not allow them, and if he should allow
them, he had come in vain. For if the world were wise by it self, and did
know and follow the truth, what need had there been that Christ and his
Disciples should preach? Wherefore it is not a small comfort to Christians, A
comfort to true Preachers that they know before that they shall suffer
persecution.
especially to Preachers, that they are certain before, that as soon as they
shall begin to preach Christ to the world, they must suffer persecution, and
that it can not be otherwise. So that it is a sure sign, and therefore to be
wished, that it is true Christian preaching, if it be tried with persecution,
especially of the holy, learned and wise men of the world. As it is an
undoubted sign also, that it is unchristian preaching, if it be praised
commonly and honored of the world, according to that saying Luke 6: Blessed
are ye when men hate you, and put out your name as evil, for the Son of man's
sake: for so did their fathers to the Prophets. Now mark how our spiritual
men do behave them selves, and of what sort their doctrine is: They have got
into their subjection the riches, glory, and power of the world, and they that
praise them, enjoy the honor and pleasures thereof, their case in all things
agrees with the case of the false Prophets, and yet they dare boast them
selves to be Preachers and Teachers of Christ, and worshippers of God.

Of whom the Preachers of Gods word must look for and desire help in the time
of trouble and persecution.
The next thing, whereby this deed does comfort and encourage the Preachers of
Christ, is, that it shows where help is to be asked, when a tempest is
risen: to wit, not of the world, for not man's wisdom or power, but Christ him
self, and he alone is able to help them. Him they must call upon in every
distres with full confidence, in him they must trust, as his Disciples here
did. For unless they had believed that Christ was able to take away the danger
wherein they were, they would not have awaked him, and prayed him to save them:
although their faith then was very weak, and very much diffidence was in them,
for that they did not confidently commit them selves with him unto danger,
douting nothing but he was able to deliver them out of the midst of the sea,
and from death it self. Hereof therefore let it be acknowledged as certain,
that as no Judge or Moderator can be given to the word of God, but God only,
so there can be had no other maintainer or defender thereof: who as he sends
it out whether he will without any merit or counsel of men, so he alone also
will defend and preserve it without the aid or strength of men: and therefore
he that seeks aid unto this word of men, shall without dout fall, being
forsaken as well of men as of God.

Whereas Christ did sleep, it gives us to understand, that in the time of
persecution he does sometimes withdraw him self, Christ sometimes in the time
of persecution and trouble with draws him self and differreth his help for a
while.
and seems as though he slept, whiles that he gives not strength and power
valiantly to resist, the peace and tranquillity of mind being now disturbed,
but suffers us to wrestle and labor with our infirmity for a while, that we
may acknowledge how we are altogether nothing, and that all things do depend
on his grace and power. As Paul confesses of him self 2. Cor. 1. that it
behooved that he should be so pressed and troubled out of measure, that we
should not trust in our selves but in God, which rayseth the dead. Such sleep
of God David oftentimes felt, and makes mention thereof in many places: Arise,
awake, O Lord: why sleep thou? why do thou forget us? etc.

In a sum, the present text offers unto us two principal things full of
confidence and godly boldness. The first, that when persecution is risen for the
word of God, we may say: We knew that it would so come to pass. Christ is in
the ship, therefore the sea so rages, the winds trouble us, the waves fall
upon us as though they would drown us. But let them rage and be furious as
much as they may: it is certain, the sea and the winds do obey Christ which
is the other principal thing which this text offers. Persecution shall
extend no farther, nor rage any longer then he will, and albeit the waves do
even ouerwhelme us, yet must they be obedient at his beck. He is Lord over
all, wherefore nothing shall hurt us: he only endue us with his grace, that we
be not overcome by unbelief and so despeire, Amen.

Whereas the men merueiled and praised the Lord, as unto whom the sea and
winds do obey, The Gospel is more spread abroad and faith increased by
persecution.
it signifies that the Gospel and word of God is so far from being
extinguished by persecution, that thereby it is spread farther abroad, and
faith also is increased and becomes stronger. Wherein it appears how
diverse the nature of this divine good thing is from the good things of the
world, which decay by calamity and misfortune, and are increased by
prosperity and fortunate affairs: But the kingdom of Christ is increased and
strengthened by tribulation and adversity: but is diminished and weakened by
peace and tranquillity. Whereupon Paul says 2. Cor. 12: The Lords power is
made perfect through weakness: which God perform in us also, Amen.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, WHEREIN IS ENTREATED OF THE LIFE OF A CHRISTIAN.
2. Cor. 6. Verse 1. SO we therefore as works together beseech you, that ye
receive not the grace of God in vain.

2. For he says: I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of
salvation have I succored thee: behold now the accepted time, behold now the
day of salvation.

3. Let us give no occasion of offense in any thing, that our ministry be not
reprehended.

4. But in all things let us behave our felues as the Ministers of God, in much
patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses.

5. In stripes, in prisons, in tumults, in labors.

6. In watchings, in fastings, in purity, in knowledge, in long suffering, in
kindness, in the holy spirit, in love unfeigned.

7. In the word of truth, in the power of God, by the armor of righteousness on
the right hand and on the left.

8. By honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report, as deceivers, and
yet true:

9. As unknown, and yet known: as dying, and behold, we live: as chastened,
and yet not killed.

10. As sorrowing, and yet always reioicing: as poor, and yet make many rich:
as having nothing, and yet possessing all things.


THis is an admonition and exhortation to the Corinthians, to apply them selves
to those things, which they did already know. The words surely are easy to
be understood, but hard to be done, and in use most rare. For in such
merueilous order and colors he painteth out Christian life, as it can not be
pleasant to the flesh to behold. First he says: The Ministers of the word
workers together with God.
As workers together we beseech you. He calls the Ministers of ye word
together workers, as 1. Cor. 3. he also says: We together are Gods laborers,
ye are Gods husbandry, and Gods building. Which is thus much in effect: We
preach and labor in the word among you by teaching and exhorting, but God
inwardly with his spirit does bless and give the increase, lest that the
outward labor in the word be in vain. And so God is the inward and true
Master, which brings to pass all things, whom we serve in the office of
outward preaching. Now he calls him self and his fellows such together
workers, lest they should contemn the outward word, as though they either had
not need of it, or had already sufficiently attained to the knowledge thereof.
For although God can alone by his spirit, without the outward word work all
things in the minds of the elect, yet he will not do it, but rather will use
together working preachers, and work by their word when and where it pleases
him. Forasmuch therefore as it seems good unto God to give to Preachers this
office, name, and dignity, that they be counted workers together with him, it
is not lawful for any man to challenge either that learning or holiness unto him
self, that he neglect even never so simple a sermon wherein the word of God is
preached, much less that he contemn it: for we know not when that time will
come, when God by his Preacher will vouchsafe to accomplish his work in us.

The preaching of the Gospel does not long continue in one place sincere and
vncorrupt
Secondly, the Apostle admonishes of the danger of losing ye light of the
Gospel, when he says: that ye receive not the grace of God in vain. Whereby he
gives us to understand that ye preaching of the Gospel is not a perpetual,
continuing and permanent doctrine, but rather that it is like rain that
suddenly comes and soon passes away when as the Sun and heat come by and
by and take away all the moisture that is left thereof, and afterward scorch and
hurt things nevertheless. This very experience proves, for no man shall be
able to bring forth even one place in the world, where the Gospel has
remained pure and sincere above the age of one man, but continued and increased
while those lived by whose ministry it began, they departing hence that also
almost wholly departed, and by and by after followed heretics and false
teachers, with their delusions and false doctrine perverting and corrupting all
things. So Moses foretold his Israelites, that by and by after his death it
should come to pass, that they should depart from the way of the Lord, and
corrupt their own ways, which the book of Judges witnesses to have come to
pass. Moreover the same book says, that as often as any judge which had
called again the word of the Lord did die, they fell again forthwith to their
ungodliness, and made all things worse and worse. So Ioas the king continued in
his duty so long as Iehoiada the Priest lived, who being dead, he began by and
by to be a King unlike him self, Act. 20 29.
and left the office of a good and godly King. Neither fell it out otherwise
after Christ had received his Apostles to him self almost the whole world was
filled with heresies and false doctrine. Which Paul pronounced before: I know
this, saythes, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among
you* not sparing the flock, etc. So stands the case at this day also, the
pure and sincere Gospel has shined unto us, the day of grace and salvation,
and the acceptable time are present, but they shall shortly be ended if the
world stand.

Moreover, to receive grace in vain can be nothing else, What it is to receive
the grace of God in vain
then to hear the pure and sincere word of God, whereby the grace of God is
preached and offered, and notwithstanding to embrace it with no diligence,
neither to be changed or altered in life. By this unthankful slothfulnes we
deserve to have it taken away again as being unworthy of it. For we making so
light of the Gospel are undoubtedly they which are bidden and called to the
marriage, but whiles being busied about other matters we despise this grace, the
good man of the house is angry with us, and swears that we shall never taste
of his supper. The same does Paul now here admonish of, that we take heed to
our selves, least that we receive the Gospel unthankfully and without fruit.
Yea Christ also admonished us of the same: Walk while ye have the light, Ioh.
12.35.
least the darkness come upon you. It ought surely to make us more wary and
heedefull, even for that we suffered so grievous and pernicious darkness under
the Pope. But we have now forgotten all such things, no thankfulness, no
amendment is found among us, which how greatly to our own hurt we neglect, we
shall shortly feel.

For he says: I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of
salvation have I succored thee: behold now the accepted time. He describes
here the merueilous felicity which is there where the Gospel flourishes,
there is no wrath, no reuengement, all things are replenished with grace and
salvation, yea it is unspeakable how great felicity these words do speak
of. Whereas he first says: a time accepted, A time accepted.
it is spoken by an Hebrewe figure, and is as much as if thou say: a gracious
time and replenished with the favor of God, wherein God turns away his
anger, and declares nothing but love toward us, and a ready will to help us.
Our sins are blotted out, not only those that be past, but those also which
as yet stick in our flesh, and that I may speak in a word: the kingdom of
mercy is present, wherein nothing but forgiveness of sins, and restoring of
grace is showed: heaven stands open, the right year of Iubile is come,
wherein all dettes are remitted, and no grace is denied. Whereupon he says: In
a time accepted have I heard thee, that is, now I favor thee and am merciful
unto thee, whatsoever thou will have, pray for it, and thou shall obtain it,
and certainly receive it. Only let not the fault be in thy self, pray, while
this time endures.

The day of salvation.
Behold now the day of salvation. He calls this the time and day of
salvation, that is of help and felicity. For we are not only certain
hereof, that God is merciful and favorable unto us, and we acceptable unto
him, but also as we believe, and by faith are sure of his goodness toward us, so
he declares in deed, hears them that cry unto him, helps and saves
them, yea and makes them plainly blessed. We therefore worthily acknowledge
and confess this time to be the wished, prosperous, happy, and very day of
salvation. For it behooves that both be together, both that God favor us, and
also that he declare his favor toward us by work or deed. That he favors
us, the accepted time which is now present does witness: that he does also
help us and finish our salvation, this other witnesses, to wit the day of
salvation, the day of help. But as the state of the life of Christians is, if
thou will judge according to the outward man, thou will judge it rather a time
of affliction, wrath and indignation, wherein the Gospel is preached, and
wherein they live, then a time of grace and salvation. Wherefore the words of
the spirit must be spiritually understood, so shall we easily see and perceive
that these noble and most pleasant names do most rightly and properly belong
to the time wherein the Gospel flourishes, that it is a time accepted, that
is, full of grace, and a time of salvation, whereby surely all the riches and
felicity of Christ's kingdom are notably commended and set forth unto us.

Let us give no occasion of offense in any thing. Forasmuch therefore as there
is so acceptable and gracious a time, let us, says he, use it worthily, and
not receive it in vain. First endeavoring to give no occasion of offense to
any man, least that our office of preachinge Christ be reprehended, No offense
must be given whereby the Gospel may be reprehended. Double occasion of
offense may be given, whereby the Gospel is reprehended.
whereby he sufficiently declares what offense he means, namely, that the
doctrine of the Gospel may not be stumbled at, as though he taught that which
is not perfect and sound. Now there may be given a double occasion of offense,
whereby the Gospel is reprehended: one, whereby the Heathen are offended, when
as some under a pretense of ye Gospel seek the liberty of the flesh, will not
be obedient to magistrates, turning the liberty of ye spirit, into fleshly
lice^tiousnes. These do meruelously offend ye discreeter and wiser sort of the
Heathen, and make that they hate the Gospel without a cause, which they think
does teach this licentiousnes: and so as it were with a certain force they do
by this their insolency repel and drive them from the faith of Christ: for
they measuring all Christians by these, do detest them as light men, and
troublers of the common wealth, and therefore not to be suffered. This offense
therefore, and this reprehension, or rather hatred and persecution of the
Gospel we acknowledge to come through these preposterous Christians. An other
offense is, whereby eue^ Christians among themselves are sometime offended,
through the unseasonable use of Christian liberty, in meats and other
indifferent things, whereat the weaker sort in faith do sometime stumble.
Whereof the Apostle has given many precepts 1. Cor. 8. Romans 14. He exhorts
therefore here unto that, whereof he admonishes in other words 1. Cor. 10: So
behave your selves, that ye give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the
Grecians, nor to the Church of God: even as I please all men in all things, not
seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they might be saved. The
same he teaches also Philip. 2. that every man look not on his own things,
but on the things of other men, for so all offense should be easily taken away,
nay none at all should be given.

That our ministry be not reprehended. Though we ca^ not bring to pass that
the word of God be not at all reprehended, yet must we endeavor that it be not
reprehended through our fault.
Who can bring to pass that our ministry shall not be reprehended, seeing
that the Gospel is necessarily subject to persecution, no less then Christ
himself? In deed it is not in us to make that the word of God be not
reprehended and persecuted of them which are ignorant of God, and do not
believe: for it is a rock of offense, Esai. 8. Romans 9. this offense comes
because of our faith, and can not be avoided of us, and therefore the blame
thereof ought not to be laid upon us. Howbeit there is an other offense which
proceeds hereof, for that our love is not sufficient dutiful, this comes
through us, inasmuch as our works are the cause thereof, because they do not
so shine by faith, that they w^i^h are conuersaunt with us may thereby be
provoked to serve God, as it is meet. This offense is given through our fault,
whom it be comes so to live, that the Jews, Heathen and Princes of the world
might have no occasion to say: Behold how light and naughty these men are,
yea and very wicked wretches, the doctrine of life which they follow must
needs be evil and pestilent. So our infamy and crimes are occasion of
offense to others, and of hatred and detestation of the most holy word of God.
For whereas we ought so to know, preach and follow it, that thereby both our
neighbors might be brought unto God, and to the leading of a godly life, and
also the glory of God set forth, we by our naughty and slothful life bring
to pass that it does not only bring no profit and commodity to our
neighbors, but is brought into hatred and made detestable through our means,
bearing our ignominy and reproach. Now it is a most horrible sin and
wickedness by our naughtines to make the word of God which is most holy and
brings salvation, to make it I say, so odious, and to repel and drive men
from it, to our own, and their most certain destruction.

But in all things let us behave our selves as the ministers of God, in much
patience, in afflictions, etc. Here he describes in order the signs and
proper tokens of a Christian life, wherewith it ought to be adorned in outward
conversation: Not meaning that one is made a Christian and godly hereby, but as
he says, that by these as by proper fruits and signs of Christianity, we
should show our selves to be both, and behave our selves as the ministers of
God, that is as Christians and godly men. And mark well that he says: as the
ministers of God. It may seem very strange, that the ministry of God
consists in these, in many afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in
stripes, in prisons, in tumults, in watchings, in fastings, etc. Among these he
numbreth not Masses, and prayers for the dead, or other trifles of fained
worship of God. He rehearses those things that pertain to the true and right
service of God, whereby the body is chastised, and the flesh tamed. Which is
well to be noted, lest that any neglect fastings, watchings and labor, and
make us count of them for that they do not justify. They bring not
righteousness in deed, yet are they fruits of righteousness being obtained,
wherein thou may be exercised, and whereby thou may keep thy flesh in
subjection, and enforce it to do his duty.

In tumults. He rehearses tumults or seditions among the rest, not that it
becomes us to teach or move them, who ought to obey Magistrates, and with
quietness to live obedient unto all in that which is good, as Paul teaches
Romans 13, and Christ Matthew. 22: Give unto Caesar those things that are Cesars:
but that we must bear tumultes of others, as also necessities, distresses,
stripes, and imprisonments, which we must cause or procure unto none, but
suffer being procured and laid upon us by others. Wherefore in the first place
he sets much patience, which surely moves no sedition or tumult, but rather
suffers it, and appeaseth it, if it can. But in the mean season it singularly
comfort us at this time, Christians commonly accused to raise sedition and
tumults, when they suffer the same being raised of other.
when as tumults are commonly imputed unto us, for that this is incident to a
Christian life, that for the preaching of the Gospel it is accused to raise
sedition, which it rather suffers being raised of other against the word of
God. For as in time past Achab accused the most holy Prophet Elias of sedition,
affirming that it was he that troubled Israel, when as he himself in deed
did trouble it: so is it neither a shameful nor new thing, for us to be
accused of the same when we preach the same word. Let us think when the
enemies of God lay this reproach and sclaunder upon us, that not only Elias,
not only the Apostles, but Christ himself was counted of the Jews a
seditious fellow, and crucified, a title being written in three languages and
put on the cross, that he should of all be counted as a seditious king of the
Jews, which would have moved that people against Caesar, and adioined them to
himself, who in deed by word and example of his life taught nothing more
themsubmissio^ and obedience, and lived so that he was ready to profit and
minister unto all. As for the rest whereof the Apostle here makes mention, as
patience, affliction, necessity, distres, stripes, prisons, labor,
watchinges, fasting, purity: it is easy to understand how they pertain to
the ministry of God, who truly disdaineth to have slothful, idle,
gluttonous, and drowsy ministers, and such as can not abide adversity and
trouble* But he specially reproves our delicate ones, which quietly enjoy
revenues and rents, and take their delight and pleasure, thinking that it is an
unworthy thing that they should labor, for they are shaven, wear long
gowns, and cry out in temples etc. Howbeit these shall not be able to approve
themselves before God, God will have none to be idle, but also labor and so
eat their own bread.
who will have all to labor, and eat their own and not other men's bread, as
it is written by Paul to the Thessalonians. Who therefore teaches here also,
that God is served by labor, and not that only, but that we also are thereby
proved and commended to be the ministers of God.

In knowledge. Paul takes knowledge here for that which we call prudence or
wisdom, whereby we use things with reason, behauing our selves with discretion
and comelines. Of which knowledge ye saying also of Paul Romans 10. is
understood: They have the zeal of God, but not according to knowledge, that
is, they bear a zeal to the law not prudently, not weying and considering
all things well, that they might do no indecent thing. Wherefore whereas he
here expressly requires knowledge in the ministry of God, Christians must
frame their life prudently and with sufficient discretion.
he thereby admonishes us, that we frame our life with reason, and order it
prudently, in all things keeping a mean, and having an advised rehard of our
neighbors, lest that in any thing we offend ye weaker sort, with unseasonable
use of Christian liberty, and that we do all things to the edifying of all.
So we must labor, fast, watch, and apply our selves to chastity and such
other things, not above measure, that either the body may be in danger by too
much honger and watching, or the true purity of life by overmuch abstinence
from matrimonial company, but we must use these things with knowledge, that
is with convenient wisdom and discretion, that they may not any whit hurt,
but always edify. Whereupon Paul 1. Cor. 7. expressly admonishes married
folks, that they abstain not overmuch from mutual company, lest that they
be tempted of Satan. In all these therefore, in fastings, watchings, labors,
chastity etc: the Apostle would prescribe and appoint no rule, law or
measure, which the councels of the Pope and Monks do, but the mean or measure
to be observed in them he left free to every man's knowledge and discretion,
that every one may consider with himself how much or long he must labor,
fast, watch, or abstain, to this end that the flesh may be camed and made
obedient to the spirit.

In long suffering, in kindness, in the holy Spirit. What the two former are the
Apostle has at large sufficiently declared Romans 2. Gal. 5. But whereas he
says: In the holy Spirit, it may be understood after two sorts, either that he
speaks of ye holy Ghost, God himself, or that he means by the holy spirit
the true force and manner of a spiritual life, as though he would admonish in
this manner: Beware of an hypocritical spirit, which will be counted for a holy
spirit through a marvelous show and crafty counterfaiting of spiritual
things, when it is in deed an unclean, profane, and an evil spirit, and
brings in nothing but sects and heresies. A true spiritual life.
But live ye in the true and holy spirit which is given of God, which gives
and maintains unity, one mind, heart and affection, whereof he speaks
also Ephesians. 4: Endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.
They therefore which persevere in the same true faith, mind and sentence,
behave themselves as the ministers of God in the holy spirit, being truly
spiritual, and living a spiritual life. For a sincere spiritual life, which
is led by the assistaunce of the holy spirit of God, is also led in the unity
of minds, the hearts by faith being affected after the same sort.

In love unfeigned, in the word of truth. As he set the holy spirit against
heretics and false Prophets, so he sets unfeigned love against slothful
and sluggish Christians, who albeit they have the same meaning and mind in the
true spiritual life, as concerning opinions of doctrine, yet are they remiss,
cold and faint in love. So he sets the word of truth against them which
abuse the word of God, and interpret it according to their own affections,
that thereby they may get them a name and profit. For as false spirits do
contemn the word of the Scripture, and prefer themselves before it: so these
do in deed boast of the word, and will be counted masters of the Scripture, but
by their interpretations do pervert the sense and meaning thereof. Against
these Peter speaks: If any man speak, let him speak as the words of God,
that is, let him take heed that he be certain that those words which he
speaks, be the words of God, and not his own vain imagination. Now Paul
calls that here the word of truth, which yt is sincere word of God, The word
of truth.
not which is vnsyncere and fained, which forasmuch as it is ours, is falsely
called the word of God. For that which we call the true and right word, the
Hebrews call the word of truth.

In the power of God. In spiritual functions and matters of salvation we must
do nothing but that which we are certain that God works by us.
Of this power Peter also speaks 1. Pet. 1. If any man minister, let him do
it as of the ability which God ministers. And Paul Coloss. 1: Whereunto I
also labor and strive, according to his working, which works in me mightily.
Again Romans 15: I dare not speak of anything which Christ has not wrought by
me, to make the Gentiles obedient. etc. Christians must be certain that they
are the kingdom of God, and do nothing at all, especially in spiritual
functions, and those things that pertain to the salvation of souls, whereof
they are not certain, that it is not they which work, but God that works by
them. For in the kingdom of God it is meet, that God alone do speak,
command, do, dispose, and work all things. This Christ meant wen he said
Matthew. 5: Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven, as the author of them,
which does them and not you.

By the armor of righteousness on the right hand, and on the left, by honor
and dishonor, etc. This armor he describes more at large in the Epistle to
the Ephesians and Thessalonians. He rehearses there the girdle of verity, The
spiritual armor of a Christian.
the breast plate of righteousness, the shoes of preparation to preach the
Gospel, the shield of faith, the helmet of salvation, etc. This armor of
righteousness, he calls in his Epistle to the Ephesians, the armor of God,
both are to this end, that he may turn Christians from corporal and profane
armor, and admonish them, that they are a spiritual people, and therefore
must be furnished with spiritual armor, wherewith they must always fight a
spiritual fight with spiritual enemies, which here he rehearses, and shows
that they do assail us both on the right hand and on the left. The enemies of
Christians which assail them on the left hand.
On the left hand he sets dishonor, evil report, and that we are counted
as deceivers, unknown, dying, chastened, sorrowing, poor, having nothing. For
all these things come unto Christians, they are openly defamed, being
reproched to their face, and by infamy falsely accused and railed on, counted
as deceivers and followers of most wicked trades. They are as unknown although
noble, all refusing to be friends with them because of the perilous confession
of the name of Christ, yea it many times comes to pass that they that were
their most familiar friends are ashamed of them, for that they have so evil a
report, and are very ill spoken of among the chief, richest, wisest, and
mightiest of the world. They are dying, that is, as sheep appointed to the
slaughter, they look for death every moment, by reason of the great hatred and
envy which the evil bear toward them, being always persecuted of the chief
of the world. They are chastened, for it often times falls out that they are
stricken and beaten, and do by other discommodities try how they are envied of
the world, and how great indignation the mighty of the world bear against
them. They are as sorrowing, for all outward things are against them, and the
whole world gives many causes of griefs unto them. They are as poor, for
there is no man of the world which will give them any thing, every man is
ready to hurt and endamage them. Neither do they possess any thing, for
although all things be not taken from them at once, yet are they in that state
that they daily look for it. Against these adversities and as enemies
assailing us on the left hand, it is needful that we be fortified and fensed
with ye armor of God, lest that we either despeire or faint. The armor of God.
Now this armor is a sure and invincible faith, continual consolation and
exhortation of the word of God, and a lively hope and undoubted expectation of
the help of God. When being furnished with these, we suffer all things
patiently, standing steadfast in our duty, we declare our selves the sincere
ministers of God, which the false Apostles and hypocrites can never do,
although they feign that they serve God.

On the right hand he sets glory, praises, Where against Christians must be
defended with spiritual armor on the right hand.
that we are counted true, known, do live, are not killed, do rejoice,
enriching many, possessing all things. For it always falls out, that there
be some which make account of Christians, and reverence them, among whom they
are well reported of, and counted true in doctrine, wherefore some are not
wanting which join themselves unto them, and do openly pretend friendship with
them, freely pronouncing them to be the ministers of God. Neither do they die
so often as they are brought into danger, and being chastened are not always
killed. Finally it comes to pass by the consolation of the spirit, that they
do then most of all rejoice, when they are in greatest affliction. For their
heart rejoices in God, which joy bursteth forth, and utters it self in
words, works, and gestures. And albeit they be poor in corporal substance,
yet are they never famished with hunger, but with the word of God do enrich
very many in spirit, and stand not in need of any thing, although they have
nothing, for all things are in their hands, for that all creatures must serve
the believers, as Christ says: To him that believes all things are possible.
These things albeit they be the excellent gifts of God, notwithstanding if the
fear of God should be absent, even they should be turned into enemies unto us,
and therefore is it needful that we be strongly fensed against them with the
armor of God, lest that they make us wax proud, or insolently puff us up. A
Christian man therefore is meruelously free, and addicted to nothing but to God
alone, he sets God only before his eyes, he endeavors to come straight
unto him by the middle and hie way, between those things which assail on the
right hand and on the left, so that he is neither thrown down by adversity,
nor puffed up by prosperity, but uses both most rightly, both to the glory of
God and profit of his neighbors. We must, says the Apostle, live such a life,
while it is the time of grace and of the lively light of the Gospel, lest that
while this day shines we work not, and that shall have shined unto us in
vain. This is the true ministry of God which only he allows, wherein he
grant that we may serve him, and that most dutifully, Amen.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, CONCERNING TENTATION.
Matthew. 4. Verse 1. THen was Jesus led aside of the spirit into the wilderness,
to be tempted of the Deuell.

2. And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward
hungry.

3. Then came to him the tempter and said, if thou be the son of God command
that these stones be made bread.

4. But he aunswering, said, it is written: Man shall not live by bread only,
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

5. Then the Deuell took him up into the holy City, and set him on a pinnacle
of the temple,

6. And said unto him: If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down: for it
is written, that he will give his Angels charge over thee, and with their hands
they shall lift thee up, lest at any time thou should dash thy foot against
a stone.

7. Jesus said unto him, it is written again: Thou shall not tempt the Lord
thy God.

8. Again the Deuell took him up into an exceeding hie mountain, and showed
him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them.

9. And said to him: All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down, and
worship me.

10. The^ said Jesus unto him, Avoid Satan, for it is written: Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

11. Then the Deuel left him: and behold, the Angels came, and ministered unto
him.


THis text has therefore bin appointed to be read in the beginning of the
solemn fast, which has hitherto bin commanded for forty days, that the
example of Christ being commended to Christians, they might thereby be provoked
to keep that fast so much more religiously, which surely was nothing but a
vain trifle. First, for that no man is able to follow ye example of Christ,
who lived without any meat, forty days, and so many nights. Christ rather
followed the example of Moses herein, then gave unto us any example to follow,
Moses receiving the Law, was forty days and forty nights in the mount Sinai
without meat: so long time would Christ also fast, coming to bring and publish
a new law. Again, this fasting is a perverse thing, inasmuch as it was
ordained of men. For albeit Christ fasted forty days, yet have we no word of
his whereby he has commanded us also to do the same. He did many other
things beside notwithstanding he will not have us also to do them: those
things that he has commanded us to do, those things, I say, we must
endeavor to do, that thereby we may obey his will. A most wicked abuse of
fasting.
But the most pestilent thing of all herein was, that we took upon us, and
used fasting as a good and meritorious work, not to tame the flesh thereby,
but to satisfy for sins, and to procure the favor of God unto our selves.
Which wicked opinion made our fasting so foul, filthy and abominable before
God, that no feastings, bankets, gluttony and dronkennes are so filthy and
detestable before him, and it were better to drink and bibbe day and night,
then so to fast. And although this ungodly and wicked intent had not defiled
our fasting, but that it had bin ordained for chastising yt body, Fasting must
be left free.
nevertheless forasmuch as it was not left free, that every one might have
taken it upon him of his own accord, but was enforced by the laws of man, so
that most which fasted, fasted against their wills, and with a grudging mind,
it could not be but vain and unacceptable to God. I speak not what other hurt
it did in women with child, in young children, in the weak and aged. Wherefore
we will more rightly consider this text, and see what manner of fasting it
teaches by the example of Christ.

Two sorts of fasting, wc are allowable and to be commended.
The Scripture comme^deth unto us two sorts of fasting which are laudable: one,
which is taken upon us of our own accord, to tame the flesh, whereof the
Apostle speaks 2. Cor. 6. where he exhorts us to behave our selves as the
ministers of God, by labors, watchings, and fastings among the rest. An other,
which in deed is not taken upon us willingly, yet is willingly borne of us,
when by reason of need and poverty we have not whereon to feed. Whereof
Paul speaks also in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, the fourth
chapter: Unto this hour we both hunger and thirst. And Christ Matthew. 9: When
the bridegroom shall be taken from them, then shall they fast. This fasting
Christ teaches us by his present example, who being alone in the desert and
having no meat, did suffer that need and hunger patiently. The first of these
two fastes may when we please be left and broken with eating of meat: but this
last must be suffered until the Lord end and break it.

Now the cause why the Evangelist did so diligently first declare, that Jesus
was led aside of the spirit into the wilderness, that he should there fast and
be tempted, is this: lest that any taking upon him to fast of his own mind
and for his own commodities sake, should in vain endeavor to follow this
example of Christ. For he must look for the leading aside of the spirit, he
will cause fasting and tentation enough: We must not procure tentation to our
selves, but patiently suffer it, when it pleases ye Lord to send it.
for he that without the leading aside of the spirit, should voluntarily bring
himself into danger of hunger, or any other tentation, when by the blessing
of God he has what to eat and drink, and whereby to live quietly, he, I
say, should plainly tempt the Lord. We must not procure to our selves poverty
and tentation, they will come soon enough of themselves, only when they are
sent of the Lord we must endeavor to bear them patiently. Jesus, as the
Evangelist writes, was led aside of the spirit into the wilderness, he did not
choose to himself the wilderness. They are led with the Spirit of God, which
are the sons of God, Romans 8. The good things which the Lord gives, he
gives for this, that we may enjoy them with thanks giving, not that we
should neglect them, tempting him.

Moreover, this history is written unto us both to instruct, The history of
Christ's tentation contains both instruction and exhortation.
and also to exhort. To instruct, that we may learn hereby, that Christ by
this his fasting, hunger, tentation and victory against Satan did serve us,
and furthered our salvation: that whosoever believes in him, may never need,
or be hurt by any tentation, but rather shall abound with good things in the
mids of poverty, and be safe in the mids of tentation, for that his head
and Lord Christ has overcome all these things for him, whereof by faith he is
most certain, according as ye Lord himself says Ioh. 16: Be ye of good
comfort, I have overcome the world. And if God could without meat nourish his
Christ forty days and so many nights, so he c^^ also Christians. We are
exhorted also here, that according to this example of Christ, we suffer hunger,
tentation, and other necessities when they come, and when the case so
requires, to the glory of God and profit of our neighbors. And surely if we
do earnestly confess and stick to the word of God, these things will
undoubtedly come unto us. The present text therefore contains a marvelous
consolation and strengthening of faith, against the filthy and incredulous
belly, which being diligently and faithfully weyed, our conscience shall be
very much comforted and stre^gthened, that we may not be careful for living,
but trust with a full confidence, that God will give us plentifully those
things that be necessary. Now, that this tentation also is incident unto us
it is manifest. For as Christ was led aside into the wilderness, that is, was
left alone of God, Angels, men, and all creatures, which might help him: How
we are sometime led aside into ye wilderness.
so also falls it out with us. We are led aside into the wilderness, we are
forsaken and left alone. And this in deed is it, which especially grieueth us,
to feel or perceive nothing whereunto we may trust, or from whence we may
look for help. As when it lies upon me to prepare sustenance for me and
mine, and I have nothing at all of my self, neither perceive any help coming
from any man, neither know where to look for any. This is to be led aside into
the desert, and to be left alone, I being in this case, am in the true exercise
of faith, then I learn how I my self am nothing, how weak my faith is, how
great and rare a thing sound faith is, and how deep abominable incredulity
is settled in the hearts of all. But he that has as yet a purse heavy with
money, a seller full of wine, a garnar replenished with grain, he is not yet
led aside into the wilderness, or left alone, and therefore can not feel
tentation while these things remain.

Satan tempts Christ with care for the belly and diffidence of Gods goodness.
Secondly, Satan comes, and tempts Christ with this care for the belly, and
diffidence of the goodness of God, saying: If thou be the Son of God, command
that these stones be made bread. As if he should say according to ye Dutch
proverb: Trust in God, and in the mean season neglect to bake bread. Tarry
till a roasted chicken fly into thy mouth. Go now, and say that thou have a
God, who is careful for thee. Where is now that thy heavenly Father, who has
so great a care of thee? Has he not goodlily forsaken thee? Eat now and
drink of thy faith, and let us see how thou shall be suffised: it were well wi^^
thee, if thou could feed on stones. What a goodly son of God art thou?
How fatherly does he behave himself toward thee? He sends thee not so much
as a piece of bread, but suffers thee here to be pined with hunger. Go now,
and believe yet that thou art the son of God, and he thy Father. Surely with
these and such like cogitations he tempts all the children of God, which
Christ also undoubtedly felt, for he was not a block or stone, but very man,
although pure from sin, as he also continued, which is not given unto us. Now
that the Deuel tempted Christ with care of the belly, diffidence and wicked
desire, the answer of Christ does sufficiently declare: Man lives not by
bread alone. Which is as much as if he had said: Thou will have me have regard
to bread alone, thou dealest with me, as though I ought to have no other care
but of meat and food for the belly. This tentation is very common, An
usual thing to be tempted with care for the belly.
even among men that are of the most perfect sort, but they especially feel
it, which when they are poor, have notwithstanding a wife and children to
nourish and maintain, and therewithal an empty house. Hereupon Paul calls
covetousness the root of all euels, for that it is the right offspring of
diffidence. And what thing else, but this diffidence and care of the belly, is
the cause that many are so loath to marie? what else does hold so many thousand
men in whoredom and unchaste living, and detaineth them from matrimony, but
this immoderate care of the belly, and ungodly fear lest they should be pined
and perich with hunger? But the present deed and example of Christ should be
thought upon, who although he had bin without meat forty days and so many
nights, yet was he not quite forsaken and left destitute, but the Angels at the
last came, and ministered all things necessary unto him.

Thirdly, we may see here how Christ meets with this tentation of the belly,
and ouercometh it. He sees nothing in deed but stones and that which can not
be eaten, therefore from those things that were before his eyes he remoueth
his mind to the word of God, thereby both strengthening himself, and
overthrowing the Deuell. On which word Christians, How Christians when they are
tempted with poverty and need must comfort themselves, and overcome ye
tentation.
especially when poverty presses them, and all things seem to be turned
into stones, and the mind does now tremble for fear of hunger, ought with a
strong faith to lay hold, and answer the tentation that would quite
discourage the^: What if the whole world were full of bread? yet does not man
live by bread alone, there is need of an other thing, that is, of the word of
God. Now forasmuch as these words are of marvelous force and efficacy, we
must a little stand upon them, and endeavor to declare them, and not lightly
pass them over. These words therefore Christ took out of the first book of
Moses chap. 8. where Moses speaks thus unto the Israelites: Deuteronomy. 8.3.
The Lord thy God humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee with
Manna, which neither thou nor thy fathers knew of, to make thee know that a man
does not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of the Lord. Which is as much as if he had said: Whereas he suffered thee
to hunger, and yet thou did not perish, thou may thereby easily know, that
it is God which sustaineth thee by his word even without bread. For if we did
live and were nourished by bread alone, it were necessary that we should be
always filled with bread. But it is the word of God that nourishes us, which
he will have preached, that we may know that he is our God, and that he will
show himself bountiful and gracious unto us. He that believes in the word of
God shall both be sustained in the time of hunger, and at the last assuredly
have food sufficient.
We are taught therefore by this answer of Christ, and testimony of Moses,
that he which believes in the word of God, shall undoubtedly have experience of
two things. First, that when meat is wanting, and he is pinched with hunger,
he is as well sustained and strengthened by this word, that he die not or
perish with hunger, as if he might abundantly enjoy meat, this word of God,
which he obtains in heart, nourishing and strengthening him without meat and
drink. And if he have but a little meat, he shall perceive that little, although
it were but even one piece of bread, to feed and nourish him no less, then
if he did enjoy princely fare. For not by bread, but by the word of God the
body is nourished and preserved, like as by it it was made, as also all other
things, like as by the word they were created, so also by it are they
preserved. The other thing, which we are here taught that the believer shall
have experience of, is, that at the length he shall assuredly receive bread,
from whence so ever it come, yea although it should rain down from heaven, as
Manna did to the Israelites, in a place where no other bread could be gotten.
Let a Christian quietly promise to himself and look for these two things,
his hope can not be frustrate, either he shall have in hunger somewhat to eat,
from whence soever it be given him, or his hunger shall be made so tolerable unto
him, that he shall be no less fed, then if he were fed with bread, the
power of the word of God nourishing and sustaining him. Those things that I
have said of bread that is, of meat, are also to be understood of drink,
apparel, house, and all things necessary unto this life.

It may be in deed that a godly man do need apparel, Singular comfort
against poverty and need.
or an house, etc. but at length he shall have them. The leaves falling from
the trees shall sooner be turned into coats and clokes, then we can be left
naked, or surely those garments which we have shall not wax old, which the
Israelites tried, whose clothes and shoes in the desert were not torn, as also
a most wide wilderness was unto them in steed of houses, places impassable,
passable, vnwaterie, waterie, finally the stony rocks, fountains of water.
For the Word of God stands sure and immovable: The Lord is careful for us.
And Paul says: 1. Pet. 5.7. 1. Tim. 6.17.
God gives us abundantly all things to enjoy. Also Christ says Matthew. 6:
Seek first the kingdom of God, and all things shall be ministered unto you,
only be careful for nothing. Such words and promises of God must needs
remain true for ever, and therefore no good thing can be wanting to them that
believe. This even daily experience may teach us. We see commonly poor folks
and their children to be better liking the^ many rich folks and their
children, for that the use of their small sustenaunce is by the blessing of God
increased, and does much more feed and nourish them, then all that most
abundant substance does feed and nourich the rich. Now, whereas the wicked
do sometime suffer need, or in the time of famine some do even die through
hunger, that is the special vengeance of God, as is also the pestilence, war
and such like. Otherwise it plainly appears, that not meat but God does feed
and sustain us.

Howbeit whereas God feeds the world with bread, and not with his word alone
without bread, he therefore does it, It pleases God to work by ordinary
means, yet of no necessity.
that he may so hide his work, and exercise our faith. So he commanded the
Israelites, that they should prepare themselves to battle, and yet he would
not have the victory to be gotten by their sword and labor: but he himself
would by means of their sword and labor overcome and vanquishe the enemies.
Here also it might be said, that the soldier does slaie and overcome the
enemy, not by his sword alone, but by the word which proceeds out of the
mouth of God. Whereupon David says Psalm. 44: I will not trust in my bow, it is
not my sword that can save me. And again, He is not delighted in any man's
legs: Psalm. 147.10.
a man of great might is not delivered by much strength: a horse is but a vain
thing to save a man, etc. Nevertheless God vseeh men, swords, horses, and
bows, howbeit not by the power and strength of them, but by them as by
certain means or instruments, he himself fights and ouercometh. This he
has sufficiently declared oftentimes, when he has overthrown the enemies,
and delivered his people, which suerly he daily does, when the case so
requires. After the same sort God uses bread also, by it, forasmuch as it is
made for that use, he feeds us, howbeit when it is wanting, he nevertheless
feeds them that be his, even by his word, without bread, as he does at other
times by bread, so that bread does as it were work under God, as the Apostles
and preachers of the word in spiritual and evangelical meat serve under him,
as it is mentioned 1. Cor. 3. For as God uses their ministry to teach men,
A similitude.
he himself by his spirit speaking in their hearts through it, and doing all
things alone, which he both is able to do, and often times wont to do without
the ministry of the preachers of his word, although he will not in the mean
season have the ministry of his to be despised, and so himself tempted: so
to the nourishing of our outward man, he outwardly uses bread, although he
does make by his word inwardly, that we be nourished and strengthened, which he
can as well do, and is wont to do when bread is away, that all our nourishment
may be attributed to the word, and not to bread, which he uses as an
instrument, but yet of no necessity. That I may speak briefly, all creatures
do as it were serve under him, and are his instruments, without which
notwithstanding he is able, and often times wont to work: by this means
providing, that we may depend on his word alone, neither trusting more unto
him, when we have bread and other things which our life uses, neither less
when we want them, but may use them with giving of thanks when he bestows
them upon us, when otherwise, may patiently be without them, being certain
nevertheless, that we shall live and be nourished in both times, both when we
have them, and when we have them not. And by this faith that vain and ungodly
care of the belly, greedy desire of things, and carefulnes of life are
overcome.

Tentation whereby we are moved to tempt God with presu^ptuous confidence.
Then the Deuell took him up into the holy City, etc. This tentation is
quite contrary to the former. He assaileth us with such tentation also whereby
he goes about to move us to tempt God, even as he wills Christ to cast him
self down from a pinnacle of the temple, and so tempt God, when there were
ladders, by which he might descend. And that this tentation provoke to tempt
God, it is manifest even by the answer of Christ, who answers Satan in
this manner: It is written: Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Hereby he
signifies that the devil would provoke him to tempt God. Now this tentation
does not amiss follow the former. For when the devil perceives the heart, that
in poverty and necessity it trusts in God, he by and by makes an end of
tempting by care of the belly and desire of things, as being weaker then that
by it he may overthrow one so strong in faith. He thinks therefore with him
self: If he profess him self to be of so religious and assured a mind, I
will on this side also give occasion to sin. And so he sets upon him on
the right side, affirming that that is to be believed, which the Lord has
neither spoken, nor commanded to be believed. As is this: If he should bring
thee to such madness, that when thou have bread at home given thee of God, as he
of his goodness gives unto us every day, thou would not use it, but would
procure to thy self necessity and hunger, saying: I must trust in God, I will
not feed on this earthly bread, I will tarry till God give me other from
heaven. This were to tempt God. For he does not command thee to believe, that
that thing shall come unto thee whereof thou have need, if it be already come of
his liberality. For why should thou believe that he will give that, which
thou have already of his gift? Thou see therefore that the devil does here
object a certain necessity and need unto Christ, where there is none. For
there was a sufficient mean to descend from the pinnacle of the temple,
neither was it reason to attempt this new unaccustomed and unnecessary mean
whereunto Satan persuaded.

Moreover allegorically we may by this doing of Satan perceive his craft and
suttletie. He took Jesus, says the Evangelist, into the holy City, and set
him on a pinnacle of the temple. By this tentation he replenisheth men with
cogitations that seem most holy, Satan tempts men unto hypocritical holiness.
that they may think them selves most plentifully endued with faith, and to
stand in a very holy place, when as notwithstanding they are set not in the
temple, but on the temple, that is, not in the synceritie of faith, but in a
vain outward show of faith. Nevertheless he is in the mean season in ye holy
city, because that this kind of men is wont to be no where but among
Christians, where the word of the Lord and the preaching of faith is daily
heard, who also like unto Satan, have sentences of Scripture in a readiness as
concerning the words, although they always pervert and wrest them to their
own error and false imaginations. So Satan recited here unto Christ out of
the 91 Psalm, that God does command his Angels concerning his children, that
they keep them, lifting them up with their hands. But the deceiuer concealed
that which is added, that is, Psalm. 91.11.
in their ways. For thus has the Psalm: He will give his Angels charge over
thee, to keep thee in all thy ways, etc. So that the custody of Angels is
not by the commandment promised unto us, unless we walk in our ways which he
has prescribed us. If we walk in them, we shall assuredly be kept of Angels.
Howbeit the devil says nothing of the ways of ye Lord, but promises by
corrupting the saying of the Psalm, that it is commanded to the Angels, to
keep us in what ways soever, whereof the Lord has commanded nothing. And
this is Satan's seducing, and persuasion to tempt God.

But this tentation does not easily happen in these outward things, as are
bread, apparel, houses, etc. Thou may find in deed some rash heads, which
for no cause do put their life, goods, good name in great danger, as they do
which go on warfare of their own accord, which leap rashly into most deep
waters, or go voluntarily into other no small dangers. Of whom Jesus the
son of Syrach says: Eccle. 3.27.
He that loves peril, shall perish in it. Whereof the Germans have a
proverb: Self do, self have: what every one follows, that he comes unto.
So is it almost usual, that none are oftener drowned then they that are most
exercised in swimming, and none fall more perilously, then they which use to
attempt hie matters. We are seldo^ brought to te^pt God by not taking the use
of outward things which he has given us.
But he shall be hardly found, which having a false and overmuch confidence in
God, attempteth any such thing, or uses not the things present, as bread,
apparel, house, and such like, loking with peril, while God provide otherwise
for him by miracle. We read of a certain Heremite, who because he had vowed to
take bread of no men, brought him self into peril by hunger, and so perished,
and undoubtedly went strait unto hell, because of that false faith and tempting
of God, which he learned no other where but of yt devil, so that his madness
was altogether like that, whereunto Satan here persuadeth Christ, to wit, that
he should cast him self down from a pinnacle of the temple. Howbeit thou
shall find very few which do follow this Heremite, and do differ to enjoy
corporal things present for that they hope that God will give them other from
heaven.

But in spiritual things, which concern the nourishment, We are easily and
often by the tentation of Satan brought to refuse the true spiritual food of
our souls, and to seek other contrary to the will and word of God
not of the body, but of ye soul, this tentation is wont to be both mighty and
often. In these God has appointed a certain manner, whereby the soul may be
fed, nourished and strengthened, both most commodiously, and also most
blessedly, so that no good thing at all can be wanting unto it. This
nourishment, this strength, this salvation, is Christ our Savior, in whom the
Father has most abundantly offered and given all good things. But there are
very few which desire him, the most part seek some other where, whereby
their souls may live, and obtain salvation. Such are all they which seek
salvation by their works. These are they whom Satan having set on a pinnacle
of the temple, bids them cast them selves down, and they obey him. They
descend where as is no way: that is, they believe and trust in God, yet so, as
they trust also in their own works, in which is no place at all for faith and
trust, no way or path unto God, wherefore throwing them selves down headlong,
they break their neck, falling into utter desperation.

Now Satan persuadeth miserable men unto this madness, as also he persuaded
Christ to cast him self down from a pinnacle of the temple, by places of
Scripture perverted and misapplied, wherein works are commanded, whereby he
makes them believe, that the Angels shall keep them, that is, that they
shall be approved of God, when as in deed they can by nothing so offend him,
as by that mad trust and confidence in works. For they acknowledge not, yt
the Scripture does no where require works without faith, or that it does every
where require a sound and lively faith from which works proceed. We have at
large declared who are such, namely, incredulous hypocrites, which are given to
works without faith, which falsely boast of the name of Christians, chalenging
to them selves to be chief in ye flock of Christ: For this tentation must be
in the holy city. Now these two tentations, and the causes of them do greatly
differ: In the former the cause why men do not believe is need and hunger,
for they are thereby moved to distrust God, and despeire of his goodness. In the
latter the cause why they do not believe is overmuch abundance, for that
miserable men are full of most plentiful and abundant treasure, so that they
loath it, coveting to have some other special thing, whereby they may procure
the salvation of their souls. So our case stands ill in both respects: If we
have nothing we despeire, and distrust God: If we have plenty of things, we
loath them, and require other, being then also void of faith. Concerning the
first, we fly and hate scarsitie and seek plenty: concerning the latter, we
seek scarsitie, and fly plenty. Howsoever God deals with us, we are not
content: our incredulity is a bottomless pit of malice and ungodliness.

Again the devil took him up into an exceeding high mountain. Tentation by
vain glory, pleasures and delights of the world.
Here he tempts with vain glory and power of the world, as by the words of
the devil does plainly appear, who showing Christ ye kingdoms of the world,
offered them to him, if he would worship him. By this tentation they are
overcome which revolt from faith, that they may enjoy glory and power here, or
at least do so temper their faith that they lose not these things. In the
number of these are all heretics and troublers of the Church, which do
therefore either leave, or oppugn the sincerity of faith, that being exempted
out of the common number they may be extolled on hie. So we may place this
tentation on the right hand, as the first assaileth us on the left. For as the
first tentation is of adversity, whereby we are moved to indignation,
impatiencie, and diffidence, so this third tentation is of prosperity, whereby
we are provoked to delights, glory, pleasures, and whatsoever is excellent and
delectable in the world. The second tentation is altogether spiritual, whereby
Satan by deceit, and marvelous and secret suttlery goes about to withdraw man
from faith. For whom he can not overcome with poverty, scarsitie, necessity,
and misery, them he te^pteth with riches, favor, glory, delights, power, etc:
and so he assayleth us on either side, yea when he prevails by neither way,
he goes about, as Peter says, and atte^pteth all means, that whom he can
overcome neither by adversity, that is, by the first tentation, nor by
prosperity, that is, by the third tentation, he may overcome either by
error, blindness, or false understanding of the Scripture, that is, by the
second tentation which is spiritual, and therefore most hurtful. By which if
he prevail against any they are also overcome both on the left side and on the
right. For whether they suffer such poverty, or enjoy plenty of things,
whether they contend, or yield unto all things, both is nothing: while they
are in error, either patience in adversity or constancy in prosperity can
be of no importance. For in both even heretics often times do notably excel,
and it is a practice of the devil eftsoons to feign him self overcome in the
first and third tentation, that he may reign victour by the second. He can be
content that they that be his do often times suffer poverty patiently, and
do also contemn the world, although they do neither of both with a simple
heart, and sincere faith. Every one therefore of these three tentations is
grievous and very hard, but the middle one is most perilous of all, for it
assayleth the doctrine of faith, and is spiritual, and wont to deceive in
spiritual things. The other two also do assail faith, howebeit in these
outward things, as adversity and prosperity, although they do also urge us
very sore. For it can not be a little grievous to suffer poverty, to want bread,
and such other things necessary. Again it is no less grievous to neglect,
and wholly to deny favor, glory, riches, friends, companions, and other
commodities which we have. But an entire and sound faith in the word of God
can perform both notably, and if it be a strong faith, An entire and sound
faith can both patiently bear adversity and contemn the vain glory and
delights of the world
they seem very easy and delectable unto it.

We can not certainly know ye order of these tentations which happened to
Christ, for that the Evangelists have not described them after one order. For
Luke has set that last, which Matthew has set in the mids, and that which
Matthew has set last, Luke has placed in the mids. But there does not so
much consist in the order. Notwithstanding when any will teach the people
concerning these tentations, it were better to follow the order of Luke. For he
may fitly say, and thus rehearse, that Satan does first tempt us with poverty
and adversity, whereby if he prevail not, that he tempts us with prosperity
and glory, which if he do in vain, that he assaileth us with all his might,
and tempts us with error, lies, delusion, and other spiritual suttleties.
Yet neither is this order always observed of Satan: but he tempts Christians
sometime with the first, sometime with the third tentation, as he has and
sees occasion. Matthew was not careful to rehearse them in that order, which
they have almost by their own nature, and which may be commodious for him that
shall teach of them. Yea it may be that they happened not unto Christ by any
certain order, but that he was assailed of Satan one day with this, an other
day with that, during the space of those forty days, as Satan thought it most
convenient and meet for his purpose.

And behold, the Angels came, and ministered unto him. This I think was done
corporally, that they having taken bodies, appeared, and ministered unto him
meat and drink, as his seruiters at the table, and Ministers of all other
things necessary for his life. Yea and I think that the devil also appeared
unto him in a corporal form, perhaps as an Angel. For in that he took
Christ, and set him on a pinnacle of the temple: also whereas in a moment he
showed him all the kingdoms of the world, he sufficiently declared, that he was
more then a man, and such a one surely he showed him self openly, when he
offered that he would give unto him those kingdoms, and required that he would
worship him. And undoubtedly he did not appear like a devil when he did these
things, for he loves to appear after a fair sort, especially when he will
lie and deceive: 1. Cor. 11.14.
for then he transformeth him self into an Angel of light, as Paul
witnesses. Now this is written chiefly for our consolation, In the time of
tentation we must nothing dout of Gods help and deliverance.
that we may not dout, that many Angels shall minister unto us, when one
devil tempts us, if we fight valiantly. For if we stand fast in faith, it is
so far of that God will suffer us to be troubled and pinched with poverty,
more then is meet, that he will sooner send his Angels to minister unto us,
to be our Butlers, our Cooks, and to help us with their ministry in all
necessity. Neither are these things written for Christ's cause, whom they
can not profit, but they are written for us, that we may learn to believe,
that if the Angels ministered unto him, they shall also when the case so
requires minister unto us his brethren and members. The Lord give us faith to
believe this.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, CONCERNING THE LEADING OF A GODLY LIFE.
Ephesians. 5. Verse 1. BE ye therefore followers of God as dear children.

2. And walk in love, even as Christ has loved us, and has given him self
for us, to be an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God.

3. But fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once
named among you, as it becomes Saints.

4. Neither filthiness, neither foolish talking, neither jesting, which are
things not comely, but rather giving of thanks.

5. For this ye know, that no whoremonger, neither unclean person, nor
covetous person, which is an idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of
Christ, and of God.

6. Let no man deceive you with vain words: for, for such things comes the
wrath of God upon the children of disobedience.

7. Be not therefore companions with them.

8. For ye were once darkness, but are now light in the Lord: walk as children
of light.

9. For the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth.


THis text is exhortatorie, wherein Paul, according to his manner, and
accustomed care for the brethren, exhorts Christians not to leave or slack
the study and care of godliness, and give them selves to slothfulnes, but to
declare by their work the word that they have learned of him, that is, to show
it forth by the fruits of faith, and make it plausible and honorable, to the
edifying of the Heathen, lest that by ye vices of them which profess the
doctrine of the Gospel, they take occasion to hate that doctrine, and so be
offended by them, whom it did behoue to win them unto Christ.

Be ye therefore followers of God as dear children. First therefore he exhorts
us, forasmuch as we are by Christ made the sons of God, to imitate such a
father, as dear children. Marvelous gently and alluringly he speaks unto us,
calling us dear children, that by the love of God our father toward us, he may
provoke us to love him again, and them whom he commands us to love, The love
of God toward us.
even as he has loved us first. But how has he loved us? Surely not after
that common sort alone, whereby in this life he nourishes and sustaineth us
being unworthy, together with all the ungodly, making his sun to arise on the
good, and on the evil, and sending rain on the just and unjust: whereof Christ
speaks Matthew. 5: Be ye perfect as your Father is perfect. But he loves us
also after an other special manner, in that he has given his son for us.
Ioh. 3. For he has abundantly bestowed upon us all temporal and also
eternal good things, yea his own self, and has as it were poured him self,
with all that he is, has, and can, into us who were sinners, unworthy,
enemies, and servant of Satan, so that he could not do and give unto us more
and greater things. Now he, whom this divine fire of love, which fills
heaven and earth, and yet is not comprehended, does not kindle and inflame to
love likewise his neighbor, whosoever he be, friend, or enemy, he I say, will
neither by law, precepts, doctrine, threatenings and force be ever moved to
godliness and love. Walk, says the Apostle, in love, whereby he signifies
that our life should be nothing else, In what kind of love we must walk.
but mere love. Howbeit he will not have us walk in the love of the world,
which in love seeks those things which are his own, and loves so long as
there is any thing, whereby it looks for commodity and lucre. Therefore he
says: Even as Christ has loved us, who neither sought nor could look for any
profit or commodity of us, and yet he loved us so greatly that he gave him
self for us, and not only his other good things which he gives us daily, and
he so gave him self for us, that he might be an oblation and sacrifice, to
obtain the good will and favor of the father toward us, and to bring to
pass, that we might now have God a merciful and favorable father, being
become his true children and heirs, etc. So also it behooves us to give and
lend, not only to our friends, but also to our enemies, neither to count this
sufficient, but to be ready also even to dye both for friends and foes,
thinking nothing else, but that we may serve and profit our neighbors both in
body and goods, as long as we shall be in the pilgrimage of this life, seeing
that we possess all things being given unto us by Christ.

To be an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God. This
manner of speech Paul borrowed out of the old Testament, wherein those corporal
sacrifices are written eftsoons to have yielded to the Lord a sweet savor,
that is, to have been acceptable unto him. The sacrifices of the old Testament
accepted for Christ's sake, who was to come. Christ the only sacrifice which
God accepts, and whereby we are acceptable unto him.
Notwithstanding that was not because of the work and sacrifice in it self,
as the Jews falsely thought, and therefore were very often reproved of the
Prophets, but for Christ's sake who was to come, the one and only sacrifice of
a good savor, whom all those sacrifices of the law did shadow forth, and
represent. Wherefore that which Paul here says, is as much as if he had said:
All the sacrifices of the old Testament have an end, they can now be of no
price: Christ him self is the only sacrifice, which yields unto God a
sweet smelling savor, that is, is pleasing and acceptable unto him, whereby
we are assured that we are acceptable unto God, and do please him. Wherefore
there is no other sacrifice in the Church which may be offered for us, beside
this only sacrifice, which being once offered has at once satisfied for the
sins of all the elect. And although we after the example of this sacrifice,
do offer our bodies to God, as Paul teaches Romans 12, yet we offer them not
either for our selves or for other, forasmuch as that is proper to Christ, the
only sacrifice, whereby the salvation of all is obtained. Wherefore those
things smell most stinkingly before God, whatsoever men offer with this mind,
as though they would satisfy for their own sins, or for the sins of other,
whereof we both have and will elsewhere speak more.

But fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once named
among you. Uncleanness.
By ye name of uncleanness beside fornication he understands all lust and
lecherous filthiness, which is committed out of matrimony, which for the
filthiness of them he does not vouchsafe to rehearse by name, as Romans 1. he
speaks very grossly of them. Although in matrimony also a mean may be
exceeded, and it is the duty of Christians so to moderate the use of marriage,
that they require and perform due love and beneuole^ce only for avoiding
fornication, but we are fallen so far, that they are most rare, which come
together only for procreation of children and to avoid fornication, which
surely were best, and should very well become us. Now the Apostle says, let
it not be once named among you, that is, be so far from these evils, that
they may not so much as be spoken of of you. There is often falling among
Christians through infirmity, and how true Christians deal in this case.
Albeit it will never come to pass in this exile, that none among Christians
be weak, and do not oftentimes fall, yet true Christians will never wink at
those things: they will reprove, amend, put away, cover, and cure whatsoever
such thing shall burst forth amongst them, that the heathen may not be offended
and say: See what vices the Christians suffer among them selves, how unclean
and lewd a life do they lead? thinking that all their whole life is defiled
with like vices as is their own. We must needs confess that among Christians
some do eftsoons fall, which we must needs bear, it is well if only the
better part lives well, and winketh not at their sins, neither teaches
them, but rather reproves and amendeth them. So Paul exhorts Gal. 6. that
they which are spiritual will restore them that offend, with the spirit of
meekenes. And he sharply reproves the Corinthians, for that they did lightly
pass over many sins of certain persons. For sin being reprehended and
punished, is now counted as no sin, neither can the Church be blamed because
of it. After the same sort heed must be taken, that covetousness be not named
among Christians, that is, that they become not infamous by the name thereof,
which they shall bring to pass, if, when it chau^ceth that covetous me^ be
amongst them, or one uses deceit toward an other in their business and
affairs, or some contend in judgment for those outward things, if I say, they
do not wink hereat, but do reprove and correct such, that the sincerity of
the doctrine of the Gospel may obtain due estimation among the people, and
there may be no cause openly to dispraise our ministry, 2. Cor. 6. These
things I have spoken because of them, who as soon as they see that all things
do not resemble and show forth a holiness among Christians, and that some do
stumble and fall, do think that there is no Christian left, that the Gospel is
to no purpose, and that all things are taught and done in vain. As though the
life of Christians were now without fight, victory and due triumph over sin
being obtained, when as rather it is a warfare and a continual fight. Where as
therefore they do now sight and are in the camp, it is no meruell if some fly
away, if some be wounded, if some fall, yea and be even slain outright. War
is not made without peril and hurt, if it be earnest war.

As it becomes Saints. This he adds to his exhortation, Christians are
Saints, and therefore must be pure, not defiled with uncleanness, covetousness,
etc.
as a reason and cause showing why it lies upon Christians, to take heed that
they be not diffamed by these names: For they are Saints, now it becomes
such to be chaste, bountiful, and ready to give, to teach and do the same. Thou
see here, that Paul calls Christians Saints, while they remain yet in this
life, and are pressed with flesh and blood, from which nothing comes but
sin, which he does undoubtedly not for their good works, but because of ye
sanctifying blood of Christ, as he witnesses 1. Cor 6: But ye are washed, but
ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the Spirit of our God. Forasmuch therefore as we are Saints, it is meet yt we
should show ye same in our works, and albeit we be as yet weak, nevertheless
we must daily endeavor to live purely, and far from covetousness, to ye praise
and glory of God, and ye edifying of our neighbors, even yt Heathen.

Neither filthiness. Al unchaste and lewd words of bauderie, Lewd, unclean and
bawdy talk forbidden.
uncleanness, and lecherous matters, he calls filthiness, of which words
abundance is wont to be poured forth in Innes and victailing houses, in the
time of eating, drinking, and playing. These the Grecians used very freely and
accustomably more then others, as their own Poets and other writers do
sufficiently witness. But he especially reproves here those lewd and wanton
words, which are spoken openly without shame, which stir up wicked and
unchaste thoughts, and are cause of many offenses, especially being spoken
among youth, according to that saying: 1. Cor. 15.33.
Evil speakings corrupt good manners, as the Apostle writes to the
Corinthians. And if any Christians should be so careless of their tongue, that
such words should come from them, such must be chastised of the Church, and if
they do not amend, they must not be suffered, lest because of them the whole
Church be ill reported of, as though these things were either taught among
Christians, or suffered to be unpunished, as it is wont to be among the Heathen.

Foolish talking prohibited.
Neither foolish talking. Fables and other trifling speeches and jests are
called foolish talking, which ye Grecians also were wont to use more then other
nations, being very witty to invent such vain speeches. Of this sort are those
tales, which our women and maidens are wont to tell, spinning at the distaffe,
also the terms and verses of iuglers and such like fellows, and many common
songs, which are partly even filthy, and partly contain other trifling and
vain things. But especially it is unseemly and inconvenient for Christians to
use such foolish and trifling talk, when they come together to hear the word
of God, or to read and search the Scriptures, and yet notwithstanding almost
even such folly happens among them, when many come together. For albeit they
begin with serious matters, nevertheless they are marvelous easily brought unto
trifles: from earnest and holy matters, to ridiculous and vain speeches,
wherewith both the time is spent in vain, and better things are neglected. So
have they been wont certain years hitherto, at every feast of Easter in the
time of preaching to tell some ridiculous tale to stir up the people from
sleep. They did not unlike at the feast of the nativity of Christ, using
songs or carrolls, wherein they said, they made discourses of the birth and
infancy of Jesus, howbeit ridiculous meeter and words, moving rather laughter
then devotion, as they called it: Also they soong many fained fables of the
wise men, whom they made 3. Kings, of ye passion of ye Lord, of the punishment
of Dorothea, and many other, all which were nothing but foolish talking and
vain inue^tions, altogether unworthy of Christians. To the number of these I
might well add those histories of Saints, which they call the legends, and
that flood of lies, of miracles and pilgrimages to images, and moniments of
Saints, Masses, and worshippings of Saints, indulgences and innumerable
other, not so much foolish as ungodly inventions, which in the assemblies of
the Church, were wont to be chiefly extolled in the pulpit, which were so
contrary to godliness, that they deserve much rather to be called the wicked
inue^tions of Satan, then foolish imaginations of me^. For they did not as
ridiculous lies are wont to do, corrupt good manners only, of which Paul
speaks especially here, but they did wholly overthrow faith, and put out of
place the word of God, so that they did not only not beseme Saints, but did
plainly abolish all Saints. Those former therefore were fables and tales of
men, which are not believed, neither esteemed any thing of, but rather laughed
at, although in the mean season they corrupt good manners, withdraw Christians
from serious matters, and make them slack and slothful. But these latter are
deuilish fables, which are believed for a truth, and counted for serious, yea
and heavenly matters, when as notwithstanding they be nothing else but fained
devises of Satan, whereby he with his angels deludeth and mocketh us.

Neither jesting. Hereby he understands all pleasant speeches, which they
whom they call iesters are wont to use, to make men merry, which by pleasant
discourses and merry terms do move laughter and stir up men's minds to mirth
and cheerefulnes, which is wont to be usual in civil bankers, and when civil
companions meet together. This jesting the Heathen counted for a virtue,
especially Aristotle. Jesting neither allowed nor used among Christians.
But Paul among Christians gives it place among vices. For Christians have
other speeches, whereby they may recreat and cheer them selves in Christ, which
also do bring some profit with them, although it easily happens, that many
Christians do offend oftentimes herein. But they that are true Christians, do
never praise it, neither do suffer that any should give him self to this
jesting, and study to exceed therein, but they reprove and prohibit him,
especially in the Church, in ye time of preaching and teaching. For Christ has
witnessed, Matthew. 12.36
that we shall in the last day give an account of every idle word. It is meet
in deed that Christians be an elegant and amiable people, but therewithal
grave, that there may be seen in them a severe gentleness, and a gentle
severity, as the life of Christ is described unto us in the Gospells.

Things which are not comely, but rather giving of thanks. This comprehends
all idle words, which want a proper name. Idle words.
Now I call them idle words which make neither to the edifying of faith, nor to
the use of our corporal life. For there be things enough both profitable and
pleasant, which when it pleases us to speak, we may talk of in the short
time of this life, as of Christ, of love, and other things either necessary or
profitable. Whereof Paul admonishes when he says: but rather giving of
thanks. For our daily speech ought to be the praise of God, and giving of
thanks to him, as well privately, as publicly in sermons, for such infinite
good things, as he has given unto us in Christ, even unspeakable. But such
is the manner of our reason and nature, that necessary and profitable things
are neglected, and foolish and frivolous things are chiefly regarded. Now mark
here, if Paul does not suffer in Christians speeches that be only pleasant and
tending to mirth, what think thou would he say of that pestilent backebyting
and sclaundering, which reigns now in all companies of men, even them that be
private, when two oftentimes do talk together? Yea what would he say of them,
which openly in sermons do as it were bite and rent one an other with
reprochful words, and maliciously accuse and speak evil one of an other?

For this ye know, that no whoremonger, neither unclean person, nor covetous
person, which is an idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and
of God. In these words he does very plainly pronounce against them which are
infected with such vices, that they are heathen under the name of Christians, how
many soever do not bring forth the fruits of faith. This is a brief and a
certain sentence: A fornicator an unclean person and a covetous person have
denied the faith. 1. Tim. 5.8.
He that is a fornicator, has denied ye faith, an unclean person has denied
ye faith, a covetous person has denied ye faith, all such are Apostataes,
perjured, and traitors toward God: as Paul writes also unto Timothe, of him
ye neglects them that be of his family: If there be any, says he, that
provides not for his own, and namely for them of his household, he denies the
faith, and is worse then an Infidel. How could he more severely and terribly
fraie us from vices? For he says: For this ye know, as if he said: Do not so
much as dout, count it not for a play, neither let it be a sport unto you,
neither comfort your selves with vain hope of a Christian name, and for that
ye are counted Christians, these things shall profit you no more, then it
profited the Jews, that they were the children of Abraham, and Disciples of
Moses. It was spoken to all which Christ says Matthew. 7: Not every one that
says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that
does the will of my Father which is in heaven: Two very forcible means to
stir us up unto godliness.
there is need of doing, and our faith must be proved by works. Whom
therefore that great force of heavenly fire shall not inflame unto godliness,
that is, the admonition of the incomparable love of God toward us, which he set
in the first place, him let these horrible threatenings of hell fire move, to
wit, whereas he witnesses, that as many as will not follow God, and walk in
love, and show forth their faith by their works, are neither the sons of
God, nor heirs of his kingdom, whereupon it follows, that they are
undoubtedly heirs with Satan of hell fire. Whom therefore these two so mighty
prouokements shall not stir up to the fear of God and godliness, with all
diligence to do the duty of a Christian, he is plainly a block and a stone,
having a heart harder then the anuill as Job says.

He particularly reproves a covetous person, The covetous man an idolater.
and pronounces him an Idolater or worshipper of images, whereby surely he
declares, how greatly he is displeased with them that are infected with this
vice, and in the third chapter of his Epistle to the Colossians he says also
the same thing of him. The cause hereof I think to be this: other sinners use
only that thing, wherein they offend, and make it serve their lust and
desire: so the fornicator and unclean person use their body to pleasure: the
proud person uses riches, learning, the favor of men, and such like, unto
glory: only this miserable Idolater is a slave to his money and riches, and
his sin is, that he spares his money and goods, keeps and hourdeth them
up, dares not apply them neither to his own use, nor to the use of other, but
does plainly serve and worship them as his god, and so much esteems them,
that he would sooner lose and suffer to perish the kingdom of God, then he
would spend his money, or give the value of a rush toward the maintaining
either of a preacher, or an instructor of youth, whereby the word of God and his
kingdom might be furthered. Forasmuch therefore as all the trust and hope of
such a man is reposed in money, and not in God alone, who gives him
abundantly whereby to live, money is worthily called his god, and he him self
said to be an Idolater, and has no inheritance in the kingdom of heaven. What
can be invented more filthy and pestilent then this disease? Woe unto thee,
incredulity, how an abominable and hurtful evil art thou? We must take
heed we be not deceived with vain words.


Let no man deceive you with vain words. These are the vain words of them
which extenuate and make light of fornication and such like sins, as though
they were not greatly evil, or did so much offend God. There were not wanting
Philosophers and Poets among the Heathen, which counted all use of lechery
beside only adultery, lawful, as a thing natural, as is to use meat and
drink. So says Terence: It is not a wickedness, believe me, for a young man to
follow harlots, etc. But this is to be ignorant of God, and to live according
to the sore of concupiscence, as the Gentiles were wont to do. Moreover such
vain words are those, which albeit they have some likelihood of truth, yet in
deed are trifling, and shall not excuse any. So covetousness does not want a
cloak and pretense for it self: for him that seeks his own with the
discommoditie of others, they call a good husband, industrious, one that
looks to his business, although in the mean while the poor perish with
hunger, or are otherwise afflicted above their strength. Wherefore such
speeches are profane and heathnish, by which love is extinguished, and they
which give ear to them and believe them, are deluded with a vain hope.

For, for such things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience. This is an other light which we ought to follow, leaving the
obscure light of reason, which does not greatly condemn fornication, The wrath
and vengeance of God hangs over fornicators, unclean and covetous persons.
uncleanness, covetousness, etc. This our light witnesses, that for such things
the wrath of God comes upon unbelievers, whom he calls the children of
disobedience, and therefore can not abide to believe the word of God, and to
give them selves to the obedience of faith. This Paul declares 1. Cor. 10. by
many examples, where he says that a great part of the people was slain for
fornication, of which deed is spoken also Number. 25. For violence also,
covetousness, and uncleanness, the whole world was destroyed by the flood.
Wherefore a sufficient sharp, yea and a certain vengeance abides them that
are infected with these wickednesses. Now he calls them the children of
disobedience, that is, of incredulity, which is as much as if he had said: of
them that have revolted from the faith, and have renounced Christ. Hereby
therefore we see and learn, that he that does not approve his faith by works,
is no better then a Heathen, yea worse, inasmuch as he has renounced Christ,
and denied the faith once received. For this cause therefore the vengeance and
wrath of God shall come upon them that are such, as we Germans do now try,
unto whom God sends abundantly the pestilence, famine, and cruel wars. Let
men take heed they give no ear to those deceivers, which with vain words
promise that those sins shall escape unpunished: Let those slack and
slothful Christians beware, who although they be not blind Heathen, but know
well that uncleanness and covetousness are sins, and think or teach no
otherwise, do nevertheless live wickedly, resting upon faith, whereby they hope
that they shall obtain salvation without works, forasmuch as works do not
save: Yea albeit they very well know, that faith without works is a fained
faith, and that worthy fruits and good works must needs follow, where a true
and sound faith is, yet notwithstanding they live securely in their sins,
presuming of the grace and mercy of God, nothing fearing God and his judgment,
when as notwithstanding it is certain, that God does require the mortification
of the old Adam, and good fruits of good trees. Although perhaps Paul
speaks not here properly of these, but of the^ which think, and in vain
words teach, that fornication, covetousness, and such like are not sins, as
the blind Heathen did, and many do at this day under the name of Christians:
yet is it to be feared, seeing they live no better then the heathen do, and be
themselves fornicatours and covetous persons, yt they shall feel ye like
vengeance of God with them, yea so much more grievous vengeance, as they do
know more certainly that those are sins, according to that saying Romans 2:
Think thou this, O thou man, that condemnest them which do such things, and
do the fame, that thou shall escape the judgment of God? after thine
hardness, and heart that can not repent, thou heapest unto thy self wrath
against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just judgment of God.
etc.

Be not therefore companions with them: For ye were once darkness, but are now
light in the Lord: walk as children of light. So Peter also says, that it is
sufficient for us, that we have spent the time past of our life after the lust
of the Gentiles, but from hence forth should have nothing common with them, but
spend the rest of our life in the service and worship of God. They which are
not yet lightened by Christ, are blind and ignorant, but they whom he has
lightened, do know both God and their duty toward him.
When we were Gentiles, we knew not that these were sins, we were so blinded
through incredulity and ignorance of God. But after that we are made light in
the Lord, that is, lightened by Christ, we do not only well understand what God
is, and what he requires of us, what sin and iniquity is, but are also able
now to be in steed of light unto others, and to teach them those things which
we have learned. Such Paul said the Philippians were, that they shined as
lights in the world in the mids of a naughty and crooked nation. So before
we were not only dark, but darkness it self, inasmuch as we were not only
ignorant and erred, but did also bring other into the same darkness, both by
words and deeds. Let us be thankful therefore to him, which has called us
out of this darkness into his marvelous light, walking as the children of
light, which Peter also admonishes us to do.

For the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth.
Forasmuch as he has here spoken of light, it had been more agreeable to have
added, for the fruit of light, as the Latin editions have, then of the Spirit,
as it is read in the Greek. Who knows, whether the greeks coppies were here
changed upon this occasion, for that Paul in the Epistle to the Galathians
entreats of the fruits of the spirit? But this skilleth little, Goodness.
of the Spirit, and of light are all one in this place. Goodness therefore is a
fruit either of the Spirit or of light, contrary to covetousness, whereby a
Christian man is good, that is, profitable and beneficial to others,
Righteousness.
ready to gratify and do well to his neighbors. Righteousness being a fruit of
the Spirit is contrary to covetousness. For it makes that no man does take
away from an other that which is his, either by violence, either by craft or
guile, Truth.
but that he endeavor rather to give unto every man that which is his own.
Truth is a fruit of the Spirit contrary to hypocrisy and lying, which
requires that a Christian be true and incorrupt not only in words, but also
in his whole life, that he do not glory of the name of a Christian without
works, that he be not called a Christian, and yet live after the manner of the
Heathen, in fornication, uncleanness, covetousness, and other vices, etc. *** *

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, WHEREIN IS DECLARED HOW GOD CARES and provides
for them that be his.
Luke 5. Verse 1. THen it came to pass, as the people preased upon him to
hear the word of God, that he stood by the lake of Gennesaret.

2. And saw two ships stand by the lake side, but the fishermen were gone out
of them, and were washing their nets.

3. And he entered into one of the ships which was Simons, and required him
that he would thrust of a little from the land: and he sat down, and taught the
people out of the ship.

4. Now when he had left speaking, he said unto Simon: lanche out into the
deep, and let down your nets to make a draught.

5. Then Simon answered and said unto him: Master, we have travailed sore all
night, and have taken nothing, nevertheless at thy word I will let down the net.

6. And when they had so done, they enclosed a great multitude of fishes, so
that their net brake.

7. And they beckened to their partners which were in the other ship, that they
should come and help them, who came the^ and filled both the ships, that they
did sink.

8. Now when Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus knees saying: Lord go
from me, for I am a sinful man.

9. For he was utterly astonished and all that were with him, for the draught of
fishes which they took.

10. And so was also James and John the sons of Zebedeus, which were
companions with Simon. Then Jesus said unto Simon: fear not: from hence forth
thou shall catch men.

11. And when they had brought the ships to la^d, they forsook all and followed
him.


TO them that believe this text is most easy to be understood, which sets
forth two things unto us, namely faith, and temporal good things, and faith,
and eternal good things. The faithful shall want nothing that is necessary
for the sustentation of this life.
First it declares unto them that believe in Christ, that they shall have
sufficient wherewith to sustain themselves even in this life: which Christ
shows by this, when he gives so many fishes to Peter and his companions, as
they durst not so much as desire. So that Christ is careful even how to feed
the belly, if that cursed incredulity be not na hinderance thereunto. For
behold S. Peter, and consider his heart aright in your mind, then shall ye
find, that he did not so much as think, that he should take so many fishes.
God therefore is present, and causes fishes to come into the net, even more
then they would have wished. By which example we are admonished that they shall
have sufficient of those things that are necessary for the sustentation of
this life, which do believe, but they that do not believe can never be
satisfied, whereby they fall into all kind of vices. Hereunto pertains that
which S. Paul says 1. Tim. 6: Godliness is great gain, if a man be content
with that he has. For we brought nothing into the world, and it is certain,
that we may carry nothing out, therefore when we have food and raiment, let us
therewith be content. For they that will be rich, fall into tentation and snares,
and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and
destruction. For the desire of money is the root of all evil, which while
some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and perced themselves through
with many sorrows. This place of S. Paul plainly declares what follows our
unbelief, Fruits of incredulity.
to wit, that it traueleth to get substance, and labors to be rich, and
falls into the tentation and snares of the Deuell. But we can not see that,
forasmuch as it is spiritual. If we could as well see the hurt, which it
brings to spiritual things, as we can see that which it brings to
corporal and outward things, then were it an easy matter to preach unto us.
For we see plainly in outward things, how he that is given to the desire of
money, scrapeth and gathers together, does injury to all men, that he alone
may gather together and heap up many things, whereunto he may trust and say:
Well, now have I goods enough. Whereby we may gather how unkind and
unmerciful a covetous man is: for he does good to no man, he shows himself
gentle and kind to no man, he gives nothing to any man, but looks unto his
own lucre and commodity.

Now this is a cursed thing, that we can not so much as trust unto the Lord,
that he will feed our belly, thinking always that we shall perish with
hunger, when as notwithstanding we shall have things necessary and that which
is sufficient for us, as Christ says Matthew. 6: I say unto you, be not careful
for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink: nor yet for your
body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more worth then meat? and the
body then raiment? Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not, neither
reap, nor carry into the barnes: yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are ye
not much better then they? Which of you by taking care, is able to add one
cubit unto his stature? And why care ye for raiment? Learn how the lillies of
the field do grow: they are not weried, neither spinne: yet I say unto you,
that even Solomon in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of these.
Wherefore if God so clothe the grass of the field, which though it stand to
day, is to morrow cast into the oven, shall he not do much more unto you, O ye
of little faith? Therefore take no thought, saying what shall we eat? or what
shall we drink? or wherewith shall we be clothed? (For after all these things
seek the Gentiles:) For your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all
these things. But seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and
all these things shall be ministered unto you. Care not then for the morrow: for
the morrow shall care for it self: the day has enough with his own grief.
Ye see in this place, how God has a care for the fowls and flowers, and does
adorn them after a most goodly sort: how much more will God give unto us those
things that be necessary? and yet we can not put our trust in him, Where
trust in God is not there charity ceasseth.
so has the Deuell entangled us in his snares. When one comes so far, that
he is not content with that he has, neither trusts in God, then charity
must needs suddenly cease, so that he does good to no man, but only provides
that his own heap be increased. Hereupon came the spiritual state of
sacrificing Priests and Monks, that they might only help themselves, feed
their belly, avoid labor, enter into Monasteries, that thereof did rise a
true proverb: Desperation makes a Monk, yea not only a Monk, but sacrificing
Priests, Bishops and Popes: for they trust not in God, that he is able to feed
them, but they study upon this only, that they may be delivered from all
misery and infirmity, which is altogether to live in incredulity: they never
trusted in God, that he is able to give them nourishment and things
necessary, if any of them should mary a wife and remain without that state of
Antichrist.

Moreover, here is an example set forth unto us, which provoke and allureth
us to confidence, and first that we commit our belly to God: for he has a
care of us, even in temporal things. Which sufficiently appears in Peter,
whereas he took such a great multitude of fishes, which ran by great
companies into his nets. Whereby is plainly signified that God will forsake
no man, but that every one shall have enough, if that we shall only trust in
him, as the 37. Psalm. affirms: I have bin young, and now am old, and yet saw
I never the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. Things necessary
shall not be wanting unto us, if faith be not wanting: for before we should
want, the very Angels should come, and minister unto us food. Whereas
therefore men are commonly oppressed with so great misery, only unbelief is
the cause thereof. We must labor, and not be careful, but commit the
success unto God.
And albeit God be with us, notwithstanding he requires yet of us, work or
labor, and hope, if he at any time differ somewhat to help us. He
commands Peter here, that for the taking of fishes, he should cast forth his
nets: Lanche out into the deep, says he, and let down your nets to make a
draught, as if the Lord said: Do thou that which belongs to a fisher cast thy
net into the deep, and commit the success unto me, leave the care unto me.
God leaves not the care unto thee, but the work and labor: howbeit we after
a clean contrary order, study to commit the care to our selves and the labor
to him. Whereby it comes to pass, that every one for himself applies his
mind earnestly to gain, and to gather money unto himself, that he may not be
enforced by any means to take pains and labor. But if thou will live a
Christian life, leave unto thy God to care how the fishes shall come into the
nets, and go thou, and take upon thee the state wherein thou may labor.
Howbeit for the most part, we wish such states of life, as in which there is no
need of labor, which is altogether a deuelish thing. And therefore have we
bin consecrated Monks and sacrificing Priests, that we might live only like
gentlemen, without labor. And for the same cause parents have set their
children to schole, that at ye last they might live merry days, and so serve
God, as they thought. Whereby it came to that pass that they did not know,
what a good life was: forasmuch as God especially commends that, and that in
deed is acceptable unto him, which is gotten with the sweat of the brows, as
he commanded Adam. Genesis 3. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread.
And the deeper thou art occupied in this law, in so much better case thy
things are, wherefore follow thy work, labor, and trust in God, all
carefulnes being cast of.

Now some murmur, and say, if faith be preached, that we must trust in God, and
leave the care unto him, I might long enough, say they, believe or trust,
before I should have wherewithal to be fed and sustained, if I should not
labor. Yea it is plain enough that thou must labor, We must still labor and
hope, though God differreth his help for a time, for he will at the last
assuredly help us.
forasmuch as labor is commanded thee: Howbeit suffer God to care for thee,
believe thou, and labor, then shall thou assuredly have those things that be
necessary for the sustentation of thy life. And this is an other thing, that
we must hope notwithstanding, though God differreth for a time. Therefore he
suffers them to labor all the night, and to take nothing, and shows
himself to be such a one, as will suffer them to perish with hunger. Which
might have come into the mind of Peter, when he had fished so long and taken
nothing, so that he might have said: now God will suffer my belly to perish
with pining and famine. Howbeit he does not so, but goes on still in his
labor, he plieth his work, and hops that God at the last will give him
fishes, albeit he differreth a time. God therefore is present, and gives him
so many fishes in one day, as he could scarce take in ye space of eight days.
Wherefore these things are to be learned well of thee, that thou labor and
hope, although God differreth his blessing a little. For albeit he differreth a
while, and suffers thee to labor sore, so that thou now think thy labor to
be lost, yet must thou not therefore despeire, but repose thy hope in him,
trusting assuredly that he will at ye last give thee prosperous success. For
he will certainly come and give more then thou did need, as he did here unto
S. Peter. Wherefore if God delayeth with thee a little, think with thy self,
he delayed also with S. Peter, and yet afterward gave unto him abundantly.
Commit thy matter therefore to his good will and pleasure, and leave not of thy
work, but hope still, and then shall not thy hope be frustrate. Thus much
concerning the former part of the text, now let us here the latter. After
therefore that they had taken fishes, and tasted the fruit of faith, their
faith is increased and augmented. We therefore must go so far, that we may
commit our belly to God: for he that can not commit so much as his belly to
him, will never commit his soul unto him. Howbeit that is only a childish
faith: Here we learn first to go by benches and settles: here we do feed on
milk as yet: but we must likewise learn by these to commit our soul also to
God. The Evangelist so means when he says:

Now when Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus knees, saying: Lord go
from me, for I am a sinful man. For he was utterly astonished, and all that
were with him, for the draught of fishes which they took. Let Peter here be
a type or figure of them which believe eternal good things, and count him as
one verily looking for and seeing the good things to come. A sinful conscience
is of that nature, The nature of a synnefull conscience.
that it so behaueth it self, as Peter here did, whereas he flies his
Savior, and thinks: Lord I am more unworthy, then that I should be saved,
and sit among thy Saints and Angels: for that good is most exceeding high.
Here a straight conscience is not able to comprehend such great good things,
but it thus thinks: If I were as Peter and Paul, I could easily believe:
Which is altogether a foolish and vain thing. For if thou would place thy
self according to thine own holiness, thou should build upon the sand.
Thou must not do so, but behave thy self like unto Peter, for in that he
esteemed himself vile, and judged himself unworthy of so great grace, he
rightly became worthy. And therefore, Though we feel ye burden of our sins
we must not despeire, but trust in God that he will remit the^ and receive us
unto grace.
whereas thou art a sinner, thou must trust in God, and dilate and open wide
thy conscience and heart, that grace may enter in. After thou have now known
God, thou must reject none of his gifts, that is, when as thou see the great
good things, thou must not despeire. It is good that we know our selves, and
the deeper we know our selves, so much the better. But that grace is not to be
refused because of thy sins. For when thou shall find thy conscience to
tremble, so that it would drive away sins, then art thou most ready and most
fit to receive grace, then shall thou find comfort in thy conscience and say
with Micheas: Who is such a God as thou, Mich. 7.
that pardonest wickedness, and castest all our sins into the bottom of the
sea? Whosoever take not away sins, they are no Gods, but idols: whereupon he
says rightly, that none is like unto our God. For other gods will find and
not bring godliness, but the Almighty God does not find it, but bring it:
wherefore thou must not forthwith despeire, if thy conscience trembles and
feels sin. For the more defiled that thou art, so much the sooner does the
Lord pour in his grace, if so be thou be repentant and thirstest after it. A
great part go so far that they say they merit grace, whiles they dispose
them selves thereunto, which is, as they interpret, whiles they do that which
lies in them, and also that they do satisfy for their sins. But it is not
so. The Scripture teaches us that it is God that takes away sin, and
casts it into the bottom of the sea. We shall not put away sins by our
works, neither shall we be justified of our selves. God himself, and none but
he shall do the thing, of his mere grace as Esaias says: I am, even I am he
only, Esa. 43.25.
that for mine own selfs sake do take away thine offenses, and forget thy
sins, so that I will never think upon them more. And so must thou believe,
otherwise thou shall never obtain a joyful conscience. Wherefore, when as
Peter said, I am a sinner, he said right. It is true in deed, there were
causes, why he might be afraid of himself, and humble himself, but he ought
not to refuse God, but most willingly receive him. Wherefore when thou shall
feel thy sin, like as Peter did, and shall perceive that thou would now
fly from God, then is it need that thou do forthwith turn thy self, and
come more and more unto him. For if God should go away, and would not take
away thy sin, would not come unto thee, nor seek thee, yet the more thou
perceiuest thy self a sinner, the more have thou ought to make unto him,
which see thou mark well, and lay it up in a myndefull memory. For as Saint
Peter does here, so all consciences do, which are terrified of sins, and
would fly from God, and seek an other god, do not thou leave so, but come
boldly, and join thy self nearer unto God. Otherwise if one go away to seek
works, and help of an other god, he is then found like the foolish Virgins,
which while they go to get themselves oil, are in the mean season shut out.
But what does Christ, when Peter so humbles himself? and by reason of his
great fear and terror, desires the Lord to depart from him? did he leave him
in such desperation of himself? No truly, but he comfort him, saying thus:

Fear not, from hence forth thou shall catch me^. This is a joyful word, God
susteyneth ye faithful both in body and spirit.
whereby weak hearts receive comfort. Now therefore, that God has a care for
us, yea even in those things that pertain to the body, ye see by this, that
he gives Peter so many fishes: he makes him also so full and rich in spirit,
that he ought to bestow some of his plenty upon others. He makes him a fisher
both in body and in spirit: in body, for that he takes many fishes which he
may sell: but in spirit he is a fisher of men. For he has the Gospel, whereby
other men must be brought to God by him, and the kingdom of Christ be
increased. Lo, it comes to pass, that where men believe, the Lord gives so
much, as succoureth and helps all men. The faithful man outwardly helps
the needy with his substance and goods: And from within he breaks forth,
teaches other, and enricheth them also inwardly. For such a man can not hold
his peace, but is enforced to show and declare to others, how he is dealt with,
as it is in the 51. Psalm. Make me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right
spirit within me. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy
Spirit from me. O give me the comfort of thy help again, and stablish me with
thy free Spirit. Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners
shall be converted unto thee. And in an other Psalm also David says: I
believed, Psalm. 116.10.
and therefore will I speak. Which is thus much in effect: when I believe, I
know God, and taste of his goodness, then I consider the case of other men, and
go and declare such knowledge and goodness of God unto them. We see therefore in
this text, how careful God is for them that be his, and that he does sustain
them both in body and in spirit. But if he does sometime differ any thing,
without all doubt it is through the fault of our incredulity, or because we
have now new begone to believe. For where faith is new and little, there is
sometime small and sclender help, that we may learn to know the Lord, and to
trust in him. But when we have gone so far that we trust strongly in God,
then nothing can be wanting to us, then God pours upon us both corporal and
spiritual good things, and so abundant treasures that we may be able to
help others. This in deed is to enrich the poor and to fill the hungry.
Thus much shall suffize concerning this text.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, CONCERNING TRUST IN GOD IN PENVRIE AND DISTRESS.
Marc. 8. Verse 1. IN those days, when there was a very great multitude, and
had nothing to eat, Jesus called his disciples to him, and said unto them:

2. I have compassion on the multitude, because they have now continued with me
three days, and have nothing to eat.

3. And if I send them away fasting to their own houses, they would faint by
the way: for ome of them came from far.

4. Then his disciples answered him, whence can a man satisfy these with
bread here in the wilderness?

5. And he asked them, how many loaves have ye? and they said, seven.

6. Then he commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground: and he took
the seven loaves, and gave thanks, brake them, and gave to his disciples to
set before them, and they did set them before the people.

7. They had also a few small fishes: and when he had given thanks, he
commanded them also to be set before them.

8. So they did eat and were suffised, and they took up of the broken meat
that was left, seven baskets full.

9. And they that had eaten, were about 4. thousand: so he sent them away.


I Hope dearly beloved, that ye do well understand the meaning of this text.
For your understanding is sufficiently well grounded in these mysteries, so
that ye do easily perceive what good is to be looked for in the Gospel, and
what is prescribed unto us therein, namely the true nature and quality of
faith. And this is the cause why Christ is of all the Evangelists set forth to
be so loving and gentle: for although the doings and works described of them
do oftentimes vary, nevertheless the simplicity of faith remains always
alike. Moreover this text does so lively set forth Christ unto us in his
colors, that it may be manifest and well known unto every one of us, what we
ought to promise our selves concerning him, to wit, that he is merciful,
bountiful, gentle, who succoureth all that fly unto him for help. And such
ought to be the image of faith. By the Law we are terrified and cast down,
but by the Gospel we are comforted and raised up.
For the Scripture sets before us a double image: one of fear, which
represents to our eyes the horrible wrath of God, before which no man is able
to stand, but rather we are all enforced to be cast down in mind, when we see
it, unless we be strengthened by faith. Howbeit against this is set the other
image namely of grace, which faith does attentively behold, and takes from
hence principles of comfort, and conceiueth trust and confidence in the favor
of God, having this hope, that man can not promise to him self from God so
many good things, but that he has infinite more treasures in a readiness for
him.

Ye have now oftentimes heard, The temporal and outward blessings of God
ought to be as means to make us hope and trust in him, that he will also
bestow upon us spiritual and eternal good things.
that there are two sorts of good things, spiritual and corporal. The
Gospel by these temporal and corporal good things teaches us the faith of
children, and they are unto the weak as a certain mean or help, whereby
they may learn the goodness of God, how bountiful he is in bestowing his
riches upon us, and that we ought in spiritual things also to place all our
hope and trust in him. For if we be now instructed by the Gospel, that God
will give food to our belly, we may thereupon account with our selves, that
he will nourish and cloth our souls with spiritual good things. If I can
not commit my body unto him that he may feed it, much less can I commit my
soul unto him that he may always preserve it. Or if I can not be brought to
believe, that a crown of gold shall be given unto me of him, how I pray you,
shall I hope for ten of crowns of gold of him? from whom I dare not promise
to my self so much as a piece of bread, truly much less shall I be persuaded
to believe, that he will give a fearme unto me, or his whole inheritance. Now
he that is not able to atteine unto this tender, and as it were as yet sucking
faith, to him surely it is very hard to believe, that God will pardon his
sins, or preserve his soul for ever. Forasmuch as we are persuaded, that the
soul is by infinite degrees to be preferred before the belly, toward which
notwithstanding he is touched with compassion as this our present text
teaches. Wherefore Saint Peter has righly admonished: 1. Pet. 2.
Beloved brethren, as newborn babes desire that sincere milk of the word,
that ye may grow thereby. For it is not enough that the infant being put to
the teate do suck, but he must also wax greater, and gather strength, that he
may accustom himself to feed on bread, and stronger meat. Now to eat
milk is to taste of the favor and grace of God, which is then tasted of, when
a trial thereof is had in our life. For although I should preach an hundred
years of the bountifulnes, favor, liberality and gentleness of God toward us,
it would profit me nothing unless I have a trial and taste of those
commodities, neither could I learn rightly to trust in God thereby. Hereof
also thou may conjecture how rare a Christian man is. There are many which
say, that they commit their belly to God, but that sticks only in the
tongue and lips, when as rather it ought to perce to the heart.

Let us now consider an example teaching us the quality and nature of faith.
The quality and nature of faith.
The Apostle Heb. 11. has written thus: Faith is the ground of things, which
are hoped for, and the evidence of things which are not seen, which is thus
much in effect: faith is the foundation, whereby I look for that good thing,
which is neither seen with the eyes, nor heard with the ears, but which I
must only hope for. Even as in our present text it plainly appears, wherein
we read that there were about four thousand men, who together with their
wives and children had now suffered hunger three days (was not this a notable
kind of fasting?) yet were not famished with hunger, being far from their
houses, and destitute of those necessaries, whereby the body is sustained. Now
Paul says that faith is a thing whereby a man hops for those things which
appear not to the eyes. Such a faith had this multitude, which although they
see no meat, nevertheless they trust in God, that he will feed them. What
does Christ here? he is moved with compassion, he demands of the disciples
with what vittailes, or with what thing their hunger may be taken away. To
whom his disciples answer: whence can a man satisfy such a multitude here in
the wilderness? Here ye see how man's reason and faith agree together, that the
wiser reason is, so much less can it submit it self to the works of God. For
this cause therefore did he ask his disciples, that every one of them might
try their own reason, and learn how much the capacity of man and faith do
differ one from an other.

Here it appears unto us how reason is blind, and how, Reason must give
place to faith.
when faith comes, it ought to give place. Whereof let this be as an example:
If I were a married man, having a wife and a company of children, and had
nothing wherewith to nourish them, neither would any man give me any thing:
yet should it be my duty to believe and hope, that God will provide for me.
But when as I see my hope to be in vain, and that I am not succored by and by
with nourishment and clothing, then if I be faithles, I yield unto
desperation, and go and purpose an other thing with my self, I apply my
mind to dishonest trades, that I may get somewhat thereby, as theft, deceit,
and other such practizes, and by all means that I am able, I pass through the
storms of adversity. See what filthy incredulity brings unto man. But if
I be endued with faith, I shut mine eyes and say: Most gentle father, I am thy
creature, and thy work, it can not be denied but thou have created me, I will
put all my trust in thee, which have greater care of my welfare then I my
self. Thou will well nourish, feed, cloth, and help, where and when thou
shall know best. So faith is a sure foundation, whereunto I trusting, No manner
of thing that is good shall be wanting to ye faithful.
do look for those things which I see not, and that I may speak at once, it
shall not want those things that be necessary. Surely the Angels themselves
should come down from heaven, and give bread dug even out of the earth,
unto such a faithful man, that he might be nourished, rather then he should be
pined with hunger, yea heaven and earth shall pass, before God will suffer a
man endued with such faith to want either clothing or any other necessary
thing. This singular trust and confidence in God, the comfortable and
effectual word of the divine promise does require. Whereof David glories
Psalm. 37: I have been young and now am old, and yet saw I never the
righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. And again: God knows the
days of the righteous, their inheritance shall continue for ever. They shall
not be confounded in the perilous time, and in the days of dearth they shall
have enough. But if we shall ask counsel of reason, it will forthwith say (as
the disciples did before) this thing is impossible: for it looks for
nothing, it trusts to nothing, when nothing is present. Of like diffidence
were the disciples, who thought thus with themselves: how can it be that such a
great multitude of men should be here refreshed with meat? truly it exceeds
our capacity. If they had seen an heap of money, store of bread, and
shambles full of flesh, they could then have easily relieved this present
necessity, they could have put all in a good hope, and fitly have disposed all
things, according to the capacity of their reason.

And thus much shall suffize to be spoken concerning the faith of temporal
good things: now we will entreat of spiritual good things, which shall come
unto us when we shall die. Then shall we see death set before our eyes, when as
notwithstanding we would willingly live, then shall hell appear unto us, when
we rather desire for heaven, then shall we behold the judgment of God,
notwithstanding his grace would be much more acceptable unto us. In a sum,
whatsoever we would desire to see, shall be taken out of our sight, yea and no
creature shall help us against death, Faith ceasseth not to trust in God even
in greatest extremity and distress.
hell, and the judgment of God. But if I believe, I say thus unto my self:
well, faith is a sure foundation: herewith I being stayed up, shall attain
unto those things which are very far out of my sight, albeit those things
be horrible which be in my sight, yet shall they not hurt him that believes.
Although therefore I do presently see nothing, but death, hell, and the
judgment of God, yet must I consider none of these, but rather my mind is to
be confirmed with an undoubted trust, that God by the virtue of his promise, not
in respect of my merits or works, will give unto me life, blessedness, and
grace. This in deed is to cleave unto God by sincere faith, which is here
very well painted forth in this gross and bodily image of four thousand men,
who cleaving to God only by faith, did not doubt that they should be refreshed
of him. If they had judged according to the capacity of their reason, they
would have murmured, and said after this sort: surely we are a very great
multitude, we are here in the wide wilderness, we have empty and hungry
stomachs, here is nothing that is able to fill the^. Howbeit they murmured of
none of these things, but conceiving a sure confidence, reasoning nothing
against God after the affection of men, they commend them selves wholly to the
good will of God, and commit unto him this urging necessity of hunger, they
them selves being quiet from all care. Then God, before this care comes upon
them, and before they begin to ask of him, is present, being more careful for
them, then they are for them selves, and says on this sort: I am moved with
compassion toward the multitude: if I send them away fasting, it is a danger
lest they faint by the way. Behold how gentle and bountiful we have God toward
us, who has even a care to feed the unclean belly. Here now our hope is
erected, and the words of Christ are comfortable to a man, when he says: They
have now continued with me three days, it now behooves me to give sufficient
unto them to eat. Here we may see, that all that do stick diligently to the
word of God, are fed of God him self.

Wherefore let us dearly beloved, at the last begin to believe, Incredulity
the mother of sin.
for only diffidence and incredulity is the mother of all sins and vices,
which at this day reign in all sorts of men. How comes it to pass, that
every where, whethersoeuer we turn us, there are so many harlots and baudes,
such plenty of deluders and deceivers, so many thieves, pillars, vserers,
robbers, Simonists, as they call them, and sellers of benefices? All these
diffidence toward God brings forth unto us. For such kind of men do judge
only according to humane reason, and reason looks unto that which is
present: but that which it sees not, it is not able to comprehend: wherefore
while it does not repose her trust by faith in God, it is enforced to despeire,
which desperation afterward causes such naughty and wicked men. Behold thus
it goes out of frame with us, when we commit our selves to be ruled, not to
faith, but to our own reason.

Moreover, as ye have now learned faith, so must ye also learn love. For
Christ is set forth unto us in a double form, in one, of faith, that we
should not be over careful: in an other, of love, Christ an example of love.
that we may learn, that as he has care of us, giving us meat, drink,
apparel, and that of mere and bountiful love, not for his own commodities
sake, or because of our merits: so also we ought to do well to our neighbor,
and that freely, only love moving us thereunto, that as Christ is to us, so we
may be to our neighbor. Hereupon now we may perceive, that all works of Monks
and Nuns are vain and to be utterly disallowed, when they are not directed
to that end, that they may serve their neighbor, but are ordained only unto
this end, that they may merit much at Gods hands by them. For the true works
of Christians, which they desire to be accepted of God, must be done so, that
they tend to the profit of our neighbor, and not to this end, that we should
think that we shall merit many things of God by them, they must be
cheerfully and freely bestowed upon all, even as Christ has done, who has
spread abroad and freely bestowed his goodness upon all. These things have I
briefly spoken concerning this text, that ye may thereby learn, that God
requires this especially of us, that we do firmly and constantly trust in
him, and that we freely do good and be beneficial to our neighbors,
according as God has of his mere goodness and mercy bestowed infinite
benefits and blessings upon us. The Prophet says Psalm. 50: Hear O my people
and I will speak, I my self will testify unto thee O Israel, I am the Lord,
even thy Lord. I will not reprove thee, because of thy sacrifices, or for thy
burnt offerings, for that they be not always before me. I will take no bullock
out of thy house, nor goats out of thy foldes. for all the beasts of the
forest are mine, and so are the cattle upon a thousand hills. I know all the
fowls upon the mountains: and the wild beasts of the field are at my
commandment. If I be hungry, I will not tell thee: for the whole world is
mine, and all that is therein. Think thou that I will eat bulls flesh, and
drink the blood of Goats? After the same sort he says unto us: Behold
Israel, that is, thou faithful man, I am thy God, thou art not my God, I will
give unto thee, thou give nothing to me, I will not be angry with thee, for
that thou offerest not many things unto me. For whatsoever is in thy stable, in
thy houses, in thy court, it was all mine before, for I have sent it thither.
Whereby he briefly reproved the Jews, who did meruelously please them selves
in their sacrifices. Now because he rejects these sacrifices, what will he
have to supply the place of them? truly even that which follows in the same
place: Offer unto me praise, and thy vows, call upon me in the time of
trouble, and I vvil hear thee, and thou shall glorify me. That is, I will have
thine heart, give over thy self to me, and account me for a gentle, favorable,
yea and for thy God, and it shall suffize me. Wherefore place thy faith, trust
and hope in him, count him for a gentle and loving God, cleave unto him, and in
extreme anguish fly unto him for succor, and to none beside him. Believe and
look for help of him, then he will help thee, thou need not any whit
dout. Afterward do good to thy neighbor with a cheereful heart and freely.
These two things are set forth in this our text, as also in many other places
beside.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, WHEREIN IS DECLARED HOW GRIEVOVSLY GOD
PVNISHETH THE CONTEMners of his word.
Luke 19. Verse 41. AND when he was come near to Jerusalem, he beheld the
city, and wept for it,

42. Saying, If thou had eue^ known at the least in this thy day those
things which belong unto thy peace, thou would take heed: but now are
they hid from thine eyes.

43. For the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench
about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side,

44. And shall make thee even with the ground, and thy children which are in
thee, and they shall not leave in thee a stone upon a stone, because thou
knew not that season of thy visitation.

45. He went also into the temple, and began to cast out them that sold
therein, and them that bought,

46. Saying unto them, it is written: Mine house is the house of prayer, but ye
have made it a den of thieves.

47. And he taught daily in the temple. And the high Priests and the Scribes,
and the chief of the people sought to destroy him.

48. But they could not find what they might do to him, for all the people
hanged upon him when they heard him.


THE sum and scope of this text is this: The Lord is troubled and lamenteth
for the evils which were to come upon the contemners of the word of God. Ye
have often times heard, what the word of God is, what is the fruit and
commodity thereof, also what Disciples it has, of which nothing is here done,
or said: but the punishment and misery only is showed, which was to come upon
the Jews, for that they knew not the time of their visitation. Which thing let
us well consider of, for it pertains unto us also. If they be punished which
know not ye time of their visitation, what shall come unto them, which
persecute, blaspheme and reprehend the Gospel and Word of God? howbeit he
speaks here only of them which know not the season of their visitation. Two
ways to preach against the contemners of Gods word.
The contemners of God are preached against after two sorts: first by
threatenings, as Christ threatens them Matthew. 11: VVo be to thee, Corazin: VVo
be to thee Bethsaida: for if the great works which were done in you, had been
done in Tyrus and Sidon, they had repented long agone in sackecloth and ashes.
But I say to you, it shall be easier for Tyrus and Sydon at the day of
judgment, then for you. And thou, Capernaum (which was his own city, wherein
chiefly he wrought miracles) which at lifted up unto heaven, shall be brought
down to hell: for if the great works which have been done in thee, had
been done among them of Sodom, they had remained to this day. But I say unto
you, that it shall be easier for them of the land of Sodom in the day of
judgment, then for you. These are the threatenings wherewith he terrifieth
them, that they should not so neglect the word of God. The other way the Lord
here shows, when as he shedeth tears, and is touched with pity toward
miserable and blind men, he does not terrify or threaten them, as being
indurate and obstinat, but is rather wholly moved with love and takes pity on
his enemies, and would willingly call them back, but that he could prevail
nothing with them, and the means which he used to reclaim them were in vain.
Before in Matthew, whereas he sharply rebukes them, he deals not by love,
but by rigor, but here is pure love and pity, as we shall afterward see.

First, when he drew near to the city, some went before him, and some
followed him, with great joy singing and saying: Hosanna the son of David,
they spread their garments in the way, they cut down branches from the trees,
and strawed them in the way, and all things were done after a goodly manner,
but in the midst of this joy Christ begins greatly to weep, Christ
lame^teth for Jerusalem.
he suffers all to rejoice, notwithstanding his eyes gushed out with tears,
when he beheld the city, and said: If thou had even known at the least in
this thy day those things which belong unto thy peace, thou would take
heed: but now are they hid from thine eyes. As if the Lord should say: O,
if thou knew what belongs unto thy peace that thou might not be
destroyed, but stand still, thou would yet at this day consider of it and
beware. Now it were time for thee to know that which should be best for thee,
but thou art blind, and wilt neglect the time, then shall there be no place
neither for help nor counsel. As if he said: Thou stand here adorned with
sumptuous and goodly buildings, and there are in thee mighty citizens, which
are both secure and merry, thinking that no danger hangs over them, but
after the space of forty years thou shall be destroyed. Which the Lord
plainly foretells in these words.

The days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench about
thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, and shall make
thee even with the ground, and thy children which are in thee, and they shall
not leave in thee a stone upon a stone, because thou knevvest not that season
of thy visitation. The careless security of the Jews.
Now the Jews, as they supposed, stood immovable and safe, resting upon the
promise of God, so that they thought no otherwise, but that they should
perseuerantly continue so for ever, they were secure and thought thus with them
selves: God will not send such things unto us: we have the temple, wherein God
him self is resident. We have also plenty of excellent men, money, and other
things, Go to then, who can do any hurt or harm to us? Moreover the
Emperor and people of Rome having taken the city, seeing it furnished with so
many and so great munitions and goodly and excellent buildings, merueiled
greatly, and confessed, that it was impossible that so great a city should be
taken, unless it had been the special will of God. Their boasting therefore,
and confidence in their own false opinion deceived them. Howbeit the Lord did
more earnestly and deeply consider the matter then they, when he said: O
Jerusalem, if thou knew those things that are known to me, thou would
have a care of thy peace (peace in the Scriptures is, when the matters and
affairs of any have good success) thou think that thou have glad and merry
days, that it is well with thee, and that thy affairs are in a prosperous
state: but if thou knew how thine enemies shall by siege afflict thee,
keep thee in on every side, and bring thee into such distress, that they
shall make thee even with the ground, destroy all thy buildings, and leave not
a stone upon a stone, thou would surely conveniently receive the word,
whereby thou might enjoy both true peace, and all good things. The reading
of the history of the destruction of this city does make much to the right
understanding of this text.

A description of Gods wrath and most grievous vengeance poured upon the Jews
for their contempt and disobedience.
God had plainly so ordained, that at the feast of Easter, at which time they
came to Jerusalem out of all quarters, the city should be besieged, and there
were then gathered together, as Josephus reports, about thirty hundred
thousand me^, upon whom the Lord would show his grievous indignation and
wrath. All the Apostles and Christians were departed and gone into the cuntrie
of Herod, not far from Jerusalem. The Lord took out the wheat, and put the
chafe together on an heap, now there was so great a multitude of people,
that they might seem to exceed not only a city, but even a kingdom. And
they were driven into so great calamity, that all their vittells were spent,
and none at al left unto them, so that they were constrained to eat ye strings
of their bows, and old shoes, dressing them in such manner as they could, yea
through the exceeding famine, they were driven to kill their own children: the
soldiers took the flesh of children roasted from the mothers, smelling the
savor of the roasted flesh two streets of: pigeons dunge was unto them in
steed of salt, and was also very dear: finally there was so great misery,
so great slaughter and shedding of blood, that it would not have been meruell
for a stone to have been moved with pity. He that had seen it, would have
thought that God could not have been so grievously angry, and so greatly have
afflicted a people. Both houses and streets were filled with carkases dead
through famine. Notwithstanding the Jews remained still so obstinate and
without understanding, that they gloried of God, and would not yield them
selves until the Emperor set upon them with his whole power, and took the
city, which they were able to keep no longer. And when as some of them were
so crafty that they devoured gold yt it might not be taken from them, the
Roman soldiers thought that they had all so done, whereupon they flewe about
two thousand, and having ripped their bellies sought for gold. There was such a
slaughter and manquelling made, that it seemed a miserable thing even to the
Gentiles, wherefore Caesar commanded that they should not be so slain, but led
captive and sold. The Jews were then sold so cheap, that thirty were bought
for a penny, they were then dispersed through the whole world, and were counted
the most abject people of all other, as also at this day they are the most
contemptible nation in the earth. For they live spread here and there, without
cities and cuntries of their own, neither can they be again gathered together
into one place, so that they shall never be able any more to erect their
Priesthood and kingdom, as they hope they shall.

Thus God revenged the death of Christ, and all the Prophets, thus were they
recompensed for that they knew not the time of their visitation. Wherefore let
us be here admonished, The example of the Jews ought to admonish and move
other to know the time of their visitation.
for it belongs not only unto us, but even unto all Germany. It is no
jesting matter or sport, neither is there any cause why we should persuade our
selves that it will fall out otherwise with us. The Jews would not believe
that evil should come upon them, until they had sufficiently tried it. And we
at this day are visited by the benefit of God: he has opened unto us a
treasure, his sacred and holy Gospel, whereby we know his will, and see how
much we were subject to the power of Satan: but no man will receive this
Gospel, yea we contemn it, and that which is more miserable, we persecute and
blaspheme it. God is patient: it pleases him to try us a while: if we be not
watchful, so that the word be again taken from us, the same wrath and
indignation which was poured forth upon the Jews, shall also be poured forth
upon us. For there is the same Word, the same God, the same Christ at this day,
that there was at that time, whereupon undoubtedly the punishment shall be the
same, or at the least as grievous both in soul and body.

We make almost a sport and trifling matter of the Gospel. For no man embraces
it from his heart, no man frames his manners according unto it. Which is a
manifest argument of blindness. O thing surely most miserable. I fear lest the
matter will shortly come to that pass, that all Germany will fall together
upon an heap, which (alas) in part of the communaltie has already had a
lamentable beginning, we have lost a great multitude of people, almost an
hundred thousand men have been slain only between the feasts of Easter and
Whitsontide. It is a hard work of God, and I fear me the war begone is not
yet at an end, this is only a forewarning and threatening whereby God would
terrify us, that we might diligently take heed to our selves: it was nothing
but the Foxes tail, if he come again with his whippe, he will scourge us more
grievously. But we will behave our selves as the Jews behaved them selves,
until there shall be place for no succor nor help. Now we might prevent it,
now were the time to know what should be best for us, and to receive the
Gospel with peace, for at this day grace is offered unto us, whereby we may
live peaceably, but we suffer day to pass after day, year after year,
applying our selves less to the Gospel then before. No man does now pray unto
God for ye increase of his word, no man receives it in his heart. If so be that
the time shall pass, no prayers shall any more help. We wey not this matter in
our heart, we think our selves safe, we do not thoroughly perceive the great
misery already come to pass, neither do we consider in our minds, how
miserably God punishes us with false prophets and sects, which he on every
side sends unto us, which preach so securely, as if they had wholly received
into their breast the spirit the comforter. Those which we counted best of all
do go away, and bring men into such a perplexity, that they almost know not
either what is to be done or not to be done. But this is only the beginning,
albeit sufficient horrible and cruel. For there can not be greater affliction
and misery, then if the Lord send amongst us sects and false prophets, which
are so rash and bold, that it is greatly to be lamented.

Notwithstanding the time of grace is now present: Christ has been sent down
into the world, has been borne man, has served us, died for us, is risen
again from the dead, has sent unto us the spirit the comforter, has given
unto us his word, has opened heaven so wide, that al good things may be
obtained of us, moreover has given unto us rich promises, whereby he promises
that he will preserve us both in this short and frail time, and in the eternal
times, in this life, and in the life to come, most plentifully pouring forth
his grace upon us. God will not suffer the contempt of his grace and word to be
unpunished.
Wherefore the time of grace is now before our doors, but we despise and
neglect it, which God neither will, neither can pardon. For when as we contemn
his word he threatens punishment, and will at the last punish us, although he
should defer it even an hundred years, but he will not defer it so long.
And the more purely that the word is preached, so much greater shall the
punishment be. But I fear greatly lest this punishment require the subversion
of all Germany. God grant that in this thing I be a false prophet, but I
fear exceedingly that it will come to pass. God can not leave this wickedness
unrevenged, neither will he defer long, for the Gospel is so abundantly
preached, that it was not so manifest even in the Apostles time as it is at
this day, thanks be to Christ therefore. Wherefore I fear much lest that all
Germany be spoiled, yea and quite destroyed, unless we otherwise apply our
selves to this matter. We which have long heard the Gospel, ought to pray God
from the heart, that he would give us longer peace. The Princes go about to
bring all things to pass by ye sword. whereby they go too rashly and
rigourously to work. Wherefore it is exceeding needful, that we should pray
unto God, that his Gospel may spread farther abroad through Germany, even unto
them which have not yet heard it. For if punishment come suddenly upon us, our
case shall be miserable, then many souls shall be in danger to be lost before
the word shall come unto them. I would wish therefore, that we would not so
cruelly despise the Gospel, that precious treasure, not only for our own
sake, but also for their sakes which are as yet to hear it. A scourge is a
little begone: God grant that it may so stay, that neither the Princes nor the
communaltie be stirred up to greater rage and fury. For if that civil war
should begin again, it were to be feared that it would have none end.

We do like as the Jews did, who had a greater care of the belly then of God,
having more regard how to fill the belly, then that they might be saved,
wherefore they lost both, and that worthily. For, forasmuch as they would not
receive life, God sent unto them death, so they lost both body and soul. They
pretended the same cause that we do. We would willingly in deed embrace the
Gospel, if there were no danger of body and goods, wife, and children. If we
shall believe him, said the Jews, the Romans will come, and take away both our
place and the nation, which nevertheless came unto them, for that which ye
wicked man fears, falls upon him. This was a let and hinderance to the
Jews that they would not believe the words of God, neither have regard to the
rich and large promises that he had made unto them. So also do we, we regard
not the mighty and comfortable promises which Christ has made unto us, as
where he says: He shall receive an hundredth fold more, Matthew. 19.29.
and shall inherit everlasting life. Leave thy wife and children, I will
preserve them, I will restore them, so as thou go to work boldly in my name.
Think thou that I can not build thee other houses? countest thou me so
simple, who will give unto thee heaven? will thou not put thy self in danger
for my sake? if thy goods be taken from thee, it is well with thee, heaven and
earth are mine, I will recompense thee abundantly. These and such like sayings
we pass over, yea and also contemn, having diligent consideration only what
we have laid up in our chest, and that our purse may be full, neither do we
see, that even that which we have God has given unto us, and will as yet give
us more, if we believe and trust in him, neither do we mark if that we lose
God, we shall lose the belly also.

The faithful refuse not to suffer peril and trouble for God his sake.
Howbeit they that believe in God, do not avoid peril if it come for his
sake, but commit all things to his divine power, that he may order them
according to his will, and thus they think: The Lord has given me both a
house and the furniture thereof, wife, children, etc. I have not obtained them
of my self, forasmuch then as they are Gods, I will commit them unto him, he
shall best preserve them. For even otherwise I must leave them, wherefore I will
refuse to suffer no peril, and to leave whatsoever I have for his sake, if the
case so require. If he will have me so to do, he can give me other things,
for he has promised that he will give sufficient to them that believe, both
here and in the time to come. If he will not have me to live here, I owe death
unto him, when he shall require me, I will be ready for his words sake. He
that shall not do thus, denies God, and is notwithstanding compelled to lose
both this frail life, and eternal life. The stinking belly which we make our
god, is the cause, Immoderate care for the belly the cause of diffidence and
distrust of Gods care and providence.
that we do not cleave to the word of God: for I will first be certain how I
may feed my self, and where my goods be. The Gospel says, Trust in God, but
I provide for my belly, and if I have one noble in gold, I think I have
sufficient to sustain and nourish me for ten days, and trusting unto that
which I have laid up, I trust not in God, that as he has hitherto fed me, so
he will nourish me still. Is not this a detestable thing, that I trust to one
piece of coin only, whereby I look to have my food and sustenance to
morrow? Fie, what a cursed thing is such care for the belly? Shall a vile piece
of coin be more esteemed of me, then God him self, in whose power are heaven
and earth, who gives unto us air and water, makes grain to grow unto us,
and sends all things necessary? It is more detestable then that it can be
expressed by the voice of man, that God is not esteemed of us so much as a
little money. Why do thou not think: God who has made me, will well nourish
me, if he will have me live. If he will not, well, then shall I have no need.
But, says the belly, I find no god in my chest. Thou foolish ass, who can
assure thee that thou shall live till tomorrow? It is uncertain whether thou
shall keep thy belly till to morrow, and desire thou to know where food and
sustenance is? If this did pearse our heart, we should see how deuilish a thing
incredulity is. Is it not a horrible thing that I do not make so great
account of God, who feeds so many mouths, as to trust in him, that he will
nourish me, yea that I do make more account of one noble in gold then of God
him self, who pours forth his good things so abundantly? The world is full
of the blessings and works of God, he is on every side with his good things,
notwithstanding we do not yet commit our selves to him, or receive his
visitatio^. O cursed world, which can not trust to God even one day, and yet
trusts to a piece of gold. Thus we see, as I think, of what sort the world
is, how it despises God for the bellies sake, which notwithstanding it is
compelled to lose. O how great contemners of salvation are we? we ought rather
to detest the world, but we are too deeply drowned in old Adam. The world is
as it were a figure of hell, yea a very deuilish kingdom, and an entrance to
hell. Wherefore Christ with weeping eyes exhorts us to know our salvation,
and to receive his visitation, lest that a plague and scourge follow, which
undoubtedly shall come upon them, which thinking them selves in safety, do not
believe and trust in God. God give us his grace, whereby we may know him. It
follows moreover in the text.

He went also into the temple, and began to cast out them that soulde
therein, and them that bought, saying unto them, it is written, Mine house is
the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves. This is the second
part of this text, wherein is declared how the Lord going into the temple,
begins to drive out the buyers and sellers therein. The former part was
nothing else but an exhortation and inuiting to faith, but here the Lord
insinuates what the temple of God is, and brings a place out of the
Scripture hereunto appertaining, namely out of Esai, Esai. 56.7.
where he says: Mine house shall be called an house of prayer for all people.
This is a strong saying, whereas the Prophet says, for all people, against
the Jews, who trusting unto that temple at Jerusalem, thought that this house
made with hand, should continue for ever, supposing it to be impossible, that
God would either destroy this temple, or leave the city desolate, because the
word of God can not lie. Wherefore they stoned Steven, for that he spoke
against that holy city, and affirmed that Jesus would destroy it, and change
the ceremonies given of Moses. For they said: The Prophets have greatly praised
this house: and do you Apostles preach that it shall be destroyed? Howbeit
this saying is thus to be understood, that the city Jerusalem, the Temple, and
the People should continue until the time of Christ, whereunto all the
Prophets tend, which referred all things unto Christ, that as he should do,
so it should be, and so it should continue. Wherefore the place of Esai
extends no farther then to the coming of Christ, which all the Prophets also
witness, affirming that there should come a kingdom, which should extend far
and wide over the whole world, as it is in Malachie: Mal. 1.11.
From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same, my name is
great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered to my
name, and a pure offering: for my name is great among the very Heathen, says
the Lord of hosts. Here the Prophet speaks of the spiritual kingdom of
Christ, who would build unto him self an house of prayer in the whole world.
It is true that God him self did confirm and sanctify the temple at
Jerusalem, not because it was furnished with precious stones and goodly
buildings, or hallowed of the Priests, which manner of trifles and dotages we
use at this day, but because he had consecrated and hallowed it with his word,
when he said: This house is my house: The true house of God.
for his word was preached in it. Wheresoever the word of God is preached,
there is his true house: where the word of God has his course and proceeding,
there undoubtedly God dwells with his grace: where his Gospel is, there is
the holy house of prayer, there prayers both may and ought to be made unto God.
God also will hear us, as Christ says Ioh. 16: Whatsoever ye shall ask the
Father in my name, he will give it you: hitherto have ye asked nothing in my
name: ask, and ye shall receive. Contrariwise, where the word is not, there is
Satan wholly. Now, whereas we imitating the Jews have builded so many temples,
it were tolerable, if we had therefore so done, that the word of God might be
preached in them, for where Gods word is preached, there is he present, and
pours forth his grace.

Christ says moreover that the Jews have made the temple at Jerusalem a den
of thieves. But they were resident in the temple which sold oxen and sheep,
that they which came might buy to offer and worship God: Why therefore does he
call it a de^ne of thieves? Surely he gives unto it a foul name, Why Christ
calls the temple at Jerusalem a den of thieves.
which came to pass upon this occasion: for that it was not any more counted
of them for the house of God, but for a house of merchandise, that is, the
Priests had no care how the word of God was preached there, and did
negligently and carelessly singe, babble, and read Moses and the Prophets. But
God does nothing esteem that mumbling up of many words, which is only vain
and childish. They behaved them selves like as our sacrificing Priests and
Munkes do, who of temples and Monasteries making denns of thieves, preach
poysonfull doctrine, and therefore only they celebrate Mass, that they may
thereby get unto them selves money, and fill the belly, killing and destroying
silly sheep with their traditions. Which is the den, wherein souls are
slain, which title is to be given to al temples, wherein the word of God is
not preached. For there they mock God, kill souls, expel the true word, and
set up theeuerie. O how fowly have we been deceived in this point? But God at
this day is highly to be praised, that his word renueth and quickneth us,
drives away thieves, and teaches us to pray aright. For a sincere Christian
must pray not in mouth only, but in heart also. Thus we have ye second part of
our text, how Christ casts out the sellers, that is them yt served the belly,
and makes place for his word. It were very good if Monasteries were scoured
after this sort, yt either Christian schools, or places wherein the word of God
might be preached, might be made of them: which if it come not to pass, they
are, and do remain dens of thieves. If Christ calls his house a den of
thieves, how much more shall our temples, which God has not consecrated, be
proved to be dens of thieves?

I have often times desired you, that ye would devoutly pray unto God, that he
turning away his indignation, would bridle the devil, who now rages in the
world. For ye have heard of a great calamity, how many thousand have been
slain, it is to be feared that they are all damned. God requires obedience of
us, and he has pronounced the sentence, that he that takes the sword, shall
perish with the sword. They were besieged of Satan, who knows whether the
same shall come unto us? Let us pray God therefore that his kingdom may come
unto us, that Christians may be multiplied, and that he will send wise and
meek Preachers, whom the people may receive and obey. Let him that knows the
gift of God, pray for others which have not yet heard the word of God. For it
is hie time so to do.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, WHEREIN IS ENTREATED OF THE LAW AND THE
GOSPEL, AND OF THE DIFference between them.
Luke 10. Verse 23. AND he turned to his Disciples and said secretly, Blessed
are the eyes, which see that ye see.

24. For I tell you that many Prophets and Kings have desired to see those
things, which ye see, and have not seen them: and to hear those things
which ye hear, and have not heard them.

25. Then behold, a certain Lawyer stood up and tempted him, saying, Master,
what shall I do to inherit eternal life?

26. And he said unto him: What is written in the law? how read thou?

27. And he answered and said, Thou shall love thy Lord God with all thine
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind,
and thy neighbor as thy self.

28. Then he said unto him: Thou have answered right: this do, and thou shall
live.

29. But he willing to justify him self, said unto Jesus, Who is then my
neighbor?

30. And Jesus answered and said: A certain man went down from Jerusalem to
Ierico, and fell among thieves, and they robbed hi^ of his raime^t, and wounded
hi^, and departed, leaving hi^ half dead.

31. Now so it fell out, that there came down a certain Priest that same
way, and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side.

32. And likewise also a Leuite when he was come near to the place, went and
looked on him, and passed by on the other side.

33. The^ a certain Samaritan, as he iornied, came near unto him, and when he
saw him, he had compassion on him.

34. And went to him, and bound up his wounds, and poured in oil and wine,
and put him on his own beast, and brought him to an Inn, and made provision
for him.

35. And on the morrow when he departed, he took out two pence, and gave them
to the host, and said unto him, Take care of him, and whatsoever thou spendest
more, when I come again, I will recompense thee.

36. Which now of these three, think thou, was neighbor unto him that fell
among the thieves?

37. And he said, He that showed mercy on hi^, The^ said Jesus unto him: Go,
and do thou likewise.


I Hope well that ye do now rightly understand this Gospel, forasmuch as it
is preached of every year: notwithstanding because occasion is now again
offered, we must again entreat and preach of it. First the Evangelist says,
that Christ took his Disciples aside, and said unto them secretly after this
sort: Blessed are the eyes which see that ye see. For I tell you that many
Prophets and Kings have desired to see those things which ye see, and have
not seen them, and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard
them. To see and hear is to be understood here simply of the outward seeing
and hearing, to wit, that they saw Christ come in the flesh, heard his
sermons, and were present at those miracles which he did among the Jews. The
Jews saw the same according to the flesh, yea and felt them also: yet did
they not truly acknowledge him for Christ, as the Apostles did, and especially
Peter in the name of all the rest did confess him, saying: Thou art Christ the
Son of the living God. We grant in deed, that there were some among the
Jews, which acknowledged him, as the Apostles did, but the number of them was
very small, wherefore he takes his Apostles here severally unto himself. Many
Prophets and Kings have seen Christ, howbeit in the spirit, as the Lord
himself says to the Jews of Abraham, Ioh. 8: How ye faithful saw Christ
before his incarnation.
Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad. The
Jews thought then that he had spoken of the bodily seeing, but he spoke of the
spiritual seeing, whereby all Christian hearts did behold him, before he was
borne. For if Abraham saw him, undoubtedly many other of the Prophets, in whom
ye holy Ghost was, saw him also. And although this seeing saved the holy
Fathers and Prophets, yet did they always with most inward and hearty
affection desire to see Christ in the flesh also, as is commonly showed in the
Prophets. Wherefore the Lord says here unto his disciples, which saw him both
in the flesh, and in the spirit: Blessed are the eyes which see those things
that ye see. As if he said: Now is the acceptable year and time of grace: The
matter which is now in hand is so weighty and precious, that ye eyes are
worthily said to be blessed, which see it. For now was the Gospel preached
openly and manifestly both by Christ himself, and also by his Apostles,
whereupon he here calls them all blessed, which see and hear such grace. Of
which grace I have preached much and a long time unto you, I would to God ye
did keep that which I have spoken thereof, fresh in memory.

When the Lord spoke these things, a certain Lawyer start up, showing
himself as though he had bin some thing, who tempting the Lord says: Master,
what shall I do to inherit eternal life? This lawer was endued with wisdom,
and not unskillful of the Scriptures, which even his answer does declare, yet
in this place he is proved a fool, yea he is brought unto shame and ignominy.
For Christ takes away all his glorying even in one word. He was of this
mind, that he had observed the whole Law, and that he was a certain chief
one in respect of other, as undoubtedly he was, and thought himself sufficient
worthy by reason of his godliness and learning to be conuersaunt with the Lord.
But what does the Lord in this case? the text following declares.

And he said unto him, what is written in the Law? how read thou? And he
answered and said: Thou shall love thy Lord God with all thine heart, and with
all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and thy
neighbor as thy self. Then he said unto him, Thou have answered right: do
this, and thou shall live. Me thinks that the Lord gave this good man a hard
lesson: he deals very straightly with him, it may seem to some that he should
have spared him a little, he puts him to shame openly before all: he proves
that he had done nothing, who notwithstanding thought that he had done all
things. He asked what he should do: but I think he had enough and overmuch to
do, if he had bin able to do more then he was. If I had time, many things
might be spoken of these two commandments. For they are the chief and
greatest commandments in Moses, on which the whole Law, and all the Prophets
do hang, as Christ himself says in Matthew: Matthew. 22.40.
Notwithstanding we will entreat somewhat of them. If we consider all the
commandments of Moses, they have respect altogether unto love. For this
commandment: Thou shall have none other gods in my sight, we can no otherwise
declare or interpret, then, Thou shall love God alone, Deuteronomy. 6.4.5.
so Moses expounds it in Deuteronomie, where he says thus: Hear O Israel,
the Lord our God is Lord only. And thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thine heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy might: from whence the Lawer
took his answer. But the Jews understand this commandment so, that they
think it to extend no further, then that they should not set up, nor worship
idols. And if they can say and witness in mouth, that they have one God only,
and do worship none but him, they think they have observed this commandment.
After the same sort did this Lawer understand it, but that was an evil and a
wrong understand thereof.

How the first commandment is to be understood and observed.
Howbeit we must otherwise consider and understand this precept: Thou shall have
none other gods in my sight. Thou, it says, with all that thou art, but
especially it requires all thine heart, soul and strength. It speaks not of
the tongue, not of the hand, not of the knees, but of the whole man, what soever
thou art and have. That no other God may be worshipped of me, it shall be
necessary that I have the true and only God in mine heart, that is, I must love
him from mine heart, so that I do always depend on on him, trust in him,
repose my hope in him, have my pleasure, love and joy in him, and daily
remember him. Even as otherwise, if we take pleasure of any thing, we say, it
does me good inwardly at the heart. And if any speaks or laugheth, and does
it not in good earnest, neither from his heart, we are wont to say: Thou
laughest in deed, but it comes not from thine heart. The love of the heart
in the Scriptures signifies a vehement and special love, which we ought to
bear toward God. They which serve God with mouth, hands, and knees only, are
hypocrites, neither has God any care of them. For God will not have part, but
the whole. The Jews did outwardly abstain from idolatry, and served God
alone in mouth, but their heart was far removed from him, being full of
diffidence and unbelief. Outward they seemed to be very earnest in serving
God, but within they were full of idolatry. Whereupon the Lord said unto them
Matthew. 23: VVoe be to you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye are like
unto painted sepulchers, which appear beautiful outward, but are within full
of dead men's bones, and of all filthiness. So are ye also: For outward ye
appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

These are those wicked ones, which glory of the outward thing, which go
about to justify and make themselves good by their own works, after the
manner of this Lawer. Consider how great the pride of this ass was, he comes
forth as though he could not be blamed or rebuked of the Lord, he thought, yea
it seemed unto him, that the Lord would here commend and praise his life before
the people. He thought not to learn any thing of the Lord, but he sought only
his own commendation, he would willingly have had Christ to set forth his
praise, toward whom the eyes of all were bent, and who was an admiration to
all. So all hypocrites do, outwardly they pretend excellent, The quality of
hypocrites.
great and weighty works: they say that they have respect neither of glory
nor praise, but within in their heart they are full of ambition, and wish that
their holiness were known to the whole world, showing a goodly sign of their
religion, by the biting of their lip, if they hear any speak thereof. But
our Savior Christ shows here no kyndnes or ge^tlenes to this Lawyer,
inasmuch as he puts him to shame: that great holy man notwithstanding
continues still in the same mind, and supposes that he shall receive great
honor, and singular praise because of his precious life, thinking that he had
fulfilled the commandment, whereupon also he looks for a joyful answer,
that the Lord should say: Good master, your maistership has done all things.
But Christ answers him: Do this. Which in deed is as much to say as: Thou
art altogether a naughty fellow, thou have never in all thy life fulfilled so
much as one letter thereof, so showing unto him how evil and naughty he was.

Like unto this Lawyer are all they which do most grievously offend against the
first commandment, and think that God is to be loved no more then the words
sound for, and that thereby it is fulfilled: the commandment therefore
remains in their mouth, and does as it were flote above the heart, and
pearseth it not: How God must be loved of us.
but I must go much farther then so, I must love God so, that I can be content
to forsake all creatures for his sake, and if it shall seem good unto him, my
body and life, I must love him above all things, for he is ielous, and can not
suffer that any thing be loved above him, but under him he permits us to
love any thing. Even as the husband can suffer, that his wife love her maids,
the house, household things, cattle, and such like, howbeit he suffers her
not to love any with that love wherewith she is bound unto him, but himself,
yea he will have her leave all such things for his sake. Again the wife
requires the same of her husband. After the same sort God can suffer that we
love his creatures, yea therefore they are created, and are good. The sun is
a goodly creature, gold and silver, and whatsoever by nature is fair,
procures us to love it, which makes it dear unto us, neither is God offended
thereat. But that I should cleave unto the creature, and love it equally with
him, that neither will he, neither can he suffer: yea he will have me both to
deny and forsake all these things, when he requires it of me, and will have
me content, although I never see the sun, money, riches, etc: The love of
creatures must be far inferior to the love which we must bear toward him.
As he is the sovereign good, so will he also be chiefly loved before all other
good things, If he will not suffer that I shall love any thing equally with
him, much less will he suffer that I shall love any thing above him.

Thou see now as I think, what it is to love God with all the heart, with
all the soul, with all the mind. What it is to love God with all the heart.
To love God with all the heart, is to love God above all creatures, that is,
although creatures be very amiable and dear unto me, and I take great delight
in them, yet must I so love them, that I do contemn and forsake them, when my
God and Lord requires that of me.

To love God with all the soul, What it is to love God with all the soul.
is to bestow our whole life and body at his pleasure, as if the love of
creatures, or any tentation assail thee, or would overcome thee, thou may
say: I will rather part from all these then I will forsake my God, whether he
cast me of, either kill me, either drown me, or whatsoever through his
permission shall come unto me, I had rather leave all things then him, I will
depend on that my Lord, rather then upon all creatures, or upon any other thing
whatsoever it be. Whatsoever I have and am, I will bestow, but him will I not
forsake. The soul in the Scriptures signifies the life of the body, and
whatsoever is done by the five senses, as to eat, to drink, to sleep, to
wake, to see, to hear, to smell, to taste, and whatsoever the soul works by
the body. To love God with all the strength.
To love God with all the strength, is for Gods cause to renounce all the
members and limbs of the body, so that one will offer to peril whatsoever he
is able in his flesh and body, before he will commit that which is against God.
To love God with all the mind, To love God with all the mind.
is to enterprise nothing but that which many please God, whereby he
understands the thought, which is in man, that that also be referred to God,
and to all things that be acceptable unto him. Thou perceiuest now what this
commandment of God contains in it. Thou shall love God, Thou, Thou says
he, and that wholly, even every part of thee, not thy hands, not thy mouth,
not thy knees alone. They which do these things, as it is said, do truly
fulfill it: but no man lives in the earth which does so, yea we do all
otherwise. Wherefore the law does here make us all sinners, so that not so much
as the least jot or point thereof is fulfilled of them that are most holy of
all in the world. For no man does so cleave with all his heart unto God, that
he can leave all things for his sake. We (alas) are gone so far, that we can
not suffer so much as a little word, nay we will not forgo the value of a
halpenie for Gods cause.

We are far of from loving God as we ought.
How can it be that we should love God, when his will is not settled in our
mind? If I love God, I can not but love his will also. Now if God send
sickness, poverty, shame, and ignominy, it is his will, whereat what do we? we
murmur, we grudge, our mind is carried hither and thither, we take it most
impatiently, and yet is this the least. What would we do, if we should leave
our body and life for God and Christ his sake? then would we show our selves
after an other sort. But in the mean season we do like unto this Pharise and
Lawyer, we lead an honest life outwardly, we worship God, we serve him, we
fast, we pray, and behave our selves in outward appearaunce justly and holily.
But God does not require that of us, but that we should bend our selves to do
his will with pleasure and love, cheerfully and lovingly. Wherefore whatsoever
the Lord says here to the Lawyer, he says it to all us, to wit, that we have
yet done nothing, but that all things do yet remain to be done. All men
therefore are guilty of death and subject to Satan: All men are liars, vain,
filthy, and whatsoever they pretend, it is nothing worth. We are wise in our
own matters, that we may scrape together money and goods, and we can speak
most sweetly and fayrely before men, and cu^ningly propound or set forth our
matter. What does God care for these things? He requires of us that we love
him with our whole heart, which no man living is able to perform, whereupon of
this place is inferred, that we are all sinners, but especially they, whose
life has a goodly outward show only. This is the former part of this text,
namely, the preaching of the law: Now follows the other part, which is the
preaching of the Gospel, which declares how we may fulfill the law, and from
whence that fulfilling is to be taken, which we shall learn of that Samaritane.

What does the Lawyer moreover, after that the Lord had thus dealt with him? He,
says the Evangelist, willing to justify himself, spoke unto the Lord and
asked him as follows: Who is then my neighbor? He asks not: Who is my God?
As if he said: I owe nothing unto God, neither do I want any thing before God,
yea it seems unto me, that I do neither owe any thing to any man: nevertheless
I would willingly know who is my neighbor. The Lord aunswering him, brings
forth a most goodly similitude, whereby he declares that we are all neighbors
one to an other, as well he that gives a benefit, as he that receives and
needs one: although by the text it seems to appear, that he only is a
neighbor, which bestows a benefit upon an other. But the Scripture makes
here no difference, sometime calling him our neighbor, which bestows a
benefit, sometime him that receives a benefit. By this similitude the Lord
infers in these words: Go and do thou likewise, so that that Lawyer had
offended not only against God, but also against man, and wanted not only love
toward God, but also love toward his neighbor, unto whom he had not done
that good which he ought. This wretched fellow is brought into such a case that
he is found wholly evil, eue^ from the head to the feet. How came it to pass
that he being most skillfull of the Scripture could not beware of this? So fell
it out: he led a pharisaicall, hypocritical, and counterfaite life, which had
not regard unto his neigbour, and to succor and help others, but sought
thereby only glory and honor before men, and so looked by negligent and
dissolute living to come to heaven. But ye have heard very often, that a
Christian life consists in this, A Christian life.
that we deal with faith and the heart in things that pertain unto God, but
use our life and works toward our neighbor, and that I must not look while
my neighbor seeks a benefit, and requires some thing of me, but according
to my duty must prevent his asking, and of mine own accord offer my
liberality unto him. Now we will see what the parable contains in it.

The Samaritane in this place is without all doubt our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has declared his love toward God and men: The love of Christ toward God and
men.
Toward God, in that he descended from heaven, and was incarnate, and so
fulfilled the will of his father: Toward men, for that by and by after
baptism, he began to preach, to work miracles, to heal the sick, neither
was there any work that he did, which did concern himself only, but all his
works were directed to his neighbor, being made our minister, when as
notwithstanding he is above all, and equal to God: but he did all these
things, for that he knew that they did please God, and that it was the will of
his father. When he had ascended to the height of the commandment, that he
loved God with all his heart, he left and committed the life of his body, and
whatsoever he had to the pleasure and will of his father saying: Father, behold
all things that I have, my life and soul are ready at thy will: I leave for
thy sake the glory and honor which I have had among men, yea and all things
how good soever they be, that the world may understand how greatly I love thee:
My father let for thy sake my wisdom be contemned, that the world may count
me for the foolishest of all: Now make I my self most co^temptible of all
other, who was before praised of ye whole world: Now am I as a most wicked
thief, who before was liberal, profitable, and beneficial to the whole world:
My father, I make no account of all these things, that I may be found obedient
to thy will. This is that Samaritane, who being desired by no prayers, came,
and fulfilled the law with his whole heart, he alone has fulfilled it, which
praise none can take from him: he alone has deserved it, and to him only it
appertains.

But whereas he is touched with care of the wounded man, has compassion on
him, byndeth up his wounds, brings him with him into an Inn, The wounded
man, and the thieves that spoiled him.
provides for him, that pertains unto us. The man which lies half dead,
wounded, beaten, and spoiled, is Adam, yea and all we. The thieves which
spoiled us, wounded us, and left us half dead, as yet a little pa^ting, are the
Deuels. The horse and his sitter do here fall down, we are not able to help
our selves, and if we should be left lying so, we should die, through great
anguish and distres, our wounds would become festred, and our affliction
miserable and exceeding great. This excellent parable is set before our eyes,
lively painting forth unto us, what we are, what is the strength of our reason
and free will. If that wretched man had gone about to help himself, his case
would have been made worse, he would have hurt himself, he would have opened
his wounds with rubbing, and so would have fallen into greater calamity.
Again if he had bin left lying, it had bin all one. So it comes to pass
when we are left to our selves: our studies and endeavor surely are nothing,
howsoever we set upon the matter. Hitherto sundry ways and diverse means have
bin invented, whereby we might come unto heaven, and amend our life, this man
found out this, an other that, whereupon have increased innumerable sorts of
Orders, letters of indulgences, pilgrimages to saints, which did always make
yt state of Christianity worse. This is the world which is painted forth in
this wounded man, he being wholly laden with sins, faints under so heavy a
burden, and is not able to help him self.

But the Samaritane who has fulfilled the Law, and is perfectly sound and
whole, comes, and does more, then either the Priest or Leuite, he byndeth up
his wounds, pours in oil and wine, sets him upon his own beast,
brings him with him unto an Inn, makes provision for him, and when he
should depart, diligently commends him to the host, and leaves with him
sufficient for expenses, none of which either the Priest, or Leuite did. By the
Priest the holy Fathers are signified, The Priest and Leuite which passed by ye
wounded man
which flourished before Moses. The Leuite is a representation of the
Priesthood of the old Testament. Now all these could do nothing by their
works, but passed by like unto this Priest and Leuite. Wherefore although I
had all the good works of Noe, Abraham, yea and of all the faithful Fathers,
they would profit me nothing. The Priest and Leuite saw that miserable man lie
wounded, but they could not help him any thing: they saw him lie half dead,
but what was that to the purpose? they could not give him any remedy. The holy
Fathers saw men drowned and plunged in sins even up to the ears, they also
felt the sting and anguish of sin, but what could they do hereunto? they
could make the case worse and not better. And those were the preachers of the
Law, which show what the world is, namely that it is full of sin, and lies
half dead, and can not even any whit help it self with his strength, reason,
and free will. But Christ is that true Samaritane, Christ the true Samaritane
which helps the wounded man. Oil.
who is touched with as great care of that miserable man as of himself.
Neither does the Samaritane call him unto him, for he has no merit, but
enjoys the mere grace and mercy of Christ, who byndeth up his wounds, and
having great care of him, pours in oil and wine, that is, the whole Gospel.
He pours in oil when grace is preached, when it is said: behold O miserable
man, this is thy incredulity, this is thy condemnation, thus art thou wounded
and sick: but abide, I will show thee a remedy for all this: Behold, join thy
self to this Samaritane Christ the Savior, he will best help and succor
thee, and beside him nothing. The nature of oil, as he know, is to make soft
and mollify: so the sweet and gentle preaching of the Gospel makes my heart
soft and tender toward God and my neighbor, so that I dare bestow my body and
life, for Christ and his Gospel, if God and need so require. Wine.
Sharp wine signifies the holy cross or affliction, which forwith follows.
Neither is there any cause that a Christian should look far about and seek
the cross, for it sooner hangs over his head then he is aware of, as Paul
witnesses 2. Tim. 3: All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution. This is the cognizance and badge of this king. He that is ashamed
of this cognizance, pertains not unto him. Moreover that Samaritane puts
this wounded man upon his own beast: this is our Lord Jesus Christ, who
bears us, we ly upon his shoulders, upon his neck and body. There is scarce
a more amiable and comfortable history in the whole Gospel, then where Christ
compares himself to a shepeheard, which carries again the lost sheep upon
his shoulders unto the flock.

The Inn whereunto ye wounded man is brought, and the host to whom he is
committed.
The Inn is the state of Christianity in this world, wherein we must abide for
a little time. The host is the ministers and preachers of the word of God, and
of the Gospel, whose charge is to have care of us. This therefore is the
sum: The kingdom of Christ is a kingdom of mercy and grace, where is
nothing else but always to be borne and to bear. Christ bears our defects
and infirmity, he takes our sins upon himself, and bears our fall
willingly, we daily lie upon his neck, neither is he wearied with that bearing
of us. It is the duty of the preachers of this kingdom, to comfort
consciences, to handle them gently, to feed them with the Gospel, to bear
the weak, to heal the sick: Moreover they ought fitly to apply the word
according to the need of every one. This is in deed is the duty of a true
Bishop and preacher, not to proceed by violence and injury, as it is the
custom of our bishops at this day, which vex, torment, and cry out: go to,
go to, he that will not willingly, shall be compelled to do it against his
will. We must in no wise do so. But a Bishop or preacher ought to behave
himself as a healer of the sick, who deals very tenderly with them,
utters very loving words unto them, talks very gently with them, and
bestows all his endeavor about them. The same must a Bishop, or minister of
any particular parish do, and think no otherwise, but that his bishoprike or
parish is as an hospital, wherein are such as are combred with diverse and
sundry kinds of diseases. If Christ be thus preached, then faith and love
come together, which fulfill the commandment of love. Now forasmuch as the
knowledge of the Law and the Gospel, and of the difference between them is
very necessary, I will entreat of them somewhat more at large.

Of the Law and the Gospel.
I have very often admonished your brotherly charity, The wlole Scripture
divided into ye Law and the Gospel.
that the whole Scripture deuideth it self into two parts: into the Law, and
the Gospel. The Law is that which teaches what we must do, what the will of
God requires of us. The Gospel teaches where that is to be received, which
the Law commands. Even as if I seek to take physic, it is one art to
tell what the disease is, and an other to minister that which is good and
wholesome to remedy it. So stands the case here: The Law reuealeth the
disease, the Gospel ministers the medecin. Which is manifest eue^ by the
text whereof we have already entreated: The Lawyer comes, and being very
desirous of eternal life, asks what he must do. The Law declares it unto
him, saying: The office of the Law.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul,
with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thy self.
He that reads these works after a bare and sclender sort only, as this
Lawyer did, understands them not. We must pearce into the Law, and every
one behold his face and heart therein. God must be loved of me from the bottom
of my heart: Again, I must love him with all my soul, that is, from the depth
of my soul, so that I thoroughly feel in my self that I love him. For to love
with the soul signifies in the Scripture such love as a young man bears
toward a maid, which he feels thoroughly in his mind, Moreover, with all my
strength, that is, with all my members. Also with all my mind, that is, all my
senses, cogitations and thoughts must be directed unto God: Now I find in my
self that I do none of these. For if I must love God with all my heart, soul,
strength and mind, it is requisite, that mine eyes show no angry twinkling
or motion, yt my tou^g speak no angry word, that my feet, hands, ears, etc.
show no sign of wrath, that my whole body even from the crown of the head to
the soles of the feet, and all things belonging thereunto, do walk in
charity, be as it were ravished with love and pleasure toward God, and always
serve and worship him. Wherefore who is he which by the pleasure and love of
virtue is chaste and righteous? there ca^ not be one such found in ye earth. For
we always find our selves readier to wrath, hatred, envy, worldly pleasure
etc: then to meekenes and other virtues. I find in me not only a spark, but
even a fiery furnace of wicked lust: for there is no love in mine heart, no
not in all my members. Wherefore here in the Law as it were in a certain
glass I see whatsoever is in me, to be damnable and cursed. For not one jot
of the Law must perish, but all must be fulfilled, Matthew. 5 18.
as Christ says: Truly I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot
or title of the Law shall not escape, till all be fulfilled. Now thou fyndest
not this in thee, that thou do with all thy soul and heart, with
cheerefulnes and pleasure, whatsoever the Law exacteth and requires of thee.
Hereupon thou art damned and under the dominion of Satan.

The Law therefore serves us thus far, to teach us, that we are condemned:
for by it we find all wicked desires in us, and yet not so much as a spark of
them ought to be in us. Howbeit our Scholemen not marking this, have taught,
that if one do according to his ability, God does give his grace unto him.
They are blind guides: They grant themselves, that a man is carried with no
pleasure or cheerefulnes to that which is good, and yet do they also teach, if
one works, although it be with grief, difficulty, and slouthfulnes, that it
is well with him before God. But Christ has taught otherwise in this place,
that we should work that which is good with pleasure and love, readiness and
facility. Whom therefore shall we rather believe, Christ or the Scholemen: but
I leave that to your judgment. Of such corrupt and evil understanding of the
Law, Monasteries afterward came, whereby entered in this opinion, that it was
thought to be sufficient to salvation, to live in a Monastery, and to follow
the orders thereof, although that were done even with grief of mind. We must
work with pleasure and cheerefulnes, not with grudging or grief.
So they taught: But Christ will have us to work with pleasure and
cheerefulnes, so that if any thing be done with burden or grief of
conscience, it is sin: remove thy self therefore quickly from such a work.
Wherefore thus it might be said unto them: Behold O man, thou miserable
creature ought to be carried with a certain delight to the doing of the
law of God, but thou come with no pleasure or cheerefulnes hereunto, now
see that thou show thy pleasure and love herein, otherwise thou shall be the
enemy of God, and the friend of Satan: thus men leaving their own rashness,
might come to the knowledge of themselves, and might then say: Therefore, O
God, am I condemned, and that not unjustly. Hereupon it follows, that we are
all under Satan, as long as we feel in us this difficulty and hardness to do
that which is good. Wherefore if I should speak the truth, I should say thus,
I find in deed something that is good in the law of God, but it is my
death, and if it could be, I would wish that it were not. So are all men
affected in their heart, as S. Paul plainly teaches Romans 7. If we should
remain in such condemnation, we must needs perish for ever.

There is therefore an other part, that is, the Gospel, The office of the
Gospel.
which shows comfort and salvation, declaring where that is to be had,
whereby the Law is fulfilled. When therefore I know by the Law that I am a
condemned man, then ly I half dead among thieves, Satan has spoiled my soul,
and has moreover in Adam taken away all faith, all righteousness, and has left
nothing but bodily life, which is also qulckly extinguished. Then come Levites
and Priests, which teach this and that, but can help nothing, and so pass
by. But when the Samaritane comes, he helps: that is, when Christ comes,
he shows his mercy unto us, saying after this sort: Behold thou ought in
deed to love God with all thine heart, but thou do it not, now believe
only in me, and thou shall enjoy my obedience as thine own: this only
helps me: Then he puts me on his own beast, that is, on himself, and
carries me into the Inn, that is, into the Church of the faithful, then he by
and by pours his grace into me, that is, oil, that I may feel my self to
be laid upon his shoulder, that at the last makes me to be of a good cheer,
and quiet and well affected in conscience. Afterward he pours in wine also,
which with his sharpnes may abate and tame the force of old Adam. And yet am I
not so wholly restored unto health, health is in deed poured in and begone, but
not yet wholly finished: then Christ has care of me, and by his grace poured
into me, does purify me, that from day to day I may become more chaste, meek,
gentle, faithful, etc: until I wholly die, for then I shall be altogether made
perfect. So when we shall come to God the father, and be asked of him, whether
we believed in God, whether we loved him, etc: the Samaritane Christ our Lord,
who has laid us on his own beast, will come forth and say: Lo Father,
although they have not wholly fulfilled thy Law, yet have I fulfilled it,
suffer thou that to turn to the commodity of them that believe in me. So is
it needful that all the Saints albeit very holy, be laid upon the back of
Christ. If so be that the holiest of all, as the Priests and Levites could not
satisfy the Law, how shall we go about with our fained works, as with
shauing, habit etc, to fulfill the same? O wretched and miserable calamity.
These things shall now suffize to have bin spoken concerning this text: Let us
pray unto God, that he will give us his grace. *** *

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, CONCERNING THE EXERCISE AND INCREASING OF FAITH.
John 4. Verse 46. THere was a certain ruler, whose son was sick at
Capernaum.

47. When he heard that Jesus was come out of Judea into Galile, he went unto
him, and besought him, that he would go down, and heal his son: for he was
even ready to die.

48. Then said Jesus unto him, Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not
believe.

49. The ruler said unto him, Sir, go down before my son die.

50. Jesus said unto him, Go thy way, thy son lives: and the man believed
the word that Jesus had spoken unto him, and went his way.

51. And as he was now going down, his seruau^ts met him, saying, Thy son
lives.

52. Then enquired he of them the hour when he began to amend. And they said
unto him, yesterdaye the seventh hour the fever left him.

53. Then the father knew that it was the same hour in the which Jesus had
said unto him, Thy son lives, and he believed, and all his household.

54. This second miracle did Jesus again, after he was come out of Judea into
Galile.


AN excellent example of faith is set forth in this text, of what sort it is,
of what nature and quality, namely, that it is not a resting or idle thing,
but lively and void of idleness, A true faith is not idle, but increases more
and more.
which goes not back, but proceeds on, and still more and more increases.
Which if it be not done, it is no faith, but only a dead opinion of God in the
heart. For a true and sincere faith, which the holy Ghost pours into the
heart, can not be idle: which I say for this cause, that no man be therefore
secure, albeit he has obtained faith, neither that he stay there. It is
nothing to begin, unless we increase by continual going forward, and come to
greater knowledge of God. For on the contrary side it is the nature and
quality of our adversary Satan, not to be idle, as S. Peter says: Satan
sleeps not, but goes about as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. If
so be that the Deuell is neither idle, neither sleep comes upon him, neither
shall it be meet for a Christian to be idle or put his hands in his bosom,
forasmuch as he has the Deuell his enemy, who is stronger then himself: for
he is called the prince of the world, as it is mentioned in the Epistle
appointed to be read in the Church on this day: Ephesians. 6.12.
We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against
powers, and against the worldly governors, the princes of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickednesses, which are in hie places. This prince
governs the world, furiously and fiercely rages, and can not suffer the
prosperous succes of a Christian. Neither is it for his profit to be suffered
of him, for an entry being made hereby, his kingdom is burst into, and his
net torn in pieces, out of which as much as he is able, he suffers no
Christian to escape. Moreover when the fire of faith is kindled, and the flame
fostered, and Satan tries and marketh that, by and by he practizeth deceit
against it, for he knows how much hinderaunce his kingdom shall take
thereby, wherefore as earnestly as he can, even with all his power, he
defends his kingdom, and labors to keep all in obedience to him.

True Christians are not free from te^tatio^, for the deuel be^deth his force
especially against them.
Wherefore it is most certain, that when a Christian has begone to believe, by
and by tentation and persecution will assail him. Which if it come not to
pass, it is a sign that his faith is not yet sound, and that he has not as
yet truly received the Gospel. For wicked Satan has a very sharp sight, he
by and by spieth out where is a true Christian, wherefore he applies himself
wholly unto this, that he may enforce him to fall, and may besiege him, and
assail him on every side: for he can not suffer that any should revolt from
his kingdom. It is perilous therefore for a man to believe, for the Devil is
ready that he may set upon him, and overthrow him, which sometime chances
even to very holy men, which understand the word of God well, The Saints of
God do sometimes fall eue^ grievously.
when they stand upright, and think themselves safe, that privy wicked fend
comes upon them by little and little, and wrastleth with them so long, till he
overthrow them, and cast them to the earth. Set before thine eyes Moses and
Aaron, who were guides of the Jews, they had an excellent faith, when they
brought the people out of Egypt, and all the people in faith passed through the red sea, death, the wide wilderness, and many other marvelous things, whereby
they showed their faith, but at the last they fall grievously, they fear that
they shall perish with hunger. Is it not a thing most miserable, that by so
great signs they show their faith, they go into death and through death,
wrestle with it, and overcome it, and yet while they think them selves surest,
they fall, and suffer themselves to be overcome of the belly, murmr against
God, and are so grievously tempted, that they fall all together. Wherefore it
is not certain and sure, if one begin to believe, and does not always more and
more increase in faith. Yea that godly man Moses, who had so great and so
strong a faith, did fall also, when as he should bring water out of the rock
with a staff, he douted, and talked thus to the people: Come let us see
whether we can bring water out of the rock. That good Moses, which had showed
so many and so great signs, falls into reason and carnal understanding,
fearing lest the incredulity of the people would hinder so great a miracle and
sign. But it had behooved him to cleave fast to the word of God, and to think
it higher, greater, stronger, and mightier, then the unbelief of the people:
that great man was tempted, he stumbled, and was overthrown.

We have like examples in the new Testament: Let him that thinks he stands
take heed lest he fall.
Peter was hardy, and firm in faith, when he beheld Christ upon the water, he
said unto him with a strong faith: Lord suffer me to come unto thee, committing
him self to the water even as to the ship, he thought assuredly that the water
would bear him. Then was there an excellent faith in Peter, and great courage,
which durst commit him self wholly unto death in the midst of the sea,
reposing his hope freely and boldly in Christ. But when he thought him self
most safe, a storm and tempest arises, he forgetting the word, suffers his
faith to fail, and he him self also falls, suffering Satan to pluck faith
out of his heart. Faith truly is a subtle and delicate thing, a small thing
makes us to stumble and fall. Satan is always watchful, and circumspect, and
does by and by obtain his purpose, if we do not diligently watch. How
earnestly did the common people follow Christ? they thought that he was a
Prophet, and did so cleave unto him, and so defend him, that the Princes of the
people were made astonished, neither durst they so much as lay hand on him. But
when they apprehend him, proceed against him, fasten him to the cross, the
people forsake him all that they may, and come no more at him. A Prophet is
present, and no man any more assisteth him, but they rather cry out against
him, crucify him, crucify him: and that which is most detestable of all, his
own Disciples revolt from him. What is become now both of their faith and
holiness?

So is it at this day in our time: at the first when the Gospel began to
shine, the preaching thereof was acceptable and pleasant, then many seemed
willing to embrace it, but when Munkes. sacrificing Priests, Nuns, etc. began
to be spoken against, and the Mass to be confuted, all (a marvelous thing to
be spoken) fell away as leaves of trees. Again, when Princes also were
touched, the Gospel suffered greater persecution, and did by little and little
daily decrease. Moreover Satan is not idle, whereupon he stirs up heresies
and schisms, for how many sects have we hitherto suffered? he sleeps not, he
will stir up greater mischiefs also, he never rests, but looks about,
and tries every way, that he may bring the matter to that pass, and prevail
so far, that no sound doctrine may remain in the church, but that if all
Germany be diligently viewed, a sermon may no where be found, wherein the word
of God is truly preached, as it was before. He goes about to extinguish and
abolish all the doctrine of Christ now increasing, for he can not abide it. It
is not an easy thing to avoid so great an enemy, he lies in wait, and
vieweth all places, and so diligently bestirreth him self, that even the
learned fall, and the elect stumble, as Moses, S. Peter, with the rest of the
Apostles. We think our selves safe, and live securely, no man considers, no
man has a care of the word, we should pray and beseech God, that he would
vouchsafe to preserve the Gospel, and make his holy name to be spread and
published more abroad. But no man is touched with care hereof, no man prays
that it may have good success. Wherefore it is to be feared that at the last
it will come to pass, that God will suffer Satan and us to run together into
one, then shall we be in a desperate case, for he will easily throw us to the
ground, when we are come into so great misery by our own slothfulnes and
default.

Satan moreover can so set forth the matter by seditious spirits, We must not
trust to our own strength but to the help and assistance of God.
that men shall think it to be just. As the Arrians were persuaded that their
opinion was sound. But a Christian humbles him self, takes nothing rashly
upon him self, but with an humble heart says thus unto God: Most gracious
God, albeit I know that the cause which I favor is not unjust, yet without
thy help I am not able to maintain it, thou therefore help me, otherwise I
shall be cast and overthrown. He is in deed certain of his cause, even as S.
Peter was on the water, who could not be surer, when the water did bear him.
For he knew no let or hinderance, but when the wind was great, and the water
troubled, be perceived what was wanting in him: Which is thoroughly to be
received into our mind, and considered of us. For albeit the certainty of our
cause be confirmed, strengthened, and ratified with plain sentences of the
Scripture, yet is it by the might, counsel, and power of God, that we are
defended, and Satan our chief adversary and enemy repressed. Which is
therefore done, that God may stir us up to watch, and keep us in awe, that
we may always be watchful, and cry unto him: Lord help us, and increase
our faith, for without thee we are able to do nothing. Our heart must be
always so disposed, as though we began to day to believe, and always so
affected, that we desire and labor to go more and more forward. For that is
the nature, force, and quality of faith, that it always increases and waxes
stronger. Satan, as it is a little before mentioned, neither is idle, nor
rests, if he be once overthrown he rises again, if he can not enter in by
the door, he endeavors to steal in on the back side, and if this be not
permitted him, he breaks in through the roof, or enters in through a
hollow place dug under the threshold, for he does so long earnestly follow
his work, until he come in, he uses many deceits and practizes, if he
prevails not by one, he takes in hand an other, and does that so long,
until he has obtained his purpose. Man is a weak and a miserable thing, as
S. Paul says 2. Cor. 4: We have this treasure in earthen vessels. I am more
frail then a pot compared to the potter, and a pot is a very weak thing,
inasmuch as it is easily broken, and whatsoever is in it, is spilt.

Now Satan when he marketh how great a treasure faith is, kept in a frail pot
(that I may so speak) he is in a great rage and fury, and says thus unto us:
I will touch thee, I will break thy pot, thou have a great treasure, which I
will spill. Though we be of our selves most frail and weak, yet God sets
us in the midst of most strong enemies, that it may appear that we stand
not by our own strength, but by the singular help and assistance of God.
So God sets the silly pot in the midst of enemies, which should utterly
perish even in a moment, if he did not defend it, for it may quickly be shaken
and broken in pieces, yea if it be but bitten of a viper, it perishes. And it
is not hard from Satan even in one moment to waste and destroy a whole cuntry.
Wherefore that vexes him, that God deals with him so simply, setting a silly
pot against him, when as he notwithstanding is so great a Prince and the most
mighty ruler of this world. Now it would grieve me, if I being strong and
valiant, any man should set upon me with a reed, surely I being moved with
anger would break the reed in pieces: for I had lever that he would set upon
me with a spear, sword, and armed on all parts. It grieved stout Goliath, that
David durst come unto him unarmed only with a staff. So it greatly grieueth
the devil, that God will suppress him by flesh and blood, if some stout
spirit should resist him, it would not grieve him so much, for that troubles
him above measure, that a silly worm, a frail pot should come to despise him,
an earthen vessel against a most mighty Prince. God has laid up this
treasure, says Paul, in a miserable and weak vessel: for man is a weak
creature, by and by moved to wrath, to covetousness, to pride, etc. so that
Satan may easily shake and break the vessel: for if God would permit him, he
would forthwith break it all to pieces. Now all this is done, says Paul,
that we may know, that not by our own power, but by the power of God we are
preserved from all evils, and especially from the force and fury of Satan,
who goes about like a roaring lion, desiring to bruise and break the weak
vessels and frail pots: and that we may hereby also be stirred up to be
watchful and to lift up our eyes toward heaven, and pray unto God that he will
vouchsafe to increase and defend our faith, and preserve the vessel by his
strength. Thus have we an entrance unto our text, it remains that we do now
consider the same in order: The Evangelist says thus:

There was a certain ruler, whose son was sick at Capernaum. It falls out
with many other men also, that they have their children sick: but that which
he says afterward is to be marked: When he heard that Jesus was come out of
Judea into Galile, he went unto him, and besought him that he would go down,
and heal his son: for he was even ready to dye. Here faith begins and
trusts in Christ. Now that he had faith the Gospel declares: for he heard
of Christ how he healed the sick, thereupon his heart was set upon him, and he
resorteth unto him, thinking thus: If he helps all men, he will also help
me, and will heal my son. He counts Christ for such a man as is able to
help men, and hops and promises to him self all goodness from him: and that
in deed is a true Christian heart, which cleaves fast unto God. If that this
ruler had stood in a place or way having two paths, douting with him self,
he had not gone unto Christ, but his heart would have been thus affected: He
helps others in deed, but who can tell, whether he will help me also?
Howbeit he does not thus dout of Christ, but rises, and makes have unto him.
This is the beginning of faith, now ye shall see how Christ meets him on the
other side, and answers otherwise then he thought for, that his faith might
be tried, and thus he says unto him:

Except ye see signs and wonders ye will not believe. Christ said also to S.
Peter Matthew. 14: Why do thou dout, O thou of little faith? Peter undoubtedly
had faith, and did believe in Christ, whereupon he committed him self to the
water, but when he saw the wind, he was afraid, and began to be drowned: so
in this place, that good man hears a good report of Christ, that he helps
every man, which he believes and therefore resorteth unto him. But when he
hears that Christ denies to come, he stumbleth, and his faith fails,
fearing that Christ would not come unto him. This is as it were an assault and
sore blow, here his new begun faith begins to be tempted. It was a hard
saying: except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe: which saying
does so tempt him, and bring him into dout, that he almost falls. Satan
standing at his back, says unto him: get thee home and look to thy business,
for he will not help thee. Notwithstanding the ruler did not by and by leave
of, but prayed the Lord moreover: Lord come down before my son dye. Here
his faith began to be in danger and to fail, but God does not forsake him,
but lifts him up again, and says unto him:

Go thy way, thy son lives. If the ruler had not had faith, he would not
have requested Christ to come to his son. What therefore does he want? even
this: he believed if Christ came to his house, he could then help his son,
if he did not come, he could not help him. Neither did his faith extend so
far, as to believe that Christ even being absent could heal the sick: but
it behooved that he should have a higher faith. Wherefore Christ lifts him up,
and sets him in a higher state, and says unto him: Go thy way, thy son
lives. Here he first ascends from his former faith, whereby he believed that
Christ could heal being present, and comes to a higher faith, so that now he
believes the word. For if he had not believed the word, he would not have left
Christ, neither would have departed from him, until he had come with him to
his house. But having laid hold on the word, he cleaves unto it by faith, for
his son is at home, and Christ is with his father. Wherefore the Father
receives this word in his heart, and thinks with him self after this sort:
My son is sick, but I shall find him whole: which faith was contrary both to
reason and experience. Reason would have thought thus: When I came from my
son he was sick, True faith leaves all wisdom and reason, and trusts to
the only word of God.
as I did leave him, so shall I find him. But faith says otherwise, it rests
only in the word and trusts wholly unto it, neither douteth it, that any
thing will fall out otherwise then the word speaks: Go thy way, thy son
lives. This is a right and a strong faith, when as man leaves sense,
wisdom, reason, and trusts wholly to the word of God. Christ says, thy
son lives: And he says with him self, without dout it is true, I shall so
find it. So faith remains not idle, nor rests, but increases and goes
forward.

Thus Christ deals with us also, he suffers us to be tempted, that we may
increase in faith: if in the end of our life when we must dye, we shall have
but a spark of such faith, we shall be in a good case, as Christ says unto
his Disciples Matthew. 17: If ye have faith as much as is a grain of musterd
seed, ye shall say unto this mountain: Remove hence to yonder place, and it
shall be removed: and nothing shall be impossible unto you. A grain of musterd
seed is but a small thing, but he that has faith agreeable to the smalnes of
this grain, shall be saved. Neither must we so much consider this, that our
faith is little, but we must look unto this, we must have regard unto this,
that the grain of musterd seed do remain, and be not eaten up of the birds,
that Satan pluck not faith out of our hearts. We must not look how little the
faith is, but we must regard and take heed that faith be not taken away.
Peter had faith upon the sea, and therefore was he carried of the water, that he
should not be drowned, if he had so perseuered in faith, he might well have
walked an hundred miles upon the sea, but when he failed in faith, he began to
be drowned. So Moses had a strong faith, but he fell from it. It consists
not in the strength or slendernes of faith, that we do stand, but in
perseuering and remaining faithful. It may be that he shall persevere in faith,
which has but a slender faith, and he that has a strong faith shall fall and
dout. Moses and Peter had an excellent faith, so that Moses by faith did lead
ye people through the midst of the sea and death, and Peter without douting
went down out of the ship into the sea, but they fall from their faith,
howbeit God raises them up quickly again. But the Thief on the cross having
once laid hold of faith, continued constant. Now God therefore suffers it to
be thus, that he may bring down rash arrogancy, that we do not gloriously
extol our selves, but always remain in fear and awe. For when tentation
comes upon us, we do forthwith fall into error, if God do not assist and
strengthen us, of which thing we may see a very goodly similitude in a tree, A
proper and apt similitude.
which in the spring time buddeth and opens it self, so that it does as it
were become white by reason of the blossoms. A shower falling upon it, many of
the blossoms are shaken of, and the frost also does much more consume them.
Afterward when the fruit begins to spring forth, some great wind blowing,
much of it being newly come forth falls down, and when it waxes ripe, the
caterpiller comes, which with other worms gnaweth and spoyleth it so much,
that scarce the twentieth part, yea scarce the hundredth part many times
remains. The same comes to pass with the hearers of the Gospel, in the
beginning thereof every one coueteth to be a true Christian, every one likes
of it very well, and the first fruits thereof are very pleasant. But when
wind, a shower, or tentation comes, all fall away from it by companies:
afterward sects and seditions arise, which like unto worms and kankers gnaw
and infect the fruits of the Gospel, and so many false opinions spring up,
that very few do persevere in the true profession of the Gospel.

We have here, thanks be given to Almighty God, the word of God plentifully
taught, we are delivered out of deep and great darkness, but we forgetting the
word are made weak, we live having no care of the word, for it is not sauory
unto us. But when as hereafter false prophets shall break in with their
corrupt opinions, and Satan also shall violently assail us, finding us idle,
and the house swept and garnished, he will bring with him seven other spirits
worse then him self, and the end shall be worse then the beginning. Which
things if they so fall out, let us not therefore be quite discouraged, but let
us rather instruct one an other, that we may learn to cleave unto God, and
pray unto him, and say: Merciful God, thou have given unto me to become a
Christian, give unto me also that I may persevere, and become daily richer in
faith. Albeit the whole world did resist, and every one conspired to destroy
the Gospel, yet will I be nothing moved, but by thy divine help will depend on
the Gospel.

But to return again to the Ruler, ye have heard that his faith was very
notable and excellent, he hears the word, thy son lives, They which
believe shall assuredly obtain al good things that they pray unto God for.
he believes it, and goes away giving honor to God, he receives the only
word, he trusts wholly unto it. Hereupo^ God deals so graciously with him,
that he restores health unto his son, raises him up, and strengthens him
in faith, neither suffers him to stick in dout or infirmity, but
establishes him, and makes him strong, and causes him to go forward and
increase. Neither does God delay until he comes home, but declares unto him
being yet in his journey the health of his son, sending his servant to meet
him, that they might bring him good news, and say: thy son lives. For God
can not differ or delay, where there is a sincere heart, which trusts in him
alone, all other things being left, looking only unto the word of God, there
God can not hide him self, but reuealeth him self, and comes unto such a
heart, and makes his abode there, as the Lord says Ioh. 14. Now what can be
more joyful, the^ for a man to give credit to the word of God, and to be
plucked from it by no affliction or tentation, but to shut his eyes against
every assault of Satan, to lay aside humane sense, understanding, reason, and
wisdom, and to say daily in his heart: God has spoken it, he can not lie. I
say nothing is more joyful then such a faith. For whatsoever we ask of God
with such a faith, we receive it more abundantly of him, then ever we desired
it, and God is sooner present with us, then we had thought. Hereupon the
Evangelist uses so many words even unprofitable, as it appears unto us, as
these: The man believed the word that Jesus had spoken unto him, and went his
way. And as he was now going down, his servant met him, saying, Thy
son lives. Then inquired he of them the hour when he began to amend: and
they said unto him: Yesterday the seventh hour the fever left him. Then the
father knevv, that it was the same hour in the which Jesus said unto him:
Thy son lives. All which tend unto this end, that we should know that if
we believe in the Lord he will give us abundantly, whatsoever we shall pray
unto him for.

The conclusion the Evangelist makes as follows: And he believed, and all
his household. He so increased in faith, that he did not only ascend from a low
state to a higher, but he brought others also unto faith. He had surely an
effectual faith, which did not rest idle and slothful in the heart, but did
break forth, so that whosoever were in his house were brought unto faith. The
nature and quality of true faith.
For this is plainly the nature of faith, this is the quality of it, to draw
others unto it, to burst forth, and apply it self even unto the work of love,
as S. Paul witnesses Galat. 5: That faith which works by love, is
effectual. For it can not keep silence or be idle, as David says Psalm. 116,
which place Paul applies to the faithful 2. Cor. 4: I believed, and
therefore have I spoken. Faith can do no other, for it is enforced to speak,
neither can it keep silence, inasmuch as he that is endued with it,
endeavors to profit his neighbor. This ruler had faith for him self, but it
does not remain in him alone, but breaks forth. For without all dout he
declared to his family, how he came unto Christ, and received comfort of him,
which they also believed. So we also, when we believe must open our mouth, and
confess the grace, which God has showed unto us. The most excellent work of
faith.
Which is the chief and most excellent work of faith, that one instruct an
other in the word. For Paul says Romans 10: With the heart man believes unto
righteousness, and with the mouth man confesses to salvation. If we be ashamed
of this word, it is a certain argument of a very light and uncertain faith.
We see therefore that there is no difference with Christ between the strong and
the weak in faith: for a little faith is faith also. He therefore came into the
world that he might receive to him self, bear and sustain the weak. If he
were so impatient as we be, he would by and by say unto us: Get thee from me, I
will none of thee, because thou beleeuest not in me. But this is a thing greatly
to be commended, when one can handle yt weak gently, and does not deal
rigorously with them, and repel them by impatiencie. For although they be
weak to day, the hour may come, when they shall receive the word more
abundantly then we. Thus we ought to instruct and teach one an other, that we
may depend on yt word of God. For if we continue in sticking to the word, we
shall be strong enough for the devil: for we glory of the word, albeit we be
but weak. Unto Satan, who is able even in one hour to overthrow us all, all
men should be even as a fether, which he would be able to remove away how and
when he will, yea even with his breath, but if we believe, that fether is made
more heavy unto him then the hill Olympus. For a Christian bears Christ in
him self, and Christ is heavier then heaven and earth. Thus much may suffize
concerning this text.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, CONCERNING FREE REMISSION OF SINS TO THE
CONTRITE AND BROKEN IN heart, and terrible judgment to the indurate and
obstinate.
Matthew. 18. Verse 23. Jesus said unto Peter and to the rest of the Disciples:
The kingdom of heaven is likened unto a certain King, which would take an
account of his servant.

24. And when he had begone to reckon, one was brought unto him, which owed him
ten thousand talents.

25. And because he had nothing to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold,
and his wife, and his children, and all that he had, and the debt to be paid.

26. The servant therefore fell down, and worshipped him saying: Lord
refrain thine anger toward me, and I will pay thee all.

27. Then that servant Lord had compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him
the debt.

28. But the same servant went out, and found one of his fellow servant,
which owed him an hundred pence, and he laid hands on him, and thratled him,
saying: Pay me that thou owe.

29. Then his fellow servant fell down at his feet, and besought him, saying:
Refrain thine anger toward me, and I will pay thee all.

30. Yet he would not, but went and cast him into prison, till he should pay
the debt.

31. And when his other fellow servants saw what was done, they were very sorry,
and came, and declared unto their Lord all that was done.

32. Then his Lord called him unto him, and said to him: O evil servant, I
forgave thee all that debt, because thou prayedst me.

33. Ought not thou also to have had pity on thy fellow servant, even as I
had pity on thee?

34. So his Lord was wrath, and delivered him to the tormentors, till he should
pay all that was due to him.

35. So likewise shall mine heavenly Father do unto you, except ye forgive
from your hearts, each one to his brother their trespasses.


CHrist brought forth this parable unto that answer which he had made to
Saint Peter, unto whom he had before committed the keys of binding and
loosing. For when S. Peter asked him, how often he should forgive his brother
his offense, whether it were enough to forgive him seven times, and he
answered, not seven times, but seventy times seven times, he then added this
similitude, by which he infers, that his heavenly father will do likewise
unto us, if we do not forgive our neighbor, even as the King did here unto the
servant, which would not forgive his fellow servant a small det, when as his
Lord had forgiven him so much. We have often times taught that the kingdom of
God wherein he reigns by the Gospel, is nothing else, but such a state or
government, wherein is mere forgiveness of sins: so that where such a
government is not, wherein sin is pardooned, neither is there the Gospel nor
kingdom. Wherefore those two kingdoms are to be separated: one, wherein sins
are punished, and an other wherein they are forgiven, or wherein the law is
exacted, and wherein that which is due by the law, is remitted. The kingdom of
grace.
In the kingdom of God, where he reigns by the Gospel, there is no exacting
of the law, neither any dealing by the law, but only remission and
forgiveness, neither wrath nor punishing, but brotherly service and well doing
one to an other. Notwithstanding the civil law or Magistrate is not taken
away, for this parable speaks not any thing of worldly government, but of the
kingdom of God only. Wherefore he that is yet governed only by the regiment of
the world, is yet far of from the kingdom of heaven, for worldly government
pertains wholly to inferior things. As if a Prince govern his people so,
that he suffer injury to be done to none, punishing offenders, he does well,
and is therefore commended. For in that government this sentence flourishes:
Civil government.
Pay that thou owe: which if thou do not, thou shall be cast into prison.
Such government we must have, howbeit we come not to heaven by it, neither is
the world therefore saved, but this government is therefore necessary, that the
world do not become worse. For it is only a defense and fortification against
wickedness, which if it were not, one would devour an other, neither could any
man keep in safety his own life, wife, goods, children, etc. That therefore
all things should not fall, come to ruin and perish, God has appointed the
sword of the Magistrate, whereby wickedness may be partly repressed, peace and
quietness among men maintained, and one may not do an other injury, wherefore
this is in any wise to be kept. But, as I said, it is not ordained for them
that are in the kingdom of grace, but therefore only, that men be not more
deeply plunged in wickedness, and become worse.

Wherefore no man that is only under the regiment of the world, ought to
glory, that he does therefore well before God, before whom all is yet
unrighteous. For thou must come so far, that thou do resign that which is
just before the world, and yield of thine own right. This the Gospel does
here require, As the Lord forgiueth us, so must we also forgive our neighbor.
which on either side sets forth unto us only forgiveness. First the Lord
forgiueth the servant all the debt: then he requires of him, that he forgive
his fellow servant his, and remit his offense. These things God requires,
and so must his kingdom be ordered: that no man be so wicked, neither suffer
him self so to be moved, that he can not forgive his neighbor. And as it is a
little before this text taught in the Gospel, if he should provoke thee to anger
even seventy times seven times, that is as often as he can offend against thee,
thou must yield of thine own right, and cheerfully forgive him all things.
Why so? because Christ did the same. For he set up and erected such a kingdom,
as wherein is only grace, which must at no time cease, so that if thou repent
all things may wholly be forgiven thee, as often as thou shall offend, forasmuch
as he has ordained the Gospel, that it might preach no punishment but only
grace and forgiveness of sins. This kingdom standing, thou may always rise
again, how deeply soever thou fallest, and so often as thou fallest, so as
thou repent. For albeit thou fallest, yet this Gospel and mercy seat always
continues. As soon as therefore thou have risen again and returned, thou have
grace restored. Howbeit he requires this of thee, that thou also forgive thy
neighbor all things, which he has committed against thee, otherwise thou
shall not be in this kingdom of grace, neither shall beco^e partaker of yt
which ye Gospel preaches, that thy sins may be forgiven thee. This briefly
is the sum and meaning of this text.

Moreover, we must not here omit, to declare who they be that receive the
Gospel, and unto whom it is acceptable. For surely that kingdom and
government, wherein God reigns and rules by the Gospel, is most excellent
and gentle, forasmuch as in it mere forgiveness of sins is preached, howebeit
it pearseth not into the heart of every one, neither is it considered or
esteemed of all. For thou may find many light and unconstant men, Abuse of
the Gospel.
who abuse the Gospel, and lead their life dissolutely and loosely, doing what
they list, who think that they should be rebuked of none, seeing that the
Gospel teaches nothing but forgiveness of sins. The Gospel is not preached
to these, who do so vilely esteem of a precious treasure, and deal lightly
with it. Wherefore neither do they pertain to this kingdom but to worldly
government, that they may be stopped and let from doing whatsoever they like
and list. To whom the Gospel is preached.
To whom then is it preached? to them which thoroughly feel such misery, as
this servant did here. Wherefore consider what happens unto him: The Lord
takes pity of his misery, forgiueth him more then he durst desire. But
before this is done, the text says, the Lord first took account of his
servant, and when he began to reckon, one was brought unto him, which owed
him ten thousand talents: and because he had nothing to pay, his Lord
commanded him to be sold, and his wife, and children, and all that he had, and
the debt to be paid. Which truly were no pleasant words, but even exceeding
severity and most terrible judgment, then is he brought into so great
perplexity and distress, that he falls down on the ground, and asks
mercy, and promises more then he has, or is able to pay, saying: Lord
refrain thine anger toward me, and I will pay thee all.

Here is set forth unto us, who they be, unto whom the Gospel is acceptable.
For so comes it to pass between God and us. When God will take an account of
us, he sends forth the preaching of his law, The preaching of the law.
whereby we learn to know what we ought to do: as when God says to the
conscience: Thou shall worship no other God, but shall acknowledge me alone for
God, shall love me with all thine heart, and repose thy trust and hope in me
only. This is the book of accounts, wherein is written what we owe, which he
taking into his hands, reads before us, and says. Lo, this thou ought to
have done, thou ought to fear, love, and worship me alone, thou ought to
trust in me alone, and from me to promise to thy self all good things.
Howbeit thou do otherwise, thou art mine adversary, thou beleeuest not in
me, but reposest thy trust in other things: and in a sum, thou feast here,
that thou do not observe so much as the least point of the law. When the
conscience has heard these things, and the law has touched one well, he
sees then what he ought to do, and what he has not done, and finds that he
has not kept so much as a letter of the law, and is compelled to confess,
that he has not performed that obedience and duty which God justly requires
of him. What does the Lord now? When ye conscience is thus touched, and feels
it self condemned, and is distressed with exceeding great misery, he says:
Sell him, and whatsoever he has, and let him pay the det. This is the
judgment, which forthwith follows, when the law has revealed sin, and
said: This thou must do, that thou ought to have done, and thou have done
nothing thereof: for to sin is required punishment, that man may be compelled
to pay. For God has not so made his law, that he does not punish them that
transgress it. It is not sweet and pleasant, but brings bitter and horrible
pain with it, it delivers us to Satan, it casts us down to hell, and
leaves us wrapped in tentation, until we have paid the utmost farthing. This
S. Paul has notably well declared Romans 4, where he says: The law works
nothing but wrath. That is, when it reuealeth unto us, that we have done
unjustly, it sets nothing before us, but wrath and indignation. For when the
conscienee sees that it has committed evil, it feels that it has deserved
eternal death, after which follows punishment, whereupon it is compelled to
despeire.

This is that that the Lord commands this servant together with all his
substance to be sold, forasmuch as he is not able to pay. But what does the
servant say? the foolish fellow thinks yet, that he shall pay the debt, he
falls down and prays that he will have patience with him. This is the wound
and cross of all consciences, that when sin biteth them so, that they feel
in how evil case they are before God, there is no rest in them, but they run
hither and thither, seeking about, that they may be delivered from sins, and
rashly take upon them as yet to do so great things, as wherewith they shall
pay God, Superstitious means invented by men to be delivered from sin, and
to purchase Gods favor.
as we hitherto have been instructed, whereupon came so many pilgrimages,
collegiate houses, Monasteries, Masses, and other trifles. We pyned our selves
with fasting, we scourged our selves with whippes, we were made Monks and
Nuns, therefore only, for that we went about to lead such a life, and to do
such and so many works, as whereunto God might have respect, and thereby be
pacified, thinking so to appease and make quiet our consciences, so we
committed the same things that this foolish fellow did. Such a heart as is
touched with the law, and thoroughly feels it own misery and calamity, is
humbled truly and in deed. Whereupon it falls down before the Lord and
craves mercy, Howbeit it is yet defiled with this vice, that it strives to
help it self, which thing can not be taken away from nature. When as the
conscience feels such misery, it dares presume to promise more then all the
Angels in heaven are able to perform. Then is it an easy matter to persuade
it to apply it self to do, whatsoever can be required of it. For it finds
it self always in such a case, that it hops that it is able by works to
satisfy for sins. Consider those things which have been hitherto of long
time done in the world, then shall thou find these things to be so: For thus
was it preached: Give somewhat to the building of a Church: Get to be admitted
into an holy Monastery, institute Masses, and thy sins shall be forgiven
thee. And when consciences were urged in confession, they would not stick to
say: Whatsoever was enioined us, we have omitted nothing of it, yea we have
given more then we were commanded. Miserable men rejoiced that by this means
they might provide for them selves, and therefore they pyned and afflicted them
selves, that they might be unburdened of their sins, yet did it prevail them
nothing. For the conscience remained in dout as before, that it knew not how
it stood before God. But if it were secure and quiet, it fell into that which
is worse, to think that God has respect unto works, neither can reason do
any other but depend of works. The Lord therefore is touched with affection of
mercy toward that misery, wherewt ye servant so entangled and snared with
sins, is holden, and taking pity upon him, does forgive and dimisse him.
Here is now set forth unto us, what is ye special office and quality of ye
gospel, and how God deals with us. When thou art so drowned in sins, and
weariest thy self, that thou may deliver thy self from them, the Gospel
comes to thee, The preaching of the Gospel.
and says: Do not so dear brother, it prevails nothing, although thou
afflict and torment thy self even til thou be mad, thy works do not profit,
but the mercy of God shall deliver thee, who is touched with thy misery: for
he sees thee wrapped in calamity, and wearying thy self, that thou may
deliver thy self out of the mire, and yet art not able: he, I say, has regard
unto this, that thou art not able to pay, whereupon he forgiueth thee all, and
that of his mere mercy. For he does not forgive thee the debt either for thy
works or merits, but for that he takes pity upon thy cry, complainte and
mourning, and thy falling down before his knees: that is, God has respect to
an humbled heart, as the Prophet says Psalm. 51: The sacrifice of God is a
troubled spirit: a broken and contrite heart, O God, shall thou not despise.
Such a heart he says, as is broken and humbled, which is not able to help it
self, but craves the help of God, and rejoices in it, such a heart is an
acceptable sacrifice to God, and he that has it is in the right way to heaven.
Now God having showed this mercy unto him, and taken pity on his misery,
ceasseth to follow his right, and abrogateth it, and says no more: Sell
whatsoever thou have and pay the debt: although he might go forward and say:
Thou must pay, for this my law requires, which I will not have abrogated for
thy sake: yet will he not deal with him by the law, but changes the law
into grace and favor, takes pity on him, and dimisseth him with his wife,
children, and all his substance, and does also forgive him the debt.

This is that which God suffers to be preached by the Gospel: unto him that
believes is remitted not only the fault, but also the punishment, and that of
mere mercy, not for any works sake. For he that preaches, that by works the
fault and the punishment may be put away, has even then denied the Gospel,
Mercy and merit ca^ not agree together.
forasmuch as these two can not agree together, that God has mercy on thee,
and yet that thou do merit some thing. For if it be grace, it is not merit:
but if it be merit, then shall it not be grace, but debt: for if thou pay thy
debt, he shows thee no mercy: but if he shows thee mercy, thou do not
make payment. Wherefore we must needs acknowledge his mercy toward us, we
must receive of him, and believe in him, which the Gospel here requires. After
therefore that this servant is thus humbled with the knowledge of his sin,
the word is exceeding comfortable unto him, wherein the Lord pronounces him
free, and forgiueth him both the fault and the punishment. Whom the preaching
of the Gospel profits.
Whereby is also declared, that it touches not sluggish hearts, that feel no
sin, neither those that are carried with rashness, but only such afflicted
consciences, as are pressed with the heavy burden of their sins, which do
greatly desire to be delivered from them, of them God has mercy, and forgiueth
them all. Wherefore it behooved this servant to receive the word, for unless he
had received it, forgiveness had profited nothing, nay there had been no
forgiveness at all. It is not therefore enough, that God suffers remission of
sins, and a golden year full of grace to be preached unto us, but it is
necessary that we receive and believe it in heart. If thou believe, thou art
free from sins. This is the first part of a Christian life, which both this
place and diverse other in the Gospels do teach us, which consists properly in
faith, which alone has to do before God: whereby also is showed that the
Gospel can not be received but of a troubled and miserable conscience.

Herupon now may be inferred that they are plain delusions, whatsoever things
are any otherwise taught concerning our works, and free will, to wit, that
they put away sins, and obtain grace. For the divine majesty alone,
beholding our misery, has pity upon us, for the text shows manifestly,
that God pardons and forgiueth them, that have nothing, and concludes that
we have nothing left, wherewith we may pay God. Howsoever therefore thou have
free will in temporal matters, yet thou hear here that it is nothing before
God. Wherefore if thou desire to be delivered from thy sins, thou must cease
to trust in any of thy works, and must plainly despeire concerning them, and
fly unto Christ, pray unto God for grace, finally receive the Gospel by faith.

Now follows the other part, wherein the fellow servant also is dealt with.
This servant now has enough, he saves his body, goods, wife, children, etc.
and has his Lord favorable unto him. Wherefore he should surely be very
foolish, if he should now depart, and do what he is able for the reconciliation
of his Lord, for his Lord might worthily say that he is mocked of him. He has
need therefore of no work, but that he receive such grace and favor as is
offered him, so may he be of a good cheer, giving thanks to his Lord, and
dealing so with others as his Lord has dealt with him. After the same sort is
it with us, for when we believe, we have God favorable and merciful unto us,
neither do we need any thing more, We must endeavor by our works to profit
our neighbor, and not seek to obtain Gods favor ^
but now it were time that we should forthwith die. Notwithstanding if we must
as yet live still in the earth, our life ought to be ordered so, that we seek
not to obtain the favor of God by works. For he that does this, does mock
and dishonor God, as it has bin hitherto taught, that God is to be solicited
so song by good works, prayers, fastings, and such like, until we obtain his
grace and favor. We have obtained grace, not by works, but by mercy, now if
thou must live, thou must have what to do, and wherewith to occupy thy self,
and it is meet that all this be referred to thy neighbor.

The servant went out, as Christ says, and found his fellow servant, whom
he takes by the throat and deals rigorously with him, and will be wholly paid
of him, showing him no mercy or favor at all. I have said elsewhere, that
Christians must burst forth by works, and by their deeds before men witness
that they have a sincere faith. God needs no works, but faith suffizeth him,
howbeit he therefore requires them to be done of thee, that by them thou may
show thy faith, both before thy self and also before the whole world, for he
knows thy faith very well, but thou thy self and men do not yet thoroughly
see it. Thou therefore must direct such works so, that they may profit thy
neighbor. Now whereas this servant should thus have done, what does he? even
the same that we do, who seem unto our selves to believe, and partly have
faith, and are glad that we have heard the Gospel, whereof we can dispute and
talk many things, Busy talkers and slow walkers.
but no man goes about to express it in his life. We have brought the matter
so far, that the doctrine and trifles of Satan are some what abated and laid
aside, that we do now see and know, what is just, and what unjust: that we must
have to do with God by only faith, and by works with our neighbor. But we
can not bring it to this pass, that love may begin, and do that to an other
which God has done unto us, as we our selves complain, that many of us are
become worse then they were before. As therefore this servant refused to remit
his neighbor the debt, and dealt extremely with him, so also do we, saying:
It is not meet that I should give that that is mine to an other, neglecting
mine own right. If this man has provoked me to anger, it is his duty to
pacify me, and to labor by entreaty to put away mine anger. Truly thus the
world teaches and does, for it affirms it to be just and right. Neither will
any Prince or magistrate enforce thee to give that which is thine to an other,
but will suffer thee to do what pleases thee with thine own goods. The
magistrate in deed restrayneth thee from doing what thou list with the good
of an other, but he constrains thee not to give thine own substance to an
other, for that is against the Law of nations, which even reason pronouncing
it, gives to every one that which is his own: wherefore he does not
unequally or unjustly, which uses his own things at his will, and takes not
away wrongfully the goods of an other.

But what does the Gospel say? If God also had held his own right, and
said: I do well in that I punish offenders, and take that which is mine own,
who shall let me? what I pray you should become of all us? We must be merciful
to our brethren as God is merciful to us.
We should be thrust down to Satan. Wherefore, whereas he has left his right
toward thee, he will have thee do the same toward other: and therefore thou
abrogating thine own right, think thus with thy self: If God has forgiven
me ten thousand talents, why should not I forgive my neighbor an hundred
pence? God might have exacted his own right, nevertheless he does not so,
but becomes a favorable Lord unto thee, takes pity upon thee, and
forgiueth thee: why therefore should not thou do likewise to thy neighbor?
Wherefore if thou will have to do in his kingdom, thou must do as he does:
but if thou had rather remain in the kingdom of the world, thou shall
never enter into his kingdom. Hereunto pertains that sentence, which Christ
in the last day shall pronounce upon the unbelievers: Matthew. 25.
I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I thirsted, and ye gave me no
drink, etc. But if thou contend here against: Notwithstanding ye say, that God
will not have respect unto works, neither will save any because of them. I
say he will have them done frankely and freely, not that we may merit any
thing thereby, but that we may do them to the profit of our neighbors, and
witness our sincere faith by them. For what have thou that thou may give him,
and whereby thou may deserve that he should pardon whatsoever thou have
committed against him? Or what does he get thereby? nothing truly, but that
thou give unto him praise and thanks. And this is the other part of a
Christian life, the name whereof is love.

They therefore that show not their faith by the works of love, are such
servant, as will have themselves forgiven, when as they notwithstanding do
not forgive their neighbor, neither yield of their own right, They that will
show no mercy shall themselves find none.
with whom it shall likewise fall out as it did with this servant. For when
the other servant (that is, the ministers and preachers of the Gospel) shall
see it, that God has forgiven them all, and yet they will not forgive any,
they are troubled, that they are compelled to see such things, and it grieueth
them very sore, that men do so indiscreetly apply themselves to the Gospel,
and not rightly receive it. What do they then? They can do no other, but come
to their Lord, and complain unto him of such things, and say: Lord, thus it
is: thou forgiuest them both the fault and the punishment, yea pardonest them
all things, and yet we can not bring them so far, as to deal so with others
as thou have dealt with them. This is the complaint: the Lord therefore will
cause them to come before him in the last judgment, and will lay these things
against them saying: when thou wast afflicted with hunger, thirst, misery,
etc: I did help thee: when thou did ly drowned in sins, I having mercy
upon thee, did forgive thee. Have thou done the same to thy neighbor? Then he
shall pronounce this sentence on him: Thou wicked one, I was touched with mercy
toward thee, yea I yielded of mine own right, but thou would not take
pity on others, nor forgive them their offense, wherefore thou shall now pay
thy debt. Here is no grace and mercy, but most grievous wrath and eternal
condemnation, then no prayers do help, wherefore he is compelled to hold his
peace, and is thrown hedlong into pain, until he pay the uttermost
farthinge. This is that which Saint Peter has spoken of them, 2. Pet. 2.21.
which after they have heard the Gospel, notwithstanding go back, that it
had bin better for them, if they had never acknowledged the way of
righteousness, then after they have acknowledged it, to turn from the holy
commandment given unto them. Why had it bin better? Because while they go
back, it becomes worse with them then it was before thy heard the Gospel,
as Christ says of the unclean spirit Matthew. 12, which takes unto himself
seven other spirits worse them himself, with which he comes, and dwells in
that man, out of whom he before had gone, and so the end of that man is worse
then the beginning. After the same manner comes it to pass with us, and shall
hereafter also be usual: so also has it fallen out with Rome. In the time of
the Martyrs she was in her best flower, but afterward she fell, and
abomination was there erected, that Antichrist might reign there, yea she
became such a one, that worse she can not be. The grace of God, which is
revealed and preached by the Gospel, was hidden, that men might not attain
unto it: wherefore it could not be but a great and grievous scourge and plague
should follow.

So we also shall try that great vengeance will come upon us, for that we do
not believe nor obey the Gospel, which we have, and know. For as often as God
would send an horrible scourge and plague, he has first set up a great light:
As when he would send the Jews out of their own country into captivity in
Babylon, God uses lenity before he executes severity, and first warns
before he harmeth.
he first raised up the godly King Hosia, who should again restore the law,
that the people might amend their life, but when they did again revolt, God
punished them according to their desert. So when he minded to destroy the
Egyptians, he made a light to be set up, and preached unto them by Moses and
Aaron: Moreover when he would drown all the world by the flood, he sent the
Patriarch Noe, but when men did not amend, but became worse and worse, such a
sore and grievous plague did follow. Likewise the five cities Sodom and
Gomorra together with the rest were destroyed, for that they would not hear
Lot, who feared God. Wherefore as sharp vengeance shall light upon them also,
which hear the Gospel, but do not receive it: even as the servant here in
the Gospel, is delivered to the tormentours till he should pay all the debt:
which is as much in effect as, that he is compelled to suffer punishment for
his fault, and is never saved. For unto sin is required death, and when he
dies, he dies always, neither is there any help or deliverance remaining.
Wherefore let us receive these things for our own admonition: as for them
that will not hear, being hardened and indurate, let them beware of the evil
that hangs over them.

This is a very comfortable text, and sweet to troubled consciences, inasmuch
as it contains in it mere forgeuenes of sins: Again it sets forth
terrible judgment to the unmerciful and hard hearted, especially seeing that
this servant is not an Heathen, but had heard the Gospel, in that he had
faith: inasmuch as the Lord took pity on him, and forgave him his offenses,
without doubt he was a Christian. Wherefore this is not the punishment of
Gentiles, nor of the common sort that hear not the Gospel, but of them that
with their ears hear the Gospel, and with their tongue talk of it, but will
not express it in their life. We have therefore the sum of this text.
Whereas the Scholemen dispute here, whether sin comes again, which was
before remitted, I let it pass, for they are ignorant what remission of sins
is: they think it is a thing that cleaves to the heart, and lies quietly,
when as notwithstanding it is plainly the kingdom of Christ, which endures
for ever without ceassing. For as the sun nevertheless shines, although I
shut mine eyes: so this mercy seat or forgiveness of sin stands always,
albeit I fall. And as I again behold the sun when I open mine eyes: so I
again have forgiveness of sins, if I rise again, and return unto Christ.
Wherefore let no man bring forgiveness into such a strait, as these made me^
dream of.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER, TEACHING THAT WE MVST CLEAVE WHOLLY to Christ,
and look to obtain all good things through him.
Matthew. 9. Verse 18. WHile Jesus spoke unto the people, behold there came a
certain ruler, and worshipped him, saying: My daughter is now deceased, but
come and lay thine hand on her and she shall live.

19. And Jesus arose and followed him with his disciples.

20. And behold, a woman which was diseased with an issue of blood twelve
years, came behind him, and touched the hemme of his garment.

21. For she said in her self, if I may touch but his garment only, I shall be
whole.

22. Then Jesus turned him about, and seeing her, did say: Daughter, be of good
comfort, thy faith has made thee whole. And the woman was made whole in that
same moment.

23. Now when Jesus came into the rulers house, and saw the minstrels and the
multitude making noise,

24. He said unto them, Get you hence: for the maid is not dead, but sleeps.
And they laughed hin to scorn.

25. And when the multitude were put forth, he went in, and took her by the
hand, and the maid arose.

26. And this bruit went throughout all that land.


Dearly beloved, ye know that the Gospel is nothing else, but a treatise of
the only person, whose name is Christ. And albeit there be extant many books
and sundry treatises concerning diverse men, as well of the Gentiles as
Christians, yea and of the mother of God, S. Peter, the Angels, and of many
other Saints beside: yet be they not Gospels, but that only is the sincere
Gospel, which sets forth Christ unto us, and what good we must hope for
from him. Sometime in the Gospel there is mention made of John the Baptist,
Marie, and the Apostles, howbeit this is not properly the Gospel, but
therefore is it written of them, that it might be more perfectly declared, from
whence Christ should come, and what is his office. So Luke describes the
history of John the Baptist even from the beginning, what was done both in his
conception and in his nativity, he writes also of the virgin Marie. All
which things were committed to writing not because of their person, but
because of Christ's person only. In the Epistles of S. Paul there is nothing
committed to memory of the Saints, but all things sound plainly of Christ.
For God has so ordained, that all men must depend on that one man Christ, must
hope in him, All that will be saved must depend on Christ, and put their hope
and trust in him.
must repose their trust in him, if they desire to be saved, for he alone is
set forth of God to be a reconciliation for us, as Paul says Romans 3. Hitherto
one has cleaued to this saint, an other to that, one chose to himself S.
Marie, an other S. Barbary, and diverse sects and sorts of religion did
flourish. But Christ was in no price, for his name only remained. We had many
intercessours, all which being neglected we ought to have cleaued only to
Christ. Hereupon S. Paul says, that the Gospel was promised of God by the
Prophets concerning his son. He reduces and brings it into such a
straight, that in the Gospel nothing is of any importance which concerns
not Jesus Christ. He that knows this, let him give thanks to God, that he
knows where he may seek for consolation and help, and in whom he may repose
his trust.

Christ in this days Gospel is set forth unto us, that he is conuersaunt in
the myddest of the people, and draws all the world unto himself with his
gentleness and sweet doctrine, that they may cleave unto him in their heart,
that they may commit themselves to his goodness, and hope that they shall
obtain of him both spiritual and corporal good things. Neither does he
receive any thing of them, upon whom he bestows benefits, nay he obtains
nothing of them but ignominy and scorning, as is declared in this text. A
benefit proceeds from him, for which he receives a mock and reproach. Why
ye Gospel is preached.
Now the Gospel is preached and offered to the whole world, that we may
learn to know this man well, and how we must be made Christians, and not how
we must be made good. Other treatises beside the Gospel teach of those
things, whereby men may be made good, as the writings of the Philosophers and
the rules of the civil law. The lives also of the Saints have especial
respect unto this, that men may imitate them. It belongs not to the Gospel
to make good men, but to make Christian men. For it is far more excellent to
be a Christian, then an honest and good man. A Christian can say nothing of his
own goodness or righteousness, for he fyndeth in himself nothing either good
or righteous, but he must fly to the righteousness which is an others, and
which comes unto him from an other. Hereupon Christ is set forth unto us,
as a continual fountain, which always ouerfloweth with mere goodness and
grace, for which he receives nothing of us, but that the godly do acknowledge
so great goodness and grace, do give him thanks for the same, do praise and
love him, others in the mean season mocking him, such a reward he receives of
them.

A Christian whereof so called.
Wherefore one is not therefore called a Christian, for that he works much,
for there is an other thing, which is cause hereof, namely for that he
receives and draws from Christ. If one receives nothing any more of Christ,
neither is he any more a Christian, so that the name of a Christian comes
only by receiving, and not by giving or doing. If thou think that because of
thy works and deeds thou art a Christian, thou have even then lost the name
of Christ. Good works in deed are to be done, counsel thereunto is to be
given and received, but no man is therefore called a Christian, neither is any
therefore a Christian. Wherefore if any will more inwardly weye this name, in
this respect only a Christian is to be acknowledged, inasmuch as he receives
of Christ alone. Even as one is called white of the whitenes that is in him,
black of the blacknes, great of his stature: so a Christian is called of
Christ, whom he has in himself, and of whom he receives that which is good.
Now if one be named a Christian of Christ, he takes not that name of his own
works, whereupon it plainly also follows, that no man is made a Christian by
works. Which if it be true, as it is true and certain, it shall follow that
Orders and Sects do nothing pertain to the name of Christ, neither do make
a Christian. Wherefore they which preach or teach in the Church, and ordain
precepts, works, and decrees, are deceivers, who albeit they pretend a
Christian name, yet profit they nothing, for under the color of that name
they endeavor to burden and oppres us with commandments and works. Of
works, giving thy self to fasting and prayers, thou may be called
abstinent and temperat, but by no means a Christian. For although thou did
lay all thy works together, yea and ioynedst the works of all other to thine,
yet neither so have thou Christ, neither art thou therefore called a Christian.
Christ is a certain other more excellent thing, then either the law or man's
tradition. He is the son of God, who is ready to give only, not to receive:
when as I am such a one that I do receive of him, I have him also, whom if I
have, I am by good right called a Christian.

Moreover, the Gospel preaches Christ also to be the greatest and most highly
exalted person in the world, not that he does terrify men, but that he pours
forth all earthly and heavenly good things, so that all men must trust in him,
must have their hope reposed in him, and always receive only of him. If any
sin terrify me in my conscience, and the preachers of the law endeavor to
help me with their works, they shall prevail nothing with me. For then
Christ alone can help and none beside him, yea others make the case worse,
whether it be Peter, or Paul, or the blessed virgin Marie her self the
mother of God. For Christ only perfourmeth all things, who in his word,
declares that if I believe, my sin is forgiven me freely, without all both
work and merit, by pure grace through faith in Christ. Which word when I shall
receive, I receive also comfort, that my sins be forgiven me as well before
God as before men, and I therefore give thanks to God through Christ, which
gives the holy Ghost and his grace unto me, that sin may not hurt me,
neither here, nor in the last judgment. If I fear death, and would not die
willingly, in this Christ I shall find comfort and remedy, that I shall not
greatly pass for death. If because of the wrath of God I be afraid, he is my
Mediator. And to be brief, he that has not this Christ, the wrath of God
always remains over him, and in that state he stands.

Wherefore he that desires to have a glad conscience, A glad conscience how it
is obtained.
which is not afraid of sin, death, hell and the wrath of God, must take
heed that he repose his trust in this Mediator Christ. For he is a fountain
abounding with grace, which gives both temporal and eternal life. Endeavor
thou to think and feel him even in thy heart to be such a one, then shall thou
obtain all things, for he abounds and ouerfloweth, neither can he but give,
flow, and abound, if that thou can believe. Then also shall thou be a right
Christian, howbeit by receiving only of Christ, and not by giving. It is a
very rich and precious word, which Paul prayseth so greatly, neither can he
ever praise it sufficiently, whereby God so gently offers his son, that he
may pour forth his grace upon all, which do not refuse to receive it.
Hereupon it moreover follows: If so be that a Christian does good works,
whereby he shows love to his neighbor, he is not therefore made a Christian
or righteous, but he must needs be a Christian and righteous before. He does
good works in deed, but they do not make him a Christian. The tree brings
forth and gives fruit, and not the fruit the tree. So none is made a
Christian by works, but by Christ.

Hereof now ye may understand, what kind of people Christians be, namely, that
they be a company which cleave unto Christ, Christians what they are.
and are of one spirit and gift with him. Hereupon it is that all Christians
are alike, neither has one more of Christ then an other. S. Peter is not
better then the Thief on the cross: Marie the mother of God does not excel
Marie Magdalen the synnefull woman. There is in deed a difference in outward
things and doings, so the work of the holy virgin Marie was greater, then
the work of Marie Magdalen: Peter had a greater work then the Thief, if thou
consider the works, but we are not therefore Christians. The holy virgin Marie
is not a Christian because of her great work, for that she did bear Christ so
unspeakable a treasure in her womb, as Christ himself said to the woman,
which cried unto him from among the people, Luke 11: Blessed is the womb that
bare thee, and the pappes which thou have sucked: yea rather, says he, blessed
are they that hear the word of God and keep it. In which place thou see,
that he prefers the faithful even above his mother. For Christians do
therefore bear their name, because they believe in Christ. A virgin and a
mother are two notable names, howbeit they are nothing being compared to the
true name of the faithful. Wherefore we are all alike in Christ through faith,
albeit S. Peter have a stronger faith then I, yet mine is as well faith in
Christ as his. For the same Christ is offered of God the father unto all
companies and people, whom he that has obtained, has him whole, whether he be
strong or weak, for that skilleth not. The woman mentioned in our text, which
was troubled so many years with her disease, does receive and apprehend
Christ as well as the virgin Marie his mother. Wherefore there is one
Christian spirit, one excels with an other in the noblenes of birth, S.
Peter is enforced to call me his brother, and I again dear be bold to call
him my brother. Yea Christ himself is touched with care of us, and counts us
for his brethren, as he said after his resurrection to Marie Magdalen, Ioh.
20: I ascend unto my Father and to your Father, and to my God and your God.
And S. Paul calls Christ the first borne among many brethren. Whereof also
he writes excellently in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, where
entreating of false brethren he speaks thus: 1. Cor. 8.9.
Take heed lest by any means this power of yours be an occasion of falling to
them that are weak. For if any man see thee which have knowledge, sit at
table in the idols temple, shall not the conscience of him which is weak, be
boldened to eat those things which are sacrificed to idols? and so through
thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish, for whom Christ died. Now when ye
sin so against your brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye sin
against Christ. Here thou see, if a Christian be offended, or evil be done
unto him, the same is done unto Christ. This therefore is the sum of the
whole Gospel, The sum of the Gospel.
that we may learn so to know Christ, that the name only do not remayn^,
but that we may know that all that we have, we have it from him. If we be
Christians, we have all things, then God is our father, and we are Lords of
all both heavenly and earthly things, which is gotten of us by no work be it
never so great.

Thou see now how far they be from the name of Christ, which be under the
kingdom of the Pope. They that will preach the Gospel must preach nothing else,
beside the only person, which is Christ, not Marie, so far must they be from
preaching the Pope or any work albeit precious, they must preach and offer
Christ only unto us, and none beside him. When now he is preached unto thee as
a judge (as he shall come in the last day) and how that good works are to be
done of thee, for which thou may be rewarded of him, and thou shall so
receive it, surely without all dout he shall be unto thee a judge and not a
savior. And if he be so set forth unto thee, as he was wont to be painted,
that his mother shows him her pappes, that is properly to preach Satan and
not Christ, who gives only, and receives not. This is certain, when thou
shall have received of him, the^ good works do flow forth of their own
accord, being not compelled, as is set forth in this days Gospel: wherein
moreover is declared that Christ preaches the Gospel to the people: now it is
not a common work to preach. For it is a great benefit unto us, that he is
become our master and instructor, that he teaches us by what means we may
come to the knowledge of him, this is a part of his great goodness and grace.
For as long as he was here in the earth, he cessed not to teach, that we might
altogether receive him for the Messiah and Savior: and by his works also did
help and relieve every one, when the case so required.

The exceeding gentleness and bou^tifulnes of Christ.
Thou fyndest no man in the Gospel, to whom help was denied, or which at any
time asked any thing of the Lord, which was not given him. For how many soever
went unto him, that were blind, deaf, lame, sick of the palsy, had the
dropsy, he received all, and helped them all according to their desire, and
healed them of all kinds of diseases, Luke 6.19.
as Luke says: All the whole multitude sought to touch him, for there went
virtue out of him, and healed them all. So does he also to this woman. The
woman hears him preaching, and perceives him to be a bountiful and gracious
man, which shows himself gentle to the whole world, whereupon she has an
affection both to love him, and to cleave unto him. For she makes account,
forasmuch as he puts away none from him, that he would not deny her his
goodness, wherefore leaving all the Apostles, she casts both her heart and
confidence upon Christ alone, and thinks thus with her self: If I may touch
but the hemme of his garment, I shall be whole. She thought no other thing in
her heart, but, certainly he will help me, if so be that I shall touch his
garment with mine hand, yet has she not so good a courage, that she dare come
before his face, she judged her self more unworthy, then that she might
either talk with him, or look upon him, for she knew that she had deserved
nothing, and that she had bestowed no good thing upon the Lord, hereupon it is
that she so behaueth her self, she comes behind his back, she falls
down at his feet, and touches only the hemme of his garment. In a sum,
here is nothing but mere bashfulnes and want of merit: here is no preparation,
here is no work, and yet the miserable woman promises her self much goodness
from the Lord, namely that he would heal her. She had bin diseased with an
issue of blood twelve whole years, what could she merit thereby? how could
she therefore be worthy of any thing? Nevertheless being unworthy, and
having merited nothing, she notwithstanding looks for help of Christ,
feeling her self to have great need thereof. And this is a true preparation,
both to the grace and goodness of Christ, when I feel my self to stand in
need thereof, and then does it very well fall out, when these two come
together, the rich and the poor, Christ and the sinner. But it is no small
matter for men to be persuaded, that they are poor, and stand in need of
grace. For that comes to pass very hardly, Satan also does not suffer it,
but always draws men back to works, that they may not come so far, as to
think that they have need either of the grace or mercy of Christ.

The text affirms that the woman was diseased with an issue of blood twelve
whole years, The woman diseased with an issue of blood.
and had spent all her substance upon physicians, and that the more medicines
she took, the worse always she was. Luke and Mark do not a little exaggerate
and amplify it, whereby they both signify, that the more works be preached,
so much the worse is it with us, and that there comes nothing unto us
thereby, but a continual multiplying of our evil. Our conscience can not be
quieted with works, for albeit some sin be driven out of the conscience,
forthwith there is an other, yea the remedy and work oftentimes do make sin
in us, where there is no sin, until such time as we come to Christ, eue^ as
it was with this woman, which had bin sick so long, neither had she bin ever
helped, if she had not come to Christ, of whom she obtains health without any
works, giving him nothing, but receives only of him, Continual preaching of
the word of God very necessary.
and suffers to be given unto her. Now here is also declared, how the word
of God is daily to be handled, and without ceassing to be urged, for there are
as yet always found such men, as have very troubled and afflicted
consciences. For this woman is a type or figure of all men, which are diseased
with an issue, that is, which feel there sins, the issue whereof does
always run, neither can it be stayed, for flesh and blood does no
otherwise, then it is carried with it own lust and desire. Now if that feeling
of sin be great, those wretches come forth and endeavor to help themselves,
then one takes this work in hand, an other that, and yet prevail they
nothing from hence so many orders, so many monasteries have sprung, hereupon so
many and so great works have bin invented, that they are almost without number.
What was the cause of all these? surely even the synnefull conscience. For we
have thought to save our souls by these, and to be delivered wholly from all
sins. But Christ was not there present, for we would give and not receive.
Wherefore our case became always worse, as it fell out also with this woman,
who if she had tried the help of all Physicians, neither yet so could she
find, whereby she might be helped. So we also believed all Physicians, for
whatsoever every one brought, that we by and by received. And was it any
meruell? for we desired to be healed and to have a glad conscience. The
Physicians are the preachers of the Law: now if any desired to be delivered
from sins, what did they unto him? they gave him, whereby he became only
weaker and feebler, which surely we have seen and felt to our great evil,
namely, how they would have men to be justified by works, and by them to be
delivered from sins. But it profited nothing, for we were always made more
weak against sin and death, so that there is never found in the earth a more
desperate sort of people, then Sacrifycing Priests, Monks and Vestall
virgins, and they whatsoever they by that trust in works: if there did but a
little byle arise upon them, byandby they must run to the Poticarie, then is
such tryinge of medecin, such running and have, as though they had now
breathed their last. Neither is any so afraid of the last judgment as this
people. Which then they very well show, when they so deal with works, that
they rest only upon them, neither do perseruer constant in any work, and the
more works they do, so much worse is their case, so much more are they cast
down in mind and become more desperate, so that it falls out with them as
with this woman.

It is a very goodly similitude, which may most fitly be applied to us: for we
do not only bestow temporal things, but our body also by fasting,
chastising, and bearing other hard and intolerable burdens, so that some have
thereby become mad, and destitute of all strength, yea and at the last lost
their life. And I my self have been such a one, and have without dout more
resorted to medicines then many other. I could not atteine so far, as to
leave the Popes law. It seemed a hard and a sore matter unto me to eat flesh
on the friday, O good God, A hard thing to forsake papistrie being once
entangled therewith.
how hard a thing was it to me, before I durst attempt to do that? Wherefore
if any will be delivered from such things, and contemn the traditions of the
Pope, truly he must have a strong foundation of faith, which if he shall not
have, let him look about him again and again before he attempt it. For if
faith be wanting, it will fall out with us as with this woman, who had spent all
her substance upon Physicians, amending nothing, but rather waxing worse and
worse: In like manner all our works, labors and endeavors shall be lost, all
our obedience, with all orders or religions, and whatsoever we have bestowed
therein shall be in vain. Howbeit if we have faith, we shall at the last see
the decrees of the Pope and popish Bishops to be nothing, because of which
before we trembled and were troubled, all which did help us so much, as the
Physicians did that good woman, which had bestowed all her substance and
riches, yea and her body also, that she might be healed. How many kinds of
medicines and syrrups think thou did that woman use? how weak, feeble, and
sick was she oftentimes made with them? yea if she might have been healed, it
may seem she would have taken any medicine, howbeit it profited her nothing,
she was afflicted with her disease the space of twelve years. How therefore is
this miserable woman at the last helped? When she did light upon a man whose
name is Christ, and put her hope and trust in him, she was healed. But who led
her to that man? without dout not the Physicians. For if our Preachers should
preach Christ, the merchandise of the Pope together with his decrees would be
nothing set by, but rather she heard it of some that was also restored to
health, who told her without douting, that the^e was a certain man, whom his
parents had named Jesus, which is a gentle and good man, which helps every
one, and sends away none from him whom he helps not, and therefore is
without dout sent of God, that he may help all. Which the woman having heard,
she leaves the Physicians, and makes have unto Christ.

So also at this day it falls (...) Not Christ, but works only are preached,
do this or that, nevertheless it is spread among the people what Christ is, what
we must look for of him, and that he alone must do all things without our
works or merits. The true preaching of Christ calls from the traditions of
men to faith and trust in him alone
This report being heard, we follow him, and lay up these words in the depth of
our heart, we leave the physicians, nothing regarding the Preachers of the law
and works, or their commandments and traditions, but run with all desire of
heart to this man, which is Christ, saying to the Pope: if I must receive only
of Christ, how unwisely have I dealt, that I have turned so much unto thee?
farewell therefore O Pope, farewell ye beloved Bishops, I need no more your
medicine, works and merits, precepts and laws, ye have grieved me long enough
with them, I have gotten one, which bestows upon me freely, whatsoever I
paid full dear for unto you before: he gives that unto me without works and
merits, for which I was feign before to bestow my body, strength and health, and
yet could not obtain it. Fare ye well, I mind to come no more to you
hereafter. Christians therefore are made, not by the decrees of the Pope, not
by works, not by the ordinances of men, but by the grace and goodness of Christ.

We must fly unto Christ in our distress.
Wherefore if thou have a disquieted and a troubled mind and conscience, so
that thou art afraid of sin, dreadest death, or have some defect otherwise,
get thee to that man, and confess what thou want, call upon him, then
surely he will help thee: pour out thy heart before him, as the 62. Psalm
says, and say thus unto him: behold here is an empty vessel which greatly
needs wherewith it may be filled, I beseech thee, O my Lord vouchsafe to fill
it, I am weak in faith, I pray thee to strengthen me, I am cold in charity,
do thou make me whot, and fervent, that my love may extend unto my neighbor,
I have no firm faith, neither can I sometime trust in God, O Lord help me,
and increase my faith and confidence: in thee have I reposed the treasure of
all good things, I am poor, thou art rich, and therefore did thou come,
that thou might have mercy on the poor* I am a sinner, thou art righteous,
yea I have abundance of sins, but in thee is all fulness and grace. When thou
shall once have learned this, the Popes ordinances shall not snare thee, by
which thou gettest nothing, but consumest all that thou have, like as this
woman did. Then will thou say: I will choose to my self him, of whom I may
receive, unto whom I ^eede not give any thing.

The other Evangelists write concerning this woman, that after she was healed,
Christ perceived virtue to have gone out of him, and turned him about in the
prease, and asked who had touched him, and that his Disciples made answer,
that the multitude did throng and thrust him, but that the Lord would not be
content with that answer, but said: some one has touched me: for I perceive
ye virtue is gone out of me, I know that some one has received some thing from
me. All which the Lord therefore did, that the faith of the woman might be
thankful unto him, which he would therefore have made manifest before all the
people, for that nothing is more acceptable unto him, then that we believe and
trust in him and also that the Lord might by this miracle confirm the faith
of the Ruler. Wherefore Mark says, that when the woman understood that the
Lord knew of her, she feared and trembled, and came and fell down before him,
and told him the whole truth, how it fell out with her: whereupon the Lord
does deliver her and says: Go in peace, and be whole of thy disease. Were not
these loving words? what great joy did the woman take here, when as Christ had
dealt so bountifully with her? The fruit of true hope in Christ.
This joy and peace all they obtain, which repose their whole hope and trust
in Christ Jesus. Where this joy shall be, forthwith works must needs follow,
which may show forth this joy: as also the faith of this woman must needs
come to light. For as soon as she had received of the Lord, she confessed
before all the people, neither was she ashamed to declare, that she had
received something of him, for which notwithstanding she had given nothing.
Now, God requires of us these works and this giving of thanks, to wit, that we
confess and declare before all men such good things, grace and benefits, that
others also may be brought unto him, and suffer a benefit to be bestowed upon
them, as it was here done. Wherefore Christian life enforces me to do good
unto others also, even as God through Christ has done good unto me, but
thereby am I not made a Christian, as the woman here is not healed by her
confession, for she was healed before any work and confession, but after she
had recovered her health, she confesses Christ, and prayseth him, even to the
commodity and converting of others. We also inasmuch as we are Christians, do
so live, that one helps and pleasureth an other in what thing soever he is at
any time able. And as this woman was healed before all works, so we must be
made Christians before we do any work.

As the Gospel is set before our eyes in this woman: so is it also set forth
in the Daughter of this Ruler. This chief ruler of the Sinagogue, whom Mark
calls Iairus, had a strong faith and confidence, that Christ would raise up
his Daughter. For unless he had been of that mind concerning Christ, he had not
come unto him, neither had desired such a thing of him which exceeded the power
and strength of nature. Wherefore by this prayer he showed his faith, which
faith being perceived, the Lord could not but grant his desire, wherefore
rising forthwith, he went with him, and in this going this history of the
woman came to pass, which had been diseased of an issue of blood twelve
years, as we have now heard. When therefore the Lord was entered into the
Rulers house, he saw the minstrells and the multitude making noise, which were
there according to the law of Moses, and did sound the trumpet and pipes as
in our cuntrie they ringe the bells to gather the people together. But he
commanded the multitude to go forth, saying: The child is not dead but
sleeps. And they laughed him to scorn and mocked him. Which gives us to
understand, The preaching of the Gospel is contemned and counted foolishnes,
of the world
that when it is preached, that Christ is he which saves, that our works
prevail nothing, then the world can not contain it self, but that it
scorneth and mocketh, for it can not be persuaded, that Christ does help and
succor, even as this people without all dout said after this sort: Behold
what an excellent Master and a goodly Physician he is, what could he have
helped, which knows not yet, what it is to sleep, and what to be dead? This
title must needs remain to the Gospel in the world, that the preaching
thereof is counted foolish and contemptible. For Satan can not abide, that
honor should be given to this Gospel before the world, for it brings but
small commodity to his kingdom, which forasmuch as he perceives full well, he
practizeth all crafts and wiles, that he may either altogether hinder it, or
at the least make it to prevail little with them that be his, whose hearts he
has wholly blinded and possessed, that the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ should not shine unto them, as S. Paul says 2. Cor. 4.

Neither yet can it be, that this preaching of Christ should not be fruitful,
forasmuch as it is not uttered in vain: for albeit it be received but of a
few, that does not greatly skill. When therefore Satan perceives any thing to
be taken from him, and that that preaching is ordained plainly against his
kingdom, Satan a most grievous enemy to the preaching of the Gospel.
he does without delay pursue it, contemn it, and assail it on every side,
that even now he is fierce and rages in the whole world. For the Gospel of
Christ overthrows whatsoever the world and Satan delight in, and whatsoever
to the world seems most holy and goodly. For the world imagines to it
self such a God, as has regard to our good works, and will be pleased with
the erecting of Masses and vigiles for them that are departed, with Rosaries as
they call them, habit, shauing, and whatsoever other trifles are used in the
Papacy. Now if there come any which brings the Gospel, and inueyeth against
these vain toys of the Pope, and says that they are nothing worth, but are
mere delusions, inasmuch as they are repugnant to Christ and the Scripture, he
is counted a most wicked fellow, and therefore must be punished, he is reproved
as an heretic and a seducer of the people: so that they burst forth into great
words and say: will thou govern all the whole world? do thou think thy
self the wisest man that is? and were our forefathers foolish and without all
understanding? many holy men have done these works, and have preached of them,
and will thou come, and turn them all to nothing? thou shall not do it. Then
rage and fury begins, yea persecution, slaying and murdering, and the
Devil will seem to have a just cause, howsoever the matter goes. Thus much
shall suffize at this time concerning this text. Now ye must take especial
heed, that out of the Gospells ye learn thoroughly, how all things consist in
the only person, whose name is Christ, and lay up this in the depth of your
heart, that a Christian has his name of Christ. For I know how much it avails
both in tentation and in adversity to hold that fast. Let us now by prayer
call for the grace of God, that at the last we may with most earnest zeal and
hearty affection embrace true Christianity, Amen. *** *

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER UPON THE GOSPEL ON SAINT THOMAS DAY, CONCERNING
THE WORKS WHICH Christ has wrough for us, wherein is contained a most sweet
consolation against the Law, Sin, Death, and Satan.
Ioh. 20. Verse 24. THomas one of the twelve, called Didimus, was not with them
when Jesus came.

25. The other Disciples therefore said unto him, we have seen the Lord: but he
said unto them: Except I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my
finger into the print of the nails, and put mine hand into his side, I will
not believe it.

26. And eight days after again his Disciples were within, and Thomas with
them. The^ came Jesus when the doors were shut, and stood in the mids, and
said: Peace be unto you.

27. After said he to Thomas, Put thy finger here, and see mine hands, and put
forth thine hand, and put it into my side, and be not faithles, but faithful.

28. Then Thomas answered and said unto him: Thou art my Lord and my God.

29. Jesus said unto him: Thomas because thou have seen me, thou beleeuest,
blessed are they, that have not seen and have believed.


The sum of this Gospel.
1 THomas does not believe that Christ is risen from the dead, but when he
sees and feels him.

2 The Disciples believe not without manifest signs. But blessed are they that
have not seen, but do believe the word only.

3 It is a great matter to know Christ God and man. He which attaineth to this
knowledge of Christ, fears neither sin nor death, neither the devil nor
hell: briefly he is quiet from all anguish and tentation. For he has a greater
and mightier then he which is in the world, as John says in his first Epistle
chap. 4.

The exposition of this Gospel.
I Know nothing more certain concerning S. Thomas, then that which this
Gospel mentions of him. Other things which are written of him in the book
of Legends, are most impudent lies. And albeit they were partly true, yet have
they no authority, neither make us any thing the better. Wherefore we will
leave them untouched, and speak something of this Gospel, which shall be more
profitable and necessary for us then all those Legends. The former part of this
Gospel fell out about the euentyde of the Passover, when two had returned
from Emmaus, and showed unto the other Disciples, that the Lord was risen
again. The latter part fell out the eight day after the Passover. It is
marvelous how comfortable this Gospel is, showing unto you, the fruits of
faith, namely peace, and joy, as Paul says Romans 5: being justified therefore
by faith, we have peace toward God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. But now we
will entreat in few words, what this is that the Lord shows to his Disciples
his hands and his feet, whereby is declared unto us, what commodity we have
by Christ, whereunto he profits us, and what we must look for of him. It is
engraffed in the hearts of all men as it were by nature, to have a certain will to
be honest and godly, and every one thinks how he may come to salvation,
whereby it has come to pass, that one has invented this thing, an other that,
being verily persuaded, that thereby he should make God favorable unto him,
and obtain heaven, but none such at any time has stood in ye right way,
forasmuch as all have had this drift, that they might procure Gods favor by
deeds and good works. Notable Doctors also and holy fathers have written and
taught many things, how we might attain unto godliness. About this they have
miserably troubled them selves, but as we see, and to our notable loss have
felt, they have done little. Wherefore it is exceeding necessary, that some
sound knowledge be had hereof, whereby we must endeavor to true godliness,
forasmuch as it is a thing of no small importance. For he that is deceived
here, lozeth the sum and chief point of all Christianity: hereof therefore
we must now speak somewhat.

True righteousness is obtained, not by our own works, but by the works which
Christ has wrought for us.
True and sound righteousness consists not in our own works, but in the works
of an other. Take an example hereof: One builds temples, an other for
religions sake goes to S. James, to Aquisgrane, to Rome, to the holy
sepulcher, the third pineth him self with fastings, prays, wears a cowle,
goes bare foot, or works some other such work whatsoever it be, these are
our own works. God has not commanded them, but men and hypocrites,
iustifiers of them selves have invented them, and have thought that they are
precious good works, and greatly esteemed of God, sweetly persuading them
selves, that they are by them delivered from sins, and that God is pacified
toward them. But these works chosen of their own proper will, are nothing
worth at all, neither can stand, forasmuch as they proceed not of faith, yea
they are sins, as Saint Paul says Romans 14: Whatsoever is not of faith, is
sin. These our works therefore are defiled and unclean in the sight of God,
yea he does abhor and loathe them. Wherefore if we will have to do with God,
we must not ascend trusting to our own works, but to the works of an other.
But which are those works of an other, that are allowed of God? Truly the
works of our Lord Jesus Christ, whom God the father sent down from heaven,
that by his death and passion he might satisfy for our sins. This
satisfaction fell out upon this occasion: We were subject to great danger, The
miserable case wherein man was before he was delivered by Christ.
grievous tyrannes had power over us, which day and night without ceasing did
vex us. The law which God gave unto man, did urge us, and required many
things of us, which we were not able to perform, and therefore it condemned
us. Sin also did lie upon us as a heavy burden which the law did often times
make greater and greater. Death went about to devour us, inasmuch as it is the
wages of sin, Satan also endeavored to throw us down headlong to hell,
inasmuch as he would punish us for our sins committed: all things were full
of trembling and anguish.

God taking pity upon this so great calamity, sent his only begotten son,
and that of his mere grace and goodness, without our desert, that he might
deliver us out of so great tyranny, which he mightily did after this sort: He
satisfied the law, Christ has fulfilled the law, prevailed against sin
overcome death and vanquished Satan.
and fulfilled it perfectly. For he loved God with all his heart, and with all
his soul, and with all his strength: he loved his neighbor also as him self,
in these the whole law and the Prophets do consist. Now whatsoever Christ
did, it consisted in these two. He loved God, inasmuch as he obeyed his will,
he took upon him the nature of man, and performed in all obedience those
things that were enjoined him of the father, as Paul says Phil. 2: He became
obedient to the father unto the death, even the death of the cross. Secondly,
he loved his neighbor: for all ye works which he did in the earth, tended
unto this end, that he might thereby profit his neighbor, and therefore he so
loved his neighbor, that he even died for him, as he says himself to his
disciples Ioh. 15: Greater love then this has no man, when any man bestows
his life for his friends: S. Paul does more set forth this, saying, for his
enemies, when he writes thus Romans 5: But God sets out his love toward us,
seeing that while we were yet sinners Christ died for us. Forasmuch then as
Christ has so fulfilled ye law, it could not accuse him, neither was sin of
any force with him. He set upon it, and did prevail over it, and swallowed it
up, it was enforced to be extinguished of him, no otherwise then a spark of
fire in the most wide sea. For in him was nothing but mere righteousness. Death
also came, and went about to devour him, it devoured him in deed, but it could
not digest him, it was enforced to yield him up again, yea and this devouring
was an utter discommoditie to death, for the case being quite altered, Christ
devoured death it self. For it had set upon him, against whom it had no
right, forasmuch as not a whit of sin did appear in him. Where sin is not,
there death has nothing to do, as Saint Paul says 1. Cor. 15: The stinge
of death is sin, with this it kills, otherwise it should be dull, and have
no strength. Satan also made a trial of his strength in him, but in vain, and
to his own grief, for he laid hands on him, with whom he had nothing to
do. The wretch was overcome in this conflict, and went away with shame, as
Christ says, Ioh. 14: The Prince of this world comes, and has naught in me.
Hell also did open his mouth, and would have devoured Christ, but contrariwise
it was devoured of him. And so in this conflict the Law, Sin, Death, Satan
and hell were vanquished, over all which he triumphed and gloried with great
pomp, as Paul says Col. 2.

The believers by faith enjoy the works of Christ as their own.
All these things were not only done for our commodity, but also if we
believe in this Lord Christ, they are given unto us. For whatsoever he has,
it serves for us, yea he him self is ours, as Paul says Romans 8. God spared
not his own son, but gave him for us all to death, how shall he not with him
give us all things also? So that I may boldly glory of all victory, which he
obtained over the law, sin, death, the devil, and may challenge to my self
all his works, even as if they were mine own, and I my self had done them,
so that I believe in Christ. Otherwise his works shall profitte me nothing at
all, if they were not given unto me. These are the works of an other which do
commend us before God, and save us. Our own works shall do nothing, we are
weaker, then that we can resist even the least sin, so far is it of that we
are able to encounter with death, How a Christian may notably comfort him self
against the law, sin, death, Satan.
Satan, and hell. Wherefore when the Law shall come, and accuse thee, that
thou do not observe it, send it unto Christ, and say: There is that man
which has fulfilled the law, to him I cleave, he has fulfilled it for me,
and has given his fullfilling unto me: when it hears these things, it will
be quiet. If sin come, and would have thee by the throat, send it unto
Christ, and say: As much as thou may do against him, so much right shall
thou have against me: for I am in him, and he is in me. If death creep upon
thee, and attempt to devour thee, say unto it: Good Maistres death, do
thou know this man? come and byte out his tooth, have thou forgotten how
little thy biting prevailed with him once? go too if it be a pleasure unto
thee, encounter with him again. Thou had persuaded thy self, that thou
should have prevailed somewhat against him, when he did hang between two
thieves, and dyed an ignominious death, which was counted cursed both before
God and the world. But what did thou gain thereby? Thou did byte in
deed, but it turned worst to thy self. I pertain to this man, I am his, and
he is mine, and where he abides, there also will I abide. Thou could hurt
him nothing, wherefore also let me alone. After the same sort if the Devil,
if hell come violently upon thee, and trouble thee, send them unto Christ,
and thou shall easily make them to cease.

And thus ye see what Christ is unto us, The inestimable commodity which the
faithful enjoy through Christ.
namely such a man as is given unto us of God, that he might extinguish sins,
vanquish death, destroy hell, overcome the Devil, and all these for our
commodity. If he had not done this, nor given unto us these things, we had
been for ever under the curse of the law, under sin, under death, under the
devil, and under hell. God has delivered us from these by that Christ.
Wherefore S. Paul says out of the Prophet Osee 1. Cor. 15: Death is swalowed
up into victory. O death where is thy stinge? O hell where is thy victory?
The stinge of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks
be unto God, which has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. We
are justified before God by no works or merits of our own, but only by the
works of Christ.
Hereof we may easily understand, what kind of works those be, which do make
us entire and righteous before God. Surely they are the works of an other, and
not our own works chosen of our selves. Wherefore the whole Papacy falls
here, with all the most precious and holy works thereof, which has this drift
only, that miserable, wretched, and blinded men may be persuaded, that they
obtain heaven by their merits, and their own works. Hereuppon have spronge
so many orders, that they can not almost be numbered, of which one striued to be
holier then an other, according as they exercised harder, greater, and
weightier works. But this their miserable labor, anguish, prayers, fastinges,
chastising of the body, and such like, were vain works, and of no value at
all, neither had they so much power, that they were able to take away so much
as even the least sin, which they call venial. They were altogether
unmindful of this saying Esaias 29, which the Lord repeteth Matthew. 15: This
people draws nere unto me with their mouth, and honors me with their
lips, but their heart is far of from me. But in vain they vvorshippe me,
teaching such doctrines, as are nothing else but the precepts of men. Hereupon
now thou may gather with thy self, that all holy men, although they be
exceeding holy, yet do obtain salvation, not by their own holiness, merits or
works. And not so much as Mary her self the mother of God, was made righteous
and holy in respect of her virginity, or in that she was the mother of God,
but salvation has come unto all by Jesus Christ, as by the works of an other.
Wherefore this is diligently to be noted, that our felicity does not consist in
our own works, but in the works of an other, namely of Christ Jesus our
Savior, which we obtain through only faith in him.

This also the history of this Gospel seems to signify, when as the Lord
shows to his disciples, but specially to Thomas, his hands and feet. By
which deed he declares, that it was necessary, that those hands and feet
should do these things, and that no other works, that is, their own, and not
the works of an other, do pertain unto salvation. Hands and feet what they
commonly signify in the Scripture.
For in the Scriptures by hands and feet works and conversation are
signified. These hands and feet Christ does as yet eftsoons show to us and
say: Behold, I am that only man, whose works and conversation are of force
with God, thou shall labor in vain with thine own works, thine own
righteousness makes nothing hereunto, it has an other end. If thou be
righteous, it is profitable to thee among me^, here in eart thou have the glory
and praise thereof, as Paul says Romans 4. But before God this thy righteousness
is of no estimation, thou must set in place thereof an other, namely mine, this
God my father does allow. For I have delivered thee from sins, death, the
deuell, hell, and from all evil, thou should never have escaped out of
these by thine own power, but had lain as yet most deeply drowned in them.
I have appeased the wrath of God, and of an angry judge, have made him, a
gentle, merciful and gracious father, believe this and it goes well with
thee, thou art then safe, entire, and righteous. Beware that thou presume not
to deal before God with thine own works, but if thou will do any thing with
him, creep into me, put on me, and thou shall obtain of my Father, whatsoever
thou desire and ask, as he him self says unto his Disciples Ioh. 16:
Verily, verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name,
he will give it you. Wherefore as from the beginning sin which was an others,
has been derived unto us from Adam, for neither I, nor thou have eat of the
apple: so also by the righteousness of an other we must be restored unto
righteousness and integrity. This other is Christ Jesus, by whose righteousness
and works we are all saved, as I have now sufficiently declared. This S. Paul
has very pithily comprehended even in one sentence, where 1. Cor. 1. he says
thus: Christ Jesus is made unto us of God, wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption, that, according as it is written, he that
rejoices, let him rejoice in the Lord. And Romans 4. he says: Jesus Christ was
delivered to death for our sins, and is risen again for our justification.
In these two little sentences are briefly comprised, and joined together,
whatsoever things we must look for from Christ.

Howbeit all these things are enjoyed by faith, for he that is without faith,
to him they are impossible to be comprehended, The preaching of Christ is
counted foolishnes of the unbelievers, but of the faithful the power and
wisdom of God.
yea they are counted foolishnes to reason and to the world, as Paul says 1.
Cor 1: Christ unto the Jews is even a stumbling block, and unto the Grecians,
foolishnes, that is, when Christ is preached, that he is our righteousness, that
salvation comes unto us by him, and that by him we are made the children of
everlasting life, without our own works and righteousness, then those holy
men, and iustifiers of them selves are offended, no otherwise then the Jews.
Moreover to the prudent and wise men of this world, it seems foolishnes and a
certain ridiculous thing, that a man being fastened to the cross and put to
death, does perform these things. Whatsoever therefore is counted righteous,
holy, wise and prudent in the eyes of the world, it is offended and stumbleth
at this Christ. But, says Paul moreover, Unto the^ which are called, both of
the Jews and Grecians, we preach Christ, the power of God, and the wisdom of
God. He says also Romans 1. The Gospel of Christ is the power of God unto
salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first and also to the
Grecian. For by it the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, as
it is written Haba. 2: The just shall live by faith. Wherefore the Lord says
very well to the Disciples of John: Blessed is he that shall not be offended in
me. So thou see now plainly, that this faith which we have in Christ, comes
by the preaching of the Gospel, as Paul affirms Romans 10: Faith is by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Here, here I say does all the force
consist, by the word of God, not by the word of man. The word of God does
these things, not when we publish indulgences, or preach of works, as
hitherto (alas) it has been done, to our exceeding loss, as well in the good
things of the body as of ye soul. We made no account of goods which we
bestowed plentifully, unless we had afflicted our body with fastings,
chastisement, pilgrimages, and such like trifles. In deed these things had
been to be granted and borne, if they had not with a false confidence in such
doing, so miserably and lamentably led us away and seduced us from a true faith
and confidence in God through Christ. But praise be unto God, that we have for
the most part perceived such delusions. For the world was so full of this
misery and preaching, that it did almost ouerflow, which surely came by the
vengeance and wrath of God, for that we contemned his word, and followed men's
fables, yea our own wits and opinions. Then we were in so great blindness,
that we did almost without difference believe every man, what kind of work
soever he brought and gloriously set forth. From these deceitful follies our
consciences are now delivered and set free, but no man does so much as once
give thanks to God therefore. If we shall be contempteously negligent, a more
grievous misery shall light upon us then this was. Neither should that come
unto us undeservedly, forasmuch as we do greatly procure these evils against
our selves by our unthankfulness. When as before we gave with so great
abundance and plentye, that by our liberality they were made almost Lords of
the world, now hardly six or seven poor men are maintained in a city, yea
now the Minister of a Parish Church has not sufficient wherewith to live.
Howbeit do not impute this perverse kind of living to the Gospel, as our
adversaries now impudently do. It is not meet, that thou suffer thy poor
neighbor by thee to need: Yea rather the whole Gospel does specially urge
this, that thou have a care of thy neighbor, and that thou be serviceable
toward him, that thou help him both with thy counsel, and substance, even as
God has helped and instructed thee.

Such a one without dout he that is endued with true faith shows him self: for
he bursteth forth, The faithful man exercises charity toward his neighbor.
and behaueth him self so toward others, as he has tried God toward him
self, and as he desires to be done to him self, if he were pressed with
poverty, anguish, and necessity. God needs not our good works, our
prayers, fastings, and buildings of temples, founding of Masses, do displease
him, he requires not our sacrifices, but rather as Esaias says, hates and
abhors them. He is content with this one thing, that we acknowledge him for
our God, trust in him, and give him thanks, as he says Psalm. 50: Hear, O my
people, and I will speak, I my self will testify against thee O Israel: for
I am God even thy God. I will not reprove thee, because of thy sacrifices, or
for thy burnt offerings: because they were not alvvay before me. I will take
no bullock out of thy house, nor he goats out of thy foldes. For all the
beasts of the forest are mine, and so are the cattels upon a thousand hills. I
know all the souls upon the mountains, and the vvild beasts of the field are
in my sight. If I be hungry, I will not tell thee: for the whole world is
mine and all that is therein. Think thou that I will eat bulls flesh, and
drink the blood of goats? Offer unto God thanks giving, and pay thy vows
unto the most highest. And call upon me in the time of trouble, so will I
deliver thee, and thou shall praise me. But God sends us douneward with out
works to our neighbors, to the miserable, afflicted, and them that be void of
comfort. It is our parts to help them, to comfort them, to teach and instruct
them. And whatsoever benefit we shall bestow upon them, that we shall bestow
upon God and his Christ, as he shall say in the last day: Matthew. 25.40
Whatsoever ye have done unto one of the least of these my brethren, he have
done it unto me. Thus ye now have heard, that we are justified and made
righteous by the works of an other, namely, by the works of Christ, which we
enjoy only by faith: the same faith charity does naturally accompany, whereby
we do so to our neighbor, as we acknowledge that God has done unto us.
Hereof ye have elsewhere heard more: here we will now make an end, and call
for the grace of God.

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER UPON THE GOSPEL ON SAINT MATTHIAS DAY.
Matthew. 11. Verse 25. AT that time Jesus answered and said: I give thee
thanks O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things
from the wise and men of understanding, and have opened them unto children.

26. It is so, O Father, because thy good pleasure was such.

27. All things are given unto me of my Father: and no man knows the Son
but the Father: neither knows any man the Father but the Son, and he to
whom the Son will reveal him.

28. Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will refresh you.

29. Take my yoke on you and learn of me: for I am meek and lowly in heart:
and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

30. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.


The sum of this Gospel.
1 REason is not capable of the Gospel. For as Paul 1. Cor. 2. says: The
natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are
foolishnes unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. Wherefore when reason seeks salvation in worldly wisdom and
foolishnes, it fyndeth it not.

2 Christ calls them children here, which trust not to their own wisdom
and righteousness, but do believe only.

3 As children only do obtain salvation, so the Father also can not be
known, unless he be revealed by Christ: that is, our wisdom does not know God
the father. But when as through faith we are taught and instructed in bearing
the cross, then the power of God becomes known unto us. Therefore also he
afterward comfort them, upon whom the cross is laid, saying: My yoke is
easy, and my burden light.

The exposition of the text.
THis text touches as it were, the very pith and marrow of the Gospel. Other
places of Scripture wherein the miracles and doings of Christ are rehearsed,
have not so much comfort as those, in which those sermons of Christ to the
people are contained, wherein he does so lovingly teach us, and allure us to
himself. I am not so certain of the favor, which I see showed to others in
working miracles, as if I have the plain words before mine eyes. It is a
far greater comfort also unto me, to hear such loving admonitions and
allurements, then the preaching of miracles: Albeit they also confirm my
faith, and are examples, that, as he has helped them, so also he will help
me. Moreover this Gospel entreats of the knowledge of God the father, and of
Christ his son, showing also whereof such knowledge does consist. Now that
the meaning thereof may be well known, it is requisite to understand aright
these two words, wisemen, and children or babes. But lest when we hear it, we
say: this pertains nothing to us, it is spoken to others, as the Jews said
to the Prophets, which referred all things to the Gentiles, the words going
before do sufficiently show, unto whom, or of whom these words of Christ are
spoken. For before he speaks of them that contemn the Gospel, not
vouchsafeing to embrace it, whose duty notwithstanding especially was to
embrace it, inasmuch as they would seem alone to be them, that were occupied
in the word of God, and were to be counted for the people of God. Of such he
says thus: Whereunto shall I liken this generation? it is like unto little
children which sit in the markets, and call unto their fellows, and say: we
have piped unto you, and ye have not daunced: we have mourned unto you, and ye
have not lamented. Which the Lord applies to himself, and unto John the
Baptist: as if he would say: we have preached unto you the Gospel: John with a
certain severity and austeritie, but I with very great clemency and
gentleness. But ye contemn our preaching and will not receive it, ye shall at
the last feel without dout to your great evil, what it is to despise the word
of God. This is very true, howsoever thou preachest to the people, whether
thou be fair spoken or severe, gentle or ungentle, they will always seem to
have some cause or other to complain of thee.

These the Lord calls here wise, and men of understanding, to these the
Gospel is hyd. He means not here those wise men, which are truly wise in
divine matters. For it is a great commendation, if one be worthy to be called
wise and prudent. True wisdom is nothing else but the knowledge of God, True
wisdom what it is. Prudence.
to wit, when as I know what we must think of God, and do understand his will.
But prudence signifies ability and knowledge to judge of worldly things,
what is right or wrong, which Paul often joins together, especially in his
Epistle to the Ephesians chap. 1. and in his Epistle to the Colossians chap. 1.
Of such wisdom Christ speaks not here, but of worldly wisdom, which
puffs up men, and excludes the true wisdom of God. We are all of this
disposition by nature, eftsoons to rise against the wisdom of God.

Humane or worldly wisdom.
That is called good, by the instinct of humane wisdom, which brings
pleasure, honor, and profit, but those things that are contrary to these,
as affliction, dishonor, loss, those are called evil. For man's nature can
seek nothing else at all, but those things that are his own, that which
pleases and profits him, that he does especially like: But that which
displeases him, he counts the worst of all things, although it be the best.
Wherefore as I have said, the Lord speaks here of those wise and prudent
men, which with their own wisdom strive against the wisdom of God. Worldly
wisdom seems to it self to be so great, that is it not content to rule
only these worldly and temporal things, but takes also upon it self to
have the oversight of heavenly things, it always sercheth out and imagines
some new thing, even in spiritual and divine matters. So man's own wisdom
has invented shaven crowns and cowles, and almost all that, wherein the
papacy consists, every one has chosen his proper work to himself, this
man has invented this, an other has inverted that, and if this be abolished,
and does not greatly please, byandby they find out some other thing, as (alas)
we have seen, and do as yet see, neither is there any measure in these
trifles, whereupon it comes, that we can hardly away with the word of God and
the truth, but are always delighted to invent some new thing. For truly this
is certain, as often as we ordain a new worship of God contrary to the word
of God, we are byandby blinded, and fall from error to error, then which
calamity none greater can come unto us. Wherefore Paul 2 Thessalonians. 2. says:
Therefore God shall send them strong delusio^, that they should believe lies,
that all they might be damned which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. Yea and at the last they become so blind, that they understand
nothing at all of God, as it is in the 14. Psalm. The fool has said in his
heart, there is no God. For it can not be that the natural man, which
consists of flesh and blood, and is not instructed by the spirit of God,
should judge and understand those things which are of God, as Paul 1. Cor. 2.
witnesses: The natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God:
for they are foolishnes unto him: neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually decerned. He which will read more hereof, let him peruse the first
chapter of the Epistle of Paul to the Romans, there shall he plainly enough
perceive, what blyndenes is, and what punishment does ensue, if the word of God
being neglected, we follow our one inventions and counsels.

All which we see in our spiritual monks, nuns, and sacrificing pristes,
and do too truly try it. God grant that they may at the last repent, and give
unto God his glory. S. Paul says there of the Gentiles, that they turned the
glory of the incorruptible God to the similitude of the image, not only of a
corruptible man, but also of birds, and four footed beasts, and of creeping
things. So do our Papists also, yea and much more foolishly and madly then the
Gentiles: for they make unto themselves a good which is delighted with a shaven
crown, with towels, with eating of flesh and fish, etc. Wherefore God has
given them up through their hearts lusts unto uncleanness, as he did the
Gentiles, and that so filthily, that it is better to conceal it, then to
rehearse it. For if such filthy and wicked things were committed among the
Gentiles, which had many wives and many concubines, what would not these
spiritual men com-Briefly which have forbidden the use of women and
matrimony? mit, so is it wont to come to pass, where Satan bears the swaie,
and the word of God is wrested to serve men's affections, which every man may
assuredly persuade himself to be so, yea these things are so known and
undoubtedly true, that children in the streets speak and sing of them. Now this
is not to be understood of spiritual men only, but even the vulgar sort and
common multitude do live so, when the word of God is not admitted. As we see
citizens to utter counterfeit wares, merchants to deceive in selling
marchandice, and so many crafty practizes, so many deceits in subtle dealing,
so much regard of usury and private profit, that it can not be rehearsed. As
yet they endeavor again to bring in the Mass, to set up their tapers etc:
being persuaded that God is pacified with such trifles, reuoluing this only in
their minds, that their fame may remain untouched and unhurt in the world,
howsoever they agree with God. Of such wise and prudent men Christ speaks
here in the Gospel, which hear the Gospel in deed, and see miracles, but it
profits them nothing, forasmuch as their heart is not touched. Now Christ
says thus:

Verse 25. I give thee thanks O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou
have hid these things from the wise and men of understanding, and have opened
them unto children:

Verse 26. It is so, O Father, because thy good pleasure was such.


Christ speaks not here of very children: there may be some notable doctor,
whom he calls a child in this place. Contrariwise there may be a rusticall
fellow, whom he calls here wise and prudent. In the eight Psalm. David also
calls these infants and children, when he says: Out of the mouth of babes
and sucklings have thou ordained strength because of thine enemies. They surely
by whom God ordained strength against his enemies, which should extol his
glory through the whole world, were not babes or children in very deed.
Those therefore the Lord calls children here, which count their own works
for nothing, attribute nothing to their own wisdom, Whom the Lord calls
here children or babes.
make nothing of themselves, but think God only to be wise and of
understanding. Wherefore they are humble and lowly, and how great soever they
are, do submit themselves to God, of whom only they suffer themselves to be
taught. Now other be over wise, and will learn nothing of God, yea they
presumptuously take to themselves judgment and censure over the doctrine and
works of God, whereof thou may read in the first and second chapter of the
Epistle to the Corinthians. Wherefore Christ says Luke 16: The children of
this world are in their generation wiser then the children of light. But the
foolish children of light are of greater estimation before God, then the wise
children of this world. Of these children the Lord speaks: Thou have hid them
from the wise and men of understanding, and have revealed them to babes. For
the wise and prudent know not these things, but the children and fools know
them. How comes it to pass that the wise know them not? because thou have
hidden them from them. How do the children know them? because thou have
revealed them. What he means hereby, we may gather of those things that were
spoken before, to wit that he had preached the Gospel of the kingdom of God
in many cities of Judea, as in Chorazin, Bethsaida, and in his own city
Capernaum, which cities their own wisdom being a hinderance and let unto
them, did not receive the foolish preaching of the Gospel. The Gospel is a
good and joyful message, which teaches me to know the glory of God, by which
knowledge I obtain pardon of my sins, and life eternal: The Gospel a
joyful message.
As Christ says to his father in the Gospel of John chap. 17: This is life
eternal, that they know thee to be the only very God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent. He says also in this Gospel: No man knows the Son but
the Father, neither knows any man the Father but the Son, and he to whom
the Son will rereueale him. Here he speaks of the knowledge both of the
Father and of the Son. To whom this is revealed, he knows, and obtains
eternal life. But the Father has hid these things from the wise and prudent,
that they may not know neither the Father nor the Son, and has revealed them
to children, they have the knowledge both of the Father and the Son, and so
do obtain everlasting life.

Moreover, if these things be thus, as they be in deed, what shall become of
free will? Seeing thou see such heinous and wicked things to be committed in
the bodies, as it is written Romans 1. go thy ways now, and glory of free will.
But this is a goodly free will, to live in such a filthy life, which is
altogether unworthy of a man, which is unknown even among beasts that are
without reason. Howbeit it is wont so to come to pass, when God forsakes us.
What state they come into, whom God forsakes.
As soon as we are forsaken of God, byandby Satan comes, and erecteth his
kingdom in us, wherein nothing else but such wickednesses are committed, which
notwithstanding are so craftily colored, and commended with such a pretense of
honesty, that it seems to be a most holy, yea and an angelike life. What I
pray you can man's strength do here? whereby some go about to bring to pass
many things, sweetly persuading themselves that they shall ascend up into
heaven thereby. But thou hear here that Christ affirms, that the Father
does reveal these things: also that it is the good pleasure of the Father
that it should be so. Whereby truly he takes away all the merits of man, here
no satisfactions profit, here is no respect of works, it is done by the will
and good pleasure of the Father. For he respects not the person, as it
appears before ye world. He does not contemn and reject the sinner, albeit
he come laden with sins. After the same sort Christ says to his disciples
Luke 12: Fear not little flock, for it is the Fathers pleasure to give you the
kingdom. This the hypocrites and iustitiaries can not abide, yea they are
driven unto fury, senssesnes, and madness, when they see simple receivers of
custom and very publicans to go before them into the kingdom of heaven, they
themselves with their holiness, and goodly and plausible works to the world,
being excluded: whom would not this drive unto madness? who would not take it
grievously, that he himself and his things should be in such a case, and
nothing at all counted of? But what should thou do, or what should thou
murmur? The good pleasure of God is such, to whom he vouchsaueth to open, to
him they shall be opened: and from whom he hides, from him they are hidden,
which count as undoubtedly true: And mark well that Christ says here, It is
so, O Father, because thy good pleasure was such, thy good pleasure I say,
before ye world was made, as S. Paul says Ephesians. 1: God has chosen us in
Christ before the foundations of the world were laid, that we should be holy
and without blame before him in love, who has predestinate us, to be adopted
through Jesus Christ in himself, according to the good pleasure of his will,
to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherewith he has made us freely
accepted in his beloved. Here all merit is excluded, wherefore let it not come
into thy mind, that thou shall obtain any thing here by thy deserts, neither
let thy works, wisdom, and merits puff thee up. Here all rejoicing is taken
away, that he that rejoices, may rejoice in the Lord, as Paul says 1. Cor.
1. It follows moreover in the Gospel:

Ver. 27. All things are given unto me of my Father: and no man knows the
Son but the Father: neither knows any man the Father but the Son, and he
to whom the Son will reveal him.
Here thou see the safety, which is in the kingdom of Christ, by whom we
have knowledge and light. If therefore Christ holds all things in his hand,
and has power over all things as the Father has, no man can pluck any thing
out of his hands, which he himself also witnesses in John: Ioh. 10.28.
I give eternal life to my sheep, and they shall never perish, neither shall
any pluck them out of my hand: my Father which gave them me, is greater then
all, and none is able to take them out of my Fathers hand. I and my Father are
one. Christians have cause to rejoice although they be diverse ways assailed of
Satan, for that they be under the tuition of Christ, who will defend and
preserve them.
Wherefore every Christian, when he has received the Gospel, may worthily
rejoice, that he is now under the tuition of Christ, and is not any thing
troubled because of his sins. If he has embraced the Gospel, Christ under
whom he fights will guide the matter excellently well. Satan in deed will
tempt him with this and that vice, as, with adultery, whoredom, theft,
slaughter, envy, hatred, wrath, and other like sins. But let him not
therefore be discouraged, he has a king, that is strong and mighty enough, of
whom he shall be easily defended. Notwithstanding it will be very hard to stand
strongly, and nothing to yield, wherefore prayer in this case is very
needful, others also may by their prayers entreat for thee, that a stout
courage and manly heart may be given unto thee, to withstand Satan. But it is
certain, that thou shall not be destitute, Christ will easily preserve thee,
be not disquieted in mind, let it only be thy care, that thou fallest not
from his kingdom. Moreover in this Gospel thou see, that Christ is both God
and man: Man, inasmuch as he prayseth God, and gives him thanks: God,
inasmuch as all things are given unto him of the Father. Which ought to be
great comfort unto us in all things that do trouble and afflict us. Whereas he
says: No man knows the Son but the Father: neither knows any man the
Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him: he in these
words overthrows free will, which will know God and Christ, when and how it
pleases it. Here thou have plainly, from whence the knowledge of God and of
Christ is: the Father, says he, knows the Son, and the Son the Father,
but how do we know, by this or that preacher? no truly, these are only
certain middle instruments, but he only knows, to whom the Son will
reveal. A little before he said that the Father does reveal or open, here he
attributes the same to the Son. Surely both the Father and the Son do
reveal, and as the Father reuealeth, so also does the Son: and Christ also
says in John chap. 14: The holy Ghost shall teach you all things. Wherefore
as the Father teaches, so teaches the Son, likewise also teaches the holy
Ghost. And where God the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost do not
teach, there all things remain void of knowledge. It follows moreover in
the Gospel.

Verse 28. Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will refresh
you.

Verse 29. Take my yoke on you, and learn of me: for I am meek and lowly in
heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

Verse 30. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.


Hitherto we have heard how the Lord deals with the wise and prudent, namely
that he blyndeth them, and hides the Gospel from them. Likewise how he is
delighted in children and simple ones, to wit, that he endueth them with right
knowledge of himself, and opens the Gospel unto them. But some man may here
say and complain: If the matter be so, surely my conscience shall be in great
danger, before I hear and know that the Gospel does pertain unto me. I am
a wretched sinner, and perhaps the Gospel pertains not unto me, what if I be
unworthy? Christ, that he may comfort these weak, dismayed, and troubled
consciences, says: Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will
refresh you. What soever burden we are laden with, we may find ease and comfort
in christ, if we fly to him for succor.
Here are we called unto comfort. Here forget all thy merit and worthiness, for
that he plainly says: ye that are weary and laden, to wit, with the burden of
the law, the anguishe and affliction of sin, and wherewithal soever the
conscience may be troubled. Therefore he does not express it by name: for he
says not, ye that are troubled with this or that calamity, but simply, ye
that are weary and laden. Neither will he have any here excluded, forasmuch as
he says, All, which is a singular and special comfort, if any thing trouble
us, what kind of tentation soever it be.

Who soever therefore is stricken with the feelinge of his sin, and knows
his one weakness to fulfill the law of God, let him come hither with a
cheerful and bold courage, and he shall certainly receive comfort. I will
refresh you, says Christ, as those that are pressed and burdened with sore
labor and grief. Let this only be thy care, that thou believe such a loving
bidding and promise. After this sort Christ cried in the temple at Jerusalem
at a certain feast: If any man thirst, Ioh. 7.37.38.39.
let him come unto me, and drink. He that believes in me, as says the
Scripture, out of his belly shall flow rivers of water of life. This spoke he
of the Spirit, which they that believed in him, should receive. Which so
comes to pass: He causes the Gospel to be preached unto us, which he that
believes, is endued with the holy Ghost, and obtains pardon of all his
sins. This is truly to refresh him, whose conscience is troubled, to wit,
when he feels that his sins be forgiven, and that he is become heir of the
kingdom of God. Neither does he refresh us only in the anguish and tentation
of sin, but he will also be present with us in other calamities and miseries,
in famine, war, dearth of victuals, and whatsoever such like can come, in all
these he will not leave us destitute of his help, as he cared for the
Patriarch Joseph, even in a strange country, with whom he was continually
present, as well in prosperity as in adversity. Now sin is a grievous
burden, whereof no man is eased, but he whom Christ the son of God
delivers, and that by the holy Ghost, whom he has merited for us of the
Father, which makes our hearts cheerful, and ready to do all things which
God requires of us.

But what is this that he says? Take my yoke on you. Is this to refresh, if I
take one burden from one, and lay upon him an other? The yoke of Christ why so
called.
This is that, whereof we have oftentimes spoken, the Gospel does first make
astonished and discourage, and is grievous to the flesh, for it tells us that
all our own things are nothing, that our own holiness and righteousness are of
no importance, that all things which are in us are damned, that we are the
children of wrath and indignation. This is very hard, and an intolerable
burden to the flesh, and therefore he calls it a burden or yoke. But lest he
should terrify or make afraid any, for that he is of great authority, high,
and mighty, and therefore can not suffer synneful and wretched men, or for
that he may seem to be tyrannical and ungentle, he before cutting of this
suspicion, says: Learn of me: for I am meek and lowly in heart. Christ will
here lovingly allure us to his doctrine, for he had spoken before of the
knowledge of the Father, as if he would say: flesh and a fearful nature
compteth me for an austere, severe, and rigorous man, but I am not of such a
nature, yea I am humble and meek in heart. Christ humble and meek.
I do not terrify men as Moses does, I do not preach: do this or that, but
I preach forgiveness of sins, neither do I preach that they should give any
thing, but rather that they may receive. There is not in me ambition and
loftines, as is in the Pharisees, which desire to be magnified, but I am
altogether gentle and lowly in heart, ready to receive sinners. If so be that
they fall again into sins, notwithstanding I do not yet cast them from me,
if they fly unto me for succor, and do with a sure confidence look for
comfort and help of me. I do not curse men as the Pharisees do, which curse
them even for their own ordinances, and for men's devises, and will sooner
suffer all the commandments of God to be neglected, then one of their decrees
and ordinances not to be observed. As we see in the Papacy, where it is
counted a greater offense to eat flesh on the frydaye, or for a sacrificing
Priest to marie, them to commit twenty adulteries or ten homicides. But here
thou see that God does abrogate even his own law, that he may so much the
sooner procure sinners unto him.

Christ in a singular signification says here, that he is meek, as if he
said: I know how sinners are to be handled, I have tried what a fearful and
an afflicted conscience is, as the Epistle to the Hebreues chapter 5.
witnesses, that he was in all things tempted in like sort, except sin.
Wherefore let no man be afraid of me, I will handle all easily and gently, I
will say nothing with a sour contenaunce, I make no man afraid, so as they
come boldly unto me, they shall find rest to their souls with me. To their
souls he says, They that believe in Christ find rest to their souls, though
in their bodies they suffer affliction.
as if he would say: outwardly in the body there may be affliction and
trouble, and calamities may ouerwhelme you, but ye ought to bear all these
things lightely, as he also says to his disciples in the Gospel of John: In
me ye shall have peace, but in the world ye shall have affliction. Wherefore
although outwardly all things fall out against us, as though they would
suppress and devour us, yet are they nothing to be esteemed of: For we have
the feelinge of peace inwardly in our conscience. And this is the first fruit
of faith, as Paul says Romans 5: Therefore being justified by faith we have
peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ. Now when our conscience is
quieted, and we have peace with God, nothing is able to move us, no nothing
shall hurt us, albeit it be evil and against us.

Let no man think thus, and say: this is not to amend ones state or case, if
I take one burden from his neck, and lay on an other, as it is before said.
For Christ says: My yoke is easy, and my burden is light, as if he would
say: the yoke of the law, under which ye lived before, was grievous to be
borne, but my burden is not so grievous, it is light, and tolerable, ye may
easily bear it. Our wisemen say now, that the yoke of Christ is more
grievous, then the yoke of the Law was, and they allege the fifth chapter of
Matthewe. But Christ does there interpret the Law, how it ought to be
understood, he does not make laws, but says, that murders and adulteries
proceed from an evil and unclean heart. And so he does only expound the
Law of Moses, and prescribes not any laws there. Why ye yoke of Christ is
said to be easy.
But the yoke of Christ is therefore easy, and his burden light, because he
takes away, not only ceremonial and man's laws, but even the whole law,
the curse, sin, death, and what soever may come unto us from the Law, all
this Christ takes away from me, and endueth me with his spirit, by the motion
and instinct whereof, I do gladly, willingly and with pleasure perform all
the duties of the Law. It is therefore also called easy, sweet, and light,
for that he himself helps us, and takes part of the burden, if we be not of
strength sufficient. It appears in deed grievous and intolerable to the
world, but it is otherwise when there is one ready to ease the burden. It is a
common saying: it is good to sing with a fit compaino^, you two will easily
bear the burden, although one alone were not of stre^gh sufficient to bear
it. Thus much shall suffize for the exposition of this Gospel. *** *

A SERMON OF D. MARTIN LVTHER UPON THE GOSPEL ON THE FEAST OF S. PHILIP AND
JAMES.
John 14. Verse 1. Jesus said unto his disciples: Let not your heart be
troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me.

2. In my Fathers house are many dwelling places: if it were not so, I would
have told you: I go to prepare a place for you.

3. And if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you
unto my self, that where I am, there may ye be also.

4. And whither I go, ye know, and the way ye know.

5. Thomas said unto him, Lord, we know not whither thou go, how can we then
know the way?

6. Jesus said unto him, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. No man comes
unto the Father but by me.

7. If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also: and from hence
forth ye know him, and have seen him.

8. Philippe said unto him, Lord, show us thy Father, and it suffiseth us.

9. Jesus said unto him: Have I bin so long time with you, and have thou not
known me? Philip, he that has seen me, has seen my Father: how then say
thou, Show us thy Father?

10. Beleeuest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father is in me? The
words that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self, but the Father that
dwells in me, he does the works.

11. Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father is in me: at the least
believe me for the very works sake.

12. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that believes in me, the works that I
do, he shall do also, and greater then these shalhe do: for I go unto my Father.

13. And whatsoever ye ask in my Name, that will I do, that the Father may be
glorified in the Son.

14. If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it.


The sum of this Gospel.
1 IN this Gospel is contained a comfort against offense that tempts us
through the cross and persecution.

2 Without the merit of Christ no man comes to glory. Therefore he says: In
my Fathers house are many dwelling places. For many are elect from everlasting
of God the Father, which notwithstanding can not come unto glory without
Christ.

3 The Disciples believed in Christ, yet did they not understand, that he
should come unto glory by death. Wherein we must mark, that faith being
imperfect in the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, is a comfort unto us, if we
rest upon the foundation Christ.

4 In Philip we see a very gross faith, for he will see and know by
experience. Wherefore Christ says: If ye will not believe my words, at the
last believe the works, that the Father is in me, and I in the Father.

5 These words: I say unto you, he that believes in me, the works that I do,
he shall do also, etc. show that Christ shall reign in us, when he is
glorified with the Father.

6 And thus we see that in all this Gospel, Christ requires nothing else of
them that be his, but faith.

The exposition of this Gospel.
IN the beginning of this Gospel Christ declares wherefore he came, and what
office he executes, which is properly the preaching of the Gospel: to wit,
that he is he which prepares dwelling places with the Father, and will when he
comes again, receive us unto himself. Moreover he says, that he is the
way, the truth, and the life, which he afterward more plainly expresses when
he says: No man comes unto the Father but by me. Also when he says: If ye
had known me, ye should have known my Father also. Hereunto moreover
pertains that which he says unto Philip: He that has seen me, has seen
my Father. This is the chief and the greatest thing in this Gospel, unto
which all are to be referred. Hereof we ought to learn, that we are not
justified by our own strength, neither saved by our own merits, but are
sanctified by ye spirit of Christ, and saved by grace, and that Christ is the
way leading to salvation.

We will discuss and examine this Gospel throughout, as God shall give us
grace. These words the Lord spoke unto his Disciples after his Supper, when he
was now about to depart from them. Forasmuch as he had said many things unto
them of his departure and passion, they were after a sort troubled and
terrified, wherefore the Lord begins lovingly to comfort the^, saying: Let
not your heart be troubled. As if he would say: I perceive that my departure
does grieve you, and that ye are therefore troubled: But seeing it can not be
otherwise, be not discomforted, there is no cause why ye should therefore be
troubled, I will come again unto you. Notwithstanding ye shall see many
things in me before, whereat ye will be offended, they shall crucify me and
unworthily handle me. But be not ye troubled because of these things, be not
afraid, it will be better shortly after, the will of the Father is such. Howbeit
flesh can not do otherwise but be offended, if it sees Christ to be crucified,
it byandby reuolteth from him, it believes him not neither counts him for a
Savior. Which also it does, when it sees holy men suffer persecution, to be
afflicted and tormented, for then it thinks that God has no care of them.
Against this offense Christ aforehand confirms his Disciples, and says: Ye
believe in God, believe also in me. That is, ye believe that God loves you and
will glorify you, believe that he will do it after that sort, that ye see me
glorified, and believe that this my death is life, to the glorifying both of
me, and of my whole body, that is, of all Christians, and that this death
satisfies for the sins of the world, as the Apostles afterward witnessed of
him in their writings. 1. John 2.2.
Thus John says: Christ is the reconciliation for our sins: and not for ours
only, but also for the sins of the whole world. Wherefore thou see that
Christ here will have hearts confirmed by faith, and by no other outward
thing. He says moreover:

In my Fathers house are many dwelling places. These dwelling places have bin
prepared from everlasting, neither is there any need that they should be
prepared of him. Why therefore does he say: I go to prepare a place for you?
This is nothing else but that he goes and is made Lord of all, whereby he may
prepare us unto such dwelling places. For as long as we are not prepared,
neither are the dwelling places prepared for us, although they be ready by
themselves. Wherefore Christ means thus much: There are dwelling places, but
not yet prepared rightly and as they must be. Howbeit then shall they be rightly
prepared and appointed, when as I have taken away the kingdom of death by my
death, and am now gone to reign, and that by the holy Ghost: which by faith
shall prepare and wholly make ready you also unto such dwelling places. So that
this is the simple and plain meaning of these words: There are dwelling
places, to wit, where the Father glorifieth, but those dwelling places are not
yet prepared, for that the kingdom of death is not yet taken away. This Christ
signifies when he says:

If it were not so I would have told you: I go to prepare a place for you. And
if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto my
self, that where I am, there may ye be also. In these words the Lord
declares how these dwelling places be prepared, namely, by the death of Christ
as it is said, by which he came unto glory, and rules over all things,
which are in heaven and earth. By which death he has obtained the holy Ghost
for us, which as is before said, may prepare us unto these dwelling places.
For through his operation and working in us, he makes us believe the Gospel,
by which believing or faith we are prepared. Which could not be done if Christ
should not depart and dye, and so possess a kingdom over all. This therefore
is the sum of this text: They are foreseen, whom the Father will glorify,
but they can not be glorified but by Christ, who unless he take away death and
sin, all shall be in vain. Here thou see that all tend unto this, that
Christ is he which prepares the dwelling places, and that we can not be
glorified but by Christ, so that the whole drift of this text is, that we are
not justified by man's strength, nor by our own merits, but by Christ, which
the whole Epistle to the Romans effectually declares, as also that which is
written to the Galathians, and almost all that Paul does in his Epistles,
tends to the same end. It follows moreover:

And whither I go ye know, and the way ye know. For ye believe in me, and
have showed signs in my name, whereby ye ought now to be certain who I am,
and what I do, and wherefore I am come. Ye have also seen and heard the
testimony of the Father of me. Wherefore ye may now know that the Father
will glorify me, and believe that I and the Father are one, it should be
therefore superfluous to speak more of these things. But the Disciples albeit
they were well instructed of the Lord him self, and had seen his miracles,
yea and they them selves also had preached the Gospel and wrought miracles,
were notwithstanding as yet somewhat gross in understanding, neither did they
perceive whereof he here spoke, and what was that way, and whither the Lord
did prepare to depart. Wherefore Thomas bursteth forth into open words and
confesses freely, that he is ignorant hereof, and says thus unto the Lord:
Lord we know not whither thou go: how can we then know the way? Here
ye hear and see, that albeit there was faith in the Disciples, notwithstanding
they were not as yet persuaded that Christ should be crucified, and by his
death should enter into his kingdom, and that the same kingdom should be
spiritual, which they did not understand even after the resurrection of the
Lord: Act. 1.6.
Lord, say they, will thou at this time restore the kingdom to Israel? Those
good men were as yet persuaded, that it should be a carnal and worldly
kingdom. Such gross things may here and there be found in the Gospels, by
means whereof the Disciples did sometime notably stumble and err. Comfort for
them that be weak in faith and sometime through infirmity fall.
All which were committed to writing for our comfort and confirmation, that we
should not be by and by discouraged, when we have sometime stumbled in faith,
and can not at the first apply our selves to the works and word of the Lord.
If this happened to these great me^, which afterward should become pillars of
Christianity, there is no cause truly that any should meruell, if we also
sometime faint in faith, yea, and let no man be afraid, although it falls out
that sometime through infirmity he so do. It is the work and matter of the
Lord, he will amend these things when it seems good unto him.

Now of the words we mind to entreat somewhat at large. Not much before, when
Christ would confirm his Disciples in faith, he promised them that they should
be glorified. Here he adds and declares how and by what means they must be
glorified, affirming that that must be by his departure, that is, by his death,
and that by that mean he must obtain his kingdom. This he had often repeated
unto them, so that now it did become them to know and understand it. Therefore
he says: VVhither I go ye know, and the way ye know, but they did not yet
thoroughly understand it, as the words of Thomas do declare. Now, it is
certain that there was faith in the Disciples, which the words of Peter
prove, who answered Christ in steed of the rest, when he asked them, whether
they also would go away: Peter said: Master to whom shall we go? Ioh. 6.68.
Thou have the words of eternal life: and we believe and know that thou art
Christ the Son of the living God. This appears also by the words of the
Lord, which he had said to them a little before at his supper: Ye are clean,
which he would not have said, if they had not believed: they knew Christ
therefore that he is the way to the Father. So they knew the Father also, for
that they had seen the miracles whereby he gave testimony of the Son, and
had heard the voice of the Father from heaven: This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased, hear him. All these things did greatly increase faith
in the Disciples hearts, notwithstanding they did not yet understand, what they
should do, and what end concerning the matters of Christ was to be hoped for.

Set before you an example hereof in Abraham. Although in faith a son was
conceived unto him, nevertheless he was yet ignorant, that he must be offered:
Neither did faith manifestly show it self, when a son was given unto him. So
was it also with the Disciples: although they had faith, notwithstanding they
wanted as yet trial of their faith: Now nothing tries faith better then the
cross and persecution. If Abraham had not been commanded to offer his son,
he had had no trial of his faith. When as the Apostles did suffer persecution,
they then had a taste and trial of their faith. As long as we may live without
tentation, we think that we are endued with a strong faith, but if any
adversity comes to us on any side, we byandby try what faith we rested
upon. Wherefore S. Paul says Romans 5: We rejoice in tribulations, knowing that
tribulation brings forth patience, and patience experience, and experience
hope, and hope makes not ashamed. After the same sort Solomon also says in
the Proverbs: As silver is fined, and gold tried in the furnace, Pro. 17.3.
so does the Lord try the hearts. Such a trial is made by ye cross and
persecution, when we are as it were crucified according to our old Adam, by
which crucifying our faith is tried, and according to this trial of faith our
flesh mortified, the spirit increasing in the knowledge of Christ. And then is
our flesh truly mortified, when we suffer the will of God to bear rule in us,
which is then done when we submit our selves to his will howsoever he deals
with us, renouncing our own. This S. Paul will have us to do, when he says
thus Romans 12: I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, that ye give up
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your
reasonable serving of God. And fashion not your selves like unto this world,
but be ye changed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what that
good, and acceptable, and perfect vvil of God is.

When Thomas thus confesses that he is ignorant whither the Lord goes,
neither knows the way, the Lord does not rebuke him with a stern
countenance, neither by and by casts him of, nor drives him from him, he
calls him not either a gross ass or ox, as we are wont to handle the
weak, but aunswering him very gently, Christ the way, the truth, and the life.
says: I am the way, the truth, and the life. I, says the Lord, am the way,
by which the father is gone unto, albeit I be slain: I carry them that believe
and are my sheep, on my shoulders to the Father: no other way beside this
leads unto heaven. He that walks not this way, goes out of the way from
the Father. I also am the truth. For I am the light which lightneth the world,
and I teach true doctrine, and make true Christians. Moreover, I also am the
life, for it is I that quicken, he that believes in me shall not dye. This, as
I said before, is to teach the Gospel rightly, that is, to show the true and
right way, which leads unto eternal life. When the Disciples knew not the
way that leads unto glory, the Lord making no delay, affirms unto them
that he is that way. As if he should say: If ye desire to know the way to
glory, seek not the strength, light, and righteousness of creatures, but look
unto me: for I am the way, the truth, and the life, although I must be put to
death, although I am vile and of no reputation according to the outward
appearance: neither let this offend you, that they which be mine, are subject
to persecutions. The right way to the father is found in me, let none remove
you from this persuasion. Therefore he says moreover:

No man comes unto the Father but by me. As if he should say: No man can come
to the Father by his own strength or merits: The law terrifieth the
conscience that it can not go to the Father: the word of Christ, which
justifies us by the righteousness of Christ, brings us to the Father.
Whereupon follows that which he afterward says:

If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also. For as no man
comes to the Father, but by the Son, so no man knows the Father but by
Christ the Son. First the Fathers will is not known, to wit, that he will
save us, unless we see it in Christ. He which is in the bosom of the Father,
has revealed it unto us. Secondly the Father is not believed. For reason by it
self does not understand, that it receives any thing of God. Wherefore it is
needful that Christ declare that bountifulnes and goodness unto us. A troubled
conscience flies the Father, neither can it abide to commit it self unto him.
But they that are justified by the word of Christ, do not any more contemn the
Father, neither fly him, as the Israelites did, but stand before him as
Moses, and are enlightened with divine light, that they may know the power of
God and mercy of the Father. Hereupon comes trust and confidence in him:
hereby we know that we receive all things at his hands, and look for all as
well spiritual as corporal things of him. All these we must acknowledge to be
received by faith, reason can not attain unto them. For it endeavors to
obtain God by her own strength and merits, but that endeavor is in vain.
Wherefore when it is not able to come to the knowledge of God by her own
strength, it utterly denies God, and says that there is no God. After when it
sees uncleanness in her works, it despeireth, and is in most great distres.
But when we are justified by foolish preaching, we come to the knowledge of God
the Father, as soon as we believe the word of Christ, and so we try the power
of the Father in afflictions and adversities, although they be even great. This
was shadowed forth in that, that the people of Israel could not abide to hear
the voice of God, but desired that Moses might speak unto them. Where Christ
also was figured, that he should make intercession for us to the Father, and be
our mercy seat. For nature is more weak and frail, then that it can abide to
talk with God. Wherefore he has given unto us this his Son a Mediator, in
whom and by whom we must have to do with him. When as the Lord so lovingly and
gently deals with Thomas, and shows unto him, how he must come to the
Father, to wit, by the Son, and that the Father is known in the Son, there
does yet happen a grosser thing in Philip, who bursteth forth and will not be
content with faith, but will know the thing assuredly by feeling and seeing.
Wherefore he says unto the Lord:

Lord, show us thy Father, and it suffices us. As though he would say, if thou will also show unto us a sign, then will we believe. Philip counts it not
sufficient to believe the word, but goes about to come to the knowledge of
the Father by an other means then by the word. For seeing that reason can not
believe, he requesteth to be certified by an other means and way. By the
interrogation therefore of Christ that follows it is showed, that the
conscience is made certain and quiet by no other thing, then by faith, for
that we must cleave to the bare word, and look for no other sign. But Philip
thought here that he should be much more certified, if he did see the Father,
then if he believed the simple and bare word. This incredulity Christ
reproves somewhat sharply, and says:

Have I been so long time with you, and have thou not known me? As though he
should say: I teach and preach, and yet thou know me not. Do thou not
know that the Father will be known by me, that my word is the word and power
of the Father, by which alone he will be known, and by nothing else? For thou
have heard the voice of the Father from heaven after this sort: This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him. Do thou not yet
understand how the Father is known? The Father is not seen with carnal
eyes, as John in his first chapter says: Ioh. 1.18.
No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten Son, which is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared him. Wherefore the Lord says to Philip:
Philip, he that has seen me, has seen the Father. This saying is like unto
that former when he says: If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father
also. That is, forasmuch as the Father will be known by me, seek no other way
to know him, but believe my word, that I am he, which shows unto you the
Father, and will make you to know him in me. Believe that by me thou have
access to the Father, by this means thou shall know the Father, by faith
thou shall understand the power and mercy of the Father, and shall feel him
to be comfortable and gracious. The Father will have my word to be believed,
and them that believe it, to be saved and obtain eternal life. Seeing
therefore that these things be thus, that we can not know the Father but in
the Son, and when we know the Son, we know also the Father: the Lord says
moreover unto Philip:

How then say thou: Show us thy Father? Beleeuest thou not that I am in the
Father, and the Father is in me? As if he would say: Forasmuch as there is no
other way to know the Father, but that which I have showed, why I pray thee,
do thou not believe my words, seeing that I have taught that I am the way,
the truth, and the life? Do thou not believe that I am in the Father, and
the Father in me? Beleeuest thou not that my divinity and the divinity of the
Father is one? and that the Father will be known by me? But why is the Father
known by the knowledge of the Son? even therefore, for that the Son is in
the Father, and the Father in the Son. For the word by which the Son is
known, is the power of the Son and of the Father. Wherefore seeing the Son
is known by his word, it necessarily follows, that the father also is known
thereby.

Believe me, that I am in the Father, and the Father is in me: at the least
believe me for the very works sake. Here he does as it were appeal to works,
that they may give testimony of the word. As if he should say: Seeing that ye
can not be content to believe the word, at the least believe the signs which
bear witness of the word, and whereby the Father has given testimony of me.
For the works and signs are testimonies of the word. By these words Christ
means nothing else but to confirm the consciences of his Disciples, and of
all us against the offense of the cross. For consciences will know and not
believe the bare words of God, but do always dout and say: What if God cares
not for thee? and have such like cogitations. Holy and godly men seem for the
most part to be neglected, as abiects and most contemptible men, inasmuch as
the world according to the will and lust thereof, rages and practizeth
tyranny against them, and does almost what it list. Hereupon they are in
anguish and in danger of faith, and desire to know the will of God toward
them. These Christ comfort, that they may seek no other comfort but in him
and in his death, and believe that he is life, that he bears rule, and makes
alive them that be dead. And that they should nothing dout hereof, he makes
them yet more certain, and says:

Verily, verily I say unto you, he that believes in me, the works that I
do, he shall do also, and greater then these shall he do. As if he should
say: Dout not any thing but that ye shall know the Father by me, and that my
word is the power of God, and that by my word ye shall be sustained, although I
be even crucified. Ye shall have trial hereof in your selves, for if ye
believe in me, ye shall not only work such works and show such signs as I
do, but even greater. Which came to pass after the ascension of Christ, when
the Apostles wrought greater miracles as well among the Jews as Gentiles, then
Christ him self. But what is the cause hereof? The Lord him self adds it
saying:

For I go unto my Father. That is, I will begin a kingdom, where I will
fulfill all things. Here the Lord annexeth the conclusion of all the questions
and consolations going before. For a little before Christ had taught, that the
Father is known by him, and that is because he is in the Father, he therefore
is showed by that word, by which the Father is showed. But that he might
confirm this, to wit, that his word is the power of the Father, he added and
said: He that believes in me, the works that I do, he shall do also. That is,
by faith in me ye also shall do those works, and know that my word is the
virtue and power of God. But why does he say: I go to the Father? I answer:
Because Christ is in the Father, therefore does he the works of the Father,
but we do them not also therefore, but for that Christ who is in the Father,
is now in us. For to go to the Father is to fulfill all things, and as Paul
according to the saying of the Psalm declares, to give gifts unto men, to
lighten and to sanctify. For this is the kingdom of Christ, whereby he
reigns in earth in the hearts of the believers, and sits upon the throne
of his Father David. The Lord also speaks these words: I go to the Father,
to comfort his Disciples. For as he did before begin to confirm them, that
they should not be troubled and offended, although he should dye, but
courageously cleave to him, and believe in him: So here he promises them that
they shall be glorified, for he goes to the Father, who shall deliver all
things into his hands, that he may mightily obtain a kingdom over all things
that are in heaven and earth. Wherefore they ought nothing at all to fear. He
yet comfort them more and says:

And whatsoever ye ask in my name, that will I do. As if he should say: As
soon as I come to the Father, there is no cause why ye should be careful. For
those things that ye have need of and ask, ye shall obtain, I will do this
for you, because I obtain a kingdom. And he peculiarly adds, in my Name,
whereby he excludes all our merits. For by Christ we are heard, as also in
Christ we are loved, by whom also we are Priests, as Peter says, to offer up
spiritual sacrifices, and acceptable to God. All these things says Christ, I
will do for this cause:

That the Father may be glorified in the Son. The Father is then glorified,
when glory is given and ascribed unto him, not unto us. That is, when we
acknowledge ye we are saved not by our own merits, not by our own wisdom and
righteousness, but do put our trust in his mercy. For he has given his Son
for our sins, and whatsoever we purpose to ask, we must ask it by this
Son, and we shall obtain it. Wherefore he repeateth these words, and says:

If ye shall ask any thing in my Name, I will do it. These words tend to
this end, that he may make us certainly believe his words, and cleave unto
him. This therefore is the sum of this conclusion: He bids his Disciples
and us therefore believe, for that he goes to reign. Before he affirms,
that he will show forth a sign and testimony of his kingdom, and so reign,
that he will declare a notable token of his government, that we may feel and
perceive it: to wit, that he will do so great works by us, as he him self
has done, yea and greater also. Also, that he will hear us when we pray, and
whatsoever we pray for unto the Father in his name. By these promises the heart
must be confirmed and made courageous against the gates of hell. For Christ
reigns by his word, wherefore it is needful that we exactly know the virtue
of the word: for the kingdom of Christ is the power and virtue of God. These
things I thought good to entreat of concerning this Gospel: Let us call upon
God for the aid of his grace, that we may be able to understand them, and by
them to strengthen our weak faith. *** *

FINIS.



