A very Comfortable, and necessary Sermon in these our days, made by the right
reverend father, and faithful servant of Jesus Christ Martin Luther,
concerning the coming of our Savior Christ to judgment, and the signs that
go before the last day. Which Sermon is an exposition of the Gospel appointed
to be red in the Church on the second Sunday in Aduent, and is now newly
translated out of Latin into English, and something augmented and enlarged by
the translator, with certain notes in the margent.

Act. 17. 30. Now God admonishes all men every where to repent, because he
has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness, by
that man whom he has appointed: whereof he has given an assurance to all men,
in that he has raised him from the dead. 2. Pet. 3. 3.
THis first understand, that there shall come in the last days, mockers, which
will walk after their lusts, and say: where is the promise of his coming?
for since the fathers dyed, all things continue a like from the beginning of
the creation. For this they willingly know not, that the heavens were of old,
and the earth that was of the water and by the water, through the word of God.
Wherefore the world that then was, perished, ouerflowed with the water: But the
heavens and earth, which are now, are kept by the same word in store, and
reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, and of the destruction of
ungodly men. Dearly beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day
is with the Lord, as a thousand years, and a thousand year, as one day. The
Lord is not slack concerning his promise (as some men count slackenes) but is
pacient toward us, and would have no man to perish, but would all men to come
to repentance. But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in
the which the heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the elements shall
melt with heat, and the earth with the works that are therein, shall be burnt
up. Seeing therefore that all these things must be dissolved, what manner persons
ought ye to be in holy conversation and godlynes: Lookyng for, and hastyng unto
the coming of the day of God, by the which the heavens being on fire, shall be
dissolved, and the elements shall melt Esaias. 65. 17. and. 66. 22.
with heat? But we look for new heavens, and a new earth, according to his
promise, wherein dwells righteousness. Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look
for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without
spot, and blameles. To all the inhabitauntes of England, and other else where
that understand the English tongue, the translator whisheth true knowledge of
God, contained in his word, which is life everlasting.
BEfore time, not many years since (dearly beloved brethren and countrymen)
the Disciples of Antichrist, and Apostles of Satan, for the establishyng of
their Lords kingdom (knowing that the continuance thereof, was the increase of
their own estimation, wealth and pleasure in this world) have devised many
politic practices, so wicked and so deuilish, that whosoever beholds them
well, shall soon perceive they were not invented without the counsel of
their Lord and master. Whereof this was the first and chief, and (as I may say)
the ground of the residue to keep all men, both Princes and their subjects,
in ignorance of God, and his word, that they not knowing the truth, might the
more casely be brought into all kind of deuilish heresies: that they not
understanding vice, should not be able to reprehe^d the horrible wickedness of
Antichrist and his ministers. To this end they have restrained all the laity
throughout Christendom, from readyng the Scriptures, and have forbidden them
to be Printed in their vulgar tounges, an din stead thereof, have given them
to occupy their brains withal, fables of Robin Hood, of Gie of Warrike, of
Geuis of Hampton, of the Knights of the round table, of the iiij. sons of
Amo^, filthy tales, Chaucer, the Court of Uenus, most horrible and blasphemous
lies out of Saints Legendes, and such like. Whereby men being drowned in
ignorance, and detestable heresies, have been cast down headlong into the
most miserable pit of hell. But now it has pleased almighty God, toward the
coming of our Savior to Judgment, by the preaching of his word, through the
workyng of his holy spirit, to oppress the power of Satan, to cut the horns
of Antichrist, to reveal 2. These. 2. 3
the man of sin: Which sittyng in the Temple of God, boasts him self as
God. Now it has pleased our Savior Christ to diminish the kingdom of
Antichrist, and to advance his own kingdom, to deface y^ Disciples of
Antichrist, and to glorify his own Disciples. He has driven out the filthy
swyne and wild bores, that have spoiled his vineyarde, and Mat. 20. 1.
has hired laborers to husband it again, that it may yield him fruit now at
harvest time, when he comes to receive the same into his everlasting
kingdom: at which time his faithful servants shall receive for their hyre,
a piece of money that never shall fail, and shall eat and drink the fruits
of their labors with him, world without end. Therefore it is convenient and
necessary for all Gods laborers, that is to say, Princes and their
Magistrates, Prelates, and all Ecclesiastical Ministers, to labor diligently
in the Lords vineyard, to keep out these swyne, which Antichrist has sent to
devour it: not only to yoke them, but also to set dogs on the^, which will
both barcke and pluck of their ^ares, if they enterprise to break through the
hedge, and to route up y^ vines with their deuilishe books, altogether void
of Gods word and of reason, to every man that has any understanding, and
knowledge of God. To this end by the authority of our sovereign Lady the
Queens Majesty in our Realm, and other Princes in other Realms, a great
number of godly men have preached diligently, other have written very
profitable books of Divinity, both in Latin, and in their own vulgar tongue,
and diverse have translated good books out of strange tounges into their own
language, husbanding thereby the Lords vineyard, and keepyng out the swyne that
endeuer to destroy it. Amongst whom I being one more ready to show my good
will, then able to do any great service, have chosen this short Sermon of
Martin Luther, the faithful servant of God, Gra^dcapitaine under our Savior
Christ, and chief hunter of these wyld bores, unto their father the devil,
from whence they were sent to destroy the sincere and true worship of God. This
man's Sermon (I say) concerning the coming of our Savior to Judgment, and the
signs that go before the last day I have chosen to translate into our English
tongue, as that which I thought a most convenient labor in this last hour of
the day, to preserve in Mat. 20. 6.
the Lords vineyard the ripe grapes from rottyng and from wild beasts, and to
have those that are unripe against the Lords coming, that is to say: to
comfort the faithful, to confirm the weak, and to instruct the ignorant, in
diverse necessary points of doctrine, or at the least to give them a watchword
of our Lords coming, that they may now at the length Math. 24. 49. Mat. 25. 4
cease from sinityng their fellow servants, and from eating and drynkyng with
the drunken, and may make them selves ready with oil in their lamps to
receive him: that when the trumpet blows, and the bridgrome comes, we may
all follow him into his everlasting tabernacle, therein to live with God the
father, the son and the holy ghost, in everlasting joy. To whom be all
praise, honor, and glory world without end.

Amen.
Anno 1569. March 22. T. B.

THe places of Scripture, that appertains to this Sermon following, are noted
in the margent, to the end that the Readers, according to the example of those
men, mentioned in the Acts of Acts. 17. ^1.
the Apostles, may examine the Scriptures, and try whether it be so or no, as
the author hereof says: and readyng them they may find many more Sentences
besides for the comfort and confirmation of their faith.

The Gospel for the second Sunday in Aduent.
THere shall be signs in the Sun, in the Moon, and in the Stars, and in the
earth: the people shall be at their wits end through despair. The Sea and the
water shall rore, and men's hearts shall fail them for fear, and for lookyng
after those things which shall come on the earth. For the powers of heaven
shall move, and then shall they see the son of man come in a cloud with
power, and great glory. When these things begin to come to pass, then look
up, and lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nere. And he showed
them a similitude saying: behold the fig tree, and al other trees. When they
shoot forth their buds, ye see and know of your selves that summer is then
nigh at hand. So likewise ye also, When you see these things come to pass* be
sure that the kingdom of God is nigh. Verily I say unto you, this generation
shall not pass, until all be fulfilled: heaven and earth shall pass, but my
word shall not pass.

The Sermon, or exposition of the Gospel.
IN this days Gospel, The effect of the Gospel* and the cause why it was
written.
Christ our Lord show eth us what shall be the estate, and condition of the
world, when all things draw to an end: Whereby we may know when the great and
horrible day shall appear (in the which Christ our Lord him self shall come
openly to Judgment) that no man need to waver, or doubt of ye matter. For he
shows plainly the signs that shall be seen in the last age, and shall go
before the last day, as tokens thereof: because it cannot be chosen, but yt so
Signs be fore y^ last day proved by humane reason, grou^ ded upon a certain
truth.
strange, yea and that the last change of the whole world should be declared
by many and great tokens, seeing that much less alterations of countries and
nations have been signified by signs and wonders going before. Because this
prefe^t Gospel has been before time sufficiently declared, so that now it is
well known unto all men: I mind not to show the doctrine that thereof may be
gathered, but after an other manner and fashion to handle it, to the glory of
God and our consolation. For therefore is it put in writtyng, and made manifest
by preaching, that it may serve to our comfort, and to the increase of faith
and hope in us, Romans 15. 4
which profess Christ, and believe in him: notwithstanding there is good cause
why it may be a terror unto the other sort of me^, I mean the wicked
unbelievers, whose destruction these signs do portend: Who in deed are nothing
moved with them at all, but with security of mind do contemn them.

Therefore (commendyng them to our God, and their Judge which shall come and
reward them, according to their deserts, that by experience they may always
feel yt, which now they neither believe nor regard) in handlyng the Gosspell,
we will have little consideration of them, but will make it frutfull unto our
selves, lest we should suffer it in vain to be put in writing, and should
leese the fruit and commodity thereof. Which if we consider well, we shall
perceive that it contains matter very comfortable and joyful, seruyng much
for our commodity. Which consolation and comfort is very nedeful for us, seeing
the signs of them selves are very terrible and (as I may say) horrible to
behold.

Moreover, Christians as they are at other times fearful enough, and of base
courage, so when they see the indignation and wrath of God toward mankind,
the waggyng of a leaf is able to make them amassed, Example hereof are the
inhabitants of Hierus^* before whose destruction God sent most horrible tokens
thereof. Whereof some they re guarded not* some they enterpreted to signify
victory over their enemies contrary to the true meaning of them, and of God
which sent them* and contrary to the express words of our Savior which
before had foretold them.
and almost dead for fear: co^trarywise the wicked are more secure and hard
hearted, and are moved with no signs, be they never so great and horrible.
Therefore this thing seems not to fall out indifferently, and as reason would:
for they which chiefly should be afraid, whom God by his signs does terrible
threaten, they (I say) have hearts of horn, stone, and iron, so that they
regard them as though they did nothing appertain unto them, what soever
wrath of God was to come, and being even now at hand, Luke. 14. 43
they do forewarne and show. Contrariwise The faithful have no more cause to
fear the signs of y^ last day, the Noe had, when the flud came* or Lot at y^
destruction of ^odome and Go^orra which s^ company of them that then were
preserved, is a sign of the little flock which goes by the narrow gate.
they which ought not to be moved, but rather rejoice when they see these
signs and tokens, as unto them they do not portend any wrath or displeasure of
God, but favor and consolation, they (I say) fear more the^ needs, and can
scarsely lift up their hearts to conceive such sweet and comfortable cogitations
as thereby occasion is offered.

Now to come to my matter, there are two things chiefly to be noted in this
Gospel: The one is, that our Savior reckons the signs in order which go
before the last day, which being fulfilled, Math. 14.
we may know for a certainty that the day is even hard at hand. The other note
is, that he says those signs shall be a consolation and a comfort to his
Christian children, so that thereby they may be moved to look for his coming
with a merry and cherefull countenance. The first sign (says he) shall appear
from heaven in the sun, y^ moon, and the stars: that is to say (as Matthew
does expound it:) The sun shall be darkened, and the Math. 24. 29.
moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven. etc.
Moreover upon the earth the people shall be at their wits end through despair,
and shall be in such perplexitye, that they shall not know whether to go, or
where to abide, their hearts shall fail the^ for fear of those things, which
are like to come upon them.

Again, signs shall be seen in the Sea, and in the Waters, so that all
creatures, and the powers of heaven shall move: there shall be such an
alteration, that the world shall seem by and by to have an end, and the last
day shall seem hard at hand. Here I will not greatly contend with any man, but
will leave it to the consideration of my Christian brethren, whether the signs
in ye sun, the moon, and the stars be already fulfilled, or not. But this
is my belefe and most certain hope, that the greater part of them have been
already seen, and that many other are not here after to be looked for. For if
we will believe, there has been seen even in our time abundantly both many and
great Eclipses or darkenyngs of the sun and moan within few years together,
one after an other, besides diverse in one year: the like we have not read to
have appeared at any time before since the begin nyng of the world. But he that
will not believe the word of God, will not believe y^ signs, nor take them for
signs, but will contemn them, and tread them under his foot, yea although ye
sun should be daily darkened before his eyes, and the stars should fall by
heaps from heaven. Although Astronomers say that such darkenynges of the sun
and moon happen by y^ course of nature (which some of them can tell of before
hand) yet they deny not, but they signify some terrible thing to happen on the
earth, especially seeing there be so many, and all most every year.

Besides this, contrary to the course of nature, many signs have been seen in
the Heavens, many Suns at one time, many Raynebowes, many terrible blasyng
Stars, fyres in the air like darts and swords, and diverse other prodigious
signs, which if they should be written, would fill a whole volume: but all are
forgotten, if they be not daily before our eyes, and as soon as they are past,
we live securely as though no such thing had ever happened at any time: yea
rather the oftener they happen, so much the less we regard them. For we take
the^ for customable things, thinkyng with our selves that of necessitye they
must so come to pass, making no more accountes of them afterward. And true
it is, that of necessity they must so come to pass, otherwise they should be
tokens in vain, and the world should not be so soon destroyed, if it being
moved thereby, should believe the Gospel. For it might (turnyng to God by
repentance) avoid, or turn away his wrath* or at the least prolong it for a
time. But alas, this is rather the chief care of the world, by continuyng in
wickedness, and most obstinatly heapyng sin, to haste^ Gods wrath, and spedely
to procure^hys own destruction. Thus much as concerning the signs in the
Sun, the Moon, and the Stars.

Now as touching the signs in the Sea, and the Waters, I commit them in like
manner to the Judgment of my Christian brethren: Whether they be fulfilled al
ready or no. Old men testify, that no man alive is able to remember so great
tempests, winds, and floudes as have happened within these few years. Some
floudes have drowned whole countries, such have happened of late about Rome,
and in the lower Germany: besides the earth quakes which we have heard of, but
I let them pass. By these things it seems that such is now the condition of
the world, that nothing shall continue any longer in his old estate, but all
things shall quickly be turned vpsidedowne, and fall to decay. And also this we
see come to pass by many examples, that many are so troubled and vexed, that
for very anguishe of mind they despair. Which thing may be understood both
bodily and spiritually, but especially spiritually. For we have heard of many
before time, and yet daily hear of mo, whom the devil so troubles and vexes
by temptations and desperation, that for the greatness of the grief and anguish,
they lay hand upon them selves, and procure their own death: so that we see
all the signs forespoke^ by our Savior Christ, have happened in all the
world. And although all things be not fully co^plished and ended, yet we can
not deny, but that the greater part of them is already fulfilled, especially so
many happenyng together one after an other. Therefore little or nothing hereafter
is to be looked for besides the end of all things, which signs are therefore
forespoken, to put us out of doubt, and that we should not think they happen
without a cause by chance or fortune, rather the^ to signify some notable
thing to come. But they are in deed all of them terrible signs, threatening
unto the world cruel eue^ts, although it do not feel them, nor care for them.
But true Christians do both see them, and mark them well, and are thereby
terrified much more then needs, seeing they are not sent to their destruction,
but rather to their consolation: and therefore they ought with joy and gladness
to behold and consider them, and not be discouraged, although the firmament
appear lamentable unto the beholders, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars and
all the heaven being darkened.

The Sun, although he be covered with a thick and black cloud, although he
leese his light, nevertheless he goes forwards in his course, he is no worse
then he was before, he remains the same Sun still, and shines as he did
before, saving that he lowreth for a time in token of destruction to wicked
men: in like mader ye residue, as the Moon and the Stars, in that they seem
terrible to behold, it is no harm unto them selves: For they are no tokens
unto them selves, but unto the wicked world, of who^ they are conte^ned. After
the same sort, whereas me^ are troubled and vexed, having a timorous and
fearful conscience, it is in deed a terrible sign, but not unto thee or the^
which suffer this, if they be Christians: only it signifies destruction to
the wicked, and despisers thereof, which do not suffer it, but neglect it: For
the sufferers are preserved nevertheless, and take no harm thereby, although
they go up and down with a pensive mind; in token of destruction to the
wicked, and ungodly persons. Even as Esaias went naked, and without shoes, and
Jeremy carried a chain about his neck for a sign of misery and calamity to
the Egyptians, and Philistines, and yet no harm happened unto either of them.
For Jeremy remained out of bondage* and thraldom, and in as much liberty, as
he was before, and Esaias notwithstanding his* nakedness, kept still his
garments: So they which keeping unto them a good conscience, do carry about them
these tokens, shall be without harm, and void of of all danger, only they
declare unto other, what shortly after shall be their estate and condition.

For although they be evil signs, yet they bring no evil to them that carry
them. Otherwise, he that has the execution of condemned persons, would not
carry the sword, or the axe, neither durst any man carry a weapon: But thou which
art a mansleaer and murderer take thou head to thy self, for thou art like to
go to the pot when the officer draws forth his sword. In like manner the
fire, the gibbet, the halter, ye gallows hurt not them selves, but bring
destruction to thieves and robbers which have committed heinous offenses: So
before the last day there must be many men, whom the devil troubles and
vexes with grievous temptations, and so oppresses them with anguish, that they
ca^ not tell which way to turn them, or where to abide. Of which sort of men
Gerson of Paris, and certain confessors have written many things, especially
in Monasteries. We have had experience of them in whom has been tender and
fearful consciences. But let him so vex and terrify men, he shall not hurt
them, if they be not such as God has determined to terrify and condemn, as
the wicked and the ungodly: but rather such as are fearful, and tender of
mind, and would gladly receive comfort, and turn unto God, and can find no
comfort or relief, until God himself have delivered them out of the misery of
their afflicted conscience, and have comforted them by his word. Only fear
thou, and take heed, which being secure and merry, co^temnest all things,
whereby God threateneth thy destruction. Unto these signs, that appertains
where he says: Men's hearts shall fail them for fear, and for lookyng for
those things which shall happen unto the whole world: that is to say, many
shall be troubled in their minds, that they shall go like me^ amassed, and as
though they did presently feel the danger that they see ha^geth over their
heads, for fear: Whereof they are so vexed, that the greatness of the grief,
and anguish of mind causes the^ to consume and pine away: Even as sorrow uses
to wast man's life, even as a priuye consumptio^ does eat, or suck the marow
out of y^ bones (as the wise man witnesses Prou. 17. 22.
in his Proverbs.) These men must feel these signs, not as tokens unto them
selves, but unto them which are more worthy to feel them. But because thou
do contemn them, at length thou shall feel more grievously, not signs, but
those things which thereby are signified, that is to say, everlasting terror,
fear, sorrow, and hell fire. For if just men suffer and feel these things in
the earth for a time: What shall we say will become of them for whose sakes
they are sent, and whose destruction God thereby does threaten? Notwithstanding
they esteem the^ no more then the paryng of their nails: But are daily worse
and worse, until experience (alas to late) does teach them. What folly and
madness was in their brain, when they gave them selves to all pleasure and
voluptuousnes, to all kind of worldly joy and pastyme? Whiles just men were
vexed with great sorrow and anguish of mind, considering the great and horrible
plagues which God has prepared for all disobedient, stubburne and stifnecked
infidels and Antichrists. It is a very hard thing to behold many so terrible
and so horrible signs, which with no small fear shall amase the minds of many
(as Christ here says) and fill them with such sorrow, and heauynes, that they
shall seem to be void of all consolation and comfort to those that see them.
But if thou be a Christian, do thou not look either upon the external signs
of heaven, or the earth, neither upon that which you feel thy self: but
look you upon the necessity, both of thy self and of the whole world, unto
who^ God (as his infallible word does testify) has ap pointed such things.
Except that day should come at y^ length, I had rather I had never been borne.

For let us consider what is now the estate and condition of the world, and how
it deals with us, and with the Gospel of our Savior Christ, most cruelly
persecutyng the Preachers thereof, by me^ that are driven headlong through Read
that discovery of the Spa nish Inqui sitio^ for the further declaration of
these words.
the devil, to devise daily mischievous and intolerable torments for the
same purpose. They most wickedly contemn and despise the Gospel, they scoff
at it, they speak spiteful and blasphemous words against it, most
sclaunderously, endeueryng thereby all that they may, to deface the faithful
servants of Jesus our Savior.

So unthankful is the world for the Gospel, such deadly and poisoned hate
does it bear toward Gods ministers, being more mad Gene. 4. 8. ^e. ^7. 41.
Exodus 1. 15 1. Sam. 19 11. and. 1. Reg. 18. 13. and. 19. 2.
and wood against the^, the^ ever was Cain against Abell: then Esa^ against
Jacob: the^ Pharao against y^ Israelites: the^ Saul against David, then
Iesabell against the true Prophets, then Herod against the Math. 2. 16
Innocents: finally then the deuilish Scribes and Phariseys against Christ our
Savior. Again on the other side, there is an infinite number of wicked me^,
as Idolaters, prophaners of the Sabbath by seruyng their own covetous and
censual lusts, instead of God, vain swearers, drunkardes, rebels, robbers,
and spoylers one of an other, adulterers, deceyuers, liars, false witness
bearers, cursed speakers, voluptuous men and weme^, slaunderers, malicious,
envious, covetous, ambitious, and perjured persons: so that there can scarce be
seen in all the world one token of discipline, reverence, fear, good manners,
or punishment of malefactors.

Princes seek their own honor, more then ye honor of God, and their own
profit, more then the profit of y^ commonweal. They make bloody battles
for small trespasses against the^ selves, not passing for many heinous offenses
committed against God. Through ambition they pick quarrels and wage war to
enlarge their own God^ king ^oure as it ^ taken for the whole world, can ^t be
enlarged, but ^s it is taken for the congregation of the Christians when his
word is truly preached, so it may and is daily enlarged.
kingdoms, having no regard to enlarge the kingdom of God.

Subjects (being destitute of good officers, and Preachers of Gods word) like
mad men bere^t of their wits, rebel against their Prince: They regard not
their laws, but either wilfully and openly break them, or else seek means
to delude them, to the satisfiyng of their own wicked lusts. Private men keep
no good laws, but by compultion: Officers see no laws kept, but in respect of
their own commodity, and to that end many times they purposely break good
laws: for bribes or for friendship, oppress the poor, and defeat them of
their right, either by false Judgment, or by delays, and such other crafty
conueances. Lawyers encorrage their clie^tes (as well him that has the false,
as him that has y^ good cause) to go forwards with the law, until their
money be spente, and then they send them home to agree amongst their
neighbors. Clientes (such are their covetous and malicious minds) some to
enrich them selves, will wrongfully by process of law challenge other men's
goods: some to vex and trouble other men, will by suits in the law undo both
them selves, and their neighbors. Rich men neglect the poor, and suffer them
to perish for hunger. Poor men (a great number of them) are idle loyterers,
and will rather by pryggyng and such like means shift for the^ selves, then by
honest labor get their living. Old me^ in all kind of lewdnes, are an example
to the youth. Young men and maids take an example of the most part which is
wicked, rather then of the lesser part which is godly. Pa rents and masters do
not instruct their children and servants in the true faith, fear, and
woorshyp of God. They seek the bodily health, and worldly profit of their
Children, but their soul health and heavenly profit they regard not at all.
Children and servants that are godly instructed, despise their teachers, and
follow the deuilish entisementes of their lewd companions.

Ecclesiastical persons that are in authority, seek more the maintenance of
their own honor and estimation, then the furtherance of the Gospel. They seek
not the increase of godly preachers in their Diocesses, nor the reformation of
such as are idle, and ungodly: yea they suffer their own families at home to
be full of dissolutnes, much more their Dioces abroad. They admit into the
ministry all manner lewd and unlearned persons: They able not unto one only,
but unto many benefices, those that are both unable, and unwilling to discharge
one, or to take any pains at all in the vineyard of God: yea many boys that
are neither Ministers, nor fit to enter into the Ministry. Private Ministers
are some of them, idle loyterers, domme dogs, hyrelynges which suffer the
wolf to devour their flock, feeders of the^ selves, and not of Christ's
sheep committed to their charge. Other some (taking upon them to be
Preachers, not so much inwardly as outwardly called thereunto) in preaching the
Gospel, preach them selves, and not Christ, as me^ not endued with the spirit
of God (which without parciality reproves all the world of sin, righteousness
and Judgment) they rebuke some of lower sort, and flatter such as are able to
do them a pleasure. They preach many times sound doctrine, but by their wicked
living they bring it in contempt, and are thereby cause of more offenses, the^
if they had spoken nothing at all. They speak many times of them selves, and
not that which they have heard in the Prophets and Evangelists, and
writtynges of the Apostles, but their own fantasies. They do not glorify
Christ, but the^ selves: For they take not that which is Christ's, but that
which is their own, and declare that unto the people. The most part of the
people hear not the word of God at all, but either abse^t the^ selves from y^
Church, or else suddenly depart, before they have heard the Scriptures read, or
any part thereof expounded. Generally all sorts of men, the more they are
instructed by the word of God, the worse they are, and ca^ not abide in any
case to be reprehended and rebuked for their wickedness.

So is the word of God, and his law troade underfoot of all degrees, and ye
true preachers thereof receive no other reward of me^, but scoffs, and mockes,
and deuilish hatred, which is very grievous to good Christians, and pearceth the
heart like a sword. Ought we not therefore to pray day and night, and cry unto
Christ our Lord, that now at the length he will use his severity, and suffer
all things to come to ruin, that such detestable wickedness may have an end,
and that all occasion of offense, all snares and stoomblyng blocks, 1. Cor.
15. 19.
may be quite taken away? For except at length we should be preserved from
these things, we were of all men that ever were borne most miserable. For we
must not so much consider the harm and destruction of the world, nor the
misery of y^ wicked worldlynges, but how great a grief it is to us, and to all
Christians to see God him self and his word contemned, reproved, and
blasphemed, and his preachers most spitefully hadeled, injuriously trod under
foot, and most cruelly tormented in the world: all preaching, crying out
against wickedness, rebukes, admonitions, and threatenings are almost
unprofitable, and in vain.

Therefore y^ beholding of these signs aforesaid, ought much to rejoice us, as
by the which almighty GOD declares, to our great comfort, that he will fight
shortly with the world, and will deliver us out of all our miseries and
calamityes. Therefore it is our part, not only with joy t^ look for this day
of salvation, but also with fervent desire, and earnest request to desire it of
Christ our Lord, saying after this sort: Thou Lord have promised to us this
day of redemption, therefore if Apoc. 22* 20.
it be thy pleasure let it come quickly, and make an end of our miseries in
this life, and for ever world without end. As touching our miseries in this
life, we may take an example of the most deuilish Pa^istes, the deadly enemies
of God and us: how courageous they are, how they triumph and leap for joy, as
often as there appears un to them never so little hope to oppress the Gospel
and us with it.

With what exclamations and earnest requests, did they desire the coming of
Caesar the Emperor into Germany, to destroy the Lutherianes (as they term us)
and to establish again their tyran^icall power? What daunsyng, leapyng and
triumphs did they prepare against his coming? Bragges above measure,
rejoicing, singyng, laughyng, leapyng, and clappyng of hands was heard
amongst them, which hoped to bathe themselves in our blood, Their reioysynges
were Unto this place apper tayneth the hystory of of y^ Emperor Char les the
v. of that name who, the year of our Lord. 1521. sent for Luther unto Worms a
City in Germany by an Herald of arms with letters of safe conduct, to whom
he came boldly, although some persuaded him that he should never have come
from thence alive. There he was examined before the Emperors Majesty of y^
books that he had wri^te^, and whether he would reca^t them, or any thing in
them contained. Who answered that he would ^cant so much as any man was able
to prove false by the word of GOD, otherwise he would deny nothing that he
had written. After a while when no other answer could be gotten of him* the
Emperor gave him leave to departs without danger, because of his safe conduct.
a^ though many labored to the contrary. especially the Popes Ambassador: as
in the book of y^ Acts and Mon^ me^ts more plainly is declared.
so great, that they could not tell how, nor by what means to express the
gladness of their minds. Some went up and down laughyng in their sleues, and
did not communicate to any man the secret joy of their heart: saving only unto
their fre^des, whom they made partakers there of by sendyng letters to and fro.
Other some with open mouth did cry out, and made manifest their joy to al men
that did see the^, saying: our Savior comes, our Savior comes (meaning
the Emperor) so that their joy was passing measure.

See these desperate thieves, and murderers, how they rejoiced in a false
savior, which was not able to help the^ any thing at all, no although he had
joined all his power with them, and had gathered together an infinite number of
armed men to take their part: yet so they did hope that they should be exalted
again, yea a great deal more honorably, and set in higher authority, the^ at
any time before when they lived in abominable wickedness, in all dissolute
behavior, having their hearts hardened, so that they could not repent. They
were so past al fear, and so iocunde, yt almost with great grief of mind, I
doubted God would not perform his promise, but should be found a liar, where
he says, that he only will be our Savior, and that we should not put any
confidence in Esaias. 4. 11 Psalm. 146. 3.
Princes, as in whom there is no hope of salvation.

This I somethyng doubted, when they laying their heads together, whispered
one with an other, took counsel, and concluded with them selves, with what
army, with what furniture, and with what weapons they would set upon us, as
though they had had us presently in hold. They did so thunder against us with
most cruel threatenynges, as though they would have deprived God of his tittle
vz. that is, he which scatters the counsayles of Princes, and brings to
naught their Psalm. 33. 10 Prou. 21. 1^
vain imaginations. But God almighty, in whose hands are the hearts of all
Princes, suffered not his honor to be taken away from him, but as one which is
all truth, stood to his promise, and compelled them to leave unto him his
glorious title, and we remain by the great goodness of God alive at this day,
and they are defeated of their false savior. They were wonderfully deceived of
their expectation, For they did not find the godly Emperor such a man as they
would, nor as they thought they should. Therefore in despite of all their cruel
bragges (thanks be to God) we are yet safe enough, and doubt not, but ma^ger
their heads we shall so continue for a time, until it please y^ true Savior,
which saves all the world, to receive our souls into his hands.

Hitherto I have recited these things for an example, seeing they put so much
trust and confidence in one man, of whom they have no The ^romise of God is the
ground of true faith, which promise was thoro^ly ^oted in Luthers heart, as ap
peareth eu^ dently by his words.
promise, neither if he had promised them, it had not been in his power to have
performed it. And why should not we put much more trust in our true Savior,
which has not only most certainly promised to come shortly, and deliver us,
but also can and will perform his promise? He will not deceive us (for he is
no liar at any time) especially when we look for him with a good confidence,
sufferyng all things for his sake, in a just quarrel, which is not ours, but
his own, and not triumphyng like them: Which puttyng their trust in Caesar,
hope for the confirmation of their heinous and mischievous acts.

Yet it is more convenient for us to rejoice and say: O what an excellent
golden world shall that be, when our true Savior shall come, and shall quite
abolish at once all wickedness and all injuries which we must suffer for a time,
and shall make an end of all miseries and calamities? Neither shall the
Gospel nor his holy name be neglected, or blasphemed any more. The preachers
thereof, which now are poor and nedy, shall be no longer trod under foot,
neither shall they suffer any more persecution: neither shall there be
afterward any more theft, robbery, spoylyng, injury, false accusations,
fornication, lying, crafty conueyance, flattery, perjury, adultery, murder,
treason, all these things (which now almost every man does commit without
punishment, or rebuke) shall cease. And we finally shall be delivered from all
evil, so that we need not to fear the world, sin, death, hell, nor the
devil: For everlasting salvation, peace, tranquillity, and joy, shall reign
over us. And ought not we with most fervent prayer to desire these things? If
we could see perfectly how we are compassed every where with an infinite number
of devils: Which every moment of an hour aim, and shoot at us with their
venomous darts, and all entisements, and prouocations to sin: then we would
pray daily, kneelyng upon our knees, yea and would weep blood, desiryng God to
make an end of this miserable life.

Therefore now Christ our Savior puts us in mind in this Gospel to behold
these signs there in mentioned with joy, saying: When these things begin to
come The seco^^ part of the Sermon.
to pass, look up, and lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nygh.
Heaviness for the most part naturally causes a man to look downwards, and
they that are troubled in their minds go heavily, knitting their brows
together. Contrary wise a merry and joyful heart makes a man to hold up his
head, to streatch out his brows, and to look merrily and pleasantly about him.
Therefore he Christ's (...) ^araphastically expounded.
says: When you see these signs come to pass, when all things in heaven and
earth, with lowryng ^here do terrify your minds, so yt you cast down your
heads for sorrow and grief, be you not there withal troubled: For they are not
tokens of destruction unto you, but unto them which molest, vex and persecute
you. Therefore be of good ^here, and look up lustely: For they bring not
tidings of destruction, but of deliverance unto you, of unspeakable treasure
and abundaunce of all good things, such as no heart can desire or think. And
give no place to the devil, which beats these signs into your heads, to
terrify you, and to bring you into despair, so that you cannot lift up your
heads, and ^ Cor. ^. 9.
desire that joyful day. Accustom your selves rather to behold them a right,
liftyng up your heads with joy, as I have said, seeing there is no cause why
you should trouble and vex your selves, but rather rejoice. For they declare
no other thing unto you, but that your redemption is now at hand, and that I
will come shortly, and deliver you out of your troubles.

Behold this notable instructour, which knows better how to expound signs
and tokens of things to come, then any Sothsayer, or Astronomer. They only The
difference between the prognos^ication of Christ, and Astrono^.
prognosticate terrible and horrible euentes thereof, but our Savior Christ
says, they be tokens of great joy and gladness shortly after to ensue. These
things which man's reason and all the world does take for signs of
destruction, and teach us to pray that they come not to effect: the same
things he (unto who^ nothing is unknown) prognosticateth to be tokens of all
goodness.

Amongst all other he uses this most comfortable word: your redemption, which
every faithful man, with all his heart does desire most earnestly. For what else
means this word: your redemption, but that thou, which now art in bondage,
under the dominion of the devil, who sets upon thee with all kind of wicked
darts, and bends all his force against thee, that you, I say (which art
oppressed and overwhelmed of y^ world with many miseries, in danger of all
misfortune, out of the which no earthly creature is able to deliver thee) shall
now be delivered and saved by Christ thy Lord, and placed there, where thou
shall reign as Lord over the world, death and the devil? Why should thou
fear, or be amassed with such signs and tokens? Why should thou not rather
with cherefull countenance receive and embrace them?

What would thou do, if thou Certain similitudes whereby it is declared with
what joy we ought to look for y^ coming of ou^ Savior to Judgment.
should stand in a circle, beset with all kind of weapons, or rather with
gunnes, being charged and bent against thee, as the only mark at the which
they should be shot of: Where present death should be continually before thy
eyes? If God by his divine power, should take thee being in this case away
suddenly, and deliver thee from the^: or if thunder and lightenyng from heaven
should at once overthrow and strike down to y^ ground, all thy enemies with
their daggers, swords, spears and gunnes: Would thou not rejoice with all
thy heart? If a poor prisoner, which under a rigorous and cruel tyrant has
lived a long time, in a filthy and stinking prison, besides the sufferyng of
many other cruel torments: if such a man (I say) should hear, that his own
Prince would come to deliver him, and by force of arms take him out of so
great miseries and calamities: How would he be affectioned in his mind trow
you, if he should see him coming with a mighty army of men, and with gunnes,
strikyng down the walls of y^ Castle where he lies? No doubt it would be a
terrible sight to all the residue therein abydyng: But unto this prisoner it
would be very comfortable and joyful. The noise and roryng of the gu^nes would
much more delight his ears, then any musical harmony of sweet songs, or
pleasant instruments. That day (no doubt) he would celebrate with much
sole^nitie, geuyng God thanks that he had lived to see that joyful hour.

Even so ought we to do when we see these signs mentioned by our Savior
Christ in this Gospel. If fire, water, thunder, and lightenyng fall from
heaven so thick, and with such abundaunce as though all things in a moment
should utterly be destroyed: We must thus think with our selves, that it is
the provision and ordinance of God our King and Captain. Whereby he destroyng
and ouerthrowyng the prison house, will deliver us, which are kept bound in the
kingdom of the devil, under sin, afflicted of the world with manifold
miseries and calamities. Wherefore then should we be afraid, when we see these
things? Why should we not rather joyfully suffer al manner of torments,
wherewith the world, and the devil molesteth us, that our redemer may come the
sooner, and deliver us? For without his comfort and consolation, we were of al
men (as I said) most miserable, and might well wish that we had never ben
borne, and that we had no God at all. Therefore let us comfort our selves with
these joyful cogitations, knowing for a certaintye that our deliverer will
come, and that these signs are (as I may term them) his Haroulds of arms,
whereby he gives to us to understand, that he him self is not far behynd.

In the mean season, although in the world we be tossed, vexed, and afflicted
with many storms, through the intolerable wickedness Math. 27. 34.
of ungodly me^: although they give us vinegar mixed with gall to drink,
bysides other daily misfortunes, as sickness, pestilence, dearth, and war,
which are grievous to the body, or to the outward man: yet we must suffer and
abide all these things with patience: We must be content to drink this bitter
drink for a time, that y^ The commodity of affliction in this world.
sweet drink which hereafter shall be given us, may be the more pleasant to our
taste, and that we may thereby be moved ye more earnestly to pray for the coming
of our true savior: otherwise we should behave our selves like savage and wild
me^, which bereaved of their wit, have no perseverance of the danger that
ha^geth over their heads: even like the secure and careless world which
knows not how to repent, yea we should be drowned in ye desire and love of
worldly honor, wealth and pleasure, and at the length cast of all care of Gods
word, and utterly perish with the wicked world.

Therefore this bitter drink is commodious unto us: For it breeds in us a
saciety and lothsomnes of this life, and comfortably causes us to hope for a
life, much more excellent now, when our true Savior shall come in ye clouds,
Mat. 24. 30.
with power and great glory: Who shall deliver us from all danger, receive us
to him self into the life everlasting, then the which nothing ca^ be more
joyful. But unto the wicked worldlyngs which set their whole delight upon this
life, caryng nothing for God, his coming shall not be very acceptable: 1.
These. ^. 3 Math. 24. 27. 1. Cor. 15. 52.
For in a moment he shall bring them to naught, so that they shall be
constrained to lie in everlasting pains and torments, which arrogantly
contemn and despise both his signs and his word.

And whereas this is no small grief to good Christians, to consider in their
minds such a great destruction of the world, whereby they trouble them selves
for their sakes, which shall perish: our Savior by the words contained in the
latter part of this Gospel, withdraws their minds from such cogitations,
moving them to consider rather how necessary their own* redemption is, then
the great destruction of the wicked: which for their deserts, God of his
justice has provided for them. For they can never make an end of persecutyng
the Gospel, which most contumeliously and blasphemously they spit at, contemn
and scoff, and rashly, injuriously, and by force grieve and oppress the
preachers thereof: from which wicked purpose they can not be withdrawn by any
admonitions, intreatynges, rebukes or threatenynges. A man were as good speak
unto a stock or a stone, as unto the^, for they will not believe, before they
try by experience how wonderfully they were deceived, and what punishment God
has provided for such iron hearted infidels. They are so secure and careless,
that what so ever happens, This saying of the wicked is after a sort true:
For the good preacher may be a cause of trouble, first because where y^ word
of GOD is sincerelye preached, the devil moves and rayseth tumultes to
suppress it: secondly, where it is preached and not obeyed, the greater shall
be the plagues of the stubburne and stiffenecked people.
terrible to ye eyes, or horrible to the ears, that they turn from them
selves upon us, saying, that we are the cause of all misery and calamity, of
all danger, of all mischief. Finally when we have done all that we ca^ do, by
preaching, praying, counsaylyng, yea and adue^turyng our own lives to profit
y^ world, we are rewarded with utter contempt, hatred, envy, and most crafty
dealyng, which are able to make a ma^s heart to cleave a sunder for sorrow, and
grief of mind.

Therefore God cannot choose (if he will bear any sway in earth) but once at the
length let them see by experience, that his word and threatninges are true,
which they scorn and jest at, and that he is able to deliver out of trouble
his Christian children most miserably afflicted. And because the children of
the world do despise his Passion, death, and resurrection, and all things that
he did or speak, with a secure and careless mind: therefore once at the length
they shall be terrified and feared, when we shall live pleasantly and joyfully
in everlasting life.

Therefore if thou have any spark of pity in thy breast, take pity rather of
ye afflicted Christians, which must suffer so many miseries and calamities in
the world: yea rather lament the state of the Gospel, and the most holy name
of Christ our God, (in the which thou wast baptized, and called to be partaker
of life everlasting,) which the wicked worldlyngs do so vyly and blasphemously
spit at, despise, tread under their feet, and revile with most spiteful
words. What kind of pity call you this, to take pity of these cruel
murderers, having an heart so stony that it cannot repent, which will not amend
their life and make an end of their mischievous acts, before they be utterly
destroyed with their forefather Pharao, and such other as have been rebellious
against y^ majesty of almighty god?

I had rather ten worlds should perish ten times, then one true Christian
should continue in sorrow and grief of mind for their sakes, which so
outrageously contemn and despise Christ our Savior, and all Christian
Religion. Therefore it is our part to pray unto God with a faithful heart and
fervent desire that his kingdom Mat. 6. 10
may come. In like manner we had need to wish and pray that the world may be
overthrown and utterly destroyed, which most arrogantly and blasphemously does
set it self against Christ and his blood, and can never make an end of his
raging fearcenes, and cruel persecutyng of poor Christians. For so that form
of prayer which Christ our Savior has prescribed unto us, teaches us
courageously, and with confidence to pray, that this day may come, and that we
cry without ceasing unto god, that once at the length he will be revenged on
those wicked and desperate verlettes, for the spiteful handlyng of his holy
and precious blood.

No Christian man ought or ca^ pray otherwise then thus, especially such as are
molested and afflicted for the confession of Christ, and preaching of the
Gospel and kingdom of God: who have no other refuge on earth, but fervent and
faithful prayer. He that is not thus affectioned in his mind, that he does not
desire y^ last day with all his heart: does not yet understand the Lords
prayer, much less can he say it with his heart. As I by experience did once
plainly perceive in my self, at what time I was more delighted with other
forms of prayer devised by ma^s brain, then with that which our Savior
himself has taught us. But to him that is oppressed with the misery and
calamity of this world, it will seem a sweet prayer, such a man will say it
with all his heart. For who in such a case will not desire, and pray most
fervently, Mat. 6. 13.
that we be delivered from evil, to the end all plagues, vexations and
troubles of the world may have an end, seeing we see the world will remain as
it is? It will not (following ye example of the Adder) suffer his old skyn The
Adder (as they say) every spryng, of purpose* wresting him self through a
narrow place, lea^eth his old skin behynd him as it were leauyng of his old
coat* and putting on a new one.
to be taken of, that is, it will not repent and amend, but will continue as
before, or rather daily increase more and more in wickedness.

Therefore of all things this is the best, withal speed possible to depart out
of it. For here we live eue^ as it were in a den of thieves, and manquellers,
and can hardly, no not at all, sometimes defend our selves from violent injury,
and loss of life. Therefore for mine own part I care not what shift I made
honest and lawful to ryd my self out of the world. For (as S. Cyprian says)
who can have any delight to live in so filthy and troublesome estate, and
condition, being as it were beset about with swords and daggers, ready drawn
against us, so that it seems impossible to escape, if we had a thousand
lives? Who in this case can be merry, before he see some man come to deliver
him? But we are they which are in this case, as we may easily understand, if we
consider well our estate, and condition, our misery and calamity, the danger
that hangs over our heads, how busyly the devil goes about to entrap us,
how fiercely he sets upon us, and how we are constrained with great pain
and trouble to award his most bitter, and venomous darts, so that we can never
have rest.

What else therefore should we desire, but that withal speed we may be delivered
out of these intolerable greuaunces and dangers, which is, by the coming of
our true Savior to judgment at the last day? which who so ever This is a a
true saying, that we can not pray faithfully, nor believe in god a right except
we joyfully, ^ooke for coming of our Savior to judgment.
does not desire, he can not say the Lords prayer, nor the Articles of our
faith with his heart, as he ought. For with what faith can a man say: I believe
the resurrection of the flesh, and life everlasting: and does not desire it?
For if a man believe it, he must needs desire it with his heart, and be glad of
it when soever it shall come, otherwise he is no Christian in deed, neither can
he justly brag of his faith.

For faith is a certain knowledge of Gods bountiful goodness toward us, which
we taste daily, but shall chiefly and perfectly enjoy it at the last day:
whereof we are put in mind by three Articles of our faith, by the which we are
taught to say: 1. We believe yt our Savior Mat. 24. 30. and. 25. ^1. Act. 1*
11. 10. 42. and. 17. 30. 2. ^im. 4. 1. Pet. 4. 5.
shall come from heaven, to judge the quick and the dead: 2. Who Esaias. ^6. 19.
Ezec. 37. 5. Job. 19. 26. Mat* 12. 42. Man. 12. 25. Luc. 14. 14. Joan. 11. 24.
Luc.. 321. 1. Cor. 15. 12. Colos 3. 4. 1. These. ^. 14. Joan. 3. 36 and 5. 2. *
Rom 6. 33. Dan. 12. 2. Mat. 19. ^9. and 25. 45. Joan. 3 15. and 4. 1^. 36.
Joan. 6. 27. and 40. and 47. and 54. Joan. ^0. 28. and 12. 15. and 50. and 17.
2. Act. 1^ 46 and 48. Romans 2. 7* and 5. ^1. and 6. 22 Gal. 6. 8. Tit. ^. 2. and
3. 4. 1. Cim. 1. 16. and 6. 12. 1. Joan. 1. 2. and 2. 25. and 5. 11* and 13.
and ^0. Jude Epist. ^1.
at his coming shall raise up our bodies: 3. And receive both body and soul
together unto the everlasting life.

This is part of our faith where by we are justified: apprehendyng thereby the
mercy of God almightye toward us miserable sinners. Without the which we can
not be saved. For it is written: He M^. ^* 16.
that believes, shall be saved: and he that believes not, shall be damned.
Faith therefore is (as I may term it) the only staff whereupon we must rest in
this our pilgrimage, being over laden with intolerable burdens of sin and
dangers yt ensue thereof. Which staff will do us no service, except we take
it in our hands, and use it at all times convenient. But we can not, nor will
not streatch forth our hands to receive it, except we be desirous thereof.
Again, except we desire those things which we are taught to believe, it is a
manifest argument, that we do not take them to be Gods benefits, and to
proceed of his bountiful goodness toward us, which is the property of the
true iustifiyng faith.

Therefore I conclude, that we cannot well say the Articles of our faith, that
is, we can not believe a right in Christ's coming to judgment, the resurrection
of our flesh, and life everlasting, except we desire that the last day may
come, at what time our true Savior will put us in full possession of these
excedyng great benefits of his. Again, a man that has no desire of the last
day, does not well understand the ten commandments: For what means it when
he says, I am the Lord thy God, thou shall not take my name Exodus 20. 2
in vain: thou shall not steal, thou shall not kill* thou shall not commit
Gal. 3. 24.
adultery* etc. but that we are in danger of al these vices and wickednesses,
and that such is our state and condition, that without sin and great danger
we can not live: the devil endeuoryng by all means to persuade us, that we do
not take God only for our God, and by crafty means to withdraw us from a
quiet, joyful, and godly life. He sets up idolatry, raises up blasphemy,
and vnhalowyng of Gods name, he stirs up men to disobedience, sedition,
wrath, filthy lust, robbery, theft, murder, and all kind of wickedness. These
incommodities who so ever sees in deed, and would feign be ryd of them, must
needs desire the last day, which is the time when all these, and such other
miseries, and calamities, shall have an end.

Against which the Lords prayer was appointed and devised by our Savior
Christ as a remedy, especially where he has taught us to say: Hallowed be thy
Mat. 6. 9.
name, thy kingdom come, Thy will be done, and deliver us from all evil. It
remains therefore that we use this remedy, heartily praying to God our heavenly
father for these things, which we cannot thoroughly and perfectly receive
before the end of the world. For (as I said before) there is no hope of any
better, then this miserable estate present, as long as the world endures:
especially in this our lat ter times toward the end thereof, it being now even
at the point to be consumed and utterly destroyed for ever. For it is even the
devils derling, past all hope of amendment, so yt all labor yt is bestowed
upon it, to any such end, is in vain: Which we may evidently perceive,
considering how the word of God is daily more and more contemned. Many kind of
errors, pestiferous sects, horrible wickednesses increase daily, whereby the
world is worse and worse whiles we hope (but in vain) for amendment.

Wherefore then, in such miseries and calamities should we be greatly desirous
of our life? And if I for mine own part had no great cause to desire the end
of all things, yet the peril and danger of my brethren, scattered here and
there in the world, ought to move me: for whose sake we have good cause hartly
to pray for it, whose state is such (as we both hear and see) that they are
constrained to suffer all manner of ignominy, reproach, slanderous words, both
privily and openly, violent injury, and finally most grievous persecution what
soever, with diverse kinds of torments, cruelly handled, and put to death.

For how many eue^ in our days have we seen, partly burnt openly, or by some
such means made away, partly put to death, privily and by traitorous means
dispatched? There are many, besides the infinite number of holy me^, which have
been slain before our time, since the Ascension of our Savior Christ, or
rather since the beginning of ye world. Whose blood being yet unrevenged,
cries for the coming of our Savior to judgment: to the end they being
restored to their bodies again, may have full fruition of the joys long
looked for, and may be reue^ged of the world, as the revelation of John
declares: Where God comfort them after this sort, saying: that they must
rest for Apoc. 6. 10.
a little season, until the number The Saints of God do not require vengeance
of their enemies, because of private hatred, but because they know the^ to be
Gods enemies, and do rage with deuelishe fury against his holy Church, and
against his everlasting truth. And in this case the love of our neighbor has
no place, where it is repugnant to the love of God. whose glory we ought to
perferre before the commodities of all the world. Therefore when man is such an
enemy unto GOD, that we must needs hate the one, and love y^ other, we must
love God, and hate man. Psalm. 139. 21. and in Gods cause pray for the
destruction of man. Ier. 18. 11 ver. 21. as against the enemy of GOD, upon a
zeal and fervent love of Gods glory, especially if they be such as we perceive
offend not of ignorance, but of malicious stubburnes and that against their
conscience. But in our own cause, as they are injurious unto our own person, we
must rather pray for man, then against man, as we are taught by the example of
our Savior and Steven. Act. 7. 60.
of their fel^w servants and brethren, which should be killed in like manner,
were fulfilled, which I hope is now come to pass.

Therefore both the Christians that are living, and those that are departed,
after a sort do desire us to help them with our prayers, desiring God to
hasten their redemption. For what thing can be more miserable unto Christians,
then that they should be constrained always to hold their tounges, the world
and the devil continually bragging and raging over the^, daily putting to
death and cruelly murderyng more and more of the faithful professors of Jesus
Christ and his vnfaillible word, and seducyng men, more and more increasing
these heinous offenses which before were intolerable?

We hear and see at this present, the Turk and the Pope, which is Antichrist,
rage with most cruel tyranny against y^ name of Christ, daily sheddyng the
blood of his Saints, with many sects bysides, contrary to his Gospel: And
should we, holdyng our hands in our bosom, look upon the devil, practisyng
without measure his crafty devises against the Christians, and not make our
earnest prayer unto God for them without ceasyng? There is no spark of
Christianity in a man's body remainyng, that would not pray unto God withal his
heart to be delivered out of these so great miseries and calamities.

Therefore if we have a mind to be Christians, we must endeuer our selves to
pray diligently and earnestly, as our Savior has taught us, and as our
necessity requires, if it be any necessity: when we see good Christians with
great persecution slain, true doctrine oppressed, the kingdom of the devil,
withal manner of vice and wickedness, advanced: Saints, by the means of
wicked men, not only despised and troade under foot, but consumed to dust and
ashes: finally the Gospel of Christ our Lord, and his name spitefully
blasphemed.

Therefore let us call upon God all that we may, desiryng him for the glory of
his name, to take upon him the defense of his Christian children, and of his
own doctrine, and bring them, by his coming at the last day to judge He^. 4.
3. Genesis 3. 15. Revel. 13. 8 Joan 1. 2^ 1. Pet. 1* 19 To. 16. 25. Ephesians* 3. 9.
Colos. 1 26 2. Timo. 1. 10. Tit. 1. 2.
the quick and the dead, to that glorious rest which he has promised and
prepared for them, from the beginning of ye world, through the death and
Passion of the immaculate lamb our Savior Christ. But if any man through the
infirmity of his flesh be afraid of that day: let him print deeply in his
mind the words of Christ our Savior, and comfort him self with this, that
he byddeth us lift up our heads and be of good cheer, calling that time our
redemption, that is: not death, but everlasting life: not wrath, but mercy and
grace: not hell, but the kingdom of God: not terror, or danger, but comfort
and joy. And therefore Paul, not without ^it. 2. 13.
a cause, calls it the blessed hope and appearyng of the glory of the great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

Therefore we may be of good cheer, and need not fear the loss of our life,
nor his coming to Math. 10. 32. Mat. 10. 38 Romans 8. 17 2. Tim. 3. 12. Math.
10. 25. Joan. 16. 2 and. 33.
Judgment, which has given us his Gospel, and his grace therewith, not to
deny him, but to love him and confess him, and to shun no danger in his
cause, which are and will be laid before us of the world, and of the devil,
until the coming of our Savior: whose coming shall not be terrible, but
joyful, yet not to the world, but to us miserable sinners: which for a time
must continue here, as it were in a den of thieves, where the devil, day and
night seeks to draw us: taking away from us, not only our life and our
goods, but vexyng our hearts, and our consciences with diverse storms of
temptations, to the end we should fear the day of our redemption, and being
destitute of all comfort, should fall into utter desperation. Unto us thus
troubled, the coming of our Savior shall be joyful: but unto the world which
will not believe, what danger hangs over his head, before he have experience
thereof: it shall Math. 24. 48.
bring terror, fear, plagues, death, destruction, hell fire.

Therefore when that day shall come upon the sudden, and utterly destroy all
things, there is no cause why thou, that art a faithful Christian, should
be afraid thereof, least it destroy thee in like sort. For either being
received, thou shall be taken out of the grave, and out of dust into heaven:
1. These. 4. 17. 1. Cor. 15. 32.
or else in a moment thou shall be changed into a glorious estate for ever, and
placed where no sin, no fear, no sorrow, no danger, but true righteousness,
joy, peace, life, tranquillity and everlasting blessedness shall reign. These
things we look for, and preach, for the little flocks sake, which shall
receive them at that day, which we desire withal our hearts, and hope it to be
now hard at hand, because so many signs and tokens thereof are already past,
forespoken by Christ, our true Savior. And this is that consolation and
comfort, which no man can give, but only the holy Ioa^. 14. 27 Job. 1. 17.
Romans 8. 11. and Ioa^. 7. 38 Act. 9. 31. Romans 5. 3. and. 10. 17. and 1^. 14. 5.
1. Lor. 2. 10
ghost, by the word of Christ our Lord.

Let us suffer therefore the Sun, the Moon and all creatures to lowre, and
to threaten terrible things to come: For although they be terrible unto the
world, they are joyful unto us, which in them see that comfortable
deliuerau^ce, which our Savior by y^ words of this Gospel has declared unto
us, and which he expounds unto us by this godly parable, or similitude
following: See (says he) the fig trees, and all other trees, when they shoot
out their buds, you see and know of your selves, how that So^mer is the^ nigh
at hand: so likewise ye also when see these things come to pass, be sure that
the kingdom of GOD is nigh. Doubtelesse this is a notable exposition, which I
my self could never invent, or apply unto this purpose. For who ever herd,
that the darkenyng of y^ Sun, and the Moon, the destruction of the heaven
and earth, the fear and tremblyng of men, the ruin of the air, water and all
creatures, should be likened to the shootyng out of buds, and y^ blossomyng of
trees? I would think rather that these things should be lykened to a rough,
sharp, and very hard winter, which with intolerable cold destroys and
kylleth all fruits, and what soever grows upon the earth.

But our Savior Christ of all other the best interpreter and expounder of his
word, expounds these signs after an other sort, better to our comfort and
consolation: showing that those things which seem terrible unto us, are
pleasant and beautiful to behold: as if we see the Sun and the Moon
darkened, the water and the wyndes stormy and tempestuous, the mountains
overthrown and made equal with the valleys, he teaches us to say: thanks
be to God, for now the pleasant some ^s at hand, now we see the spryng of the
leaf in some trees, and other some to shoot out their buddes.

No man, no reason, no humane wisdom, could thus interpret these signs,
terrible to behold, that redemption and everlasting joy should be signified
thereby, which unto reason, and man's wisdom seem rather to prognosticate
death and all kind of destruction. But seyug we have learned this
interpretation of such a notable scholemaster, eue^ of him which sends them,
and therefore knows best how to expound the^: therefore (I say) let us learn
it well, and accustom our selves unto it, that we may print it in our minds
the better to our comfort, and that we may behold these signs, and give our
indgement of them according to the word of God: and not according to reason and
man's wisdom, which is foolish, and ^ull of corruption, which teaches us to
shun and be afraid of those things, that in deed are pleasant and joyful.
It will not gladly suffer us to be hold all things darkened and to look
lowringly: thunder and lightenyng, great storms and te^pestes, are
unacceptable unto it.

Notwithstanding a Christian man ought not to be troubled therewith, but take
hold upon Gods word, whereby he opens our minds, yt as he interprets these
things, we may interpret them also: knowing thereby y^ pleasantnes of summer
is now at hand, and the earth will very shortly bring forth an abundance of
goodly lilies and sweet roses, most pleasant to behold, that is to lay: that
now after this filthy and wicked life, in the which we are tumbled and tossed
with many miseries, and 1. Lor. 5. 7 2. Cor. 5. ^. (...). 6. 15 Ephesians. 4. 24
calamities we shall be brought into the haven of tranquillity, blessedness, and
all pleasure, which never shall have end.

For this is his will, that as we That is best, which is new unto ye world, but
old unto God.
must be new me^, so we must have new senses, new cogitatio^s, new
understanding of things, and not behold any thing with the eyes of our own
reason, as they seem unto Colos. 3. 9 Collos. 2. 8
the world, but with the eyes of faith, and as they seem unto God: that we may
the better fashion our Heb. 11. 1
selves unto that new life to come which is invisible, which we hope for, after
the tribulation of this world. And that we be not delighted with this temporal
life, nor grieved to depart out of it, or to see the destruction of the world
and all creatures therein, of whom it is no time now to take pity, we ought
rather to take pity of the miserable Christians, both of them which presently
are afflicted in the world, and also of them which being departed, sleep in
the grave, and desire to see the glorious day of their resurrection. Even as
the yerbes which in the winter time lie hid in the earth, and the trees, the
juice thereof being kept in with cold, can not spryng and bring forth buds,
blossoms, and leaves, but look for the spryng, at which time shootyng out
their buds, they flourish, and are lively to behold: so we in like manner ought
with joy to look for the iast day, saying: Now the sharpenes of winter is
ended, the pleasant summer is come, yea such a summer which never shall have
end. At the coming whereof not only the Saints, but also the Angels rejoice,
and are glad. Pea all creatures after a sort look for 1. Pet. 1. 12 Romans 8. 22
it, and desire it earnestly.

For heaven, earth, A mind and speech attributed to creatures without lyse.
Esa. ^4 23. and not properly but figuratively* as when we say the earth does
praise the Lord, that is to say, it does declare his wondrous works, and the
workemanshyp thereof ministers a man matter to praise the Lord: so it desires
y^ last day, that is to say, it being accursed daily more and more for our
sin, shows our miserable estate, and what cause we have to ^ament and to
desire our deliuerau^ce by the coming of our savior to judgment.
Sun, Stars, air and all creatures can no longer bear the wickedness of
the world, which they are constrained to behold, unto whom it is grievous to
serve to the use, or rather to the abuse of sinners, and are an aid to the
wickedness of the devil. And therefore they would gladly be delivered of this
fylthy bondage, and be made a new heaven, and a new earth: as Peter, and the
Prophet Esaias 2. Pet. 3. 13 Apoc. 2^. 1. Esa. 65. 17. and. 66. 22.
says, in y^ which only righteousness shall dwell. For iniquity and the
wi^kednes of man passes all measure: so that it can not be suffered any longer.
And therefore all things are moved (as now we see) crying (as it were) unto God
for their deliverance.

For this cause our Savior Christ concludes after this sort: So you, when you
see these things come to pass, know that the kingdom of God is at hand.
Verily I say unto you: this age shall Here an age may be taken for the space of
two thousand years, whereof there are but three in all the world, one from the
beginning of the world unto the law, the second from the law unto the coming
of our Savior, and the last from the coming of our Savior unto the end of
the world, which shall be shortened. But how much it is uncertain.
not pass, until all things be fulfilled: heaven and earth shall pass, but
my word shall not pass. As though he should say, you have prayed after this
sort: Let thy kingdom come, deliver us from evil: Therefore now know you for
a certainty, even as certainly as my word is true and everlasting, that when
you see these signs, your prayer is heard, that the kingdom of God shall come
even as you have desired: and all sin shall have an end, and be consumed. etc.

Therefore when I come in the clouds withal my angels, with great glory in
flaming fire, wherewith all creatures shall melt and be consumed, and all
things shall give alyght, and shine after a stranger and wonderful sort:
your bodies shall be glorified, so yt they shall pass the pureness of the air,
and all the army of heaven, shine they never so bright, and shall reign with
me for ever in unspeakable glory. Finally, you shall see the wicked under your
feet naked in the earth, in perpetual shame, tremblyng and shaking, being
accursed and cast down headlong into hell.

Now to make an end, after this sort, as I have declared unto you, the signs
of the last day must be expounded unto the Christian people, that it may
appear they signify no harm, but marvelous joy, great profit, and
commodity. As for the Astronomers let them interpret them to signify nothing
else but war, murder, and utter destruction: let them fear and tremble, which
have, and desire nothing but a temporal life, and pleasant days in this
world: But let us be of good cheer, as men that are renewed and regenerate in
Christ through the holy Ghost. And even as he is the Lord of heaven and earth
and all creatures therein: so we by him are the Lords of all signs, what
soever seems terrible to the eyes of man: neither can any thing hurt us, n^,
although it take away ou^ life. For our life and conversation Phil. 3. 20
is not here, but we look for an other life when our body shall be delivered,
which life is now hid with Christ in heaven, through faith (as S. Paul says)
Collos. 3. 3
but shortly shall be revived before all the world in immortal and everlasting
bryghtnes: When both in body and soul, we shall reign with God the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost, to whom be all praise, honor, and glory, world
without end.

Amen.
The Signs that were given to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, before their
destruction.
A Whole year before the 1.
coming of Vespas^an to (...) the C^e, right over it, was seen a blasing
Star like unto a sword: which the common people did interpret to be a token
of their deliverance out of bondage, into the which they were brought by the
Romans. 2.


Before the war begone, at the feast of unleavened br^ad, which was then the
viij. day o^ April, there was suddenly seen at nine of the clock at night, for
the space of half an hour, such a great light about the Alter, and the
Temple, that it seemed to be mydday.

At y^ same feast, a Cow being brought 3.
to be sacrificed, brought forth a Lamb in the myddest of the Church.

The Cast gate of the Temple, being 4.
of brass and shut every night, but not without the strength of twenty men,
being locked ^ barred with diverse locks and bars, was seen at v^. of the
clock at night, and (as Egesippus testifies) diverse nyghtes to open it self
without the hand of men. This thing was thought of the most part to be a
token of good luck, and that the gates of their enemies should open unto them
of their own accord. But some that were of the wiser sort, said it was a
token that the strength of the Temple should be dissolved without the hand of
man, that it might be spoiled of their enemies and destroyed.

A few days after their solemn 5.
^eastes, there appeared in the clouds before Sun setting, a vision of
charets, and hosts of armed men, where with all the Cities of Iurye and the
country there about were invaded and ouerrunne.

At the feast called Pentecost, the 6.
Priests entryng in the night into the inner Temple, according to their manner
to do their divine service, first they perceived a noise or rushelyng after,
they heard a voice saying often: Let us depart hence, let us depart hence.

One called Jesus, the son of Anani, 7.
a base man and of low degree, four years before the war, the City being
in great wealth and quyetnes, coming to the celebration of one of their
solemn feasts, called the feasts of tabernacles, went up into the Temple,
and suddenly cried out with a loud voice, saying: A voice from the East, a
voice from the West; a voice from the four wyndes, a voice against Jerusalem,
and the temple, a voice against new married me^, and new married women, a voice
against all this people: crying thus day and night he went thorough all the
streets of the City. Certain of the chief men, being a^ed, and fearyng that
it was a token of misfortune, took the man and whipped him. But he whiles he
was beaten, cried still as before, and being still beaten, until a man might
see his bare bones, he ^er desired them to let him go, neither ^yd he shed
any tears for the matter, but cried still at every strype: Woe, woe unto the
inhabitauntes of Jerusalem, and at the length dimissed, as a man out of his
wits, he cried still as before, especially, on the solemn feast days,
until the slege of the City, at which time he entryng up on the wall, and
crying, woe, woe unto the City, the Temple, and the people: he cried at the last
w^ unto my self, and was cast do wne dead with a stone hurled to him by the
enemies out of one of their engyns. They were nothing moved with these signs,
but thinkyng they should have victory over their enemies, resisted them, until
both they and their City was destroyed, according to the words of our
Savior. Luc. 19. 43.

Signs, and wonders signifiyng alteration, or misery and calamity of certain
Countries, and Nations, or of great Personages.
ABout the year from the beginning of the world. 3458. Tarquinius, surnamed
Superbus the seventh King of the Romans, was deprived of his kingdom by his
subjects, and thrust out by force of arms, and the state of governance
altered, from the government of one monarche, unto ij. yearly offices called
Consuls: a little before which time in signification thereof (as
Historiographers do write) a Dog did speak, and a Serpent ^id bark. T.
Plinius lib. 8. Cap. 41.

The year from the beginning of the world. 3538. the light of the Sun was so
taken away by an ^lipse seen in Greece, that a man might see the Stars as well
at midday, as at midnight. Shortly afterward followed y^ war, called the
war of Peloponesus which continued seven and twenty years. Thucidides.

The year from the beginning of the world. 3698. at Rome, and the country
there about, blood instead of water gushed out of the sprynges, and milk from
heaven, like rain. Shortly after followed the war of Carthage against the
Romans, which cost the lives of many thousands. Orosius li. 4. Cap. 5.

Anno Domini. 1452. Constantinople in Greece (where in those days was the
Emperors Palace) was besieged and overcome of ye great Turk, called Mahomet
the second of that name: who when he had gotten the victory, used most beastly
cruelty toward the Christians, both men, women, and children, old and young,
rich and poor. The Emperor being slain, his head was set upon a spear, and
carried round about the City, (ye more to grieve his subjects) his wife and
daughter, with many noble women were ravished, and after cut in pieces, all the
noble men were slain, the common people were made bond slaves, and many other
such like vilanies were done, bysides the bryngyng of the whole country of
Greece into his own dominion. A little before which time, was seen at Comus, a
City in France, toward Sun setting, a great multitude of dogs, carried
in the air, and after the^ droues of diverse kinds of beasts: also men armed
diuersely, some with spears and shieldes, who were pursued of a great army of
horsemen, being divided into diverse co^panyes. For the space of three hours
the army seemed to be setting forth, at the last came forth a tall and huge
man, fearful to behold, sittyng upon a terrible horse, seemyng to be the
Captain of the host: and many such strange things appeared, until night
when they could be no more seen.

THese few examples I have here added in the end of the Sermon, to let men see
that before great alterations or channges of kingdoms and commonweals, God
sends wonderful tokens thereof, to signify the same before it come to pass:
whereby with Martin Luther, the author of this Sermon, we may well conclude
that before the alteration of the whole world (which is the last day) he will
send many signs and tokens thereof, which he shows for the most part to be
already fulfilled: and therefore the end of all things is now to be looked
for, because there has happened of late days many wonderful Eclipses, or
darkenyngs of the Sun, and Moon, many Suns have been seen at one time,
many rain bows, many terrible blasyng Stars, and other strange sightes of
fire in the air, many great tempests of wyndes, with floods and earth quakes,
which have destroyed and ouerflowe^ both Cities, and whole countries: Whereof
here might be added diverse examples, both of such as happened before Luther did
write this Sermon, as also since that time. But they are almost innumerable,
and have been partly seen with our own eyes, and are at large set out in
Print, by Conraedus Gesnerus, Marcus Fritschius, and others, who have written
no small books of such wonderful and strange things, as by the providence of
almighty God have happened before time: to this end, that we seeing these
things come to pass, forespoken by our Savior, might the more diligently
watch for his coming, least we following the example of the lewd servant,
lead a careless life in all kind of wickedness, and he coming upon us
unawares, give us our portion with hypocrites and dissemblers in everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. God grant us therefore to watch
for the coming of our Savior, that we being prepared with oil in our Lamps,
he may take us with him unto euerlastyng^lyfe.

Amen.
* Imprinted at London, by John Day, over Aldersgate.

Cum gratia and Priuilegi^ Regi^ Maiestatis.

2570.


