A Methodicall preface prefixed before the Epistle of S. Paul to the R^^^^
^erie necessary and (...) su^able for the be^^^^ understanding of it.

Made by the right reverend Father and faithful servant of CHRIST JESUS,
Martin (...) newly translated out of (...) into English, by (...) student.

Can there any good thing come (...) Come, and see. JOHN 1.4^. (...) Anno Dom
(...)

To the Celestial Christian Reader, W. W. wishes grace, mercy, and peace,
with a true and lively knowledge of our only Lord omnisufficient Savior and
Redeemer CHRIST JESUS.
I Do offer and present unto thee (gentle Reader) here published in Print,
this little Treatise, first written by that famous and godly learned Doctor in
CHRIST'S School Martin Luther, Aristotle says that a good thing, the more
common it is made, the better it is.
in the Germane or Duche tongue, for his own Contrymen: afterward
translated into Latin, by a learned man, named Iustus Jonas, that it might be
common to noe then it was before: now also though plainly, yet faithfully
^urned into English, for the bene^ite and commodity of this our Israel, by one
most studiously careful, and zealously desirous of thy profit. This excellent
Preface will lead thee as a Lantern of light to the better understanding of
that most precious, The use of this Preface.
most fruitful and profitable Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans, which when
thou can well and wisely understand, first it will make thee ready armed,
well furnished and instructed to withstand and answer all the popish Romanists
(GODS greatest adversaries, and enemies to his Gospel) who stoutly maintain
and defend that man's works do merit and deserve salvation, and so present us
just and righteous before GOD: Secondly it will teach thee a Christian life and
conversation: namely how thou ought to bring forth the worthy fruits of
Faith which alone does justify us before God, because it is (as it were) the
hand whereby we apprehend and take hold fast of the merits of Christ's blessed
Passion to be ours Other branches of doctrine and manners there be in that
notable Epistle good store. Use and pervse this prologue, and then it will
lighten thy understanding very much in this weighty matter of our salvation,
in this chief and principal point of Christian religion: to wit, whether we
be justified by the works of the Law, or by the mercy of God only, for the
mediation of his Son, who was made a slain sacrifice upon the Cross for us
most wretched and miserable sinners. After that thou do fully and perfitlie
attain to the true meaning of it, I doubt not but thou will (by the help of
Gods holy Spirit working mightily in thee) persevere and continue faithful
unto the end in this doctrine of faith taught hereby the Apostle. Tim 1.19
Only be strong in the LORD, fight a good fight, keeping faith and a good
conscience: then surely this godly doctrine will prepare thy heart in a strong
defense, that the fiery darts of the Devils Ministers by errors and falsehood
shall not wound thee. Wherefore (gentle Reader) use this Introduction to thy
comfort and commodity: Read and regard it, and give God the glory, who be
praised for ever and ever. Amen. Farewell in the Lord, and pray for me, as I
daily do for thee.

Ephesians. 2. v. 8. and 9. By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of
your selves. For it is the gift of God, and comes not of works: least any
man should boast himself.

A Methodicall Preface prefixed before the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans,
written by Martin Luther: and Englished by W. W.
Seeing that this Epistle of St. Paul written unto the Romans, is the Method
of the whole Scripture, and the most absolute Epitome or Abridgement of the new
Testament, that is, of the Gospel (which verily alone it ^oth briefly and most
purelie ^et out unto us) I account it ^orthie not only of all Chri^^ians to be
known from their childhood, The excelencie of this Epistle
yea and learned without the book, word by word: but also (being by daily and
continual meditation as it were chewed and concocted) even as well disgested
meat to descend and enter into our innermost bowels. This Epistle is such a
rich treasury of spiritual wealth, and as it were a most plentiful Copiae
Cornu, that he that reads it a thousand times shall always meet with some
new thing not perceived before. In so much that the reading of this Epistle is
most profitable of all other, because it does, as it were ascend higher in the
doctrine of holy things, in the knowledge of Christ in learning the nature of
faith, and in the knowledge of all spi^^^^al affections: yea, the more it is
^andled, the greater it grows more pleasant and delightful, more precious
and plenteous it ^howeth and seems then before. Wherefore I thought it ^abour
well bestowed, if (according to that measure of grace which I have received of
God) I might put to my helping hand, and by this brief Preface prepare an
entry into it: to the end that it might more easily and plainly be read and
understood of al. Chiefly knowing that this Epistle (which one alone ought to
be accounted the Index and Method of all the Scriptures) has been so
obscured and darkened by certain men's foolish Comentaries Gloses, and vain
subtilties, that very few Writers in many ages past have perceived the drift,
scope, meaning, an^ intention of the Apostle, which notwithinding of it self is
mos^ easy and plain.

First of all we must diligently search out and labor to know the nature of
words, and figurative speeches which the Apostle uses. And before al^ things
we must learn to know what St. Paul means by these and such like words: The
Law* Sin, Grace, Faith, Righteousness, Flesh, Spirit, etc Otherwise though
thou read diligently, thou loses all thy labor.

This word Law, must not here be taken after the vsual^ manner of the
Philosophers, 1. Law what it is, and how it is to be understood.
or according to common reason: namely, to be defined a doctrine which teaches
men what to do, and what to leave undone, (...) ^ternall work for the most
part will break out at length, though it be for a time dissembled: this
oftentimes follows in such hypocrites. Wherefore (as he says) thou which
teach another, teach not thy self, that is, thou art ignorant thy self
what thou teach, because thou art ignorant of the meaning of the law, how
that it is not satisfied but with the inward affection and motion of the heart.
The Law being done in the outward work only, is so far from justifying,
that it rather increases and augmenteh our sin, The Law increases sin
as Paul says in the 5. chapter of this Epistle Wherefore the better thou
understand the Law, the less thou love the law: because it does exact and
require of thee so many things quyte contrary to thy affections, and altogether
repugnant to thy nature. Heerevpon it is that in the 7. chap. he says: The
law is spiritual: as if he should say, If the law were carnal or moral
doctrine only, then it would be satisfied by the external work. But seeing
that now it is spiritual, that is, requyring the affect and spirit: it
follows, that no man can fulfill it, unless he does those things which the
law commands, with a cheerful heart, with a certain ardent fervencie of
mind, and with all his affection. Such a new heart, and such a ^ervent and
cheerful affection of the heart, thou can not obtain of thine own
strength, or by thine own merits: but ^nely by the operation and se^ret
instinct of the holy Ghost.

For it is the Spirit of GOD ^nely that gives a new heart, and that makes a man
spiritual: and so being made spiritual, he ^ay love the law which is
spi^ituall, and may fulfill it, not for ^eare, or love of commodity, ^ut with
a cheerful and wil^ing heart, and that he may be ^aried violently (as it were
with ^ certain force) to do those things which the law commands, freely,
and of his own accord. So is that saying to be understood. The Law is
spiritual, that is, the Law is not fulfilled but by the Spirit, but by a heart
renewed by the Spirit. Therefore where there is not that renovation of the heart
by the spirit, there remains that grievous hatred of the law (which law
nevertheless of (...) self is just, holy, and good) (...) far is it from
fulfilling it.

Wherefore accustom an^ acquaynt thy self with thi^ Phrase and manner of
speakin^ which the Apostle here uses It is one thing to do the work of the
law, and another thing to fulfill the law. For it is a work of the law when
without grace, 1. Works of the Law.
without the Spirit we begin to work well, and when we labor to fulfill
the law by our own proper strength and power of our free will. But seeing that
there always remains in the heart certain servile fear and a most deadly
hatred of the law, sure it is that such works are sin and heinous factes
against the ^^w, and so do not please God. the Apostle says in the 3.
^hapter: By the works of the ^w shall no flesh be justified his sight. Here
therefore ^e may know and acknow^^^ge how the Sophisters and ^oole doctors are
far wide ^m the truth, who teach and ^irme this wicked and blas^emous
assertion: that by our ^orkes we may prepare the ^ay unto grace. But how can
^repare for my self away to ^ace by that work which I ^e with a stubborn,
froward, ^d untoward heart, and with repugnant affection: How ^n that work be
acceptable God which I do not wil^^^gly but with great grief of ^eart, yea
with extreme hatred ^f the law.

Fulfilling of the law.
that is, free and of thine own accord to li^ unto God, and to work we though
there were no law all.

Such a cherefulnesse, read^nesse, willingness, and arde^ affection, cannot
come into our hearts but by the quickening Spirit and his lively impulsion and
agitations in our heart, a^ the Apostle says in the 5 Chapter. Now the Spirit
is g^ven only by faith in JESUS CHRIST, as the Apostle sai^ in the beginning.
Faith comes through the hearing o^ the Gospel, through which word Christ is
preached vnt^ us, to have died, to have been^ ^^ried, and to have risen again
^^om death for us, as he says (...) the 3. 4. and 10. Chapters. therefore our
whole justifica^^on is of GOD: Faith also and ^^e Spirit are of GOD: they ^^me
not of our selves. Where ^re let us conclude that Faith (...) one justifies
and that Faith one fulfilleth the Law. For ^aith through the merit of CHRIST
obtains the holy spirit, which Spirit does make ^s new hearts, does
exhilarate ^s, does excite and inflame our ^eart that it may do those things
willingly of love which ^he law commands, and so at ^he last good works in
deed ^oe proceed freely from the ^aith which works so migh^ily, and which
is so lively in ^ur hearts. This is the meaning of the third Chapter. F^
whereas he had utterly damned the works of the law, a^ might have seemed to
have d^ anulled and abolished the la^ by the teaching the doctrine faith, he
preventeth that o^jection in these words. We d^ not (says he) destroy the la^
but rather establish it. That we teach how the law m^ truly be fulfilled by
faith. by believing in CHRIST JESUS.

Now it remains that we show how this word (Sin) taken in the Scriptures. 2
what
Sin n^ in the Scriptures signifies no only the external work: b^ that
whole force and native operation incredulity, as tha^ wickedness which we
hau^ by lineall descent (as it were ^om our great Graundfather ^de Adam, which
even vio^ntly carries us headlong (...) sin, namely that wicked ^eart and
all our reason, with (...) (yea even his best and chie^st) his strength and
power ^herwith we can do nothing ^e but sin: so that then we ^e said to
commit sin, when ^y the efficacy of this original ^nne (as with a certain
violent ^rce) we are carried headlong ^o do evil. There is no out^ard sin
done but first by his natural force and impul^on a man is wholly and with ^l
his affection carried roundly way to sinning. The Scripture and God himself,
when they ^ake of sin, they have respect unto this wickedness of our ^earts,
unto this natural inclination, that is, this vice of i^ credulity, as to the
fountai^ of all other sins. Like as the^fore Faith alone does justify and alone
does obtain the Spirit and pow^^ to fulfill the la^ and to do tho^ works in
de^ which are one (...) ^ood: so one incredultitie a^^ ^nbeleefe ca^seth sin,
and exciteth and kin^leth the flesh to sin, and commit evil works, as w^
see it happened to Adam a^ Eve in Paradise. Genesis 3.

Sin is principaly ^^^med vn^^^^efe
Wherefore CHRIST also the Gospel calls only a^ chiefly incredulity, sin.
Ioh. 1 The Spirit (says he) shall r^proue the world of sin, because they
have not believed me. Those works which truly good, even as good frui^ cannot
proceed and spring b^ ^f a good tree, that is, of faith ^orking in the heart:
as con^ariewise evil fruit can not ^ome but from an evil tree, that is,
incredulity of the hart^ Therefore this wickedness and incredulity of the
heart, is very where in the Scriptures ^lled the head of the Serpent ^^d of the
old Dragon, Genesis 3.
which ^as to be broken by that bles^^d seed of the woman, namely CHRIST.

But now to proceed: As con^erning these two words grace gift, they differ
thus, Grace what it i^
Grace the favor, mercy, and free ^ood will and benevolence of ^OD toward us.

Gift is the holy Spirit him^^lfe Gift what it is
and whom he favors; as very well appears in the 5 chap. where he
distinguishes gift from grace Although now we have not the fulness of this gift
or of the Spirit (because in this life there will always remain in us re^nants
of sin which fight again the Spirlt, as the Apostle sayt in the 7 chap. and the
3 Galat^ as also Moses says in the 3 ^ Genesis that there will be a conflict
betwixt the seed of the woman and the seed of the Serpent) yet grace works
this i^ us that the relics of sin sha^ not be imputed unto us: bu^ that we
shall be reputed an^ accounted before God as me^ fully and perfitly just.
Neithe^ is the grace and favor of Go^ so imperfitely bestowed upon us: as we
said the gift was. For God rather does love and embrace us with a full favor
and a right perfect good will for Christ's sake, who is our mediator, earnest
penny and the first fruits of the Spirit. Therefore though remnants of sin
daily do glister and shine in us: yet nevertheless we are just before God,
and sin is not imputed unto us through faith, which day^y striveth and wageth
war against the flesh.

So then you may understand that place in the 7 chap. where the Apostle, though
he was justified in the Spirit, acknow^edgeth himself yet to be a sinner: and
yet notwithstanding he says in the 8 chap. There is now no condemnation to
these which are in Christ Jesus. As many therefore of us as are justified
through faith in Christ, w^ are both sinners and just. Si^ners by reason of the
imperfi^ mortification of our flesh, an^ for that in this life (the relic of
sin remaining in us) we can not have or attain the fulnes^ of the Spirit.
First because w^ have through faith the first fruit and earnest of the Spirit:
so tha^ for our faith in Christ, God fatherly favoring us, does no impute unto
us that sin which remains in our flesh: neithe^ does judge us until that
sinn^ by death be quyte broken, banished, and abolished.

5. Faith what it is.
But now let us speak some what of faith. Faith is not a certain cold opinion
or a wandering cogitation of a man's mind, such a one as any man (hearing the
history of the ^hospell) may foolishly ima^^ne himself to have.

For certain men (hearing any things preached of faith, ^^d seeing that they
can dispute any things of faith and of christ, and yet for all that by ^at
knowledge, cogitation, or ^igent meditation, perceive ^^emselues not to be
foorth^th incited to do good works) (...) into that wicked and impi^s error,
that they stoutly de^ man to be justified by faith ^n: but that also works are
re^yred. these me^ indeed hearing ^e Gospel, feign to themselves ^ertaine
opinion, and they re^^lve in their minds certain ^^d cogitations of Christ,
thin^g then that faith is nothing (...) the dream of their own and and those
vain cogitations. And these men now and then boult out these excellent
speeches. A feigned faith
O (say they) if faith only justifies them, I pray you what say you to this?
Behold, I have heard the Gospel preached; I remember the history of Christ:
Lo, I believe and yet am not justified. True it is, for because this thy faith
is nothing but thy own bare and naked imagination and cogitatio^ of faith
which does not innovate thy heart, and which does move thee nothing at all,
there follows no newness of life, no works of faith.

But a true faith is the work of God whereby we are regenerate and borne anew
by his Spirit. John I chap: whereby also our old Adam is quelled, and we being
wholly trans-formed, we are made (as the Apostle says) new creatures to
Christ, the holy Ghost being the life, and government of our hearts. Wherefore
faith is such an effectual, lively, Faith is lively and not idle.
quick and mighty operation in our heart, that it cannot be idle, but must
needs break out, and show it self by good works

Neither does he that has this faith care greatly whether good works be
commanded or no? For though there were no law at all, yet by this lively
impulsion working in his heart, he is of his own accord forced and carried to
work true and godly Christian works.

He that does not his good works of such a lively affection of the heart, is
wholly in unbelief, and a stranger and aliant from the faith, as many of these
be which in schools dispute and jangle much of Faith and good works, not
knowing what they speak, or what they hold and affirm.

A true definition of Faith.
Faith therefore is a constant trust and a sure confidence of the mercy of God
toward us, which is lively, and works mightily in our hearts, whereby we
commit our selves wholly to God, casting all our care upon him: leaning and
trusting assuredly to this Faith, we ate not affrayde to die a thousand times.
For this so bold an assurance of the mercy and favor of God does make our
hearts merry, glad, and light: does also erect, raise, and even ravish us with
most sweet motions and affections toward God: yea and does so embolden the
heart of the true believer, that trusting to have God on his side, he is not
afraid to oppose himself alone against all creatures. But it is the Spirit of
GOD which gives us this heroical heart and stout stomach through faith,
which working effectually in our hearts, does incyte and inflame us to do
good. Now we have this cheerful towardnes and forwardness, to the end that
we might be most prompt and ready willingly and of our own accord to do,
tolerate, and suffer all things, whereby we may be obedient to so gentle and
favorable a father, who through Christ has enriched us with so great
abundance of his graces. It can not possibly be but that in whom soever this
efficacy and life of faith is, it should daily work, fructify, and give
increase to God. A lively comparison.
Even as it is impossible that a fire being kindled and flaming should not give
light and cast forth brightness, wherefore watch thou and take heed that thou
do not believe either thine own vain songs and sounds of faith, Fancyes
thine own foolish imaginations, or the vain trifling stuff of Sophisters.
Blind Pasters.
For these Sophisters have neither wit nor wisdom. They are belly beasts
borne only to those feasts of schools. But pray thou unto God (who commands
by his word that light should shine out of darkness) that he would shine
brightly in thine heart, and that he would create a true Faith in thee:
otherwise thou shall never believe truly, though for the space of a thousand
years thou did labor and study about such cogitations and imaginations,
either of a faith heretofore gotten, or hereafter to be sought for.
Righteousness.
This faith now is, that true justice which the Apostle calls the justice and
righteousness of God, that is, which only is of force avaylable and can stand
before God: because it is the mere gift of God. And this faith does transform
the whole man and makes him such a one, that (according to that common
definition of civil justice) he is ready to give and render to every one that
which is due to him. For seeing by that faith we are justified and endued with
the love of the law of God, then surely we so (magnifying God and the law) do
give that glory unto God which is due unto him. Also seeing by that faith we
do believe firmly that we are justified freely, and reconciled unto GOD
through Christ, who every where is ready to save us, then by course we serve
for our neighbor, and so again render and attribute to every man that which
is his. This righteousness of the heart we cannot obtain by any endeavor of our
own free will, or by our strength and merits. For as no man can see that
lively operation, that is, faith of our hearts, but only GOD: so no man can
repel from himself that wickedness and incredulity of the heart but only
by grace and the Spirit of God: so far we are from being able to deliver our
selves from sins by our own power. Therefore though works do seem to show
gallantly and gloriously: yet notwithstanding whatsoever is not of faith, is
hypocrisy and sin.

Now as concerning flesh and spirit which often are used in this Epistle: you
must not take flesh to be (after the common manner) the desires and lusts of
the flesh only, neither must you call the spirit only these things which are
done spiritually in the inward corners of the heart. For the Apostle S. Paul (as
also Christ himself in the 3 chap. of John do call flesh, 6. Flesh wha^ it is.
whatsoever is borne of the flesh, that is, the whole man body and soul, all
man's reason wholly with all his chiefest and best powers: Because that all these
things do savor of nothing but flesh, and seek after nothing but fleshly
things. Wherefore thou shall call al those works flesh, which seem to be
good, and make a beautiful show of holy works, and yet are done without the
grace and working of the holy Spirit of GOD in the heart. Which thing is plain
and evident by the 5 chap. to the Gal. where Paul reckons and counts
heresies amongst the fruits of the flesh. And in the 7 chap. to the Romans he
says, that the law is made weak, by reason of the flesh, which thing ought to
be meant not only of the unchaste lusts of the flesh, but also of the whole
mass of corruption and wickedness: yea briefly and chiefly of incredulity,
or unbelief, Incredulity the ground of al sins
which is the most secreet and chief sin of all.

Contrariwise, 7. Spirit what it is.
thou shall call the Spirit those spiritual things, even those external
works which proceed from a spiritual man, or from a heart innovated and made
new by the holy spirit. That washing of the feet which Christ did to his
Disciples, though it was an outward work, yet it was spiritual.

Peter's fishing, to which he returned being now justified in the spirit, was
also spiritual. Therefore that is flesh, whatsoever a man does, seeking and
savoring only carnal and fleshly things. And that is Spirit, whatsoever is
done within or without, wherewith a man exercising faith and Charity, does
seek spiritual things. Unless we take these words in this sense, we shall
neither understand this Epistle of St. Paul, nor any other books of the divyne
Scriptures. Therefore whether it be Jerome, or Augustine, or Ambrose, or
Origin: briefly what writers soever they be that use these words otherwise,
let not the authority of men move thee any thing at all, but rather flee from
them al as from the plague and pestilence. But now let us come to handle the
Epistle it self.

A godly in struction for readers
Seeing therefore it is the duty and office of an Evangelist or preacher of
glad tidings, first of all to preach the Law and to show how that all men
(which are without the circuit and compass of grace and faith in Christ) are
the sons and children of wrath, are sinners, and can do nothing but sin,
that so they acknowledging their misery and wretchedness with an humble and
contrite heart, might thirst after grace, the Apostle St. Paul in in this first
Chapter does first of all find fault with the unbelief, Chap. 1.
and checketh and rebukes those gross sins which aptly and plainly were
known to be manifest offenses, The manner of S. Paul's doctrine.
as were the Idolatry and such gross sins of the Gentiles: as also are of
those men which at this day being ignorant of GOD, void of grace, and without
the Spirit, do live in blindness and darkness. The wrath of God is revealed by
the Gospel (says the Apostle) from heaven against al ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men which withhold the truth in unrighteousness. For
though man might know by the Creatures that there was a God: yet
notwithstanding his nature is evil and wicked, insomuch that it does not
glorify him nor give him thanks, but being blinded, does always give over it
self to worse and worse, until they do not only commit Idolatry and al kind
of wickedness. but also favor them that do them, and give their consent and
agreement to those which commit such things.

Chap. 2.
In the second Chap. he does more at large show that even these little holy ones,
and those glorious hypocrites (as namely the Jews then, The Jews as ill, or
worse sinners than the Gentiles
and now in these days all the Iusticiaries which go about by their own
strength and power to fulfill the law) are also sinners, who by doing
outwardly the good works of the law: notwithstanding inwardly nourishing that
grief of their heart, do hate the law.

And these (as right hypocrites commonly use to do) are very quick to condemn
other men, counting themselves holy and pure, when as they are full of malice
and envy, fraud, deceit, and all kind of filthiness and uncleanness, as
Christ says Mat. 23. And these are they which faining themselves holy,
contemn and despise in very deed the great goodness of God, and according to
the hardness of their hearts, heap and treasure up to themselves wrath,
against the day of wrath. Paul therefore as a true Evangelist first of all
preaches the Law, All are sinners.
concluding all men alike to be sinners and denuncing to all the wrath of God.
Wherefore they who mark well, by the power of their own nature or free will,
are so far from being any better than those gross and open sinners mentioned
in the first Chapter: that the Apostle calls them obstinate, stubborn, men
that cannot repent, aliants and strangers.

Chap, 3.
In the third Chap. he declares that both the Jews and the Gentiles are alyke
sinners before God: Difference betwixt both Jew and Gentile.
notwithstanding that the Jews are preferred and excel the Gentiles in this
prerogative, namely, for that the pormises of God did belong to them, and also
for that the words and Oracles of God were committed unto them. And though some
of the Jews did not believe, yet for all that their unbelief made not the
faithful truth of Gods promises vain, void, or without effect: and to prove
this, he alleges that place of the 51. Psalm: as it is written (says he)
that thou might be justified in thy words, and overcome when thou art
judged. After this he returns to his cause and purpose, and proves by the
Scriptures, that all are equally sinners without any exception, and that no
man is justified by the works of the law: but that only by the law comes
the knowledge of sin. Finally he teaches the true and right ways of
righteousness and salvation. All (says he) have sinned, The hye way to
righteousness is by faith in Christ.
and are destitute and deprived o^ the glory of God: but they are justified
freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom GOD
has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood. And a
little before: But now (says he) is the rigteousnesse of GOD made manifest
without the law, being approved by the testimony and witness of the law and
the Prophets, to wit, the righteousness of God, by the faith of Jesus Christ
unto all and upon al^ that believe. So then the law is established through
faith, although works and glorying in the works of the law are excluded by
faith.

Seeing therefore in the three former Chapters, he has taught, that all men
are sinners: and also shows that only faith in Christ, is the way unto
righteousness, and means to justification, Chap. 4.
by and by in this fourth Chap. he answers to certain objections and cauils.
As for the most part, when Christ or faith is taught (that is, that our works
are nothing, that we are only justified by faith) straight ways certain
Iusticiaries object: If faith alone does justify, then we must cease
altogether to do good works, then good works are to be omitted and left
undone. The Apostle answers, proposing the example of Abraham: What shall we
say then, that Abraham our Father has has found concerning the flesh? Did he
merit nothing at all by his works? He concludes, that Abraham was justified
only by faith without any works, insomuch that the Scripture says, that
Abraham (before he was circumcised) believed GOD, and it was counted and
reputed unto him for righteousness. Genesis 15.6. If therefore the work of
circumcision which GOD commanded (which was a precious work of obedience)
profited Abraham nothing to justification, then it is most sure and certain,
that there is none other work which is available to justification. An apt
similitude.
But as circumcision being an outward sign, was unto Abraham a seal of his
righteousness by faith: so good works are only an external sign, which does
not justify, but which does signify unto men, that a man is inwardly
justified before God, and they do testify and approve as certain signs and
fruits, that lively faith, which works in the heart. By this, as by the most
grave, weighty, and authentik example, the Apostle does confirm, and build out
of the Scriptures his doctrine of faith delivered out, and taught in the third
Chapter. Furthermore, the Apostle allegeth the testimony of David in the 32.
Psalm. to prove this matter. Also in most plain words he affirms that a man
is justified by the imputation of righteousness, without works: although (as I
have said before) works do follow those that are justified by Faith. Moreover
he dilateth and amplifieth the example against all other works of the law,
inferring that the Jews are not therefore straight way the true heirs of
Abraham, because their stock and pedigrue is derived from the circumcised
Abraham, or because they received the law, unless they tread and follow the
steps of says, and believing in Christ, imitate the faith of Abraham:
specially and chiefly, seeing that Abraham before the law (whether it were of
Moses or of the circumcision) was justified only by faith, and called the
father of many nations, that is, of all believers. Finally he concludes thus:
Seeing that the law cannot give that effectual working, whereby it may
willingly and chearefully be satisfied: also seeing that the grudging and
murmuring stirred up by the law, abides and remains in us, and disdaineth
and takes it grievously that there should be any positive ^aw set down for
her, I say that this hatred against the law, and the law giver God himself
still continuing, it cannot be that ^he works of the law should please God:
Nay rather seeing ^hey proceed from a heart that ^bhorreth the saw and God,
^hey are nothing else but sin. and do always incense and kindle the
indignation and wrath of God. Wherefore Faith only does obtain the blessing
and grace promised to Abraham. Now it is not written for him only, but also
for us (as Paul says in the latter end of this Chapter) the faith might also
be imputed and reckened to us for righteousness.

In the fifth Chapter, he entreats of works, and of the fruits of faith
which be these: peace, joy of conscience, love toward GOD and our neighbor:
a profitable, courageous and bold confidence: and a stout and manfull
perseverance and pacient in tribulations and afflictions, for straight way
these fruits follow, wheresoever this true faith is in the heart. Surely that
most excellent riches, and abundant wealth of the grace of God offered, and
exhibited to us in Christ (whom GOD would have dye for us, when we were as yet
weaklings, yea enemies to God) if so be, by faith it be known and
acknowledged of us in our hearts, it cannot but inflame us, and make us strong
and able to do most willingly, cherefully, and readily, all those things which
we know will please this our most gentle Father. Therefore the chief sentence,
drift and scope of this Epistle stands steadfast and sure, namely, that by faith
alone we are justified, without works, and yet for all that good works are
not condemned. For those works that indeed, and truly may be called good, and
those good fruits do follow faith, and wheresoever faith is, it cannot choose
but work: Like as the flame cannot but give good light. Of these that be truly
good works the Iusticiaries (who have nothing so rise in their mouths, as
works, works, works) know nothing at all: They do but only jmagine in
themselves certain cold works, which because they have no spark of faith in
them, are void of all spiritual affections: as joy, peace of conscience, and
that bold trust and assurance in God and are rotten fruits of a rotten tree.
After this the Apostle makes a pleasant digression, showing how sin and
righteousness, also how death and life came upon us. And there he compares
these two, Adam and Christ. Wherefore he reasons thus: The Apostles argument.
It was therefore needful and necessary, that Christ should be sent, who
should make his righteousness to be ours, by the new birth or regeneration in
faith and the spirit, even as the old man Adam by propagation left us his sin
through that old generation according to the flesh. Again, by this argument
aaother proposition is surely grounded, namely, that no man by his own strenth
and power is able to deliver him self from sin, or to justify himself. For it
was not in our choice to be borne, or not to be borne of the old Adam, and
according to the flesh, which by other arguments is evident, and clear enough.
For if the law of God (which surly, if any other thing in the world might have
justified, ought to have prevailed and availed for righteousness) does not only
not justify, but rather increases and augmenteth sin in us, namely, that
grudging and fretting of our nature, daily stomacking and murmuring at God: yea
the more it does press us, the more it stirs up sin in our nature,
Nitimur in vetitum semper cupimusque negata.
which goes against all whatsoever is forbidden. Therefore the more perfitly
we know the law the more misery we behold in our selves, and we see the better
how that we have more need of Christ.

Chap. 6.
In the 6 chap. he handles that great and chief work of faith, to wit, the
warfare and conflict of Christians betwixt the flesh and the spirit. The
warfare of Christians.
For the flesh fights against the spirit, and the spirit wageth war against
the flesh, to the end that the desires of the flesh, and relics of sin,
which remain in us after justification, might be quite suppressed, quelled,
and quenched in us.

And in this chap. the Apost. teaches, that we are not so justified and freed
from sin by faith that sin is quite taken away, and altogether abolished in us:
Relics of sin.
but that the relics of sin as yet remain in us. Nevertheles these
remnants of sin are not laid to our charge, by reason of faith, which
continually wrestles with the desires of the flesh. wherefore as yet, because we
live in the flesh, that strife and combat indureth in us, and they that are
already justified have enogh to do, and have labor enough to turn them unto:
yea all their lifetime they may toil until they sweat again, by indevouring
to tame their flesh, to repress the lusts of it, and to make it subject unto
the Spirit. Mortification.
And by that mortification of our flesh, and newnes of our spiritual life, we
express the Death and the Resurrection of Christ, as also that sign of
mortification in Baptism, which does signify and represent unto us no other
thing, but this continual mortification of the flesh, and daily vivification
and quickening of the spirit. For Baptism, that is this mortification does work
in us so long, until sin being abolished and abandoned by the death of our
bodies, we rise in our bodies with Christ, and reign with him for evermore.

And this thing (namely, the daily mortificatio^ of our flesh) we may perform,
because we are not under the law: but under grace. Now what it is, not to be
under the law, What it is, not to be under the Law.
must not be so understood, as though it were lawful for us to do what we
list: but not to be under the law is this, that our hearts are so made new by
the spirit, through faith, that freely, willingly, and of our own accord, we
may do that which the law requyres, though there were no law at all. For
grace does endue us with the love of the law. Wherefore we being justified,
have no more the law against us, but agreeing with us. To be under the law,
What it is to be under the Law.
is to work without grace, and not to be able to fulfill the law, where
there cannot choose but be sin.

And this now at length is the true liberty and freedom from the law and sin,
of which the Apostle here disputes, even unto the end of this Chap. As for
this liberty it is such, that we may willingly from our hearts do good
without any exaction of the law. Therefore it is a spiritual liberty which
does not take away the law: but gives and imparteth a certain power, and
spirit to fulfill the law: namely, a cherefull mind, a ready will, and fervent
desire to work well, whereby it does then satisfy the law: insomuch that it
has not any thing to exact at his hand, or to charge him withal. A fit and
apt similitude.
Even as if thou were endebted to a certain creditor of thine, and did owe
him a great sum of money, thou might after two ways satisfy him, and so
discharge the debt: First by a free forgivenes of the debt, and cancelling of
thy handwriting. Secondly, by surety of another man, who will give his faith
and truth for thee, promising to stand to the payment of all the foresaid
money, and so by his word and faith given for the obligation, wherewith thou
wast bound, may be blotted and cancelled, as void, and of none effect.
Likewise Christ has delivered us from the law as from a creditor. Wherefore
that liberty is not carnal, whereby it is lawful to do what thou will: but is
altogether laboursome and paynefull, which willingly does good works: so that
it needs not any exaction of the law.

Chap. 7.
In the seventh Chap. he confirms this by a certain similitude of marriage,
between the husband and the wife. For even as the woman if her husband be
dead, A simili^ude to ^roue the ^^berty from ^he law.
is delivered from the law of the man: not so freed that she may not marry,
but rather contrary: now first of al she is freed indeed and truly, that she
may marry another man, which she could not do before she was delivered from
her former husband: so also our conscience is dead to the law, as long as old
Adam lives in us. But when this old Adam is mortified by the spirit, there is
then liberty for both parties, like as I have said there was betwixt man and
wife: But the conscience is not free, so that it cannot at all do any work:
but rather so that now he begins to cleave unto another, even unto Christ,
that it should bring forth fruit unto God.

After this, he does at large explicate the nature of sin, The nature of
sin.
and of the law: showing the law to be the force and power of sin, For the
old Adam or nature, how much more it is pressed down by the law, (which of
his own strength he cannot fulfill) so much the more it does fr^t and fume
against it. And no marvel, seeing it can do nothing of it self, but sin.
Therefore the law is unto it a punishment, and death: not that the law is
evil: but this is done through the fault of our own nature, which takes it
grievously, that any good should be exacted of it which she cannot fulfill: not
unlike a sickly weak man who is heavily displeased, if any man require of him
to do those works, or that maine strength which is in a sound and strong man.

The nature of the law.
Wherefore Paul here infers, that the law, the more exactly and throghly it
is known does work in us nothing else, but this, that it does the more show
our sin and increase it: by which it does slay us, and make us guilty of
eternal death and of the wrath of God. But of this matter no man can dispute
better than he whose conscience has felt and had trial of the terror of the
Law: whose conscience has felt that shaking and quaking (as it were) the very
foundations of the earth, and who has well perceived it at some time or other
to have caused a great tumult in his heart. Therefore we have need of a more
effectual and mightier force in our hearts to justify us, than the Law is.
Truly they that have not so known the law, they are altogether blind, and
walk in this life in a certain bold confidence, thinking that they can fulfill
the law by their works: not considering at all, how that the Law does
imperiously require the whole heart, and all the affection. Wherefore these men
behold not the end of the Law: only they view the covered and hid face of
Moses without grace, who are like perpetually to perish in their vain works.

After these matters, the Apostle sets forth, The strife twixt the flesh and
the spirit, even in the regenerate.
how the flesh and the Spirit in one and the same man does strive and wrestle
together: and he exhibiteth himself unto us, as an example (though he was
justified.) Wheerby we might learn this mortification of the remnants of sin.
Now he calls both the Spirit and the flesh, a certain law. I have found
(says he) a law in my members contrary and repugnant etc. For like as the law
of God does urge and exact those things to be done of us, which God would have
done so the law of the members or of the flesh, does incite and compel us to
carnal things, contrary to the spirit. Again, on the other side, the spirit
does labor mightily against the flesh, moving us to spiritual things. And this
conflict and combat dureth so long as we are clothed with this flesh. In this
man the strife is mightier and stronger: in that man more remiss and faint: in
every man accordingly as the spirit, or flesh is in him, stronger or weaker:
notwithstanding one and the same man is that flesh and spirit, which so strives
and wrestles with himself, until (Sin being quyte abolished) he become
spiritual, Chap. 8.


In the 8 chap. he comfort those which fight so with their own flesh: A
comfort for the afflicted conscience.
also he declares that the relics of sin can not hurt us: that there is no
comdemnation to them that are in Jesus Christ, which walk not after the flesh,
but according to the spirit. Furthermore, he does explicate at large the
nature of the flesh and spirit, showing that the spirit is given to man only
by Christ. He that has not the spirit of Christ (says he) the same man is
none of his. Again, as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the
sons of God. For it is the Spirit alone which does innovate and renew our
hearts, which does make them spiritual, which does encourage us with sweet
and loving affects and motions: lastly which does give testimony and bear
witness unto our spirits, that we are the very sons of God, teaching us that
we (although sin does boil with rage within our flesh) have God for our
Father, and may account our selves his sons, if so be that we do daily by
the spirit wrestle against the flesh.

Now because nothing is more profitable to the mortifying of the old Adam the
flesh, than the cross, tribulation and affliction, that is, the Apostle does
here comfort us in these tribulations, affirming that the Spirit does make
intercession, and request for us with sighs that cannot be uttered and
expressed: also that all the creatures, being subject to vanity and abuse, do
even groan and travel in pain together with us, until this body of sin be
abolished, and the glory of the sons of God be revealed. Thus we see that
these three last Chapters, do urge nothing so much, as this only and chief
work of our faith, namely, the mortification of our old Adam, which is the
flesh.

Chap. 9. 10. and 11
In the 9. 10. and 11. Chap. he handles the matter of Predestination. For all
the rest depend upon that: namely, who should receive the word, and who should
not, who should believe, and who not, who should be freed from sin, who should
be blinded, who should be damned, and who should be justified. Seeing
therefore that both the sending out of the preachers of the Gospel, and the
word it self be of God, it is certain that it lies in Gods hand only to
justify us. And surely this stable sentence and immovable necessity of
predestination, Predestination must be taught and preached.
is a most necessary doctrine to be taught. For we are so weak that if it
were in our hands, very few or rather none should be saved. For the Devil
would overcome us. Yet now seeing this sentence and decree of God is most sure
and certain, so that it cannot be changed or altered by any creature, we have
then good hope to overcome at the length these relics of sin, although that
now they rage in our flesh.

But these curious men (who before they have learned Christ and the virtue of
his Cross, A Caveat for curious Christians.
do search the profunditie and depth of predestination, laboring in vain to
inquire whether they are predestinat to life or death) must be rayned,
strained and kept back with some holy bridle. For without all doubt, these men
by this their foolish curiosity, will lead and learn to cast themselves
headlong into the confusion of their conscience, or into the bottomless pit of
desperation. But thou (dear Christian) see that in reading and learning holy
things thou follow the order and method set down here in this place by the
Apostle.

Learn this godly Method.
First of all learn the knowledge of Christ, that thou may acknowledge that al
thy strength and power avails to nothing, but to sinning. Furthermore, that
by faith thou may daily wrestle with thy flesh, as he has taught thee in
the 7. first Chapters. Finally, after that thou be come to the 8. Chap. that
is, after that thou have tried the cross and tribulation, after thou have had
experience of this wholesome mortification, often to be repeated, then first of
all will this necessity of predestination, wax sweet unto them, then thou
shall first feel in the 9. 10. and 11. Chapters, how full of comfort and
consolation this doctrine of predestination is. For unless thou have had
experience and trial of tribulation: Predestination only comfortable to
those which are well exercised in affections.
unless thou have felt thy self to have been brought sometime even unto the
gates of hell (as we see in David and other Saints) thou can not bear or
brook this doctrine and sentence of predestination without peril and danger,
with a certain murmuring and grudging of nature against GOD. Therefore it is
needful and necessary that old Adam should first be mortified, that the
sense of the flesh should be beaten down, that the sucklings should first grow
up in Christ before they drink of this sweet Cup of wine. For even here also
there is in every one a certain infancy and childhood, who has in the mean
time need to be fed with milk, until he be acustomed to eat stronger
meats.

Chap. 12
In the twelfth chapter he does annex and adjoyne certain admonitions and
precepts For this order the Apostle is wont to observe in all his Epistles, The
second part of this Epistle concerning Christian conversatio^
that first he does teach Christ and Faith: afterward he does exhort to good
works, and a continual mortification of the flesh. Wherefore he does teach
here good works in deed, and the true worship of God. And here he makes all
Christians to be Priests, commanding them to offer not money, either Oxen or
Gotes (as it was the custom of the Law) but to offer themselves a spiritual
sacrifice, A spiritual priesthood.
mortifying the old Adam. Furthermore he does delyver out most briefly unto us
the institution and instruction of Christian manners: as how we should teach,
preach, rule, and govern namely, in the Church: how we should serve our
neighbor, how we should suffer tribulations: to be brief, how it behooves a
Christian to behave himself toward his friends and enemies. And these are
truly good works of a Christian man, which do flow out of Faith, as from a
fountain and head spring: Yea which do even make a violent eruption. For
faith (as I have said) is not idle: Papists works wh^^ they are.
But the works of the Iusticiaries which are done without this lively flame of
Faith in the heart, are but hypocrites purple show, and fained colors,
wherewith they paint themselves outwardly, which as inwardly they are full of
hatred, avarice, filthiness, and deceit.

In the 13. chapter he teaches us to be obedient to earthly and worldly
Magistrates, Chap. 13 Obedience to the Magistrate.
seeing that all power is of GOD. For though the administration of the sword,
and these political and civil Laws do help nothing to the justification of
the heart: notwithstanding because that power and authority is ordained and
appointed of God, to the maintenance and preservation of the peace of the
common wealth, that malefactors might be punished, and good men defended:
therefore it is to be reverenced and honored even of the Saints of God and
righteous men, which otherwise stand not in need of that authority. At the
last he comprehends summarily al duties in this one word Love. Love is a
short sum of all Christian duties.
And whereas he proposed Christ as the cause and author of our righteousness,
now here after another sort he proponeth and sets him forth as an example:
namely that we imitating and following Christ, should so serve our neighbor,
as Christ has served us.

In the 14. Chap. 14
Chap. he teaches that the weak in faith not as yet expert and cunning in
Christian liberty, Patience.
ought to be patiently tolerated and borne withal through love: also how we
ought to use that liberty not to any offense, but to the instruction and
edifying of the weak conscience of our neighbor. For unless the offending of
the weak be diligently and warely avoided, there will follow a discord and
contempt of the Gospel: whose dignity and renoune it stands us greatly upon
to conserve and keep inviolate. Wherefore it were better to yield for a time
to the weak in faith, until they be confirmed, than that the Gospel should
be contemned or suppressed. And this is the chefest work of Christian love
and Charity, which very many in these our days have need of, who abuse
their liberty by eating of flesh, and by other means, hurting weak
consciences, yea making them to stumble as it were in the entry and door of
Christianity, before they know the liberty of Christ, and the way of
righteousness.

Chap. 15
In the 15. Chap. yet once again he proposes Christ to be followed, that by
his example we should support and bear with the weak whosoever they be,
whether sinners, Weak brethren oght to be considered.
unlearned, rude, and unskillful, or those which otherwise are evil mannered,
or of naughty conditions. For even those are not straight way to be contemned,
but rather to be tolerated and suffered until they be better amended. So our
Savior Christ (as we see in the Gospel) did bear with our sins and
offenses: yea and at this day does tolerate our sins, errors, and
imperfections, ever reaching his right hand to help us, ever ayding us through
his unspeakable mercy.

Moreover he prays for the increase of their faith, peace, and joy of
conscience, also praising them, and committing the^ to GOD: yet once again he
commends also and magnifieth his office, namely how he may glory in that he
handles and medleth with Gods business and matters, how that he does and has
preached through the grace which he has received of God, being also called
from heaven by God, and not by any man. By and by after, (setting before them
the example of the Macedonians insted of a little Exordium or insinuation) he
does very civilly take an occasion to beg and crave alms of them for the
poor Saints in Jerusalem. Alms to be given to the poor Saints.
To be brief, whatsoever this most Apostolical breast does, or speaks it
is mere Charity and love, mere works of says and of the Spirit.

Thus thou have (gentle reader) here in this Epistle most fully and absolutely
set out whatsoever appertains any way either to Christian life, The Epistle
to the Romans a sufficient doctrine for a Christian man.
or justification: what Christians ought chiefly to learn, namely what the law
is, what the Gospel is, what sin, grace, faith, justice or righteousness,
Christ, God good works, charity, love and hope is: briefly in what thing the
sum of all Christianity does consist: how a Christian ought to behave
himself toward his neighbor, whether they be good or bad, weak, or strong,
friends or foes. Last of all how we should behave our selves toward our
selves, the Apostle does so diligently fortify and strengthen all these things
by Scripture, and so con^irme them by his own example (...) the example of the
Prophets, that thou can not here desire or wish any thing more, or more
plain and manifest. For (no doubt) it was the Apostles mind to comprehend in
this Epistle summarily, and to handle compendiously the whole Gospel, and
whatsoever belongs to Christian learning and instruction, also to prepare a
method and brief introduction, unto all the writings of the old Testament,
namely, Moses and the Prophets. For whosoever has red this Epistle well, and
thoroughly digested it in his mind, A profitable exhortation.
that man has a most sure and certain method to all the old Testament.
Wherefore as I admonished before, s^ here now I do exhort you that you would
(as Moses does in the 11 chap. of Deuteronomy.) lay up these things in your hearts
(...) children to the end that by a continual recording and repeating of them
they may be made by all means most familiar unto you. Chap. 16.


The last chap. contains salutations or commendations: to which he adjoyneth
a very good and most necessary admonition, namely that we should shun and
eschew (as the plague and extreme infection and poison of faith) the doctrines
and traditions of men wherewith the Gospel and word of God being contemned)
the false Apostles do seduce and withdraw from Christ the hearts of the simple.
Traditions not to be received.
For the Apost. foresaw in the Spirit, that there should arise and spring
certain Romanistes (for they are not worthy the name of Romans) out of Rome,
and Romans: who by their wicked and blasphemous, most divilish and sathanical
decretals, and their whole den of man's laws and traditions, as by a most wast
floude and h^g^ d^^uge, would labor to drown, ^^^tinguish, and destroy not on^^
this excellent Epistle, but even the whole body of Scripture (...) at the
doctrine of fai^^ (...) the Spirit: insomuch (...) they should leave us nothing
but this Idol our belly, Papists belly gods.
whose worshippers he does call them here, Philip 3.1^
and most plainly in the Epistle to the Philippians. For (says he) there be
many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, they are
the enemies of the Cross of Christ whose God is their belly and their glory,
to their shame, they are world^^ mi^ded. The GOD of all Pea^^^ bruise and beat
down Satan and his kingdom under our (...)


