PRoblemys of old liknesse and figures.
which prouyd been fructuous of sentens
And have auctorities grounded on scripture
By resemblance of notable apperannce
with moralitees concludynge on prudence.
Like as to the bible rehercith by writynge.
How trees sometime those them a king
First in their chose they named olyue.
To reign among them Judicu^ does express
But he him self began excuse blyue.
That he might not forsake the fatness
Nor the figgetre her amozous swetenes.
Nor the vine tree his holsom fresshe courage.
which yeueth comfort to al manner of age.
And semblably poets laureat.
By dyrke parables full convenient.
Feyne that birds and bestes of estate
As a ryol / eglys and lions by assent.
Sent out wrytes to hold a parliament
And made the cry brefly for to say.
Some to have lordeship and some to obey
Eglys in the air heest to take their flight
Power of lyones on the ground is seen.
Cedre emonge trees highest is of sight
The laurelle of nature is ay grene.
Of flowers al flora ay goddess and queen.
Thus in all things there been diuersitees
Some of estate and some of low degrees
Poetys write wonderful likeness.
And under covert keep thym self full close
They take bestes and fowls to witness
Of whose saynges fables first arose.
And here I cast on my purpose
Out of frensshe a tale to translate.
within a pamflet I radde and saw but late
This tale which I make of mention
In gross reherceth plainly to declare
The great proverbs pays for the raunson
Of a little bird taken in a snare.
Wonderful desirous to escape out of care.
Of mine auctour following the process.
So as it fell in order shall express
Sometime there dwelled in a small vyllage.
As mine auctor makes mention.
A chorle which had lust and courage
within him self by diligent trauayl.
To array his gardyn with notable aparayl
Of lenghe and bread y liche square and long
Hedged and diched to make it sure and strong
All the alyes were made plain with sonde
The benches covered with new turues grene.
With the sote herbs and condutes at the hunde
That wellyd up against the son shene
Like unto silver or any cristal clean
The burbyl waves in their up boylynge.
Round as a beral their bemys out showing.
In mids of the gardyn stood a fresshe laurel
Thereon a bird syngyng day and night.
With shynyng feathers brighter than gold wyre
Which with her song made heavy hertes light.
That her to biholde it was an heuynly sight
How toward even and in the dawning.
She did her pain most amerously to sing
Esperus enforced her courage
To ward ewyn when phoebus went to west
Among the branches to take her auantage.
To sing her compleyn and than to go to rest
At at the rysyng of the queen alceste
To sing again as it were her dew
Erly on morrow the day after to salewe
It was a very heuynly melody
Even and morrow to here the birds song
And the sweet sugared armony
with uncouth warbles and tones draw a long
That all the gardeyn of the noise ronge
Till on the moro we when titan did shine clet^
The bird was trapped and caught in a pantere.
The chorl was glad that he the bird had take
Merry of chere of look and of visage
And in all haste he cast for to make
within his house a pretty little cage.
And with her song to rejoice his courage
Till at the last the cely bird abrayde.
And soburly unto the chorle she said
I am now take and stand under danger
Holden strayt that I may natfle.
A dieu my song / my lusty notes clear.
Now have I lost my liberty.
Now am I thralle that sometime was free.
And trust me well while I stand in distress
I can not sing nor make no gladness
And though my cage forged were of gold.
And the penacles of beral and cristal
I remember a proverb said of old
who lesith his fredom he lesith all
For I had leuyr upon a branch small
Merely sing among the wode grene
Than in a cage of silver bright and shene
Song and prison have noon accordance.
Trowyst thou I will sing in prysone
Nay / for song procedith of joy and plesaunce.
And prison causes death ad destruction
Ryngyng of feters makes no merry sound.
Or who should be merry or iocunde.
Against his will that lies in cheynes hounde
what avails a lion to be a king
To be shyt up in a toure of stone
Or an egle under strayt keeping
Called king of fowls euerichone
Fie on lordeshyp when liberty is gone
Answer herto and let it not asterte
who syngeth merely that sing not at heart
But and thou wylt rejoice of my syngyuge
Suffer me to go fre from al danger.
And every day in the gray morning
I will repair unto thy laurer
And merely sing with lusty notes clear
Under thy chamber or before thyn halle.
Every season when thou list me call
To be shytte up and pynned under dread
No thing accords to my nature
Though I were fed with myllr and wastel bread
And sweet curdes brought to my pasture.
yet I had leuyr to do my besy cure.
Erly on morrow to shrappe in the wall
To find my dinner among the worms small.
The labourer is gladder at the ploughe
Erly on moro we to feed him with bacon
Than some man is that has tresour enoughe
And of al deynties plenty and foyson
And no fredom with his possession
To go at large but as a bear at a stake
To pass his bonds if he leave take
Take this answer for a full conclusion
To sing in prison thou shall me not co^strain
Till I have fredome in wodes up and down
To flee at large on bough rough and plain.
And of reason thou sholdest not disdeyn
Of my desire but laughe and have good game
But he that is a chorl would each were the same.
well quod the chrole since it wol not be.
That I desire as by thy talking.
Magre thy will thou shall chese one of three
within a cage merry to sing
Or to the kechyn I shall thy body bring.
Pluck thy feathers that been bright and clear.
And after roste or bake the to my soupere
well quod the bird as to reason I say not nay
Touching my song a full answer thou have
And when my feders be pulled a wey
If I be rostyd and baken in a paste.
On me thou shall have a small repaste
But and if thou will work after my conseil
By me thou may have great auayl.
If thou wylt to my reasone assent
And suffer me to go fre from prison
without raunson or any other rent
I shall the give a notable guerdon
Three great wisdoms according to resone.
More of value take heed what I profre.
Than all thy gold shyt in thy cofre
Trust me well I shall the not disceyue.
well quod the chorle tell on let see
Nay quod the bird thou must before co^ceyue
who that shall teache of reason must go fre
It sytteth a master to have his liberty.
And at large to teache his lessone
Have me not suspecte I mean no treason
well quod the chorle I hold me content.
I trust thy promysse which thou made me
The bird fley forth the chorle was of assent
And took her flight unto the laurel tree
Than thought she now stand I free
with nor panters I cast not al my live.
Nor with lyme tuygges any more to strive
He is a fool that escaped is danger.
Broken his fetters and fled out of prison.
To resort / for brent child dredith fire.
Each man be ware of wisdom and reasone
Of sugre strawed whichl hydeth falls poison
There is no poison venym so perlous of sharpnes
As is when it has of triacle a likeness
who dredith no peril in peril he shall fall
Smothe waters ben oftentimes deep
The quayle pype can most falsely call
Till the qu ayle under the net does crepe
A blere yed fouler trust not though he weep
Eschew his thomb of weping take non head
That small birds can nyppe by the head
And I that now such danger am escaped
I will be ware and before provide
That of no fouler I will no more be iaped.
From their lyme twigs I will fle fer aside.
where peril is great peril is to abide.
Come nere thou chorle and herkyn to my speech.
Of three wisdoms that I will the teache.
Give not of wisdom to hasty credence
To every tale and each tydynge
But considre of reason and prudence
Among many tales is many a great lesyng.
Hasty credence has caused great hyndrynge.
Report of tales and tidings brought up new
Caused many a man to be hold untrue.
For one part take this of my raunson
Learn the secounde grounded on scripture
Desire thou not by no condition
Through which is impossible to recure
worldly desires stand in adventure
As who desires to clymbe hye on loft
By sodeyn turn he falls vnsofte
The third is this beware both even and morrow.
Forgete it not but learn this of me
For tresoure lost make neuyr to great sorrow
which in no wise may recovered be.
For who so takes sorrow for love of any degree
Rekyn his love and ofter his pain.
And of one sorrow he makes sorrows tweyn
Aftre this lessone the bird began a song
Of her escape greatly reiosynge
And she remembered also the great wrouge.
Done by the chorle first at her taking
Of her affray and her imprisonynge
Glade that she was out of dread
Said unto him houyng above his head
Thou were quod she a very natural fool
To suffer me depart of thy lewdness
Thou ought co^playn and make dole
And in thy heart to have great heaviness
That thou lost so passinge great richesse
which might suffised by value in reknynge
To pay the raunson of a mighty king
There is a stone which is called a iacounce
Of old engendered in mine entrayl
which of fine gold passith a great ounce
Citryne of color like a garnet of entable
which makes men victorious in batayl
And who soeuir beryth on him this stone.
Is fully assured against his mortal fone
who that has this stone in possession
Shall suffer no pouerte ne noon indigens
But of al treasoure have plenty and foyson
And every man shall do him reverence.
And noon enemy shall do to him offense
But fro thy hondes now that I am gone.
Pleyn if thou wylt for thy part is none.
If causes love it makes men gracious.
And favorable in every mannys sight
It makes accord bit wene men enuyous.
It conforteth soroful it makes heavy hertes light
Like to poison in color shyneth bright
I am a fool to tell al at onye
Or to teache a chorle the price of precious stones.
Men should not put a precious margarite.
As rubyes saphires and other stones ynde
Emeraudes nor round perles white
A fore rude swyne that love draffe of kind
For a sow delyteth as I find
More in foul draffe her pigges for to glade
Than in all the pery that cu^meth of garnade.
Each thing draws to his semblable
Fysshes in the sea bestes on the ground.
The air for fowls is commendable
And to the plough man for to tylle the land
And a chorle to have a muk forke in hand
I lose my time any more to tarry.
Or to teache a chorle of the lapidary.
That thou had thou gettyst no more again
Thy lyme twigs and thy panters I defye.
To let me go thou were foul ouirseen
To lose thy richesse only of folly
I am now fre to sing and to fly /
where that me list he is a fool at all
That gothe at large and makes him self a thral
To here to wisdom thyn erys been deef
Like an ass that lysteth to an harp
Thou may go pype in an yue leef
For bettre is to sing on thorns sharp
Than in a cage with a chorle to carpe.
For it was said of follres year a gone
That a chorles hyrde is often woby goue
The chorle felt his heart at weyn
For very sorrow and asondre ryue
Alas quod he I may well weep and pleyn.
As a wretch neuir like to the nor thryue.
But to morn in pouerte al my live
For of folly and of wylfulnesse
I have lost holy al my richesse
I was a lord I cried out on fortune.
And had great tresoure late in my kepinge
which might have made long for to continue.
with that stone to have lived like a king
Or if that I had set it in a ring
Borne it upon me I had good enough
Me nedyd no more to have goon to plough.
when the bird herd the chorle thus morn.
And how that he was heavy of his chere.
She took her flight and began again return
Toward him and said as ye shall here.
O thou dulle chorle wisdom for to lere
That I the taught al is left behind
Raced awey and clean out of thy mind
Taught I the not this wisdom in sentence
To every tale brought up a new
Not to hastily to give credence
Unto the time thou knew that it were true
All is not gold that shewyth goldisshe hew.
Nor stones al by nature as I find.
Be not sapphires that shewyn color ynde
In this doctrine I have lost my labor
To teache the such proverbs of substance
Here may thou se thy lewd blind error.
For all my body paysed in a balaunce.
weyeth not an ounce rude is thy remembrance.
I to have more peyse closed in mine entrayl
Than al my body set for the counterayl.
Al my body weyeth not an ounce /
How might I than have in me a stone.
That peyseth more than does a great iaconce.
Thy brain is dulle thy wit is almost goon
Of three wisdoms thou haste forgoten one.
For thou sholdest not after my sentence.
To every tale to gyne to hasty credence
I badde also be ware both even and morrow.
For thing lost by soden adventure
Thou sholdest not make to much sorrow
when thou see thou may it not recurne
And here thou faylest that doste thy besy cure.
In thy snare to cache me ageyn
Thou art a fool thy labor is in vein
In the thryd thou doste rave.
For I badde thou sholdest in no manner.
Coueyte thing which thou may not have.
In which thou haste forgoten mine empryse.
Thus I may say plainly to deuyse
That thou have of madness forgoten al three
Notable wysdomes that I taught the.
It were folly more with the to carpe
Or preche of wysdomes more or less
I hold him mad that brings forth an harp
Thereon to teache a rude dulle ass.
And madder is he that syngeth a fool a mass
And he is most mad that both his business
To teache a chorse termys of gentylnesse
And semblably in apryl and in may
when gentyl birds maken most melody
The gucko we syngeth but one lay
Of other tones he has no fantesye
Thus every thing as books specifye
As fowls bestes of every age
From whens they came thy take talage
The vyntener tretyth of his holsom vynes.
Of gentyl fruits bostith the gardener.
The fyssher cassiteth his books and his synes.
To cache fisshe in every fresshe ryuere.
Of tysth of land tretyth the labourer
The gentylman tretyth of gentrye
And the chorle deliteth him in all rebaudry.
All one to the a faucon as a kyte.
As good an owl as a popingay
A donghyl ducke as deynte as a snyte
who seruith a chorle has many a careful day
A dieu sir chorle fare well I fle my weye
For I cast me neuir hensforth in my liking
A fore a chorle any more to sing
ye folk that shall this fable see or read
New forged tales I counseyl you to fle
For loss of gods take neuyr to great head.
Nor be not sorye for noon aduersite
Ne coueyt thing that may natt recovered be.
And remember where euyr ye goue
That a chorles bird is euyr wobigone.
Unto purpose this prouyd is full ryue
Read and report by old remembrance
That a chorles bird and a knaves wyue.
Have oftentimes great sorrow and myschaunce
And who that has fredom has al suffisance.
For bettre is fredome with little in gladesse.
Than to be thralle with all worldly richesse
Go little squire and reco^maunde me
Unto my master with humble affection
Besechynge him lowle of mercy and pity
Of this rude making to have compassion.
And as touching the translacion.
Dute of frensshe how so it englisshed be
All thing is said under correctioy
with supportacion of your benignynte
Here ends the tale of the chorle and the byrd. Emprentyd by me Richard
Pinson.


