A fruitful and godly Exposition and declaracion of the kingdom of Christ, and
of the christen lybertye, made upon the words of the Prophet Ieremye in the
xxiij. Chapter, with an exposycyon of the viij. Psalm, intreatyng of the same
matter, by the famous clerk Doctor Martyn Luther, whereunto is annexed a Godly
sermon, of Doctor Vrbanus Regius, upon the ix. Chapyter of Mathewe of the woman
that had an issew of blood and of the rulers daughter, newly translated out of
high Almayne.

Imprinted for Gwalter Lynne. Anno. M.D.xiviij.

To the most gratiouse and virtuous Lady Elizabeth sister to the Kings most
Royal Majesty: Her most faithful daily Orator Gwalter Lynne, wyssheth long
life to GODS pleasure, increase of honor and the life everlasting.
Considering this time (most virtuous Lady) to be the time of Christ's
raygne and kyngedome, wherein the Gospel is the rule of the prinxely powers,
and mercy is more esteemed then sacrifyce: I thought that I could not gratify
your grace more with any kind of obsequye, that I could show through the
slender talentes, that it has pleased the almighty to endue me withal, then
if I should set forth in the Englysh to^g, some godly lesson of some learned
and Christian teacher, concerning the same, I have therefore translated into the
English long this little book of master Martine Luthers doing, concerning the
kyngedome of Christ and Christian liberty, made upon the Epistle of Ieremye
the Prophet. And because I know that a good thing can not be to often nor to
much spoken of. I have added hereunto another piece of the same man's labors, a
sermon that he made upon the eyghte Psalm. Lord, our Lord, etc. concerning
the same matter, and cousyderyng that faith in the blood of christ our
sufficient price and ransom, and the hope of the resurrection these mortal
bodies, is most necessary to be known to al christians. I have also added in
the end of this little book, a sermon made by the famous doctor Vrbanus
Regius, concerning the same, made upon the ix. Chapyter of Mathewe, occasyon
taken by the mencyon of the woman, that suffered the blood flixe and the
rulers daughter.

How pithilye, learnedly and christianlye the, these matters be handled, it
shall not need me to report, knowing that your grace delyteth more in the, the
pervsyng and reading of the Authors themselves, then of any encomion or
praise, that can be given unto them, willing all other therefore to follow
your graces example herein. I commit this my labor unto your grace, as a
most sure toke^ of my good will to gratify your grace by setting forth and
furthering to my power, the truth of Christ, who always preserve your grace
to much honor, spiritual knowledge, and life without end. So be it.

Your graces faithful and daily Orator Gwalter Lynne.

Of the kingdom of Christ
Ieremye in the xxiij. Chap. Behold the time comes says the Lord, yt I will
raise up unto David a righ teous brau^che, and he shall prospere with wisdom,
and shall set up equity and righteousness again in earth.

In his time shall Judah be saved, and Israel shaldwell without fear: and this
is the name, yt they shall call him, the Lord our righteousness.

And therefore behold, the time comes (says the Lord) that it shall be no
more said, the Lord lives, which brought ye children of Israel out of yt land
of Egipte. But ye Lord and the Christen liberte. lives, which brought forth
and led the seed of the house of Israel, out of the Northlande, and from all
countries, where I have scattred the^, and they shaldwel in their own land
again.


IN this Epistle, or prophecye of Jeremy, is Christ showed unto us, what he
is, and what his kyngedome is, how he shall rule, and how they that are under
his kyngedom shall dwell without fear. First says the Prophet, that Christ is
the branch and seed of David, Even so says also Saynct Paull to the Rumayns
in the.i. That God has caused his Gospel of his. son to be prophesied by the
Prophets in the scriptures, that he should be such a Lord, which should be
borne of the seed of David (as pertaynyng to the flesh) and yet myghtelye
declared to be the son of God after the spirit that sanctifyeth etc. Romans i.
Even such a saying is this also, and therefore it is cuydent that the hole
old Testament serves unto this purpose, that we may see, that all things,
which we now preach and believe are performed, even as they were showed and
prophesied before, as we shall further mark and perceive in the process.

Ye have heard that it was said unto Abraham, Ge. xxij
Genesis xxij. In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. This is a
Gospel, wherewith the holy fathers were sustained a very long time, but it was
not yet fulfilled, for he says: It shall come to pass, that all nacyons shall be
blessed. In this sayng is it surely promised unto Abraham, that this seed
should be borne of his generation, to thinte^t, that he should not need to
grope here and there, as in the time of Adam, whereas they had also a Gospel,
but it was very dark, namely where as God said unto the serpent, Gene. Genesis
iij.
iij. I will put enemitye, between the, and the woman, and between thy seed and
her seed, the same shall tread down thy head, and thou shall tread upon his
hele. Which is spoken altogether of Christ, that he should tread down the
devils head and all nations should be blessed in him.

In all these saynges it appears clearly, that Christ must be God and man,
that he must dye and rise again and receive an everlasting kingdom here upon
earth, which only is done by his word. All which things although they be
not expressly mentioned in these words, yet they are never theles contained
there in undoubtedly, and it may well be gathered of the words, if the Text
be indifferently looked upon, and merked. But if a man do pass ever the words
unadvisedly and indiscreetly, without any further consideracion, than can no
such thing appear to be in them. As in this saying. In thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed. They be few and short words, but if thou
mark them diligently, thou shall fyud therein, that Christ is God and man and
that he must dye and rise again from the dead. For if he shall bless (which
is as much as to take away the curse) then truly must he be above the curse
which curse is nothing else, but death sin, and all myschiefe, if he shall
do this, then must he needs have power to take away sin and death, and to
give life, where upon it must needs follow that he is more then a pure man.
For noman is able to do such works but God alone, and he that does this
work, must needs be God also. Furthermore, if he shall be the natural seed
of Abraham, then must he needs be man also. Now if he be a man, then must he
needs be mortal, or else he could not be called Abraham's son. Again, if
he shall bring the blessinge upon all nations of the earth, then must he
needs live always, and for ever, where upon it follows, that he is mortal,
and lyuinge. etc.

And so shall thou find it in all other places of the scripture, if the
saynges be justly and diligently marked. But we will see from word to word,
what Jeremy does notify unto us in this saying, that we may find this also in
like manner. First says he thus.

Behold, the time comes says the Lord, that I will raise up unto David a
righteous branch. These words are vndoubtebly spoken of Christ, wherein is
contained, as the Prophecye declares, that he should come of the synage and
stock of David. Therefore says Sayncte Paul well, Romans i
that after the flesh he is borne of the seed of David. For the Prophet
Jeremy would describe the savior plenteoufly, that he might be perfytely
known, what he should be, and from whence he should come, because of them,
which cyther at that time or afterward should come unto the faith and believe
in him that they should not need to grope after him here or there, or seek him
any where else. Therefore does he knyite him unto the generation and stock of
David, from whence men should look for him undoubtedly. With such words have
the Prophets conforted the people, and warned them that they should mark
diligently upon this generation, and that they should be thoroughly persuaded,
that he should come none other way, but from the stock of David.

This knew the Jews well enough out of the sayenges of the scripture, and
were as sure of it, as we know and surely be leave, that Christ shall come again
at the later day. Therefore said also the Angel Gabriell unto Marie. Luce. i.
Luc. i. The Lord God shall give unto him, the seat of his father David, and
he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kyndgdome shall be
none end.

He says: I will raise up, that is to say: I will set and stablysshe it,
that it may stand sure. As though he would say: The people of the Jews have
been hitherto afflicted and troubled with their kings. For where as I have
sometime styred up unto them, iiij. Re. xviij.
^ne good king (as Ezechiam) they have had ten bad for him. But I will once
raise up, and ordeyne a king, which shall continue. For ever but I will not
raise him for this cause, that he shall assault any man. But he him self
shall be assaulted of the world, of the devil, and of all whatsoever is great
and mighty in the world, but I will so set him, that he shall stand fast and
sure, and his enemies shall not prevail against him.

And he says: he will raise up unto David, a righteous branch. Eue^ so
says Sachary also, Sach. ix
that he is righteous, and a savior. Lo says he: Thy king comes unto the a
righteous king and also a savior. On this wise did the Prophets see Christ
(even as we see him also) namely, a king that justifies the world. For the
world is nothing else, but a stable full of unthrifts. The world is the
kingdom of the deiull, and blood and flesh is her housseholde, of whose
ungracious and wicked assanltes, al saynctes have ever complained, and must
also ever more complain, as Paul declares to the Romans in the vij. To.
vij.
Therefore did the holy Fathers and Prophets, without ceassing desire, and
cry after this righteous brau^ce, after this Christ which should make them
just and righteous, and take away sin and death. And this also do all good
and faithful hertes (yea the unfaithful also) still contynually desire. For
who would not rather have life then death and rather have righteousness then
sin? To. vij.
Therefore cries Paul. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
this body of death? But thus cry not all men, for they feel it not all: The
devil possesses the heries of many, and seduceth them that they can not
think thereupon.

Thus may we see that this is the Sum, or Chief point of this Prophecye,
that this king is just and righteous, that is, without all sin, where by
he is segregated, and secluded from all other men, which all are unrighteous,
wicked and sinners. Now if he be righteous, than may he not be borne after
the manner as other men's Children be borne. Therefore it follows that his
mother must be a virgyn. For it is said of all other men, by the Prophet
David. Psalm. li. Behold, Psalm. li.
I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me. Therefore
must this king needs have had another Master, that he was conceyned and
borne without sin. For if he shall be righteous, and not gyltie of death,
then may he not, be borne of a woman, by the help of a man (as we are). But
he must be pure from his birth.

But how comes this to pass, that he is pure, and not subject unto death?
From whence comes this unto him? He should come from the stock of David, And
is not the kynred of David also under the malediction? Yes truly, but here
unto must a virgin be used out of the stock of David the other has the holy
Ghoost executed, he has purified this birth, as the Angel said unto the
virgyne Mary Luc. i. Luce. i.
The holy Ghoost shall come upon the, and the power of the hygeste shall
ouershadowe the. Therefore also that holy thing which shall be borne, shall be
called the son of God. Therefore have we such a king, which has a name
before all other kings, that he is righteous, and righteous in all things. In
so much that he also makes other good and righteous. And so will these words
that he must needs be God and man, and be borne of a virgyn, albeit that these
words do not clearly and manifestely express it, yet bring they so much with
them, if they be thoroughly searched.

But where he calls him a branch, that is spoken after the manner of the
Ebrewes, which call the children branches, which wax and grow eue^ as the
herbs, busshes and trees do grow which sounds not so well in our ears, as
in the ears of the Jews. So says God also in Esa. Cap. xiiij. Esa xiiij
of the kingdom of Babylon. I will root out the name and remnaunte, son
and sons son of Babylon. For the children come from the parents, eue^ as
the branches and boughs come out of the trees. Therefore says also Esaye in
the xi. Chap. Esa. xi.
A rod shall come forth out of the stock of Iesse out of a stock, which
now is dead (says he) shall grow a branch, that is out of an old
withered stock. Where of noma^ looked for any thing to spring forth of it.
For David was dead, and his kynred lay altogether under foot, even in the
ashes. Pilate was at Jerusalem in the stead of the kingdom of David, and the
Romans had the rule and dominion, so that of the kynred and stock of David
was very littel remembrance, and lay hid skant in two or three per sons, as
in Joseph and Mary, which were at Nazareth.

Now says God, let the stock wax old and hole withered, I am able to reuine
him, when ye look least of all for his coming, then shall he come, when men
think, that the stock of David is clean extincte, and decayed and paste
recoueringe, then will I come and make him to florysshe, and to spring forth,
and to bring forth fruit. There may ye se how the Prophets agree together,
and go all upon David, that out of his stock and kynrede should come the
just and righteous king, which should deliver his from sin, death,
devil, hell, and from all evil, and make them safe for ever. Whereof Jeremy
now speaks further, and says.

And he shall reign a king, and shall prospere with wisdom, and shall set
up equity and righteousness again in earth. These words sound, as though he
would signifye, that there is no righteousness in earth. I mean not only of
the righteousness, which is of valor before God, but also of the outward
righteousness of the world, which is but a very beggars cloak. For the world
is a right school of the devils unthrifts. Therefore has God also ordained
the swearde, and also the hangeman, that yet a lyttel part of righteousness
might be in earth. For with the righteousness which is of valor before God,
it will not be. In earth is nothing but vnrightuosnes, both in the temporal
Governance, and also in the spiritual. Governance is nothing but
blaspheminge of God. For thus says the Psalm. xiiij. Psalm. xiiij. and liij.
Romans iij
The Lord looked done from heaven upon the Children of men to see, if there
were any that would understand and seek after God. But they were all gone
out of the way, and were altogether become abominable, there is none that
does good, no not one. and cete. There gives he a short sentence, saying
that there is not one good. God to then, this is sure, if a man will behold
the world even from heaven dounewarde, he shall se nothing but mere blyndenes
iniquity, unrighteousness, and foolishenes, and nothing else, but a stable
full of vngrations unthrifts, and not much better then she was in the time of
Noah. When God through the floudde, caused all men to peryshe sauinge eight
persons.

How be it, very few do felt such blyndenes and unrighteousness, but only
such as by the law are taught and instructed, as in those days the holy
Fathers and Prophets, the common people wandereth even as the cattle.

Now this Thild, which should be borne of David, righteous and just,
without sin shall be the king which shall stand, Esaye xi. b. Romans xix. b.
and rule for ever. Now for as much then as he is a branch and a twygge of
the stock of David. He must needs be mortal for bodily is he borne in this
temporal life, and therefore must he needs dye. But seyuge he shall stand
allwaye and rule for ever, then must he also be immortal. How will this
frame? Even thus he must rise agayue from the dead. This is it that Sayncte
Peter means. Where as in the Acts of the Apostles, he alleges onte of the
Prophet David, that it was impossible, that he should be holden of death.
Acto. ij. Act. ij. Psalm. xvi.
Psalm. xvi. What was the occasyon? For he shall continue a king, and rule
for ever. And so sieste thou in these words every where notifyed the
resurrection of Christ. That he must be borne and dye, and yet rule always,
therefore must henedes rise again from death.

Further more (says the Prophet) that this king shall prospere with
wisdom, that is, he shall rule with understanding and discretion, as it is
written, of David. i. Reg. i. Reg. xviij.
xviij. He behaved him self wisely in all his ways, that is, he was the
most circumspecte, and most righteous among all them that were in the
court of Saul. Even so sayethe here Jeremy also of this king, that he shall
prospere with wisdom, that is, he shall behave him self wisely. Hitherto
have we heard of the person of this king, namely that he should come from
the stock of David, that he should be a man, and be borne of a virgyne, and
should be a righteous king, which is all to be understand of his person.

Now follows it further, that whatsoever this king has, he shall not keep
for him self, but shall bestow it and give it unto men, and this means
the Prophet where he says: He shall prospere with wisdom, that is, he shall
rule with no another thing, but only with wisdom. As though he would say,
he shall not occupye harnas, sweardes, gounes, bows and spears, but he shall
begin to make men righteous, after a new and a strange guyse, not with
rakynge or hanging, but with, or by the Gospel, he shall take the people
whereby they may best be taken. Namely, by the heart, and not by the neck to
the intent that they may subdue them selves, and be willinge to follow him. There
see thou that he is a king, for this cause, that he helps the people, and
does the same without strokes of the swearde, only by his Gospel. For the
which cause he is also risen from the dead, and causes his Gospel to be
preached, through the holy Ghoost, throughoute all the world.

After this sayethe the Prophet, that this king shall set up equity and
righteousness in earth. These two words Equity and righteousness doeste thou
read very often together in the Scripture, as in Esaye, Esa. ix.
in the ix. he shall sit upon the seat of David, and in his kyngedome, to
set up the same, and to stablysshe it with equity and righteousness, from
henceforth, for evermore, where also he speaks of the king dome of Christ
and it is as much in our spech as to judge righteously which the Jews do
pronounce with two words, and yet they mean no more than that we call
righteousness. How be it, there by are signifies these two points to leave
that which is evil, and to do that which is good, for these are the two
points which belong to the righteousness. And for as much as there are no
more, but even these two points, therefore uses the scripture these two
words, Iudicium, and Iustitia. Through Justice or equity, does God punysshe,
that is, he puts away that which is evil. Through the righteousness makes
he the people to be good and righteous, and preserves, and defends
innocenrye. Now this king is not only for him self just and righteous, but
he fulfilleth that, which the world, with her righteousness and works is not
able to do. Namely, that the people might be righteous. Who did ever se such
a King? He sits on the right hand of God, his heavenly father, and yet
shall iustifye the people, and this shall also be done here upon earth, which
is yet more merneylous? But how comes this to pass? Even thus, The kyngedome
of Christ is a spiritual kyngedome, which rules herein earth, and yet it is
not of the earh, but of heaven. This could never no King bring to pass, that
he had set up a kingdom, which were in earth, and yet were not terrestrial,
but celestial. Wherefore this work declares, that this King must be more
then a bare or pure man.

For he that knows this science, and has the power, that he is above sin,
and can iustifye sin, the same must needs be God, for God only iustifyeth
the ungodly, To. iiij.
as Paul says Roma. in the.iiij. And for as much, as this King performs, and
brings to pass such things, it follows therefore, that he is very God,
sense he has the honor, and does the works, which only belong to God, Now
then, if he can bring to pass, that the people may be delivered from their
sins, and by that means make the^ ryghteous, then can he also soon deliver
them from death, for where as is no sin, there can be no death, for the
stynge of death is sin, as Paul says to the Torinthians. i. Co. xv
i. Cor. xv. for if there were no sin, then should death have no might nor
power, and thus does this King deliver us from sin, and death, from the
devil, from hell, and from all infelicite, and gives us the eternal
ryghteousnes, and everlasting life. He makes GOD our father, and gives us
the kyngedome of heaven, Now, this is no man able to do, neither angel, nor
saynete, neither also Mary the mother of God, but only GOD him self, whereout
it follows then, that this king must needs be God, and although it be not
expressed with manifest words, yet do the words and the understanding of
this saying, bring it with them, that he is very GOD and man, So goodlye
could the Prophets speak of Christ, and counterfayte him so excellentely
unto us, that it is to be merneyled, to the intent, that we should not mysse him.
Here ryseth now a questyon, Thou saydest even now, how that all saynctes
must cry with Sayncte Paul, over sin, and death. O wretched man, that I
am, who shall deliver me from this body subdued unto death. Here se we also,
that the Christians dye, yea the better Christians, the heauyer death they
suffer? what means this? call ye that delyueryng from death and sin? This
is it, that I have said. It is a spiritual kyngedome, and kyugedome of faith,
It will stand in faith, and men must also behold it with the eyes of faith,
Otherwise can no man at no time understand it, for there remains yet, that
death must devour us, The Emperors and Cyrannous have behedded the Apostles
and holy martyrs, Sayncte Paul was feign to stretche forth his head,
Moreover there remain yet the lusts and inclinations toward sin, There be
also many heresies and sects, which al obiecte themselves agayuste the
Christians, where is here life? where is here the ouerco^mynge of death, which
is preached in this kyngedome?

Unto that do I answer thus: We have dominion and rule, over syune and over
death, how be it, we have not yet overcome them, and we be not yet delivered
from them, for the text says that the King is yet workynge, For he does
always raise up righteousness, and makes yet styliuste and ryghteousnes, like
as a Tayllour which makes a garment, as long as he makes thereouer, so long
is he in the work, and it can not be said, that the garment be al hole
fynyshed. Even so is the kingdom of Christ in earth still in work, he
works and rayseth daily thereouer, and shall so continue until the latter
day, And then shall althynges first be made right perfect. In the mean season
do the Christians still fall in syune, albeit agayust their will. But this
advantage has a Christian, although he do feel the sin, yet is he
nevertheless lord over it, but to that end can he not bring it, that he
might clean be delivered from sin, until the old wretch dye clean, and
peryshe.

Therefore albeit that the Christians fall, yet is Christ present with them,
which rules by his spirit, and overcomes sin, and still rayseth them up
again, saying, arise brother, be of good comfort, there is no danger. And so
is Christ always in the battle and in workynge, and fyghteth with our
enemies. They do often resist against him, but at the last he obtayneth the
victory, and they are depressed. Even so goes it also with them, that are his,
in whom God triumphet and ouercometh thorough Christ. Therefore says Paul. i.
Cor. xv. i. Co. xv
But thanks be unto God, which has given us victory, thorough our Lord
Jesus Christ. And. ij. Cor. ij. says he. ij. Cor. ij
Thanks be unto God, which always gives us the victory in Christ. Although
sometime one be put to the worste, yet is Christ at hand, and lyfteth him up
again, sayenges up brother, arise, thou have no hurt, at it again still,
thou must needs fight it out, it can not be done without falling, but take heed that thou lie not still. There is evermore falling and rysynge again, as
long as we live in this world.

Now, Nota been.
as Christ has overcome sin, even so does he also overcome death, when
death is at hand, and presses upon the, and will destroy the, then is Christ
present with the, and says, at it lustely, he can not hurt the and although
he do stryke the, it shall be no more unto the, then if thou we^test to sleep,
Now go to, it is but a small matter, within this short hour it shall be better
A man may feel, that death is bitter and sharp, But he can not prenayle nor
triumph over the. For Christ has made him faynte, his stynge or darte is
made to blunt, He has weryed him self upon CHRISE, which has overcome him,
and treaden him under his fete.

Even so goes it also with the Sects and Heresies, and with all other
adversities, which all can not hurt us, for we have one in heaven, unto whom
all things are possible, and be is able to preserve us, that nothing shall
happen unto us without his will.

Therefore I say, that the outward temptatious, may well remain, but yet our
faith can not be hurt, for there remains yet in the heart a certain power
against sin, and a courage against death, and all adversities. This is it,
that CHRIST continues in his office, and dryueth his work, stryueth with
sin, and fyghteth with death, until his kyngedome be at complysshed, that
is, until the latter day.

Thus have we heard now, how the Prophet Ierempe has declared Christ, what
his person is, and what his office shall be, namely, that his office tends to
this end, that he prospere with wisdom, and rule wisely, so that he raise
equity and ryghteousnes in earth. And this office or dominion, is comprehended
in these words, whereby it does clearly appear, that his kyngedom is not
visyble, and bodily, but that it must be an invisyble and spiritual kingdom,
although it be here in earth, that is, among men, which live here in earth.
Wherefore it follows, that it is a kyngedom of faith, and can not be
comprehended with bodily eyes, Thereof have ye heard now sufficiently, wherefore
it follows further in the Prophet.

In his time shall Iudabe saved, and Israel shall dwell without fear. That
is, at the same time of the branch of David, when this King shall rule, then
shall Judah be saved uprightly, at that time will I help the, and deliver the
out of all thy trouble, so that this is a helpyng or delyueryng from all
adversities, and from all dangers.

These two sayenges do also signifye unto us, that this kingdom, is not a
bodily kingdom, for ye know that the kingdom of the Jews was divided into
two kyngedoms, Into the kyngedome of Judah, and into the kyngedome of Israel.
The ten trybes had one King of their own, and were called the kyngedom of
Israel. Afterward began the kyngedom of Judah and Ben Iamin, and that was
called the kyngedom of Judah. For the people were divided, and either of them
had his, propre King, Now the great kyngedome did God reiecte, because of
their sins and Idolatry and so dispersed and destroyed it, that he never
raised it up again, but scattered it among the Heathen, among the Medes, and
Assyrianes. Wherefore he never sent them any Prophets, neither did he sterevp
any among them, And so did this be separated the one from the other, and shall
never come together again, so that it might be made again one kyngedome, how
says then here the Prophet, Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell without
fear, and so coupleth Judah, and Israel together, and the text sounds as
though it should be one kyngedome and one people.

This may not be understand bodily, that Judah and Israel both should come
again bodily into the land together, but it is done under Christ, spiritually
in the faith, when he is publysshed through the holy Gospel, For when
Christ was preached at Jerusalem, there were many Jews converted, and believed
in Christ, both of the stock of Judah, and also of Israel, for upon
Vvhytesonday there were at Jerusalem, of Assiriens, Cilicians, Persia^s, Medes,
and of al nations under heaven three thousand converted in one day, and
cleaued unto the seed of David, namely unto Christ. Therefore may not this
text be understand of the bodily kyngedome, but of the spiritual kingdom of
Christ, for that Judah and Israel should come together again, and be made
one kingdom, could never be brought to pass, under no bodily King. Therefore
when the Prophets join these two nations together, namelye Judah and Israel,
then will they always signifye Christ's kyngedome. And so here also says the
Prophet Ieremye, that Judah shall be saved, and Israhel shall dwell without
fear which was done under Christ, for otherwise came they never together,
neither shall they at any time hereafter come together again.

Wherefore says he then, Nota.
Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell without fear? Therefore, as
though he would say, as long as these kyngedomes stand, they shall be
assaulted, and at the last shall they be destroyed also the kyngly generation
shall be taken away, How be it they shall have help. It is now grievous unto
Judah, they are carried away into a strange land, where as they must submit
them selves and serve other, Notwithstanding I will ones raise up an help,
that my people shall always have the vpperhande, although the hole world
should be mad and rage for it. But this understood not the Jews. Besides
this, here is signified unto us, that Christ's kyngedome is subdued unto the
holy Cross, for this can never fayll, wheresoever Christ's kyngedome is
preached through the holy Gospel, there follows by and by the cross, Luc.
xi.
and persecution surely, This signifies the Parable in Luke. Cap. xi. where
the Lord Christ speaks on this wise, when a strong man armed, watches
hyshouse, that which he possesses is in peace, But when a stronger then he
comes upon him, and ouercometh him, he takes from him his harnas, wherein he
trusted, and divides his goods.

How goes that to work? Nota be^e.
Even thus, when the holy Gospel goes not abroad, then is the devil in the
world, and rules mightelye, with good peace and rest, and all men go even
stepynge into hell, as we have seen hitherto, under the Papacye, there was an
outward peace, but it was not an vpryght peace. But in the holy Gospel is
the true peace preached, under the which is contained mere discord, because
of the Tyrauntes and Sects. Therefore because that now the holy Gospel
ryseth, which begins to lay hand upon the deuyls kyngedome, and to
declare, what manner of fellow the devil is, how black he is, and that his
kyngedom, how holy and good soever it appear, leads unto damnation. All the
world is set against it, whatsoever is great and holy, hangs thereon, and
it greueth the devil that his kingdom is destroyed. Therefore does he stir
up all whatsoever he is able to make, and to bring up, saying: I sleep and
sit in good peace and tranquillite for a great season, but ye will distourbe
my out of my sleep abide, and I will break you of your sleep again, and I
will cause you to have trouble enough, if ye have delight, in trouble and
tribulation, ye shall have enough of it. This does he also very largely, as we
see, for as soon as we receive the Gospel, we have peace, and also no peace,
It preaches peace, and yet follows the greatest trouble.

How whereas Christ rules through his Gospel and word, there shall be help
and succor, this causes he to be preached and declared unto us, The devil
may well raise up Tyrauntes and Sects, and cause the hole world to rebel
against the Gospel, let them rage and be mad, they shall not prevail
agayust it, thereof be thou sure, for of these say nges and promyses is the
scripture full, Psalm. xxxiij.
as where the.xxxiij. Psalm says. The Lord brings the Counsayll of the
Heathen to naught, and makes the deuyses of the people of none effect. Psalm.
ij.
And in the second Psalm says David, that the Heathen rage furiously, and
the people Imagine the kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers take
counsayll together, against the Lord and his anointed. But he adds a
littell word thereto, which is called vaynely, and says. He that dwells
in heaven, shall laugh them to scorn, the Lord shall have them in derision. And
why? Because he is to strong and to myghtie for them, he is able to bring
their deuyses to naught yea though there were a thousand times so many of
them, they shall get nothing at his hand, they may be sure. But here unto
perteyneth a strong faith, and a sharp sight, to knowledge these things.

Therefore are these earneste words, that the Prophet says: Judah shall be
helped, or saved, Nota been.
and Israhel shall dwell safe, or without fear, if thou do not behold them
with faith, thou shall surely find the contrary part. For call ye this
helpinge, or is this peace, when Christ the king him self is hanged upon the
Cross? When the apostles heads be smiten of. And when the Christians be put
from house and land, and are driven from town to town? Item, When Christ,
as he says him self in Mathewe. Mat. x.
Capit. x. sends forth his Apostles and preachers, as sheep among wolves?
verily there should be pretty peace? Clubbes and Halbardes, or dogs should be
sent among them? I suppose also that it is called a kyngedome of peace, and of
Salvation. It might well enough be called a kyngedome of war, where as is
nothing but kyllinge and murtheringe? Yea this is it that I have said, It is
another manner of kyngedome, than mense with their eyes. It apeareth outwardly,
as though it were damned, as though it were forsaken and destitute of help,
but inwardely is it meare peace and salvation, there is the battayll overcome
by faith, In the sight of the world does it sometime apeare as, though the
Christians lay underfoot, for they are killed and murdered evermore like the
Cattle, and the ungodly swymme alofte. The Sects and Heresies have the
victory and triumph. But what is it? Sap. v.
It lasts not long than are all things turned, there shall the ungodly
perysshe, and the doctrine of the spirits of error shall be forgotten. There
shall it then appear, how Christ has helped and succored his people. And
how they have had dominion over sin, death and the devil. Which now
appears very little or nothing.

Even so was it in the time of Arrius, than were there scant three Bysshopes in
the hole Christianite, that preached right, then was the hole world seduced
with this heresy, and also the Emperor him self. Then was there a great
persecution of the Christians, because of this heresy, in so much that many of
them euerywher were banysshed; and driven out of the towns and countries, so
sore that we read of no greater persecution, then that, which was at the time
of Arrius. Then did it appear, as though Christ had layen underfoot, and
Arrius above, then thought men, now is it at an end with Christ and with his
Christians, the Gospel is gone, and it is out now. Out quod he, nay nay:
For Christ remained still and the faith. Where are now those heretykes?
Arrius with the Emperor peryshed, in so much that their names stynke more
now before the world, than their doctriue as then was in estimation, and
besides that, they are all goue to the devil. But Christ is yet a live, and
his Kyngedome stands also yet sure.

Even so at this time, Nota been.
when men say: There are many Sects, there are many heresies against the
Gospel, and it is to be feared that the Gospel shall be put down, I pray the
let them go, they can not leap over this saying. Judah shall be saved, and
Israhel shall dwell without fear. This fayenge must be true, though the
devil say nay to it, Satan and the world will hinder it, and take away
faith, but he says, I will suffer them to fall, but yet will I help them, and
they shall dwell safe, in despite of all them that will let me. Although there
apeare no certeinte (for what certaynte can there be under the Cross) and the
world seek the life never so nygh, and though Satan will take away their
faith, yet shall they dwell without fear. And this happens also
undoubtedly, for where as the Gospel is, there is such a sure wall, which is
fyrye and of iron and thicker then heaven and earth. And a thousand Emperors
are not able to ouerthro we this wall a Christen man. For the word of God
endures for ever. Esa. xl.
Wherefore the Christians have merry and quiet conscientes, and the more the
world rages, the bolder they wax, yea the surer this certaynte and boldenes
do stand. And so does the Tyranne of the world, and the sects strengthen the
hertes of the Christians.

Therefore shows this text once again, that he speaks of a spiritual
kingdom. For there is no kingdom so myghtie, that ever was able by the sweard
to conquer unto his subjects such a certaynte and peace. The Romans have been the most mightiest Lords, notwitstandinge they were oftentimes beatten,
and could never bryuge it to that point, that they might have had peace and
certayntie, sometime there were four thousand slain, and sometime ten
thousand, to that they had always assaults, and enemitie. It follows now
further in the Prophet.

And this is the name that they shall call him, even the Lord our
righteousness. The Person has he described, and also the office, and the fruit
of the office, namely, that he shall set up equity and righteousness, and
that the people shall have help, and dwell in sauetie, how be it under the
Cross and persecution. Now declares the Prophet, what his name shall be,
and says: he shall be called, the Lord our righteousness. The Jews hold
much of this name in the Ebrewe tongue, which we have translated Lord, and
say: that he may not be named, neither do they name him also, in such great
reverence do they keep it, they writtet it upon no paper, and when they writ
it there on, they alter the letters, and make seant two letters, and they allow
it not that the Christians should se it written. Also some wicked persons
among the Jews, have deceived many Princes and Lords, unto whom they have
given this name in writtinge, and have told them, that whosoever did bear it
about him, should not be slain, and that it does serve for more other
things, of like superstition. Even as also many Christians, which have
learned it of the Jews, where wont to grave this name in gold or silver, and
to hang it about their necks, to the intent, that they should not be shot or
wounded, etc.

The cause wherefore the Jews hold so much of this name is this, where as
this name Lord stands in the scripture there does it signify God in his
Godly essence and Majesty, and there is spoken of the very God. The Hebrewe
language has about ten names, whereby she names God, among the which
there are many whereby she names God, concerning his works, but this name
Jehovah, Lord, signifies only God as he is in his Godly essence. This
difference can we not keep in our language, for we do commonly call it Lord,
and can not wreste nor constrayne this word, that it should signify God
only, for we call a Prince Lord, and a ruler is also called Lord, and it is
very common to us in our language. But that we call God also a Lord, this have
we out of the Evangelists, which call him Dominum, Lord, whom we do follow
herein leaninge it as we find it. The other names in the Ebrewe, are not only
asseribed to God, but they are also spoken to other men, but this name,
Jehovah, is only attributed to the very lyuinge God.

For as much now as the holy scripture, and the Jews them selves, besides
that also the holy Fathers, and all writters do agree in one, that this name
only and properly appertains to the Godly Majesty and essence, so have we
here in the Prophet Jeremy, a mighty strong defense against the Jews, and a
very excellent great conforte for us Christians. For there is very mightily
grounded this Article, of our faith, That Christ is a very natural God. I
have my self reasoned thereof with the Jews, even with the Chiefest and best
learned, which know the Bible so well, that there is never a letter in it,
but they understood it, and laid this sayeuge before them. But they could
allege nothing against me, at the last, made they this answer, and said
that they believed their Talmud, that is, their exposition, which speaks
nothing of Christ, and the same exposition must they follow. Therefore abide
they not by the Text, but seek startinge holes and bypathes, for if they
would abide only by the Text, they were convinced. For this saying
concludes to strong, that this seed of Danid, is a very true and natural
God, for he shall be called by the name, whereby the very lyuinge God is called.

In the second book of Moses Exodi. Ex. xxij
xxij. Are the Judges called Elohim, Gods, for their offices sake, because
that they sit in Gods stead, and are Gods ministers: In like manner are
also all Christians called Gods, as Christ, out of the.lxxxij. Psalm,
Psalm. lxxxij.
in the.x. of John makes rehersall, where as he said unto the Jews: Is it
not written in your law, I said, ye are Gods. But this word, Jehovah
shall thou synde no where appropriated to any other, but only to the Godly
majesty. The other names, whereby God also is called in the Hebrewe language,
as the Jews say them selves, have some occasion of any work which God
does. As Pahad, is he called of the fear, that he is feared with all: And so
did Jacob swear by the fear of his Father. Item God is also called, Schadai,
because he preserves and provides all things, and as the other names be
called in their degrees: So that every name brings a work with it which he
does, whereof also he is named. Even as we say also, and call him a God of
truethe, bebecause, that he is true, yea he is the truth him self, and makes
men true vprighte. Item a faithefull God, that he is faithful, and keeps
whatsoever he promises.

Item a God of Peace, a God of patience, a God of consolation, as Sayncte Paul
does often name him according as occasion is given unto him in the matter
whereof he does entreat. But of this name, whereby he is called, Jehovah (say
the Jews them selves) is nome occasion known, to be declared, neither is
there any work expressed, whereof he is so called, but only that it
comprehends the bare God, hedade and the Godly Mayestie. And therefore when
the Jews read this Text, they read not Iehonah, but Adonay.

Thus may we Christians here upon this saying of Jeremy confortably conclude,
that Christ must be known as a very and natural God. Therefore let us mark
diligently this text, Nota been.
that when heretykes and Sects shall arise, and assault this Article of our
faith, that Christ is not a very and natural God (as undoubtedly this
heresye will come) that we then may be furnysshed, and ready to dasshe them in
their teethe with this saying, against the which they shall not lightely be
able to bring up any thing. With such strong and sure arguments and
sayenges must they be taken and convinced, or else they will escape us, and
get away through even as the fysshes escape through the net. For an
heretic is a slyppery merchant, which can not easily be taken, for he is
very uymble in the scripiures. Wherefore he must be warely handled in the Godly
scriptures. All the occasion hereof is that they prefer their own
Imagination in the scripture, and that the scripture must be judges after
their own fantasyes and after their own understanding, and must be bent and
wrested after their own brains. Wherefore we ought te hear Gods word with
fear, and handle it with humility, and not to fall into it with our own
Imaginations. Thou mighteste rather fall into all manner of sins, then into
thine own fantastical Imagination, Nota been.
such a dangerous and noysible thing is it. For the word of God is not to
be gested with all, if thou can not understand it, then take of thy cappe for
it. For it suffers no scorues, nor any man's interpretation, but it is an
earneste matter, and it will be honored and remembered: And beware whatsoever
thou do, thou fall not into it with thine own Imagination, for if thou come
into it with thine Imagination, thou shall ouershute thy self as our Spirits
of error have done, and know not whether thou art behind or before in it,
and it shall be hard for the to guess it: For when any man falls into his
own Imagination, the same can not lightely be helped out of it again.

Even so happened it also unto the Jews, they could not perceive it, neither
can they yet at this day perceive it, that Christ should be a natural very
God, for they be hardened, and captyues of the devil, which does keep them
surely in his power, they have ears and hear it not, and they have eyes and
se it not: Even as Esaye in the.vi. Esa. vi.
Chapter has prophesied of them. Nota been.
And so has it happened unto all heretykes, when the truth has been laid
before them so clear and evident that they might perceive it plainly, yet for
all that would they not se nor understand it. Even so do also all Sects and
heretykes, as many as there be of them, they will not be persuaded, though it
stood never so clear in the Scripture. Is not this the devil, that a man can
not hear, nor se that thing which stands before his eyes? But this is it,
Psalm. cix
that the.cix. Psalm says. It is gone through their mary and bones like
oil, and like water into their bowelles, when thou haste drunk water and it
is changed into thy flesh and blood, then bring it out if thou causte.
Likewise with the oil, when it is flowen into any thing it can not easily be
taken out again. Even so goes it also with Sects and heresies and with our
Imaginations, when this disease is rooted in, then may the devil pluck it
out, for I can not. Therefore speaks Saynet Paul well unto Titus.
Chapter.iij. Tit. iij.
A man that is given to heresy, after the first and the second admonicion
avoid, remembringe that he that is such, is perverted, and synneth even damned
by his own judgment. Therefore beware of Sects, It is easy to come into
them, but it is hard to come out again, believe me thou can not so easily
come out again, as thou wentest in. All this have I said because of the
Jews, which by this manifest Text will not be persuaded, that Christ is a
natural and very God.

More over it can not be said that God does participate this name unto him, as
unto men, as it is written in the first book of Moses. Gene.i.
Gene.i. Let us make man in our Image after our lykenes, but that man should
be called a very natural God, that can not be, for God speaks in Esaye
Chapter.xlij. Esa. xlij
my glory will I give to none other. But this name gives he verily unto this
man Christ, the seed or branch of David. Whereof he has spoken before,
because that he is also a natural God. And therefore speaks the one Lord of
the other Lord, that is, one very natural God, of another very natural God
(for the Prophet speaks hereof two persons) and says, I Lord and very God,
will raise up unto David a branch, which also shall be called Lord, and very
God. And hereunto is requisite a faith, which may comprehend these things.
There is yet, as I have said, an heresye to come, against this Article of our
faith that Christ is a very and natural God, God grant that we do not live
so long.

Furthermore says the Prophet that this sede of David shall also be called,
our ryghteousnes, The first name, that he is called Lord, is concerning his
Godly person, whereof he gives nothing, neither does he participate any
thing thereof unto us. But the other, that he is called our ryghteousnes, is
as touching his office, wherewith he ministers unto us, For in this name, is
comprehended his hole office, and the fruit or commodity of this King. We
have such a King, which is very God, and not only very God, but he is
pertaynyng unto us, For he is our righteousness. This is our greatest
conforte, that this King and Lord is ours. And he is become ours, through
the humanite, which he took upon him, to the intent, that he should care for us
as for his own flessh. Such names ought to be written with golden letters, yea
not only with golden letters, but also with druppels of blood in the botome
of the heart. Here see thou, that this King Christ is not only God, but also
our ryghteousnes, or our justification, which makes us just and ryghteous,
as also Paul declares in many places, and specially to the Corith. i. Cor. i.
i. Corint. i. whereas he says, Christ, of God is made unto us wisdom, and
also ryghteousnes, and sanctifyenge and redemption.

I have said ofte^tymes, that a christen life, stands in these two points.
First, that our sins, which we have committed, are quyte, and clean
forgeuen and remitted unto us through Christ, when I believe in him.
Secondarely, that not only our sins be remitted, and have obtained a
righteousness, but there is also a sanctifyenge from the remnaunt of sins, so
that the remnaunt of sins can not hurt me, for Christ is there present, the
most perfect ryghteousnes, which is hole ryghteous and pure, and cleanses me
also from the sins, which yet remain in my flesh, for this ryghteousnes
of Christ is mine, and is counted to me, so that I am without sin, not of my
self, but because of the ryghteousnes of Christ. Now when I believe in
Christ, then must Christ with his ryghteousnes step forth before the face
of God in heaven and make answer for me. Therefore ought we and must, repute
his righteousness, as though it were our own, and be so bold thereon, as on
our inheritance. For these words, that he is called our ryghteousnes, and
no gestes.

Now behold what richesse a christian man has, which can never dye, Nota been.
for he has CHRIST himself, what will now death or sin prevail against a
Christen man at the hour of his departing? Nota be^^.
Nothing, death is a laughinge stock for him, he does also care nothing for
sin, for neither sin, nor death, neither devil nor hell is able to bring up
any thing against Christ, whom a Christian has up him. Therefore when death
comes to a faithful Christian, then says the Christian, Ye are welcome good
Sir death, what good news with you? what seek ye here? know thou not, whom
I have by my? Christ is my ryghteousnes, I pray the go to and take her from
me, if thou do take her from me, then will I follow the, but thou shall not
be able to do it, And so do the Christians defye death, and speak with sayncte
Paul, i. Cor. xv. i. Co. xv
Death where is thy stynge? Hell where is thy victory? And as he says in
another place. Philip. i
Philip. i, Christ is to me life, and death is to me advantage, if I dye, I
have advantage, for I come so much the sooner to life. There see thou, what
death preuayleth against the Christians, he is now their advantage, they lose
nothing by him, but he byteth himself to death upon them.

Even so goes it also with the sin, which is yet remaynyug, Nota.
and cleaneth yet unto us, she can not hinder us, neither can she damn us, for
Christ is by us, which cleanses and puryfyeth us, so that we from day to day,
become more holyer and holyer, and the longer we live, the more enemies we
become unto sin, and so desire to dye, longing for the salvation, and after
the life euerlastyuge, This is our sanctification. Therefore, whylest Christ's
righteousness is ours, she is not idle, but cleanses and purges us, as long
as we live in this world, until that we also be pure and holy, as Christ is
holy, But all this comes from him.

And thus has the Prophet by these words declared the office of Christ,
namely, that he is our King, Nota been.
our Bishop or Priest, and our ryghteousnes, and also our redemer and
delyuerer from sin, death, devil, and hell, and that he delyuereth us out
of al tribulations, and that he is our life and health and salvation. Therefore
when I have him by faith, then can the hole world, inuente nothing against
me, nor hurt me in any thing, for he is to great, and sits on the right
hand of God, where also he shall remain how soever says nay. Let me see, if
any man can thruste him down from thence. He has good hold, let us also take
good hold upon him and on his ryghteousnes, than shall we not need to fear.
It follows further now in Ieremye, And therefore behold, the time comes
(says the Lord) that it shall be no more said, the Lord lives, which
brought the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt. But the Lord
lives, which brought forth, and led the seed of the house of Israel out of
the Northlande, and from all countries, where I have scatred them, and they
shall dwell in their own land again.

The Prophet will forgette nothing at all. But will very roundely and
thoroughly teach exactely, what is to be preached in the new Testament, and will
say thus: It were not sufficyent, although this were preached even as ye have
heard it, for there might peradventure yet be found some weak consciences,
that would yet hang upon the old Testament, and believe the same, Those does
the Prophet here preuente, and speaks of the Christian liberte, and does
hole abrogate and dissanulle the old Testament, for he will teach a new, And
the new can not be taught, except the old be abrogate as the Epistle to the
Hebrews says in the viij. He. viij.
Chapter. As though the Prophet would say. There shall arise a new
preaching, The old Testament shall be no more allowed in the new Testamente,
but it shall reasse, and be abolysshed, This will the Prophet in this laest
saying.

And this is now the doctrine that we teach, and which we have received of
Paul, namely that among the Christians, there should be no law or
commandment outwardely, for thus says he unto the Galathians. Gala. ij
ij. I through the law am dead to the law, That is, through the new law in
the new Testamente, am I dead to the old law in the old Testament. Moses is
no more allowed with me, sense I have Christ. The old Testament contains that
the Jews were bound to keep the commandments, which God gave unto Moses
upon the mount Sinay, namely, how that they should keep the holy days or
feasts, how that they should dwell in them, and in the land, how they
should order them selves concerning meats and raiment, and whatsoever there
were more of such laws and commandments, so that al their doings were
comprehended, and bound to certain persons, time, Nota.
place, and appearaunce, So that they had a politic rule, even as other
regions and realms have their ordinances statutes and laws, as the Saxons
have the glass of Saxon, where after they govern and keep them selves, But
such a compulsion as the Jews had, should not the Christians have, for they
should not be bound to any law, so that they must do any thing by
compulsyon and should be bound to any person, time, and apparel as the Jews,
but it should be a free people without any compulsyon, which should do al
things voluntarely and wyllyngly. Therefore says the. Cx. Psa. Lx
Psalm. Thy people shall be willing. etc.

But what is the occasyon, that the Christians shall not be bound to the law?
This is the cause, for this King is come to set up ryghteousnes in earth, that
is, to make the people righteous. Now if he will make the people ryghteous,
what needs then the law, if the people were just, and ryghteous, then neded
they not to be made ryghteous, he that is hole, needs no physician, says
Christ in the Gospel.

For as much now as the Prophet has spaken before hand, Nota been.
that this King is a just and a ryghteous King, not only for him self, but
also that he make other just and righteous, then be not we, which are in his
kingdom, bound to any law, neither have need of any law to make us
ryghteous, for if the world were righteous, the^ should we not need an
Emperor, nor Prince, nor mayer, nor judge, nor hangeman, nor wheles, nor
gallows, nor fire, nor water, nor swearde, nor halbarde, for every man should
do willingly of his own mind, whatsoever he ought to do, even as a man
eats and drynketh willyngly, and not compelled. But seeing she is a stable
full of wicked persons, there must needs be laws and Superyours, Judges,
hangemen sweardes, gallows, and whatsoever there is more, whereby the evil
doers may be kept in awe. i. Tim. i
For as Paul says, i, Timo. i. The law is not given unto a ryghteous man,
but unto the unrighteous and disobedient, to the ungodly and to sinners, to
unholy and unclean, to murderers of fathers, and murderers of mothers, to
manslears, and hooremongers. But in the Christianite, there are they just and
ryghteous, every man does, as he ought to do wyllyngly, and gladly, there is
no power or dominion of the one, over the other, but there are they al
brethren, and the one serneth the other, helps him, delyuereth him, and
cares for his neighbor, as for his brother, yea even as for him self, I
omit then that the one should eudamage the other, or sclaunder him, there
needs neither Judge nor hangeman, neither sweard nor gallows, for all things
are done brother like, for also Christ was not ashamed to call us his
brethren, where as he said unto Mary Magdalen, Ioh. xx.
after his resurrection. Johan. xx. Go unto mybrethren, and say unto them, I
ascend unto my father and your father to my God, and your God.

Therefore says now the Prophet here, Nota.
that at that time, when this just and ryghteous King shall raygne, shall the
law of Moses stand no more in effect, which he expresses with these
words, where he says, It shall no more be said, The Lord lives, which
brought the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt, for this was the
oath or manner of swearyng amongst the Jews, that they said. By the living
God, which brought us out of Egypt. This is also the manner of the scripture
to swear, as we se every where in the Prophets, whereby they would certifye
and assure the people, that they teach and preach in the name of God, and at
his commandment, as though they would say, This is the truth and Gods
word, by the living GOD, or as truly as the Lord God lives, Even so should
also all preachers be sure, that they might say, thus says the Lord, this is
Gods word, and when I preach the word of God, then is it as much as if I
did swear. And whosoever is not sure of this, and can not say. Thus says the
Lord, the same may cease from preaching well enough, for he shall do no good.

So is now this the meaning of the Prophet, Nota been.
that the old Testament shall be no more taught nor preached that it should
bind, but only for this intent, that men may take there out examples of our
faith, whereby we be assured that God keeps his promyses. But of him shall now
be preached, that has dissanulled the old Testament, and that noman is
justified or saved by the law, as the Jews but that Christ is only he, that
iustifyeth by his ryghteousnes.

And this predication, shall not only be preached in Judah, or in one or two
countres, but throughout all the hole world, Summa Summarum, The old Testament
shall no more be preached, but the new, so that this ryghteousnes shall be
spread abroad, throughout the hole world.

These be our letters and sealles, that we be a free people, withoutlawe and
without compulsyon, but only for the Christians, which know how to use the
Christian liberty, for we may not do, as the plowemen did the laest year.

But where be such Christians that use the Christian liberte a right, that do
all things willyngly and gladly, that so serve their neighbor, and make
other partakers of their goods and do according as God has done unto them?
where be they that gladly suffer the Cross? A christian is a seldom bird.
There are very few that know what is the true Christian liberte, The most
part do draw it to the body, and know not, that it is a liberte of the
conscience, and of the soul, namely, that thou art not pure nor ryghteous
after the heart and conscience, but if thou shall be pure and ryghteous, then
must thou knoweledge, that thou art made pure and ryghteous by this King
Christ JESUS only, by the means of his blood, whithe he has shed for thy
upon the cross, this makes the free, But the Law of Moses, and the law of
the Emperor and other things more do not make the free.

When I preach thus, then do I not mean that men should not obey to the
hyer powers, serve them, and give unto them that which is due unto them, for
the Christian liberte is nothing touching the body, nor the outward
behaueoure and conversation, but the soul, Therefore, when thou do serve or
obey the hyer powers, then do thou even as much as though thou dyddest
give to a naked man a coatte, or did feed the hungry, for it is also a deed
of charity, which flows and springs onte of faith, not that thou should
be made ryghteous through this work, but that it declare thy faith, Therefore
is this the sum, before god shall thou be ryghteous, without works, without
al laws, only through Christ Jesus.

Here see thou, Nota been.
how counyngly and myghtelye, the Prophets could counterfaycte Christ and
hye kingdom, to the intent that they would make us sure and certain, wherein our
salvation consists. God grasit that we may so comprehend it and believe it.

Thanks be to GOD

A sermon of D. Marten Luther, of the kyngedome of Christ, out of the eight
Psalm. Lord our Lord etc. made at Mersburg the syxte day of Aug. anno 1545.
This is one of the principal Psalms of the kyngely Prophet David, wherein he
has written of Christ and his kingdom. And they are no dark words, but
clear light and easy to understand. And he describes the kingdom of Christ
on this wise, that although it be in heaven by working, yet is it also here
beneeth in earth, and in all the world, and seperateth the kingdom of Christ,
from the worldely kingdom, which is governed by worldly kings and Powers.

These two kingdoms are here beneth in earth among men, for also the kingdom
of Christ is here beneth in earth among me^. But there is a great difference,
that notwithstanding, that both the kingdom of Christ, and also of the
world are here in earth, yet are they ruled and governed after an unlike
sort. For the king of whom here the Psalm speaks, albeit that he have his
kingdom in earth, yet does he rule spiritually, and after a heavenly fasshion:
So that although his kingdom be not seen, as the worldely kingdom is seen,
yet is it heard, but how? Out of the mouth of infauntes and sucking babes
have thou ordained strength, and so is the kingdom of Christ, a kingdom of
hearing, and not of seeing.

For the eyes do not lead and bring us thither, where as we find and learn to
know Christ, but the ears must do that, and also such ears, as hear the
word, out of the mouth of Infantes and sucking babes. This is not the fasshion
of the worldely kingdom, for the same stands not only in the hearing, but in
workyng and by putting in ure, that the good may be defended, and kept in
equity Justice and peace, and that the ungodly untoward and evil may be
punysshed, that men may also labor with their hands, and obtain goods and
profits, for there shall they not rule nor wax rich by their ears: For that
thou art made rich, is not done by the ears, but by the eyes and hands,
that thou doeste take it in hand and accomplish it in deed. In those points
consists the worldely kingdom, far segregated from the spiritual kingdom
of Christ, which kingdom, although it be here in earth yet is it not executed
with plowynge, and with our hands. But it consists in the word, and is
executed through the word, which proceeds forth of the mouths of Infantes
and suckinge babes,

As when thou see and hear a preacher, preaching the word of God, thorough
the which by the commaun hemente of Christ he pronounces Repentance and
forgeuenes of sins, there seeste thou neither plough nor harrowe. But thou
see and hear, that the Preacher only uses the tongue and the word, and
yet not his own word but the word of Godwher by Christ rules here in earth.

In like manner also, when we se the holy Sacraments ministered, wherein God
offers and gives unto us remission of all our syunes, mercy salvation, and
the life everlasting: There see thou the delyueraunce from sin and death,
that thou also art no more deteyned captive in the kingdom of the devil, thou
doeste not se it, but only hear it, that it is offered and give the with the
tongue of the Preacher, thorough the word.

Likewise, when a child, is young borue into the world of father and mother,
which is a sinful birth, this do we se with our eyes, but when the Child is
brought to Christ, grafted in Christ through Baptism, and is borne again of
new, washed from sin, and is made the Child, and heir of God, then is it
borne again a new which is far an other birth than the first, which we
se and feel. The second and new birth, which is done through the water,
word, and the spirit, is not seen, there are only the words heard, which
if I believe I am made the child and heir of God, and fellow heir with
Christ, not of this corruptible life, wherein we are borne, thorough the first
birth, but of the everlasting life, not an heir of money and goods. Silver
and Gold. But I am made heir of the everlasting and heavenly goods and gifts
of God.

Of these things se I none, but only hear the word, which profereth me
such goods, and says, that I shall so enjoy them, if I do then receive and
believe it, then is it even so, and I obtain all whatsoever the word does
profer, promise, and give me.

So do we also say in our Chylder Creed, I believe in the holy Ghost, etc.
forgeuenes of sins, and the life everlasting. These are things, which we
neither se nor feel. They are not executed with hands, there unto belongs no
plough, nor other external work. But the word, if I hear it and believe it,
then do I receive, and obtayue whatsoever the word proferet and promises unto
me: namely remission of sins, and the life everlasting, for the word
deceyueth not, whatsoever it promises, the same is yea, and comes so to pass
again, whatsoever it denies the same is ^ay, whosoever therefore does stick
to the word and his promises, the same does also receive whatsoever it
promises and offers.

Whansoeuer I feel my sins, and confess them unto God, and desire of a
Priest, or Minister of the word, absolution, or remission of Sins, then
does the Minister of the word lay his hand upon my head, and by the
commandment of Christ our Lord he assoyleth me quyte from my sins. There
do I hear, and se nothing but only the word, whereby he assoyleth me from
my synues. Nevertheless, if I believe the word, as it foundeth, then is it sure,
whatsoever it promises unto me, and I receive through the absolution,
remission of all my sins, and knowledge a merciful God. Here might now any
man say, they are great and high things where of thou speak, if it were
true, how happy were we? that incontinently remission of sins, and all
heavenly goods should follow the word, if I hear it and believe it? Then
could I no more fear death, nor despair for my sins, nor yet fear the
devil. For all these things are now through the word of absolution taken
away from me? Yea I say, all those things haste thou, and obtayneste them
even as the word promises unto the, if thou doeste accept it with a sure and
steadfast faith, and doeste not doubt at all, As soon as thou begyuneste to
waver and to doubt, then haste thou also and receyueste nothing at all, we
may not here hauge upon the sight, but upon the word, that I believe it, than
do I obtain it every whitte. But if I do not believe, but will bring it to
pass and obtain it by the sight than have I also nothing, etc.

Whosoever now, hears, remembers, and marketh this with diligence, shall
easily and ^one understand and mark, what these two kingedomes, namely the
kyngedome of Christ, and the kyngedome of the world are, what their office
is, and wherein they do consiste: And what difference there is between both
these kyngedomes, namely that although they be, and are governed both, here in
earth, yet does the outward and worldly hyngdome consiste only in doing and
framinge, which requires eyes and hands. But the kingdom of Christ
consists only in the hearing, so that I hear the word, receive it, and
believe it, namely the word, which also proceeds from the mouths of Infantes,
and is taught and preached by suckelinges, if I do believe it, I have all
things.

After this sort, can no Emperor, King nor Prince rule, for he must do
stwith the deed. If I shall be rich, he must not give me words, but money
and goods with the deed. For words will not help the matter. But here, in
Christ's kyngedome, is it clean contrary, for here, although I were exceeding
rich, and had all the goods of the world, yet were they not able to forgive
nor to take away my sins, with all their might, dominion, and power, with all
the plowes and harrowes, and with all the strenght and power of all the
substance and riches of this world.

Wherefore? and why so? I thought, whosoever had money and goods, power and
dominion, had had all things? No, not so, he is yet far from the remission
of sins, and the life everlasting although he be rich, and have great
goods, and is mighty, for they hear not the word, wherefore they believe not
but stick in darkness, are drowned in covetousness, and in the substance of
this world, and they regard not the word nor God him self. And whersoeuer the
word nor God him self is not, there is darkness and the kyngedome of the
devil, out of the which, nomoney, goods, power nor dominion, is able to
deliver him. But if he will be losed out of the kingdom of darkness and of the
devil, and have remission of sins, and the life everlasting, which in the
kingdom of Christ, through the word is offered and given us freely, then let
him stick fast and cleave to the word, hear the same, receive it, and believe
it, so shall he obtain all things, etc.

Thus speaks the Prophet clearly, and distinctly of both the kingdoms not
that he does abrogate and disanull the worldely and external kingdom which
consists in the doyuge and applyenge, but rather does approve and confirm
it: For rulers must be had, for to keep peace, justice, and unity, to defend
the good, and to punysshe the evil, or else there should be a great disordre
in all things, therefore does not the Prophet abolysshe the same outward
kyngedome.

But in the Spiritual kingdom of Christ when a minister of the Church
baptiseth, with words and water, after the institution of Christ, if an
ungodly and unbelieving person do se it, he does langh it to scorn, as a
folysshe deed, in man's reason, because he does neither se nor feel, what there
is executed, namely that there are present, and baptize, all the three persons of
the godly majesty, receive the man, which was conceived and borne in sin,
and make him lose from the kingdom of the devil, and fette him in the kingdom
of heaven, wherein is remission of sins Grace, and salvation.

In likemaner also, wha^ an ungodly person and an infidele sees, a Priest
saying his hands upon a sinner, and co^trite heart for his sins sake, and
forgeuing sin, or assoyling him from sin he does also laugh it to scorn,
and would set more by it if a Cronne of silver or of Gold garnyshed with
Perles and precious stones, were set on a man's head, this does an infidel
regard much, and a thousandtymes more, then the layenge on of hands, and
forgeuing of sins, notwitstanding that it is not to be compared with any
substance, treasure of this world.

But a Christen man, beholds it with other eyes and with another heart, he
regards not the Golden Crown, but has a respect to the word, which he
hears, marketh the same, and cleaves thereunto, which says unto him on this
wise. Believe and cleave unto the word, and thou shall live for ever and be a
Lord over Sin, Law, Death, Devil and Hell, albeit that there are yet
sins left remaining in the, they shall not be imputed unto the, but they
shall be all covered and quenched for Jesus Christus sake the son of God.
What can be more confortable unto us, then this, that all out sins shall be
forgeuen, put out and taken away: And besides that, shall have a merciful
God, and obtain everlasting life?

This is wonderfully spoken, but thou must believe, then shall thou obtain all
these things, for without faith, doeste thou continue in sin, and in
captivity in the devils kyngedome. But if thou believe, thou art lose from
sin, and delivered out of the kyngedome of the, devil into the kingdom of
Christ.

And if here any man would say, I have even as well a mouth, and speak even
as well, and make words, as a Curate, yet does not this follow my words, that
they might deliver me from syn, and set me in the kingdom of God, how is it
then possible, that the mouth and words of my Curate, should have more
efficacy, to give all the benefices above rehearsed? To this shall we answer on
this wise: There is a great diversity between thy mouth, and the mouth of a
Preacher, between thy word, and the word of a Preacher, which difference
David does here clearly show, saying: Thou haste anaunced thy praise out of
the mouth of Infantes and suckinge babes. This is now an other word, than
thine, or my word which comes by the commandment of him, which sayethe,
Ite. Math. xxviij. Marci, xvi.
Go ye into all the world, and preach the glad tydinges, and teach all
nations baptising them, etc. he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved,
but he that believes not shall be damned. Christ Jesus, the son of God, our
Lord, which gives this commandment unto his Apostles, and to all ministers
of the Church of God, bids here to speak and to preach, he does lay a
word in their mouth, which is another word, tha^ thy word, Esa. xl.
namely: the word of God, which is everlasting, and endures for ever, and
says, he that believes the same, shall be saved, but he that believes not
shall be damned, this word has another virtue, to forgive sin, which none
other word has.

If thou now hear me, which am a preacher, and hear me none otherwise,
than even as thou hear another man, and also genest none other credence unto
my words, then thou doeste give to the words of another man, then art thou
damned with me, If I also did preach no more but mine own word, as the Pope
has done, which has taught his own word and not Gods word, whom we
have also heard as a man, and is so heard yet of many, which all are damned
with the Pope, as they that hang upon the word if men. Thus may thou not
hear me, as a man which preaches the word of men, for if thou do so hear
me, it were much better, that thou did not hear me at all, likewise also,
thou may not hear thy Curate, as a man, that speaks and preaches the
words of men. But thou must hear him, as one that speaks the word, out
of the mouth of Infantes, and suckelinges, which say on this wise: I believe
in the holy Ghooste, the holy Catholyke Church, which has the word,
forgeuenes of sins, the holy Sacraments, and the right use of the
Sacraments. This church preaches the word of God, commands to believe,
forgeueth sins, ministers the Sacraments, upon the word, which is the
right foundation, and the sure ground against the which all the Devils can
not prevail there on must I trust and build. This is the commandment of
Christ, which he has left unto his Church and felloweship: namely, that she
in his name and by his commandment, has given and left us his word, which
he speaks and preaches by our mouths, which also we ought to hear,
receive and believe, as his own word, where as this is done in such wise,
there may it be said. Thou have prepared a power for thine enemies, for to
destroy the adversary and the revenger.

This power or strength is prepared and made through the word, whereby he
begins his dominion, so that when sin comes and will byte and devour me,
that then I may say. Ah sin, soft a while, I have nothing to do with the,
neither do I know of any sin, for I am made lose and assoyled from sin
thorough the word, whereunto I will stick. Item, if the devil come, and will
also assault me, and obtain the victory over me, that as them I may say, I
set not by the a strowe. Even so should I also say to hell and to death, Oh
Death I know of no Death, etc. Now even as the word says unto the, so have
thou al things if thou do believe it. But if thou do not believe it, thou
have nothing neither do thou obtain any thing but abydest in sin, under
the power of the devil, and must attend the everlasting damnation, and
death.

But the Catholyke Church, which has this confort and power,
notwithstanding, that in comparyson of the world, which exercyseth great and
mighty things, she is counted for foolyshenes and despised. Yet has she such
great strength and domynion. But whence comes such great power, and strength,
to the poor despised flock, the feloweshyppe of Christ? The worldely power
gives her not this strenght, neither has she it to give. But the word of God
ordeyneth this power, kyngedome, and church, which is such a people, called
here in earth, through the Gospel, in the universal Christianite, that has
the pure and sincere word, and the right use of the Sacraments, and is
myghtyer and of greater power, then the Devil, Death and hell, and that not in
one place, nor in one people But in all the world, wheresoever the Christians
are dispersed, which kingdom of Christ is ruled and governed without
external compulsyon and violence, and without worldely wisdom, and
understanding, but only through the mouth of infau^ten that is, only
through the word of faith, The Same suck lynges and infantes are the fowls of
the world, and are despised. Well so should it be, this is right, so ought
they to be called before the world, how be it, they have another name before
God, and a better respect, They are called princes and Angels of God, and they
are so in deed. For behold, what says here David thereof, He says, that the
kingdom of the Lord Christ is such a kingdom, which rules and bears do
minion throughoute all the world, not with haruas, Gold, silver, dominyons and
Lordeshyppes, how does he than set forth such a great power? only through the
word, which proceeds and is heard out of the mouths of the suck lynges and
infantes,

For, when our Lord Jesus Christ, began this his kyngedome in this world, he
took not the Emperor of Rome, or the high Priests of Jerusalem, or the
best, highest, and myghtyest among the people, But he took, poor despised
beggars, poor fysshers, as Peter, Andrewe, John, James, Thomas, and other
poor sinners for it, into their mouths did he put his word, and sent them
forth to preach, which notwithstanding, that they were called chosen, and
sent of Christ, yet were they counted and called fools before the world, But
behold in what case were they on Whit sunday, there did their power shine and
breoke forth, when by the first Sermon of S. Peter, there were three thou sand
persons converted, and afterward by their preaching many thousands were
brought to the kyngedome of Christ, then was their power seen and his power
bare rule in Jerusalem, and among the people, of the Jews, until he had
clean gathered out the wheat, then did he put fire in the chafe, and burned
it through the Romans, Than did it appear, what manner of kingdom and power
Christ had set up. This kingdom and powerdoeth David here boaste, wha^ he
says. Thou have prepared a power, because of thine enemies, etc. And is also
worthy to be boasted and magnyfyed.

Therefore do we also which are preachers of the word, suffer great wrong
and iniurye, that we be so hated reuyled and abhorred, which notwithstanding,
bring neytherharnas nor weapen, neither also poison, nor any other evil
thing with us, But only the saving word of God, what do we then? or
wherewith do we deserve it? that they do so be heretyke us? what are the great
crimes, wherein we do offend? Here say thou, yea the Pope has condemned you
with your doctrine, therefore do we take you also forheretykes and damned. But
what can I do withal? I have not deserved it, the word and the doctrine is
not mine, if I did it, and if it were my word then ought it to be condemned and
accursed, as man's word and doctrine, But now is it not my word, neither is it
my doing, But it is done by the mouth of suckelynges and infantes, through
the word, which is not mine but God his word. We bring with us a goodly
hoolsome doctrine, the holy Gospel, which offers and gives remissyon of
sins, and the life everlasting, verily this is a goodly and lovely doctrine,
which is none of ours, but his that sent us, Jesus Christ's the son of God,
if we should say, that she were ours, we should do amysse, if we should
also teach and bring with us our own doctrine, and would lead and instruct
the people in our own words, than were we worthy to be counted for heretics
condemned, and put to death for heretykes, and no iniurye should be done unto
us, But whereas we be condemned, and must be called Heretykes of them, for the
hoolsome doctrine of the Gospel, which we (as ye have heard) bring with us,
and yet is none of ours, God amend this, that for such healthful doctrynes
sake, we must be called heretykes and condemned.

O good Lord, what does the word what does it work, wherewith does it
deserve it, that it is so persecuted. This does the word speak and teach,
how thou shall be delivered from thy sins, from Death, from the power of the
devil, and from hell. Is this any hurt, or heresye. I thought that men
would have run after the doctrine, and the word, which teaches us, how
we shall be delivered from sin, even to the worlds end, this will not men do
now, but persecute it, and teach us to dout in it, and lead us to many other
places, where we should seek salvation, and remission of sins, as that we
should go to Vvalsingam, to Vvilsedom to Caunterbury to S. James in
Compostella, and to many innumerable places more. What goo do shave men
brought home from thence, but a pouche of lether, and a payr of weary legs,
had it not ben bitter, and godlyer, that thou had tarried at home, and
had exercysed thine office and vocation, wherein thou art ordained of God,
and had herb thy Curate, which preaches unto the, and out of the mouth
of the suckelynges and infantes, shows the, the sure and right way to
salvation, where thou might be sure to have remissyon of sins for thy wife
and children sit ydell, thou spendest thy money, and make weary legs, and
yet do no good, and at the last, thou art even as unsure, yea much vnsurer
of the remissyon of sins, then thou wast before.

Here say they again yea but it hyndereth the masses, they have borne much
hitherto, O what hurt is that, although it did hurt the^, which
notwithstanding it does not, what harm were it, when thou must depart out of
this world, and dye, what good can than the masses do unto the. Who abides
than by the Masses? not one, Mass.
they are all gone, both they that have said mass, and they that have heard
mass, what does it help the than, that thou do long hold taste? for thou
must away, where are they become, that lie about and are buried in the
Cloisters? what good has the mass done to them? what profit have they had by
her? they have been, and abyde^ by the masses, but the masses have not abyden by
them, for the masses are here, but they are damned. With all our hearts do we
wysshe unto them salvation, and everlasting life, but thou must leave the
mass, if not, thou haste everlasting hell fire for it, why will thou not
rather embrace, receive, love, and believe the word? etc.

Moreover they have this objection and excusation, that they are poor, and can
not otherwise get their living, as he says also, they can or will not
labor, and they are ashamed to beg. Well, if thou will not in any wise
have it otherwise, then go thy ways, But I hold me self to the everlasting,
incorruptyble promise of the word, go thou thy ways still with thy temporal
goods, masses, prebendes and Canosyes. Go to, let us see, how sure are the
Chanous then of their re^tes and Prebendes? This is sure, if our Lord God, of
his mere goodness and grace, had not fent us the Gospel in Germany, ye should
have here by this time, nothing at all, neither prebendes nor Canonisyes to
grant, for they had all ben gone for twenty years agone. But not through us,
they need not to be afraid for us, But the Pope had had them all away
twenty years agone. But how? First through the Pallia, Annates, Bulls, and
Pardons, whereupon the Emperor Maximilian, has co^playned sense above
measure, above xlviij. years agone, wha^ the Pope by a Pardon took out of
Douchelande more then four hundredth thousand crounes, whereby they waxed hot
and covetous upon the money, and came again three years after with another
Pardon, and would fayn have taken every day so much money for their pardon.

Then, what have they taken yearly out of the great Mynsters, and
Bisshoprikes, and of the great Prelatures If I do well remember, they took
every year, of the Prouostye of Mirtzburg, ij. m. crounes, and so in other
Mynsters more, which amounts yearly to a great so^me of money. Now, what
does the Pope with the money: He gives it to his Meretricibus, Ciuedis, and
Chamberlaynes, to this use does he put it. Well to the matter again, I say
thus, if the Gospel had not come, the Pope with his Romysh court had above
twenty years agone and more plucked to him self al Prebendes, Prelatures, and
Canonisyes, so that there should not have been one, in no Bysshopryke, which
the Pope should not have had to love, and pulled into his power. Thorough these
tittels, rycheners, Chamberlaynes, Commensales, etc. Which Tytels they do
labor out, and bye them before of the Pope, for a great sum of money, In
so much that they have given and yet give for one tyttel, certain hundredth
dueates, yea also a thousand crounes, according as the Tytell is great. For
therefore does the Pope keep the two thousand persons, whom he calls his
Commensales or boorderers, whereof he does yet keep none to board, nor geneth
them meat, but only keeps them for this, distributeth and gives them the
Tytels after that forte, that through them he may pull all Prelatures and
Prebendes to him self, for as soon as there is any void any where, his
Commensales are at hand, and beg it, and so at the last they come al hole to
the Pope.

Thus should it also have happened long sense (right worshipful audience) at
Mersburg, and in other mynsters, at Magdeburge, Halberstadt, and Vvirtzburge,
the Pope would have trimmed you after the new guyse, by his cooks,
cha^berlaynes, and booderers which notwithstanding are none of his Cooks, nor
Boorderers in deed, if the holy Gospel had not prevented him. For the Pope
does only for this cause (as has been said) keep so many persons about him,
that through them he may draw and pluck unto him, the goods and incomes of
al Churches, all Cauonisyes and Prelatures, as it is to be seen and is manifest
even at Rome, where so many glorious great Mynsters and Cloisters are spoiled
and wasted by the Pope, as of S. Peter and Paul. Item, of S. Agnete, wherein
were well. Cl. virgins or Nonnes, but now there is not one left. In like manner
also other cloisters wherein have been many Monks, are allspoyled, and dryue^
out, and no more but one left remayninge therein, and so stand also yet the same
great gorgious Churches and Mynsters, as emptye Barnes, which of a surety are
well so great and wyd, or rather greater then this fair cathedral church is,
wherein before many men were fed, relieved entretayned, and had their living,
now is there no man entretayned. Thus were it also happened unto your church
and mynster and other Bysshoprykes, if the Gospel had not come, and stopped it.
Therefore need not the fault to be put in the Gospel, that Bysshoprykes,
Canonicales, and cloisters are dissolved, but in the Pope.

And this is sure, if the Bysshoppes will not desiste, but still hang upon the
Pope, and the Romyshe court, they shall depresse, and destroy al Bysshoprykes,
but if they would take in hand a goodly Christian reformation, so that the
Bysshoppes did preach the Gosspel, and Chanons did study, and did read in the
mynsters, to their vycares, and to the young gentilmen, which did live in the
mynsters, than might they well continue. And why should not men rather keep
such Prelatures and Chanoneryes in our own country then to suffer the^ to be
plucked away?

The Bysshoppes, if they would themselves, might soon find a good remedy for
this matter, if they would take counsel, and hear the mouth of infantes,
out of the which the Lord has prepared a power for the^. But this do they
not, but they study and counsayll, how they may shede much blood. And why
so? because they take us for heretykes, what manner of heretykes are we then?

Even such herelykes are we, that preach the Gospel, repentance and
remissyon of sins, and teach, how we shall be delivered from sin, and made
safe, and obtain everlasting life. This heresye, as they call it, do we
teach. Oh good Lord is this evil? Ought men for this to destroy, and to
shede blood? We are no heretykes, but preach the help Gospel syncerelye
and purely, And yet do we find with great sorrow and smartes, that they do so
call us, and seek to shede our blood, notwithstanding that think nor mean
none evil, but would feign help, and bestow our counsel most earnestly
and faithfully in it, that such gorgious Imperial mynsters Canonisyes, and
Prebendes, might not be given to the heinous hores and fornicatours of Rome.
But that they might be turned to the good and right use, whereunto they were
first minded and given. Mass.
But here is one thing in thy way again, namely the mass which thou would
fayn maintayne^ Alas, what is the mass? Let go what soever will not avyde, thou
did never willyngly say mass before, this is sure, and I know it by me
self, which notwithstanding have been a holy freer, and have miserably and
pitefully blasphemed my Lord Jesus Christ for the space of xv. years with my
massyng, and yet I did never say mass willingly, how holy and devout soever
I was. But take the Bible, instead of the mass, study and learn the holy
Scripture, Holy scripture.
deserve and keep thy prebe^d with a good conscience, this is better, than that
the ungodly Romans should take it away. I would not now take ten thousand
crounes, and say one mass. Seeing then, that thou did it unwillingly
before, why do thou then hold so sore with the mass? But if thou have a
delight still to accumulate and gether money and to give the same to the
Romanystes, well, give unto them still, as long as thou haste any thing, what
does it hinder me.

But this would I wysshe with all my heart, that seeing the Bysshoppes do
nothing toward any reformation, but let al things go, and be taken away
after this sort, that the Emperors majesty would look to it, and prevent,
that yet the Pope might not pluck all things into his hands, and undo us in
the Douche countries and nations, what does he for it? He casts a bulle
before us, wherewith he leads us to the devil. This have we for our money,
and nothing else.

I must break of, I have gone to farce from the matter, Thus I say: we that
are preachers, seek nothing else, than this, that the word of God might
sound and be taught, out of the mouths of infantes and suckynge babes, and
that unto those which do mind it and study it earnestly, such fair
stipendes might be given, and not to the Pope, and his harlottes, kytcheners,
and boorderers, which do nothing for it at all.

This is nowthe difference between both the kingdoms, whereof David syngeth
here in the Psalm, namely, the kingdom of Christ, which consists in the
word, offers and gives us remission of sins, and the life everlasting, and
is governed here on earth, through the mouth of suckelynges and infantes. The
corporal and worldely kyngedome, will also be and give the same, and gropeth
there after, but it is but only gropinge, and gives only occupienge and
defense. The kingdom of Christ is a kingdom of faith, which is not seue nor
felt, but only heard: The outward and worldly kingdom will be felt. But the
kingdom of christ can not say, I feel it, and grope with my fyngers the
remission of sins, the life and salvation. But it will be believed. Now
follows further what manner of king there is, in this beleuyng and spiritual
kingdom.

What is man, that thou remembrest him, and the soune of man, that thou
regardest him, etc. thou have subdued althinges under him.

Here becomes the king God, and David descrybeth the King, our Lord
Christ, in this wise, that he be both very man, and very God, as is here
clearly showed and declared, but yet so, that he shall suffer and dye, and rise
again the third day etc. He is God. for whatsoever is in heaven and earth is
subdued unto him. For to have all things under his hand and power, pertayneth
only to God, and not to any manner of creatures. No not to the Angels, which
are also under the dominion of the King our Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom be
laud and praise, for ever and ever AMEN.

An homily or sermon of the famous doctor Vrbanus Rhegius of faith and
resurrection, upon the Gospel of Matthew in the ix. Chapter, of the woman,
which was grieved with the issew of bloudde, and of the daughter of the chief
ruler, which being dead Christ restored to life, preached to the people of
Hannouer in Saxon.
Well-beloved in the Lord, when before the space of two years, I was called to
you, according to the will of God our celestial father, that I might advance
your love and honor dew unto God and health of your souls by teaching,
admonyshing and writing, I ceased not from that time to pray unfeignedly and
diligently God our heauenli father, that he would vouchesafe to preserve you
in wholesome doctrine, true faith and hope of the Gospel, and to finyshe his
work, begone in you. And now I thank his fatherly goodness, that he has
preserved you under so many temptations, storms and ingines of afflictions and
persecutions and has fortified your minds to co^staunce, and because all your
afflictions and persecutions have chanced to the increase and stabilitie of
your sanynge hope, through the fatherly goodness of God and his singular
counsayll, that ye may be now more strong and more perfect to a devout and
blessed life in every exercise, than ye have been before. But forsothe for as
much as the devil our most cruel and most sworn enemy, does assault and
endeavor to destroy the faith and doctrine of Christ, by diverse and
continual temptations, by merualous wiles, by most crafty subtilitie, and by
many cauteles in every place and in every momente, it is necessary that ye
fortify your selfs, and fight with all your might and main against an
enemy so much to be feared, taking quycklie true and vnwynable weapons, and
an invincible sword, that is to say, the word of God, the word of saving and
eternal verity, which the devil more fears and dreadeth tremblyng, than we
miserable and feeble men may be troubled for fear of fire, of flouddes, of
tempests, of knyfes, and of swords, of gonnes, and of what other thingesoeuer
may hurt and destroy our corporal life. Colos. ij
And therefore Paul admonysheth his colossians, that the word of God in habit
abundantly in them. For he did know and had learned by experience, that the
spirit of lienge may suffer nothing less nor more grenouslie, than the
exercise of the pure word of God, by which his counsayls and weapons be made
blunte and be broken, by which also we be fortified in faith and hope of
Christ more and more, that we may fight valiauntly in spiritual fyghtyng and
battle, against the Lords of this world, the gouernoures of darkness of
this time, truly against the evil and crafty spirits under heaven, and that
we may obtain finally a glorious victory.

For this cause I would confirm and confort your charities with some short and
compendiouse oration, instruction, and admonition, because I came again to
you, God so gouernyng and willinge. Therefore I will entreat the gospel of this
present day of s. Matthew, in the ix. chapter, Mat, ix
in which s. Matthew sets out to us two notable miracles done of Christ,
which was written of the Evangelist to our profyt, that our faith may be
stirred up, renewed, quickened fortifyed and preserved, and that our charity
may be kendled and inflammed toward God and our neighbor.

First, Christ restored to health that miserable woman, which was grieved sore
with a flixe of blood xij. years, and could not be healed with any medicynes.
After he calls again the dead maid unto life. In these two histories and
wiracles of the gospel, I will entreat principally also two articles. First,
for as much as Christ does commend so greatly the faith of that woman
sayng, believe, thy faith has made the safe, and because we know that he has
testored her, by his own propre power, puttyng away her sickness, a netessary
questyon presents it self to to us, which is worthy to be discussed and
declared, that is, wherefore scripture attributes every where so much so faith
Christ says here, yt faith has made the woman safe. In an other place we
read again, Ioh. iij.
that faith brings justice and eternal salvation, when not withstanding it
is manifest, that our faith is yet imperfect and weak, that we be constrained
with the disciples to pray, Mar, ix
Lord increase our faith, We hear also often in these times, how
vehementlye the blind world is offended, when faith unto Christ is publyssed,
and exalted with worthy praises. These new doctoures (say they) can no other
thing now, tha^ to praise and auau^t only faith, whether only faith might do
althynges and save us? in nowyse: mo things be required tha^ only faith. For
it is necessary that works be also present, only faith is not sufficient, and
is much we aker and of less power, tha^ that it may do that thing. Does not
the devil also believe, but nevertheless he is condemned euerlastyngely. These
be the saynges of our adversaries, where it may be understand easily, how
greatly they be offended by the praises of faith. But we shall hear how
greatly they err.

After we shall entreat of the resurrection of the body, occasion taken of
that, that Christ calls again here unto life a wenche, now when her body
should have been buried, this is truly so great and such a work, that
neither reason will nor may conceyne it, but strong faith must needs be
present. It is truly necessary, that the holy Ghost give and preserve
merueloullye that faith: for it is tempted by merueylouse and horrible ways
of the world, which judges that faith to be a mere folyshenesse, it is tempted
also of our own propre reason, and of the devil him self.

This Gospel perteyneth to two articles of the creed, of our Christian
faith, that is to say: to that greatest article, which makes us Christians,
I believe in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord, And I believe the
resurrection of the body.

The first Article.
Christ prayseth the faith of the woman, Mat. xv viij. Luc. vij xvij.
and he does that in many places in the histori of the Gospel, there of it may
be easeli understand, that faith should be published and exalted with praises,
and his power and strength should be always and dilige^tli declared and
ineulcated: for Christ does praise nothing, except it be praise worthy.
Wherefore, first I shall teach and prove, that the prophets Christ, the
Apostles and old writters of the right opinion and faith have preached and
published always faith after the same manner, that it may be seen, that we be
reproved and blamed now unworthily for this doctrine. Therefore I will not take
it grievously, to put to also the cause of so great praise and commendation,
whereby faith is praised.

Moses about to show how Abraham first obtained so great grace of god, that
god reputed him to be just, and confessed, that he was his well beloved
seruau^te, which should be heir of the world, and of whom he would begod,
Gent. xv.
says in this wise. Abraham believed in god (understand thou in the promises
of god) and it was reputed to him to justice, as Paul consydereth and declared
diligently and exactly these words of god. Romans iij. iiij. Mal. iij.
Romans 3 and. 4 also galat. 3. I beseech you, is it a light and little matter,
that Abraham was reputed just before God for his faith? here surly says unto
the promises of god is prefers to all the works of Abraham, and by this
self thing he is declared very evidently to please almighty god chiefly. Let
all the sorts of monks, and all the flocks of pahriseis of our time come
out, and let the^ bring forth so clear and evident testimony of the scriptures
to the glorifycation and confyrmation of their humane works.

In the sero^d book of par ali. 20. wha^ king Iosaphat was in great peril, the
Moabites, Aminonites and Edomites cominge at hand: to him great speed, and
when he might notwithstande by the strength and power of his people so great a
power and violence of his ennemies, and all Judah being abashed for that, the
propher Iasihel said, dread not and fear not this multitude, but only stand
boldly, and ye shall see the help of the lord upon you. Believe in the lord
your god, and ye shall be in saufegarde, believe to his prophets, and all
things shall chance prosperouse, And when the people did sing praises to god
in faith, the lord turned the wiles and craft of their enemies against the^
selfs for the sons of Ammo^ and Moab did arise together against the
Edomites, and afterward they did slay and destroy their selfs by motual
disme^bring, but all the people of Judah and their king having the rich spoil
and so great a fortune, rei^^ed excedingly. This example is surely ^^ted and
written also to us, unto our profit that we may understand that faith pleases
god, and that the self faith leadinge to the promise of GOD over comes and
obtains victory, And that it may all things with God, and those things also
which seem to men to be impossible.

The second Psalm says: Psalm. ij Ier. xvij
blessed be all men which trust in the Lord. If they be blessed which trust to
god in his word, suerly it is necessary that faith is no little thing before
God, for as much as it promyseth blessing to them that believes in him.

Also the.xxx. Psalm says: Psa. xxx xxv. lxx.
I trust in the O Lord, I shall not be confounded for ever. Let no man marvel
that I bring sentences of hope to my purpose and instruction for hope and faith
in Christ be joined together, and may be separated by thought, but this is there
nature that they be always co^ioyned and undivided companions. For whatsoever
I be leave of the promise of God, and therefore not yet do I see it (for that
which is seen is not believed) I trust that, that shall come and be here after,
and I look for that to be here after sometime. Moreover that word which David
uses here, that is, Thasah, signifies also to trust. We know of Pau. in the
iij. and iiij. chapters to the Romans that without al controversy, faith by it
self is that trust in Christ, or that ithath that trust conjoined and annexed.
Esa. liij.
Esaias in the liij. chap. teaches that we are justified by counynge and
knowledge of Messiah: but that conning is no other thing than faith in
Christ which we take by christ of the promise of God. Therefore Esaias teaches
us that same thing in that chapter, which Paul teaches in the iij. and.iiij.
chapters to the Romans, and in the.iij. Romans iij iiij. Gal. iij.
and in the.iij. chapter to the Galatians, that faith in Christ makes us just.

Ieremi. xvij. blessed is the man which trusts in the Lord, Ier. xvij
and whose co^fide^ce shall be the Lord. Iere. v. Iere. v.
Lord thy eyes look upon faith. The word which the interpreter translateth
here, faith, is in the Hebrew Emunah, which also Hierome noted, And that word
signifies truth and trust, when a man does nothing faynyngly, nor of
hypocrisye, but ernestlye and of good will and courage that he may cleave to
with full trust of heart and constante, taythe to the most true promise of God,
which can not deceive, lie and disapointe. We know truly that when god
turns so his eyes or face any where, he she weth not indignation and wrath,
but grace and faith, as faithful fathers have their eyes fyred upon their
children with the most inclined and ardent affection of heart, that they may
keep them, their heart always fyxed thider, whither their eyes be directed.

Therefore faith is an pleasan^te and sweat sacrifyce in the eyes of god, and
the true worshippinge which he requires every where in scriptures. The text
sath in the.6. Daniel. vi.
chapter of Daniel Daniel was brought forth of the lake and no hurt was found
in him, because he believed his god. See thou not that faith obtains also
victori where battalle is begone with most cruel lions? the lord says in the
second of Oseas, Osee. ij.
shall be troth she to me in faith forsothe this is the greatest and truest
praise of faith, that it is the betruthinge and weddinge ringe, with which we
be affyaunced to god, as his most pleasunt spouse, that we may receive
communion of all his goodness with him.

Habacurk in the second chapter, Haba. ij
the just man shall live by faith. The prophet speaks not here of this
corporal life, whithe also the wicked and missheuous me^ have, yea and the
brute beasts, but of the true life, by which we life before god in grace, as
well beloved sounes of god, which surely shall enter unto eternal life, as
heirs to the father, after this transptory and shortly decayenge life, in
which heirs Christ lives here, and leads rules, and governed them with
his word and spyrite etc.

Now let us see what christ and his disciples say of faith in the new
testament. Math. viij.
In the 8 chapter of Matthew christ says to Ce^turio, like as thou beleuest so
be it to the. In the.9. Math. ix.
chapter of Matthew, when christ had seen the faith of the man sick in the
palsy and their faith which brought to christ the man taken with the palsy,
lyeng sick in a bed, he did forgive to him his syunes and restored his
health to him. Mat. xv
In the.xv. chapter of Matthew, Christ cries, woman, thy faith is great,
Matthew. xxi.
be it to the as thou willeste. In the.xxi. chapter of Matthew, ye shalres ceyue
all things, whatsoever ye believing shall ask in your prayer. In the ix.
chapter of Mark, Mar. ix Luce. vij
to men believing all things are possible. In the.vij. chapter of Luke, the
Lord says to Magdalent thy faith has maid the safe, go thou away in peace.
Luke viij
In the.viij. chap. of Luce Christ says to the chief man of the synagog: fear
thou not, believe thou only, and thy daughter shall be safe. In the xvij. chap.
of Luke, Lu. xvij.
Christ says to the man full of lepry, which he made clean, rise you up, go
thou away, thy faith has saved the. So he said also to the blind man in
Hiericho. Lu. xviij
In the xviij. chap. of Luke Faith is called the gift of God, And through the
holy Gospel of John, God promises everlasting life to them that believe in
Christ. In the xv. chapter of the Acts, Act. xv.
Peter tea cheth that faith purifieth our hearts. And in the xvi. of the Act.
Act. xvi
wha^ the kepar of the prison says to Paul and Sila, Masters what thing must
I do, that I may be saved? They answered to him, believe in the Lord Jesus, and
thou shall be safe, and thy house. And in the xi. Hebr. xi
Chapter to the Hebrews, Saint Paul reckeneth forth a great rehersall of the
devout and old Christianes, And he writteth that they were well-beloved to God,
and pleased him. And that they showed miracles by faith, and that it may not
be, that any man please god without faith. How often says Paul, that faith
without works iustifyeth, which thing the ancient Doctors of the church of
right opinyon and faith setfurthe by these words: only faith iustifyeth.

But for as much as our adversaries accuse us, and babble, that faith is
praised to much, and exalted above measure of us, thereby they show the^
selfs not yet to understand, what is faith, and what the scriptures of the
Prophets, and Evangelists, yea and the fathers and ancient Bishops teach
of Christian faith. Wherefore let no man suffer himself to be leadde away from
the truth by the rebukes of our adversaries, by which they overthrow us.

That not any man may be troubled lightly, and called away from the true
sentence, we shall show the causes wherefore scripture prayseth and exalts so
greatly faith in Christ. Faith in us is imperfect, and euereaceth from day to
day, and for that cause it is not so perfect a work by it self, that so great
things may be attributed and given for the perfection of it self. But the
couse of this laud and praise is, because faith gives true glory to our
Lord God, and because it believes, that he is merciful, just, and true,
which will and may perform surely his promise in Christ. This is the right
and true worshipping of God, Whosoever believes, so the word of God, he
calls upon God in all his necessite without doubt, and trusts and looked
for help of him in patience. Therefore faith is the same thing, which cleaves and
fasteneth it self to true perfection, that is to say, to Christ, and
apprehends the mercy of god promised in Christ, which promise may not be
apprehended and taken otherwise by no other mean or instrumet, tha^ by faith,
which is a trust unto the promised grace and help of god in Christ in all
miseries and necessities. If it might be, that I had all the works of al men,
and I had not this faith, I might not yet apprehe^d the promise in christ by all
these works. This is the nature of the promise, that it desires to be
apprehended by faith. God promises to us al help and grace for Christ's sake,
wherforyf I should make lean, and amost kyl my selt the space of an hole year
by most strayte and grievous fastings, eating nothing, but crustes of bread,
and drinking pure water, and if I should go on pilgrimage to Rome armed and
fenced on al parts, or upon my bare fete, not clothed with synnyng clothe, but
with a wolle^ and rough garment, rubbing and prickyng my skin, yet I might
never apprehend the promise of God in Christ by they works how painful soever
they be. But wha^ I hear yt God promyseth and offers to me his mercy and
help, and when I trust to his word as true and almygtye, and I believe to God
which can not lie and deceive, than I apprehende and receyne these things by
that faith, which he has promised in Christ. Therefore the fathers of true
opinion and faith does declare, openly not without a cause that only faith
and not any work iustifyeth and saves. For because the Gospel shows,
offers and gives to us Jesus Christ the Son of God, which alone and no
other has delivered us from sin and death, how may thou receive otherwise
him, and apprehend in thy heart him as thine own propre, than by only faith
in him, that thou may believe to the Gospel, that is to say, that he has
dyed and risen again for the, and that he is trnely thy sauyoure and delyuerer.

Wherefore note ye diligently and forgette not, that true fay the in Christ
is only the true mean and instrument, by which we lay hand on, apprehende
and receive the mercy of God promised to us in Christ, and al benefytes to our
salvation. But when we hear that faith is greatly praised let us not think
that there is such a perfection in us, which has deserved so great
testification in words, honors and praises. For it by it self deserves not
that, but it is the trust in the mercy of God by Christ. Therforouer thoughts
must be anon directed unto Christ, unto whom faith casts it self, to
whom it fasteneth and conioyneth it self, to whom it cleaves, and for whose
cause it looks for and receives all good and healthful things of God.
Faith is always imperfect, but Christ to whom faith afflixed cleave to, is
not imperfect, but the true, infinite, and unmeasurable treasure of all
perfection. If folyshenesse is with us, Christ is our wisdom. If we have
sin, Christ is our justice, If we be not enduwed yet with that holiness, with
which we should be, for the cause of our synnynge flesh, Christ is our
sanctification. And when we ware yet prisoners under the tyran of hell to
everlasting death, And when he had no counsayll nor help in the hole world,
forasmuch as no creature might deliver us, and therefore we should hane
peryshed, than God fend and gave to us his own propre sonue unto a redemer,
that he might be our redemption i. Corinth i. i. Cor. i.
In conclusyon we have all fullness in Christ, and we have these things in him
most sufficiently, most plenteously and most abundauntly, which we have
need of: And we may not make propre to us, and claim or lay hand on this
treasure, and gift of God by any other mean, than by tiue faith, which faith
without controversy is effectual also by good works, because it receaueth the
holy Ghooste, and renews and purifyeth the man. No devil nor wicked and
myscheuouse person has this faith, albe it they be not very ignoraunte of
the historye of Christ, what his person is, and what is his service,
notwithstanding they have not this confidence of him, that he is their
redemer, and sauyoure, and that he will deliver and help the^. For the Devils
know what thing God has thretened to them, that is to say, judgment, and
most sure damnation, and therefore they tremble and quake. But when we praise so
greatly faith, than we speak of true faith in Christ, which is a certain
lively trust and hope of the grace of God, which he has promised to us in
Christ, that is to say, yt he will forgive to us all our sins for Christ's
sake, which has satisfied for our sins, he will repute us just, and he will
give to us eternal life. Neither the devil nor his members may have this faith
of ye promises of god, but the chose^ in Christ have only it. And this is that
faith, which has restored this woman, by which she was made partetaker of ye
divine grace and help. This faith has made this woman the daughter of Christ,
that he did vouchesafe to call her his daughter, as Chrysostom says. And when
scripture prayseth this faith, tha^ is ye grace and mercy of god, for this
faith is ye trust unto ye meregrace of god promised for christ's sakerther for
they me^ must uede be rude, dismayed, unadvised yea froward and maliciouse,
which can not suffer, that ye most abundaunt grace of God, by which we ware
delivered from the power of darkness be praised and exalted. See that ye be
ware of this kind of men, for they be leadde of thatsame evil spirit, which
blinded once the Pelagianes.

Let us set before our eyes, and follow also here the example of charity and
mercy, which we see here in Christ Jesus our Lord and God, and that we may be
moved by affection of calamity and misery of our neighbors, And that we may
help and aid them according to the faculty of our powers and goods. For
faith ought not to be without fruytes.

An other Article of the resurrection of the dead.
Here let us behold and consider with intentyue, eyes both the word and work
of Christ our Lord. For as much as they he so merueylouse, that we may never
marvel enough at them, nor never praise enough the glory of his grace. He
says that the wenche slepeth, anon he took her hand, and calls her unto
life.

The world hearing this, stands by with styf and astouyeng eyes, and reason
mocketh, for it seems incredible and a mere folyshenes, that a deformed,
mortal, cold, styffe, and stynkyng caryon sleapeth. In conclusyon how may
reasone believe, that death is not death.

Augustine in the.lxviij. Psalm says. We knew (understand then, before the
coming of Christ, before the word of God was publyshed in the world, or
before our conuersyon, and regeneration) in mankind two things but one thing
was vtterlyvnknowe^ to us. That men be borne and dies, yt we know, but that
they shall arise again from the dead, and shall live euerlastyugly, that we knew
not. The mysteries of God be hyd before reason. The knoweledge of these very
great things is not graffed and set in the hearts of me^ as the law of
nature, and therefore reason all philosophy and worldly wisdom might know
nothing of that. It was known first of al by the gospel of christ, which was
sent by the holy ghoost from heaven unto earth. Whosoever has not the gospel,
or believes not it, he ca^ know nothing of the resurrection nor of eternal
life, which thing ye blind and ignorant gentiles, witnesses sufficiently in
their writtynges. Therefore says Paul. i. Cor. ij.
i. Cor. ij. that God has reveled and showed to us these things by his
spirit, and that we have not received the spirit of the world, but the
spirit of God, that we may know what things have be^ given to us of Christ.
A natural man understands not those things, which be of the spirit of God
it is folyshenesse to him, and he ca^ not understand it. And we hear that here
in the Jews, which mock and scorn the Lord, where he says, she is not
dead, but she slepeth. For they could not perceive and know, how death might
be a sleep. When for they supposed that these words of Christ was dreams of
a sick man, and mere tryfles and sayings of a mad man. And this is the
desteny of the gospel always in the world, that it is supposed and called
folyshenesse.i. Cor. i. i, Cor. i.


When Paul in the.xxvi. Ac. xxvi
of the Acts teached of the resurrection of the dead the lieuetenaunt Festus
judged that he was mad. How hardly believed Thomas that Christ was revived
from dead John. xx. John. xx
At Athenes they called the sermones of Paul of the resurrection a babblynge,
although they auaunted that there was the fountain of al arts, sciences, and
wisdom, Ac. xvij
the xvij. of the Acts. The Sadducees among the Jews judged that the sermones
of Christ of the resurrection was a certain tryflyng fable and things
impossyble. Math. xxij. Matthew. xxij.
And Augustyne writes in the.xxij. book de ciui. dei. the.v. Chapter. There be
three things incredyble, which not withsta^dyng have be^ done. It is incredible
yt christ has ryse^ again in body, and has ascended unto the heavens with
his body. It is incredible that the world has believed a thing so incredyble.
It is incredyble yt that men of none estimaton, feeble, very few, unlearned,
might persuade so effectually a thing, so incredible to the world, and also to
learned and connyng me^ in it. The carnal sons of this world suffer not to
believe the first point, that is to say, that Christ has risen again. The
second point, that is to say, that me^ notwithstanding has believed this
thing, although it was incredible, they be constrained to see before there eyes
it, forasmuch as the resurrection of the dead is believed so steadfastly and
constat^ly throughout all the world of al christianes, yt therefore they may
despise this life with all his riches, profittes, pleasures, and power, and
show also their middel finger to death, as Paul does. i. Corin. xv. i. Co. xv
Where is death thy prick?

The sons of this world ca^ not find or know from whence that other is done
that is to say, that the world believes the resurrection, except they shall
believe also the third point, that is to say, that it was done by the Apostles,
men beleuyug their preaching and sermons. Our faith depends not of opinions
of me^, nor has causes set and grounded upon reason, as philosophy or worldly
sciences, but it depends and consists all in the word of God. What things
soever god has promised, he may perform the^, and no man may let it. The
world knows nothing of the word and power of God, it believes not the first
article of the almighty power of God, and of the creation and conseruatio^ of
all things, it has regard only upon creatures and their mutatio^s, it sees
death, but it can see nothing else here, than these things, which may be
apprehended, with corporal and outward senses, that is to say, a wenche their
lyeng, styf, horrible in sight, dead and destitute of alher strenghtes: It
sees also, that she being dead, can not help her self, that none in earth
can call her again unto life. Reason thincketh upon nothing, but man's
strenghtes, it can not go further, and therefore it mocketh the words of
Christ. For as al worldely power may not make a creature of nothing, so it may
not raise up again a dead man. Therefore if we look and regard only ma^s power
and strenghtes, than our labor is in vain, and it is plainly impossyble that
a dead man be called again to life, and arise again. Wherefore it is necessary
that we have regard here unto the divine power and strenghtes of the creator,
except we desire to err and blaspheme with the wicked and myscheuous world.
Who is he that says, the wenche sleapeth? If I or any other pure tried man
should say these words of him self, tha^ should there be only consolation of
the words, and nothing else. For we may not call again a dead man unto life
of our propre strenghtes, as we call up a man sleapyng naturally in his bed.
But here speaks that great man, that greatest noble Lord, which ca^ order and
rule death at his pleasure. Here speaks the creatoure and first maker himself
of al things of his own creature, which he made before of nothing of whom
John and Paul bear witness, John. i.
that al things be made by him, and they have there byeng by him. But that
thing was hid from the preastes, phariseys and the vulgar people of the Jews
at that time. For they knew neither Christ nor his ministration or service.
The chief me^ of the synagoge ware blind guydes, as Christ calls them,
neither understanding nor belening to ye law and the Prophets. Therefore what
might yt miserable poor peoople, or yt vnlerued people know? So it was
fulfilled, Esa. ivi and.iij.
that Esaias prophesied of the^: al their blind espialles was ignorant, the
shepeherdes theirselfes knew not wisdom. Esa. lvi. and iij. my people which
call the blessed, they their selfs deceive the. etc. But if they had known and
learned of the law, and the prophets two things, yt is to say of what qualite
should their Messiah be, and what should be his ministratio^ and work among men
in earth, tha^ would they not have scorned christ, but they would have thanked
him, their hearts and hands lifted up to god, because they had come to, and
had seen yt quiet, ioious and most wisshed day; of health, in their life, in
which Messyas present did these self works, which be attributed and
assigned to his first coming in scriptures, in which time he declares also
him self a true and perfect savior of our bodies and souls. The law and the
Prophets teach us first, that Messiah was to come not only a very man, but
also a very God, so that very God himself was to come in his own propre
person, unto the earth and to become man, to teach and to save his people.
Gene. i. Psalm. C. xxiij. Psalm. lxxxxvi.
For Moses says that God has made heaven and earth, which thing the
prophets teach also in many places, as in 123. Psalm, God made heaven and
earth and Psalm. 96. God made heaven and earth, and all things which be in
the^. Moreover the prophets bear witness also, that thatsame adonay, yt is
to say, that true and one God was to come to us, and to become a very man of
the stock of David, that he might be our savior and Christ. Esaye. xxxiij.
For Esaias in the xxxiij. Chapter says. Jehovah or God our judge, God our
gyuer of laws, God our king: he himself shall save us. Ieremi. xxxiij.
And Ier. xxxiij. where the Prote promyseth Christ, he calls him not only
the branch of justice, which he was to give to David, but he calls him in
the same chapter clearly and well to the purpose Jehovah, or god our justice,
which thing nether the Jews nor christianes may deuye, which has known the
holy tongue.

Also in. xxij. psalm, Psalm. xxij.
and in the prophet Abdia, the kingdom is the lords or gods. In both the
places the speech is of Messiah or of Christ, and it calls him by the same
name by which scripture names in every place the true and only God, maker
of heaven and earth, therefore it must needs follow and can not be denied, that
Christ is true God. Is it than so incredible, that the creator and maker of
all things, restores and calls again unto life his creature, now fallen
and dead, which he made before of nothing. Actu. xxvi.
And so says Paul in the 26 chapter of the acts before king Agrippa,
wherefore is it thought incredible among you, if God raise up dead men, as he
would say. For as much as ye believe that God is almighty, and that he has made
heaven and earth, how tha^ may he not also, call again unto life his creature
that is dead. Is it not more difficell and a greater thing to make something
of nothing, than to restore and renew that which was made before. Whosoever
believes the creation of al things, he must needs believe also that God may
raise up again dead men, and that he will do it, because he promised that he
him self would do it. Seco^dely yt law and the prophets teach us, what is
the ministratio^ of Messiah, or what he his works which he would do after in
earth, that is to say to put away sins, to slay death, to redeem his chose^
me^ from power of death, to call again dead men unto life, and to give to his
chosen me^ everlasting life, here for a short time to be thrown down, to be
made less, and to be made low, poor and abject, but therefore a little after
to be exalted and to reign with his own for ever world without end. Of these
the Jews might have gotten forsothe to them selfs so great understanding, if
they had taken heed, that they would not have mocked the words of Christ,
saing, the whenche sleapeth, like as he had spoken vain things, and had
promised openly impossible things.

Moses teaches Gene. ij. Genesis ij. Ge. iji.
how death came unto the world by sin. And 3. chapter he teaches who shall
take away and destroy death, truly, the sede of the woman, which should
after tread down the head of the serpent the devil, that is to say to
overthrow and destroy his Kingedome. The devil subdued all man kind to him
self by sin, that al me^ was subject to death and damnation. Heb. ij.
Therefore Paul says in the.ij. chapter to the Hebrews, that the devil haith
rule over death. The sede of the woman, that is to say christ should break and
trouble this kingdom and this power of syune and death, hold fast and slay
sin, and kyl death. Esai. xxxxiij.


Esa. xxxxiij. when Christ had said, thou have made me to serve in thy sins,
thou have given labor to me in thy iniquities, he reherseth anon. I am, I am
my self, which put away thy iniquities for my sake. If he puts away sin
or iniquities, from whense death comes, than without all controversy he
puts away death the wages of sin Esa. xxv. the prophet says of Messiah,
he shall throw down headlynge, Osee. xiij.
or consume death for ever. Osee xiij I shall deliver them from the power of
death, I shall redeem them from death O death I shall be thy death. Esa. ix.
Esaias. ix
Christ is called the father of the world to come, or father everlastingly.
Therefore it is necessary suerly, that he raise up his sons from death, and
grant to them everlasting life. Ioh. xi.
Therefore he says in John the.xi. I am the resurrection and life. Whosoever
believes on me shall live, although he weredead. And whosoever lives and
believes in me, shall never die. And John the.v. and as the father rayseth up
the dead and quicheneth them, John. v.
euenso the son quit keneth whom he will.

Ye see here of now, how great and gross blyndenesse was in Iewry, wha^
Christ was sent to them, he declares by mighty and marvelous works and
miracles that he is very Messiah, which scripture promised savior and
delyueret of the whole world, and doith the same self works which scripture
had prophesied Messiah to do, and where of he might be known most plainly and
most easily, but not withstanding where he says, that the wenche sleapeth,
that miserable and blinded people mocketh their lord and God, but never the
less their mockinge must needs serve to faith, for by that self thing they
grant that the whench is verily dead, as also the servants of the house of
the lieuetenaunt meetinge their master, show that the whench is dead, that
he should not offend Christ Therefore they might not say that the whenc did lie
in a traunse or a swoune, or slaped naturally, but they doubted not, and they
confessed opnely, that she had verily departed from this life. And therefore they
ware constrained after, to knowledge and confess that a true miracle was done
here, that is to say, that the whench was called again trewly from death unto
life.

And therefore Christ commands to give to her some thing, that she may eat,
that they should not doubt that she was raised again truly. Mat, ix
Matthew declared this miracle in few words, but Marc, Mare, viij. Luc, viji.
and Luc, add to that anon after that Christ had said, whenche rise thou up,
her spirit returned, and she did arise up by and by, and that Christ
commanded meat to be given to her. Some me^ suppose that that miracle which
Math. declares, where Christ only raises up again the dead whe^che by
touching her, is an other miracle, from that which Luke and Mark declare,
whom they suppose to write of a whenche of ij peers old, the daughter of a
chiefman of the synagoge, whose name was Iairus but I have supposed hither to
with Ensebius, Hierome, Augustine in the ij, book of the consent of the
Eua^gelistes the xxvi chapter, also with Chrysostom and other of true opinion
and faith, that these three Enangelistes declare the same history and speak of
the same miracle. Therefore our lord Jesus Christ willed to declare his divine
power and ministration, when he said, the whenche sleapeth, for as Augustine
says, no man can raise up so easily from sleep a man sleapinge naturally in
his bed, how easily christ raises up a dead man forth of his sepulcher.
And so wo^t Christ to speak of death, as an almighty lord as lord of life and
death, and he calls death a sleep unto the comfort of faithful Christians
for death is made a pacified and quiet sleep to them that believe in Christ,
for because they be graffen in Christ by faith, they shall not se death, for
although they suffer very greatly corporal death, and their soul depart from
their body, notwithstanding they come not unto the second death, which is
everlasting damnation, but to Christ where there propre joy, gladness and
reioicinge is, and the body rests in the earth in sure hope of sauinge
resurrection, unto the day of the lord. So says also christ John the xi. of
Lazarus, our fre^d Lazarus sleapeth, but I go that I may raise him up from
sleep, than his diciples said, Ioh. xi.
lord if he sleapeth he shall be safe, that is to say, he shall be better at
ease, tha^ their is no peril. But Christ did speak of his death but they
thought that he had spoken of the sleaping of sleep. Than said he manyfestly
to them, Lazarus is dead: forwhan the soul departs from the body, than that
departinge by it self is death, and it should remain death and everlasting
sleep against all the power of the whole world, which might not at any time
break and vanquishe everlastingly this sleep, but when death is compared to
Christ, and is put against him, than it is non other thing tha^ a sleep to
his divine power, because Christ (for as much as he him self is almighty life
and everlasting fontaine of al life) speaks only one word, Ioh. xi.
Lazarus come thou fourth. John the.xi. Ionge man. I say to the rise thou up,
Luc. vij.
in Luke the.vij. also he thoucheth the dead body, and death is constrained to
depart, and the self life to return, as here Matthew the ix. anon after he
held the hand of the whenche, Mat. ix
the soul returns unto the body. For as Chrysostom says, he put not in an
other soul into the body, but he restored so easily to the body that self
soul, which it had before, even as he had raised it up from sleep. The
fathers of true faith has wined and considered with much more diligence, than
we this divine power of Christ, which he has declared in raisyng up the dead
by only touching, and they had here very good and very excellent meditations
of the parson of Christ, of the mystery of his humanity, as Cyrillus upon John
in the.vi. Ioh. vi.
chapter, where he says, that the flesh of our savior Christ is united or
joined together, also made lively to the eternal word of God, which is
naturally the self life, so that it may make lively. And therefore Christ wha^ he
raised up the dead, used not only words nor commanded only, as almyghtye
God, but he used to that business some time also his flesh and body, as a fellow
worker that he might declare by the self work, that also his body has virtue
of quickeninge and making linely, for asmoch as it is in unity and joined
together to his divine nature that man believing, might learn that it was his
ownproper body and no other ma^s. So he raised up the daughter of iairus by his
word and touching of her body from death, which warke was done of him which
is God and man in one person, for he called not again the dead unto life
always by his only word, but also by touching, that he might declare and
trache that his body also might make lively and quicken, than for as much as
the things which have been corrupted and perished, be restored, renewed and
begone a fresh, how than should we not live which do eat the flesh of
Christ? There is no doubt but he will bring and reform them to perpetual
life, which be partakers of him, for not only thee soul must needs ascend
unto a blessed life by the holyghost, but also this gross and eartly body,
must needs be brought to a perpetual life by tastinge, touching and by meat,
whichis convenient and agreat to his nature, Hilarious speaks almost after the
same manner of the se things also upon Matthew the. Mat. ix
ix. chapter. And therefore the apostles call death a sleep, teaching us by this
self thing, that death is to be condemned and not to be feared. Luke says in
the.vij. of the acts, Act. vij.
ye Steven sleaped wha^ he was stoned. Paul i. Corin. xv. names Christ the
first fruits of them which had sleaped, i. Cor. xv.
and he says, we all shall not sleep also he says i. tes. 4. brethren I will
not that ye be ignorant of these which has sleaped, i. Tessa. iiij. Daniel
xij.
that ye be not sorry etc. Also Dauiel has spoken in the xij. after this manner
of corporal death, for sosaith he many of them which sleep in the dust of the
earth, shall awake, here he calls the resurrection to come in the last day
awakinge, all these forsooth be very great consolation to all Christianes, when
they be troubled with temtation of death.

Now let us hear wherefore scripture compares our death to natural sleep first
whosoever sleapeth naturally, he rests from those thoughts and labors,
which he suffers that watche^ and he renews his stre^ghtes by that rest,
when he waketh he is not so weary as he was, before he did take the sleep but
quick of spirit and wit, fresh, stronger his stre^ghtes being renewed, and
more dilygent and spedy to take labors. So also our death is a rest from all
care, heuinesse, thoughts and labors of this life a little while enduring,
miserable, most punished and most full of adversity, and our body only
rests in the ground, and it shall return again in the last day renewed,
swifte, well fortifyed, whole, merry, strong, endewed with most prosperouse and
perpetual health, i. Cor. xv.
as Paul teaches us. i. Corin. xv. The body is sown in corruption, reproach,
feblenesse and is a beastly body, but it rises again without corruption, in
glory, in power, and a spiritual body, which is so pure, so subtle, and is
preseued so merualousely of God him self, that it has need of no meat, drink
or sleep, and that it is subject to no corporal feblenesses and miseries, as
it was in this life, wha^ it was yet constrained to take meat, to drink, to
sleep, to digest, to suffer cold, heat, hungre and such other things.
Secondly, whosoever lieng in his bed sleapeth and rests naturally, he may be
raised up easily, because his soul is in his body, and the man lineth. Christ
our God may call again so easily and much more easily dead men unto life,
whose souls be not dead nor may die, Math. x. but be in the hand of Christ.

Thyroly, we go not to bed, that we may sleep continually fastened always
in our bed, but that we may rest a few hours, that our body may restore and
renew his strenghtes, and that after we being wakened from sleep, we may do
our office and duty, and that we may apply our studies and works of our
office. So when we dye corporally, our bodies are not buried in to the earth,
that they may lie hid perpetually in it, but they be buried that they may
rest their a certain time in sure hope of resurrection, that they may raise
again in the last day, and that they may live together with the soul
everlastingly, because death is utterly overcome by Christ, and corporal
death or sleep is converted and ordained here to us by him unto a necessary
and wholesome medicine, that is to say, that sin and the body of sin may have
sometime their end, and that we may put away mortality by this corporal
death, and afterward come forth immortal at the due time. But although Christ
raises up also so easily wicked men from corporal death, as us, not
withstandinge the death of devout and godly men is called properly a sleep,
and devout and Godly me^ are said to sleep only, for when the soul of a
wicked or mesheuouse man has departed from the body, than nether rest nor
co^forting is their, for his body was the most filthy stable and swynes stye
of the city Augia, yea of the devil, which he builded by evil thoughts,
desires and works without all rest, and is afterward as a certain abominable
thing cast unto the earth, tarieng that God may raise it up to everlasting
ponishement, that it may be made a fyrebrande of hell, which burns always,
and nut withstanding it may not make an end of burninge, nor be consumed. In
the mean season the soul is vexed and trubled with very great torments and
extreme inquietnes, like as an evil doar worthy to be headed, whiles he
sytteth bounden in prison and cage, knowinge ye a very sure reward or whele is
at haude, althongh yt punisheme^t is differred a few days, and he feled it not
yet in his body, notwithsta^dinge he is care full in mind above measure, and
his heart thinks no other thing than gallows and wheles, and his life is no
other thing, than tre^blinge, terror and fear coming before the peine being
at hand, and a most cruel death. Athanasins writing of diverse questions
uses this symilitude, as Luke teaches us of the rich man lieng in tourme^tes
in the.xvi. chapter, Luc. xv^
and desires greatly at ye least his tung to be refreshed of Lazarus, and not
withstanding he could not receive at ye least a little drop of water. But
Lazarus had consolation and rest in the bosom of Abraham, where that blessed
kepar tariethto gither with the sanctes until all the chosen be borne and be
called, Heb. xi.
for they holy fathers (as Paul says in ye xi chapter to the Hebrews) received
not the promise, because God had provided a certain better thing for us, that
they should not be made perfect with out us. It is plainly a contrary thing
between them and which have not believed to the gospel of Jesus christ, and the
denout and Godly men, first the bodies of the devout and godly men be so holy
relics, that the wicked misheuous me^ be unworthy to behold with their eyes
devout and godly men, because their bodies be (as Paul says i. Cor. vi.) i.
cor. vi.
members of Christ and temples of the holy ghost, which duelleth in devout and
godly men. And although they be buried in the earth, notwithstanding they
sleep now in saving hope of resurrection, and of that clearness of which the
son is in the firmament they shall come forth of the earth and shall be joined
to the blessed souls, and shall be made fellows of the celastyall and eternal
life and joy together with the souls. This is the most sure and blessed hope
of the chosen and faithful Christianes, i. Tes. iiij.
as Paul teaches. i. Tes. iiij. If we believe (says he) that Jesus is dead and
has risen again. So also God shall bring them which have sleaped by Jesus
with him, and so we shall be always with him. This most sure hope was so much
worth always with devout faithful Christianes, that they did not cast away
their bodies as some most vile and naughty carrion, as that ge^tile Philosopher
diogenes, but they honored it as a well-beloved companion and tellowe worker of
their blessed soul and buried it honorably. And as we see here that a great
company of me^ was present before the house of this principal man of the
sinagoge, that his daughter being dead, might be brought houorabely to ye
sepulture, and be buried. For they had heard and learned of scriptures to have
a sure hope, that it should be thereafter, that that self body should revive,
raised up again in the own time: for the Jews has the promise and the word
of God, that is to say, the gospel of Jesus Christ, which we have, which is
the promise of eternal life. ij. tim. i
ij. Tim. i. Paul calls this hope in the xxviij. of the Act. a hope of
Israel, Actu. xxviij.
that is to say, which al true Israelites or devout Jews looked for. And
therefore they called their church yardes or places appoyuted to the burie^g of
the bodies Bethhachaum, that is to say, the house of the living. And so they
knew of the word of god, God to be God, ye is to say, a savior and deliverer
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and of theirs, or their posterities sede, which
be the faithful Christian sons of these faith full Christian Patriarchs. The
greek church also calls the court or that plase of sepulchers or to^bes
cemiterium, that is to say, a place of sleapyng, that they should not doubt that
me^ there buried should sleep and rest unto the last day only, in which they
shall arise again unto everlasting life.

But bechaunche some man will say, than why mock the Christ, if they knew by
the word of God, that dead me^ should arise again? I answer, they wax not al
true Israelites, that is to say, faithful Chistianes, and there was yet much
darkness and ignorance with the chose^ me^ dyuine matters in which have been
converted afterward. I beseech the at what point is the matters now in the
church? Suppose ye that they al be true Christianes which profess Christ by
name, and follows the bodies of dead men to be buried by cause of honor? how
many Epicuries and Saduceis, how many stynkynge hogs might thou find which
know and believe little of these greatest matters? chafe is always mixed to
corn.

Of these we learn that churchyardes and burienges of faithful Christianes should
be honored and had in reverend dread, for as much as we witness by this self
thing, a Christian hope of our resurrection in Christ. Wherefore the men in our
times be wicked and Saduceis, which worship not fearfully the churcheyardes
of Christianes, and sets nothing by an honorable sepulture, and handles
no other wise the bones of Christianes nor sets more by the^, than they ware
the bones of brute beasts. All faithful Christianes, as well among the Jews,
as the gentiles, worshipped always fearfully sepultures, as both the
testamentes bears witness.

Ye have now what Christ means here where he says, the whenche sleapeth, And
what he does wha^ he calls her again unto life: which miracle is written
for us, that we may renew, fortify and preserve our faith of the resurrection
of the body by it, for this promise is so great, by which Christ promises to
us the resurrection of the body, and everlasting life after this life, that we
can not understand it by reason, for it passes al understanding, reason, and
wisdom of the whole world. Therefore our faithful deliverer Jesus Christ
annexed and ha^geth to a most sure and most strong seal to this his promise,
wha^ he calls again dead me^ unto life, yt we should not doubt of this
promise, but believe steadfastly, yt as he has called this daughter of the man
in chief auctorite, So also he shall raise up again in one momente us all in
the last day, not unto a mortal life, but unto an everlasting life, for as
John says in the.v. Chapt. the hour shall come, John. v
in which all men that be in sepulchers, shall hear his voice, and they which
have done good, shall come fourth unto the resurrection of life, but they which
have done evil, shall come fourth unto resurrection of judgment. So also
Chrysostom wont to apply these miracles, and draw them to an Article of our
faith of the mystery of the resurrection, that we may fortify by the^the faith
of that general resurrection, which shall be in the later coming of christ, And
he commands us to be of good hope and courage in the peril of death, because
that our death is no more a death but a sleap, And he says that not we, but
the devil with his should be sorrowful and careful or complayue. For he
says that we go from this temporal life by death, unto immortal life and
perpetual rest, but that the devil with his fall down strayghte unto
eternal punyshme^tes.

Therefore when temptations invade us in these greatest articles, that is to
say, of resurrection and life to come, that they may overthrow and destroy
our faith of the divine promise to us, than this gospel and such like, where
Christ has called again the dead unto life, and by which he promises a
glorious resurrection unto eternal life, is to be taken and laid hand on, and
our faith should be fortifyed and confirmed with these against the fyery
darts of the devil.

And because as Augustine says in the C. iiij. Psalm. our faithful God has
given to us holy scripture his divine word, as a writynge or obligation of his
own hand, that it might remayn with us, Therefore in all such temptations in the
articles of our faith, we shall show forth anon the very propre obligation of
God, and we shall behold his mercy and verity in it. If Satan te^pteth us,
putting voluptuous thoughts unto our hearts, as if god would suffer us to
perysh by death, and as if we should remayn under the earth, tha^ let us take
quickly his hand writtyng, the holy guspel, and let us see what God has
promyseth to us, what now he has done and given, and shall give yet. He has
promised surely to us his only begotten son unto a sauinur. Nota been.
He has sent him in fullness of time. He has said ye should dye for us, ye
has been done. He said that he should rise again and asee^d to ye heavens, so
it came to pass. He said ye he would send his holy ghost for ernest money of
the celestial heritage, ye also was done, He promised ye he would publishe
abroad the gospel, throughout ye hole world and call the gentiles to everlasting
life. He did yt also, he promised yt he would save and defend his well-beloved
people, faithful christianes, in ye world among so many devils and
impedime^tes, yt they may persevere and abide unto ye end. He did yt also. See
thou his hand writing, and look thou what he owes moreover. He shall come unto
judgment, he shall raise up from ye sea and earth, all dead me^ from Ada^
unto the last man, he shall lead good me^ unto his king do^, he shall thruste
down evil me^ to ye helles unto ever lasting tourme^tes. Tha^ he has
accomplyshed al things, which he promised to us in ye obligation of his hand
writtinge. Therefore for as much as ye most true god, and celestial father has
accomplished and paid al thiges with so faithful execution of his promise, as
we know and confess tha^ wherefore should we doubt of ye rest, ye is, of yt
resurrection, and of the blessyng to come? O unthankful man. Thou read ye
debt, and you feast what is paid, wherefore doubtest thou, but also he will
perform and pay ye rest? By what faithful execution of promise he has paid
those things, which we have received now, by the same faithful execution of
promise, he will pay those things which rest and remain, and he shall raise us
up again, and he will tra^sfigure our bodies, which be now vile, yt he may make
the^ like to his gloriouse body, in effect or virtue, by which it may also make
subject to it self al things. Phil. iij. Phil. iij
These be said of this gospel. Christ our Lord and God vouchesafe to fortifye
our faith, that we never doubt of the most sure verity of his promise. AMEN.

FINIS.
Seek peace, and ensue it. Psalm. xxxiij. i. Pet. iij. printer's device of
Walter Lynne W L



Imprinted for Gwalter Lynne, dwelling upon Summers kaye, by Byllynges gate. In
the year of our Lord God. M.D.xiviij.


