Here follows the Interpretacoin of the names of gods and goddesses as is
reherced in this trety^se following as Poets write


Phoebus is as much to say as the Son. Apollo is the same or else God of
sight. Morpleus Shewer of dremis Pluto God of hell. Mynos Judge of hell.
Cerberus Porter of hell. Colus the wind or God of the Air. Dyana Goddess of
wode and chase. Phebe the Moon or Goddess of waters. Aurora Gods of ye
morowor spry^g of ye day Mars God of battle Jupiter God of wysdom. Juno
Goddess of richesse Saturn God of cold. Ceres Goddess of corn. Cupydo God
of love. Othea Goddess of wisdom. Fortune The varyant Goddess Pan God
shepherdes. Isys Goddess of fruit. Neptunus God of the se. Mynerue Gods of
ye batail or of heruest Bachus God of wine. Mercuryus God of langage. Venus
Goddess of love. Dyscorde Gods of debate and stryffe Attropos Death Here
ends ye interpretacyon of the names of Gods and Goddesses as is reherced in
the / treatise following as poets write.

When Phoebus the crabbe had nere his course run
And toward ye Leon his Journey began take
To look on Pyctagoras spear / I had begone
Syttyng all solytary allone beside a lake.
Musyng on a manner how y^ I might make.
Reason and sensualyte in one to accord.
But I could not bring about ye manacorde.
For long er I might sleep me began oppres
So ponderously I coud make none obstacle
In mine head was fall such an heuinesse.
I was feign to draw to mine habytacle.
To rowne with a pylow me semyd best tryacle.
So leyde I me down my disease to releue.
Anon came in Morpleus and took me by ye sleue
And as I so lay half in a traunse
Twene slepyng and wakyng he bad me arise.
For he said I must give attendaunce.
To the great Court of Mines the Iustyse.
Me naught auayled ayene him to sylogyse.
For hit is often said by hem that yet lives.
He must needs go that the deuell dryues.
When I see no better but I must go.
I said I was ready at his commandment.
Wheder that he would me led to or fro.
So up I arose and forth with him went.
Till he had me brought to the parliament.
Where Pluto sat and kept is estate.
And with him Mynos the Judge desperate.
But as we thyderwarde went by the way.
I him besought his name me to tell.
Morpleus he said thou me call may.
A sir said I than where do ye dwell.
In heaven or in earth either else in hell.
Nay he said mine abydyng most commonly
Is in a little corner called fantasy.
And as soon as he these words had said.
Cerberus the porter of hell with his cheyne.
Brought theder Colus i^ rags evil arayd
Agay^ whom Neptunus and Dyana did co^pey^t
Saying thus O Mynos you Judge souerayn.
Give thy cruel judgment aye^ this traitor so
y^ we may have cause to preyse thy lord Pluto
Then was there made a proclamacyon.
In Plutoos name commanded scylence.
Upon the pain of strayt correccyon.
y^ Dyana and Neptunus might have audience.
To declare her grefe of the great offense.
To hem do by Colus whereon they co^pl^ined
And to begin Dyana was constreyned.
Which thus begin as ye shall here.
Saying in this wise. O thou lord Pluto.
With thy judge Mynos syttyng with the in fere
Execute your fury upon Colus so.
According to thofence that he to me has do
That I have no cause forther to appele.
Which if I do shall not be for your well.
Remember first how I a goddess pure.
Over all deserts / forestes and chaces.
Have the guydynge and under my cure.
This traitor colus has mani of nu places
Destroyed with his blastes and daily me manaces
Where any wood is he shall make it plain.
If he to his lyberte may resort again
The gretest trees that any man may find
In forest to shade the dear for her comfort.
He breketh he^ aso^der or rendith he rote and ri^de
Out of the earth this is his dysporte.
So that the dear shall have no resort.
Within short time to no manner shade
Where thorough the game is lykly to fade.
Which to my name a reproach synguler.
Should be for ever while the world last.
And to all the gods an high dyspleyser.
To see the game so destroyed by his blaste.
Wherefore a remedy puruey in haste.
And let him be punysshed after his offense.
Cousyder the crime and give your sentence.
And when Dyana had made her compley^t
To mynos the Judge in Plutoos presence.
Came forth Neptunus with vysage pale and feynt
Desiring of favor to have audyence.
Saying thus Pluto to thy magnyfycence.
I shall reherce what this creature.
Colus has done me out of mesure.
Thou know well that I have the charge
Over all the se and thereof god I am.
No ship may sail Keruel / bote ne barge.
Great karyk nor hulke with any living man.
But he have my saueconduyte than.
who me offendith within my Iurysdyccyon*
O with to submyt him to my correccyon.
But in asmoche as it is now so.
That ye him here have as your prysone^re
I shall show my compleynt so.
wherefore I pray you that ye will here.
And let hy^ not escape out of your daungere^.
Till he have made full sethe and recompense
For hurt of my name through his great offense
First to begin this Colus has often.
Made me to return mi course agein nature.
with his great blastes when he has be alofte
And charged me to labor fer out of mesure
yt it was gtete merueyl how I might endure
The com of my sweet will testyfy.
That on the se banks lie beten full hye.
Secundly where my nature is.
Both to eb and flow and so thy course to keep.
Often of mine intent has he made me mys
where as I should have filled dykes deep.
At a full water I might not theder crepe.
Before my season came to return ageyn.
And than went I faster than i would certain
Thus he hathme driven again mine entente
And contrary to my course natural.
where I should have be he made me absente
To my great dishonor and in especyall.
Oo thing he used that worst was of all.
For where I my sauegard granted
Ay in that cost he commonly haunted
Of very pure malice and sylfwyll.
Them to destroy in dyspyte of me.
To whom I promised does in good and ill.
For to be her protector in all aduersyte.
That to them should fall upon these.
And even suddenly or they coud beware
with a sodeyn pyry he lapped them in care.
And full often sith with his boystous blaste.
Or they might bewar^ he drof he^ on ye sond
And other while he brake top sail and maste.
which caused their to peryssh or they ca^ to land
Then cursed they the time yt eue^r they me fa^d
Thus among the people lost is my name.
And so by his labor put I am to blame.
Consider this matter and ponder my case.
Tender my compleynt as rygure requires
Show forth your sencence with a breef clause
I may not long tarry the time fast expyreth
The offense is great wherefore it desires.
The more grievous pain and hasty judgment
For offense don wylfully will non auysement
And wha^ ye god pluto a whyl had hi^ bethought
He rowned with mynos what was to do.
Then he said openly look thou fayl naught
Thy sentence to give without fauoore so.
Like as thou have herd the causes the too.
And so euenly dele twene thise partyey twein
That none of he^ have case on ye other co^pleint
Then said mynos full indyfferently.
To Dyana and Neptunus is there any more.
That ye will declare ageyn him openly.
Nay in deed they said we keep none in store /
we have said Enough to punysshe him fore
If ye in this matter be not parcyall.
Remember your name was wont to be egall
Well than said Mynos now let us see.
What this boystous Colus for hy^self cay say
For here / Prima facie to us does appear.
That he has offended no man can say nay
wherefore thou Colus without more delay
Shape us an answer to thine accusemente
And else I must proceed upon thy judgment
And even as colus was onward to have said
For his excuse / came in a messengere.
Fro god Appolo to Pluto and him prayde.
On his behalf that he without daungere
would to him come and bry^ge with him in fere
Dyana and Neptunus unto his banquet
And if they dysdeyned hy^self he would he^ fet.
Moreover he said to god Appolo
Desired to have respyte of the judgment
Of Colus both of Mynos and Pluto
So Dyana and Neptunus were therewith co^te^t
And if they were dysposed to assente
That he might come unto his present
He it desired to know his offense
What say ye herto said Pluto to hem tweyn
will ye both assente that it shall be thus
ye said the goddess for my part certain
And I also said this Neptunus
I am well plesid quod this Colus
And when they had a while thus togy d spoke
Pluto commanded the court to be broke
And than togeder went they in fere.
Pluto and Neptunus ledynge the goddess
whom followed Cerberus with his prysonere.
And alderlast with great heaviness.
Came I and Morpleus to the forteresse.
Of the god appolo unto his banquet.
where many gods and goddesses met.
When Appolo se that they were come.
He was right glad and prayed them to sit.
Nay said Dyana this is all and some.
ye shall me pardone I shall not sit yet.
I shall first know why Colus abide.
And what execucyon shall on him be do
For his offense / well said Appollo.
Madame ye shall have all your plesere.
Sith that it will none other wise be.
But fyste I pray you let me ye matter here
why he is brought in this perplexyte.
well said Pluto that shall ye sone se.
And began to declare even by and by.
Both their complayntes ordynatly.
And when Appolo had herd the report
Of Pluto in a manner smiling he said.
I se well Colus thou have small comfort.
Thy self to excuse thoumayst be dysmayde.
For to here so great co^pleyntes again the laid
And notwythstondyng if thou can say ought
For thine own well say and tarry naught
Nota
Forsooth said Colus if I had respyte.
Hereto an answer cowd I counterfete.
But to have her grace more is my delight.
wherefore I pray you all for me entrete.
That I may by your req^st her good grace get
And what pain or greef ye for me provide
without any grutchyng I shall it abide.
Lo good dame said god Appollo.
what may he do more but sew to your grace.
Behold how the teres from his eyes goo.
It is satysfaction half for his trespace.
Now glorious gods show your petious face
To this pore prisoner at my request.
All we for your honor think thus is best.
And if it like you to do in this wise.
And so to foryeue him clearly his offense.
One thing surely I will you promise.
If he ought rebel and make resystence
Or dysobey unto your sencence.
For every tree that he makes fall.
Out of the earth an / C / rise shall.
So that your game shall not dyscrease
For lack of shade i dare undertake
well sir Appolo said she than will I cease
Off all my rancour and mercy with you make
And than god Neptunus of his manner spak
Sayng thus appolo though dyana him relese
yet shall he sue to me to have his pease.
A said Appolo ye wend I had forgete.
You for my lady Dyana the goddess.
Nay think not so for I will you entrete.
As well as her without long process.
will ye agree that Phoebus your maystresse.
May have the guydyng of your varyaunce.
I shall abide quod he / her ordinance.
Well than quod appolo I pray you gods all
And goddesses that been here present.
That ye companable will a board fall.
Nay than said Othea it is not conuenyente.
A dew order in every place is expedyente.
To be had wherefore ye may not let.
To be your own marshal at your own ba^ket
And when appolo se it would none other be
He called to him Aurora the goddess.
And said though ye weep ye shall before me.
Ay keep your course and put yourself in p^sse
So he her set first at his own mess.
with her moist clothes with teres all be sprey^t
The medewes in may snew thereof her co^plei^t
Dext her sat Mars mighty god and strong
with a flamme of fire enuyroned all aboeut
A crown o iron on his head a spear i^ his ho^d
It seemed by his che^ as he would have fought.
And next unto him as I perceive might.
Sat ye goddess Dyana in a mantell fine.
Of black sylke purfyled with poudred ermine
Like as he had take ye mantell and the ring
And next unto her arrayed roally.
Sat the god Iupyter in his demenynge.
Full sad and wise he seemed sykerly.
A crown of tynne stood on his head.
And that I record of all philosophers.
y^ little store of Coin keep in her cofres.
Joined to hy^ in syttyng next there was
The goddess Juno full rychely besene.
In a sercote yt shone as bright as glass
Of goldsmyth werk with spa^gles wrought beden^
Of royal riches wanted she none I wene.
And next to her sat the god saturn.
That often sith causes many one to morn.
But he was clad me thought straungely
For of froste and snow was all his array.
In his hand he held a fawchon all blody
It seemed by his chere as he would make a frai
A baudryck of Isykles about his neckegaye
He had. and above on high on his head.
Couchid with hayl sto^es he wered a crou^ of led
And next in order was set by his side.
Ceres the goddess in a garmente.
Of sack cloth made with sleues large and wide
Embrowdered with sheues and sycles bent
Of all manner greynes she sealed ye patente.
In token y^ she was gods of corn.
Old Poets say she beryth the heruest horn
Then was there set the god cupydo.
All fresshe and galaunte and costly in array.
With ouches and rings he was beset so.
ye paleys thereof sho^n as though it had be day
A kerchyff of plesau^s stood over his helm ay
The goddess Ceres he looked in the face.
And with one arm he her did enbrace.
Next to Cupido in order by and by
Of wordly wysdum sat the forteresse.
Called Othea chyef ground of polycy.
Reuler of knyghthode of prudence ye gods
Clad all in purpure was she more and less.
Saaf on her head a crown there stood.
Couched with perles oryent fine and good.
And next to her was god Pluto set
With a derke myste enuyrond al about.
His clothy was made of a smoky net.
His color was both within and without.
Foul / derke and dy^me his eyes great and stout.
Of fire and sulfure all his odoure wase.
That woe was me while I beheld his face
Fortune the goddess with her perty face.
Was unto Pluto next in order set.
Varyant she was ay in short space.
Her whele was ready to turn without let.
Her gown was of gaudy grene clamelet
Chaungeable of sundry diverse colors.
To ye condycyons accordy^g to her shoures
And by her sat though he unworthy were.
The rewde god Pan of shepherdes y^ gyde
Clad in russet frese and breched like a bear.
With a great terbox hangyng by his side.
A shepcrok in his ho^d he spared for no pride.
And by his fete lay a prekered curre.
He rateled in ye throat as he had ye murre.
Isys the gods bare him company.
For at the table next she sat by his side.
In a close kyr ell embrowdered curyously
with branches and leaves brood large and wide.
Grene as any grass in ye somer tide.
Of all manner fruit she had the governance
Of favors odyferous was her sustynauns
Next to her than was god Neptunus set.
He sauoured like a fyssher (...) before
It seemed by his clothes as they had be wet.
About hy^ i^ his gyrde^sted hi^g fysshes mani a xx
Of his strange array merueyled I sore.
A ship with a top and sail was his creste.
Me thought he was gayly dysgysed at ye fest
Than took mynerue the gods her sete.
Jointly to Neptunus all in curas cladde.
Gau^telettis on ho^des and sabatou^s on her fete
She looked about as though she had be mad.
An hamer and a sithe on her head she had
She wered two bokelers one by her side.
that other ye wot were this was al her pri^d
Tha^ came ye god bachus and by her set hy^ down
Holding in his hand a cup full of wine.
Of grene vine leaves he wered a Ioly croun
He was clad in clustres of grapes good and fine
A garlonde of yuy he chose for his sign.
On his head he had a thredbare ke^dall hode.
A gymlot and a fauset thereupon stood.
Next him sat phoebus with her color pale.
Fat she was of face but os complexon feynte.
She said sherewled Neptunusp and made hy^ vayl
And ones in ye monthe with phoebus was she mei^t
Also ne were she Ceres were ateynte
Thus she sat and told the might of her nature
and on her head she wered a croun of silver pure
Jointly to her Marcuryus took his see.
As came to his course witness the zodyake.
He had a gylden tongue as fill for his degree
In eloquence of langage he passed al y^ pake
For in his talkyng noman coud find lake
A box with quycksyluer he had in his hand /
Multyplyers know it well in every land
By him sat dame Venus with color crystalline
Whose long here shone as wyre of gold bryt
Cryspe was her skyn her eyes columbyne
Rauysshed mine heart her chere was so lyt
Patrones of plesau^ce be named well she myt
A smock was her wede garnysshed curyusli
But all other she had a wanton eye
On her head she wered a red coper crown
A nosegay she had made full plesauntly
Between her and aurora Apollo set him down
With his beams bright he shone so ferue^tly
That he therwyth gladyd al ye company
A crown of pure gold was on his head set
In syne yt he was master and lord of y^ banquet
Nota
Thus was the table set round about
With gods and goddesses as i have you told
Awaytyng on the board was a great route
Of sage philosophers and poets many fold
There was sad Sychero and Arystotle old
Tholome Dorothe with Dyogenes
Plato Myssehala and wise Socrates
Sorts and Saphdrus with hermes stood behynd
Auycen and Aueroys with hem were in fere
Galyen and ypocras that physyk have in mind
with help of Esculapyo^ toward he^ drowner
Vyrgyle Orace Ouyd and Omere
Euclyde and albert yaue her attendaunce
To do the gods and goddesses plesaunce
Horeberded Orpheus was there with his harp.
And as a poyt musycal made he melody
Other mi^stral had they non saf Pan ga^ to carpe
Of his lewd bagpyp which caused ye compani
To law yet many mo there we^ if i should notly
Some young some old both better and werse
But mo of their names can I not reherce
Of al manner deyntes there was habu^dau^ce
Of metes and drynkes foyson plenteuous
In came Dyscord to have varyaunce
But there was no roum to set her i^ that house
The goddis remembered the scysme odious
Among the three goddesses yt he had wrought
At the fest of Peleus wherefore they thought
They would not with her dele in a venture
Lest she hem brought to some inconuenyente
She seeing this was wroth out of me^ure
And in that great wrath out of ye paleyse went
Say^g to herself that chere should they repent
And anon with Attropes happed she to mete.
As he had been a ghost came in a wy^dy^g shete
She took hymby ye hond and rowned in his ere
And told hy of the banquet y^ was so delycate.
How she was received and what chere she had year
And how every god sat in his astate
Is it thus quoth attropos what in ye deuyls date
well he said I se well how the game goth
Ones yet for your sake shall I make he^ wroth
And when she had him al together told
From her he departed and of her took his leave /
Sayng yt for her sake his way take he would
In to the paleys his matters to meue
And or he thens went he trowed he^ to grieve.
with such tidings as he would hem ^el
So forth he went and spoke words fell
When he came in the p^sence of ye goddis all
As he had been mad he looked him a bout
His shete from his body down he let fall
And on a reud manner he saluted all the route
with a bold voys spekyng words stout
But he spoke all holow as it had been one
Had spoke in a another world y^ had woe begone
He stood forth boldly with grym countenance
Sayng on this wise as ye shall here
All ye gods give attendaunce
Unto my words without all daungere
Remember how ye made me your offycere
Al tho with my darte finally to chastyse
That you / dysobeyed or would your law dyspise
And for the more surete seiled my patent
Gyuyng me full power so to ocupy
Whereto I have enployed mine intent
And that can dame Nature testefy
If she be examyned she will not it deny
For when she forsakyth any creature
I am al ready to take hy^ to my cure
Thus have I deuly with al mi dylygence.
Executed the office of old antyquyte
To me by you granted by your common se^te^ce
For I spared none high nor low degree
So that on my part no fault has be
For as soon as any to me committed was
I smote hy^ to ye heart he had none other grace
Ector of Troy for all his cheualry
Alexander thegre te and mighty conqueroure
Iulyus Cezar with al his company
Dauyd nor Iosue nor worthy Artur
Charlis the noble that was so great of honor
Nor Judas Machabee for all his true heart
Nor Godfrey of Boleyn coud me not asterte
Nabugodonozor for all his great pride
Nor the king of Egypt cruel Pharao
Jason ne Hercules we^nt they never so wide.
Cosdras Hanyball nor gentle Sypyo.
Cyrus Achylles nor many a another mo
for fair nor foul gat of me no grace
But al be at ye last I seized hem with my mace.
Thus have I brought every creature
To an end bothman fysshe foul and best
And every other thing in whomedame nature
Has any Iurysdyccion either most or lest
Except oonly one in whom your be hest
Is to me broke for ye me promised
That my might of non^ should have be despised
Whereof the aontrary daoe I well a uow
Is true for one there is that will not apply
Unto my correction nor in no wise bow
To the dynt of my darte for dole nor desteny.
What comfort he has nor the cause why
That he so rebellyth I can yot thynk of ryt
But if ye hy^ granted your alders safcondyght.
And if he so have than do ye not as goddis.
For a goddys writing may not reuersed be.
if it should I would not give you ii pesecoddes
For gra^ut of your patent of offycenere of fee.
wherfdre in this matter do me equity
Accerdandg to my patent for till this be do
ye have no more my seruyse nor my good wy
And when all the goddis had attropos hered
As they had been wode brayd up attones
and said they would not rest till he were conq^red
Taken an dystroyed body blood and bones
And that they swear great oaths for ye noms
Her lad to dyspyce that was so malapert
They said he should be taught for to be so pert
Well said Appollo if he on earth be
with my brennyng chare I shall hy^ confound
In feyth quod neptunus and he keep these
He may be well sure he shall be drowned
A sy rsayd Mars this have we well found
That any dysubeyed our goodly precept
We may well thynk we have to long slept
But nevertheless where I may him find
with thu^d and lyghtning about I shall hy^ chase
And I quod Saturnus before and behynd.
with my bytte cold shall show hy^ hard grace
well said Mercuryus if I may se his face.
For ever of his spech I shall him depryur
So that him were better deed than alive
Ye quod Othea yet may he well be
In the eyr where he will and ax you no leave
wherefore my counseyl is that all we
May entrete Neptunus his rahcour foryeue.
And than I dout not Colus will hy^ myscheus
So may ye be sure he soal you not escape
and ellis. of you anger he will make but a iape.
But for to tell you how Colus was brought.
In daungere of Pluto yei had I forget
wherefore on this matter forther will I nout.
Proceed till I thereof have knowledge you let
It besell on a day the weder was wete
And Colus thought he would on his dysport.
Goo tn rejoice his spyrytis and comfort
He thought he would se what was in ye ground
And in a krauers forth he began him dress
A drough had the earth late before found.
That caused it to chyne and krauy more and less /
Suddenly by wete constreyned by duresse
Was the ground to close his superfycyall face.
So streyt that to escape colus had no space
This seeing Colus be still within abode.
Seky^g where he myt have gene fer or nere.
Auone he was espied and one to Pluto rode
And told hy^ how Colus was in his dau^gere
Than said he to Cerberus fet me y^ prysonere /
Till I have hy^ seen let hy^ not go at large /
As ye wylt answer of hem I give the charge
Thus was this Colus take prysonere
Than happed it so that thhsame day
Pluto had prefyxed for a great matter
Mynos to sit in his robe of Ray
Wherefore Cerberus took the next way
And led hy^ to the place where the court shall be
where I told you Morpleus brought me
So thither came Dyaua carried in carre
To make her compleynt as I told you all
And so did Neptunus yt does make and mar
Walewyng with his wawys and to^blyng as a ball
Her matters they meued fall what may befall
There was the first sight y^ ever I them saw
And if I never do eft I care not a straw
But now to my matter return again
And tu begin new where I left.
when all the goddis had done her besy pain.
The way to contryue how it should be reft
Of his life Attropos had no cause eft
To co^pleyn than Phoebus stert upon her fete /
And said I pray you let me speak a word yet
Othea menyth well to say on this wise
But al to entret Neptunus thope shall notnede
Me semyth I alone durst take ye entesprise.
Er I am begyled or ellie I shall speed
How say ye Neptunus shall I do this deed.
Will ye your rancour seal at my request
Madame quod he reule me as ye lykyth best
G ramercy said she of your good will
That it pleysyth you to show methatfauorus
Wherefore the goddys high pleysur to fulfill
Perform my desire and leave al old rancoure
For our elders well and saving of our honor
Again this colus that ye long have had
It is done quod he forsooth than am I gladd
Said he now than Colus be you to us trewe^
Keep well the eyr and our great rebel
May we than sone ever to us subdew
Yes and that quod Colus shall here tell
No where in the eyr shall he rest nor dwell
If he do there of put me in the fault
With my bitter blastes so shall I hy^ asaut
What said the god Pluto what is his name.
That thus presumyth again us to rebel
Virtue quod attropes yt have he mykyl shame
He is never confounded thus of hy^ here I tell
A said this pluto in deed I know hy^ well
Ho has been ever mine utter enemy
Wherefore this matter again hy^ take will I
For all the baytes yt we for him have laid
Without my help be not worth a pere
For though ye all the contrary had said
yet would he bread right nigh your althris ere
No manner of thing can him hurt or dear
Save only a sone of my bastard
Whose name is vice he kepyth my vawarad.
Wherefore you Cerberus now I the charge
Of Colus and will that thou heder fet
My dear sone Vice and say that I hy^ charge.
That he to me come without any let
Armed at all points for a day is set
That he with Virtue for all ye goddis sake
In our defense must on him batayl take.
Forth then went Cerberus we his fyry chein
Brought thyd vice as he commanded was
Again noble Virtue ye batayl to dereygne
On a glydy^g serpent rydy^ge a great pace
Formed like a dragon scaled hard as glass
whoos mouth flammed fire weout fayll
wings had it serpentyne and a long tayll
Armed was vice all in cure boyll
Hard as horn blacker fer than suit
An ungoodly sort followed him perde
Of unhappy capteyns of myschyfe crop and rot
Pride was the first y^ next hy^ rode god wot
On a roryng Lion next whom^ came Envy
Syttyng on wolf he had a scornful eye
Wrath bestrode a wyld bore and next hy^ ga^ ride.
In his hond he bare a blody swerd
Next whom came couetise y^goth so fer and wide
Rydy^g on a Olyfau^t as he had been a ferd
After whom rode Gloteny with his fat berd
Syttyng on a bear with his great belly
And next hy^ on a got followed Lechery
Sloth was so slepy he came all behynd
On a dull ass a full weary pase
These were ye capteins that vice coud find
Best to set his feld and folowon the chase
As for pety capteyns many mo there was
As sacrylege symony and dyssymulacyon
Manslaughter mordre theft and extorcyon
Arrogau^ce Presu^pcyon with contumact
Conte^pcyon Contempt and Inobedyence
Malyle Frowardnes great Ielasy
wodnes Hate Stryf and Impacyence
Unkindness Opp^ssyon with woeful neglyge^ce.
Murmur Myschef Falshod and detraccyon
Usury Perjury Ly and adulacyon
Wrong Rauyne Sturdy vyolence
Falls Judgment with Obstynacyon
Dysceyt Dronknes and Improuydence.
Boldness in ill with foul and Rybaudy.
Fornycacyon Incest and Auoutry
Vnshamfastnes with Prodygalyte
Blasfeme vaynglory and worldly vanyte
Ignorance Dyffydence with Ipocrysy
Scysme Rancour Debate and Offense
Herely Error with Idolatry.
New fangylnes and sotyll false Pretense
Iordynat desire of worldly excellence
Feigned pouerte with apostasy
Dysclaunder scorn and unkind Ielousy
Hoordom baudry false mayntenaunce
Treyson abusyon and pety brybry
Vsurpacyon with horrible vengaunce
Came alder last of that company
All these pety capetayns followed by and by.
Showing theymself in the paleyse wide
And say they were ready that batayl to abide
Idylnes set the comyns in a ray
Without the palayse on a fair field
But there was an ost for to make a fray
I trow such a another never man beheld
Many was the wepyn amonghe^ yt they weld
What they were y^ came to that dysporte
I shall you declare of many a sundry sort
There were bosters crakers and brybours
Praters sasers strechers and wrythers
Shameful shakelers soleyn slauedours
Oppressors of people and mighty crakers
Mayntenours of quarrels horrible liars
Thieves traitors with false heretykes
Charmars sorcerers and many scysmatykes.
Preuy symonyakes with false usurers
Multyplyers coin wasshers and clyppers
Wrong usurpers with great extorcyoners
Bachyters Glofers and fair flaterers.
Malycyous murmurers with great claterers
Tregetours Tryfelers Feyners of tales.
Lastyuous lurdeyns and Pykers of malys.
Rouners Vagabundes Forgers and lesingis.
Robbers Reuers Ravenous Ryfelers.
Choppers of Chyrches Fynders of tidings
Merrers of matters and money makers.
Stalkers by night with Euysdroppers.
Fyghters Brawlers Brekers of love days
Getters Chyders Causers of frayes.
Tytyuyllis Tyrau^tis with Tourmentours.
Corsyd apostatis Relygyous dyssymulers:
Closshers Carders with common hasardours.
Tyburne colops and Purskytters.
Pylary knyghtys double tollyng Myllers.
Gay Ioly tapters with hostelers of the stews.
Hores and Bawdes that many bale brewes
Bold blasfemers with false Ipocrytes.
Brothellers Brokers abhomynable swerers.
Dryuylls Dastardes dyspysers of ryghtis
Homycydes Poyseners and common morderers
Scoldis Caytyues Comberous clappers.
I dolatres Enchauntors with false regenates.
Sotyl ambydextrys and sekeers of debatis.
Pseudo Prophets false Sodemytes.
Quesmers of children with fornycatours.
wetewoldes that suffer syn in their syghtis.
Auoutrers and abhomynable auauntours.
Of syn great clappers and makers of clamours
Unthriftiness and vnlustes came al to that game
with luskes and loselis y^ might not thryue for sham^
These were the commons ye came thider ye day.
Ready bowne in batayl Virtue to abide.
Apollo them beholding began to say.
To the goddys and goddesses being there y^ tid
Me semyth conuenyent an herowd to ride
To Virtue and bid hy^ to batayl make hy^ boune
Hy^self to defend forsooth it shall be sone.
And let him not be suddenly take.
All dyspurneyed or that he beware.
For than should our dishonor awake.
If he were cowardly take in a snare.
Ee quod Vice for that have I no care.
I will advantage take where I may.
That heryng Morpleus p^uely stale away.
And went to warn Virtue of all this afray.
And bad hy^ awake and make himself strong
For he was like to endure that day.
A great mortal shoure er. it were euensonge.
with Vice wherefore he bad him not long.
Tarry to send after more-socoure.
If he did it should torn him to dolor.
And brefely the matter to he declared.
Like as ye have hard beginning and end.
Well quod Virtue he shall not be ^pared
To the feld I will go how it wend.
But gramercy Morpleus mine own dear friend
Of your true heart and faithful entente.
That ye in this mat to meward have meant.
This done Morpleus departed away.
Fro Virtue to the palayse retorny^g again.
None him aspyed that I dare well say.
In which time Virtue did his besy pain
People to reyse his quarrel to maynteyn.
Ymagynacyon was his messengere.
He went to warn people both ter and nere.
And bad hem come in all have they might
For to strength Virtue for with out fayll.
He said he should have long or it were night.
With Vice to do a mighty strong batayl.
Of ungracious gestes he bryngyth a great tayll
Wherefore it behouyth to help at this need.
And after this shall Virtue rewar yor mede
When ymagynacyon had gone his cyrcuyte
To Virtue and frendis thus all about.
Within short time many men of might
Gadered to Virtue in all that they might.
They him comforted and bad hy^ put no doubt.
His utter enmy Vice to overthrow.
Though hwt hy^ brout never so great arow
And when Virtue se the sustau^ce of his oost
He prayed all the commons to the feld hem hye
With her pety capteyns both lest and most
And with his capteyns should follow redely.
For he said he knew well yt vice was full nigh.
And who might first of ye feld recover ye ce^tre
Would keep out y^ other he should not esely e^tre
Then sent he forth Baptym to ye feld before
And prayed him heartily it to ouerse.
That nomaner trayn nor cotlrop therein wor^
To noy nor hurt him nor his meyne.
And when he thither came he began to se.
How Vice his purseuannt crime orygynall.
Was entered before and had seized up all.
But as soon as hereof Baptym had a sight.
He fled fast away and left the feld alone.
And anon Baptym entered with his might.
Serchyng al about where this crym^ had gon^
But the feld was clean defaut found he none.
Then came Virtue after with his great oste.
And his mighty capteyns both lest and most*
But to enfourme you how he thither came.
And what manner capteins he to ye feld brout.
Himself sekerly was the first man.
Of all his great host ye thyderwarde sought.
Syttyng in a chare ye rychely was wrought.
With gold and peerles and gemmes precious.
Crowned with laurer as lord vyctoryous.
Four doubty knights about ye chare went.
At every corner one hit for to gyde.
And convey according to. Virtue his intent.
At the first corner was Ryghtwysnesse ye tide.
Prudence at the second was set to abide.
At ye thryd strength ye fourth kept temperau^ce.
These ye chare gyded to. Virtue his pleasau^ce.
Next to ye chare seven capyteyns there roode.
Echone aftre other in order by and by.
Humylyte was ye first a lamb he bestroode.
With contenau^ce demure he rood full soberly.
Afawcon gentle stood on his helm on hy.
And next after him came there. Charity.
Rydyng on a tygre as fill to his degree.
Boody as a roose ay he kept his chere.
On his helm on high a pellycan he bare.
Next whom came pacye^ce y^ no where has no pere
On a camel rydyng as void of all care.
Afenix on his helm stood so forth began he fare.
Who next him followed but lyberalyte.
Syteng on a dromedary y^ was both good and fre.
On his helm for his crest he bare on ospray.
And next after him followed abstynence.
Rydyng on an hete was trapure and gay.
He seemed a lord of right great excellence.
A popyniay was his crest he was of great dyffe^ce.
Next him followed chastyte on an unicorn.
Armed at all points behind and beforne.
A tortyldoue he bare on high for his crest.
Than came good business last of ye seven.
Rydyng on a panter a sundry colored best.
Gloryously beseen as he had come from heaven.
A crane on his head stood his crest for ^o steven.
All these.vii. capteyned had standardis of price.
Each of hem accordy^g after his d^uyse.
Many pety capteyns after these went.
As true feyth and hope mercy pease and pity.
Right troth meekness with rood intent.
Goodness concord and parfyte unity.
Hoe est true love with symplycyte.
Prayer fasty^g preuy almysdede.
Joined with ye artycles of the creed.
Confession contrycyon and satyffaccyon.
With sorrow for sin and great repentance.
For^euenesse of trespass with good dysposycyon.
Resystence of wrong performy^g of penance.
Holy devotion with good contynaunce
Presth^de hem followed with the sacrame^tis
And sadness alse with the commandments
Suffraunce in trouble with Innocensy
Clennes contynence and virgynyte
Kyndnes reverence with curteysy
Content and pleased with pyteous pouerte
Entendyng well mynystryng equity
Twene right and wrong hole indyfferently
And labouryng the seruyse of god to multyply
Refuse of riches and worldly vaynglory
Perfeccyon with perfyght contemplacyon
Relygyon professyon well kept in memory
Verry dread of god with holy predycacyon
Celestyall sapyence with gostly inspyracyon
Grace was the guide of all this meyne
Whom followed konnyng with his genealogy
That is to say gramer and Sophystry
Philosophy natural logyke and Rythoryke
Arsmetrycke geometry with astronomye
Canon and Civil melodyous musyke
Noble Theology and corporal physyke
Moralyzayson of holy scripture
Profound poetry and drawy^g of pycture
These followed connyng and thyd with h^n ca^n
With many one mo offryng her seruyie
To Virtue at that need but notwythsto^dy^g than
Some he refused and said in nowyse
They should with him go and as I coud auyse
Thysewore her names first Nygro^mancy
Geomansy magyke and glotony
Adryomansy Ornomancy with pyromancy
Fysenomy also and pawmestry
And al her sequeles if I shall not lie
Yet connyng prayed Virtue he would not deny
Them for to know nor dysdeyn his eye
On hem to look whereto Virtue granted
How be it in his werres ge would not they hau^ted
So had they connyng lyghly to depart
From Virtue his feld and they seeing this
By common assent hired them a carte
And made hem be carried toward Vice Iwys.
Fro thens forth to serve hy^ this would, not mys
For loath they were to be maysterles
Instead of the better the worse there they ches
But forth to relese all the rrmenaunt
Of pety capteins that with Virtue were
Moderate diet and wysdom auenant
Even weight and mesure ware of contagyous ge^
Loath to offend ann loving ay to lere
Worship and profit with mirth in manner
These pety capteyns with Virtue were in fere
Commons hem followed a great multitude
But in came pyson to that other side
I trow there was not brefely to conclude.
The.x. man that batayl to abide.
Yet nevertheless I shall not from you hyde.
what manner people they were and of what sect
As nere as my wit thereto will me derect.
There were noble and famous doctors.
Example yeuers of living gracyous.
Perpetuel prestes and dyscrete confessors.
Of holy scripture declarers fructuous.
Rebukers of syn and myscheues odyous.
Fysshers of souls and lovers of clennes.
Dyspysers of veyn and worldly richesse.
Peasyble prelatys Iustycyal governors.
Founders of chyrches with merciful peers.
Reformers of wrong of her progenytours
On peynfull pore pyteous compassyoners
well menyng merchants with trewartefecers
Vyrgyns pure and also Innocents
Holy matrones with chaste contynence
Pilgrims and palmers with true laborers
Holy heremytes goddys solycytours
Monesteryal monks and well dysposed freres
Chanons and nonnes feyth professoures
Of worldly people true coniugatours.
Lovers of Christ Confounders of ill.
And all that to godward give her good will
Mayntenours of right verey penytentes.
Dystroyers of error causers of unity.
True actyf lyuers that set her ententis
The dedis to perform of mercy and pity
Contemplatyf people that desire to be.
Salytary seruauntis unto god alone.
Rather the^ to habou^d in rychesses echone.
These with many mo than I reherce can
were come thither ready that batayl to abide.
And take such part as fyl to Virtue than
Vice to uoercome they hoped for all his pride
Al though he had more people on his side
For the men that Virtue had were full sure.
To trust on at need and connyng in armure
Macrocosme was the name of the feld
where this great battle was set for to be
In the myddys thereof stood co^syence and beheld
which of hem should be brought to captyuyte
Of that noble tryu^ph Judge would he be
Synderesys sat hy^ within closed as a park
with his table in his hand her dedys to mark.
To come in to the feld were high ways.v.
Fre to both parties large broad and wide
Virtue would not tari but highed hy^ thyd bliue
Lest he were by vice deceived at that tide
Long out of the feld loath was he to abide
In adventure that he out of it were kept.
For tha^ would he have thout he had to long slept
In this mean time while Virtue thus proceeded
For hy^ and his people the feld for to win.
He charged every man by grace to be guyded
And all that ever might ye feld to enter ynne.
In all that season went orygynal sin.
To let Vice know how Baptym with his host.
Had entered Macrocosme and serched every cooste
A said Vice I se well it is time.
Baners to dysplay and standards to auaunce.
Al most to long had you tarried crime.
To let us have knolege of this purueyaunce.
Yet I trow I shall learn hem a new dance.
Wherefore I command you al without delay
Toward the field draw in all the have ye may
Than said ye god Pluto yt al men myt here
Vice I the charge as thou wylt eschew.
Our heuyous Indy^gnacyo^ you draw not arere
But put ye forth boldly to overthrow Virtue.
In faith quod Attropos and I shall after sew /
For if he escape our hondys this day.
I tell you my seruyse have lost for ay.
Forth than rode Vice with al his hole strength
On his stead serpentyne as i told you before.
The ost that hy^ followed was of a great length.
Among who^ were penou^s and g^yt^s mani a scor^
Of his pety capteynes he made many a knit
For they should not fle but manly with him fight
He doubed Falshod with Dyssymylacyon.
Symony Usury Wrong and Rybawdy.
Malice Deceyt Lie without Extorcyon.
Perjury Dyffydence and Apostasy.
With boldness in ill to bear him company.
These.xiiii. knights made vice that day.
To win her spores they said they would assay
In like wise Virtue doubed on his side:
Of pety capteyns other fourtene.
Which made her auou with him to abide:
Hor spores would they wy^ y^ day should it be ^en^
These wore her names if it be as I wene
Feyth* Hope and Mercy Troth and also Right.
with Resystence of wrong a full hardy wyghte
Confession Contrycyon with Satysfaction
Verrey dread of God Performy^g of penance
Perfeccyon Connyng and Good dyspocision
And all knyt to Virtue they were by alyauns
Wherefore to him they made assurance.
That feld to keep as long as they might.
And in his quarrel again Vice to fight.
The lord of Macrocosme and rewler of ye fee
Was called Frewyll chaunger of the chance:
To whom Virtue sent embassatours three
Reason dyscresyon and good remembrance.
And prayed hy^ be favorable his honor to e^ha^s
For but he had his favor at ye point of need
He stood in great doubt he could not lightly speed.
In like wise. Vice embassatours three.
For his party unto Frewyll sent.
Temptacyon folly and sensualyte.
Prayng hy^ of favor that he would assent.
To hy^ as he would at his commandment.
Have hy^ eftsoon when he list to call.
On hy^ for any thy^g y^ afterward might fall.
Answer yaue he none to neither party.
Save oonli he said ye battle would he se
To wete which of hy^ should have ye vyctory.
Hit hy^g in his balau^ce ye ambyguyte.
He said he would not restrain his lyberte.
When he come where sorrow should awake.
Than it should be know what part he will take
When. Virtue and Vice be her ambassatours.
Knew of this answer they stood in great doubt.
Nevertheless they said they would e^dure tho shours
And make an end shortly of yt they went about.
So forth came. Vice with all his great route.
Er he came at ye selde he sent yet privily.
Sensualyte before in manner of a spy.
Which sewe ye field with his unkind seed.
That caused Virtue after mykyll woo to feel
For thereof grew naught but all oonly weed.
Which made the ground as sleper as an yele.
He went ayene to vice and told him every dele.
How he had done and bad him come a way.
For he had so purueyde ye vice should have ye day*
So as it happed at ye field they mete.
Frewyll virtue and vice as tripartite.
Saaf virtue a litil before the field had get.
And ellis his aua^tage forsooth had be fullyght
Not for then encombred so was never wight*
As virtue and his men were with the rank. wede
That in ye field grew of sensualitees feed
But as soon as vice of virtue had a sight.
He began swage gonnes as he had be wood
That heryng virtue commanded every wight
To pauyce him under the sign of ye rode.
And bad he^ not dread but keep still where thy.
It was but a shour should soue co^fou^de
wherefore he commanded the^ stand and keep her ground stood.
And when vice came nerer to the field.
He called sore for bows and bad hem shote fast
But virtue and his meyny bare of with ye sheld.
Of the b^yssyd Trynyte ay till shot was past.
And wha^ shot was done vice came forth at last.
Purposyng the field with assaute to win.
But virtue kept it long he might not ent theryn.
All that time Frewyll stood and him bethought.
To which he myt leave and what pere he would take.
At last sensualite had hy^ so fer brought.
That he said plainly he virtue would forsake.
And in vice his quarrel all his power make.
Nota Iwis quod reason yt is not for the best.
Noforse said frewyll I will do as my list.
Virtue was full heavy when he see frewyll
Take part with vice but yet nevertheless.
He did that he might the field to keep still.
Till vice with frewyll so sore began hy^ oppress.
That he was constranyed clearly by duresse.
A little tyne abacke to make abew retret.
All thing considered hit was the best feet.
First to remember how vice part was.
Ten again one strenger by lyklynesse.
And than how frewyll was with him alas.
Whoo could deem virtue but in heaviness.
Moreover to think how that slyper grass.
That of sensualyte his on kind seed grew.
Under foot in standing encombred vertew
Yet notwitstondyng virtue his men all.
Nobelly them bare and faught myghtyly.
How be it ye sleper grass made many of he^ fall.
And from thense in manner depart suddenly.
That seeing vice his host began to shout and cry.
And said on in Pluto name on and all is our.
For this day shall Vice be made a conqueror.
Thus Virtue was by might of vice and Frew
Driven out of the feld it was the more pity ill
How by it yet Baptym kept his ground still.
And with him abode feyth hope and unity.
And konnynge also with a great meyne.
Confession contrycyon were ready at her hond.
And Satysfaction Vice to wythstond.
But all the time while Virtue was away.
A myty conflycte kept they with Vycys rout.
And yet nevertheless for all that great afray.
Hope stod vpryght and feyth would never lout
And euermor^ said Baptym syres pu^ no dout.
Virtue shall return and have his intent.
This feld shall be ours or let me be shent.
And whyl these pety captey^s sustend thus ye feld
With Virtue his reward come good perseuerauns
An hugy myty host and when he beheld.
How Virtue him withdrew he took dysplesau^s.
And wha^ he to hy^ came he said ye shall your cha^s
Take as it fallyth wherefore return ye must.
Yet ones for your sake with Vice shall I Tust.
Alas that ever ye should lose your honor.
And therwyth also ye high perpetuel crown.
Which is for you kept in the celestyal tour.
Wherefore be ye called chrystys champyon.
How is it that ye have no compassyone.
On baptyme feyth and hope konnyng and unite.
That stand so hard bestad and fight as ye may see.
All the tresour erthely under ye fyrmame^t
That ever was made of goddys creacyon.
To reward them euenly were not equyualent.
For her noble labor in his affleccyon.
Wherefore take upon you your Iurisdyccyon
Rescu yonder knights and recontynu fight.
And else a dew your crown: or al your great myt
With these and such wordys as I have you told
By good perseueraunce vttred in this wise.
Virtue him remembered and began to vex bold.
And said give true knyghtis to rescu Iauyse
Let us no lengar tarry from this entrepryse.
Again to yt field so Virtue returned.
That caused he^ be merry yt long before had morned
Auaunt baner quoth he in ye name of Jesus
And with yt his people set up a great shoute.
And cried with a loud voce a Virtue a Virtue.
Then began Vice his host for to look a boute.
But I trow perseuerau^ce was not long without
He bathed his swerd in his foos blood.
The boldest of hem all not ones hy^ withstoode.
Constau^ce him followed and brought hy^ his spear
But when perseuerau^ce saw Vice on his stead.
Noman could him let till he came there.
For to bid him ride I trow it was no need.
All Virtue his oost prayed for his good speed.
Again Vice he rode with his great shaft.
And him overthrew for all his so^yll craft.
That seeing Frewill came to conscience.
And began him to repent yt he with him had be.
Prayeng him of counsel for his great offense.
That he again Virtue had made his arm.
What was best to do to hymylyte:
Quoth conscience must you go so he him thither sent
Dysguysed yt he were not known as he went.
And when he thither came humylyte him took.
A token and bad him go to conffessyon.
And show him his matter with a peteous look
Which done he him sent to contrycyon.
And fro thensforthe to satysfaccyon.
Thus fro poost to pyler was he made to dau^ce.
And at the last he went forth to penance.
But now for to tell you when Vice was outhrow
A great part of his oost about him began resort.
But he was so febyll y^ he could noman know.
And when they se yt they knew no comfort.
But carried him a way be a preuy port.
And as they carried dyspeyre with hy^ met.
With Vice his reward he came them for to fet
Then came there down goodly ladies tweyn.
From the high heaven above the fyrmamente.
And said the great Alpha and Oo most souereyn.
For that nobell tryumphe had hem thither sent.
One of hem to drive Vice to great tormente.
With a fyry strong y^ she bare in her hand.
And so he deed dyspere and all his hole band.
The name of this lady was called Prestyence.
She never left Vice ne none yt would hy^ follow.
Till they were committed by ye dyuyne sentence.
All to pain perpetuell and Infynyte sorrow.
Right wysnes went to se yt noma^ should he^ borow.
Thus al entreted sharply were they till Cerberus
Had hem beshut within his gates tenebrus.
And all ye while yt Prestye^ce with her scorge smert
To reward Vice began her thus occupy.
With all his hole, bend after her desert.
That other glorious lady y^ came fro heaven on hy.
Having in her hand the palm of vyctory.
Came down to Virtue and took him to yt p^sent.
Saying thus that Alpha and Oo has him sent.
And as far as I right could understand
That ladies name was Predestynacyon.
Virtue and his oost she blessed with her hand.
And in heuyn granted hem habytacyon.
Whereto each of hem reseruyd was a crown.
She said in token that they enherytours.
Of the glory were and gracious conquerours.
Wych done the ladies 'ayen to gyder met
And toward heaven up they began to sty
Embraced in arms as they had been knyt.
Togyd with a gyrdyl but so suddenly.
As yy were vanysshyd saw I neuthy^g with ey.
And anon Virtue with al his company.
Kneled dou^n and thanked god of yt vyctory.
Yet had I forget when Vice was overthrow.
To have told you hou many of Vycys host.
Began to seek pease and darked dou^n full low.
And besought mercy what so ever it cost.
To be her mean to Virtue else y^y we^ but lost.
And some in like wise to feyth and hope sought.
What to do for pease they said they ne route.
Some also Baptym sewed to be her mean.
Some to one some to other as they he^ get myte.
But al to Confession went to make he^ clean
And as y^y came to co^sye^ce he they^ bad go lyte.
Er tha^ old attropes of he^ had a sit.
For if he so them took lost they we^ for ever
He said Vice to forsake better late thy^ never.
Some eke for socour drew to circumcision.
But by hy^ coud they get but small favor.
For he in that company was had but in derysyd
Neueryelesse to feyth he bad he^ go labor.
Prayng they^ for olde^ acqueynta^ce they^ socoure
Well quoth feth for his sake I shall do y^ I may do
But first for the best way baptym go ye to.
For by him sonest shall ye recover grace.
Which shall to Virtue bring you by process.
Wherefore in any wise look ye make good face.
And let noman know of your heaviness.
So they were by baptym brout out of destres
Turned al to Virtue and when this was done.
Virtue cu^mau^ded Frewyl before him come.
To whom thus he said I have great merueyl
Ye durst be so bold Vices party to take.
Who bad you do so and yaue you that counseyl.
Justly unto that ye shall me preuy make.
Then said Frewyll and swemfully spoke.
Knelyng on his kne with a chere denyng.
I pray you sir let pity your eres to me enclyne.
And I shall you tell the verrey soth of all.
How it was and who made me that way draw.
For soth sensualyte his propre name they call.
A said reason then I know well that fellow.
Wyld he is and wanton of me stant hy^ none awe.
Is he so quoth Virtue well he shall be taught.
As a player should to draw another draught.
And with thal came sadness wit his sober chere.
Bryngyng Sensualite being full of thought.
And said that he had take him prysonere.
A welcome said Versu now have I ye I sout.
Blessed be the good lord as ye would it is naught
Why art you so wanton he said for shame.
Or y^ go at large you shall be more tame.
But sto^d a part a while till I have spoke a word
With Frewyl a lytyl and then shaite you know.
What shall be thy fynau^ce then he saydin board
Unto Frewyl the bend of your bow.
Begynnyth to s^ake but such as ye have sow
Must needs repe there is none way,
Notwythstondy^g that let what ye can say.
What is your habilite me to recompense.
For the great harm that ye to me have do.
Forsooth said Frewyll in open audyence.
But oonly Macrocosme more have I not loo.
Take yt if it pleyse you I will that it be so.
If I may understand ye be my good lord.
In deed said Virtue to that will I accord.
Then made Virtue Reason his leyftenaunte.
And yaue hi^ a great charge macrocosme to keep
That done Sensualite yield him recreaunte.
And began for anger bysterly to weep.
For he demed surely his sorrow should not sleep
Then made Virtue Frewyll bayl vnd Reason.
The feld for to ocupy to his behoue that season.
And then said Virtue to Sensualyte.
Thou shall be rewarded sor thy business.
Under this furme al fragylyte.
Shall you forsake both more and less.
And vnd the guydy^g you shall be of sadness.
All though it somewhat be again thy heart.
Thy Judgment is given you shall it not asterte
And even we that came in dame Nature.
Saying thus to Virtue sir ye do me wrong.
By durcsse and constreynt to put this creature.
Gentle Sensualyte yt has me proved long.
Clearly from his lyberte and set him among.
They^ that love hy^ not to be her un dloute.
As it were a cast away or a sho cloute.
And perde ye know well a rewlehaue I must
Within Macrocosme forsooth I say not nay.
Od Virtue butse^sualyte shall not perform your lust
Like as he has do before this if I may.
Therfro hy^ restreyn sadness shall assay.
How be it ye shall have your hoselyberte.
Within Macrocosme as ye have had fre.
And when Virtue had to Nature said thns
A little tyne his ey castyng him beside.
He se in a corner stondyng Morpleus.
That hy^ before warned of ye verily tide.
A syrs said Virtue yet we must abide.
Here is a friend of ours may not be forgete.
After his deserte we shall hy^ entreat
Morpleus said. Virtue I thank you hertely.
For your true heart and your great labor.
That ye list to come to me so redely.
When ye understood ye comy^g of that shoure.
I thank god and you of sauy^g of my^ honor.
Wherefore this preuylege now to you I grant
That wtin Macrocosme ye shall have your hau^t
And of five posternes ye keys shall ye keep.
Lettyng in and out at hy^ whom ye list.
As long as in Macrocosme your fad will crepe.
Blere whose ey yewyll hardely with your mist
And keep your works close there as in a chyst
Saaf I would desire you spare Pollucyon.
For no thy^g may me plese ye sou^eth to corrupcyon.
And wha^ he had thus said ye keys he hy^ took.
And toward his castle with his people went
Byddy^g reason take good head and about look.
That se^sualite by Nature were not she^t.
Keep hy^ short he said till his lust be spent
For better were a child to by vnbore.
Than let hy^ have ye will and forever be lore.
And wha^ old Attropos had seen and herd all this
How Virtue had opteyned astonyed as he stood,
He said to hy^se lfe some what there is amys.
I trow well my patent be not all good.
Saying to the goddys I see ye do but iape.
After a worthy whew have ye made me gape.
How a devil way should I Virtue overthrow.
When he dredeth not all your hole route.
How ca^ ye make good your pate^t would I know
Hit is to Impossable to bring that about.
For stryke him may I not yt is out of doubt.
A good Attropos said god Apollo.
An answer conuenyent shall thou have herto^.
The words of thy patent dare I well say
Stretche to no forther but were dame Nature
Has Iurysdyccyon the^ to have thy way Nota.
And largess to stryke as longet to thy cure.
And as for Virtue he his no cryature.
Under the predycament contained of quantyte
Wherefore his dystruccyon longs not to the.
A ha said Attropos then I see well.
That all ye goodys be but coue^terfete.
For oo God there is that can euerydell.
Turn as him lest both dry and whete.
In to whoos service I shall assay to get.
And if I may ones to his scruycece me.
Your names shall be put to oblyuyone.
Thus went Attropos fro the paleys wrooth.
But in the mean time while ye he there was.
Glydyng by the paleys resydyuacyon gooth.
Toward Macrocosme with a pe^ynted fase.
Clad like a pilgrim walkyng a great pase.
In the form as he had been a man of ynde.
He wede have made reason and fadnesse both bly^de
With sensualyte was he soon aqueynted.
To whom he decared his matter pryuely.
Yet he was espied for all his face peynted.
Then reason hy commanded pyke hy^ the^s lightly.
For his ease quoth sadness so cou^ eyll him will I.
So was sensualyte ay kept under foot.
That to resydyuacyon might he do no boot.
Then went he to Nature and asked her auyse.
His intent to opteynde what was best to do.
She said ever sith Virtue of vice man ye pryse.
Reason with sadness has rewled the field so.
That I and sensnalyte may iytyll for the do.
For I may no more but oonly keep my course.
And yet is seusualyte strenger kept and wours.
Thus hery^g resydiuaco^n fro the^s he went ageyn
Full of thought and sorrow yt ehe might not speed.
Than reason and saduesse took we dehokes tweyn.
And all wild wa^tonesse out ye field began wede.
With all thr slyper grass ye grew of the sede.
That sensualyte before therein sew.
And fro thens forth kept it clean for vertew
Than began new grase in the field to spryng.
All unlike yt other of color fair and bright.
But then I aspyed a marvelous thing.
For the ground of ye field began wex hoar and whyt.
I could not conceive how ye be might.
Till I was informed and taught it to know.
But where virtue occupyet must needs well grow
Yet in the mean time while the field thus grow.
And reason with sadness thereof had gouerau^ce.
Many a preuy messenger thither sent Vertew.
To know if it were guyded to his plesau^ce.
Now prayer eft fasting and often time penance.
And when he might goo preuely almesdede.
And bad hy^ to his power help where hese need
While ye field thus rewled reason with sadness.
Maugre dame Nature for all her carnal might
Came thither Attropos void of all gladness.
Wrapped in his shete and axed of any wight.
Could wysse him the vay to the lord of light.
Or ellis where might find ryghwysnesse.
Forsothe said reyson I trowas I guess.
At Virtue his castle ye may soon him find
I ^ye list the labor thither to take.
And there shall ye know if ye be not blind.
The next wey to the lord of light I undertake.
So thither went Attropos petycyon to make.
To ryghtwysnesse preyeng that he might.
Be take in to the seruyse of the lord of light.
What sad ryghwysnesse you old dotyng fool.
Whom yast thou served sith the world began
But oonlh him where have you go to scole.
Whethery art you doubl cor else the sam man.
That thou were first a sir said he than.
I pray you hertely hold me excused.
I am old and febell my wyttys are dysused.
Well said ryghtwysnes for as much as thou.
Know not thy mayst^ thy name shall I change
Death shall you be caled from he^s forward now
Among all the people that shall be had strange.
But when you begynnest to make thy chalau^ge.
Dredde shall thou be where so thou become.
And to no creature shall thou be welcome.
And as for them whom thou dedest serve.
For as much as they presume on hem to take.
That high name of god they shall as they deproue
Therefore he rewarded I dare vnertake.
With pain perpetual among fendes blake.
And her names shall be put to oblyuyon.
Among men but it be in dyrysyon.
Aha fayd Attropos now begy^ne I wexglad.
That I shall thus avenged of hem be.
Sith they so long time have made me so mad.
Ire quoth right wysnesse here what I say to the.
The lord of light sent the wordeby me.
That in Macrocosme sesyne shall thou take
wherefore thy darte ready look thou make
And as soon as Virtue that understood
He said he was pleased that it should so be
And even forth with he commanded presthood
To make him ready the field for to se
So thither went presthode with benygnyte
Conueyen^g thither the blessed sacrament
Of Eukaryst but first were thither sent
Confessyo^ contrycyon and satysfaccyo^ nota
Sorrow for sin and great repentance
Holy devotion with good dysposycyon
All these thither came and also penance
As her dewte was to make purueaunce
Again the coming of that blessed lord
Feyth hope and charity thereto were acorde
Reason with sadness did his dylygence
To cleanse the field within and without
And when they se the bodily presence
Of that holy Eukaryst lowly began they lout
So was that lord received out of dout
with all huble chere debonayre and benygne
Lykly to pleasure it was a great sign
Then came to the field the mynyster fynall
Called holy vnccyon with a crysmatory
The five hye ways in especyall
Thereof he anoy^ted and made hit sanctuary
whom followed death which would not tarry
His fervent power there to put in ure
As he was commanded grau^tyng dame Nature
Nota.
He took his darte called his mortal aunce
And bent his stroke toward the feldes heart
That seeing preesthode bad good remembrance
Toward the field turn him and aduerte
For except him all virtues thense must sterte
And even with that death there sesyne took
And then all the company clercly hit forsook
And as soon as death thus had sesyne take
The color of the field was changed suddenly
The arasse therein seere as though it had be bak
And the five high ways were mured upon hy
That fro the^s forward none enter should therbi
The posternes were also without let
Both in ward and outward fine fast shette
Which done suddenly death vanysshed a way
And Verty exalted was above the fyrmament
where he took crown of glory ^t is ay
Preparate by Alpha and oo omnypotent
The sweet fruit of macrocosme thyd why^ went
And on all this matter as I stood musyng thus
Again fro the field to me came Morpleus
Saye^g thus what chere how lyketh ye this fight
Haste thou seen enough or will thou see inore
Nay sir I said my truth I you plyght
This is suffycente if I knew wherefore
This was to me showed for thereof he lore
Coueyte I to have if I get might
Follow me quod he and have thy delyght
So Thym followed till he had me brougt
To a foresquare herber walled round about
Loo quoth Morpleus here may thou yt thousought
Find if thou will I put the out of doubt
Alytyll while we stood still there without
Till wit chyef porter of that herber gate
Required by stodye let us in there ate
But when I came in meruayled greatly
Of that I beheld and herd report
For first in a chair apparaylled royally
There sat dam doctrine her childern to exorte
And about her was many a sundry sort
Some wyllyng to learn diverse science
And some for to have perfyte intellygence
Crowned she was like an Emperesse
Which iii. crowns standing on her head on by
All teyng about her an Infynyte process
were to declare I tell you certainly
Nevertheless some in mind thereof have I
which I shall to you as god will give me grace
As I saw and herd tell in short space
Fast by Doctrine on that one side
As I remember sat holy Text
That opened his mouth to ye people wide
But not in comparyson to Gloss ye sat next
Moralyzacyon with a cloak contexte
Sat and Scripture was scrybe to them all
He sat ay writing of that that should fall
These were tho that I there knew
By no manner way of old acqueyntau^ce
But as I before saw them with Vertewe
Company in field and having dalyau^ce
And as I thus stood half in a trance
while they were occupied in her business
About the wallesmyn ey began I dress
where I beheld the meruaylous story
That ever I yet saw in any pycture
For on tho walls was made memory
Syngulerly of every creature
That there had been both form and stature
whoos names rehearse I will as I can
Bring them to mind in order every man
First to begin there was in portrature
Adam and Eve holdyng an apell round
Noe in a ship and Abraham having sure
Aflyntstone in his hand and I saaclay bound
On an high mou^te Jacob slepyng sound
And a long ladder stood beside
Joseph in a Cysterne was also there that tide.
Next whom stood Moses with his tables two
Aaron and Vrre his arms supporting
Ely in a brennyng chare was there also.
And Elyze stood clad in hermytes cothynge.
Dauyd with an harp and a stone slynge.
I say Jeremy and Ezechyell.
And closed with Lions holy Danyell.
A bacuc Mychee with Malachy.
And Jonas out of a whales body coming.
Samuel in a Temple and holy zachary.
Beside an altar all blody stondynge.
Dsee with Judyth stood there conspyryng.
The death of Oloferne and Salamon.
A child with his sword dyuydynge in two.
Many mo prephetes certeynly there were.
Whoos names now come not to my mind.
Melchysedech also Jespyed there.
Bread and wine offryng as fell to his kind.
Ioachym and Anna* stood al behind.
Embraced in arms to the golden gate.
And holy Johan Baptyst in desert sat.
And now comyth to my remembrunce.
I am auysed I saw Sodechy:
And Amos also with sober countenance.
Stondyng with her faces toward Sophony.
Neemy and Eldras bare hem company.
The holy man Job as an Impotente.
Then followed in pycture with Thoby pacyent
These with many mo on that one side.
Of that grene herber portrayed were.
A said Morpleus a little time abide.
Turn thy face where thy back was ere.
And behold well what thou seeste there.
Than I me turned as he me badde.
With heart steadfast and countenance sad.
Where I saw Peter with his keys stand.
Poule with a sword and James also.
With a sealop and Thomas holdyng in his hand
Aspere and Phylyp aproched him to:
James the less next hem in pycture loo.
Stood with Bartylme w which was all flayn
Simon and Thadee showed how they were slain
Mathy and Barnabe drawy^g lottys stood
Next whom was Mark a Lion him by.
His book holdyng and Matthew in his mode.
Resembled an angel with wyngys glyouly.
Luke had a calfe to hold his book on hye.
And Johan with a cup and palm in his hand.
An Egle bare his book thus saw I shem stand
G regory and Jerome Austyn and Ambrose.
With pyllyo^s on there hedes stood like doctors
Bernard with Amselme and as I suppese.
Thomas of alquyne and Domynyk co^fessours
Benet and Hew relygyous governors.
Martyn and Johan with bishops tweyne.
Were there also and Crysostom certain.
Behynd all these was worshypfull Bid.
All behind and next him stood Orygene.
Hydynge his face as he of his deed.
Had hem a shamed ye wot what I mean.
For of error he was not al clean.
And on that side stood last of all.
The noble prophetyssa Sybell men her call.
Let me remember now I you pray
My barayn is so thynne I deem in my heart
Some of the felyshyp that I there say.
In all this while to have ouersterte.
A benedicite none ere could I aduerte.
To thy^ke on Andrew the apostle we his cross.
Whom to forgete were a great loss.
Many one were peynted on that wall.
Whoos names come not to my remembrance
But these I marked in especyall.
And moo could I tell in countenance.
Of time but forth to show you the substance.
Of this matter in the myndys of that arbere.
Sat Doctrine colored as any crystal clear.
Crowned as I told you late here before.
Whoos apparayl wos worth tresour Infynyte
All erthyly richesse count I no more.
To that in co^paryson valewy^g the^ a myte.
Over her head houed a culuer fair and white.
Out of her byll proceeded a ^rete leme.
Downward to Doctrine like a son beme
The words of Doctrine yaue great redole^s
In swetnesse of savor to her dyscyples al.
It fer exceded myr and frankencense.
Or any other ire spyce or else galle.
And when she me espied anon she began me call.
Ad commanded morpleus y^ he should bry^ me nere
For she would me hew theffect of my desire.
She said I know the cause of thy coming.
Is to understand be mine enforma^yon.
Sensyble the matter of morp-leus his she wynge
As he has the led about in vesyon.
Wherefore now I apply thy natural reason.
Unto my words and or thou hens wend.
Thou shall it know beginning and end.
For when Colus to pluto was brought:
By his own neclygence taken prysonere.
Within the earth for he so fer sought.
Sygnyfyed is no more be that matere.
But only to show she how it does appear:
That wealth unbridled at thyneye.
Enbraseth mysre wle and often causyth folly.
For like as Colus being at his large
Streyted himself through his own lewdenesse
For he would deele where he had no charge
Right so wantons by her wyldenesse
Often sithe bring himself in dystresse
Be cause they sometime to largely deele
what may wors be suffered tha^ ouermykell weel^
By Mynos the Judge of hell desperate
May be understand goddys ryghtwysnes
That to every wight his pain deputate
Assygneth acordyng to his wyckednes
Wherefore he is called Juge of cruelnes
And as for Dyana and Neptunus compleynte
Fygured may be fools reason feynt.
For like as they made her suggestyon
To have me Colus from course of his kind
which was Impossyble to bring to correceyon
For evermore his lyberte have will the wind
In like wise fools other while be blind
wenyng to subdew with her one hand
That is ouermykell for all an hole land
But what follows thereof that shall thou here
when they were come to the bankete
The great Apollo with his sad chere
So fair and curtously began them entret
That he made her beerdys on the new get
Loo what wisdom doothto a fool
wherefore are children put to scoole
Often is it seen with sobre contenaunce
That wise men fools overcome ay
Tornyng as hem list and all her varyaunce
Change from ernest in to merry play
what were they both amendeth that day
when they were dreuen to her wits end
were they not feign to grant to be his friend
Right so fools when they have done
All that they can than be they feign
Give up head matter to oblyuyone
without reward they have no more brain
And yet full often has hit be said
when they it have foryete and set at naught
That they full dear have afterward it bought
And as for all tho that represent
To be called goddys at that banquet
Resemble false ydollys but to his intent
was Morpleus commanded thither the to fet
That thou sholdest know the manner and the get
Of the paynym law and of her believe
How false ydolatry ledeth hem by the sleue
For soon upon the worldys creacyon
when Adam and Eve had broke the precept
which clerks call the time of deuyacyon
The worldly people in paynym law slept
Till moses vnd god the tables of stone kept
In which time Poets feyned many a fable
To dyscrete Reason right acceptable
And to the intent that they should sound
To the ecres of hem the more pleasantly
That they^ should read or here they yaue they^ a ground
And addid names unto they^ naturally
Of whom they spoke and callid he^ goddis hy
Some for the strength and might of her nature
And some for her sotyll wytty conjecture
By nature thus as the seven planettes
Have her propre names by Astronomeres
But goddys were they called by old Poets
For her great feruency of werkyng in her speres
Experyence preueth this at all years
And for as other that goddys called be
For sotyll wit that shall I teache the
How they by that high name of god came
In this said time the people was so rude
That what manner creature man or woman
Could any newelte contryue and conclude
For the common well all the multitude
Of the common people a god should him call
Or a goddess after hit was fall
Of the same thing that was so new found
As Ceres for she the craft of tylthe fond
whereby more plentouously corn did habou^de
The people her called through out every land
Goddess of corn wendyng in her hand
Had layn all power of corns habundaunce
Thus were ye Paynems deceived by ignorance
In like manner Isys was called the goddess
Of fruit for she first made it multuply
By the name of graffyng and so by process
The name of Pan began to deyfy
For he first found the mean sheep to guy
Some took it also by her condycyon
As Pluto Fortune and such other done
Thus all that Poets put under couerture
Of fable the rural people hit took
Properly as act refusyng the figure
which error some of hem never forsook
Often a false myrour deceyueth a man's look
As thou may daily pryue at thine ey
Thus were the paynyms deceived generally
That seeing the dedely enemy of mankind
By his pouer premyssyue entered the ymagys
within the Temples to make the people blind
In her ydolatry standing on high stagys
In somoche whoo used dangerous passagys
Any manner way by water or be land
when hyd his sacryfyce his answer ready fond
Thus during the time of deuyacion
From Adam to Moses was ydolatry
Through the world used in common opinion
These were the goddys that thou there sy
And as for the a wayters that stood hem by
They polytyke Philosophers and Poets were
which feyned the fables y^ I speak of here
Then seized the time of deuy acyon
when Moses received that tables of stone
Entryng the time of reuocacyon
On the mount of Synay stondyng allone
God yaue him might ayene all his fone
And then began the old testament
which to the people by Moses was sent
And that time dured the Incarnacyon
Of Christ and then began it to sese
For then came the time of reconcylyacyon
Of man to god I tell the doutlese
When the sone of man put him in prese
wylfully to suffer death for mankind
In holy scripture this may thou find
This Reconcylyacyon was the time of grace
when founded was the church upon ye fair sto^e
And to holy Peter the keye delivered was
Of heaven hell dyspoyled was anon
This was mankind delivered from his fone
wnd then began the new testament
Which.iii. times a sundry dyuyded
May thou heresee if thou list behold
The first behind the in pycture in provided
The second of the lift hand show prophet old
The.iii. on the right hand here it is to y^ told
Thus have thou in vysyon the verey figure
Of these.iii. times here showed in portrayture
That is to say first of deuyacyon
From Adam to Moses recordyng scripture
Second fro Moses to the Incarnacyon
Of Christ keeps reuocacyon cure
And as for the third thou may be verrey sure
will dure from thens to the worlds end
But now the.iiii. must thou have in mind
which is callid properly ye time of pylgremage
After some and some named it otherwise
And call hit the time of dangerous passage
And some of werre that fully hit despise
But what so it be named I will the auyse
Remember it well and prynte it in thy mind
whereof the figure may thou me behind
And else remember thyselfe in thine heart
How Vice and Virtue daily them occupy
In manner one of hem him to peruerte
Another to bring him to endeles glory
Thus they continue fight for the vyctory
Hit is no need hereof to tell the more
For in this short vysyon you have seen it before
And as for Attropos grievous compleynt
Unto the goddys betokens no more
But oonly to show the how frendely constrey^t
On a steadfast heart weyeth full sore
Good will requires good will ayene therefore
Dyscorde to death has ay been a friend
For Dyscorde brings many to her end
Wherefore Death thought he would avenged be
On his trendes quarrel if that he might
For her great unkindness in somoche as she
was among hem all had so in despyte
And at that banquet made of so lyte
which caused him among he^ to cast in a bone
That found they^ gnawyng enough euerichone
Thus often is seen on friend for a another
will say and do and some time matters feyne
And also kynnysmen a cosyne or a brother
will for his alyer he have cause complain
And where that he loves do his besy pain
His friends matter as his own to take
which often sithe causes mychyll sorrow awake
Be hit right or wrong he charge not a myte
Ap toward that point he takes little head
So that he may have his froward appetyte
Per sormed he cares not how his soul speed not
Of God or Devil have such little dread
How be it one there is that lord is of all
which to every wight at last reward shall
And as for ye batayl between Virtue hold
So plainly appears to the inwardly
To make exposycyon thereof new or old
were but superfluyte there fore refuse hit I
In man shall thou find yt were kept daily
Like as you have seen it fowtyue before thy face
The pycture me behynd the weth it i^ little space
And as for Macrocosme it is no more to say
But the less world to the common intent
which applied is to man both night and day
So is man the field to which all were sent
On both parties and they that thither went
Sygnyfye no more but after the condycyon
Of every manes opinion
And as for the noble knygt Perseueraunce
which gate the field when it was almost gone
Betokens no more but the contynuance
Of virtuous living till death has auergone
who so will do rewarded is anon
As Virtue was with the crown on by
which is no more but everlasting glory
And as for Prestynacyon
That each of hem rewarded after his deserte
Is to understand no more but dampnacyon
To vycyous people is the verey scourge smert
Reward for they fro Virtue would pervert
And endelesse Joy is to hem that be elect
Rewarded and to all that follow the same sect
And as for the keys of the posternes five
which were to Morpleus rewarded for his labor
Sygnyfye not else but while man is on live
His five inward wits shall be every hour
In his sleep occupied in hele and in langour
with fantasyes tryfels Illusyons and dremes
which Poets call Morpleus stremes
And as for Residiuacyon is no more to say
But after Confession tornyng ayene to sin
which to every man retornyth sauns delay
To vycyous living again him to win
while any man lives will it never blynne
That cursed conclusyon for to bring about
But Reason with Sadness keep it still out
Here have thou properly the verrey sentence
Herd now declared of this vysyon
The pycture also yeueth clear intellygence
Thereof beholden with good dyscresyon
Look well about and take consyderasyon
As I have declared whether hit so be
A sir quoth Morpleus what told I the
Have thou properly the verey sentence
Look on yon wall yonder before
And all that time stood I in a wyre
which way first mine heart would give more
To look in a stody stood I therefore
Neuethelesse at last as Morpleus me badde
I looked forward with contenaunce sad
Where I beheld in portrayture
The manner of the field even as it was
Showed me before and every creature
On both sides being drawyng in small space
So curyously in so little a compace
In all this world was never thing wrought
Hit were Impossyble in earth to be thought
And when I had long behold that pycture
what quoth Morpleus how long shalt thou look
Daryn^ as a dastard on yon portrayture:
Come of for shame thy wit stante a croke
I heryng that mine heart to me took
Toward the fourth wall tornyng my vysage
where I saw Poets and Philosophers sage
Many one moo than at the banquet
Served the gods as I said before
Some were made standing and some in chayris set
Some lokyng on bokys as they had stodyed sore
Some drawyng almenakis and in her hondis bore
Astyrlabes taking the altytude of the son
Among whom Dyogenes sat in a tonne
And as I was lokyng on that fourth wall
Of Dyogenes beholding the image
Suddenly Doctrine began me to call
And bad me turn toward her my vysage
And so then I did with humble courage
when thynkest you she said have you not thentent
Yet of these four walls what they represent
The pycture on the first yt stands at my bake
Shows the ye present time of pylgremage
Of which before I unto the spoke
which is the time of dangerous passage
The second dyscrettly again my vysage
The time expresses of Deuyacyon
while paynyme law had the domynacyon
The thryd wall standing on my life hand
The time represents of Reuocacyon
And the fourth standing on my right hand
Determyneth the time of Reconsylyacyon
This is the effect of thy vysyon
wherefore the needs no more thereon to muse
Hit were but vein thy wits to dysuse
But during the tym of Reconsylyacyon
Thy time of pylgremage look well you spend
And then well gracyous Predestynacyon
Bring ^he to glory at thy law end
And even with that came to my mind
My first conclusyon that I was about
To have dreuen er sleep made me to lute
That is to say how Sensualyte
with Reason to acorde might be brought about
which caused me to knele down on my kne
And beseke Doctrine determyne that doubt
Oo lord god said Doctry^e can you not without
Me that conclusyon bring to an end
Far is fro the wit and ferther good mende
And even with that Death began appear
Showing himself as though that he would
His darte have occupied within that herbere
But there was none for him young nor old
Save oonly I Doctrine him told
And when I herd her with him common thus
I me withdrew behind Morpleus.
Dredyng full sore lest he with his dart.
Through Doctrynes words any entresse.
In me would have had or claymed any part
which should have caused me great heaviness
within which time and short process
Came thynder Reason and Sensualyte.
A quoth Doctrine right welcome be ye
Hit is not long sithe we of you spoke
Ye must er ye goo determyne a doubt
And even with that she the matter brake
To them and told hit every where about
I would have be thens if I had moute
For fere I looked as blake as a cole
I would have cropen in a mouse hole
what quoth Doctrine where is he now
That meu^d this matter strange and dyffuse
He is a cowarde I make mine auow
He hyded his head his mocyon to refuse
Blame him not quoth Reason always yt to use
when he sees Death so nere at his hand
Yet is his part him to withstonde
Or at the least way else fro tym flee
As long as he may who does other wise
Is an ydeote quoth Sensualytee
who dredeth not Death wise men him despise
what said Doctrine how long has this gyse
Be holden and used thus a twixe you tweyne
ye were not wont to acorde certain
yes quoth Reason in this point always
To every man have we yeuen our counsayll
Death for to flee as long as they may
Al though woe otherwise have done our trauayl
Each other to repress yet without fayll
In that point oonly dyscordeth we never
Thus condescended therein be we for ever
A ha said Doctrine then is the conclusyon
Clearly determined of the great doubt
That here was meuyd and half in derysyon
She me then called and bade me look out
Come forth she said and feere not this route
And even with that Reason and Sensualyte
And Death fro thens were vanysshed all three
Then looked I forth as Doctrine me badde
when Death was gone me thought I was bold
To show myself but yet was I sad
Me thought my doubt was not as I would
Clearly and openly declared and told
Hit sowned to me as a parable
Derke as a myhe or a feigned fable
And Doctrine my conceyte began espy
wherefore said she stand thou so still
wherein is thy thought art thou in stody
Of thy questyon have thou not thy fill
To the declared tell me thy will
Herdest thou not Reason and Sensualyte
Declared thy doubt here before the
Forsothe quoth I. I herd what they said
But nevertheless my wit is so thynne
And also of Death I was so afraid
That hit is out where hit vent ynne
And so that matter can^ I not win
without your help and benyuolence
Thereof to express the very sentence
Well quod Doctrine then give attendaunce
Unto my words and thou shall here
Openly declared the concordaunce
Atwene Sensualyte and Reason in fere
If thou take heed hit clearly does apere
How they were knette in one opinion
Both again Death held contradyccon
Which concordaunce no more sygnyfyeth
To plain understanding but in every mane
Both Sensualyte and Reason applies
Rather Death to flee then with hit to be taken
Loom that point accord they holly thane
And in all other they clearly dyscorde
Thus is trewly set thy doubtful monacorde
I heryng that kneled on my kne
And thanked her lowly for her dyscyplyne
That she wouchesafe of her benygnyte
Of tho great doubts me to enlumyne
well was she worthy to be called Doctrine
If it had be no more but for the solucyon
Of my demand and of this strange vysyon
And as I with mine head began for to bow
As me well ought to do her reverence
She thens departed I can not tell how
But within a moment gone was she thens
Then said Morpleus let us go hens
what should we here tarry lengere
Have thou not herd a general answer
To all thy materes that thou list to meue
My time draws nere that I must rest
And even therewith he took me by the sleue
And said goo we hens for that should I best
As good is enough as a great fest
Thou have seen enough hold the content
And even with yt forth with him I went
Till he had me brought agene to my bed
where he me found and then pruyely
He stale away I could not understand
were he became but suddenly
As he came he went I tell you verily
which done fro sleep I began to awake
My body all in swet began for to shake
For dread of the sight that I had seen
wenyng to me all had be true
Actuelly done where I had been
That batyll hold twene Vice and Vertew
But when I see hit hit was but a whew
A dreme a fantasy and a thing of naught
To study thereon I had no more thought
Till at the last I began me bethynke
For what cause showed was this vysyon
I knew not wherefore I took pen and ynke
And paper thereof to make mencyon
In writing taking consyderacyon
That no defaute were found in me
whereon accused I ought for to be
For slouthe that I had left hit untold
Neither by mouth nor in remembrance
Put it in writing where thorugh manyfolde
ways of accusacio^ might torn me to greuau^ce
All this I saw as I lay in a trance
But wheder it was with mine ey bodily
Or not in certain god knows and not I
That to dyscerne I purpose not to dele
So large by my will it longs not to me
were hit dreme or vysyon for your own well
All that shall hit read here rad or se
Take thereof the best and let the worst be
Try out the corn clean from the chaff
And then may ye say ye have a sure staff
To stand by at need of ye Will it hold
And walk by the way of Virtue
But al wey beware be ye young or old
That your Frewyll ay to Virtue more
Apply than to Vice the easyer may be bore
The burden of the field that ye daily fight
Again your.iii. enemies for all her great might
That is to say the Devil and the Flesh
And also the world with hith his glosyng chere
which on you looks ever new and fresshe
But he is not as he does apere
Look ye keep you ay out of his daungere
And so the vyctory shall ye obtain
Vice fro you exyled and Virtue in you reyne
And then shall ye have the tru^phall guerdon
That god reserved to every creature
Above in his celestyall mansyon
Joy and bliss in fynyte eternally to endure
whereof we say we would feign be sure
But the way thyderwarde to hold be we loathe
That often sithe causes ye good lord to be wroth
And by our deserte our habytacyon chau^geth
Fro Joy to pain and woo perpetuelly
From his glorious sight thus he us estrau^geth
For our vycyous living thorugh our own folly
wherefore let us pray to that lord of glory
while we in earth be y^ he will give us grace
So us here to guide that we may have a place
According to our Regeneracyon
which heavenly spyrytes his name to magnyfy.
which down descends for our redempcyon
Offryng himself on the cross to his fad on hy
Now benygne Ihesu that boren was of Mary
All that to this vysyon have give her audyence
Grant eternal Joy after thy last sentence
AMEN.
Here ends a little Treatise named The assemble of gods



