ENDIMION, The Man in the Moon.

Played before the Queens Majesty at Greenewich on Candlemas day at night, by
the Children of Paul's.

NOSCE TE IPSUM NE QUID NIMIS

LOVE AND LIVE



AT LONDON, Printed by I. Charlewood, for the widdowe Broom. 1591.

The Printer to the Reader.
SInce the Plays in Paul's were dissolved, there are certain Commedies come
to my hands by chance, which were presented before her Majesty at several
times by the children of Paul's. This is the first, and if in any place it
shall dysplease, I will take more pains to perfect the next. I refer it to
thy indifferent judgment to peruse, whom I would willingly please. And if
this may pass with thy good lyking, I will then go forward to publish the
rest. In the mean time, let this have thy good word for my beuere,
couragement.

Farewell
The Prologue.
MOst high and happy Princess, we must tell you a tale of the Man in the
Moon, which if it seem ridiculous for the method, or superfluous for the
matter, or for the means incredible, for three faults we can make but one
excuse. It is a tale of the Man in the Moon.

It was forbidden in old time to dispute of Chymera, because it was a fiction,
we hope in our times none will apply pastimes, because they are fancies; for
there lives none under the Sun, that knows what to make of the Man in the
Moonee. We present neither Comedy, nor Tragedy, nor story, nor any thing,
(...) whosoever hears may say this, Why here is a tale of the Man in the
Moon.

Actus primus. Scaena prima.
Endimion. Eumenides. End. I Find Eumenides in all things both variety to
content, and satietie to glut, saving only in my affections, which are so
stayed, and withal so stately, that I can neither satis-fie my heart with
love, nor mine eyes with wonder. My thoughts Eumenides are stitched to the
stars, which being as high as I can see; thou may imagine how much higher
they are then I can reach.


Eume. If you be enamored of any thing above the Moon, your thoughts are
ridiculous, for that things immortal are not subject to affections, if
allured or enchaunted with these transitory things under the Moon, you show
your self senseless, to attribute such lofty tytles, to such love trifles.


End. My love is placed neither under the Moon nor above.


Eum. I hope you be not sotted upon the man in the Moon.


End. No but settled, either to die, or possess the Moon herself.


Eum. Is Endimion mad, or do I mistake? do you love the Moon Endimion?


End. Eumenides the Moon.


Eum. There was never any so peevish to imagine the Moon either capable of
affection, or shape of a Mistress: for as impossible it is to make love fit to
her humor which no man knows, as a coat to her form, which continues not
in one bigness whilst she is measuring. Cease of Endimion to feed so much
upon fancies. That melancholy blood must be purged, which draws you to a
dotage no less miserable then monstrous.


End. My thoughts have no veins, and yet unless they be let blood, I shall
perrish.


Eum. But they have vanities, which being reformed, you may be restored.


End. O fair Cynthia, why do others term thee unconstant, whom I have ever
found immovable? Injurious time, corrupt manners, unkind men, who finding a
constancy not to be matched, in my sweet Mistress, have christened her with the
name of wavering, waxing, and waning. Is she inconstant that keeps a settled
course, which since her first creation alters not one minute in her moving?
There is nothing thought more admirable, or commendable in the sea, then the
ebbing and flowing, and shall the Moon, from whom the Sea takes this virtue,
be accounted fickle for increasing, and decreasing? Flowers in their buds, are
nothing worth till they be blown, nor blossoms accounted till they be ripe
fruit, and shall we then say they be changeable, for that they grow from
seeds to leaves, from leaves to buds, from buds to their perfection? then, why
be not twigs that become trees, children that become men, and Mornings that
grow to Euenings, termed wavering, for that they continue not at one stay? I
but Cynthia, being in her fulness, decays, as not delighting in her greatest
beauty, or withering when she should be most honored. When malice cannot
object any thing, folly will, making that a vice, which is the greatest virtue.
What thing (my Mistress excepted) being in the pride of her beauty, and latter
minute of her age, that waxes young again? Tell me Eumenides, what is he
that having a Mistress of ripe years, and infinite virtues, great honors, and
unspeakable beauty, but would wish that she might grow tender again?
getting youth by years, and never decaying beauty, by time, whose fair face,
neither the Summers blase can scorch, nor VVinters blast chappe, nor the
numbering of years breed altering of colors. Such is my sweet Cynthia, whom
time cannot touch, because she is divine, nor will offend because she is
delicate. O Cynthia, if thou should always continue at thy fulness, both
Gods and men would conspire to ravish thee. But thou to abate the pride of our
affections, do detract from thy perfections, thinking it sufficient, if once
in a month we enjoy a glymse of thy majesty, and then, to increase our
greefes, thou do decrease thy glemes, coming out of thy royal robes,
wherewith thou dazelist our eyes, down into thy swath clowtes, beguiling our
eyes. And then


Eum. Stay there Endimion, thou that committest Idolatry, wilt straight
blaspheme, if thou be suffered. Sleep would do thee more good then speech:
the Moon hears thee not, or if she do, regards thee not.


End. Vain Eumenides, whose thoughts never grow higher the^ the crown of thy
head. Why troublest thou me, having neither head to conceive the cause of my
love, or a heart to receive the impressions? follow thou thine own fortunes,
which creep on the earth, and suffer me to fly to mine, whose fall though it
be desperate, yet shall it come by daring. Farewell


Eum. Without doubt Endimion is bewitched, otherwise in a man of such rare
virtues, there could not harbor a mind of such extreme madness. I will follow
him, least in this fancy of the Moon, he deprive himself of the sight of the
Sun.

Exit.
Actus primus. Scaena secunda.
Tellus. Floscula. Tellus. Treacherous and most periurde Endimion, is Cynthia
the sweetness of thy life, and the bitterness of my death? What revenge may be
devised so full of shame, as my thoughts are replenished with malice? Tell me
Floscula if falsenes in love can possibly be punished with extremity of hate.
As long as sword, fire, or poison may be hired, no traitor to my love shall
live unrevenged. Were thy oaths without number, thy kisses without measure,
thy sighs without end, forged to deceive a poor credulous virgin, whose
simplicity had been worth thy favor and better fortune? If the Gods sit
unequal beholders of injuries, or laughers at Lovers deceipts, then let
mischief be as well forgiven in women, as perjury winked at in men.


Flosc. Madame, if you would compare the state of Cynthia with your own, and
the height of Endimion his thoughts, with the meandness of your fortune, you
would rather yield then contend, being between you and her no comparison, and
rather wonder then rage at the greatness of his mind, being affected with a
thing more then mortal.


Tellus No comparison Floscula? and why so? is not my beauty divine, whose body
is decked with fair flowers, and veins are Vines, yielding sweet liquor to
the dullest sprits, whose ears are Corn, to bring strength, and whose hears
are grass, to bring abundance? Does not Frankincense, and Myrthe breath out of
my nostrils, and all the sacrifice of the Gods, breed in my bowels? Infinite
are my creatures, without which, neither thou nor Endimion, nor any could love,
or live.


Flosc. But know you not fair Lady, that Cynthia governs all things? Your
grapes would be but dry husks, your Corn but chafe, and all your virtues
vain, were it not Cynthia that preserves the one in the bud, and nourishes
the other in the blade, and by her influence both comfort all things, and by
her authority commands all creatures; Suffer then Endimion to follow his
affections, though to obtain her be impossible, and let him flatter himself
in his own imaginations, because they are immortal.


Tellus Loath I am Endimion thou should die, because I love thee well, and
that thou should live it greeueth me, because thou love Cynthia too well.
In these extremities what shall I do? Floscula no more words, I am resolved.
He shall neither live, nor die.


Flosc. A strange practice, if it be possible.


Tellus Yes, I will entangle him in such a sweet net, that he shall neither
find the means to come out, nor desire it. All allurements of pleasure will I
cast before his eyes, insomuch that he shall slake that love which he now
voweth to Cynthia, and burn in mine, of which he seems careless. In this
languishing, between my amorous devises, and his own loose desires, there
shall such dissolute thoughts take root in his head, and over his heart grow so
thick a skin, that neither hope of preferment, nor fear of punishment, nor
counsel of the wisest, nor company of the worthiest, shall alter his humor, nor
make him once to think of his honor.


Flosc. A revenge incredible, and if it may be, unnatural.


Tellus. He shall know the malice of a woman, to have neither mean, nor
end, and of a woman deluded in love, to have neither rule, nor reason. I can
do it, I must, I will. All his virtues will I shadow with vices, his person
(ah sweet person) shall he deck with such rich Roabes, as he shall forget it
is his own person, his sharp wit (ah wit too sharp, that has cut off all my
joys) shall he use, inflattering of my face, and devising Sonnets in my
favor. The prime of his youth and pride of his time, shall be spent in
melancholy passions, careless behavior, untamed thoughts, and unbridled
affections.


Flosc. When this is done what then, shall it continue till his death, or shall
he doat for ever in this delight?


Tellus. Ah Floscula, thou rendest my heart in sunder, in putting me in
remembrance of the end.


Flosc. Why if this be not the end, all the rest is to no end.


Tellus Yet suffer me to imitate Juno, who would turn Jupiters lovers to
beasts on the earth, though she knew afterward they should be stars in
heaven.


Flosc. Affection that is bred by enchauntment, is like a flower that is
wrought in silk, in color and form most like, but nothing at all in
substance or savor.


Tellus It shall suffice me if the world talk that I am favored of Endimion.


Flosc. Well, use your own will, but you shall find that love gotten with
witchcraft, is as unpleasant, as fish, taken with medicines unwholesome.


Tellus Floscula, they that be so poor that they have neither net nor hook,
will rather poison dowe then pyne with hunger: and she that is so oppressed with
love, that she is neither able with beauty, nor wit to obtain her freende,
will rather use unlawful means, then try intolerable pains. I will do it.

Exit.
Flosc. Then about it. Poor Endimion, what traps are laid for thee, because
thou honor one that all the world wondreth at. And what plots are cast to
make thee unfortunate, that studiest of all men to be the faithfullest.

Exit.
Actus primus. Scaena tertia.
Dares, Samias, Sir Tophas, Epiton. Dares Now our Masters are in love up to
the ears, what have we to do, but to be in knavery, up to the crowns.


Samias O that we had Sir Tophas that brave Squire, in the midst of our mirth,
and ecce autem, will you see the devil?


Enter Sir Tophas. Tophas Epi.


Epi. Here sir.


Tophas I brook not this idle humor of love, it tickleth not my liver, from
whence the Loue-mongers in former age seemed to infer they should proceed.


Epi. Love sir may lie in your lunges, and I think it does, and that is the
cause you blow, and are so pursie.


Top. Tush boy, I think it but some devise of the Poet to get money.


Epi. A Poet? what is that?


Tophas Do thou not know what a Poet is?


Epi. No.


Top. Why fool, a Poet is as much as one should say, a Poet. But soft, yonder
be two Wrennes, shall I shoot at them?


Epi. They are two lads.


Tophas Larkes or wrennes, I will kill them.


Epi. Larkes? are you blind? they are two little Boys.


Top. Birds, or boys, they are both but a pittance for my breakefast,
therefore have at them, for their brains must as it were imbroder my bolts.


Sam. Stay your courage valiant Knight, for your wisdom is so weary that it
stays it self.


Dares Why Sir Tophas have you forgotten your old friends?


Top. Friends? Nego argumentum.


Sam. And why not friends?


Top. Because Amicitia (as in old Annuals we find) is inter pares, now my
pretty companions, you shall see how unequal you be to me, but I will not cut
you quite off, you shall be my half friends, for reaching to my middle, so
far as from the ground to the wast I will be your friend.


Dares Learnedly. But what shall become of the rest of your body, from the
wast to the crown?


Top. My children quod supra vos nihil ad vos, you must think the rest
immortal, because you cannot reach it.


Epi. Nay I tell ye my Master is more then a man.


Dar. And thou less then a mouse.


Top. But what be you two?


Sam. I am Samias, page to Endimion.


Dar. And I Dares, page to Eumenides.


Tophas Of what occupation are your Masters.


Dares Occupation, you clown, why they are honorable, and warriers.


Top. Then are they my prentises.


Dares Thine, and why so?


Tophas I was the first that ever devised war, and therefore by Mars himself
given me for my Arms a whole Armorie, and thus I go as you see, clothed with
Artillary, it is not Silks (milksops) nor Tyssues, nor the fine wool of
Cares, but iron, steel, swords, flame, shot, terror, clamor, blood, and ruin,
that rocks a sleep my thoughts, which never had any other cradle, but
cruelty. Let me see, do you not bleed?


Dares Why so?


Tophas Commonly my words wound.


Samias What then do your blows?


Tophas Not only confound, but also confound.


Samias How dare thou come so near thy Master Epi? Sir Tophas spare us.


Tophas You shall live. You Samias because you are little. You Dares, because
you are no bigger, and both of you, because you are but two; for commonly I kill
by the dosen, and have for every particular adversary, a peculiar weapon.


Samias May we know the use for our better skyll in war?


Tophas You shall. Here is a burbolt for the ugly beast the Blackbird.


Dares A cruel sight.


Tophas Here is the Muskit, for the untamed, (or as the vulgar sort term it)
the wild Mallard.


Samias O desperate attempt.


Epi. Nay my Master will match them.


Dares I if he catch them.


Tophas Here is a spear and shield, and both necessary, the one to conquer,
the other to subdue, or overcome the terrible Trowte, which although he be
under the water, yet tying a string to the top of my spear, and an engine of
iron to the end of my line, I overthrow him, and then herein I put him.


Samias O wonderful war. Dares, did thou ever hear such a dolt?


Dares All the better, we shall have good sport hereafter, if we can get
leisure.


Samias Leisure, I will rather loose my Masters service then his company,
look how he stroutes; But what is this, call you it your sword?


Tophas No, it is my Simiter, which I by construction often studying to be
compendious, call my Smyter.


Dares What, are you also learned sir?


Tophas Learned? I am all Mars and Ars.


Samias Nay you are all Mass and Ass.


Tophas Mock you me? You shall both suffer, yet with such weapons, as you
shall make choice of the weapon wherewith you shall perrish. Am I all a mass
or lump, is there no proportion in me? Am I all Ass? is there no wit in me.
Epi, prepare the^ to the slaughter.


Samias I pray sir hear us speak, we call you Mass, which your learning does
well understand, is all Man, for Mas maris is a man. Then As (as you know) is
a weight, and we for your virtues account you a weight.


Tophas The Latin has saved your lives, the which a world of silver could not
have ransomde. I understand you, and pardon you.


Dares Well Sir Tophas we bid you farewell, and at our next meeting, we will be
ready to do you service.


Tophas Samias I thank you. Dares I thank you, but especially I thank you
both.


Samias Wisely. Come, next time we will have some pretty Gentle-women with us
to walk, for without doubt with them he will be very dainty.


Dares Come let us see what our Masters do, it is high time.


Exeunt. Tophas Now will I march into the field, where if I cannot encounter
with my foul enemies, I will withdraw my self to the River, and there
fortify for fish: for there rests no minute free from fight.

Exit.
Actus primus. Saena quarta.
Tellus, Floscula, Dipsas. Tellus Behold Floscula, we have met with the Woman
by chance that we sought for by travel; I will break my mind to her
without ceremony or circumstance, least we loose that time in advise, that
should be spent in execution.


Flosc. Use your discretion, I will in this case, neither give counsel nor
consent, for there cannot be a thing more monstrous, then to force affection
by sorcery, neither do I imagine any thing more impossible.


Tellus Tush Floscula, in obtaining of love, what impossibilities will I not
try? and for the winning of Endimion, what impieties will I not practice?
Dipsas, whom as many honor for age, as wonder at for cunning, listen in few
words to my tale, and answer in one word to the purpose, for that neither my
burning desire can afforde long speech, nor the short time I have to stay many
delays. Is it possible by herbs, stones, spells, incantantation,
enchauntment, exorcismes, fire, metals, plannets, or any practice to plant
affection where it is not, and to supplant it where it is?


Dipsas Fair Lady, you may imagine that these horie hears are not void of
experience, nor the great name that goes of my c^nning to be without cause. I
can darken the Sun by my skill, and remove the Moon out of her course; I can
restore youth to the aged, and make hills without bottoms; there is nothing that
I can not do, but that only which you would have me do, and therein I differ
from the Gods, that I am not able to rule hearts, for were it in my power to
place affection by appointment, I would make such evil appetites, such
inordinate lusts, such cursed desires, as all the world should be filled both
with supersticious heates, and extreme love.


Tellus Unhappy Tellus, whose desires are so desperate, that they are neither
to be conceived of any creature, nor to be cured by any art.


Dipsas This I can, breed slacknes in love, though never root it out. What is
he whom you love, and what she that he honors?


Tellus Endimion, sweet Endimion is he that has my heart, and Cynthia, too too
fair Cynthia, the miracle of Nature, of time, of Fortune, is the Lady that
he delights in, and dotes on every day, and dies for ten thousand times a day.


Dipsas Would you have his love, either by absence of sickness aslaked. Would
you that Cynthia should mistrust him, or be jealous of him without color?


Tellus It is the only thing I crave, that seeing my love to Endimion
unspotted, cannot be accepted, his truth to Cynthia (though it be
unspeakable) may be suspected.


Dipsas I will undertake it, and overtake him, that all his love shall be
doubted of, and therefore become desperate: but this will wear out with time,
that treads all things down but truth.


Tellus Let us go.


Dipsas I follow.


Exeunt. Actus secundus. Scaena prima.
Endimion, Tellus. End. O Fair Cynthia, o unfortunate Endimion. Why was not
thy birth as high as thy thoughts, or her beauty less then heavenly? or why
are not thine honors as rare as her beauty? or thy fortunes as great as thy
deserts? Sweet Cynthia, how would thou be pleased, how possessed? will labors
(patient of all extremities) obtain thy love? There is no Mountain so steep
that I will not climb, no monster so cruel that I will not tame, no action so
desperate that I will not attempt. Desire thou the passions of love, the sad
and melancholy moodes of perplexed minds, the not to be expressed torments of
racked thoughts? Behold my sad tears, my deep sighs, my hollow eyes, my
broken sleeps, my heavy countenance. Would thou have me vowde only to
thy beauty and consume every minute of time in thy service, remember my
solitary life, almost these seven years, whom have I entertained but mine
own thoughts, and thy virtues? What company have I used but contemplation?
Whom have I wondered at but thee? Nay whom have I not contemned, for thee? Have
I not crept to those on whom I might have trodden, only because thou did
shine upon them? Have not injuries been sweet to me, if thou vouchsafest I
should bear them? Have I not spent my golden years in hopes, waxing old with
wishing, yet wishing nothing but thy love. With Tellus, fair Tellus, have I
dissembled, using her but as a cloak for mine affections, that others seeing
my mangled and disordered mind, might think it were for one that loves me,
not for Cynthia, whose perfection allows no companion, nor comparison.

In the midst of these distempred thoughts of mine, thou art not only jealous
of my truth, but careless, suspicious, and secure: which strange humor makes my
mind as desperate as thy conceits are doubtful. I am none of those Wolves
that bark most, when thou shynest brightest. But that fish, (thy fish Cynthia
in the floode Aranis) which at thy waxing is as white as the driven snow, and
at thy wayning, as black as deepest darkness. I am that Endimion (sweet
Cynthia) that have carried my thoughts in equal balance with my actions,
being always as free from imagining ill, as enterprysing; That Endimion, whose
eyes never esteemed any thing fair, but thy face, whose tongue termed nothing
rare but thy virtues, and whose heart imagined nothing miraculous, but thy
government. Yea that Endimion, who diuorsing himself from the amiablenes of
all Ladies, the bravery of all Courts, the company of al men, has chosen in
a solitary Cell to live, only by feeding on thy favor, accounting in the
world (but thy self) nothing excellent, nothing immortal; thus may thou
see every vain sinew, muscle, and artery of my love, in which there is no
flattery, nor deceit; error, nor art. But soft, here comes Tellus, I must
turn my other face to her like Ianus, least she be as suspicious as Juno.


Enter Tellus. Tellus Yonder I epsy Endimion, I will seem to suspect nothing
but sooth him, that seeing I cannot obtain the depth of his love, I may learn
the height of his dissembling; Floscula and Dipsas, with-drawe your selves out
of our sight, yet be within the hearing of our saluting; How now Endimion,
always solitary? no company but your own thoughts? no freende but
melancholy fancies?


Endimion You know (fair Tellus) that the sweet remembrance of your love, is
the only companion of my life, and thy presence, my paradise, so that I am not
alone when no body is with me, and in heaven it self when thou art with me.


Tellus Then you love me Endimion.


End. Or else I live not Tellus.


Tellus Is it not possible for you Endimion, to dissemble?


End. Not Tellus, unless I could make me a woman.


Tellus Why, is dissembling joined to their sex inseparable? as heat to fire,
heaviness to earth, moisture to water, thinness to air?


End. No, but found in their sex, as common, as spots upon Doves, moles upon
faces, Caterpillars upon sweet apples, cobwebs upon fair windows.


Tellus Do they all dissemble?


Endimion All but one.


Tellus Who is that?


End. I dare not tell. For if I should say you, then would you imagine my
flattery to be extreme, if another, then would you think my love to be but
indifferent.


Tellus You will be sure I shall take no vantage of your words. But in sooth
Endimion, without more ceremonies, is it not Cynthia?


Endimion You know Tellus, that of the Gods we are forbidden to dispute,
because their dieties come not within the compass of our reasons, and of
Cynthia we are allowed not to talk but to wonder, because her virtues are not
within the reach of our capacities.


Tellus Why, she is but a woman.


End. No more was Venus.


Tellus She is but a virgin.


Endimion No more was Vesta.


Tellus She shall have an end.


Endim. So shall the world.


Tellus Is not her beauty subject to time?


End. No more then time is to standing still.


Tellus Will thou make her immortal?


End. No, but incomparable.


Tellus Take heed Endimion, lest like the Wrastler in Olimpia, that striving
to lift an impossible weight, caught an incurable strain, thou by fixing thy
thoughts above thy reach, fall into a disease without al recure? But I see thou
art now in love with Cynthia.


Endim. No Tellus, thou know that the stately Cedar, whose top reaches
unto the clouds, never boweth his head to the shrubs that grow in the valley,
nor Iuie that climeth up by the Elm, can ever get hold of the beams of the
Sun; Cynthia I honor in all humility, whom none ought, or dare adventure to
love, whose affections are immortal, and virtues infinite. Suffer me therefore
to gaze on the Moon, at whom, were it not for thy self, I would die with
wondering.


Exeunt. Actus secundus. Scaena secunda.
Dares, Samias, Scintilla, Fauilla. Dares Come Samias, did thou ever hear
such a sighing, the one for Cynthia, the other for Semele, and both for moon
shine in the water?


Sam. Let them sigh, and let us sing, how say you gentlewomen, are not our
Masters too far in love?


Scint. Their tongues happily are dipped to the root in amorous words and sweet
discourses, but I think their hearts are scarce tipped on the side, with
constant desires.


Dares How say you Fauilla, is not love a lurcher, that takes men's stomachs
away that they cannot eat, their spleen that they cannot laugh, their hearts
that they cannot fight, their eyes that they cannot sleep, and leaves nothing
but lyuers to make nothing but Lovers?


Fauil. Away peevish boy, a rod were better under thy girdle, than love in
thy mouth: it will be a forward Cock that croweth in the shell.


Dares Alas good old gentlewoman, how it becomes you to be grave,


Scint. Fauilla though she be but a spark, yet is she fire.


Fauil. And you Scintilla be not much more then a spark, though you would be
esteemed a flame.


Sam. It were good sport to see the fight between two sparks.


Dares Let them to it, and we will warm us by their words.


Scint. You are not angry Fauilla?


Faui. That is Scintilla, as you list to take it.


Sam. That, that.


Scnit. This it is to be matched with girls, who coming but yesterday from
making of babies, would before to morrow be accounted Matrons.


Fauil. I cry your Matronship mercy; because your Pantables be higher with
cork, therefore your feet must needs be higher in the insteppes: you will be
mine elder, because you stand upon a stool, and I on the flower.


Sam. Good, good.


Dar. Let them alone, and see with what countenance they will become friends.


Scint. Nay, you think to be the wyser, because you mean to have the last
word.


Sam. Step between them least they scratch. In faith gentlewomen, seeing we
came out to be merry, let not your iarring mar our iestes: be friends, how
say you?


Scint. I am not angry, but it spited me to see how short she was.


Fauil. I meant nothing, till she would needs cross me.


Dares Then so let it rest.


Scint. I am agreede.


Fauil. And I, yet I never took any thing so unkindly in my life.


Scint. Tys I have the cause, that never offered the occasion.


Dares Excellent and right like a woman.


Sam. A strange sight to see water come out of fire.


Dares It is their property, to carry in their eyes, fire, and water, tears
and torches, and in their mouths, honey and gall.


Scint. You will be a good one if you live, but what is yonder formal fellow?


Enter Sir Tophas. Dares Sir Tophas, sir Tophas, of whom we told you: if you
be good wenches make as though you love him, and wonder at him.


Fauil. We will do our parts.


Dares But first let us stand aside, and let him use his garb, for all
consists in his gracing.


Tophas Epi.


Epi. At hand sir.


Tophas. How likest thou this Martial life, where nothing but blood
besprinkleth our bosoms? Let me see be our enemies fat?


Epi. Passing fat: and I would not change this life to be a Lord, and your
self passes all comparison, for other Captains kill and beat, and there is
nothing you kill, but you also eat.


Tophas I will draw out their guts out of their bellies, and tear the flesh
with my teeth, so mortal is my hate, and so eger my vnstaunched stomach.


Epi. My master thinks himself the valiantest man in the world if he kill a
wren: so warlike a thing he accompteth to take away life, though it be from a
Lark.


Tophas Epi, I find my thoughts to swell, and my spirit to take wings, in
so much that I cannot continue within the compass of so slender combats.


Fauil. This passes.


Scint. Why is he not mad?


Sam. No, but a little vain glorious.


Tophas. Epi.


Epi. Sir.


Tophas I will encounter that black and cruel enemy, that bears rough and
vntewed locks upon his body, whose Sire throws down the strongest walls,
whose legs are as many as both ours, on whose head are placed most horrible
horns, by nature, as a defense from all harms.


Epi. What mean you Master to be so desperate?


Tophas Honor inciteth me, and very hunger compels me.


Epi. What is that monster?


Tophas The Monster Ouis. I have said, let thy wits work.


Epi. I cannot imagine it; yet let me see, a black enemy with rough locks it
may be a sheep, and Ouis is a sheep: his Sire so strong, a Ram is a sheep
Sire: that being also an engine of war, horns he has, and four legs, so
has a sheep: without doubt this monster is a black sheep; Is it not a
sheep that you mean?


Tophas Thou have hit it, that Monster will I kill and sup with.


Sam. Come let us take him off Sir Tophas all hail.


Tophas Welcome children, I seldom cast mine eyes so low as to the crowns of
your heads, and therefore pardon me that I spoke not all this while.


Dares No harm done, here be fair Ladies come to wonder at your person, your
valor, your wit, the report whereof, has made them careless of their own
honors, to glut their eyes and hearts upon yours.


Tophas Report cannot but iniure me, for that not knowing fully what I am, I
fear she has been a niggard in her praises.


Scint. No gentle knight, Report has been prodigal, for she has left you no
equal, nor her self credit, so much has she told, yet no more than we now
see.


Dares A good wench.


Fauil. If there remain as much pity toward women, as there is in you
courage against your enemies, the^ shall we be happy, who hearing of your
person, came to see it, and seeing it, are now in love with it.


Tophas Love me Ladies? I easily believe it, but my tough heart receives no
impression with sweet words. Mars may pearce it, Venus shall not paint on it.


Fauil. A cruel saying.


Sam. There Is a girl.


Dares Will you cast these Ladies away, and all for a little love? do but
speak kindly.


Tophas There comes no soft syllable within my lips, custom has made my
words bloody, and my heart barbarous: that pelting word love, how watrish it is
in my mouth, it carries no sound, hate, horror, death, are speeches that
nourish my spirits. I like honey but I care not for the bees, I delight in
music but I love not to play on the bagpipes, I can vouchsafe to hear the
voice of women, but to touch their bodies I disdain it, as a thing childish,
and fit for such men as can digest nothing but milk.


Scint. A hard heart, shall we dye for your love, and find no remedy.


Tophas. I have already taken a surfeit.


Epi. Good master pity them.


Tophas Pity them Epi? no I do not think that this breast shall be pestred
with such a foolish passion. What is that the gentlewoman carries in a chain?


Epi. Why it is a Squirrill.


Tophas A Squirril? O Gods what things are made for money.


Dares. Is not this gentleman ouerwise?


Fauil. I could stay all day with him, if I feared not to be shent.


Scint. Is it not possible to meet again.


Dares Yes at any time.


Fauil. Then let us hasten home.


Scint. Sir Tophas, the God of war deal better with you, than you do with
the God of love.


Fauil. Our love we may dissemble, digest we cannot, but I doubt not but time
will hamper you, and help us.


Tophas I defy time, who has no interest in my heart: come Epi. let me to the
battle with that hideous beast, love is pappe and has no relish in my taste,
because it is not terrible.


Dares Indeed a black sheep is a perrilous beast, but let us in till another
time.


Fauil. I shall long for that time.


Exeunt. Actus secundus. Scaena tertia.
Endimion, Dipsas, Bagoa. End. No rest Endimion? still uncertain how to settle
thy steps by day, or thy thoughts by night? thy truth is measured by thy
fortune, and thou art judged unfaithful because thou art unhappy. I will see
if I can beguile my self with sleep, and if no slumber will take hold in my
eyes, yet will I embrace the golden thoughts in my head, and wish to melt by
musing: that as Ebone, which no fire can scorch, is yet consumed with sweet
savors, so my heart which cannot be bent by the hardness of fortune, may be
bruised by amorous desires, On yonder bank never grew any thing but Lunary,
and hereafter I will never have any bed but that bank. O Endimion, Tellus was
fair, but what avails Beauty without wisdom? Nay Endimion she was wise,
but what avails wisdom without honor? She was honorable Endimion, belie
her not, I but how obscure is honor without fortune? Was she not fortunate
whom so many followed? Yes, yes, but base is fortune without Majesty: thy
Majesty Cynthia all the world knows and wondereth at, but not one in the
world that can immitate it or comprehend it. No more Endimion, sleep or dye;
Nay die for to sleep it is impossible, and yet I know not how it comes to
pass, I feel such a heaviness both in mine eyes and heart, yt I am suddenly
benumbed, yea in every iont: it may be weariness, for when did I rest? it may
be deep melancholy, for when did I not sigh? Cynthia, I so, I say Cynthia.


He falls a sleep. Dipsas Little do thon know Endimion when thou shall
wake, for had thou placed thy heart as low in love, as thy head lies now in
sleep, thou might have commanded Tellus, whom now in stead of a Mistress,
thou shall find a tomb. These eyes must I seal up by Art, not Nature, which
are to be opened neither by Art nor Nature. Thou that laist down with golden
locks, shall not awake until they be turned to silver hairs: and that chin,
on which scarcely appears soft down, shall be filled with brissles as hard as
broom: thou shall sleep out thy youth and flowring time, and become dry hay
before thou knew thy self green grass, and ready by age to step into the
grave when thou wakest, that was youthful in the Court when thou laidst thee
down to sleep. The malice of Tellus has brought this to pass, which if she
could not have entreated of me by fair means, she would have commanded by
menacing, for from her gather we all our simples to maintain our sorceries.
Fan with this hemlocke over his face, and sing the enchantment for sleep,
whilst I go in and finish those ceremonies that are required in our Art: take
heed ye touch not his face, for the Fan is so seasoned that who so it
touches with a leaf shall presently dye, and over whom the vvind of it
breaths, he shall sleep for ever.

Exit.
Bagoa Let me alone, I will be careful. What hap had thou Endimion to
come under the hands of Dipsas. O fair Endimion, how it grieueth me that that
fair face must be turned to a withered skin, and taste the pains of death
before it feel the reward of love. I fear Tellus will repent that which the
heavens themselves seemed to rewe, but I hear Dipsas coming, I dare not
repine, least she make me pine, and rock me into such a deep sleep, that I
shall not awakd to my marriage.


Enter Dipsas. Dipsas How now, have you finished?


Bagoa Yea.


Dipsas Well then let us in, and see that you do not so much as whisper that I
did this, for if you do, I will turn thy hairs to Adders, and all thy teeth
in thy head to tongues, come away, come away.


Exeunt. Actus tertius. Scaena prima.
Cynthia, three Lords, Tellus. Cynth. IS the report true, that Endimion is
stricken into such a dead sleep, that nothing can either wake him or move him?


Eum. Too true Madame, and as much to be pitied as wondered at.


Tellus As good sleep and do no harm, as wake and do no good.


Cynth. What makes you Tellus to be so short? the time was Endimion only was.


Eum. It is an old saying Madame, that a waking dog does a far off bark at
a sleeping Lion.


Sem. It were good Eumenides that you took a nappe with your friend for your
speech begins to be heavy


Eum. Contrary to your nature Semele, which has been always accounted light.


Cynth. What have we hear before my face, these unseemly and malepart
ouerthwarts? I will tame your tongues, and your thoughts, and make your
speeches answerable to your duties, and your conceits fit for my dignity,
else will I banish you both my person and the world.


Eum. Pardon I humbly ask; but such is my unspotted faith to Endimion, that
whatsoever seems a needle to prick his finger, is a dagger to wound my heart.


Cynth. If you be so dear to him, how happens it you neither go to see
him, nor search for remedy for him?


Eum. I have seen him to my grief, and sought recure with despair, for that
I cannot imagine who should restore, him that is the wounder to all men: your
highness, on whose hands the compass of the earth is at command, (though not
in possession) may show your self both worthy your sex, your nature, and your
favor, if you redeem that honorable Endimion, whose ripe years foretell rare
virtues, and whose vnmellowed conceits promise ripe counsel.


Cyn. I have had trial of Endimion, and conceive greater assurance of his age,
then I could hope of his youth.


Tell. But timely Madam crookes that tree that will be a camock, and young it
pricks that will be a thorn, and therefore he that began without care to
settle his life, it is a sign without amendment he will end it.


Cynth. Presumptuous gyrle, I will make thy tongue an example of unrecoverable
displeasure, Corsites carry her to the Castle in the Deserte, there to remain
and weaue.


Cors. Shall she work stories or poetries?


Cynthia It skylleth not which, go to, in both, for she shall find examples
infinite in either, what punishment long tongues have. Eumenides, if either the
Soothsayers in Egypt, or the Enchaunters in Thessaly, or the Philosophers in
Greece, or all the Sages of the world, can find remedy, I will procure it,
therefore dispatch with all speed: you Eumenides into Thessalie. You Zontes
into Greece, (because you are acquainted in Athens.) You Panthon to Egypt,
saying that Cynthia sends, and if you will, commands.


Eum. On bowed knee I give thanks, and with wings on my legs, I fly for
remedy.


Zon. We are ready at your highness command, and hope to return to your full
content.


Cyn. It shall never be said that Cynthia, whose mercy and goodness fills the
heavens with joys, and the world with meruailes, will suffer either Endimion
or any to perrish, if he may be protected.


Eum. Your Majesty's words have been always deeds, and your deeds virtues.


Exeunt. Actus tertius. Scaena secunda.
Corsites, Tellus, Cors. Here is the Castle (fair Tellus) in which you must
weaue, till either time end your days, or Cinthia her displeasure. I am sorry
so fair a face should be subject to so hard a fortune, and that the flower
of beauty, which is honored in Courts, should here wither in prison.


Tellus Corsites, Cynthia may restrain the liberty of my body, of my
thoughts she cannot, and therefore do I esteem my self most free, though I
am in greatest bondage.


Cors. Can you then feed on fancy, and subdue the malice of envy by the
sweetness of imagination.


Tellus Corsites, there is no sweeter music to the miserable then despair,
and therefore the more bitterness I feel, the more sweetness I find, for so
vain were liberty, and so unwelcome the following of higher fortune, that I
choose rather to pine in this Castle, then to be a Prince in any other Court.


Cors. A humor contrary to your years, and nothing agreeable to your sex: the
one commonly allured with delights, the other always with sovereignty.


Tellus I marvel Corsites that you being a Captain, who should sound nothing
but terror, and suck nothing but blood, can find in your heart to talk such
smooth words, for that it agrees not with your calling to use words so soft,
as that of love.


Cors. Lady, it were unfit of wars to discourse with women, into whose minds
nothing can sinck but smoothnes; besides, you must not think that Soldiers
be so rough hewne, or of such knottie mettle, that beauty cannot allure, and
you being beyond perfection enchaunt.


Tellus Good Corsites talk not of love, but let me to my labor: the little
beauty I have, shall be bestowed on my Loome, which I now mean to make my
Lover.


Cors. Let us in, and what favor Corsites can show, Tellus shall command.


Tellus The only favor I desire, is now and then to walk.


Exeunt. Actus tertius. Scaena tertia.
Sir Tophas, and Epi. Tophas Epi.


Epi. Here sir.


Tophas Vnrigge me. Hey ho.


Epi. What Is that?


Tophas An interiection, whereof some are of mourning: as eho, vah.


Epi. I understand you not.


Tophas Thou see me.


Epi. I.


Tophas Thou hearst me.


Epi. I.


Tophas Thou feel me.


Epi. I.


Tophas And not vnderstand'st me?


Epi. No.


Tophas Then am I but three quarters of a Nowne substantive. But alas Epi, to
tell thee the troth I am a Nowne Adjective.


Epi. Why?


Tophas Because I cannot stand without another.


Epi. Who is that?


Tophas Dipsas.


Epi. Are you in love?


Top. No: but love has as it were milkt my thoughts, and drained from my heart
the very substance of my accustomed courage; it works in my head like new
Wine, so as I must hoope my skonce with iron, least my head break, and so I
bewray my brains: but I pray thee first discover me in all parts, that I may
be like a Lover, and then will I sigh and die. Take my gunne, and give me a
gown: Caedant arma togae.


Epi. Here.


Tophas Take my sword and shield, and give me beard, brush, and Cyssers:
bella gerant alii tu pari semper ama.


Epi. Will you be trimd sir?


Tophas Not yet: for I feel a contention within me, whether I shall frame the
bodkin beard or the bush. But take my pike and give me pen: dicere que puduit,
scribere iussit amor.


Epi. I will furnish you sir.


Tophas Now for my bow and bolts, give me ynke and paper, for my Smiter a
penknife: for Scalpellum calami, atramentum, charta libelli, sint semper
studiis arma parata meis.


Epi. Sir will you give over wars, and play with that babble called love?


Tophas Give over wars? no Epi, Militat omnis amans, et habet sua castea
Cupido.


Epi. Love has made you very eloquent, but your face is nothing fair.


Tophas Non formosus erat, sed erat facundus Ulysses.


Epi. Nay I must seek a new Master if you can speak nothing but verses.


Tophas Quicquid conabar dicere versus erat. Epi, I feel all Ovid de art
amandi lie as heavy at my heart as a load of logges. O what a fine thin hair
has Dipsas, what a pretty low forehead? What a tale and stately nose? What
little hollow eyes? What great and goodly lyppes? How harmless she is
being toothlesse, her fingers fat and short, adorned with long nails like a
Bitter. In how sweet a proportion her cheeks hang down to her breasts like
dugges, and her pappes to her waste like bags. What a low stature she is,
and yet what a great foot she carries? How thrifty must she be in whom
there is no waste? How virtuous is she like to be, over whom no man can be
ielous?


Epi. Stay Master, you forget your self.


Tophas O Epi. even as a dish melts by the fire, so does my wit increase by
love.


Epi. Pithily, and to the purpose, but what? begin you to nodde.


Tophas Good Epi let me take a nappe: for as some man may better steal a
horse, then another look over the hedge: so diverse shall be sleepie when they
would fainest take rest.


He sleeps. Epi. Who ever saw such a woodcock, love Dipsas? without doubt all
the world will now account him valiant, that ventureth on her, whom none
durst undertake. But here comes two wagges.


Enter Dares and Samias. Sam. Thy Master has slept his share.


Dares I think he does it because he would not pay me my board wages.


Samias It is a thing most strange, and I think mine will never return, so
that we must both seek nevve Masters, for we shall never live by our manners.


Epi. If you want Masters, join with me and serve Sir Tophas, who must needs
keep more men, because he is toward marriage.


Samias What Epi, where is thy Master?


Epi. Yonder sleeping in love.


Dares Is it possible?


Epi. He has taken his thoughts a hole lower, and says, seeing it is the
fashion of the world, he will veil bonet to beauty.


Samias how is he attyred?


Epi. Lovely.


Dares Whom loves this amorous knight?


Epi. Dipsas.


Samias That ugly creature? Why she is a fool, a scold, fat, without
fashion, and quite without favor.


Epi. Tush you be simple, my Ma. has a good marriage.


Dares Good? as how?


Epi. Why in marrying Dipsas, he shall have every day twelve dishes of meat
to his dinner, though there be none but Dipsas with him. Four of flesh, four
of fish, four of fruit.


Sam. As how Epi?


Epi. For flesh these, woodcock, goose, bitter, and rail.


Da. Indeed he shall not miss, if Dipsas be there.


Epi. For fish these, crab, carpe, lump, and powting.


Sam. Excellent, for of my word, she is both crabbish, lumpish, and carping.


Epi. For fruit these, fretters, medlers, hartichockes, and Lady longings.
Thus you see he shall fare like a King, though he be but a beggar.


Dares Well Epi, dine thou with him, for I had rather fast then see her face.
But see thy Ma. is a sleep, let us have a song to wake this Amorous knight.


Epi. Agreed.


Sam. Content.


Song. Top. Sleep is a bynding of the senses, love a loosing.


Epi. Let us hear him awhile.


Tophas There appeared in my sleep a goodly Owl, who sitting upon my
shoulder, cried twyt, twyt, and before mine eyes presented her self the
express image of Dipsas. I meruailed what the Owl said, til at the last, I
perceived twyt twyt, to it, to it: only by contraction admonished by this
vision, to make account of my sweet Venus.


Sam. Sir Tophas, you have ouer-slept your self.


Top. No youth, I have but slept over my love.


Dares Love? Why it is impossible, that into so noble and unconquered a
courage, love should creep, having first a head as hard to pearce as steel,
then to pass to a heart armed with a shirt of male.


Epi. I but my Master yawning one day in the Sun, love crept into his mouth
before he could close it, and there kept such a tumbling in his body, that he
was glad to untruss the points of his heart, and entertain Love as a stranger.


Tophas If there remain any pity in you, plead for me to Dipsas.


Dares Plead? Nay we will press her to it. Let us go with him to Dipsas,
and there shall we have good sport. But sir Tophas when shall we go? for I
find my tongue voluble, and my heart venturous, and all my self like my self.


Samias Come Dares, let us not loose him till we find our Masters, for as long
as he lives, we shall lack neither mirth nor meat.


Epi. We will trauice. Will you go sir?


Tophas I praesequar.


Exeunt. Actus tertius, Scaena quarta.
Eumenides, Geron. Eumenides Father, your sad music being tuned on the same
key that my hard fortune is, has so melted my mind, that I wish to hang at
your mouths end, tell my life end.


Geron These tunes Gentleman have I been accustomed with these fifty Winters,
having no other house to shrowde my self, but the broad heavens, and so
familiar with me has use made misery, that I esteem sorrow my cheifest
solace. And welcommest is that guest to me, that can rehearse the saddest
tale, or the bloodiest tragedy.


Eumenides A strange humor, might I enquire the cause?


Geron You must pardon me if I deny to tell it, for knowing that the revealing
of griefs, is as it were a renewing of sorrow, I have vowed therefore to
conceal them, that I might not only feel the depth of everlasting
coffeehouse, but despair of remedy? But whence are you? What fortune has
thrust you to this distress?


Eumenides I am going to Thessalie, to seek remedy for Endimion my dearest
freende, who has been cast into a dead sleep, almost these twenty years,
waxing old, and ready for the grave, being almost but newly come forth of
the cradle.


Geron You need not for recure travel far, for who so can clearly see the
bottom of this Fountain, shall have remedy for any thing.


Eum. That me thinks is impossible, why what virtue can there be in water?


Geron Yes, who soever can shed the tears of a faithful Lover, shall
obtain any thing he would, read these words engraven about the brimme.


Eum. Have you known this by experience, or is it placed here of purpose to
delude men?


Geron I only would have experience of it, and then should there be an end
of my misery. And then would I tell the strangest discourse that ever yet was
heard.


Eum Ah Eumenides.


Geron What lack you Gentleman, are you not well?


Eumenides Yes Father, but a qualme that often comes over my heart does now
take hold of me, but did never any Lovers come hither?


Geron Lusters, but not Lovers; for often have I seen them weep, but never
could I hear they saw the bottom.


Eum. Came there women also?


Geron Some.


Eum What did they see?


Geron They all wept that the Fountain ouerflowed with tears, but so thick
became the water with their tears, that I could scarce discern the brimme,
much less behold the bottom.


Eum Be faithful Lovers so skant?


Geron It seems so, for yet heard I never of any.


Eumenides Ah Eumenides, how art thou perplexed? call to mind the beauty of
thy sweet Mistress, and the depth of thy never dying affections, how often have
thou honored her, not only without spotte, but suspicion of falsehoode? And
how hardly has she rewarded thee, without cause or color of despite?

How secret have thou been these seven years, that have not, nor once
dare not, to name her for discontenting her? How faithful? that have
offered to dye for her, to please her. Unhappy Eumenides.


Geron Why Gentleman did you once love?


Eumenides Once? I Father and ever shall.


Geron Was she unkind, and you faithful?


Eum. She of all women the most froward, and I of all creatures the most fond.


Geron You doted then, not loved: for affection is grounded on virtue, and
virtue is never peevish: or on Beauty, and Beauty loves to be praised.


Eum. I but if all virtuous Ladies should yield to all that be loving, or all
amiable gentlewomen entertain all that be amorous, their virtues would be
accounted vices, and their beauties deformities, for that love can be but
between two, and that not proceeding of him that is most faithful, but most
fortunate.


Geron I would you were so faithful, that your tears might make you fortunate.


Eu. Yea father, if that my tears clear not this fountain, then may you
swear it is but a mere mockery.


Geron So says every one yet, that wept.


Eum. Ah, I fainte, I dye. Ah sweet Semele let me alone, and dissolve by
weeping into water.


Geron This affection seems strange, if he see nothing without doubt this
dissembling passes, for nothing shall draw me from the belief.


Eum. Father, I plainly see the bottom, and there in white marble engraven
these words, Ask one for all, and but one thing at all.


Geron O fortunate Eumenides, (for so have I heard thee call thy self) let me
see, I cannot discern any such thing. I think thou dreamest.


Eum. Ah Father thou art not a faithful lover, and therefore can not behold
it.


Geron Then ask that I may be satisfied by the event, and thy self blessed.


Eum. Ask? so I will: and what shall I do but ask, and whom should I ask
but Semele, the possessing of whose person, is a pleasure that cannot come
within the compass of comparison, whose golden locks seem most curious, when
they seem most careless, whose sweet looks seem most alluring, when they
are most chaste: and whose words the more virtuous they are, the more amorous
they be accounted. I pray thee fortune when I shall first meet with fair
Semele, dash my delight with some light disgrace, least embracing sweetness
beyond measure, I take a surfit without recure: let her practice her accustomed
coyness, that I may diet my seife upon my desires: otherwise the fullness of
my joys will diminish the sweetness, and I shall perrish by them before I
possess them.

Why do I trifle the time in words? The least minute being spent in the
getting of Semele, is more worth then the whole world: therefore let me ask.
What now Eumenides? Whether art thou drawn? Have thou forgotten both
friendship and duty? Care of Endimion, and the commandment of Cynthia?
Shall he dye in a leaden sleep, because thou sleep in a golden dream? I,
let him sleep ever, so I slumber but one minute with Semele. Love knows
neither friendship nor kindred.

Shall I not hazard the loss of a friend, for the obtaining of her for whom I
would often loose my self? Fond Eumenides, shall the intycing beauty of a
most disdainful Lady, be of more force then the rare fidelity of a tried
friend? The love of men to women is a thing common, and of course: the
friendship of man to man infinite, and immortal. Tush, Semele does possess
my love. I but Endimion has deserved it. I will help Endimion. I found
Endimion unspotted in his truth. I but I shall find Semele constant in her
love. I will have Semele. What shall I do? Father thy gray hairs are
Ambassadors of experience. Which shall I ask?


Geron Eumenides, release Endimion, for all things (friendship excepted) are
subject to fortune: Love is but an eye worm, which only tickleth the head
with hopes, and wishes: friendship the image of eternity, in which there is
nothing moveable, nothing mischeeuous. As much difference as there is between
Beauty and Virtue, bodies and shadows, colors and life: so great odds is
there between love and friendship.

Love is a Camelion, which draws nothing into the mouth but air, and
nourishes nothing in the body but lunges: believe me Eumenides, Desire dies
in the same moment that Beauty sickens, and Beauty fades in the same instant
that it flourishes. When adversities flow, then love ebbes: but friendship
stands stifflie in storms. Time draws wrinckles in a fair face, but
adds fresh colors to a fast friend, which neither heat, nor cold, nor
misery, nor place, nor destiny, can alter or diminish. O friendship of all
things the most rare, and therefore most rare because most excellent, whose
comforts in misery is always sweet, and whose counsels in prosperity are ever
fortunate. Vain love, that only coming near to friendship in name, would
seem to be the same, or better, in nature.


Eum. Father I allow your reasons, and will therefore conquer mine own. Virtue
shall subdue affections, wisdom lust, friendship beauty. Mistresses are in
every place, and as common as Hares in Atho, Bees in Hybla, fowls in the air:
but friends to be found, are like the Phaenix in Arabia, but one, or the
Philadelphi in Arays, never above two. I will have Endimion, sacred Fountain,
in whose bowels are hidden divine secrets, I have increased your waters with
the tears of unspotted thoughts and therefore let me receive the reward you
promise: Endimion, the truest friend to me, and faithfullest lover to
Cynthia, is in such a dead sleep, that nothing can wake or move him.


Geron Do thou see any thing?


Eumenides I see in the same Pillar, these words: When she whose figure of
all is the perfectest, and never to be measured: always one, yet never the
same: still inconstant, yet never wavering, shall come and kiss Endimion in
his sleep, he shall then rise, else never. This is strange.


Geron What see you else?


Eum. There comes over mine eyes either a dark mist, or upon the fountain
a deep thickness: for I can perceive nothing. But how am I deluded? or what
difficult (nay impossible) thing is this?


Geron Me thinks it easy.


Eum. Good father and how?


Geron Is not a circle of all Figures the perfectest?


Eum. Yes.


Geron And is not Cynthia of all cyrcles the most absolute?


Eum. Yes.


Geron Is it not impossible to measure her, who still works by her influence,
never standing at one stay?


Eum. Yes.


Geron Is she not always Cynthia, yet seldom in the same bigness, always
wavering in her waxing or wayning, that our bodies might the better be
governed, our seasons the daylier give their increase, yet never to be
removed from her course, as long as the heavens continue theirs?


Eum. Yes.


Geron Then who can it be but Cynthia, whose virtues being all divine, must
needs bring things to pass that be myraculous. Go, humble thy self to
Cynthia, tell her the success, of which my self shall be a witness. And
this assure thy self, that she that sent to find means for his safety,
will now work her cunning.


Eum. How fortunate am I, if Cynthia be she that may do it.


Geron How fond art thou, if thou do not believe it?


Eum. I will hasten thither, that I may entreat on my knees for succor, and
embrace in mine arms my friend.


Geron I will go with thee, for unto Cynthia must I discover all my sorrows,
who also must work in me a contentment.


Eum. May I now know the cause?


Geron That shall be as we walk, and I doubt not but the strangeness of my
tale will take away the tediousness of our journey.


Eum. Let us go.


Geron I follow.


Exeunt. Actus quartus. Scaena prima.
Tellus, Corsites. Tellus I Marvel Corsites gives me so much liberty: all
the world knowing his charge to be so high, and his nature to be most
strange, who has so ill entreated Ladies of great honor, that he has not
suffered them to look out of windows, much less to walk abroad: it may be
he is in love with me, for (Endimion, hard hearted Endimion, excepted) what is
he that is not enamourd of my beauty? But what respectest thou the love of all
the world, Endimion hates thee. Alas poor Endimion, my maylce has exceeded my
love: and thy faith to Cynthia, quenched my affections. Quenched Tellus? nay
kindled them a fresh; in so much that I find scorching flames, for dead
embers, and cruel encounters of war in my thoughts, in steed of sweet
parlees. Ah that I might once again see Endimion, accursed girl, what hope
have thou to see Endimion? on whose head already are grown gray hairs, and
whose life must yield to Nature, before Cynthia end her displeasure. Wicked
Dipsas, and most deuilish Tellus, the one for cunning too exquisit, the other
for hate too intolerable. Thou wast commanded to weaue the stories and
Poetries, wherein were showed both examples and punishments of tatling tongues,
and thou have only imbrodered the sweet face of Endimion, devises of love,
melancholy imaginations, and what not, out of thy work, that thou should
study to pick out of thy mind. But here comes Corsites, I must seem
yielding and stout, full of mildness, yet tempered with a Majesty: for if I
be too flexible, I shall give him more hope then I mean, if too froward, enjoy
less liberty then I would, love him I cannot, and therefore will practice that
which is most contrary to our sex, to dissemble.


Enter Corsites. Cor. Fair Tellus, I perceive you rise with the Lark, and to
your self sing with the Nightingale.


Tellus My Lord I have no play-fellow but fancy, being barred of all company I
must question with my self, and make my thoughts my frindes.


Cor. I would you would account my thoughts also your friends, for they be
such as are only busied in wondering at your beauty, and wisdom: and some
such as have esteemed your fortune too hard, and diverse of that kind that offer
to set you free, if you will set them free


Tellus There are no colors so contrary as white and black, nor Elements so
disagreeing as fire and water, nor any thing so opposite as men's thoughts and
their words.


Cor. He that gave Cassandra the gift of prophesying with the curse, that spoke
she never so true, she should never be believed, has I think poisoned the
fortune of men, that uttering the extremities of their inward passions, are
always suspected of outward periuries.


Tellus Well Corsites I will flatter my self, and believe you. What would you
do to enjoy my love?


Cor. Set all the Ladies of the Castle free, and make you the pleasure of my
life: more I cannot do, less I will not.


Tellus These be great words, and fit your calling: for Captains must promise
things impossible. But will you do one thing for all.


Cor. Any thing sweet Tellus, that am ready for all.


Tellus You know that on the Lunary bancke sleeps Endimion.


Corsites I know it.


Tell. If you will remove him from that place by force, and convey him into some
obscure cave by policy, I give you here the faith of an unspotted virgin,
that you only shall possess me as a lover, and in spite of malice, have me
for a wife.


Cor. Remove him Tellus? Yes Tellus, he shall be removed, and that so
soon, as thou shall as much commend my diligence as my force. I go.


Tellus Stay, will your self attempt it?


Corsites I Tellus: as I would have none partaker of my sweet love, so shall
none be partners of my labors: but I pray thee go at your best leisure, for
Cynthia begins to rise, and if she discover our love we both perish, for
nothing pleases her but the fairness of virginity. All things must be not
only without lust, but without suspicion of lightness.


Tellus I will depart, and go you to Endimion.


Corsites I fly Tellus, being of all men the most fortunate.

Exit.
Tell. Simple Corsites, I have set thee about a task being but a man, yt the
gods themselves cannot perform: for little do thou know how heavy his
head lies, how hard his fortune: but such shifts must women have to deceive
men, and under color of things easy, entreat that which is imposible:
otherwise we should be cu^bred with importunities, oaths, sighs, letters, and
all implements of love, which to one resolved to the contrary, are most
loathsome. I will in and laugh with the other Ladies at Corsites sweating.

Exit.
Actus quartus. Scaena secunda.
Samtas, Dares and Epiton. Sam. Will thy master never awake?


Dares No, I think he sleeps for a wager: but how shall we spend the time?
Sir Tophas is so far in love that he pineth in his bed, and comes not
abroad?


Sam. But here comes Epi, in a pelting chafe.


Epi. A pox of all false Proverbs, and were a Proverb a Page, I would have
him by the ears.


Sam. Why art thou angry?


Epi. Why? you know it is said, the tide tarieth no man.


Sam. True.


Epi. A monstrous lie; for I was tide two hours, and tarried for one to unloose
me.


Dares Alas poor Epi.


Epi. Poor? No, no, you base conceited slaves, I am a most complyt Gentleman,
although I be in disgrace with sir Tophas.


Dares Art thou out with him.


Epi. I, because I cannot get him a lodging with Endimion, he would feign
take a nappe for forty or fifty years.


Dares A short sleep, considering our long life.


Sam. Is he still in love?


Epi. In love? why he does nothing but make Sonets.


Sam. Can thou remember any one of his Poems?


Epi. I, this is one. The beggar Love that knows not where to lodge: At last
within my heart when I slept, he crept, I wakt, and so my fancies began to fodge.


Sam. That Is a very long verse.


Epi. Why the other was short, the first is called from the thombe to the
little finger, the second from the little finger to the elbowe, and some he
has made to reach to the crown of his head, and down again to the soul of
his foot: it is set to the tune of the black Saunce, ratio est, because
Dipsas is a black Saint.


Dares Very wisely, but pray thee Epi how art thou complet, and being from thy
Master what occupation will thou take?


Epi. No my hearts, I am an absolute Microcosmus, a petty world of my self,
my library is my head, for I have no other books but my brains: my wardrope
on my back, for I have no more apparel then is on my body; my armorie at my
fingers ends, for I use no other Artillarie then my nails; my treasure in my
purse. Sie omnia mea mecum porto.


Dares Good.


Epi. Now syrs, my Palace is pau'd with grass, and tyled with stars: for
celo tegitur qui non habet vrnam, he that has no house, must he in the yard.


Samias A brave resolution, But how will thou spend thy time?


Epi. Not in any Melancholy sort, for mine exercise I will walk horses.


Dares Too bad.


Epi. Why is it not said: It is good walking when one has his horse in his
hand?


Sam. Worse, and worse, but how will thou live?


Epi. By angling; O it is a stately occupation to stand four hours in a cold
Morning, and to have his nose bytten with frost, before his bait be mumbled
with a Fish.


Dares A rare attempt, but will thou never travel?


Epi. Yes in a Western barge, when with a good wind and lusty pugges, one
may go ten miles in two days.


Samias Thou art excellent at thy choice, but what pastime will thou use, none?


Epi. Yes the quickest of all.


Samias What dyce?


Epi. No, when I am in have, xxj. games at Chesse, to pass a few minutes.


Dares A life for a little Lord, and full of quickness.


Epi. Tush let me alone, but I must needs see if I can find where Endimion
lies, and then go to a certain fountain hard by, where they say faithful
Lovers shall have althings they will ask. If I can find out any of these, ego
et Magister meus erimus in tuto, I and my Master shall be friends. He is
resolved to weep some three or four payle-fuls, to avoid the rume of love
that wambleth in his stomach.


Enter the Watch. Samias Shall we never see thy Master Dares?


Dares Yes, let us go now, for to morrow Cynthia will be there.


Epi. I will go with you. But how shall we see for the Watch?


Samias Tush let me alone, I Will begin to them. Masters God speed you.


1. Watch Sir boy, we are all sped already.


Epi. So me thinks, for they smell all of drink, like a beggars beard.


Dares But I pray sirs, may we see Endimion?


2. Watch. No, we are commanded in Cynthias name that no man shall see him.


Sam. No man? Why we are but boys.


1. Watch. Mass neighbors he says true, for if I swear I will never drink
my liquor by the quart, and yet call for two pints, I think with a safe
conscience I may carouse both.


Dares Pithily, and to the purpose.


2. Watch. Tush tush neighbors, take me with you.


Samias This will grow hot.


Dares Let them alone.


2. Watch. If I say to my wife, wife I will have no Reysons in my pudding, she
puts in Corance, small Reysons are Reysons, and boys are men. Even as my wife
should have put no Reysons in my pudding, so shall there no boys see Endimion.


Dares Learnedly.


Epi. Let Master Constable speak: I think he is the wisest among you.


Ma. Constable. You know neighbors it is an an old said saw, children and fools
speak true.


All say. True.


Ma. Constable. Well, there you see the men be the fools, because it is provided
from the children.


Dares Good.


Ma. Constable. Then say I neighbors, that children must not see Endimion, because
children and fools speak true.


Epi. O wicked application.


Samias Scuruily brought about.


1. Watch. Nay he sais true, and therefore till Cynthia have been here he
shall not be uncovered. Therefore away.


Dar. A watch quoth you? a man may watch 7. years for a wise word, and yet go
without it. Their wits are all as rustie as their bills. But come on Ma. Constable.
shall we have a song before we go? Constable. With all my heart.


Song. Exeunt. Actus quartus. Scaena tertia.
Corsites solus. Corsites I am come in sight of the Lunary bank, without doubt
Tellus doteth upon me, and cunningly that I might not perceive her love, she
has set me to a task that is done before it is begun. Endimion, you must
change your pillowe, and if you be not weary of sleep, I will carry you
where at ease you shall sleep your fill. It were good that without more
ceremonies I took him, least being espied, I be intrapt, and so incur the
displeasure of Cynthia, who commonly sets watch that Endimion have no wrong.

He lifts. What now, is your Maistership so heuie? or are you nayld to the
ground? Not stir one whit? then use all thy force though he feel it and
wake. What stone still? turned I think to earth, with lying so long on the
earth. Did not thou Corsites before Cynthia pull up a tree, that forty years
was fastened with roots and wrethed in knots to the ground? Did not thou
with maine force pull open the iron Gates, which no Ram or Engine could move?
Have my weak thoughts made braunfallen my strong arms? or is it the nature of
love or the Quintessence of the mind to breed numnesse, or lythernesse, or I
know not what, languishing in my joints and sinews, being but the base
strings of my body? Or does the remembrance of Tellus so refine my spirits
into a matter so subtle and divine, that the other fleshie parts cannot work
whilst they muse? Rest thy self, rest thy self: nay rent thy self in pieces
Corsites, and strive in spite of love, fortune and nature, to lift up this
dulled body, heavier then dead, and more senseless then death.

Enter Fayries But what are these so fair fiendes that cause my hayres to
stand upright, and spirits to fall down? hags, out alas, Nymphs I crave
pardon. Aye me, out what do I here.


The Fayries dance, and with a song pinch him, and he falls a sleep, thy
kiss Endimion, and depart. Cynthia, Floscula, Semele, Panelion, Zontes,
Pythagoras, Gyptes, Corsites. Cynthia You see Pythagoras what ridiculous
opinions you hold, and I doubt not but you are now of another mind.


Pytha. Madam, I plainly perceive that the perfection of your brightness,
has pierced through the thickness that covered my mind; in so much that I am
no less glad to be reformed, then ashamed to remember my grosenes.


Gyptes They are thrice fortunate that live in your Palace, where Truth is
not in colors but life, virtues not in imagination, but execution.


Cynthia I have always studied to have rather living virtues then painted
Gods, the body of Truth, then the tomb. But let us walk to Endimion, it may
be it lies in your Arts to deliver him, as for Eumenides, I fear he is dead.


Pytha. I have alleged all the natural reasons I can for such a long sleep.


Gyptes I can do nothing till I see him.


Cynthia Coin Floscula, I am sure you are glad that you shall behold Endimion.


Flosc. I were blessed if I might have him recovered.


Cynthia Are you in love with his person.


Flos. No, but with his virtue.


Cynthia What say you Semele?


Semele Madame, I dare say nothing for fear I offend.


Cynthia Belike you cannot speak except you be spightfull. But as good be
silent as saucie. Panelion, what punishment were fit for Semele, in whose
speech and thoughts, is only contempt and sowrenesse?


Pane. I love not Madam to give any judgment. Yet since your highness
commands, I think, to commit her tongue close prisoner to her mouth.


Cynthia Agreed; Semele, if thou speak this twelue-month, thou shall forfet
thy tongue. Behold Endimion, alas poor Gentleman, have thou spent thy youth in
sleep, that once vowed all to my service. Hollow eyes? gray hairs? wrinckled
cheeks? and decayed limbs? Is it destiny, or deceit that has brought this
to pass? If the first, who could prevent thy wretched stars. If the latter,
I would I might know thy cruel enemy. I favored thee Endimion for thy
honor, thy virtues, thy affections: but to bring thy thoughts within the
compass of thy fortunes, I have seemed strange, that I might have thee stayed,
and now are thy days ended before my favor begin. But whom have we here,
is it not Corsites?


Zon. It is, but more like a Leopard then a man.


Cyn. Awake him. How now Corsites, what make you here? How came you
deformed? Look on thy hands, and then thou see the picture of thy face.


Corsites Miserable wretch, and accursed. How am I deluded? Madame, I ask
pardon for my offense, and you see my fortune deserves pity.


Cynthia Speak on, thy offense cannot deserve greater punishment: but see thou
rehearse the truth, else shall thou not find me as thou wishest me.


Corsites Madam, as it is no offense to be in love being a man mortal, so I
hope can it be no shame to tell with whom, my Lady being heavenly. Your
Majesty committed to my charge fair Tellus, whose beauty in the same moment
took my heart captive, that I undertook to carry her body prisoner. Since
that time have I found such combats in my thoughts between love and duty,
reverence and affection, that I could neither endure the conflict, nor hope
for the conquest.


Cynthia In love? A thing far unsitting the name of a Captain, and (as I
thought) the tough and vnsmoothed nature of Corsites. But forth.


Corsites Feeling this continual war, I thought rather by parlee to yield,
then by certain danger to perrish, I unfolded to Tellus the depth of my
affections, and framed my tongue to utter a sweet tale of love, that was wont
to found nothing but threats of war. She too fair to be true, and too false
for one so fair, after a nice denial, practiced a notable deceyt, commanding
me to remove Endimion from this Caban, and carry him to some dark Cave,
which I seeking to accomplish, found impossible. And so by Fayries or fiendes
have been thus handled.


Cynthia How say you my Lords, is not Tellus always practicing of some
deceites? In sooth Corsites thy face is now too foul for a Lover, and thine
heart too fond for a Soldier. You may see when VVarriors become wantons, how
their manners alter with their faces. Is it not a shame Corsites, that having
lived so long in Mars his Camp, thou should now be rockt in Venus Cradle.
Do thou we are Cupids Quiver at thy gyrdle, and make Lances of looks? Well
Corsites rouse thy self, and be as thou have been, and let Tellus who is made
all of love, melt herself in her own loosenes.


Corsites Madam I doubt not but to recover my former state, for Tellus beauty
never wrought such love in my mind, as now her deceit has dispight, and yet
to be revenged of a woman, were a thing then love it self more womanish.


Gyptes These spots Gentleman are to be worn out, if you rub them over with
this Lunarie, so that in place where you received this maine, you shall find a
medicine.


Corsi. I thank you for that. The Gods bless me from love and these pretty
Ladies that haunt this green.


Flos. Corsites, I would Tellus saw your amiable face.


Zontes How spightfully Semele laugheth, that dare not speak.


Cynthia Could you not stir Endimion with that doubled strength of yours?


Cors. Not so much as his finger with all my force.


Cyn. Pythagoras and Gyptes, what think you of Endimion? what reason is to be
given, what remedy?


Pyth. Madame it is impossible to yield reason for things that happen not in
compass of nature. It is most certain, that some strange enchauntment has
bound all his senses.


Cynthia What say you Gyptes.


Gyptes With Pythagoras, that it is enchauntment, and that so strange that no
Art can undo it, for that heaviness argues a malice vnremooueable in the
Enchauntresse, and that no power can end it, till she die that did it, or the
heavens show some means more then miraculous.


Flos. O Endimion, could spite it self devise a mischief so monstrous as to
make thee dead with life, and living being altogether dead? Where others
number their years, their hours, their minutes, and step to age by stairs,
thou only have thy years and times in a cluster, being old before thou
remembrest thou wast young.


Cynth. No more Floscula, pity does him no good, I would any thing else
might, and I vow by the unspotted honor of a Lady he should not miss it:
but is this all Giptes, that is to be done?


Giptes, All as yet. It may be that either the Enchauntresse shall dye, or else
be discovered, if either happen I will then practice the utmost of my art. In
the mean season, about this Grove would I have a watch, and the first living
thing that touches Endimion, to be taken.


Cynth. Corsites what say you, will you undertake this?


Corsites Good Madame pardon me, I was overtaken too late, I should rather
break into the midst of a maine battle, then again fall into the hands
of those fair babies.


Cynth. Well, I will provide others. Pithagoras and Giptes, you shall yet
remain in my Court, till I hear what may be done in this matter.


Pyth We attend.


Cynth. Let us go in.


Exeunt. Actus quintus. Scaena prima.
Samias, Dares. Samias EVmenides has told such strange tales, as I may well
wonder at them, but never believe them.


Dares The other old man, what a sad speech used he, that caused us almost all
to weep. Cynthia is so desirous to know the experiment of her own virtue,
and so willing to ease Endimions hard fortune, that she no sooner heard the
discourse, but she made her self in a readiness to try the event.


Sam. We willl also see the event, but whist here comes Cynthia, with all
her train: Let us sneake in amongst them.


Enter Cynthia, Floscula, Semele, Panelion, etc. Cynth. Eumenides, it cannot
sink into my head, that I should be signified by that sacred Fountain, for
many things are there in the world, to which those words may be applied.


Eum. Good Madame vouchsafe but to try, else shall I think my self most
unhappy, that I asked not my sweet Mistress.


Cynth. Will you not yet tell me her name?


Eum. Pardon me good Madame, for if Endimion awake he shall: my self have
sworn, never to reveal it.


Cynth. Well, let us to Endimion. I will not be so stately (good Endimion) not
to stoop to do thee good: and if thy liberty consist in a kiss from me,
thou shall have it. And although my mouth has been here tofore as untouched
as my thoughts, yet now to recover thy life, (though to restore thy youth it be
impossible) I will do that to Endimion, which yet never mortal man could bost
of heretofore, nor shall ever hope for hereafter.


She kisseth him. Eum. Madame he begins to stir.


Cynth. Soft Eumenides, stand still.


Eum. Ah, I see his eyes almost open.


Cynth. I command thee once again stir not: I will stand behind him.


Pan What do I see, Endimion almost awake?


Eum. Endimion, Endimion, art thou deaf or dumb? or has this long sleep
taken away thy memory? Ah my sweet Eudimion, see thou not Eumenides? thy
faithful friend, thy faithful Eumenides, who for thy saftie has been
careless of his own content. Speak Endimion, Endimion, Endimion.


End, Endimion? I call to mind such a name.


Eum. Have thou forgotten thy self Endimion? then do I not marvel thou
remembrest not thy friend. I tell thee thou art Endimion, and I Eumenides:
behold also Cynthia, by whose favor thou art awaked, and by whose virtue thou
shall continue thy natural course.


Cynth. Endimion, speak sweet Endimion, know thou not Cynthia?


End. O heavens, whom do I behold, fair Cynthia, divine Cynthia?


Cynth. I am Cynthia, and thou Endimion.


End. Endimion, What do I here? What, a gray beard? hollow eyes? withered
body: decayed lymbes? and all in one night?


Eum. One night? thou have here slept forty years, by what Enchauntresse as
yet it is not known: and behold the twig to which thou laiedst thy head, is
now become a tree, call thou not Eumenides to remembrance?


End. Thy name I do remember by the sound, but thy favor I do not yet call
to mind, only divine Cynthia, to whom time, fortune, destiny, and death, are
subject, I see and remember, and in all humility, I regard and reverence.


Cynth. You have good cause to remember Eumenides, who has for thy safety
forsaken his own solace.


End. Am I that Endimion, who was wont in Court to lead my life, and in
Iustes, turneys, and arms to exercise my youth? am I that Endimion?


Eum. Thou art that Endimion and I Eumenides, will thou not yet call me to
remembrance?


End. Ah sweet Eumenides, I now perceive thou art he, and that my self have
the name of Endimion, but that this should be my body I doubt: for how
could my curled locks be turned to gray hairs, and my strong body to a
dying weakness, having waxed old, and not kowing it.


Cynthia Well Endimion arise, a while sit down, for that thy limbs are
stiff, and not able to stay thee, and tell what have thou seen in thy sleep
all this while? What dreams, visions, thoughts, and fortunes? For it is
impossible, but in so long time, thou should see things strange.


End. Fair Cynthia I will rehearse what I have seen, humbly desiring, that
when I exceed in length, you give me warning, that I may end: for to utter
all I have to speak would be troublesome, although happily the strangeness
may somewhat abate the tediousness.


Cynth. Well Endimion begin.


End. Me thought I saw a Lady passing fair, but very mischeeuous, who in
the one hand carried a knife, with which she offered to cut my throat: and in
the other a looking-glass, wherein seeing how ill anger became Ladies, she
refrained from intended violence. She was accompanied with other Damsels, one
of which with a stern countenance, and as it were with a settled malice
engraven in her eyes, provoked her to execute mischief: an other with visage
sad and constant only in sorrow, with her arms crossed, and watery eyes,
seemed to lament my fortune, but durst not offer to prevent the force. I
started in my sleep, feeling my very veins to swell, and my sinews to
stretch with fear, and such a cold sweat bedewed all my body, that death it
self could not be so terrible, as the vision.


Cynth. A strange sight. Giptes at our better leisure shall expound it.


Eum. After long debating with her self, mercy overcame anger, and there
appeared in her heavenly face such a divine Majesty, mingled with a sweet
mildenes, that I was ravished with the sight above measure, and wished that I
might have enioied the sight without end, and so she departed with the other
Ladies, of which the one retained still an immovable cruelty, the other a
constant pity.


Cynth. Poor Endimion, how wast thou affrighted? What else?


End. After her immediately appeared an aged man, with a beard as white as snow,
crying in his hand a book with three leaves, and speaking as I remember these
words. Endimion, receive this book with three leaves, in which are contained
counsels, policies, and pictures, and with that he offered me the book, which
I rejected: wherewith moved with a disdainefull pity, he rent the first leaf
in a thousand shiuers, the second time he offered it, which I refused also: at
which bending his brows, and pitching his eyes fast to the ground, as though
they were fixed to the earth, and not again to be removed: then suddenly
casting them up to the heavens, he tore in a rage the second leaf, and offered
the book only with one leaf. I know not whether fear to offend, or desire
to know some strange thing, moved me: I took the book, and so the old man
vanished.


Cynthia What did thou imagine was in the last leaf?


End. There I portraid to life, with a cold quaking in every joint. I beheld
many wolves barking at thee Cynthia, who having ground their teeth to bite, did
with striving bleed themselves to death. There might I see ingratitude with an
hundred eyes, gazing for benefits, and with a thousand teeth, gnawing on the
bowelles wherein she was bred. Treachery stood all clothed in white, with a
smyling countenance, but both her hands bathed in blood. Envy with a pale and
megar face, (whose body was so lean, that one might tell all her bones, and
whose garment was so totterd, that it was easy to number every thread) stood
shooting at stars, whose darts fell down again on her own face. There
might I behold Drones, or Beetles, I know not how to term them creeping
under the wings of a princely Eagle, who being carried into her neast, sought
there to suck that vein, that would have killed the Eagle. I mused that
things so base, should attempt a fact so barbarous, or durst imagine a thing
so bloody. And many other things Madame, the repeticion whereof, may at your
better leisure seem more pleasing: for. Bees surfette sometimes with honnie,
and the Gods are glutted with harmony, and your highness may be dulled with
delight.


Cynth. I am content to be dieted, therefore let us in. Eumenides, see that
Endimion be well tended, least either eating immoderatlie, or sleeping again
too long, he fall into a deadly surfette, or into his former sleep.

See this also be proclaimed, that whosoever will discover this practice,
shall have of Cynthia infinite thanks, and no small rewards.

Exit.
Flosc. Ah Endimion, none so joyful as Floscula, of thy restoring.


Eum. Yes Floscula, let Eumenides be somewhat gladder, and do not that wrong
to the settled friendship of a man, as to compare it with the light affection of
a woman. Ah my dear friend Endimion suffer me to dye, with gazing at thee.


End. Eumenides, thy friendship is immortal, and not to be conceived, and
thy good will Floscula, better then I have deserved. But let us all wait on
Cynthia: I marvel Semele speaks not a word.


Eum. Because if she do, she loses her tongue.


End. But how prospers your love?


Eum. I never yet spoke word since your sleep.


End. I doubt not but your affection is old, and your appetite cold.


Eum. No Endimion, thine has made it stronger, and now are my sparks grown
to flames, and my fancies almost to frenzies: but let us follow, and within
we will debate all this matter at large.


Exeunt. Actus quintus. Scaena secunda.
Sir Tophas, Epiton. Tophas Epi, love has iustled my liberty from the wall,
and taken the upper hand of my reason.


Epi. Let me then trippe up the heels of your affection, and thrust your
goodwill into the gutter.


Tophas No Epi, Love is a Lord of misrule, and keeps Christmas in my corpse.


Epi. No doubt there is good cheer: what dishes of delight does his Lordshippe
feast you withal?


Tophas First, with a great platter of plum-porrige of pleasure, wherein is
stued the mutton of mistrust.


Epi. Excellent love lap.


Tophas Then comes a Pie of patience, a Hen of honnie, a Goose of gall, a
Capon of care, and many other Viandes, some sweet, and some sour, which
proves love to be as it was said of, in old years. Dulce venenum.


Epi. A brave banquet.


Tophas But Epi. I pray theee feel on my chinne, some thing prycketh me.
What do thou feel or see.


Epi. There are three or four little hairs.


Tophas I pray thee call it my bearde, how shall I be troubled, when this
young spring shall grow to a great wood?


Epi. O sir your chinne is but a quyller yet, you will be most maiesticall when
it is full fledge. But I marvel that you love Dipsas that old Crone.


Tophas Agnosco veteris vestigia flammae, I love the smoke of an old fire.


Epi. Why she is so cold, that no fire can thawe her thoughts.


Tophas It is an old goose Epi, that will eat no oats, old Kine will kick,
old Rats gnawe cheese, and old sackes will have much patching. I prefer an
old Cony before a Rabbet sucker, and an ancient hen before a young chicken
peeper.


Epi. Argumentum ab antiquitate, My master loves anticke work.


Tophas Give me a pippin that is withered like an old wife.


Epi. Good sir.


Tophas Then, a contrario sequitur argumentum. Give me a wife that looks like
an old pippin.


Epi. Nothing has made my master a fool, but flat Schollership.


Tophas Know thou not that old wine is best?


Epi. Yes.


Tophas And thou know that like will to like?


Epi. I.


Tophas And thou know that Venus loved the best Wine.


Epi. So.


Tophas Then I conclude, that Venus was an old woman in an old cup of wine.
For, est Venus in vinis, ignis in igne fuit.


Epi. O lepidum caput, O mad cap master. You were worthy to win Dipsas, were
she as old again, for in your love, you have worn the nappe of your wit
quite off, and made it thredbare. But soft who comes here?


Tophas My solicitors.


Sam. All hail sir Tophas, how feel you your self?


Tophas Stately in every joint, which the common people term stifnes. Does
Dipsas stoop? will she yield? will she bend?


Dares O sir as much as you would wish, for her chin almost touches her knees.


Epi. Master, she is bent I warrant you.


Tophas What conditions does she ask?


Samias She has vowed she will never love any that has not a tooth in his
head less then she.


Tophas How many has she?


Dares One.


Epi. That goes hard Master, for then you must have none.


Tophas A small request, and agreeable to the gravity of her years. What
should a wise man do with his mouth full of bones like a channel house. The
Turtle true has nere a tooth.


Samias Thy Master is in a notable vain, that will loose his teeth to be like
a Turtle.


Epi. Let him loose his tongue to, I care not.


Dares Nay you must also have no nails, for she long since has cast hers.


Tophas That I yield to, what a quiet life shall Dipsas and I lead, when we
can neither byte nor scratch? You may see youths, how age prouides for peace.


Samias How shall we do to make him leave his love, for we never spoke to her?


Dares Let me alone. She is a notable Witch, and has turnde her maid Bagoa
to an Aspen tree, for bewraying her secrets.


Top. I honor her for her cunning, for now when I am weary of walking on two
legs, what a pleasure may she do me to turn me to some goodly Ass, and
help me to four.


Dares Nay then I must tell you the troth, her husband Geron is come home, who
this fifty years has had her to wife.


Tophas What do I hear? Has she an husband? Go to the Sexteene, and tell
him desire is dead, and will him to dig his grave. O heavens, an husband?
What death is agreeable to my fortune?


Samias Be not desperate, and we will help you to find a young Lady,


Tophas I love no grissels they are so brittle, they will crack like glass,
or so dainty, that if they be touched, they are straight of the fashion of
wax: Animus maioribus instat. I desire old Matrons. What a sight would it be
to embrace one whose hair were as orient as the pearl? whose teeth shall be so
pure a watchet, that they shall stain the truest Turkis? whose nose shall
throw more beams from it then the fiery Carbuncle? whose eyes shall be
enuirond about with redness, exceeding the deepest Coral? And whose lips
might compare with silver for the palenesse? Such a one if you can help me to,
I will by peece-meale curtoll my affections toward Dipsas, and walk my
swelling thoughts till they be cold.


Epi. VVisely provided. How say you my friends, will you angle for my Masters
cause?


Samias Most willingly.


Dares If we speed him not shortly, I will burn my cappe, we will serve him
of the spades, and dig an old wife out of the grave, that shall be answerable
to his gravity.


Tophas Youths adieu; he that brings me first news, shall possess mine
inheritance.


Dares What, is thy Master landed?


Epi. Know you not that my Master is Liber tenens? Samias What Is that?


Epi. A Freeholder. But I will after him.


Samias And we to hear what news of Endimion for the conclusion.


Exeunt. Actus quintus. Scaena tertia.
Panelion, Zontes. Pane. Who would have thought that Tellus being so fair by
nature, so honorable by birth, so wise by education, would have entered into a
mischief to the Gods so odious, to men so detestable, and to her friend so
malicious.


Zontes If Bagoa had not bewraied it, how then should it have come to light?
But we see that Gold and fair words, are of force to corrupt the strongest
men; And therefore able to work silly women like wax.


Panelion. I marvel what Cynthia will determine in this cause.


Zontes I fear as in all causes, hear of it in justice, and then judge of it
in mercy; for how can it be that she that is unwilling to punish her
deadliest foes with dysgrace, will revenge injuries of her train with death.


Panelion That old witch Dipsas in a rage, having understood her practice to
be discovered, turned poor Bagoa to an Aspen tree, but let us make have and
bring Tellus before Cynthia, for she was coming out after us.


Zontes Let us go.


Exeunt. Cynthia, Semele, Floscula, Dipsas, Endimion, Eumenides. Cynthia
Dipsas, thy years are not so many as thy vices, yet more in number then
commonly nature does affoorde, or justice should permit. Have thou almost
these fifty years practiced that detested wickedness of witchcraft? Wast thou
so simple, as for to know the nature of Simples, of all creatures to be most
sinful?

Thou have threatened to turn my course awry, and alter by thy damnable Art,
the government that I now possess by the eternal Gods. But know thou Dipsas,
and let all the Enchaunters know, that Cynthia being placed for light on
earth, is also protected by the powers of heaven. Breath out thou may words,
gather thou may herbs, find out thou may stones agreeable to thine Art,
yet of no force to appall my heart, in which courage is so rooted, and constant
persuasion of the mercy of the Gods so grounded, that all thy witchcraft I
esteem as weak, as the world does thy case wretched.

This noble Gentleman Geron, once thy husband, but now thy mortal hate, did
thou procure to live in a Deserte, almost desperate. Endimion the flovvre of my
Court, and the hope of succeeding time, have thou bewitched by Art, before
thou would suffer him to flourish by nature.


Dipsas Madam, things past may be repented, not recalled: there is nothing so
wicked that I have not done, nor any thing so wished for as death. Yet among
all the things that I committed, there is nothing so much tormenteth my rented
and ransackt thoughts, as that in the prime of my husbands youth, I divorced
him by my deuillish Art, for which, if to die might be amends, I would not
live till to morrow. If to live and still be more miserable would better
content him, I would wish of all creatures to be oldest and vgliest.


Geron Dipsas, Thou have made this difference between me and Endimion, that
being both young, thou have caused me to wake in melancholy, loosing the
joys of my youth, and him to sleep, not remembering youth.


Cynthia Stay, here comes Tellus, we shall now know all.


Enter Corsites, Tellus, Panelion. etc. Corsites I would to Cynthia thou
could make as good an excuse in truth, as to me thou have done by wit.


Tellus Truth shall be mine answer, and therefore I will not study for an
excuse.


Cynthia Is it possible Tellus, that so few years should harbor so many
mischiefs? Thy swelling pride have I borne, because it is a thing that beauty
makes blameless, which the more it exceeds fairenes in measure, the more it
stretches it self in disdain. Thy devises against Corsites I smyle at, for
that wits the sharper they are, the shrewder they are. But this unacquainted
and most unnatural practice with a vile Enchauntresse, against so noble a
Gentleman as Endimion, I abhor, as a thing most malicious, and will revenge,
as a deed most monstrous.

And as for you Dipsas, I will send you into the Deserte amongst wild beasts,
and try whether you can cast Lions, Tygars, Bores, and Bears, into as dead a
sleep as you did Endimion, or turn them to trees, as you have done Bagoa.
But tell me Tellus, what was the cause of this cruel part, far unfitting thy
sex, in which nothing should be but simplenes: and much disagreeing from thy
face, in which nothing seemed to be but softnes.


Tellus Divine Cynthia, by whom I receive my life, and am content to end it. I
can neither excuse my fault without lying, nor confess it without shame; Yet
were it possible that in so heavenly thoughts as yours, there could fall such
earthly motions as mine, I would then hope, if not to be pardoned without
extreme punishment, yet to be heard without great marvel.


Cynthia Say on Tellus, I cannot imagine any thing that can color such a
cruelty.


Tellus Endimion, that Endimion in the prime of his youth, so ravished my heart
with love, that to obtain my desires, I could not find means, nor to resite
them reason.

What was she that favored not Endimion, being young, wise, honorable, and
virtuous; besides, what metal was she made of (be she mortal) that is not
affected with the spice, nay infected with the poison of that (not to be
expressed, yet always to be felt) Love? which breaks the brains, and never
brooseth the browe: consumes the heart, and never touches the skin: and
makes a deep skarre to be seen, before any wound at all be felt. My heart
too tender to vvithstande such a divine fury, yielded to Love. Madame I not
without blushing confess, yielded to Love.


Cynthia A strange effect of love, to work such an extreme hate. How say you
Endimion, all this was for love?


End. I say Madam then the Gods send me a woman's hate.


Cynthia That were as bad, for then by contrary you should never sleep. But
on Tellus, let us hear the end.


Tellus Feeling a continual burning in all my bowels, and a bursting almost in
every vain, I could not smoother the inward fire, but it must needs be
perceived by the outward smoke, and by the flying abroad of diverse sparks,
diverse judged of my scalding flames.

Endimion as full of art as wit, marking mine eyes, (in which he might see
almost his own,) my sighs, by which he might ever hear his name sounded,
aimed at my heart, in which he was assured his person was imprinted, and by
questions wrunge out that, which was ready to burst out. When he saw the
depth of my affections, he swear, that mine in respect of his, were as fumes to
Aetna, valleys to Alps, Ants to Eagles, and nothing could be compared to my
beauty but his love, and eternity. Thus drawing a smooth shoe upon a crooked
foot, he made me believe, that (which all of our sex willingly acknowledge)
I was beautiful. And to wonder, (which indeed is a thing miraculous) that any
of his sex should be faithful.


Cynthia Endimion, how will you clear your self?


End. Madam, by mine own accuser.


Cynthia Well Tellus proceed, but breefelie, least taking delight in uttering
thy love, thou offend us with the length of it.


Tellus I will Madame quickly make an end of my love and my tale. Finding
continual increase of my tormenting thoughts, and that the enjoying of my
love, made deeper wounds then the entering into it. I could find no means to
ease my grief, but to follow Endimion, and continually to have him in the
object of mine eyes, who had me slave and subject to his love.

But in the moment that I feared his falsehoode, and fried my self most in
mine affections, I found, (ah grief, even then I lost my self.) I found him
in most melancholy and desperate terms, cursing his stars, his state, the
earth, the heavens, the world, and all for the love of


Cynthia Of whom? Tellus speak boldly.


Tellus Madame, I dare not utter for fear to offend.


Cynthia Speak I say; who dare take offense, if thou be commanded by Cynthia?


Tellus For the love of Cynthia.


Cynthia For my love Tellus, that were strange. Endimion is it true?


End. In all things Madame. Tellus does not speak false.


Cynthia What will this breed to in the end? Well Endimion, we shall hear
all.


Tellus I seeing my hopes turnde to mishaps, and a settled dissembling toward
me, and an immovable desire to Cynthia, forgetting both my self and my sex;
fell unto this unnatural hate; for knowing your virtues Cynthia to be
immortal, I could not have an imagination to withdraw him. And finding mine
own affections unquenchable, I could not carry the mind that any else should
possess what I had pursued. For though in majesty, beauty, virtue, and
dignity, I always humbled and yielded my self to Cynthia, yet in affections,
I esteemed my self equal with the Goddesses, and all other creatures
according to their states with my self. For stars to their bigness have their
lights, and the sun has no more. And little pytchers when they can hold no
more, are as full as great vessels that run over. Thus Madam in all truth,
have I uttered the unhappiness of my love, and the cause of my hate, yielding
wholly to that divine judgment which never erred for want of wisdom, or envied
for too much partiality.


Cynthia How say you my Lords to this matter? But what say you Endimion, has
Tellus told troth?


End. Madame in all things, but in that she said I loved her, and swore to
honor her.


Cynthia Was there such a time when as for my love thou did vow thy self to
death, and in respect of it loathed thy life? speak Endimion, I will not
revenge it with hate.


End. The time was Madam and is, and ever shall be that I honored your
highness above all the world, but to stretch it so far as to call it love, I
never durst. There has none pleased mine eye but Cynthia, none delighted mine
ears but Cynthia, none possessed my heart but Cynthia. I have forsaken all
other fortunes to follow Cynthia, and here I stand ready to die if it please
Cynthia. Such a difference has the Gods set between our states, that all
must be duty, loyalty, and reverence, nothing (without it vouchsafe your
highness) be termed love. My unspotted thoughts, my languishing body, my
discontented life, let them obtain by princely favor that, which to
challenge they must not presume, only wishing of impossibilities: with
imagination of which, I will spend my spirits, and to my self that no
creature may hear, softly call it love. And if any urge to utter what I
whisper, then will I name it honor. From this sweet conte^plation if I be not
drinen, I shall live of al men the most content, taking more pleasure in mine
aged thoughts, then ever I did in my youthful actions.


Cyn. Endimion, this honorable respect of thine, shall be christened love in thee,
and my reward for it favor. Persevere Endimion in loving me, and I account more
strength in a true heart, then in a walled City. I have labored to win all,
and study to keep such as I have won, but those that neither my favor can
move to continue constant, nor my offered benefits get to be faithful, the
Gods shall either reduce to truth, or revenge their trecheries with justice.
Endimion continue as thou have begun, and thou shall find that Cynthia shyneth
not on thee in vain.


End. Your Highness has blessed me, and your words have again restored my
youth: me thinks I feel my joints strong, and these moldy hairs to molt,
and all by your virtue Cynthia, into whose hands the Balance that weighs
time and fortune, are committed.


Cynth. What young again? then it is pity to punish Tellus.


Tellus Ah Endimion, now I know thee and ask pardon of thee: suffer me still
to wish thee well.


End. Tellus, Cynthia must command what she will.


Flosc. Endimion, I rejoice to see thee in thy former estate.


End. Good Floscula, to thee also am I in my former affections.


Eum. Endimion, the comfort of my life, how am I ravished with a joy
matchless, saving only the enjoying of my mistrisse.


Cynth. Endimion, you must now tell who Eumenides shrineth for his Saint.


End. Semele Madame.


Cynth. Semele Eumenides? is it Semele? the very waspe of all women, whose
tongue stingeth as much as an Adders tooth?


Eum. It is Semele, Cynthia: the possessing of whose love, must only prolong
my life.


Cynth. Nay since Endimion is restored, we will have all parties pleased.
Semele, are you content after so long trial of his faith, such rare secrecy,
such unspotted love, to take Eumenides? Why speak you not? Not a word?


End. Silence Madame consents: that is most true.


Cynth. It is true Endimion. Eumenides, take Semele. Take her I say.


Eum. Humble thanks Madame, now only do I begin to live.


Semele A hard choice Madame, either to be married if I say nothing, or to
lose my tongue if I speak a word. Yet do I rather choose to have my tongue
cut out, then my heart distempered: I will not have him.


Cynth. Speaks the Parrat? she shall nod hereafter with signs: cut off her
tongue, nay her head, that having a servant of honorable birth, honest
manners, (...) true love, will not be persuaded.


Semele He is no faithful I (...)or then would he have asked his Mistress.


Geron Had he not been faithful, he had never seen into the fountain, and
so lost his friend and Mistrisse.


Eum. Thine own thoughts sweet Semele, witness against thy words, for what
have thou found in my life but love? and as yet, what have I found in my love
but bitterness? Madame pardon Semele, and let my tongue ransom hers.


Cyn. Thy tongue Eumenides? what should thou live wanting a tongue to blaze
the beauty of Semele. Well Semele, I will not command love, for it cannot be
enforced: let me entreat it.


Semele I am content your Highness shall command, for now only do I think
Eumenides faithful, that is willing to lose his tongue for my sake: yet loath,
because it should do me better service. Madame, I accept of Eumenides.


Cynth. I thank you Semele.


Eu. Ah happy Eumenides, that have a friend so faithful, and a mistress so
fair: with what sudden mischief will the Gods daunt this excess of joy?
Sweet Semele, I live or dye as thou will.


Cynth. What shall become of Tellus? Tellus you know Endimion is vowed to a
service, from which death cannot remove him. Corsites casts still a lovely
looks toward you, how say you will have your Corsites, and so receive pardon
for all that is past?


Tellus Madame most willingly.


Cynthia But I cannot tell whether Corsites, be agreed.


Corsites I Madame more happy to enjoy Tellus then the Monarchy of the world.


Eum. Why she caused you to be pincht with Fairies.


Cor. I but her fairness has pinched my heart more deeply.


Cynthia Well enjoy thy love. But what have you wrought in the Castle Tellus?


Tellus Only the picture of Endimion.


Cynthia Then so much of Endimion as his picture comes to, possess and play
withal.


Corsites Ah my sweet Tellus, my love shall be as thy beauty is, matchless.


Cynthia Now it rests Dipsas, that if thou will forswear that vile Art of
Enchaunting, Geron has promised again to receive thee, otherwise if thou be
wedded to that wickedness, I must and will see it punished to the uttermost.


Dipsas Madam, I renounce both substance and shadow of that most horrible and
hateful trade, vowing to the Gods continual penance, and to your highness
obedience.


Cynthia How say you Geron, will you admit her to your Wife?


Geron I with more joy then I did the first day: for nothing could happen to
make me happy, but only her forsaking that leude and detestable course. Dipsas
I embrace thee.


Dipsas And I thee Geron, to whom I will hereafter recite the cause of these
my first follies.


Cynthia Well Endimion, nothing rests now but that we depart. Thou have my
favor, Tellus her friend, Eumenides in Paradise with his Semele, Geron
contented with Dipsas.


Sir Tophas Nay soft, I cannot handsomely go to bed without Bagoa.


Cynthia Well Sir. Tophas, it may be there are more virtues in me then my
self knows of, for Endimion I awaked, and at my words he waxed young, I will
try whether I can turn this tree again to thy true love.


Tophas Turn her to a true love or false, so she be a wench I care not.


Cynthia Bagoa, Cynthia puts an end to thy hard fortunes, for being turned
to a tree for revealing a truth, I will recover thee again, if in my power be
the effect of truth.


Tophas Bagoa? a bots upon thee.


Cynthia Come my Lords let us in, you Gyptes and Pythagoras, if you cannot
content your selves in our Court, to fall from vain follies of Philosophers,
to such virtues as are here practiced, you shall be entertained according to
your deserts, for Cynthia is no stepmother to strangers.


Pytha. I had rather in Cynthias Court spend ten years, then in Greece one
hour.


Gyptes And I choose rather to live by the sight of Cynthia, then by the
possessing of all Egypt.


Cynthia Then follow.


Eumenides We all attend.


Exeunt. FINIS.
The Epilogue.
A Man walking abroad, the wind and Sun strove for sovereignty, the one with
his blast, the other with his beams. The wind blew hard, the man wrapped his
garment about him harder: it blustred more strongly, he then girt it fast to
him: I cannot prevail said the wind. The Sun casting her Crystal beams,
began to warm the man: he unloosed his gown. yet it shined brighter: he then
put it off. I yield said the wind, for if thou continue shining, he will also
put off his cote.

Dread Sovereign, the malicious that seek to overthrow us with threats, do
but stiffen our thoughts, and make them sturdier in storms: but if your
Highness vouch safe with your favorable beams to glaunce upon us, we shall not
only stoop, but with all humility, lay both our hands and hearts, at your
Majesty's feet.


