

This is the Royal Cite of Thebes.


Here begins the prologue of the Storye of Thebes.
THan bright phoebus passed Phoebus in Aryete
was the Ram
Myd of Aprell and in to the Bo le came
And Satourne old. with Saturnus in Virgin
his frosty face
In Virgyne. taken had his place
Melencolyke. and sloth of mocyo^
And was also. in thopposycyon
Of Lucyna the moon. moist and pale Jupiter in capiteca^cri

That many shoure. fro heaven made auale
when Aurora. was in the morrow red
And Jupiter. in the Crabbes head
Has take his paleys. and his mansyon
The lusty time. and Joly fresshe season
when that Flora. the noble mighty queen
The soyll has clad. in new tender grene
with her flowers. craftily meynte
Branche and bough. with red and white depeynte
Fle^yng the baume. on hills and on vales
The time in soth. when Canterbury tales
Complet and told. at many sundry stage
Of estates. in the pilgrimage
Eueryche man. like to his degree
Some of desporte. some of moralyte
Some of knyghthode. love and gentyllesse
And some also. of parfyte holiness
And some also. in sothe of Rybaudrye
To make laughter. in the company
Each admytted. for none would other grieve
Like as the Look. the Myller and the Reave The Look Myller and ye Reave

Aquyte hemselfe. shortly to conclude
Boystously in her terms rude
when they hadden. well dronken of the bolle
And eke also. with his pylled nolle
The Pardoner. beerdles all his chyn Pardoner

Glaly eyes. and face of Lherubyn
Tellyng a tale. to anger with the Friar
As openly. the story can you lere
word by word. with every circu^staunce
Echone I write. and put in remembrance
By him that was. if I shall not feign Lhaw^er

Flower of Poe^es. thorugh out of all Bretayne
which sothly had. most of excellence
In Rethoryke. and in eloquence
Read his making. who list the truth find
which never shall. appallen in my mind
But always fresshe. ben in mine memory
To whom be give. pryse honor and glory
Of well saying. first in our langage
Lhyfe regystrer. in this pilgrimage
All that was ^olde. forgetyng naught at all
Feigned tales. nor thing hystoryall
with many proverbs. diverse and uncouth
By rehersayle. of his sugared mouth
Of each thing. keeping in substance
The sentence hole. without varyaunce
Voydynge the chaff. sothly for to sayn
Enlumynynge. the true pyked grayn
By crafty writing. of his sawes sweet
Fro the time. that they did mete
First the pilgrims. sothly euerychon
At the Tabard. assembled one by oon
And fro Sothwerke. sothly for to seye At the ^a bard in sou thwerke

To Lanterbury. riding on her weye
Tellyng a tale. as I rehearse can
Lych as the host. assygned every man
Noon so hardy. his bidding dysobeye The Oost

And this while. that the pilgrims leye
At Lanterbury. well logged one and all
I not in soth. what I may it call
Hap or fortune. in conclusyon
That me befelle. to enter in to the town
The holy Saint plainly to vysyte
After my sykenesse. vows to acquyte
In a Lope of blake. and not of grene The discri uynge of ye monk etc.

On a palfray. Sclender. long and lene
with Rusty brydell. made not for the Sale
My man toforne. with a void male
That of fortune. took mine ynne anoon
where the pylgrimes. were logged euerychon
The same time. her governor the Oost
Scondynge in halle. full of wind and boost
Lyche to a man. wounder stern and fers
which spoke to me. and said anon dan pers The wordis of ye ost to ye monk

Dan domynyk. dan Godfray or Llement
Ye be welcome. newly in to kent
Though your brydell. have another boos ne bell
Besechynge you. that ye will tell
First of your name. and what country
without more. shortly that ye be
That look so pale. all deuoyde of blood
Upon your head. a wonder thredbare hode
well arrayed. for to ride late
I answerde my name. was Lydgate Lydgate monk of Burye

Monk of Burye. nigh fyfty year of age
Lome to this town. to do my pilgrimage
As I have hight. I have there of no shame
Dan Johan quoth he. well brouke ye your name The wordis of ye ost

Though ye be sooll. byth right glad and light
Prayeng you to suppe. with us this night
And ye shall have made. at your deuys
A great poddynge. or a round hagys
A fraunche moyse. a tanse or a Froyse
To ben a monk. sclender is your coyse
ye have been syke. I dare mine head assure
Or let feed. in a faint pasture
Lift up your head. be glad take no sorrow
And ye should home ride. with us to morrow
Pars prima Here begins the Story of the destruccyon of the Lyte of Thebes
SIrs quod I. sith of your curtesye
I entered am. in to your company
And admytted. a tale for to tell
By him that has. power to compelle
I mean our Ost. governor and guide
Of you echone riding. here beside
Though that my wytt. bareyn be and dulle
I will rehearse. a story wounderfulle
Towchynge the Syege of destruccyon
Of worthy Thebes. the mighty royal town
Bylte and begone. of old antyquyte
Upon the time. of worthy Josue
By dylygence. of king Amphyon
Lheef cause first. of his foundacyon
For which his fame. which never shall away
In honor floureth. yet unto this day
And in story remembered. is and preysed
But how the walls. were on heyght raised
It is wonder. and marvel for to here
But if ye list. I shall you platly lere
The manner hole platly in sentence
Under supporte. of your pacyence
As write mine auctour. and Bochas both two
Read her books. and ye shall find it so
Eueryche conclude. lyche as his fantasye
And thus full often. gendred is envy
In folks hertes. of soleynce and pride
For such as list not. ones to look aside
To reward hem. when they low lou^e
And again kind. it is out of doubt
That any head. by record of the wise How ye pour people supporte^ and be ren
up ye state of a k^g

Should the foot of dysdayne despise
which bears him up. who so can take heed
And susteyneth. in his most need
As his pyler. and his suppoayle
For finally. ne were the porayle
Her berer up. and supportacyon
Fare well lordshyp. and denomynacyon
Thorugh out the land. of every high estate
wherefore me seems. more is fortunate
Of Marcurye. the sweet sugared harp
Than Mars sword. whettyd kene and sharp
More accepted. with aspectes good
Than is this god. with his lokes wood Nota What the goodlihede of a prince
avails to wine ye her ^is of his people

For humble speech. with glad contenau^ce
May a prince. shortly auau^ce
Among his people. hertes for to win
Of Inward love. which will not twyne
Than gold. richesse. pride or tyranny
Other dysdayne. daungere or surquedye
Or of lords. clerks can report
But that love. her crown do supporte
The fine is not. in conclusyon Ensample of king a^phyon

I take record. of king Amphyon
That bylte Thebes. by his eloquence
More than of pride. or of vyolence
Noble and rich. that like was nowhere none
And thus the walls. made of lyme and stone
were raised first. by syngynges of this king
Like as poets feynen. in her writing
But sothly yet. some exposytours How after thopynyon of some auc tours Cad mus
bylded first ye cite of Thebes

Groundyng hem. upon old auctours
Sayen that Cadmus. the famous old man
Full long before. the Cytee first began
And the ground. of byldyng set
And the bonds. by compass out met
with thong out kerue of a bolys side
which enuyron. stretche might wide
To get in land. a full large space How the co^ tree of boece took first his
name of a bolyskyn and aftir callid The bes How king cadmus was exyled out of
Thebes by the prowess of king Amphyon

where upon to bylde. a dwelling place
And called was. the soil thus getten in
whylom Boece. of the bolys skyn
The name after. in to Thebes turned
But Cadmus. has not there long soiourned
Like in story. as it is compyled
For shortly. he fro thennes was exyled
Never after. for to dwell in the town
By the knyghthode. of this Amphyon
which up perfourmeth. rich for the nones
The Cytee Thebes. of mighty square stones
As I you told. a lyte here to forne
And Cadmus thus. his kingdom has lorne
Scepter and crown. and his power royal
Now have I told. unto you ground of all
That ye well know. by Informacyon
Clearly the pyth. and thexposycyon
Of this matter. as clerks can you tell
It were but vain. longer for to dwell
To tarry you on this matter
Sith my tale. which that ye shall here
Upon our way. will last a long while
The space in sothe. as I suppose of an mile
And now ye know. first how Amphyon
Bylte and began this Cite and this town
Regnyng there. long after as I read
Of him no more. for I will proceed How the ly ^e of aphy on by ducet was co^^ey
e^ unto k^ge Layus

To my purpos. that I first began
Not tellyng here. how the line ran
Fro king to king. by succession
Conueyeng down. by the stoke of Amphyon
Ceryously by line. all the dyscente
But leave all this. plainly of entente
To tell forth. in books as I read
How Layus. by process began succeed
To bear the crown. in this mighty land
Holdyng the scepture. of Thebes in his hand king Layus and ^ocasta his wife

Manly and wise. during all his life
And Jocasta. called was his wife
Full womanly. the story says certain
For a time. though she were bareyn
Till layus. in full humble wise
To have a child. did sacrefyce
First to Appollo. in his chare so bryghte
And Jubyter. that has so great a might
Besechynge hem. with devout reverence
To grant oonly. through her influence
That his request. executed may be
And specially. to goddesses three
He besoughte. Pallas and Juno
And Dyane. for to help also
That he be not defrauded. of his boon
And his prayer accepted. was full soon
That finally. thorugh his rytes old
Even like. as his heart would
The queen Jocasta. has anon conceived
which when the king. fully has perceived
He made in haste. him list not to abide
Thorugh his kingdom. messengers ride
Fro coost to coost. the story can deuyse
For dyuyners. and philosophers wise
For such as werne. famous physycyens
And well expert. Astronomyens
To come in haste. unto his presence
To find out. shortly in sentence
By craft oonly. of calculacyon How the astronomye^s and the philosophers of
thebes calked out the fayt of edippus

The childs fate. and dysposycyon
And thereupon. to give a Jugemente
The rote I take. at ascendente
Trewly sought out. by mynute and degree
The self hour. of his natyuytee
Not for yet. the heavenly mansyons
Clearly serched. by small fraccyons
First by secondes. teers. and eke quartes
On angrym stones. and on white carts
I preued out. by dylygente labor
In tables correct. deuoyde of all error
Justly sought. and found out of both two
The years collecte. and expanse also
Consydred eke. by good inspeccyon
Every hour. and constellacyon
And each aspecte. and look eke diverse
which were good. and which also peruers
where they were toward. or at debate
Happy welfull* or unfortunate
And finally. in conclusyon Nota the cursed co^stella co^n and indis^osi co^n
of heaven in ye nat^^y te of edippus Nota How ye face of edyppus dysposed yt he
should sle his own fader

They found Saturn. in the Scorpyon
Heavy chered. malencolyke and loathe
And wood Mars furyous and wroth
Holding his septure. in the Caprycorne
The same hour. when this child was borne
Venus dyrecte. and contraryous
And depressyd in Marcuryus house
That the dome. and Jugemente fynall
Of thees clerks. to speak in special
By fatal sort. that may not be withdraw
That with his sword. his fader shall be slawe
There may no man. help it nor excuse
On which thing. the king began sore muse
And cast he would. on that other side
Again her dome. for himself provide
Shape away. and remedy toforn
Byddyng the queen. when the child were born
without mercy. or moderly pity
That he be deed. it may none other be
And in all haste. like as he has sent
She obeyed. his commandment
with woeful heart. and pyteous look
And face pale. her young sone she took
Tender and grene. both of flesh and bones
To certain men. ordained for the nones
Fro point to point. in all manner thing
To execute. the bidding of the king
They durst not. delay it nor abide
But to a foreste. that stood far beside
They took her way. and fast began hem speed
The kings will. to perform in deed
Having thereof. passing heaviness
But when that. they beheld the fayrenesse
Of the child. and excellent beauty
In her heart. they had great pity
And plainly cast. among hem was no strife
That the child. should have his life
And anon. full high upon a tree
In a place. that no man might see
They henge him up. the story can rehearse
But first his fete. thorugh they began to perse
And on bows tender. towgh and small
They knette him up this no tale
Him to preserve. fro bestes wild and rage
And after that. taken her vyage
Toward Thebes. in all the haste they may
But of fortune. thylken same day
with her hounds. searching up and down
The hunters went. of king polybon
Through the foreste. game for to find
Some aforne. and some come behind
And began search. and seek wounder sore
Among the hills. and the holtes hoar
And as the reenge. the trenches by and by how the hu^ters of king polybon
fond ye child in ye foreste and present him unto the king

They hard a noise. and a pyteous cry
Of this child. hanging on this tree
And all atrones. drowe it for to see
And left not. till they have him found
And took him down. and his feet unbound
And bare him home. unto polybon
Lrynge of Archadye. the famous regyon
And when that he. first the child began see
Of his wounds. he had great pytee
To behold. his tender fete blede
And called him. Edyppus as I read
which is to seyn. platly this no phage
Bored the fete. as in that langage
And first the king. in his royal halle
Made his men. a nouryce for to call
This young child. to fuster and to keep
with her milk. that he naught weep
And his leches. he charged eke also
Till he were hoole. her devour for to do
Fully in purpose. for the child was fair
After his day. to make him his heir
For cause oonly. who so takes head
Sone had he none. by line to succeed
And where that he had. a wife or none
I find not. and therefore let it gone
But by process. of days and of years
This Edyppus. among his playeng feres
was in his port. passing full of pride
That none. with him might in peace abide
I heart he. was so inly surquidous
Malencolyke. and contraryous
Full of despyte. and high dysdayne
That no wight durst. shortly him with said
Till on a day. he began with one debate
To whom he had. specially great hate
which of rancoure. and of hasty tene
As he that might. his pride not sustene
Began upon him. truly abrayde
And unto him. felly thus he said
whereto quod he* art thou so proud of port
Lontrarye ever also in our dysporte
Froward and fell. lasting ever moan
As thou were lord. of us euerychone
And presumeste. fully in worchynge
Like as thou were sone unto the king
And descended. of his royal blood
But where so be. thou be wroth or wood
Thou art nothing. and thou list take heed
Apperteynynge. unto his kynrede
But in a foreste. founden and unknow
when thou were young. the* fore bear the low
And utterly. remember if the list
Thy birth and blood. are both two vnwyste
This is the fine. shortly of my tale
wherewith Edyppus. began to wax pale
And change also. chere and countenance
And began a point. in his remembrance
word by word. and feyned right naught
And felly to muse. in his own thought
And cast he would. without more taryenge
The truth enquere. of Polybon the king
And when he saw. oportune space
And the king. in syker place
He him besoughte. lowly on his knee
To his request. benygnely to see
And that he would. plainly and not spare
Of his birth. the true truth declare
And make him sure. of this thing anon
If he were his verray sone or none
And Polybon. oonly of gentylnesse
when he beheld. the great heaviness
Of Edyppus. and the woeful pain
He began dyssymule. and in manner feign
Like as he had be. verrely his heir
But more and more. he falls in dyspeyre
And down on knees. efte again began fall
Him conjuring. by the goods all
To tell truth. and no thing to hyde
Affermynge eke he would not abide
Longer with him. but ryden and enquere
Till time he may. the verray sothe here
In any part. of hap or of fortune
And for that he. was so importune
In his desire. the king without abode
Leryously* told how it stood
In a foreste first. how he was found
Upon a tree. by the feet I bound
And how he cast. in conclusyon
To make him king. of that regyon
After his day. shortly for to tell
But Edyppus. will no longer dwell
But to ke leave. and in haste began ride
To a temple. fast there beside
Of appollo. in story as it is told
whoos statu. stood in a chare of gold
On wheles four. burned bryghte and shene
And within. a spyryte full unclean
By fraud oonly. and false collusyon
And answer gafe. to every questyon
Bringing the people. in full great error
Such as to him. dyden false honor
By ryghtes used. in the old dawes
After custom. of paganymes laws
And Edyppus. with full humble chere
To Appollo. made his prayere
Besechynge him. on his knees bow
By some sign. that he might know
Thorugh euydence. shortly comprehends
Of what kynrede. he was descends
And when Edyppus. by great devotion
Fynysshed has. fully his oryson
He found anon. wymmen Inuysyble
with a voyse. dreadful and horrible
Bade him in haste. taken his vyage
Toward Thebes. whereof his lynage
He heren shall. and be certefyed
And on his way. anon he has him hyed
By hasty Journaye. and so his horse constreyned
Day by day. till he has atteyned
Unto a castle. Pylotes I called
Rich and strong. and well about walled
Adiacente. by sight of the country
And perteynente. to Thebes the cytee
Lrynge Layus. being there present
For to hold. a manner tornemente
with his knights. young and curyous
And other folk. that were desirous
To preue hemselfe. shortly for to tell
who by force. other might excelle
Or get a name. thorugh his hye prowess
Each of hem. did his business
On horse back. and also eke on foot
All be that some found all vnsote
Rather apply. of werre than of pees
where Edyppus. put himself in prees
As he that was ay ready to debate
Enforsynge him. to entren in at gate
Maugre all tho. that him would let
And in the prees. of adventure how he met How edyppus slough his fad a^^ a
castle

Lrynge Layus. and cruelly him slow
Though the story. writ not the manner how
Ne no wyghte. can of all the company
By no sign. verily espy
By whose hand. that the king was slawe
For Edyppus in haste began. him withdraw
And kept him coye. of entencyon
Great was the noise. and the pyteous soun
In the castle. for slaughter of the king
Dooll and complaynte. sorrow and weeping
But for they see. heaviness and thought
Against death. vayleth little or naught
They ordeyne. with Rytes full royal
For the feste. called funeral
And like the custom. of the days old
The cors they burnt. in to ashes cold
And in a vessel. round made as a balle
They closed hem. in gold and in metalle
And after that did her besy cure
An Thebes. to make a sepulture
And rychely. hem list no longer let
The asshen did they. enclose and shette
Of this matter. there is no more to seyne
But to Edyppus. I will turn ayene
which him enhasteth ay fro day to day
Towerde Thebes. in all that ever he may
Brennynge in heart. hot as any fire
The fine to know. of his fatal desire
But for that he failed. of a guide
Out of his way. he went fer beside
Thorugh a wyloe. and a waste country How edyppus went by ye hylle where ye
mo^stre lay yt called was spynx

By a montayne that stood upon the sea
where that monstres. of many diverse kind
were conuersante. in story as I find
Among which. sothly there was one
So Inly cruel. that no man durst gone
For dread of death. forth by that passage
This monstre. was so mortal in his rage The des^^ co^n of yt fou le monstre

which had also. by descrypcyon
Body and feet. of a fers lion
And like a maid. in sothe was head and face
Fell of his his look. and cruel to manace
And odyous. of contenaunce and of syghte
And as I read. Spynx this monstre hyghte
worse than Tygre. Dragon or Serpente
And I suppose. by enchauntemente
He was ordained. on the hylle to abide
To slew all tho. that passeden beside
And specially. all that did fail
To expowne. his mysty dyuynayle
His problem eke. in words plain and bare
without a mysse. openly declare
Or with the life. he might not escape
This is berray sothe. platly and no Jape
And if that he. by declaracyon
Gaaf there upon. clear exposycyon
He should in haste. there was none other mean
Slay this monstre. for all his cruel teane
There may of mercy. be none other grant
But for all this. Edyppus ignoraunte
This dreadful hylle. standing on a Roche
Or he was ware. full nigh began aproche
More perlous platly. then he wend
And suddenly the monstre began descend
To stoppen his way. and letten his passage
Thus abraydynge. with a fell courage
I have in heart. Inly great dysporte
That fortune has brought the. to my sort
To make a priest. if thou may endure
The fatal end of this adventure
Set at a fine. sothely by days old
And by and by. all the caas him told
Chargynge him. to be well ware and wise
Get the palm. and bear away the pryse
Thouchynge this thing. set atwene us twey^
with life or death. which we shall dareyn
And this monstre. with a despytous chere
His problem. began thus. as ye shall here
There is a be. merueylous to see Of the problem that spynx putt to edyppus

The which in sothe. at his natyuytee
Is of his might. so tender and so grene
That he may not. himself sustene
Upon his fete. though he had it sworn
But if that he be. of his mother borne
And afterward. by process of age
On four feet. he makes his passage
After one. three. if I shall not feign
And alderlaste. he gooth vpryghte ontwayne
Diverse of port. and wonderful of cheres
Till by length. of many sundry years
Naturelly. he gooth again on three
And sith on four. it may none other be
And finally. this is the troth plain
He retorneth. kyndely again
To the matter. which that he came fro
Loo here is. all my problem do
Muse here upon. withouten werre or stry^e
It to declare. or else lose thy life
And when Edyppus. began this thing aduerte
well assured. in his manly heart
Began in his wit. serchen up and down
And of prudence. cast in his reasone
By great auyse. what this thing may be
Seenge also. that he may not fle
And how there was. counseyll none nor read
But tell troth. or else to be deed
And by full good delyberacyon
Thus he answered. in conclusyon
Thou Spynx quod he. falls and fraudulente
Thou foul monstre. thou dragon you serpente
That in this hylle. lyche as I conceive
Lyeste in a whayte. folks to deceive
But trust well. for all thy sleyghty wit
Thy false fraud. shall anon by quyte
Me list not now. whysper nether rowne
But thy problem. anon I shall expowne
So openly. thou shalt not goo there fro
Loo thus it is. take good head there to
Thylke best. thou spoke of her beforne How edyppus expow ned ye problem yt
spynx put to him

Is every man. in this world borne
which may not gone. his lymmes be so soft
But as his mother. beryth him a lofte
In her arms. when he does cry or weep
And after that. he gynneth for to crepe
On four fete. in his tender youth
By experyence. as it is often couthe
A forne I rekened. his hands both two
And by process. thou may consider also
with his two fete. for all thy fell tene
He has a staff. himself to sustene
And than he gooth. shortly upon three
And alderlaste. as it must needs be
Voydynge his staff. he walks upon tweyne
Till it so be. thorugh age he atteyne
That lust of youth. wasted be and spente
Than in his hand. he takes a potente
And on three fete. thus he gooth again
And I dare afferme. you may it not withsayne
And soon after. thorugh his unwieldy might
By influence. of natures right
By experyence. as every man may know
Lyche a child. on four. he ^repeth allow
And for he may. here no while soiourne
To earth again. he must in haste return
which he come fro. he may it not renew
For in this world. noman may eschew
This verraye sothe. shortly and no doughte
when the whele of kind. comyth aboughte
And naturelly. has his course run
By cyrcuyte. as does the shene son
That man and child. of hye and low estate
It gayneth not. to make more debate
His time set. that he must fine
when Antropos. of malice does untwine
His lives ^hred. by Cloto first compowned
Loo here thy problem. fully is expowned
At our metynge. as I took on hand
To the law. that thou must needs stand
And in all haste. of mine hondes deye
But of reason. thou can it ought with seye
And so this spynx. a wapyd and amate
Stood dysamayed. and dysconsolate
with chere done cast. muyte pale and deed
And Edyppus. anon smote of the head
Of this fend. stynkynge and vnsw^te
And the country. set holy in quyete
whereby he has. such a pryse I won
That his fame. is every cost yronne
Thorugh all the land. yt he the monstre has slawe
And line right. to Thebes he began draw
well received. for his worthynesse
For his manhood. and his right prouesse
And for they see. he was a semely knight
well favored. in every mannys syghte
And saw also. Thebes the mighty town
Not oonly they. but all the regyone
werne destytute. of a gouernoure
Avens her foon. having no socoure
Hem to defend. but the queen allone
Among hemselfe. making full great moan
For there was none. as books specyfye
The Septure or crown. for to occupye
For which the lords. all by one assente*
within the town. set a parlyamente
Shortly concludynge. if it might been
Prudently to treat. with the queen
Namely they that. held hemselfe most sage
To condyscende by way of marriage
She to be Joined. to this manly knight
Passing prudente. and famous eke of might
Most lykely man. as they can dyscexne
The worthy Cite. to kepen and govern
And thorugh counseyll. of the lords all
To her desire. plainly she is fall
And corded. without more taryeng
That of Thebes. Edyppus shall be king
By full assente. was none that said nay
And time set. again a certain day
Among hemselfe. and fynaly dyuysed
The wedding was in Thebes solempnysed
Full ryally. with needs most vnthryne
Oonly for he is. mother took tho wine
Un ^yst of both. he was of her blood
And Ignoraunte. shortly how it stood
That he tofore. had his fader slawe
For which this weddyng. was again the law
And to^ore god. is another fair ne good
Nor acceptable. blood to touch blood
which cause has be. of great confusy^^
In many land. and many Regyon
Ground and rote. of unhap and meschaunce
The fine concludynge. always in vengaunce
As men have seen. by clear experyence
And holy write. records in sentence
How herodes. falsely in his life
Vyolence. took his brothers wife
For she was fair. and pleasant to his sight
And kept her still. by force thorugh his might
All be to her. title had he noon
And for her sake. the holy man saint Johon
For his truth. in prison lost his head
Therefore I read. every man take heed
where so he be. prince lord or king
That he be ware. to eschew such wedding
Or that the sword. of vengaunce of manace
Lest he lose hap. fortune and grace
Taking ensample. in all manner thing
Of Edyppus. in Thebes crowned king
All be that he wroughte of ignorance
Full derke and blind. of his woeful chance
And if vnwyste. he of Innocence
As ye have herd. fylle in such offense
For which he was punysshed and brought low
what ar they worthy that her error know
And fro the knotte. list not to abstene
Of such sponsayle. to god and man unclean
I can not seen. no more thereof deuyse
Demeth your self. that prudente ben and wise
And Edyppus. have among in mind
Of whom the weddyng. like as ye may find
Unhappy was. and passing odyous
Infortuned. and ungracious
I am weary. and thereof more to write
The hatfull process. also to endyte
I pass over. fully of entente
For Imynens. was not there present
Nor Lucyna. list not thereto shine
Ne there was none. of the musys nine
Of our accord. for to make melodye
For they song not. by heavenly Armonye
Another Clyo. nor Calyope
One of the sustren. in nombre thryes three
And they did. when Phylogye
Ascended up hye. above the sky
To be wedded. this lady virtuous
Unto her lord. the god Marcuryus
As Marcyan I named. de Capelle
In his book of wedding. can you tell
There concludynge. in this marriage
The Poet. that whylom was so sage
That this lady. called Sapyence
I wedded was. unto Eloquence
As it sat well. by heavenly purueaunce
Hem to be Joined. by knotte of alyaunce
But both two. sothly of entente
At wedding. in Thebes were assente
That caused after. great aduersyte
For fynall end. of that solempnyte
was sorrow. and woo and destruccyon
Vter ruin. of this royal town
There may no man. help it ne socoure
For a time in Joye. though they flower
But at wedding. platly for to tell The infortunat follr yt were at
edippus weddyng. Cerberus herebz Noye with her iii daughters dread fraud
Trecherye treson pou^te Indygence need death and cruel Mars

was Cerberus cheef porter of hell
And herebus. fader to hatrede
was there present. with his hole kynrede
His wife also. with her brows blake
And her daughter. sorrow for to make
Hydous chered. and vggely for to see
Megera. and Thesyphonee
Allecto eke. with labor and envy
Dread and Fraud. and false Trecherye
Treson Pouerte. Indygence and Need
And cruel Death. in his rent wede
wretchedness. complaynte and eke rage
Ferfull pale. derkenes crooked age
Cruel Mars. as any tygre wood
Brennynge ire. of unkind blood
Fraternall hate. deep set the rote
Saaf oonly death. that there nas no bote
Assured oaths. at fine untrue All thise unthrifty people were at ye weddyng
of Edyppus and Jocasta

All these folk. were at this wedding new
To make the town. desolate and bare
As the story. after shall declare
But ay in Thebes. with his walls strong
Edyppus regnyth. many day and long
And as mine auctoure write. in words plain
By Jocasta. he had sons twain
Ethyocles. and also Polymyte
And in bookys. as soundry clerks write
Daughters two. full goodly on to see
Of the which. one hyghte Antygonce
And that other. called was I meyne
Off her beauty. inly souereyne
Edyppus ay deuoyde. of werre and strife
with Jocasta. ladde a merry life
Till fortune. or his iniquyte
Had envy. of his prosperyte
For when he shone. most rich in his renoune
Fro her whele. she plonged him adoune
Out of his Joye. in to sondayne woo
As she is wont. frowardly to do
And namely hem. that setten her affyaunce
On erthly trust. in her varyaunce
For when this king. passing of great might
Sat with the queen. upon a certain night
Casuelly when his folk echone
Out of his chamber. suddenly were gone
Or he was ware. Jocasta began behold
The carectes of his wounds old
Upon his feet. enprented wounds deep
Tournynge her face. brast out for to weep
So secretly. he might it not aspye
And she anon. fell in to a fantasye
Ay on this thing. musing more and more
And in her bed. began to sygh sore
And when the king. conceived her dystresse
He began enquere. of her heaviness
Fully the cause. and occasyon
For he would wit. in conclusyon
what her eyleth. and why she ferde so
My lord quod she. without words moo
Parcelle cause. of this sodeyne rage
Is for I in my tender age
Had a lord. I named Layus
Lrynge of this town. a man right virtuous
By whom I had a sone. wonder fair
Lykely to have been his. successor and heir
But by cause. his dyuynours told
At his birth. sothly that he should
If he have life. by fatal destenye
Slay his fader. it might none other be
For which the king. his face to eschew
Badde me in haste. as him thought due
To slay the child. and have thereof no routhe
And I anon badde. without slouthe
To certain men. upon pain of Jugemente
To excecute. the commandment
Of the king. as I gaaf hem in charge
And forth they gone. to a foreste large
Adiacente to this country
Percen they his feet. and hanging on a tree
Not perfourmynge. the execucyon
On him they. had such compassyon
Left him there. and home resort again
Being in doubt. and in none certain
At her repair. as they told all
Of this child. what afterward is befalle
Saaf they said. hunters have him found
which lad him forth. and his feet unbound
But to what cost. they could not declare
which percell is of. mine evil fare
Ground and cause. of mine heavy chere
Considered eke. the wounds that appear
Upon your feet. and wot not what they mean
And one thing is. ay at mine heart grene
My lord alas. but of new date
Lrynge Layus. slain was but late
At a castle. nigh by this country
Upon your coming. in to this Cytee
All this I wayed. and rekened in to one
Making mine heart. heavy as any stone
So that I can counseyle. none ne read
And with yt word. the king lift up his head
And abarayed. with sharp syghes smerte
And all this thing. by order began aduerte
Ceryously. by good aduysemente
And by signs. clear and euydente
Conceyueth well. and sore began repent
It was himself. that Jocasta mente
And when ye queen. in manner saw him plain
By her gods. she began him to constrayne
To shown out. the cause of his affraye
And it expowne. and make no delay
Croppe and rote. shortly why that he
Entered first. in to that country
Fro when he came. and fro what regyo^
But he her put in delusyon
As he had done it. for the nones
Till at last. he brake out attones
Unto the queen. and began a process make
First how he was. in the foreste take
wounded the feet. and so forth every thing
Of his searching. how Polybon the king
And hole the cause. why he him forsook
And in what wise. he the way took
Toward Thebes. as Appollo badde
And of fortune. how he was ladde
where that Spynx. kept the mountain
And how that he slow* also in certain
Lrynge Layus at castle gate
Toward night. when it was full late
And to Thebes. than he began him speed
To find out. the stok of his kynrede
which unto him. began wexe couthe
For by process. of his grene youth
He found out well. by reckoning of his life
That she was both. his mother and his wife
So that all night. and suyng on the morrow
At twene hem two. began a new sorrow
which unto me. were tedyous to tell
For thereupon. if I should dwell
A long space. it would occupye Tragedia senecede Edyppo rege thebax

But ye may reden. in a Tragedye
Of moral Senek. and fully his ending
His dooll. his myscheef and his compleynynge
How with sorrow. and unwieldy age
This Edyppus. fylle in to dotage
Lost his wit. and his worldely delight
And how his sons. had him in dyspyte
And of dysdayne. took of him no keep
And books sayen. his eyes out he wept
And as mine auctour. lyketh to deuyse
As his sons. rebuke him and despise
Upon a day. in a certain place
Out of his head. his eyes he began out race
And cast at hem. he began none other bote
And of malice. they tradde hem under foot
Fully deuoyde. both of love and dread
And when Edyppus. for myscheef was thus deed
withinne a pytte. made in the earth low
Of cruelte. his sons have him throw
werre than serpente. or any tygre wood
Of cursed stok. comes unkind blood
As in story. ye may reden here to forne
All by the Rose. grow out of a thorn
Thus of Edyppus. when he was blind and old
The wretched end. I have yon plainly told
For which shortly. to man and child I read
To be well ware. and take heed Nota How every man ought of dewte to do
reverence to fader and mother. or ellis the wylfull vengaunce thereof

Of kyndly right. and conscience
To do honor. and due Reverence
To fader and mother. of what estate they be
Or certainly ellis. they should never thee
For whoo that is. not to hem debonayre
In speech in port. for to treat hem fair
Hem to obey. in honest and dread
And to cherysshe. of what they had need
I dare afferme. exceptynge none estate
That he shall first. be unfortunate
In all his work. both in see and land
And of what thing. he takes on hand
Fortune froward. and to him contrayre
waste of his good. plainly and appayre
Find plente. of contek war and strife
Unhappy end. and shortyenes of life
And graceles of. what he has to do
Hatrede of god. and of man also
Therefore no man. be here of recheles
But make your myrroure. of Ethyocles
And his brother. called Polymyte
which in such thing. gretely weve to wit
As ye shall here. of hem how it fylle
And when we be descended down this hylle
And I passed here. the low vale
I shall begin. the remenante of my tale
Explicit prima pars istius Codicilli.
Inmediate sequitur secunda pars eiusdem.
PAssyd ye thorpe. of boughton on the blee
By my childern. I began anon to see
Through ye son. yt full clear began shine
Of the clok. that it drowe to nine
And saw also. the silver dropes shene
Of the dew. lyche perles on the grene
Vapoured up. in to the air a lofte
when zepherus. with his blowynge soft
The weder made lusty. smothe and fair
And right attempred. was the wholesome air
The same hour. all the hole route
Of the pilgrims. riding Round about
In my tale. when I began proceed
Rehersynge forth. as it was in deed
when Edyppus. buried was and grave
How his sons. the kingdom for to have
Among hemselfe. by full of mortal hate
For the crown. gonne to debate
which of hem. Justely shall succeed
And the septure. of the town possede
Aduertynge not. another to right ne wrong
But each of hem. to make her party strong
And his quarrel. proudly to sustene
From whoos hertes. was deuoyded clean
Of bretherhode. the faithful alyaunce
False couetyse. so made hem at dystaunce
Fully worchynge. in to destruccyon
And ruin of this noble town
So hot burnt. the hatred envy
of both two. thorugh pompous surquedye
That neither would. plainly in a point
Other forborne. they stood in such desioynte
How as they had. of birth be foreyns
Till of the town. the noble Cytezeyns
Lmyghtes barons. with many worthy lord
Shope away to make hem of accord
And to set hem. in quyete and in pes
But for his part. this Ethyocles
Allege began. that he was first borne
For which of reason. he ought goo to forne
In the cytee. to be crowned king The co^trauercy of the two brethren

Sithe by law. there was no lettynge
For unto him. longs the herysage
By descend. and by title of age
But Polymyte. of full hye dysdayne
All openly. began replye again
And for his part. said in special
Reason was none. that he should have all
Regalye. and domynacyon
And the lorshyppe. hole of the town
And he right naught. out of the Cite
Live in exyle. and in pouerte
Full concludynge. without fere or dread
Rather than it suffer. he will be deed
And thus alas. thorugh her enuyous strife
At end eueryche lost his life
At great myscheef. as ye shall after here
But thylke time. the lords all I fere
Full besely did. her dylygence
By great auyse. of full high prudence
To setten hem in quyete and in rest
Cou^seylynge hem. plainly for the best
To leave her strife. of wisdom and reason
A condescende. to some conclusyon
which to both might. most avail
That finally thorugh. her gouernayle
The lords all. being tho present
They have hem brought. to be of one assente
Of one heart. as brother unto brother
Eueryche of hem. to regoen after other The co^uen cyon of the two brethren

year by year as it come about
So that the town. shall absente him out
Fully that year. and himself guye
By his manhood. and his chyualrye
Haunte himself. in deeds marcyall
while his brother. in his see royal
Holds his septure. the Cytee to govern
And when the year. his course has run yerne
And is come out. he shall have repeyre
To regne in Thebes. like as lord and heir
Thereto receive. fully his dygnyte
while that the other. voydeth the Cite
Pacyently taking. his adventure
Till he again. his honor may recure
Thus entrechange. every year they shall
That one ascends. that other has a fall
They must obey. of heart and take it well
Lyche as the turn. resorteth of the whele
For this was. hole the composycyon The words of the composicyon

By twene the brethern. and conuencyon
Full knytte up. by great auysemente
Therefore the gods. by oath of sacrament
Never after to grutche. ne to varye
But accomplysshen. shortly and not tarry
Lyche as ye accord. enrolled in the town
Fro point to point. made mencyone
But alder first. by reason of his age
Ethyocles. had thauantage
To regne aforne. to were a crown
Polymyte hastynge him out of town
During that year. it may none other be
While his brother. sat in his royal see
Full rychely. upon fortunes whele
And rode him forth. armed bryghte in steel
This Polymyte. sothly as I read
Himself allone. on a Royal stead
Without guide. all the long day
Being aferde. to keep the high way
In his heart. having suspecyon
To his brother. of malice and treson
Lest he pursued. through his false unkind blood
To have him deed. for couetyse of good
That he allone. might have possessyone
During his life. fully of the town
For which in haste. having no felawe
Polymyte aside began him draw
By a foreste. Joynynge to the sea
Linowyng right naught. ye sight of the country
Full of hills. and of hye mountayns
Craggy roches. and but few playns
Wounder dreadful. and loathsome of passage
And therewith all. full of bestes rage
Holding his way. of heart no thing light
Mate and weary. till it drowe to night
And all the day. beholdynge enuyrone
He neither saw. castle tower ne town
The which thing. greuyd him full sore
And suddenly. the sea began to rore
Wind and tempeste. hydously to arise
The reyne down beat. in full grysly wise
That man and best. thereof was adradde
And nigh for fere. began to wax mad
As it seemed. by the woeful sowns
And Tygres Beres. Bores and Lions
Which for refute. hemselfe for to save
Eueryche in haste. drowe unto his cave
But Polymyte. in this tempeste huge
Alas the while. he fyndeth no refuge
Nor him to shronde. saw no where no socour
Till it was passed. almoost mydnyghte hour
The cloud void. in heaven did appear
A large space. that the sterres clear
So that this knight. out of a foreste large How Poly myte came in to ye
land of Arge

Began approchen. to the land of Arge
Seenge a paleys mighty of byldynge
Of which Adrastus. called was the king
A manly man. rich and wounder sage
And run was. somdele in to age
Borne of the isle. that called is Clyson
And whylom sone. of the king Chalon
And for his wit. in story as is couthe
He chosen was. in his tender youth
Of all Arge. to be crowned king
Chyfe of all greece. by record of writing
Nor by dyscente. ne succession
But all oonly. of free eleccyon
Behold of Arge. the septure in his hand
As most worthy. of all Greeks land
Loved and drad. for wisdom and Justyce
And as the story plainly can deuyse
This worthy king. had doughtres two
Passing fair. and right good also
It were to long. her beauty to dyscryue
And the eldeste. called was Argyue Argyue dei phyle and Adrastus

Deiphyle. I named the second
And Adrastus. lyche as it is fond
This worthy king. had sone none
To succeed. after he be gone
For which he was during. all his life
Tryste in heart. and passing pensyfe
But hole his trust. and his hope stood
By alyaunce. of some worthy blood
Brought in by mean. of his daughters twayn
That he shall be. relessed of his pain
Thorugh recomforte. of some hye marriage
And sothly yet. full hye in his courage
He troubled was. by occasyon The dreme of adrastus of a bore and of a lion

Of a sweuen. and a vysyon
Showed to him. upon a certain night
For as him thought. in his inward syghte
While he slepte. by clear inspeccyon
A wild bore. and a ferce lion
Possede shall. the bestes in her rage
His daughters two. by bond of marriage
In short time. within a certain day
which brought his heart. in full great affraye
But thing in southe. that destyne has shapere
Here in this world. full hard it is tescape
Eke merueylous. a man teschue his fate
And Polymyte. of whom I spoke late
With the tempeste. beat and all bereyned
By grace oonly. the cytee has atteyned
Where Adrastus. full statly of degree
Thylke time. held his Royal see
The trouble night. myrke and full obscure
Has brought this knight. oonly by adventure
Through the cytee. enclosed with a wall
Unto the paleys. chyffe and pryncypall
Where as the king. in his chamber alofte
Lay in his bed. and slepte wounder soft
Eke all his folk. had her chambres cake
Like as fortune. peraunter had shape
The self time. by cause it was so late
And casuelly. no porter at gate
As it had be right. for the nones
And in a porche. bylte of square stones
Full myghtly. enarched enuyrowne
Where the domes. and the plees of the town
Were execute. and laws of the king
And there this knight. without more taryenge
weary and mate. fro his stead a light
Hanging the reyn. in all the haste he might
Upon his arm. surer him to keep
And laid him down. and began anon to sleep
As him seemed. that time for the best
And while he lay. thus for to rest
Of adventure. there come a knight riding
The worthyest. in the world living
Curteys lowly. and right virtuous
As says my auctour. called Tydyus
Eureus in arms. and manly in werkynge
Of his birth. sone unto the king
Of Calydonye. a land of great renown
And he alas. out of that regyowne
E^yled was. for he his brother slow
As Scace of Thebes. write the manner how
All be that he to him. no malice mente
For on a day. as they on hou^tynge went
In a foreste. for heart and for hynde
So as he stood. under a grene lynde
And casuelly. let his arowe slyppe
He slow his brother. called menalyppe
Through mortal sort. his hand was begyled
For which he was. banysshed and exyled
As the law. narowe set his charge
And for this caas. he came first to Arge
In to the porche. where Polymyte sleep
Of adventure. or he took any keep
The same night. hydously besaen
with the tempeste. of thonder wind and rayn
And fylle also. anoye and great damage
Through the foreste. holding his passage
As Polymyte. had done beforne
In perell often lykely. to be lorne
with bestes rage. set on every side
Till of grace. without any guide
He rode through Arge. the great mighty town
Streyte to the paleys. and the chief dou^gone
Lyche as I told. where Polymyte lay
And at his coming. made a great afraye
For he was blind. thorugh derknesse of ye night
And him to guide. he found no light
when he came in. of pryket ne of torche
Till he unwarily. entered the porche
And would have taken there. his herbygage
But Polymyte. sterte up in a rage
Suddenly awaked. as I read
with the nyghynge. of his proud stead
And first of all. when that he beheld
A knight armyd. upon his breast a shield
And began the manner. of his array aduerte
Of verraye ire. upon his horse he sterte
And cruelly. began tydynge enquere
whennes he came. or what he did there
And badde in haste. his answer to deuyse
And Tydeus. in full humble wise
Answered again. of verray gentylnesse
And said in sothe. that of high dystresse
Of the tempeste. and the derke night
He driven was. like an arrante knight
Of need oonly. and of necessyte
And hye constreynte. of his aduersyte
Take lodging. where so that he might
And in that court. therefore he a light
without more. thinking none outerage
Nor to no wyghte. menynge no damage
Than Polymyte. of malice and hye pride
Told him shortly. he should not abide
No longer there. though he had it sworn
For I quod he. took it up beforne
And will it keep. during all this night
I say the platly. maugre all thy might
Quod Tydeus. that is no curtesye
Me to deuoyde. but rather vylonye
If ye take heed. that seem a gentle knight
And I suppose. ye have no title of right
To this lodging. by way of heritage
More than have I. for all your fell rage
And parde. yet shall it be no dysese
Till to morrow. that do me ese
Of gentylesse. oonly by your leave
To suffer me. it shall little grieve
But ay the more. Tydeus spoke fair
Polymyte. was froward and contrayre
And shortly said. it geyneth not to strive
That of force. he shall deuoyde blyue
Or utterly between hem both two
This thing to try. he must have a do
And Tydeus seeng no better mean
Full like a knight. in steel armed clean
without abode. fast gam him speed
wounder lightly. for to take his stead
And thus. these knights pompous and elate
For little cause. fellen at debate
And as they ran together on horse bake How Tydeus and Polymyte stro fe for
her lodgyng

Eueryche on other. first her spear brake
And after that. full surquydous of pride
with sharp swerdes. they together ride
Full yrously. these mighty champyons
In her furye. like Tygres or Lions
As they hurtle. that all the paleys shoke
And king Adrastus. out of sleep woke
And made in haste. his chamberleyns call
And through the court. his worthy knyghtis all
Commaundyng hem. to descend and se
And report what it might be
This wounder noise. in his court be night
And wha^ they saw. two strange knight fight
In plates bright. and in thyk mayle
without Juge. they had great marvel
And dysamayed. of this uncouth thing
As they found. told they to the king
And Adrastus. for derkenesse of the nygh^
Fro his chamber. with many torches light
In to the court. is descended down
All his main. stondynge enuyrowne
Of these knights. having full great wounder
And of manhood. he put hem first asounder
Hem commaundyng. like a gentle king
To leave her stryte. and cesen of her fyghtyng
And entered in. with a knyghtly look
And first from hem. her swerdes both he took
Affermyng eke. as to his fantasye
It was a rage. and a great folly
So wylfully. her lives to in part
without Juge. her quarrel to depart
And specially. in the derke night
when neither of other. might have a sight
Chargyng hem. on pain of her life
To desure and stynten of of her strife
And Tydeus. in all the haste he might
Full humbly. fro his stead a light
And right mekely. with chere and contenau^ce
Put him hole in the governance
Of Adrastus. in all manner thing
And Polymyte. made eke no taryeng
To a light also. and would it not withseye
The kings byddyng. lowly to obey
So as him ought. with due reverence
And as they stood. both in his presence
He began enquere. first of her estate
The cause also. why they where at debate
Of her countrees sothly. and her age
He asked eke. touching her lynage
By dyscente of what. stok they were borne
And Tydeus. his answer gaaf toforne
Told plainly. made no lesyng
How that he was. sone to the king
Of Calydonye. and rightful heir thereto
And of thexyle. the soth he told also
As ye have herd. in the story radde
And Polymyte. with chere and face sad
Unto the king. touching his country
Said he was borne. in Thebes the Cytee
And Jocasta. the great famons queen
His mother was. withouten any wene
But of his fader. whylom king and lord
For verraye shame. he spoke not a word
Oonly for he. if I should not feign
His fader was. and brother both twain
The which in south. he was full loathe to tell
And eke the king. would him not compelle
Of gentyllesse. but badde without blame
Of his birth. for to have no shame
For hole the caas. and manner every dele
Touching his kyn. ye ground he knew full well
Lyche as it was. by full clear report
Enforsyng him. for to do comfort
with all his might. and his besy pain
This manly king. to these knights twain
And to hem said. aforne him as they stood
He wist well. that of worthy blood
They were descended. touching her kynrede
And made his officers. in haste to lead
The strange knights being at debate
Through his paleys. to chambres of estate
Each by himself. for to take his ease
And every thing in south yt might hem please
was offered hem. lyche to her estates
And when they weren. dyseuered of her plates
Cusshewes grenes. and her sabatous
Her harneys voyded. and her habargous
Twayn mantels. unto hem were brought
Fret with perle. and rich stones wrought
Of clothe of gold. and veluett cremesyne
Full rychely furred. with armyne
To wrappe hem in. again the cold morrow
After the rage. of her nyghtes sorrow
To take her rest. till the son arise
And than the king. in full prudente wise
First of all. was nothing recheles
The knights hertes. to ^etten in pees
That ever after. I dare aferme it well
Each was to other. as true as any stele
During her life. both in work and deed
Under a knotte. bounden of bretherhede
And Adrastus. the worthy king famous
A feste made. rich and plenteuous
To these knyghtis. and himself there at present
And after mete. full goodly he has sent
This noble king. for his daughters dear
Of gentyllesse. for to make hem chere
To the knights. Icome fro so fer
And like in sothe. as Lucyfer the ster
Gladdeth the morrow. at his vprysyng
So the ladies. at her incomyng
with the stremes. of her eyes clear
Goodly apporte. and womanly manner
Contenaunce. and excellent fayrenesse
To all the court. broughten in gladness
For the fresshenesse. of her heavenly cheres
So agreeable was. to the strangers
At her enter. that in special
Hem thought it like. a thing celestyall
Enhastyng hem. in full knyghtly wise
Against hem. goodly to arise
And as they met. with humble contenaunce
Full connyngly. did her obseruaunce
Hem conueyeng to her syttyng place
But sothly. I have leyser none ne space
To rehearse. and put in remembrance
Hole the manner. of her dalyaunce
I^ were to long. for you to abide
But well I wot. that the god Cupyde
By influence. of his mighty hand
And the feruence. of his fyry bronde
Her metyng first. fortuned has so well
That his arowe. of gold and not of stele
I perced have the. knights hertes twain
Through the breeste. with such a lusty pain
That there abode. sharp as spear or lance
Deep I fyxed. the point of remembrance
which may not lightly. rased ben a way
And thus in Joye. they driven forth the way
In play and revel. for the knights sake
And toward night. they her chambres took
At due time. as her fader badde
And on her way. the knights have hem ladde
Reverently. up by many a steyre
Taking leave. began anon repair
To her lodgyng. in a full statly toure
Assygned to hem. by the herberyoure
And after spyces. plainly and the wine
In cups great. wrought of gold fine
without taryeng. to bed streyte they gone
Touching her rest. where they slepte or none
Demeth ye lovers. that in such manner thing
By experyence. have fully knowlechyng
For it is not. declared in my book
But as I find. the king all night woke
Thought full in heart. the story specyfyes
Musyng sore. and full of fantasyes
First aduertyng. the great worthynesse
Of these knights. and the semlynesse
Her lusty youth. her force and her manhood
And how they weren comen. of Royal blood
All this he began to reuolue about
Ay in his heart. having a manner doubt
Between two. hangyng in a balaunce
whether he should maken alyaunce
Between his daughters. and the knyghtis twayn
For one thing. ay his heart began constrayn
The remembrance of his auysyon
Of which. therefore I made mensyon
Touching the lion. and the wild bore
It needs not. to rehearse it more
Castyng always. in his fantasye
what it might. clearly sygnyfye
This derke dreme. this was hid and close
But on the morrow. Adrastus up arose
And to the temple. the right way he took
And began pray devoutly on his book
To the gods. his dreme to specyfye
And they him badde. homewarde for to hye
And to behold. in the knights sheldes
The fell bestes. peynted of the feldes
which shall to him. by clear inspeccyon
Full plainly. make declaracyon
Of his dreme. that he had in the night
And Adrastus. enhasted him full right
In her sheldes. hanging upon hokes
The bestes rage. with her mortal hokes
And to purpose. like as write Bochas
Polymyte. full strayte enbraced was
In the hyde of a fers lion
And Tydeus. abouen his haberyon
Agypon had. ^^dous sharp and hoar
wrought of the brystles. of a wild bore
The which bestes. as the story leres
were wrought and beat. upon her baners
Dysplayed broad. when they should fight
whereof the king. when he had a sight
At his repair. in heart was full glad
with a face full demure and sad
with his lords. that he about him had
To the temple. he these knights ladde
And when they had. with all circumstau^ces
Of rytes old. done her obseruau^ces
Home to the court. they resort again
And in a hall. rich and well besayn
This worthy king. of heart lyberall
Made a feste. solemn and Royal
which in deyntes. suerly did excelle
But it were veyn. every course to tell
Her strange sewes. and her sotyltees
Ne how they. sat like to her degrees
Fer lak of time. I let it ouerslyde
And after mete. Adrastus took aside*
The knights two. and like a prudente man
In secret wise. thus his tale he began
SIrs quod he. I doughte it naught Verba Regis Adrastus ad Polimitem et Tydeu^

That it is fresshe. and grene ay in your thought
How that first. by goodis ordinance
And after next. through fates purueau^ce
And by workynge. of fortu^^s hand
How yt ye werne. first brought in to this land
Both tweyne. but now this last night
Of wos coming. I am full glad and light
First in my self. shortly to express
when I consider. and see the lyklynesse
Of your persons. with the circumstaunces
And hole the manner. of your gouernaunces
Seeing full well. whereto should I feign
ye lykely be. here after to attain
The great estate. of habondaunce of good
Through your birth. and your Royal blood
ye may not fail. but ye have wrong
For ye are both manly. and right strong
And for to set. your hertes at more rest
My purpose is. I hope for the best
So that in you. be no varyaunce
To make a knot. and by alyaunce
A twixe you and my daughters two
if your hertes. accorden will thereto
And for. I am fully in dyspeyre
To succeed. for to have an heir
Therefore ye shall have. possessyon
During my life. of half this regyon
Forth with in hand. and hole after my day
There is noman. that thereto shall say nay
And sothly after. when I am grave
Each of you. shall his part have
Of this kingdom. as I have provided
This to seen. it shall be divided
Between you two. eueryche to be crowned
your purpartyes. by equity compowned
So egally. in every mannys syghte
That each of you. rejoice shall his right
And by your wit. ye shall the land amend
And of manhood. knyghtly it defend
Again our enemies. and our mortal foon
And for the days. passed ben and goon
Of my desires. and my lusty youth
I am full set. for to make couthe
That ye should have. like mine opinion
The governance of this regyon
To this entente. me semyth for the best
ye to govern. and I to live in rest
Fully to fulfylle. the lust of my pleysurs
Hunte and hawke. in woods and ryuers
when so ever. thereto I shall have pleasance
And for to have. none other attendance
Unto nothing. but unto mine ease
For which shortly. if it agree and please
That I have said. to you that been so wise
And ben according. unto your auyse
Delayeth not. but in words plain
what you semyth. give answer again
ANd when Adrastus. had his tale fined Responsia a Polimite et tideo ad Regem
Adrastu

Tydeus with head. full low enclyned
As he that was. a verry gentle knight
with all his power. and his full might
Full humbly. thanked the king
Touching his profre. of so high a thing
And for his part. said he would assente
Fully of heart. never to repent
To all that ever. the king has said
And Polymyte. was also well apayde
In the story. as it is comprehended
And so they be both. condescended
The kings will. to fulfylle in deed
Fro point to point. and thereupon proceed
where so ever. that they win or lose
And Tydeus made. his brother chese
Of gentyllesse. and of curtesye
which was most. to his fantasye
Of the sustren. for to have to wyue
And he in south. chosen had Argyue
That eldest was. full womanly to se
And T^deus. took than Deyphyle
Of her beauty. most souerayn excellent
And Adrastus. through out his land has sent
For his lords. and his baronage
To be present. at marriage
Of the knights. and make no lettynge
And they echone. come at his bidding
In goodly wise. meke and full benygne
Again the day. that he did assygne
And thither come. full many lusty knight
Full well beseen. and many lady bryghte
Fro every cost. and many fresshe squyre
The story it says. and many comynere
To behold. the great Royalte
And the manner. of this solempnyte
But to tell. all the circumstaunces
Of Justes. revel. and of diverse daunces
The festes rich. and the gifts great
The pryue syghes. and the feruente hete
Of loves folk. brennynge as the glede
And deuyses. of many sundry wede
The touches stole. and the amerous lokes
By stoyll craft. laid down line and hokes
The Jelous folk. to trayssen and begyle
In their a wait. with many sundry wyle
All this in southe. descryuen I ne can
But well I wot. the new fame ran
This mean while. with full swyfte passage
Unto Thebes. of this marriage
And by report true. and not I feigned
The sown thereof. the eres has attained
Mine auctour write. of Ethyocles
Touching the honor. and the great encres
Of Polymyte. hyghly magnyfyed
And how that he. newly was allied
with Adrastus. in the land of Arge
The which thing. greatly he began to charge
Dredyng inly. that this marriage
Shall after turn. in to his damage
Sore musyng. and castyng up and down
The great power. and the hye renown
Of Adrastus. the which of Greeks land
Had all the power. sudgett to his hand
Lest that he for Polymyte sake
would upon him. a new werre make
But if that he. like to the conuencyon
At the time set. delyuerd the town
To his brother. by bond of both I sworn
By couenauntes. assured here byforne
If ye remember. late as I you told
which he was not. in purpos for to hold
But from his hest. casted for to ^arye
And thereupon list no longer to tarry
Lyche his desire. to shape remedies
And first he sent. for his next allies
In whom he had. most affyaunce
For his lords. that had governance
Of his kingdom. to come to him anon
And when they were present euerychone
He said plainly. wenyng for the best
That his heart. shall never lain in rest
But in sorrow. and in a manner dread
Till his brother. utterly be deed
That he in Thebes. in his Royal sete
Might allone. regne in quyete
He mente himself. shortly and none other
Unperturbed. of Polymyte his brother
And at this counseyll. dyucrse of entente
I find writ three folks were present
Some in sothe. that feythfull were and true
And some also. that changen can of new
And other eke. that between twain
Covertly could under color feign
THe first said. above all thing The comme^dacyon of troth

Troth should long to a king
Of his word. not be varyable
But plain and hole. as a contre stable
For troth first. without any wene
Is chyfe pyler. that many a king sustene
In Joye and honor. for to lead his life Nota How truth is preferred ^v ye
book of esdre aforne kyngis wy^ me^ and wine

For troth whylom had a prerogatyfe
As of Esdre. the book can specyfye
Record I take. of prudente Neemye
That worthy king. for all her great pride
with all her power. and domynacyon
Having reward. in comparyson
The trouthes might. trouthes worthynesse
For as Esdre. plainly does express
who takes head. in the same place
The influence sothly. and the grace
Of troth allone. this old Neemye
Gate him license to redefye
The walls new. of Jherusalem Salamon Troth and mercy p^ser uen a king fro
all aduersyte Chau^gene doublinesse should not be in a king

which troth is. tresoure. cheef of every realm
For Salamon writ. how that things tweyn
Troth and mercy. lynked in a cheyn
Preserve a king. like to his degree
Fro all myscheef. and aduersytee
Alas therefore. that any doubleness
Varyaunce. or vnsykernesse
Change of word. or mutabylytee
Fraud or deceyte. other instabylyte
Should in a king. have domynacyon
To causen after. his destruccyon
Of kings read the story done by row
And seen how many. have been overthrow
Through her falshede. fro fortunes whele
For unto god. it pleseth never a dele
A king to be double of entente
For it may hap. that the world is blente
Full often sith by sleyth of her werkyng
But this is the troth. god sees every thing
Right as it is. for there may be no cloud
Toforne his sight. troth for to shroude
It may be clypsed. and derked by dyscente
By false engyne lyeng in a wait
As a serpente. for to undermine
But at last. it will clearly shine
who that says nay. she we his bright beams
For it is in sothe. of kingdoms and of reames
Is berer up. and conseruatryce
Fro all myscheef. and southfaste medyatryce
To god above. who so list to see
To keep a king. in prosperytee
On every side. as I affermely dare
For which kyngis. and lords be well ware
your behestes. Justly for to hold
And think how Thebes. with his wall old
Destroyed was. platly this no less
For the doubleness. of Ethyocles
which his people. after sore abought
Donly for he not by counseyll wrought
Of hem that were. both true and wise
Him list not worche. after her deuyse
But left troth. and set his fantasye
To be governed. by false flaterye
That had him think. how he was a knight
And to shield of force. more than of right
During his life. lordshyp of the town
And not for to lose. his possessyon
For no bond. ne hestes made aforne
But late his brother. blown in a horn
where that him list. or pypen in a read
This was the counseyll. platly and the read
Of such that list not. to sayen the southe
But falsely flater. with her words smothe
And when they had. hole her tale feigned
Ethyocles. fully was enclyned
who so ever there at. lawghe or weep
Like her counseyll. pessessyon to keep
who that say nay. or grutche there again
Him to contrary. he thought it was but vain
But in this while. has the shene son How the ye re was comen out yt
Ethyocles reigned in Thebes

The. xii. signs. round about run
Sith Ethyocle. by Just rekenyng
In Thebes was crowned lord and king
Holdyng the septure. and the dyademe
That by reason. as would seem
The time was full complete and the space
Of covenant. he should void his place
And Polymyte eke. his Journey make
Toward Thebes. possessyon to take
Of due title. but if he had wrong
which thought in soth* ye year was wou^d long
Of his exyle. or it come about
And for he had in heart. a manner doubt
Lest in his brother. there were falshede fond
To acquyte himself. like as he was bond
To Adrastus. he began declare his heart
Besechynge him. this matter to aduerte
And thereupon. to give his counseyll sone
Touching his right. what was best to done
where it was. best to gone or to abide
Or like a knight. manfully to ride
Himself allone. and make no message
For the chalange. of his rightful heritage
within Thebes. either by peace or strife
And thereupon. to yeoparde his life
Thus was he set. for all his fers brother
But Adrastus sothly. thought a another
Better was to send. than himself to goon
Lest he were trapped. among his mortal foon
Having his brother. suspecte in the case
That by fraud. or by some falase
He would work. to his destruccyon
If he were hardy. to entren in to the town
For which he badde him. prudently take heed
Full concludyng. how it was more speed
That some other. be to Thebes sent
To apperceyue. fully the entente
Of Ethyocle. outewarde by some sign
And where that he his crown will resygne
For tylke year. like as he made his oath
And when he knew. how his purpos goth
Thereupon to work and proceed
Thus Adrastus. wisely began him read
And while they treat. upon this matter Tydeus took upon hy^ to do ye message
of his brother Polymyte

Tydeus with a manly chere
Said utterly. for his brothers sake
This message. he would undertake
with hole tempryse. of the embassyate
were it wylfull. or unfortunate
He will not spare. what so that bytyde
But Adrastus. on that other side
And Polymyte. in conclusyon
weren contrary. to that opinion
And said sothly. as hem thought right
Sith that he was. so well aproued knight
And descended. of so worthy blood
That they nolde. for none erthly good
For all Thebes. with the rygalye
Put his body. in such yeopardye
BUt all this thing. auayled he^ right nouzt
For he would forth. how dear yt it be bought
Taking leave. first of all the states
And armed him. in mayle and sure plates
And shope him forth. upon his Journey
who made sorrow. but Deyphyle The sorrow of Deyphyle wha^ tydeus went unto
Thebes

with bitter teeres. dewed all her face
Full often sith. swownyng in the place
Tryste and morning. in her blake wede
when she saw. that he took his stead
So inwardly. began encreace her moan
Seeng her lord. so ride forth allone
Upon his way. this worthy Tydeus
And in all haste. the story tells us
He speed him so. making no delays
That in space. of a few days
The hye towers of Thebes he began see
And entered is in to the Lytee
wisely enqueryng. where the paleys stood
And like a knight. thither streyte he rode
Marked full well. in many man's sight
Lyche Mars himself. in steel armed bright
Till he atteyned has. the cheef dongyon
where as the king. held his mansyon
And through the paleys with a knyghtly look
In to the halle. the right way he took
Fro his stead. when he light down
Not aferde. but hardy as a lion
where as the king. with lords a great route
In the halle. syttyng round about
He entered in most manfull of courage
To execute. the fine of this message
And as him thought. conuenyente and due
Full connyngly. he began the king salve
Requyryng him of kyngly excellence
In goodly wise. to give him audyence
And not dysdayne. neither in port ne chere
Sith he was. come as a messagere
From Polymyte. his own brother dear
Gynnyng his tale thus. as ye shall here
QVod he unto your worthynesse How wisely and how knyghtely tydeus did his
message

My purpos is. bryfly to express
Theffecte oonly as in sentemente
Of the message. why that I am sent
It were in vain. long process for to make
But of my matter. the verraye ground to take
In eschuynge. of prolixyte
And void away. all superfluyte
Sith yourselfe. best ought to understand
The cause fully. that we have on hand
And eke conceive. thentente of my menyng
Of rightwysnesse. longyng to a king
First consydred. if that ye take heed
when Edyppus. the old king was deed
How yourselfe. and your brother blyue
For the crown. contagyously began strive
As mortal foon. by full great hatred
which of you two. first should succeed
Till that ye weren. by means recouncyled
The to regne. and he to be exyled
Out of this town. for a years space
And than again. resort to his place
To regne as king. and ye to void out
So as your turn. by process come about
Eueryche of you. pacyently to endure
The enterchaungyng. of his adventure
who were put out. or stood in his estate
Thereupon to make no debate
Lyche the conuenaunte. and conuencyon
Enrolled up. by lords of this town
which of reason may. not be denied
And sithe ye have. a year I occupied
Polymyte. requires you of right The request yt tydeus made in ye name of
polimyte vnd ye title of ye co^uencyon

To acquyte you. lyche a true knight
In eschewyng. of mortal werre and stryte
Sith ye have had. a prorogatyfe
As eldest brother. for to regne a forne
And thynheth eke. how that ye are sworn
your oath to keep. and make no taryeng
Hole aduertyng. like a prudente king
That troth is more in comparyson
Than all the tresoure. of your regyon
More acceptable. both to god and man
Than all riches. that ye reken can
wherefore in haste. and let there be no slouthe
Ouyteth your self. Justly of your truth
Unto your brother. auoydyng this cite
And let him regne. in his royalte
The crown of Thebes. a year to occupye
Than will all Greece. preyse and magnyfye
your hye renown. and may say none other
But ye have you. Justly to your brother
This is hole theffecte. of all that I will sayen
Answer expectante. what ye list send again
When Tydeus had told his tale
Ethyocles. tryste and wonder pale
His conreyte first. in manner had refrayned
Dyssymelyng. under color feigned
Showing a chere. in manner debonayre
To his entente. wounderly contrary
Inward in heart. wood and furyous
Tournyng his face. toward Tydeus
But he began abrayde. and at last outbrake
And even thus. to him he spoke I have great meruaylle quoth tydeus The a^swe re of
ethyo cles

I have great marvel. quod he in my thought
Of the message. which thou have I brought
That my brother. as thou haste expowned
Desires so in Thebes. to be crowned
Having reward. to the habondaunce
The great plente. and the suffysaunce
That he has now. with the king of Arge
That me seems. that he should little charge
To have lordshyp. or domynacyon
In the bonds. of this little town
Sith he regneth. so fresshely in his flowers
Surmountyng. all his predecessoures
By new increase. thorugh fortunes might
whereof in heart. I am right glad and light
Full trustyng. if I had need
To his help. that without dread
Like a brother. than I should him find
To mewarde. faithfully true and kind
Supposyng. plainly evermore
Of this regne. he set but little store
Nor cast him not. for so short a while
As for a year. his brother to exyle
To live in pouerte. and great dystresse
He will not suffer it of his great noblesse
It were no token of no brotherhede
But a sign rather of hatrede
To interrupte. of my possessyon
Of this little poor regyon
All that he spoke. whoo that could aduerte
Of verray scorn. roted in his heart
As it seems. the story can you teache
By the surplus. sothly of his speech
He might not. him no longer refrain
But platly said. as tweyne us twain
I mean thus Polymyte and me
There is no bond. another suerte
Nor faith I made. that may him avail
As he claymeth. to have the gouernayle
Of this Lytee. another year ne day
For I shall let him sothly if I may
That he shall not. by title of no bond
Rejoice in Thebes. half a foot of land
Let him keep. all that he has won
For I purpose. as I have begone
To regne in Thebes. hensforthe all my life
Maugre all hem that there again strife
And in despyte. of his friends all
Or the counseyll. that him list call
Let him be sure. and know this right well
His manassyng. I dread never a dele
And sykerly. as to mine auyse
It shows well. that thou were not wise
But supprysyng. with a manner rage
To take on the. this surquydous message
And presume. to done so hye offense
So boldly to speak in my presence
But all I fere. avail shall right naught
For the tidings. that thou, haste brought
Shall unto him. be but dysencrees
He better were. to haven in pees
Than of folly. and presumpcyon
Against me. to seek occasyon
For while I leave. and thereto here mine hand
As I said erste. he wynneth here no land
For finally. I do the to understand
while the wall. of this town may stand
That they shall first. be beat down full low
And all the toures. to the earth I throw
Or he in Thebes. have any thing to do
Loo here is all. return and say him so
When Tydeus saw. the feruente ire
Of the king. with anger set a fire
Full of dyspyte. and malencolye
Conceyuyng eke. the great felonye
In his apporte. like as he were wood
This worthy knight. a little while stood
Sad and demure. or he would ought seyn
But at last. thus he spoke ageyn
Lerteys quod he. I conceive of new The knyghtely answer of tydeus again to ye
king

About the. thy counseyll is untrue
I dare it sayn. and vowen at lest
Nor thou art. faithful of thy beheste
Stable of thy word. that you have said toforne
B^t dysceyuable. and falsely eke forsworn
And eke periure. of thine assured oath
But where so be. that thou be leff or loathe
I say the shortly. hold it for no fage
All shall turn. unto thy damage
Trust it well. and in full cruel wise
All Greeks land. shall upon the rise
To ben avenged. and manly to the redress
The great untruth. and the hye falfnesse
which that you haste. again thy brother wrought
It shall full dear. after this be bought
And verrayly in deed. as thou shalt lere
Lryng Adrastus. will medell in this matter
And all the lords. about him enuyron
That bound ben. to his subgeccyon
Princes Dukes. and many a noble knight
In susteynyng. of thy brothers right
Shall upon a day. with spear and shield
Agayns the be gadred. in a field
Lrnyghtly to prove. all by one assente
That thou art falls. and double of entente
Of thy promise. atteynt and eke outrayed
And leave me well. it shall not be delayed
But in all the haste. execute in deed
Like thy deserte. thou shalt have thy mede
For god above. of his ryghtwysnesse
Such open wrong. shall in haste redress
And of his might. all such conclusyon
Refourme again. and all extorsyon
For this the tyne. falshede shall not avail
Again troth. to hold battle
wrong is crooked. both halte and lame
And here anon. in my brothers name
As I that am his next allye
In his quarrel. I shortly the defye
Fully auysed. with all my hole entente
And the lords. that been there present
I you require. of your worthynesse
To say troth. and to bear witness
when time comes. Justly to record
How your king. falsely can dyscorde
From his heste. of false varyaunce
And think how ye. of faith and lygaunce
Arne bond echone. ye may not goo therfro
For to obey. and seruen both two
This next year. now anon following
As to your lord. and your true king
Polymyte. though he be now absente
By Just accord. made in perlemente
At your deuyse. which sytten here arowe
Engrosed up as it is right well know
And enrolled. oonly for witness
In your regestres. to voyden all falnesse
That none of you. varye may of new
For that I say. but if he be untrue
For which I read. your self to acquyte
Let no ^yme longer you respyte
But attones. without more taryeng
Of manly force. fetteth home your king
Manger his foon. like as ye are bound
And let in you. no sloth be found
To put him Justly in possessyon
This my counseyll. in conclusyon
As Tydeus had his message said
Like to the charge. yt was on him laid
As he that list. no longer there soiourne
Fro the king. he began his face turn
Not astonyed. nor in his heart aferde
But full proudly. leyd his hand on his sword
And in despyte. whoo that was leff or loath f^ow tydeus manly departed from the
king

A stern paas. thorugh the hall he goes
Thorught out ye court. and manly took his stead
And out of Thebes. fast began him speed
Enhastyng him. tylle he was at large
And speed him forth. toward the land of Arge
Thus leave I him. ride forth a while
while that I return again my style
Unto the king. that in the hall stood
And among his lords furyous and wode
In his heart wroth. and evil apayed
Of the words. that Tydeus had said
Specially having. remembrance
On the proud. dyspytous dyffyaunce
whiles that he satte. in his royal see
Upon which. he will avenged be
Full cruelly. what ever that befalle
And in his ire. he began to him call
Chyfe constable. of his chyualrye
Chargyng him fast for to hye
with all the worthy chose. of his household
which as he knew. most manfull and most bold
In all haste. Tydeus to sue
Toforn. or he out of his land renew
Upon pain of lyffe. and lesyng of her head
without mercy. anon that he be deed
And of knights. fyfty were in nombre
Mine auctour says. unwarily him tencombre
Armed echone. in mayle and thyk stele
And therewith all I horsed wounder well
At a posterne. forth they began to ride How falsely ethiocles laid a
busshemete in ye valey to have slain Tydeus

By again path. that lay out aside
Secretly. that no man hem aspye
Oonly of treason. and felonye
They haste hem forth all the long day
Of cruel malice. for to stop his way
Thorugh a foreste. all of one assente
Full cowardly. to lay a busshemente
Under an hylle. at a strayte passage
To fall on him. at more auantage
The same way. that Tydeus began draw
Ate thylk mount. where Spyx was slawe
He nothing ware in his opinion
Of this compassed. conspyracyon
But Innocente. and like a gentle knight
Rode ay forth. till it drew to night
Sole by himself. without company
Having no man to wise him or to guye
But at last. lyftyng up his head
Toward eve and began take heed
In mind of his way. right as any line
Thought he saw again the moon shine
Sheldes fresshe. and plates bourned bright
The which enuyron. casten a great light
Ymagynyng. in his fantasye
There was treason. and conspyracye
Wrought by the king. his Journey for to let
And of all that. he nothing set
But well assured. in his manly heart How tydeus outerayed fyfty knights yt
lay in a wait for to slay him

List not ones. aside to dyuerte
But kept his way. his shield upon his breast
And cast his spear. manly in his rest
And the first platly. that he met
Thorugh the body. proudly he him smette
That he fell deed. chyfe master of hem all
And than attones. they upon him fall
On every part. by compass enuyrown
But Tydeus. thorugh his hye renown
his blody sword. let about him glyde
Sleeth and killed. upon every side
In his ire. and in his mortal tene
That marvel was. he might so sustain
Again hem all. in every half be set
But his sword. was so sharp I whette
That his foon. found full vnswette
But he alas. was light on feet
By force grounded. in full great dystresse
But of knyghthode. and of great prowess
Up he rose. maugre all his foon
And as they come. he slew hem one by one
Like a lion rampant in his rage
And on this hylle. he fond a narowe passage
which that he took. of full hye prudence
And lyche a bore. standing at his defense
As his foo men. proudly him assail
Upon the plain. he made her blood to rail
All enuyron. that the soil wax read
Now here now there. as they fyllen deed
That lay here one. and there lay two or three
So mercyles. in his fers crueltee
Thylke day he was. upon hem found
And attones. his enmyes to confound
where as he stood. this mighty campyowne
Beside he saw. with water turned down
An huge stone. large long and square
And suddenly. or that they were ware
As it had layen there for the nones
Upon his foon. he rolled it attones
That ten of hem. wenten unto wrake
And the remenaunte. amassed drowe a bake
For one by one. they went to myschance
And finally he brought to outrance
Hem euerychone. Tydeus as blyue
That none but one. left of hem a live
Hemselfe I hurt. and I wounded kene
Thorugh his harneys. bledyng on the grene
The slain knyghtis. in compass round about
In the vale. slain all the route
which pyteously. again the moon gape
For none of them. shortly might escape
But deed echone. as they it have deserved
Saaf one except. the which was reserved
By Tydeus. of this entencyon
To the king to make relacyon
How his knights. have on her Journey sped
Eueryche of hem. his life left for awed
And at metyng. how they have hem borne
To tellen. all he sured was and sworn
To Tydeus full. lowly on his knee
By which ensample. openly ye may see
Again truth. falshede has no might How truth with little multitude
has ever in the fine vyctorye of falshede

Fie on quarrels. not grounded upon right
without which. may be no vyctorye
Therefore each man. have this in memory
That great power. shortly to conclude
Plente of good. nor much multitude
Sleyght or engeny. force or folonye
Arn^ to feeble. to hold champartye
Again troth. who that list take heed
For at end. falshede may not speed
To endure long. the should find it this
Record I take. of worthy Tydeus
which with his hand. through tronyes excellence
Fyfty knights slew. in his defense
But one except. as I late told
Sworn and assured. and his hand uphold
The king to enfourme. how they were attaynt
And Tydeus of bledyng. wounder faint
Meat and weary. and in great dystresse
And ouerlayd. of verray feblynesse
But as he might. himself to sustene
He took his horse. standing on the grene
worthed up. and forth he began to ride
An easy pace. with his wounds wide
And shortly yet. in his opinion
He was always. aferde of treason
But anguysshous. and full of besy pain
He rode him forth. till he did attain
In to the bonds. of Lygurgus land How tydeus all for wounded come in to
Lygurgus land

A worthy king. and manly of his hand
And he full pale. oonly for lack of blood
Tydeus saw. where a castle stood
Strong and mighty. bylte upon a roche
Toward whom. fast he began approach
Conveyed thither. by clerenesse of the stone
That by night. again the moon shone
On the towers. with crestes mar^yall
And Joynyng. all most to the wall
Was a gardayne. little out beside
In to whom. Tydeus began to ride
Of adventure. by a gate small
And there he found. for to reken all
A lusty Erber. unto his deuyse
Sweet and fresshe. lyche a paradyse
Verray heavenly. of inspeccyon
And first of all. he lyghted a down
The goodly place. when that he beheld
And from his nek. avoided has his shield
Draw his brydell. fro his horse head
Let him goon. and take no manner head
Through the gardayn. that enclosed was
Him to pasture. on the grene gras
And Tydeus. more heavy than is led
Upon the herbs. grene white and read
As him thought. that time for the best
He laid him down. for to take his rest
Of werynesse. desirous to sleep
And none awayte. his body for to keep
And with dremes. grutched ever among
There he lay. till the lark song
with notes new. hye upon in the hair
The glad morrow. rody and right fair
Phoebus also. castyng up his bemes
The hye hills. gylte with his stremes
The silver dew. upon the herbs round
There Tydeus lay. upon the ground
At the vpryste. of the shene son
And stoundmele. his grene wounds run
Round about. that the soyll depeynte
Of the grene. with read meynte
And every morrow. for holsumnesse of the heir How lygurgus dought fond tideus
slepyng in the erber al forwou^ded

Lygurgus daughter. made her repair
Of custom. ay among the flowers new
In the gardayne. of many diverse hew
Such Joye had. for to take heed
On her stalks. for to see hem sprede
In the alayes walkyng to and fro
And when she had. a little while go
Her self allone. castyng up her sight
She beheld. where an armed knight
Lay to rest him. on the herbs cold
And him beside. she began eke behold
His mighty stead. walkyug here and there
And she anon. fell in a manner fere
Specially. when she saw the blood
Sprad all the grene. about there she stood
But at last. she caught hardynesse
And womanly. began her for to dress
Toward this knight. having a manner of dread
And began great doubt. lest yt he were deed
And of her will. soothly it was cheef
That she thought. for to make a preef
How that it stood. of this man full often
And forth she gooth. and touched him full soft
There as he lay. with her hondes small
And with a face dedely. bleyke and pale
Lyche as a man. dawed in a swone
Up he sterte. and his sword he drowe
Not fully out. but put it up again*
Anon as he has the lady said
Besechyng her. oonly of her grace
To have pity upon his trespace
And rewe on him. of her womanhede
For of afraye. he was fall in dread
Lest he had. assailed be of new
Of the Thebans. preued full untrue
For dred of which he was so recheles
Full humbly yeldyng him to the pees
Trust in himself. he passed had his bounds
And when that she saw his mortal wounds
She had routhe. of verraye gentellesse
Of his disease. and of his dystresse
And bad he should. no thing be dysmayed How womanly yt lady acquyteth her to
tydeus in his disease

Nor in heart sorrowful. nor afraid
Dyscomforte him. in no manner thing
For I quod she. am daughter to the king
Called Lygurge. that greatly me delight
Every morrow. this gardayne to vysyte
It is to me. so passyngly dysporte
wherefore quod she. byth of good comfort
For no wight here. touching your vyage
Shall hinder you. ne do you no damage
And if ye list. of all your adventure
The plain truth. to me dyscure
I will in south. do my business
To refourme. your grievous heaviness
with all my might. and mine hole dylygence
That I hope. of your great offense
ye shall have help. in your aduersyte
And as ferforthe. as it lies in me
Trusts right well. ye shall no fault find
And when he saw. that he was king
So womanly. so goodly and so benygne
In all her port. by many diverse sign
He unto her. by order would not spare
His adventures. fully to declare
In thebes first. touching his message
And all the hylle. of the wood rage
Of his wounds. and hurtes sore
It were but vayn. to rehearse it more
By and by. he told her every dele
The which in soth. she lyked never a dele
But had reuthe and compassyon
Of his myschyfe. wrought by false treason
Byddyng in haste. that he should her sue
And womanly. as her thought due
To a chamber she lad him up a lofte How tydeus was refesshed in the castle of
ye lady

Full well besayn. there in a bed right soft
Rychely abouten apparayled
with clothe of gold. all the flore I rayed
Of the same. both in length and bread
And first this lady. of her womanhede
Her wymmen bad. as goodly as she can
To be attendaunte. on this wounded man
And when he was unarmed to his sherte
She made first. wasshe his wounds smerte
And search hem well. with diverse instrumentis
And made fette. sundry oynementis
And leches eke. the best that she could find
Full craftily. to staunchen hem and to bind
And every thing that may do hem ease
To swage his pain. or his woo to pease
was in the court. and in the castle sought
And by her byddyng. to the chamber brought
And for his sake. she has after sent
For such deyntes. as were conuenyente
Most nutrytyfe. by physykes lore
Hem that were syke. or wounded to restore
Making her wymmen. eke to taken keep
And wait on him. a nyghtes when he sleep
And be well ware. that no thing a sterte
That was or might. be lusty to his heart
And with all this. she prayed him to abide
Till he were strong. and mighty for to ride
In the castle. to play him and dysporte
And at leyser. home again resort
when he might. bywelde him at his large
But all for naught. he will home to Arge
Took his leave. on the next day
without abode. to haste him on his way
Lowly thankyng. unto her goodness
Of her fredome. and of her bounteous largeness
So wommanly. that her list take heed
Him to refresshe. in his great need
Behotyng her. with all his full might
He would be her servant. and her knight
while he lives. of what she would hem charge How tydeus repayreth home to
Arge all forwou^ded and sore I hurt

And forth he rode. till he come to Arge
In full great haste. and would no where dwell
But what should I rehersen other tell
Of his repair. the costs or the playns
The craggy roches. or the hye mountayns
Or all the manner. of his home coming
Of the metyng, or of the welcomyng
Nor the Joye that Adrastus made
Nor how his sus^re. ne his wife were glad
Nor how that they. where to should I write
Embrased him. in her arms wit
Nor the gaderyng. about him ne the prece
Nor the sorrow. that Polymyte
Made in himself. to see him so sore wounded
His grievous hurtes. his sorrows eke unsounded
His dedely look. and his face pale
Of all this. to gynne a new tale
It were in south a manner ydelnesse
Nor how himself. in order did express
First how that he. in Thebes has him borne
Nor how the king. falsely was forsworn
Nor of the awayte. nor treason that he set
when fyfty knights. on the way him met
As he have herd. all the manner how
without which. my tale is long ynowe
But Adrastus. made men to seche
In every cost. for many diverse leche
To come in haste. and make no taryeng
Upon a pain. by byddyng of the king
To done her craft. that he were recured
And of his force. in every part assured
And they echone. so her connynges show
That in space. of days few
He was all hole made. of his sykenesse
Tho was there Joye. the was there gladness
Thorugh the court. and thorugh all the town
For every man. has such opinion
In Tydeus. for his gentyllesse
For his manhood. and his lowlynesse
That he was hold. the most famous knight
And best beloved. in every man's sight
Thorugh out Greece. in every regyon
But now must I make. a dygressyon
To tell shortly. as in sentemente
Of thylke knight. that Tydeus has sent
In to Thebes. oonly to declare
The great myschyfe. and the evil fare
Unto the king. how it is befall
The open truth. of his knights all
How Tydeus has slain him euerychone
Than saaf himself. there escaped none
That were reserved. fro shedyng of his blood
The king to tell. plainly how it stood
And when he had. rehearsed every point
Ethyocles stood. in such dysioynte
Of hatfull ire. that he wax nigh wode How ethyocles was as toned wha^ he herd
ye death of his knights

And in his tene. and in his fell mode
Of cruel malice. to the knight he spoke
And felly said. that it was for lake
Oonly of manhood. thorugh her cowardyse
That they were slain. in so mortal wise
And hanged be he. hye by the nek
That of your death. or of your slaughter rek
Or you complain. other one or all
Of the myscheef. that is you befall
I do no force. that none of you asterte
But fie upon. your false coward heart
That one knight. through his hye renoune
Ha^th brought you. all in confusyon
Full graceles. and full unhappy to
Nay quod this knight. it is not so
It is thine unhap. plainly and not ours
That so many. worthy werryoures
which all her life. never had shame
Except this quarrel. taken in thine name
That grounded was. and roted in falnesse
This was cause. in verray sykernesse
Of our unhappy. I wot well and none other
And the untruth. done unto thy brother
And that thou were. so openly forsworn
A percell cause. why that we were forlorn
was false brekyng. of thine assured oath
And tho the king. all most mad for wroth
In purpose was. for to slay this knight
Oonly for he said unto him right
The which miles alas. both at eve and morrow
Supprysed was. with a dedely sorrow
Renewed ay in his remembrance
with the pyteous. and unhappy chance
Of the myscheef. and mysauenture
Touching the death. and the dyscomfyture
Of his fers. and of himself also
That the shamfaste. importable woe
So fratte on him. with such a mortal strife
That he was weary. of his own life
Hence a sword. and a side sterte
And roffe himself. even to the heart
The king himself. being tho present
That the romoure. and the noise is went
Through out all Thebes. and the wood rage
By such as weren. Joined by lynage
To the knights. slain at hill
That all attones. of one heart and will
They would have risen. through out all the cite
Upon the king. avenged for to be
which of her death. was cheef occasyon
But the barons. and the lords of the town
Full besy weren. this rumoue to dyscease
Of hye prudence. to stynten and appease
In quyete. every thing to set
And after that the bodies home they fette
Of the knights. like as ye have herd
A forne I slain. with the blody sword
Of Tydeus. full sharp whette and ground
And in the field. so as they hem found
Oonly of love. and of affection
Solempnely. they brought hem to the town
And like the manner of her rightes old
They were first burnt. in to ashes cold
Eueryche I buried. lyche to his degree
Loo here kalendes of aduersytee
Sorrow upon sorrow. and destruccyon
First of the king. and all the regyon
For lack oonly. like as I you told
That behestes. truly were not hold
First ground and rote. of this ruin
As the story. clearly shall determyne
And mine tale herafter. shall you lere
If you list. the remenaunte for to here
Explicit pars Secunda.
Sequitur pars Tercia.
O Cruel Mars. full of malencolye
And of thy kind. hot combust and dry
As the spercles. shown fro so fer
By the stremes. of the read ster
In thy spear. as it about gothe
what was cause. that thou were so wroth
with hem of Thebes. through whose fervent ire
The Cytee burnt. and was set a fire
As books old. well rehearse konne
Of cruel hate. roted and begone
And engendered. the story makes mind
Oonly of blood. corrupt and unkind
By infeccyon. called orygynall
Causyng a strife. dreadful and mortal
Of which the myscheef. through all Greece ran
And king Adrastus. alder first began
That has him cast. a conqueste for to make
Upon Thebes. for Polymytes sake
In knyghtly wise. there to preue his might
Of full entente. to recure his right
And first of all. he set a parlyamente
And has his lettres. and messengers sent
Through out Greece. to many soundry kings
Hem to enhaste. and make no lettynges
And round about. as made is mencyon
He sent also. to many Regyon
For princes dukes. lords and barons
To taken up. in cytees and in towns
And chesen out. the most lyklyeste
And such that waren preued for the best
And of manhood. and send hem up echone
And in her hand. receive her pay anon
with Adrastus. to Thebes for to ride The great purueau^ce of king Adrastus
toward ye cite of thebes

And the lords. that with him abide
In household still have her leave take
To ryden home. her retenu to make
In their countrees. as they were of degree
To stuffen hem. and to take up main
And make hem strong. with knight and squyres
with speres bows. and with arblastres
In all the haste possible. that they may
And to return. in her best array
At term set. full manly to be sayen
To forne Arge. moustren in a plain
And as I read. full worthy of degree The kings and princes that come with
adrastus

Thither came first. Prothonolope
The which was. by record of writing
Of Archada. sone to the king
And full prudente. fond in werre and peace
There come also. the king Cylmythenes
And as I find. full famous of renoun
Thither come eke. the king Epymedon
And passing all. of knyghthode and of name
And excellyng. by worthynesse of fame
The noble king. called Campaneus
Come eke to Arge. the story tells us
Proved right well. and had ryden fer
And thither come. the king Melleager
Lryng Genor eke. that held his royal sete
Mine auctoure says. in the land of Crete
Lryng Laerys. and the king of Pyrrus
And eke the king. called Tortalanus
And renomed in many regyon
There come the king. I named Polemon
Often assayed and I found. a manly knight
That with him brought. in steel armed bright
Full many worthy. out of his country
And Tydeus. most knyghtly for to see
That manly man. that noble werryoure
As he that was. of worthynesse flower
Master and myrrour. by prouesse of his hand
Has sent also. in to the mighty land
Of Calydonye. whereof he was heir
That is a kingdom. both rich and feyre
Chargyng his counseyll. and his officers also
In all the haste. that it may be do
To seken out the best werryours
Of famous knights. and proved saudyours
Through all the land. and leyd on hem this charge
without abode. for to come to Arge
And they obey shall. his byddyng
Enhastyng hem. and made no lettyng
But sped hem fast. upon her Journeye
And from Thebes. the mighty strong Cite
Come down knygh^. with many a another man
Mauger the king. to help what they can
Consydred first. his falshede and treason
I mened oonly. of troth and of reason
Polymytes. as they were sworn of yore
To his crown. Justely to restore
And when they wern. at large out of the town
In to Arge they be descended down
And like her oath. and their assurance
As they weren bound. oonly of lygaunce
To him they came. in full lowly wise
Ready to done. what him list to deuyse
And when he had. her troth full conceived
He has to grace. goodly hem received
Assygnyng hem. her place myd the ooste
Assembled there. fro many diverse cost
That finally. in this company
I gadred was. the flower of chyualrye
I chosen out. of all Greeks land
The most knyghtly. and manfull of her hand
That I trow. sithe the world began
There was not seen. so many manly man
So well horsed. with spear and with shield
Together assembled. sooth in a field
There men might see. many strange gyses
Of armyng new. and uncouth deuyse
Every man after his fantasye
That if I should. in order specyfye
Every pees longyng to armure
And thereupon. do my besy cure
It were in south. almoost a days work
And the terms. ben also to derke
To rehearse hem clearly. and to ryme
I pass over. oonly for lack of time
And tell I would. forth of her lodgyng
How Adrastus. the noble worthy king
Has every lord. like to his degree
Receives well. within his cytee
And there they had. like to her pleasaunce
Of what needs. fulsome habondaunce
For man and horse. plente of vytayle
Commaundyng. that no thing ne fail
That all these noble werreours
Both hye and low. and pooer saudyours
I served were. of that they had need
For Adrastus. prudently took head what vayleth a king to pay his people truly
her soude

Full like a king. touching her term day
That they to forne. were served of her pay
He was so free. him list* nothing restrain
And no man. had cause to complain
Hunger. thirst. nor Indygence
And in a prince. it is full greece offense Nota

As clerks sayn. and a greece repre^e
To suffer his people. lyuen at myschefe
It is full heavy. and grievous in her thought
If he habonde. and they have right naught
He may not both. possede good and heart
He to be rich. and seen his people smerte
He may the body. of poor well constreyne
But her heart. has a full long reyne
Mauger his might. to louen at large
There may no king. on hertes set a charge
Nor hem cohercen. from her lybertee
Men seen full often. how that thought is free
For which each prince. lord and gouernoure
And specially. every conqueroure
Let him beware. for all his noblesse
That bounte fredome. plente and largess
By one accord. that they his brydell led
Lest of his people. when he has most need
He be defrauded. when he is but allone
Than is to late. for to make his moan Nota How love auaylethe more a king
tha^ gold or great richesse

But in his court. let him first deuyse
To exyle scarshede and couetyse
Than is he lykly. with fredome if he gynne
Love of his people. evermore to win
To regne long. in honor and contune
Ay to increase. by favor of fortune
And his enmyes. manly to oppress
For love is more. than gold or great richesse
Gold fails often. love will abide
For list or death. by a lords side
And the tresoure. shortly of a king
Stands in love. above all thing
Fare well lordshyp. both morrow and eve
Specially. when love takes his leave
And who so list. a myrrour for to make
Of kyndly fredome. let him ensample take
Of Adrastus. the manly king famous
So lyberall. so bounteous
Unto his people. at all time found
Which made him strong. his fomen to confou^de
And love oonly. his enmyes to werreye
All greece. made his byddyng to obey
Of one accord. knyghtly by his side
All attones. to Thebes for to ride
For tauenge. sith they were so strong
The great Iniurye. and the Importable wrong
Done to his sone. and to his next allye
As ye to forne. have hard me specyfye
But while Greeks. areste a while in pes
I will resort to Ethyocles Nota

with Inn Thebes. warly has aspyed
By his friends. as he was certefyed
Of the Greeks. hole the ordinance
Her purpos eke. and her purueaunce
And thereof had in heart. a manner dread
And first he took. his counseyll and his read
Of the lords. and of the barons of the town
And of the wysest. of his regyon
How he might. maken resystence
Manly to standen. at defense
To be strong. that there were no doubt How ethyo cles made him strong again
the coming of ye Greeks

And in tho contrees. adiacente about
And eke* also. in foreyn regyons
He has withholde. all the champyons
And thereupon. he sent out his aspyes
And his friends. and his next allies
And all the worthy. dwelling enuyrowne
Young fresshe and lusty. he gadred in to town
Maskowede his walls. and his hye toures
And stuffed hem. with many sadyoures
Round about. he set many gonnes
Great and small. and some large as tonnes
And in his hasty. passing feruente hete
He spente his tresoure. and gaf yeftes great
Unto knights. and worthy men of name
And evermore. to increase his fame
He yafe to lords. Jewels many fold
Clothes of veluette. of damask and of gold
To get him hertes. sothly as I read
To help him now. in this great need
And prudently purueyed him to foam
Of flesh and fysshe. and of wine and corn
Set his Capyteyns. erly and late
with full styfe strong. at every gate
He made also. by werkmen that were true
Barbycans. and bolwerkes new
Bars chains. and dyches wounder deep
Making his vow. the Cytee for to keep
while he lives. despyte of all his foon
And by his gods. of metal and of stoon
Full often he swore. both of heart and thought
That it shall first. full dear ben a bought
And many a man. with pollax and swerd and knyfe
To forne this town. first shall lose his life
And there shall eke. many sides blede
Or his brother. peasybly possede
The town in peace. like as Greeks wene
But at end. the troth shall be seen
Let him beware. and well to forne provide
For Adrastus. on that other side
For his part. was not neclygente
But on a day. held a parlyamente
All his lords. syttyng enuyron
To drive shortly. a plain conclusyon
And up thappoynte. the fine of her entente
But some thought. full expedyente.
Of they proceed. to work by thauyse
Of one that was. full prudente and right wise
And circumspecte. in his works all
A worthy bishop. in to age fall
And called was sothly by his name How ye bishop a^phio rax was sent for to
come to ye greeks

Amphyorax. of whom the great fame
Through all the land. both est and south
Among Greeks. passyngly was couth
A man in sothe. of old antyquyte
And most excepted. of auctoryte
First by reason. of his hye estate
And eke. for he was so fortunate
In his works. and was also secree
with the gods. knowing her pryuetee
By grant. of whom as books specyfye
He had a spyryte. of true prophecye
And could a forne. full openly dyuyne
Things begone. how they should fine
And eke by craft. of calculacyon
Give a dome. of every questyon
And had in Magyk. great experyence
And find could. by heavenly Influence
And by meaning. of hye sterres
A fynall dome. of contek and of werres
And wist well. as his gods told And wyste well ye true prophecye of bishop
amphyorax

That if Greeks. forth her Journey hold
It turn should. platly this no phage
To great myschyfe. and to great damage
Of hem echone. and in especyall
The most part. of the blood royal
Through all Greece. it may not be withdraw
In this vyage. shortly shall be slawe
And if himself. with the Greeks went
who that ever wept. him or by mente
This was the fine. and may not be socoured
Of the earth. he should be devoured
Quyke as he was. he knew none other in serteyne
And for he saw. there was non^ other geyne
To save his life. nor no bet defense
Than utterly. to withdrawn his presence
Prayeng his wife. for him to provide
If he were sought. that she would him hyde
And womanly. for to keep him close
And of troth. councelen his purpose
For all his trust. touching his greuaunce
was fully set. in her preuyaunce
I hope to god. that he need not dread
Of no decerte. in her womanhede
She was so true. as wy^men ben euerychone
And also close. and muet as a stone
That she ne would. as the matter stood
Dyscuren him. for no wordly good
But finally. the Greeks of entente
In all his dread. have for the bishop sent
Though it was long. or they might him find
For cause his wife. was to him so kind
That full suerly. has locked up his cors
But for she had. a manner remors
In her self. greuyng her conscience How yt wit of amphyo rax of conscience to
sa ue her oath discured her husbonde

Dredyng to fall. in full great offense
Lest her soul. were in perell lorne
when she by oath. compelled was a sworn
There requyryng. if she could tell
where her lord. the bishop should dwell
which to dyscure. her heart was full loathe
Till time she ganne. remembren on her oath
And could a truth of custom not deny
And had also great conscience to lie
wounder heavy. with a sorrowful face
Mauger her lust. taught hem to the place
where as he was. shytte up in a toure
All allone. having no socoure
They fell on him. or that he was ware
And set him up. in a full rich chare
A great fool he was. to yeoparde his life
For to dyscure. his counseyll to his wife
And yet she was. full sorry for his sake
Specially when she saw him take
But I hope. that her heaviness
Began a swage. full sone by process
In short time. when that he was gone
There is no tempeste. that may lest ever in one
But this bishop. by verray force and might
Unto Greeks. conveyed was full right
This hoar graye. in his chare syttyng
And they full glad. were of his coming
Having a trust. and full opinion
And thorugh cause. and occasyon
Of his wisdom. and his sapyence
And by virtue. of his hye presence
They should eschew. all aduersytee
Possible to fall. as in her Journee
And as the storye. fully has devised
Full circumspecte. and right well aduysed
He has pronounced. in the parlyamente
To forne the lords. and the presydente
His clear conceyte. in verray sykernesse
Not entryked with no doubleness
Her dysmole days. and her fatal hours
Her adventures. and her sharp shoures
The froward sort. and the unhappy stou^des
The complayntes. of her dedely wou^des
The woeful wrath. and the contrauerse
Of fell Mars. and his cruelte
And how by mean. of his gery mode
There shall be shed. all the worthy blood
Of the Greeks. it may not be eschewed
If her purpose. be execute and sewed
There is no more. this shall be the fine
The hye noblesse. shall draw to declyne
Of Greeks blood. in myschyfe sorrow and woe
And with all this. I myself also
As my fate. has to forne dysposed
Deep in the ground. I shall be enclosed
And locked up. in the derke vale
Of cruel death. loo this was the tale
That the bishop to Adrastus told
Him counseylyng. his purpos to withholde
In eschewyng. of more myscheef and sorrow
For all his goods. he take unto borowe
If the Thebans. and the Greeks mete
The fine thereof. shall be vnswete
That all Greece. after shall it rewe
warnyng him. if they the myscheef knew
That shall follow. that no man may let
They would abstene. a sege for to ^ette
Unto Thebes. and her purpos leave
with whose words. the lords began hem grieve
And there in had. but full small delight
And every chone. of herely hye despyte
They abrayde. and said he was untrue
A contryuer. of prophecyes new
And eke also. for his long berde
And old dottarde. a cowarde and a ferde
And of rancoure. began to defye
Both his calkyng. and his astronomye
And said shortly. they took thereof none head
Ne will no thing. govern hem after his read
This was the clamoure. and noise in every cost
Of hye and low. thorugh out all the host
And specially of the saudyours
And of lords. regnyng in flowers
And of the states. effectuelly I mean
which of age. were but tender and grene
That have not had. by Martys Influence
Of the werre. great experyence
Here if ye list. ye may consider and see
Of conceytes. full great dyuersytee
How that youth. no peril cast a forne
Till the myschyfe. suddenly be borne
Where as age prouydeth every thing
Or he begin. to casten the endyng
youth is governed by a large reyne How age and youth ben of diverse opynyons

To run forth. and can not him refrain
But of head. set on all attones
As he that hurtlyth. again the hard stones
Broseth himself. unwarily and parbraketh
But age expert. no thing undertakes
But to forne. of good dyscrecyon
Make a due examynacyon
How it will turn. other to bad or good
But youth as fast. as stered is the blood
Take empryses. of hasty wylfulnesse
Joye at gynnyng. the end is wretchedness
The old prudente. in all his governance
Full long a forne. makes purueaunce
But youth alas. by counseyll will not work
For which full often. he stombleth in the derke
Thus selde is seen. the troth to termyne
That age and youth. draw by one line
And where that folly has denomynacyon
wisdom is put in to subieccyon
Like as this bishop. with all his hye prudence
For cause. he might have none audyence
All his wisdom. and his prophecye How ye wysdom without suppor taco^n auay
leth little or naught

Of the Greeks. was holden but folly
For though Plato. and wise Socrates
Moral Senek. and Dyogenes
Albumazar. and prudente Tholome
And Tullyus. that had soueraynte
whylom in Rome. as of eloquence
Though all these. shorly in sentence
were a live. most connyng and expert
And no man. list her counseyll to aduerte
Nor of her sawes. for to taken head
what might avail. and it come to need
For where prudence. can find no socoure
And prouydence. has no favor
Fare well wisdom. fare well dyscrecyon
For lack oonly. of supportacyon
For vnsupported. with his locks hoar
Amphyorax. syghen began full sore
with head enclyned. and many evil thought
when yt he saw. his counseyll stand for naught
For utterly. the Greeks as I told
Have fully cast. her Journey for to hold
Made hem ready. and gonnen to hosteye
Toward Thebes. the Cytee to werrey
And forth with hem. Amphyorax they carye
And in Greece. will no longer tarry
Sytte in his chare. with a doolfull heart
when he wist. he might not asterte
Of his fate. his dysposycyon
And hostyng. in to the regyon
Of Lygurgus. Greeks began approach
A sondy land. with many a craggy roche
But all the way. sothly that they gone
For horse nor man. water was there none
So dry was the vales. and the playnes
For all that year. they hadden had no reins
But full great drought. as made is mencyon The great myscheef yt greeks had of
ye defaut of water

And all the land. serchyng enuyron
They another fond. well ne ryuere
Hem to refresshe. ne water that was clear
But they alas. no refute ne conne
So importable. was the shene son
So hot on hem. in feldes where they lay
That for myscheef. man and horse began dey
Gapyng full dry. upward in to south
And some putten. her swerdes in her mouth
And spear hedes. in story as it is told
Taswage her thirst. with the iron cold
And of his life. full many one dyspayred
In this myscheef. and home again repaired
Till on a day. worthy Tydeus
And with him eke. the king Campanous
Of purpos rode. thorugh out the country
If they might. any water see
From cost to cost. both fer and nere
Till of fortune. they entered an herbere
with trees shadowed. for the son shene
Full of herbs. and of flowers grene
wonder wholesome. both of sight and hair
There Inn a lady. that passyngly was fair
Syttyng as tho. under a laure tree
And in her arms. a little child had she
Full gracyous. of look and of vysage
And was also. wounder tender of age
Sone of the king. borne to succeed
Called Lygurgus. in story as I read
whoos hertly Joye. and worldly eke dysporte
All his myrthe. pleasance and comfort
was in this child. of excellent fayrenesse
And this lady. myrroure of semlynesse
All suddenly. as she cast up her sight
And on his stead. saw an armed knight
Gretely abashed. began anon renew
But Tydeus. after began to sue
And said. sister byth nothing dysmayed
In your self. dyspleased nor affrayed
For we are come. oonly to this place How tydeus co^playneth to the lady in the
erber for water

you to beseech. of mercy and of grace
Us to socoure. in our great need
Declaryng you. how it stand in deed
Here fast by. all most at hand
The worthyest. of all Greeks land
Lrynges princes. ben lodgyng in the field
And many other. with pollax spear and shield
which in myscheef. parell and great dread
For want of water. ben lykly to be deed
For there was none. of hye ne low degree
In all our Do. now passed days three
That drank. alas except none estate
Our vyage. is so Unfortunate
Prayeng you. of womanly pity
Benygnely. and gracyously for to see
How of greece. all the chyualrye
Of her lives. stant in ieopardye
That ye would of womanhede tell
If ye know. river spryng or well
Specially now. in all our care
Of gentyllesse. unto us declare
Loo here is all. if ye list to here
That ye will seyn. mine own sister dear
And when this lady Inly virtuous How the lady taught tydeus to ye well

The complaynte herd. of worthy Tydeus
Of verray pity. changes chere and hew
And in her heart. upon her woo began rewe
And full goodely. seeng his dystresse
Said unto him. in all his heaviness
Certes quod she. if I were at large
Touching this child. of whom I have charge
I should in haste. of all that does you grieve
To my power. helpen to releue
Oonly of reuthe. and compassyon
And leave all other occupacyon
Conueye you. and be your true gyde
To a river. but little here beside
But I dare not. so much me assure
This little child. to put in adventure
I am so ferfull. from it to depart
But for your sake. that I in part
My life my death. of true affection
To provide. for your sauacyon
Took the child. and leyde it in her lap
And richely in clothes. began it wrappe
And couched it among the herbs soote
And leyde about. many holsom root
And flowers eke. both blewe and read
And supprysed. with a manner dread
With Tydeus forth anon she went
As she in troth. that no treason mente
And in her way. would she never dwell
Till she him brought. to a right fair well
And to a river. of water right habonde
But who was glad. and who was tho Joconde
But Tydeus seeng the river
which in all the haste. sent his messenger
To Adrastns. and bade him not abide
But down descend. to the river side
with all thoost. recure for to have
At this river. her lives for to save
And this enhaste. hem making none abode
All attones. to the river rode
For to drink. they had so great lust
Of appetyte. for to stanche her thruste
And some drunk. and found it did them good
And some were so feruente and so wood
Upon the water. that in sykernesse
Through indiscreet. and hasty gredynesse
Out of mesure. the water so they drink
That they fill deed. even upon the brynke
And some naked. in to the river run
Oonly for hete. of the somer son
To bathen hem. the water was so cold
And some also. as I have you told
I mean tho. that prudente weren and wise
The water drank. in mesurable wise
That of the thirst. they have toforne endured
They were refresshed. fully and recured
And Greeks than. of hye and low degree
For hye profit. and great commodytee
Compass the river. crystalline of sight
Of one accord. there her tents pyght
To rest hem. there in relees of her pain
Oonly the space. of a day or twain
And whiles Greeks. upon the river lay
This Tydeus. upon the same day
Full knyghtly. has do his dylygence
This young lady. with great reverence
To Adrastus. goodly to present
At whoos coming. the king himself went
Against her. she falling down on her knees
All the states. present and degrees
Of greeks land. absente was not one
And in his arms. took her up anon
Thankyng her. and of her business
Of her labor. and her kyndnesse
Behotyng her. like as he was hold
If any thing. plainly that she would
That he may done. she should it ready find
And Greeks all. the story makes mind
Of the states. being tho present
Thanked her. with all her hole entente
For the refresshyng. done to many a Greek
And for her part. they behyght her eke
with her bodies. and goods both two
what her list. command hem for to do
To be ready platly. and not fail
And here mine auctour. makes rehersall
That this lady. so fair upon to see
Of whom the name. was Isyphyle
To Adrastus told. as ye may read
Lynealy the stok of her kynrede
Whylom how she a kings daughter was
Rehersyng him. hole all the caas
First why that she. out of her country went
Shortly. for she nolde not assente
To execute. a conspyracyon
Made by the wymmen. of that regyon
A thing contrary. and ayenste all right
That each of hem. upon a certain night
By one accord. shall warly take keep
Fader brother. and husbondes in her sleep
with knyues sharp. and rasours kene
Lrytte her throtes. in that mortal tene
Unto this fine. as Bochas tell can
In all that land. be not found a man
But slain echone. to this conclusyon
That wymmen might have domynacyon
In that kingdom. to regne at lyberte
And on no part. interrupted be
But for this lady. passing debonayre
To this morder. was froward and contrary
Lrepte her fader. that he was not slawe
But fro the death. preserved and wythdrawe
For which alas. she fled the country
And of a pyrat. taken in the sea
To king Lygurgus. broughten in all dread
And for her truth. and her womanhede
To her he took his young child to keep
which in the herber. alone left to sleep
when Tydeus. she brought to well
And by Jason. some books tell Jason

That this lady. had sons two
when that he. and Hercules also Hercules

Toward Colchos. by her country came
For tacomplysshe. the conquest of the Ram
But who that list. by and by for to see
The story hole. of this Isyphyle Isyphyle

Her faders name. of which also I went
Though some seyn. he named was Toante
And some books. Vermes eke him call
But to know. the auentures all
Of this lady. Isyphyle the fair
So faithful ay. and Inly debonayre
Look on the book. that Johan Bochas made
whylom of wymmen. with Rothorykes glad
And dyrecte. by full sovereign style
To fair Jane. the queen of Secyle
Read there the Rubrysshe of Isyphyle
Of her troth. and of her hye bountye
Full craftily compyled. for her sake
And when that she. has her leave take
Of Adrastus. homewarde in her way
Tydeus. began her to conueye
To the gardeyn. till she is repaired
But now alas. my matter dysepeyred
Of all Joye. and of all welfulnesse
And destytute. of myrthe and all gladness
For now of woo. gynneth the sharp shoures
For this lady found. among the flowers
Her little child. turned up the face How the child was slain with a serpent

Slain of a serpente. in the self place
Her tail burled. with scales silver shene
The venyin. was so persyng and so kene
So perylous. eke the mortal vyolence
Caused alas. thorugh her long absence
She was to slow. homewarde for to hye
But now can she. but weep wayle and cry
Now can she not. but syghen and complain
And woefully. wring her hondes twain
Dedely of look. pale of face and chere
And began to rende. her gylte tresses clear
And often sithe. began she say alas
I woeful wretch. unhappy in this caas
what shall I do. or wheder shall I turn
For this the fine. if I there soiourne
I wot right well. I may not escape
The pyteous fate. that is for me shape
Socoure is none. nor there may be no read
Lyche my decerte. but that I mote be deed
For thorugh my sloth. and my neclygence
I have alas. done so greece offense
That my gylte. I may not excuse
Shall to the king. of treason me accuse
Thorugh my defaute. and sloth both two
His sone is deed. and his heir also
which he loves. more than all his good
For tresoure. none so nigh his heart stood
Nor was so deep. grave in his courage
That he is lykly. to fall in a rage
when it is so. mine odyous offense
Reported be. unto his audyence
So Importable. shall be his heaviness
And well wot I. in verray sothfastnesse
That when the king. has this espied
To mine excuse. it may not be denied
I doubt it not. there geyneth no pity
with out respyte. he will avenged be
On me alas. I have deserved
That fro the death. I may not be preserved
Another by bylle. ne supplycacyon
For the rage. of my transgressyon
Requires death. and none other mede
And thus alas. quakyng in her dread
None other help. ne remedy ^an
But dreynte in sorrow. to the Greeks ran
Of hertly woo. face and chere desteyned
And her chekes. with weeping all bereyned
In her affraye. dystracte and furyous
To forne all. she come to Tydeus
And fill on knees. and began her complaynt make
Told plainly. that for Greeks sake
She mote be deed. and shortly in substance
Rehersyng him. the great of her greuance
First how by traynes. of false serpente
The child was slain. while she was absente
In what dysioynte. and perell that she stood
And when that he. her myschyfe understood
Unto her. full knyghtly he behyght
To help and further. all that ever he might
Her pyteous woe. to stynten and appeal
And for to find. unto her disease
Hasty comfort. he went a full great pase
To Adrastus. and told him all the caas
Of this unhappy. woeful adventure
Besechyng him. to done his besy cure
As he was bound. of equity and right
And aduerten. and to have a sight
How she quyte her. to Greeks here to forne
when they were lykly. for to have be lorne
The socour void. of her womanhede
Of which he must. of knyghthode take heed
To remedyen this unhappy thing
And Adrastus. like a worthy king
Taquyte himself. the story makes mind
To this lady. will not to be found unkind
Another for cost. nor for no travail
But besy was. in all that might avail
To her socoure. considered all things
And by thauyse. of all the worthy kings
Of Greeks land. they ben accorded thus
Princes dukes. and worthy Tydeus
To hold her way. and all attones ride
To Lygurgus. dwelling there beside
Of one entente. if they may purchase
In any wise. for to get grace
For this lady. called Isyphyle
They would assaye. if it might be
And to his paleys. full royal bylte of stone
The worthy Greeks. came rydyng euerychone
Every lord. full fresshely on his stead
And Lygurgus. example of manlyhede
Anon as he knew. of her coming
Taquyte himself. lyche a gentle king
Again hem went. to mete hem on the way
Full well beseen. and in full good array
Receyuyng him. with a full kyngly chere
And to Adrastus said. as ye shall here
Cosyn quod he. and began him to enbrace
ye be welcome. to your own place
Thankyng hertely. to your hye noblesse
That so goodly. of your gentyllesse
Toward me. ye list you taquyte
your self day. your Cosyn to vysyte
In this castle. to make your lodgyng
That never yet. I was so glad of thing
And all my life. and there to here my truth
And evermore. there shall be no slouthe
That the chambres. and the large toures
Shall be delivered. to your herberyours
That every lord. as is of degree
Unto his lodgyng. assygned shall be
Your officers. let hemselfe deuyse
If the housyng. may largely suffyse
To you and youres. stretchen and attain
That none estate. have cause to complain
And all your host. lodged here beside
which in tents. upon you abide
Let hem fette. by mine auctoryte
Vytayle you here in my cite
And all that may. hem socoure or save
And at a word. all that ever I have
Is full and hole. at your commandment
Quod Adrastus. that is not our entente How adrastus and all the stat^ of
greeks prayed lygurgus for the life of Isyphyle

Nor in no party. cause of our coming
For we come. all for a another thing
A certain gift. of you to require
Benygnely. if ye list to here
which may Greeks. passyngly avail
Of your request. that ye not ne fail
which we dare not openly express
without that ye would of gentyllesse
your grant a forne. conferme an ratyfye
Than were we bold. it to specyfye
Quod Lygurgus. what thing ever it be
Naught excepted. by oonly things three
The first thing is it. touches not my life
My young sone plainly. ne my wife
Take all my good. or what ye list provide
Of my tresoure. and set these three a side
All the surplus. I count not at a myte
Than Adrastus. astoned was a lyte
when Lygurgus in conclusyon
Of his sone. did make excepcyon
And whiles they thus entreaten I fere
There come forth one. with a woofull chere
Of face. of look pale and no thing read
A loud cries. the kings sone is deed
Alas the while. that whylom was so fair
After Lygurgus borne. for to ben hair
The which alas. has yolden up the brethe
As a serpente. stongen unto the death
And with his wound. new fresshe and grene
In therber. lies that pity is to seen
And has so layen. all most all this day
That when Lygurgus hard this affraye
And wyste his child was deed. and had no moo
Little wounder. though that he were woo
For suddenly. the Importable smerte The sorrow ye king ligurgus made for ye
death of his child and ye lame^taco^n of the queen

Ran anon. and hente him by the heart
That for constreyne. of his dedely pain
Thorugh out he felt. koruen every vein
The rage began mine. in him so deep
That he can not. but sygh sobbe and weep
And with the noise. and lamentacyon
The queen destraught. is descended down
And when she knew. ground of all this sorrow
It need her no teres for to borowe
But twenty time. by upon a row
A swoune she fell. unto the ground low
And stounde mele. for this hye myschau^ce
Still as stone. she lyggeth in a trau^ce
And when it. in to the court was brought
Therefore Lygurgus alas. I wit him naught
Upon the cors. with a mortal face
He fell attones. and began it to embrace
Sore to grype. and again up sterte
That when Adrastus. began this aduerte
Of kyngly reuthe. and compassyon
From his eyes. there teres fell down
Eke kings dukes. that about stood
O only of pity. that is in gentle blood
No power had the water to restrain
That on her chekes. down began to reyne
But all a day. would not suffyse
All her sorrows. in order to deuyse
First of the king. and of the queen also
To tellen all. I should never have do
Naught in the space. all most of an hour
But when the storms. and sharpshoures
Of her weeping. was somewhat over gone
The little cors. was graven under stone
And Adrastus. in the same tide
Lygurgus took. alyte out aside
And full wisely. with his prudente speech
The queen present. began him for to teache
That so to sorrow. avail may right naught Agayns de the may be no recure

To morder himself. with his own thought
Sith los of death. noman may recure
Though he in woo. perpetuelly endure
All helps not. when the soul is go
And our life here. who takes head thereto
Is but an exyle. and a pilgrimage
Full of tourmente. and of bitter rage
Lyche a see. rennyng to and fro
Suyng an ebb. when the flode is do
Little space. abydyng at full
Of whoos soiourne. the ^ope yeueth no bull
Nor king is. nor duke no Emperor
That may him shroude. again yt fatal shoure
Of cruel death. when him list manasse
To mark a man. with his mortal mace
That geyneth not. to his sauacyon
Another franchyse. ne proteccyon
And little or naught. may help in this caas
Save conduyte. or supersydeas
For in this world. who looks a right
Is none so great. of power ne of might
None so rich. shortly ne none so hold
That he must dye. other young or old
And who in youth passes this passage
He is escaped. all the wood rage
All sorrow and trouble. of this present life
Replenysshed. with contek war and strife
which selde or never. stand in suerte
wherefore best is. as seems unto me
No man grutche. but of hye prudence
The sonde of god. take in pacyence
And ye that be so manly to
your life to drown. in tournement and in woe
For loss of thing. that ye list to see
which in no wise. recured may be
Is great folly. and vndyscrecyon
And thus Adrastus. has conveyed down
The substance hole. of that he would say
Till that he fond. a time for to pray
Conuenyente. for Isyphyle
Besechyng him. for to have pity
Of that she has. his highness
Not wylfully. but reklesnesse
First that he would. his domes to deuyde
Mercy prefer. and set right aside
At request and prayer. of hem all
Of this unhap. and myscheef that is befall
By hasty rygoure. and not to vengaunce
But thing a forne. in his purueaunce
who to wretches. does mercy in her dread
Shall mercy find. when he has most need
And sith he has. power might and space
Let him take this lady to his grace
For lack of ruthe. that she naught dye
But tho the queen. began again replye
And platly said. as in this matter
Avails not. request nor prayer
Pity mercy. no remyssyon
But if it be. by this condycyon
But if the serpente. cause of all this sorrow
Though his labor. leye his head to borowe
This is fynall. and utter recompense
To find grace. for her great offense
Or shortly shede. blood for blood
And when the Greeks. her answer understood
All of one accord. in her best wise
Took on hem. this auentures empryse
For love oonly of Isyphyle
And began to ride. enuyron the country
By hills vales. roches and eke caves
In dyches dark. and in old graves
By every cost. serchyng up and down
Tyll^at last. full famous of renown
The worthy knight. Parthonolope How parthonolope saw first this serpent

was the first. that happed to se
This hydeous serpente. by a river side
Great and horrible. stern and full of pride
Under a roche. by a bank low
And in all haste. he hent a sturdy bow
And there in set. an arowe fyled kene
And through the body. spotted blewe and grene
Full myghtely. he made it for to glyde
And rent out a sword. hangyng by his side
Smote of his head. and anon it hente
And therewith all. began the queen present
Where thorugh. her sorrow parcel began a swage
And thus of prowess. and of hye courage
This manly man. Parthonolope
Has reconsyled. fair Isyphyle
Unto grace. fully of the queen
Her ire auoyed. and her old tene
And by Adrastus. medyacyon
Lryng Lygurgus. granted a pardon
To this lady. that from all danger fre
She was restored. to her lyberte
In her paleys. all her life to dwell
Though Johan Bochas. the contrary tell
For this auctoure. affyrmed out of dread
That wha^ this child. was by the serpent deed
She durst not. for her great offense
Never after come in presence
Of Lygurgus. but of intencyon
Fled anon out. of that regyon
A^te heart she took. the childs death so sore
what fell of her. I find can no more
Than ye have herd. me a fore specyfye
And the kingdom. but kookes lie Nota De Ligurgus rege regni tracee

Of Lygurgus. was I called trace
And as I read. in a another place
He was the same mighty champyon
To Athenes. that came with palamon
Against his brother. that called was Arcyte
Lad in his chare. with.iiii. boles white
Upon his head. a wreth of gold full fine
And I find eke. how Bachus god of wine Bachus deus vinu^

with this king. was whylom at debate
Oonly for he. pompous and elate
Destruccyon did. to his vynes
And for he first. allaye set on wynes
Meynte water. where they were to strong
And this Bachus. for the great wrong
Brake his lymmes. and dreynte him in the sea
Of Lygurgus. ye get no more of me
But the troth. if ye list verryfye Nota^du^ de xii arborius in libro
bochacii de geneologya deorum

Read of gods. the geneologye
Lyneally. her kynrede by degrees
Ibrau^ched out. upon twelve trees
Made by Bochas. Decertaldo called
Among poets. in Itayle stalled
Next Frauncys. petrarke suyng in certain
Unto Greeks. I will return again
To tell forth. shortly if I can
Of her Journey. that they have begone
How Adrastus. has his leave take
Of Lygurgus. with his brows blake
And departing. with saint Johan to borowe
Made his wards. on the next morrow
So well beseen. so mighty and so strong
wonder erly. when the lark song
with a trompette. warned every man
To be ready. in all the haste they can
For to run. and no longer lettyng make
And so they have. the right way take
Toward Thebes. the Greeks euerychone
That such a nombre. gadered in to one
Of worthy knights. never a forne was said
when they in fere. moustren in a plain
And they ne stynte. by none occasyon
Till they become. even a forne the town
And pyght her tents. proudely as I read
Under the walls. in a grene mede
And when the Thebans. weren besette about
The manly knights. would a issued out
And have scarmesshed. in her lusty pride
with her fomen. on that other side
But by byddyng of Ethyocles
All thylke night. they kept hemselfe in pees
By cause oonly. that it was so late
with great awayte. set at every gate
Men of arms. all the night wakyng
On the walls. by byddyng of the king
Lest there were. treynes or treason
And on the coures. and in the chyfe dongon
He set up men. to make mortal souns
with brazen horns. and loud claryons
Of full entente. the watches for to keep
In his ward. that no man ne sleep
And Greeks proudly. all the long night
Lryndly fyres. and made full great light
Set up lodgyng. upon every side
Like as they sold. ever there abide
Compass the town. there was no void space
But all besette. her fomen to manace
And whiles they. a forne the Cytee lay the forraye yt the Greeks made in ye
country about the bes

On every cost. they sent out the forraye
Burnt towns. thorpes and vyllages
with great Rauyne. making her pyllages
Spoil and rob. and brought home vytayle
And all manner sorts of bestayle
Sheep and neet. and in her cruel rage
with hounds slow. all that was savage
Heart and hynde. both buk and do
The blak bore. and the wild Roo
The fat swyne. and the tusshy bore
Caryeng all home. for the Greeks store
whete and wine. for her advantage
Hay and otes. foder and forage
with this kalendes. as hem thynk due
Greeks began the Thebans to salve
Mynystryng hem. occasyons fell
The sege set. shortly for to tell
Of full entente. in her hatfull pride
For life or death. there upon to abide
Who so ever therewith be agreued
Till they fully. her purpos have acheued
There may thereof. be maked no reles
And of this. full ware Ethyocles
Began in party. gretely marvel
when that he saw. the great apparayle
Of the Greeks. the Cytee round about
And in himself. had a manner doubt
None at point. what was best to do
For thylke time. it stood with him so
That to some. abydyng in the town
He had in heart. great suspeccyon
Lest toward him. they were unstable
And to his brother. in party favorable
For in the Cytee. there was varyaunce The varyance in the bes yt cytee among
he^ self

which unto him. was a great meschaunce
For in his need. shortly he ne wyste
Upon whom. that he might tryste
For they were not all of one entente
For which he has. for his council sent
All his lords. and the old queen
which as he dempte. were pure and clean
Hole of one heart. and not varyable
Of old expert. and always found stable
Requyryng him. by cause they were wise
All openly. to tellen her auyse
where it where. bet plainly in her sight
with his brother. to treaten or to fight
And some gafe. a full blonte sentence
which had of werre. none experyence
Said it was best. and not be aferde
To try his right. manly with his sword
And some also. that were more prudente
Spoke unto him. by good aduysemente
And list not spare. but their conceyte told
How it was best. his couenante for to hold
And to perform. his heste made to forne
To his brother. lyche as he was sworn
So yt his sword. the wors to make him speed
Be not found varyaunte. fro no deed
For none hatred. rancoure another pride Nota The words of ye queen Jocasta
unto ethyocles ye king

And tho the queen. took him out a side
Told him plainly. it was vnsyttyng
Such doubleness. to find in a king
And said him eke. all though he were strong
To his brother. how he did wrong
As all the town. will record in deed
And bear witness. if it came to need
wherefore let us shape a another mean
In this matter. while that it is grene
Or this quarrel. gonne of volunte
Turn in the fine. of more aduersyte
For if it be. darreyned by battle
who trusts most. may lykely fail
And it is folly. by sho^te aduysemente How perylous it is to be gou^ned by
Marces in any quarrel

To put a strife. in Martis Jugemente
For hard it is. when a Juge is wood
To treat a forne him. without loss of blood
And if we put it hole in Mart
That with the sword. his laws does coarte
Than may it hap. where ye be glad or loathe
Thou and thy brother. shall repent both
And many a another. that is here present
Of your trespace. that been Innocente
And many thousand. in caas shall complain
For the debate. oonly of you twain
And for your strife. shalt find full vnswote
And for thou art. gynnyng ground and rote
Of this Iniurye. and this great unright
To the gods. that here of have a sight
Thou shalt a countes. and a rekenyng make
For all tho. that perysshen for thy sake
And now the cause. driven is so far
Sodeyn peace. or hasty war
Must follow anon. for the fatal chance
Of life and death. depends in balaunce
And no man may by no craft restrain
That upon one. platly of these twain
The sort mote fall. like as it does torn
whose that ever. laughe or morn
And thou art drive. so narowe to the stake
That thou may not. mo delays make
But fight or treat. this quarrel for to fine
Be none engyne. thou canste it not declyne
An hasty casse. as folk seyn that been wise
Redress requires. by full short auyse
For to treat long. now avails naught
For to the point. sothly thou art brought
Either to keep. thy possessyon
Or in all haste. deuoyde out of this town
where thou therewith. be wroth or well apayde
Now note well. all that I have said
And by my council. wysly condescende
wrong wrought. of old newly to amend
The time is come. it will be none other
wherefore in haste. treat well with thy brother
And ageyn him. make none resystence
But to thy lords. fully give credence
By whoos counceyll. sith they be so sage
Let Polymyte. rejoice his heritage
And that shall turn. most to thine aueyll
Loo here is hole. the fine of our counceyll
And shortly tho. for verray ire wroth
Though he thereto. froward was or loath
Accorded is. heryng all the pres
If he algate. treat shall for pees
It must be. by this condycyon
That he would have. the domynacyon
First in chyfe to himself reserved
As him thought. he had it well deserved
And save to him. hole the soueraynte
And under him. in Thebes the Cite
He to grant. with a right good chere
Polymyte. to regne for a year
Than avoid. and not resort again
For more to cleyme. was not but in vain
Thus would he done. oonly for her sake
And other wise. he would none end make
with the Greeks. what fortune ever fall
And finally. among his lords all
There was not one. of hye ne low estate
That would gone on bassate
Out of the town. another for bette ne worse
Till Jocasta. made sadell her horse
And cast her self. to gone for this treat
To make an end. if it would be
And this was done. the morrow right by time
Upon the hour. when it drowe to pryme
And with her went. her young daughters tweyne
Antygone. and the fair Imeyne
Of her meyne. full many one about
At gate she was conveyed out
And of purpos. she made first her went
On horse bak. to the king Adrastus tente
He and his lords. being all I fere
And they resceyue her. with right glad chere
Suyng her. like to her degree
On every half. full great humanyte
Polymyte rysyng. fro his place
And humbely. his mother began embrace
^ryssed her. and than Antygone
And Imeyne. excellent of beauty
And for that they were passyngly fair
Great was the pres. concours and repair
Of the ladies. for to have a sight
And Jocasta. proceeds anon right
To Adrastus. her matter to purpose
And began to him. openly dysclose
Thentente and will. of Ethyocles
And by what mean. he desires pees
To him reserved. as she can specyfye
The honor and hole. and the regalye
with the septure. and crown fro him not divided
But hole to him. as he has provided
And Polymyte. under this condycyon
Under him to regnen. in the town
As a subgette. by suffrau^ce of his brother
But the Greeks. thoughten all a another
And specially. worthy Tydeus The a^swere of tydeus to ye queen

Plainly affermyng. it should not be thus
For he will have no condycyons
But set a side. all excepcyons
No thing reserved. as in special
But hole the lordshyp. regaly and all
Polymyte. it fully to possede
In Thebes crowned. verrayly in deed
As ryghtfull king. put in possessyon
Lyche the couenantes. and conuencyon
Imade of old. assured and essealed
which shall not now. of new be repleted
But stabyll and hole. in his strength stand
And let him so. platly understand
And first yt he. deuoyde him out of the town
And deliver. the septure and the crown
To his brother. and make there of no more
And shortly else. it shall be bought full sore
Or this matter. brought be to an end
For Greeks is there none. yt shall hens wend
Or that our right. which is us denied
with life or death. dereyned be and tried
we ne will. erst fro this town rennewe
And if him list. all this to eschew
And all myschyfe. stynten and appease
To either part. he may do great ease
Thus I mean. for his advantage
Deliver up hole. the true heritage
To his brother. for a year to endure
And Greeks shall him. fully assure
By what bound. that him list deuyse
The year complete. in our best wise
To him deliver. again possessyon
without strife. or contradyccyon
And to his fine. Justly hold us to
And if it fall. that he would not so
Let him not wait. but oonly after war
The hour is come. we will it not defer
^oo here is all. and thus ye may report
To him again. when that ye resort
Fro which a point. we cast us not to varye
And yet to him. Amphyorax contrary
Full plainly said in conclusyon
This fine shall cause a destruccyon
Of hem echone. if it forth proceed
To be performed. and executed in deed
But thylke time. for all his eloquence
He had in soth. but little euydence
For where so ever. it mente good or ill
King Adrastus. bad him to be still
And tho Jocasta. as wisdom did her teache
Humble of her port. with full soft speech
Began seek means. in her fantasye
If she might. the ire modefye
Of the Greeks. to make hem to enclyne
In any wise. her rancoure for to fine
She did her deuoyre. and her besy cure
But tho befell. a wounder adventure
Cause and ground. of great confusyon
Greeks perturbyng. and eke the town
And it tell. may not me asterte
For which a while. my style I mote dyuerte
And shortly tell. by descrypcyon
Of a Tiger. dwelling in the town
which from a kingdom. besyden adiacente
Out of Egypt. was to Thebes sent
Which best. by record of scripture
Is most swyfte. as of his nature
And of his kind. also most savage
And most cruel. when he is in his rage
And as clerks. maken mensyon
He of body. resembles to a lion
And like a greyhou^de. the mosell and the head
And of eyes. as any fire read
Eke of his skin. written as I find
Lyche a panter. conuersaunte in ynde
With all manner. hues and colors
And is full often desceyued with myrrours
By fraud of hunters. and false appearance
Showed in glass. without exystence
When his kyndles. arn by sleyght Itake
And he desceyued. may no rescuse make
And like a lamb. was this Tiger tame
Again kind. mine auctour write the same
And this best. merueylous to se
Was sent. to Imeyne and antygone
Which unto hem. did great comfort
And could play. and make great dysporte
Like a whelpe. that is but young of age
And to wight. did no damage
No more in south. than does a little hounde
And it was worth. many a hou^dred pound
Unto the king. for ay in his greuau^ce
There was no thing. did him more plesau^ce
That for no tresoure. it might not be bought
For when that he was. in pensyfe or in thought
It put him out. of his heaviness
And thylke time. the story did express
That Jocasta. treated for a pes
This tame Tiger. in party rekles
Out of the gates. in sight of many a man
In to the field. wyldly out ran
And casuelly. rennyng to and fro
In and out. as does a tame To
Greeks wenyng. that were young of age
That this Tiger. had be savage
And cruelly besectyng all the place
Round abounte. began him to enchase
Till he was deed. and slain in the field
The death of whom. when that they beheld
The proud Thebans. which on ye walls stood
They run down. full furyous and wode
Wenyng he had. ben slain of despyte
Taking her horse. without more respyte
Fully in purpos. with Greeks for to fight
The Tigers death. tauenge if they might
And out they rode. without gouernayll
And full proudely. Greeks began assayll
And of hatred. and hye dysdayne
Fill upon hem. that have the Tiger slain
And cruelly quyten hem her mede
That many Greek. in the grene mede
By the force. and the great might
Of her fomen. lay slain in the sight
The Tygres death. so dear they a bought
So mortally. the Thebans on hem wrought
That all the Ooste. in the field lyggyng
Was astoned. of this sodeyn thing
And in this while. of rancoure reckles
Out of Thebes. rode Ethyocles
And with him the worthy king Tremoure
Of his hand a noble werryoure
That made Greeks. to forsake her place
And to her tents. began hem enchace
And myd the field. as they together met
On horse bake. with speres sharp whette
Of ve^ray hate. and enuyous pride
Full many one. was deed on every side
The which thing. when Tydeus espyeth The great ma^hode of worthy tydeus

Wood as a lion. to horse bak hyeth
As he that was. never a dele aferde
But ran on him. and met hem in the berde
And maugre hem. in his crueltee
He made hem fiee. home to her Lytee
Hem pursuyng. of full dedely hate
That many one. lay slain at gate
Gapyng vpryghtes. with her wounds wide
That utterly. they durst not abide
There for the sword. of this Tydeus
He was on hem. so passing furyous
So many Theban. he rofe to the heart
That when Jocasta. the slaughter began aduerte
Polymyte. she began pray full fair
To make Greeks. home again repair
And that they would stenten to assail
For thylke day. and seasen her battle
At whoos request. plainly and prayer
And at reverence. of his mother dear
Polymyte. her heart to comfort
Greeks made. home ageyn resort
And Tydeus to stynten. of his chase
And they of Thebes. hastyng a great pace
Full tryste and heavy. ben entered in to the town
And for the Tygre. in conclusyon
As ye have herd. first began this strife
That many Theban. that day lost his life
And reculees. have yolden up the breath
In thauengyng. of the Tygre is death
And all this while. duly as she ought
The queen Jocasta. humbly besought
Lryng Adrastus. oonly of his grace
Some mean way. wysly to purchase
To make a peace. a twene the brethern tweyne
And the treat. so prudently ordeyne
On either party. that no blood be shad
And this Adrastrus. wise and right sad
For Greeks party. answer gave anon
That other end. shortly get she none
Lyche as the lords. fully ben aduysed
That Tydeus. has to forne devised
And when she saw. it may none other be
She leave took. and home to the Cite
She is repeyred. having to her gyde
Polymyte rydyng by her side
And Tydeus. lad Antygone
And of Archadye. Prothonolope
The worthy king. did his besy pain
To be attendaunte. upon fair Imeyne
Whose heart she has. to her service lured
And he again. has p^rtrayed and fygured
Myd of his breast. that lightly may not pass
Hole the fetures. of her fresshely face
Him thought she was. so fair a creature
And though that he. durst not him dyscure
Yet in his heart. as ferforth as he can
He has auowed. to be her true man
U^wyste to her. plainly and unknow
How he was marked. with Cupydys bow
with his arowe. suddenly werreyed
And to the yate. the ladies conveyed
Ben entered in. for it drew to eve
Greeks of hem. taking tho her leave
Though some of hem. were loathe to depart
yet of wysdom. they durst not inparte
Under a conduyte. to entren in to the town
Lest it turned. to her confusyon
Though some books. the contrary sayn
But mine auctoure. is platly there again
And fermeth. in his oppynyon
That Tydeus. of hye dyscrecyon
Of wylfulnesse. nor of folly
Ne would as tho. put in party
Another himself. ne none of his feres
And the ladies. with heavenly there
Angelyke. of look and contenaunce
Lyche as it is put. in remembrance
At her entryng. fro Greeks in to the town
Polymyte. of great affection
The queen besought. thylke night not fine
For to assaye. if she might enclyne
Ethyocles. of conscience and right
To keep couenaunte. as he has behyght
Full year ago. with the superlusage
Lest the contrary. turn to damage
First on himself. and sith on many other moo
And thus from Thebes. the Greeks ben a goo
To her tents. and rest hem all the night
And Lucyna the moon. shone full bright
within Thebes. on the chyfe dongon
when Jocasta. made relacyon
Unto the king. and told him all the gyse
How that the Greeks. utterly despise
His profer made. by false collusyon
Only except. the conuencyon
Of old engrosed. by great purueaunce
That is enrolled. and put in remembrance
Upon which. finally they will rest
Him conseylyng. her though for the best
To conferme him. to that he was bound
Lest in the fine. falsnesse him confound
But all her counseyll. he set at no price
He dempte himself. so prudente and so wise
For he was wylfull. and he was Indurate
And in his heart. of malice obstynate
And utterly aduysed. in his thought
within Thebes. his brother get right naught
And in his error. thus I let him dwell
And of Greeks. forth I will you tell
which all that night. kept hemselfe close
And on the morrow. when tytan up a rose
They armed hem. and began hem ready make
And of assente. have the field Itake
with the Thebans. that day out of doughte
For to fyghten. if they issue out
And Adrastus. in full trysty wise
In the field. his wards began deuyse
As he that was. of all deceytes ware
And rychely armed in his chare
Amphyorax come. with his menye
Full renomed. of antyquyte
And well expert. by cause he was old
And while that Greeks. as I have you told
were besyeste. her wards to ordeyne
Myd of the field. befell a caas sodeyne
Full unhappy. loathsome and odyble
And lyche a thing. that were Inuysyble
This old bishop. with chare and horse certain How bishop a^phiorax suddenly
fell down in to hell

Dysapered. and no more was seyn
Oonly of fate. which no man can expelle
The earth opens. and he fill down to hell
with all his folk. that upon him abode
And suddenly. the ground that he on stood
Closed again. and together shytte
That never after. Greeks with him met
And thus the deuell. for his old outrages
Lyche is deserte. paid him his wages
For he full low. is descended dewn
In to the dark. and black rogyon
where that Pluto. is crowned and Istalled
with his queen. Proserpyna called
with whom this bishop. has made his mansyon
Perpetuelly. as for his guerdon
Loo here the mede of ydolatrye
Of ryghtes old. and of false mammentrye
Loo what auaylen Incantacyons
Of exorsysmes. and coniurysons
what stood him stead. his nygramancye
Calculacyon. or Astronomye
what vayled him. the heavenly mansyons
Diverse aspectes. or constellacyons
The end is not. but sorrow and myschaunce
Of hem that setten. her utter affyaunce
In such works. superstycyous
Or trust on hem. he is ungracious
Record I take. shortly for to tell
Of this bishop. sonken down to hell
whoos woeful end. about in every cost
Such a rumor. has made in the oste
That the noise. of this uncouth thing
Is I run. and I come to the king
How this vengau^ce. is vnwardly fall
And he anon. made a trompette call
All his people. out of the field again
And euerychone. assembled on a plain
Tofore the king. and also round about
Every man of his life in doubt
Full pyteously. began to froune and loure
Lest that the ground. hem all would devour
And swalue hem. in his dark kaue
And they ne can. no recure hem to save
For neither force. ne manhood may hem avail
In such myschyfe. the value of a mayle
For he that was wyseste. could most
To search and seek. thorugh out all the oost
Amphyorax. when he lest wend
To hell is sonken. and can not him defend
To him the time. unknown and vnwyste
In whom whylom. was all the Greeks tryste
Her hole comfort. and her affyaunce
But all attones. for this sodeyn chance
And this myschyfe. they began hem all dyspeyre
Home to Greece. that they will repeyre
This was the purpos. of hem euerychoon
And on the walls. of Thebes lay her foon
Reioysyng hem. of this unhappy eure
wenyng thereby. greatly to recure
And on her towers. as they loken out
They on Greeks. enuyously began shoute
And of despyte. and great enuyte
Bad hem foles. gone ho^^ to her contre
Sith they have lost. her comfort and her socoure
Her falls prophet. and her dyuynoure
where through. her part greatly is appeyred
And in this wise. Greeks dysespeyred
Dempte plainly. by tokens euydent
This case fall. by so^^ enchantement
By wytchecrafte. or by false sorcerye
Against which. may be no remedy
Trysty defense. help nor socoure
And when Adrastus. herd this clautoure
He besy was. agayns this perturbance
To provide. some manner cheuysance
And to him calls. such counsel as he wyste
For life or death. that he might trust
Requyryng hem. but in words few
In this myschyfe. her mocyon to show
And declare by good auysemente
what to Greeks. were most expedyente
To remedyen. and make no delay
The uncouth noise. and the great affraye
That Greeks made. with clamor Importune
And now and now ever. in one contune
And they yt weren. most manly and most wise
Shortly said. it were a great cowardyse
The empryse. that they have undertake
For dread of death. so suddenly forsake
It were to hem. a perpetuell shame
And our hyndryng. unto Greeks name
And better it were. to every werryoure
Manly to deye. with worship and honor
Than like a cowarde. with the life endure
For ous shamed. hard is to recure
His name again. of what estate he be
And sith Greeks. of old antyquyte
As of knyghthode. who so list take heed
Ben so famous. and so renomede
If now of new. the shynyng of her fame
Eclypsed were. with any spot of blame
It were a thing. uncouth for to here
Of whoos renon. the bemes yet ben clear
Through all ye world. where as they have passed
And ben nor yet. dyrked ne defaced
By no report. neither on see ne on land
Thing to forsake. that they took on hand
And by ensample. of our progenytours
That whylom weren. so manly conquerours
To forne that we. in to Greece wend
Of thing begone. let us make an end
And part not. nor severe fro this town
Till it be brought. to destruccyon
walls toures. crested and embatayled
And for werre. strongly apparayled
Be first down. beat that no thing be seen
But all together. to the earth pleyn
Be low laid. or that we resort
That afterward. men may of us report
That we began. knyghtly we have achened
Upon our foon. with worship vnrepreued
This was the counsel. shortly and thauyse
Of the Greeks. that manly were and wise
That none aforn. were marked with no blame
And specially. such as dread shame
And fully cast. what fortune every tide
On her purpos. to the end abide
That on no part. her honor not appall
And this counsel. Greeks one and all
Ben condescended. for more happy speed
Instead of him. that was so late deed
Amphyorax. buried deep in hell
That could whylom. to the Greeks tell
Of things hyde. how it shall fall a forne
Instead of whom. now they have him lorne
They casten him. wysly to purchase
Some prudente man. to occupye his place
That in such thing. might hem most avail
Thorugh storye. of his dyuynayle
By craft of sort. or of prophecye
If any such. they conden out espy
And among all. her purpos to attain How Greeks chosen hem a new dyuynoure in
ye stead of a^phyorax ye bishop

As I find. they have chosen twain
Most renomed. of hem every chone
And Menolyppus. called was that one
And Tardynyus. eke that other hight
And for he had. most favor in her sight
This Tardynyus. was chosen and preferred
And her choys. Greeks have not arred
For whylom. her learned is empryse
Of his master. Amphyorax the wise
And was dyscyplyne. under his doctrine
And of entente. that he shall termyne
Unto Greeks. things that shall fall
And as bishop. mytred in his stall
Done for him. in many uncouth wise
In the Temple. to gods sacryfyse
And thus confermed. and stalled in his see
And fell days. stood in his degree
After his master. with full great honor
Of Greeks chose. to be successoure
And all this time. in story as it is told
Full great myschyfe. of hunger thrust and cold
And of Thebans. as they yssuen out
Lay many one slain in the route
On either part. of fortune as they met
Her mortal swerdes. were so sharp whette
And Tydeus. among hem of the town
Fro day to day. plays the lion
So cruelly. where so that he rode
That Thebans none. a forne his face abode
He made hem. through his hye renon
So great slaughter. and occasyon
That as the death. fro his sword they fled
And who came next. leyde his head to wed
He quyte himself. so like a manly knight
That where he went. he put hem to the flight
And maugre hem. in his crueltee
He drofe hem home. in to their Lytee
Hem pursuyng. proudly to the gate
That unto him. they bare so dedely hate
That they hem cast. by slyght or some engyne
To bring him. unawarely to his fine
And leyde awayte. for him day and night
But o alas. this noble manly knight
Upon a day. as he began home enchase
And mortaly made. hem to lose her place
And sued hem. almoost to the town
That cause was. of his destruccyon
For one alas. that on the walls stood
Which all that day. upon him abode
With a quarrel. sharp heded for his sake
Marked him. with a bow of brake
So cruelly making. none areste How pyteously worthy tydeus was slain with a
quarrel

Till it was passed. both back and breast
Where thorugh alas. there was none other read
Nor lechecrafte. that he mote be deed
There may thereof. be made no delays
And yet was he. holden in his days
The best knight. and the most manly man
As mine auctoure. well rehearse can
But for all that. was there no defense
Again the stroke. of dethes vyolence
And Bochas write. or he was fully deed
He was by Greeks. presented with the head
Of him that gave his last fatal wound
And he was called. like as it is found
Menolyppus. I can not other tell How he yt slow tydeus called was menolippus

But thylke day. Thebans wax so fell
Upon Greeks. that under her Lyte
The manly king. Parthonolope
Islayn was. even a forne the gates
And there also. armed bright in plates
The famous king. called ypomedon
The same day. as made is mencyon
On horse back. manly as he faught
At brygge. even upon the draught
Besette with pres. casuelly was drowned
And thus fortune. has on Greeks frouned
On every side. thylke unhappy day
But all the manner. tellen I ne may
Of her fyghtyng. nor her slaughter in sothe
More to declare. than mine auctour does
But thylke day. I find as ye may seen
When phoebus. passed was merydyen
And fro the south. westwarde began hem draw
His gylte tresses. to bathen in the wawe
The Theban king. fell Ethyocles
Rote of vnreste. and causer of vnhappes
The slaughter of Greeks. when yt he beheld
Armed in steel. he come out in to the field
Full desirous. in that sodeyn hete
Polymyte. at good leyser to mete
Syngulerly. with him to have a do
For in this world. he hated no man so
He satte so nigh. emprented in his heart
Whoos coming out. his brother began aduerte
Upon his stead. in the opposyte
And had agaynwarde. also great delight
To meten him. if fortune assente
Thenuyous fire. so her hertes burnt
With hate cankred. of unkind blood
And like two Tygres. in her rage wode
With speres sharp. ground for the nones
So as they ran. and met both attones
Polymyte. through plates mayle and shield
Rofe him through out. and smote him in to ye field
But when he saw. the stremes of his blood
Rail about. in manner of a blood
All suddenly. of compassyon
Fro his courser. he a light down
And bretherly. with a pyteous face
To save his life. began him to unbrace
And fro his wound. of new affection
Full besy was. to pull out the tronchon
Of love oonly. handlyng him right soft
But o alas. while he lay^ a lofte
Full yrously. Ethyocles the fell
Of all this sorrow. verray sours and well
with a dagger. in all his pains smerte How eueryche of ye theban brethern
slow other to f^ren the cite

His brother smote. vnwardly to the heart
which all her life. had be so wroth
And thus the Thebans were slain bathe
At enter. even a forne the town
But Greeks tho ben a^ayled down
Out of the field. the worthy knights all
And in Thebes land. as any shall
The Cytee arose. when her king was d^de
And to the gates. armed foot and head
Out of the town. come many proud Theban
And some of hem. upon the walls ran
And began to shoute. that pity was to here
And they without. of her life in where
without comfort. or consolacyon
Dysespyred. run home to the town
And Greeks folowen after at back
That many one. that day gooth to wrack
And as her fomen. proudly hem assail
Full many greeks. through plates and through mayle
was shet through. out pressyng at walls
And beten of. which with great round balls
That here lay one. and a another yonder
And the noise. more hydeous than thonder
Of gonne shot. and arblastes ^he
So londroute rong. that many worthy Greek
There lost his life. they were on hem so fell
And at the gates. shortly for to tell
At Greeks pres. to entren the Cytee
They of Thebes. in her crueltee
with hem met. full furyous and wo^e
And mortally. as they again hem stood
Men might see. speres shyner a sonder
That to behold it was a verray wonder
How they feyne. with daggers and with swerdes
Thorugh the vyser. having at berdes
Persyng also. through the round mayles
Rent out pieces. of her auantayles
That naught avails. the mighty gestran
Through breast and neck. yt the mighty speres ran
Her wepenes were. so sharp ground and whette
In there armure. that there were no let
For there lay one. trodden under foot
And yonder one. persed to the heart rode
Here lyet one deed. and there a another lame
This was the play. and the mortal game
Attwene Thebans. and the Greeks proud
That the swonnes. and the cries loud
Of hem that lay. and yolden up the ghost
was herd full fer. about in many cost
And at gates. and saylyng of the wall How all the gentle blood of ye land
of gre^es and of the bes ye Cite destroyed was upon a day

I slain was. all the blood Royal
Both of the town. and of Greeks land
And all the worthy. knyhtes of her hand
And of lords. I shall not feign
On greeks side. a live were but twain
Lryng Adrastus. and Campaneus
That day to hem. was so ungracious
And for tytan. westred was so low
That noman might. uneaths other know
Tho of the town shette her gates fast
with ^arres round made. for to last
In which no wight. kerue may ne hew
And Adrastus. with a Greeks few
Repeyred is home. unto his tente
And all that night. he hasted and spente
For his unhap. in sorrow complaynyng
And they in Thebes. the next day suyng
Her deuoyre did. and her besy cure
To ordeyne. and make a sepulture
For her king. Islayne in the field
And offered up. his baner and his shield
It were a death. to any man a live ward ^he^ bes

And if I should. by and by dyscryue
Their tender weeping. and her woeful bale
Her complayntes. with taces deed and pale
Thereof I might. make a new tale
All most. a day you to occupye
And as mine auctoure. clearly does certefye
Through out Greece. fro all the Regyons
Out of Cytees. and Royal towns
Come all the ladies. and wymmen of estate
Full heavy chered. and dysconsolate
To this assemble. to forn as I you told
I purpose fully. her Journey for to hold
Toward Thebes. these sorrowful creatures
There to bewail. her woeful auentures
Taquyte hemselfe. of troth in womanhede
To her lords. which in the field lay deed
And as the story. lyketh to declare
All this Journey. they went on foot bare
Like as they had gone. on pilgrimage
In token of morning. barbed the vysage
wympled echone. and in burnette wedes
Not in chares. drawn forth with stedes
Nor on palfrays. blake neither white
The sely wymmen. could hem not delight
To hold her way. but bare foot they went
So faithfully. euerychone they mente
Thorugh heaviness. defaced of her hew
And as I find. they were all true
Now was not that a wonder for to see
So many true. out of oo country
Attones gadred. in a company
And feythfull all. books can not lie
Both in her port. and Inward in menyng
Unto my dome. it was an uncouth thing
Among a thousand wymmen or twain
To fynden one. that could in heart feign
It was a marvel. not often seen a forne
For selde in feldes. grows any corn
But if some wede. spryng up there among
Men allaye wynes. when they be to strong
But her troth. was meynt with none allayes
They were so true. fond at all assayes
And they ne stynte. upon her Journee
Till that they come. there as they would be
where Adrastus written. as I find
Lay in his tente. all of color ynde
Greatly meruayled. when that he beheld
The nombre of hem. sprad through all the field
Clad all in black. and bare foot euerychone
Out of his tente. he dressed him anon
Upon his hand. the king Campaneus
Full tryste in heart. and face right pyteous
Again the wymmen forth. they went I fere
And to behold. the woeful chere
The woeful cries. also when they met
The sorrowful syghes. in her breasts shette
The teres new. dystyllyng on her faces
And the swounyng. in many sundry places
When they her lords. alive not ne found
But in the field. through gyrte with many wound
Lay stark vpryght. plainly to endyte
with dedely eyes. turned up the white
who made sorrow. or felt her heart ryue
For her lord. but the fair Argyue
who can now weep. but Deyphyle
Tydeus for she. ne might feel
whoos constrayntes. were so kene
That Adrastus. might not sustene
To behold the ladies. so complain
wysshyng her heart. parted were on twain
But yet alas. both eve and morrow how cursed Creon will not suffer ye bodies
neither to be buried ne to be brent*

A thing there was. that doubled all her sorrow
That old Creon. fader of felonye
Ne would suffer. thorugh his tyranny
The deed bodies. be buried neither I burnt
But with bestes. and hounds to be rent
He made hem all. upon an hepe be laid
whereof the wymmen. tryste and evil apayde
For verray dooll. it was no wonder
Her hertes felt. all most reyne a sonder
And as my master. list to endyte
All clad in black. with her wymples white
with great honor. and due reverence
In the Temple. of the goddess Clemence
They abode the space. of forty night
Till Theseus. the noble worthy knight
Duke of Athenys. with his chyualrye
Repeyred home. out of Femynye
And with him ladde. full fair upon the seen
Thorugh his manhood. Ipolyta the queen
And her suster. called Emelye
And when these wymmen. began first espy
This worthy duke. as he came rydyng
^ryng Adrastus. hem all conueyeng
The wymmen brought. to his presence
which him besought. to give hem audyence
And all attones. swounyng in the place
Full humbly. prayed him of grace
To rewe on hem. her harms to redress
But if ye list. to see the gentylnesse
Of Theseus. how he has him borne How the fynall destruction of thebes is
compendiously rehearsed in the knight tale

if ye remember. ye have herd it to for^e
well rehearsed. at Depforde in the vale
In the beginning. of the knygtes tale
First how that he. when he herd hem speak
For verray reuthe. felt his heart break
And her sorrows. when he began aduerte
Fro his courser. down anon he sterte
Hem comfortyng. in full good entente
And in his arms. he hem all up hente
The knights tale. reherseth every dele
Fro point to point. if ye look well
And how this duke. without more abode
The same day. toward Thebes rode
Full like in sothe. a worthy conqueroure
And in his Oste. of chyualrye the flower
And finally. to speken of this thing
with old Creon. that was of Thebes king
How yt he faught. and flow him like a knight
And all his oost. put unto flight
yet as some auctours make mencyon
Or Theseus entered. in to the town
wymmen first. with pykeys and with malles
with great labor. beat down the walls
And in her writing. also as they sayn
Campaneus. was on the walls slain
with cast of stone. he was so ouerlade
For whom Adrastus. such sorrow made
That no man might. him relees of his pain
And Jocasta. with her daughters twain
Full woefully. opressed of her cheres
To Athenes. were sent as prisoners
what fell of hem. can I not seyn
But Theseus. mine auctoure write certain
Out of the field. or he from Thebes went
He bette hit down. and the houses burnt
The people slow. for all her cryeng loud
Made the walls. and her towers proud
Round about. even upon a row
with the soil. to be laid full low
That naught was left. but the soil all bare
And to the wymmen. in relees of her care
The bones of her lords. that were slain The bones of her lords were de
lyuered to the ladies by duke the seus*

This worthy duke. restored has again
And what should I. than longer dwell
The old rytes. by and by to tell
Nor the obsequyes. in order to deuyse
Nor to declare. the manner and the gyse
How the bodies. were to ashes burnt
Nor of the gomes. in the flamme spente
To make the air swetter of reles
As frankensence. myrre and aloes
Nor how the wymmen. round about stood
Some with milk. and some also with blood
And some of hem. with vrnes made of gold
when the ashes. fully were made cold
To enclosen hem. of great affection
And bear hem home. in to her regyon
And how that other. full dedely of her look
For love oonly. of the bones took
Hem to keep. for a remembrance
That to rehearse every observance
That was done. in the fyres bright
The wake plays. during all the night
Nor of the wrastlyng. to tell point by point
Of hem that weren. naked and enoynt
How eueryche other. lugge began and shake
Nor how the wymmen. have their leave take
Of Theseus. with full great humblesse
Thankyng him. of his worthynesse
That him list. on her woo to rewe
And how that he. his fredome began renew
with the wymmen. of his hye larges
I parted has eke. of his richesse
And how this duke. Thebes eke forsook
And to Athenes. the right way took
with laurer crowned. in sign of vyctorye
And the palm. of conquest and glory
Did his honor. duly to Mart
And how the wy^men. wept when they depart
with king Adrastus. home again to Arge How ye king Adrastus with the ladies
repeyred again home to Arge

To tell all. it were to great a charge
And eke also. as ye should understand
At gynnyng. I took no more on hand
By my promise. and in conclusyon
But to rehearse. the destruccyon
Of mighty Thebes. shortly and no more
And thus Adrastus. with his locks hoar
Still abode. in Arge his Cite
Unto his end. ye get no more of me
Saaf as mine auctoure. lyketh to compyle
After that. he lived but a while
For he was old. or the sege began
And thought and sorrow. so upon him ran
The which in sothe. shorted has his days
And time set. death makes no delays
And all his Joye. passed was and gone
For of his lords. a live was not one
But slain at Thebes. ye known all the cas
And what this king. in Arge buried was
Full royally. with great solempnytee
It was accounted. in books ye may see
Four hundred year. as made is mencyon Four hundred year to forn the
fu^daco^n of rome was thebes fynaly destroyed

To forne the byldyng. and foundacyon
Of greece Rome. so Royally and so large
When the ladies. departed fro Arge
To her countries. full tryste and desolate
Loo here the fine. of conteke and debate
Loo here the might. of Mars the mighty sterre
Loo what it is. to gynne a werre
How it concludes. ensample ye may see
First of Greeks. and next of the Lytee
For either part. has matter to complain
And in her strife. ye may see things twain
The worthy blood. of all Greece spylte
And Thebes eke. of Amphyon first bylte
Without recure. brought in to ruin
And with the soil. made plain as a line
To wilderness turned. and deserte
And Gr^kes eke. fall in to pouerte
Both of her men. and also of her good
For finally. all the gentle blood
Was shad out there. her wou^des were so wide
To lose fynall. unto either side
For in the werre. is none excepcyon
Of hye estate. nor low condycyon
But as fortune. and fate both I fere
List to dyspose. with her double chere
And Bellona. the goddess in her chare
A forne prouydeth. therefore each man beware
Unadvised. a werre to begin
For no man wot. who shall lose or win
And hard it is. when either part leseth
And doubteles. neither of hem cheseth
That they must. in all such mortal rage
Maugre her list. follow great damage
It may not be. by man's might restrained
And werre in soth. was never first ordained
But for sin. folks to chastyse
And as the bible. truly can deuyse Nota How yt werre first began in heaven by
pride and surque dye of proud Lucyfer

Hye in heaven. of pride and surquedye
Lucyfer. fader of envy
The old serpente. he Leuyathan
Was the first. that ever w^rre began
When Mycaell. the heavenly champyon
With his fers. vaynquysshed the dragon
And to hell. cast hem down full low
The which serpente. has the bockell sow
Through all e^th. of envy and debate
That uneaths. is there none estate
Without strife. can live in charity
For every man. of hye and low degree
Enuyeth now. that other should thryue
And ground and cause. why that men so scryue
Is couetyse. and false ambycyon
That eueryche. would have domynacyon
Over other. and trede him under foot
Which of all sorrow. gynnyng is and rote
And christ records. read the book and ye may se
For lack of love. what myschyfe there shall be
For oo people. as he does deuyse Surget gens contra gente^ Luce xxi

Again another. of hate shall arise
And after tellyth. what dyuysyons
There shall be. at wene regyons
Eueryche beside other to express
And all such strife. as he bears witness
Lralendes ben. I take his word to borowe
And a gynnyng. of myschyfe and of sorrow
Men have it found. by experyence
But the venym. and the vyolence
Of strife of werre. of contek and debate
That makes lands. bare and desolate
Shall be proscrypte. and voyded out of place
And Martys sword. shall no more manace
Nor his spear. grievous to sustene
Shall now no more. whetted be so kene
Nor he no more. shall his hauberk shake
But love and peace. in hertes shall awake
And charity both. in length and bread
Of new shall. her bright bemes sprede
Through grace oonly. in diverse nacyons
For to reform. atwene Regyons
Peace and quyete. concord and unity
And he that is both. one and two and three
Eke three in one. and souerayn lord of pease
Which in this exyle. for our sake these
For love oonly. our troubles to termyne
For to be borne. of a pure virgyne
And let us pray to him that is most good
That for mankind. shed his heart blood
Through besechyng. of that heavenly queen
Wife and mother. and a maid clean
To send us peace. here in this life present
And of our sins. parfyte amend^mente
And Joye eternal. when we hens wend
Of my tale. thus I make an end
AMEN
Here now ends as ye may see The destruccyon of Thebes the Lytee

