THE ENGLISH JAR. OR DISAGREEMENT AMONGST the Ministers of great Britain,
CONCERNING the KINGS Supremacy.

Written in Latin by the Reverend Father, F. MARTINUS BECANVS of the Society
of JESUS, AND Professor in Divinity.

And translated into English by I. W. P.

Imprinted Anno M. DC. XII.

THE PREFACE TO the Catholics of England.
GOD save you Right HONORABLE, and most worthy Champions. Give me leave awhile
to interrupt your patience. And if it be not troublesome unto you, hear me a
word or two. I will not hold you long. Two years ago I wrote two little
books, concerning the Kings Primacy: the one against the Apology, and Preface
Monitory of the High and Mighty Prince, James King of Great-Brittaine: the
other against the Torture of Tortus, or the Kings Chaplayne. This thing your
Academickes took heavily, and presently waged war against me in their Kings
quarrel; especially M. William Tooker, M. Richard Tompson, M. Robert Burhill,
and M. Henry Salclebridge. Yet for all this I do not fly or fear. Nay there be
many reasons which make me more courageous. First the equity of the Cause. Then
your Faith and Constancy. And lastly the Iarres and deadly Discords of my
Adversaries one against another.

Concerning the right of the Cause, which I am to defend, what need I say any
thing? I am to fight for the Church of Christ, for the honor and Obedience of
Prelates, and for the example and custom of my Forefathers. And heerin, shall
I fear any man? Has not your faith and constancy which is testified to the
whole world, by your daily imprisonments, fetters, punishments, yea death it
self suffered for Christ, already shaken off my drowsinesse? Whom would it not
animate and spur forwards: seeing that in this case, I may with good reason
apply that saying of the Apostle unto you, Spectaculum facti estis Deo,
Angelis, and Hominibus: you are made a spectacle to God, Angels, and Men? To
God, who behouldeth your Combats, gives you strengh to get the victory, and
prepares a Crown for your Triumph. To Angels, who admire, that, living in
this frail flesh, you do not fear the mighty powers of Hell; and withal
rejoice, that so valiant Champions are committed to their charge. You are made
a spectacle to men, who throughout the whole world are wonderfully incensed and
styrred up by your example, virtue, and patience, to undergo the like combats
and conflicts for Christ.

Besides this, the disagreements and iarrings of my Adversaries amongst
themselves are so many, and their forces so scattered and disordered, that I do
not esteem them to be greatly feared. If perhaps you know not these their
discords; here I offer and dedicate this little Book unto you, wherein it is
particulerly showed in what points they disagree. If your leisure serve you,
read it, and hope well of the issue. In the mean while, I will prepare my
self to the Combat, and when it is time, I shall entreat you to be the
Spectators. Fare ye well, and take in good part, I beseech you, this m^
Interpellation. From Mentz this month of November. 1611.

Your most loving friend, Martin Becanus.

THE ENGLISH JAR, CONCERNING the Kings Supremacy.
THE Kings Supremacy in the Church of England is a new thing. It began under
King Henry the 8. continued under King Edward the 6. and Queen Elizabeth: and
now under King James, the same is rent and torn in pieces, with so many
domestical iarres and divisions, that long it cannot stand. So as Christ in
the Gospel said full well, Omne regnum in se diuisum desolabitur: Every
Kingdom divided in it self, shall be destroyed. But what, and how great these
discords be, I will show in these few questions following: I. Whether the King
of England have any Primacy in the Church, or no? II. Whether the Primacy of
the King, be Ecclesiastical and spiritual? III. Whether the King by this
Primacy, may be called the Primate of the Church? IIII. Whether by virtue of
the same Primacy, the K. may be called Supreme Head of the Church? V. Whether
this Primacy consist in any Power, or Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical? VI.
Whether the King, by reason of his Primacy, can assemble or call together
Councels, and sit as President therein? VII. Whether he can make
Ecclesiastical Laws? VIII. Whether he can dispose of Ecclesiastical
livings, or Benefices? IX. Whether he can create, and depose Bishops? X.
Whether he can excommunicate the obstinate? XI. Whether he can be Judge, and
determine of Controversies? XII. From whence has the King this his Primacy?
XIII. Whether he can force his Subjects to take the Oath of Supremacy?


In these Questions do our Adversaries extremely differ and dis^gree, but
especially these, M. Doctor Andrews, in his Tortura Torti; M. William Tooker
Deane of Lichefield, in his Combat, or single Fight with Martin Becanus; M.
Richard Tompson, in his Reproof of the Refutation of Tortura Torti; M. Robert
Burhill, in his Defense of Tortura Torti; and M. Henry Salclebridge, in his
Refutation of Becanus his examen. Besides these (as opposite unto them) I will
also cite Doctor Sanders, in his book of the Schism of England; Genebard in
his Chronology; Polydor Virgil in his History of England; Iacobus Thuanus of
Aust, in the History of his time; John Calvin in his Commentary upon the
Prophet Amos, and others.

The I. Question. whether the King of England have any Primacy in the Church?
1 THE first Jar or contention then is, concerning the Name of Primacy. Many
of our Adversaries admit this Name: but M. Richard Tompson had rather have it
called Supremacy then Primacy. His reason is, because Primacy does signify a
power of the same Order. Now, the King has not power in the Church of England
of the same Order with Bishops and Ministers, but a power of higher and
different Order from them. Ergo he has not the Primacy, but the Supremacy. The
words of M. Tompson page 33. of his book are these: Nos in Anglico nostro
idiomate belliores long sumus, quam per inopiam Latini sermonis, nobis Latin
esse licuit. Non enim dicimus, The Kings Primacy, Regis Primatum, sed The Kings
Supremacy, Regis Suprematum: Quo vocabulo nos quoque deinceps vtemur. Multum
enim disserunt Primatus and Suprematus. Illud enim Potestatem eiusdem Ordinis
videtur significare, hoc non item. We in our English tongue, do speak much
more properly, then we can do in the Latin speech, through the penury thereof.
For we do not say The Kings Primacy, but The Kings Supremacy: which word we
will hereafter use. For that Primacy and Supremacy do greatly differ: Primacy
seeming to signify a power of the same Order; but Supremacy not so.

2. Out of which words, we gather two things. The one, that all Englishmen, who
use the Name of Primacy, do either err or speak improperly, if we believe M.
Tompson. For if they speak properly, seeing that the word Primacy does properly
signify a Power of the same Order; they do plainly understand, that the King
has Power of the same order with the Bishops and Ministers of his Church. But
this now according to M. Tompsons opinion, is an error: wherefore either they
do err, or speak improperly.

3. The other is, that a Conjecture may be made of the thing signified, from
the word signifying. The word Supremacy is a new and lately invented word,
unknown to the Ancient Fathers, not used in Scriptures, unheard of in the
Christian world. Moreover, what does it signify? The Supreme power (forsooth)
of the King in the Church? Wherefore this is new also. Surely if the ancient
Fathers, either Latin or Greek, had known this power, they would have found
out at least some word, whereby to have expressed the same properly. But this it
seems none of them did.

II. Question. whether that this Primacy, which the King has in the Church,
be Ecclesiastical or Spiritual?
1 THIS is now another Jar. Under King Henry the 8. and King Edward, this
Primacy was always called Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, as it appears out
of Doctor Sanders, whose words are these: Caluinus Henrici Primatum
Ecclesiasticum oppugnauit. Calvin did oppugn King Henryes Ecclesiastical
Primacy. Again: Episcopus Roffensis, quod Henrici Primatum Ecclesiasticum
nollet confiteri, ad mortem producitur. The Bishop of Rochester, because he
denied King Henryes Ecclesiastical Primacy, was brought forth to dye etc. And
again: Multi in custodijs propter negatum Ecclesiasticum Regis Primatum
detenti. Many were kept in prison, for denying the Kings Ecclesiastical
Primacy. In like manner: Henricus mandauit vt filius in fide Catholica
educar^tur excepto Primatus Ecclesiastici titulo, quem ei r^liquit. King Henry
commanded that his Son ( Edward) should be brought up in the Catholic
faith, excepting the title of Ecclesiastical Primacy, which he left unto him.
And yet more: Stephanus Wintoni^nsis, Edmundus Londinensis, Cuthbertus Dune
mensis, Nicolaus Wigorniensis, and Daius Cicestrensis ^piscopi, timide
restiterunt pu^ri Regis Primatui spirituali, imo simpliciter subscripserunt.
The Bishops of Winc^ester, London, Durham, Worcester, and Chichest^r did
fearfully withstand the Spiritual Primacy of the Child King, nay they
absolu^ly subscribed therun^o etc.

2. Under Queen Mary that succeeded to her brother King Edward in the Crown,
this Title of Primacy was taken away in a Parliament held at London, as
witnesses Iacobus Thuanus in the 9. book of the History of his time, in these
words: Antiquatus ijsdem Comitijs Primatus Eccl^siastici titulus. The title of
Ecclesiastical Primacy was abolished in that Parliament. The same was again
restored under Queen Elizabeth, as testifies the same Author in his 15. book
etc.

3. But now in these our days under King James this matter is called into
question: Some not daring to call it Primacy Ecclesiastical and spiritual,
but only Primacy belonging to Ecclesiastical and Spiritual matt^rs: amongst
whom is M. Doctor Andrews, or the Kings Chaplain in his Torture of Tortus
page 90. where he writes thus: N^que v^ro quoad spiritalia, alium nos Regi
Primatum tribuimus, neque quoad temporalia alium Pontifici detrahimus^ quam
d^b^mus. Prior ille Regibus omni iure; pos^erior hic Pontifici nullo iure
debetur. Neither do we attribute one Primacy, concerning spiritual matters
unto the King, nor do we take from the Pope any other Primacy, concerning
temporal matters, then we ought to do. The first is due unto Kings by all
right; the later no way pertayneth to the Pope etc. I, when I first read these
words in the Chaplaynes book, did think that he had taken these two, to wit,
Primacy spiritual, and belonging to spiritual; as also these other, Primacy
temporal, and belonging to temporal, for one and the same thing. But now it
seems that the Defenders and Interpreters of the Chaplain, to wit M. Tompson,
and M. Burhill, do take it otherwise. For so writes M. Burhill page 55. of his
Book, concerning this point: Non dicit, Primatum spiritual^m, sed Primatum
qu^ad spiritualia d^b^ri Regibus omni iure. He ( the Chaplain) does not s^y,
that Spiritual Primacy, but Primacy belonging to Spiritual, is due unto Kings
by all right etc. And then again page 133. in fine: E^si ^nim R^gi tribuimus
Primatum in ^cclesia non tam^n Primatum spiritualem a^t Ecclesiasti^um ^i
t^ibu^mus: s^d pot^us ^rimatum quoad res and personas spirituales and
Ecclesias^^cas. For although we give unto the King Primacy over the Church; ^et
do we not give unto him Primacy spiritual or Eccle^i^^ticall; but rather
Primacy belonging to things and persons spiritual and Ecclesiastical etc. And
M. T^mpson page ^^. of his Book also says: Non dixit, Primatum
Ecclesiasticum, aut Spiritualem, quasi formaliter intelligat; sed quoad
Spiritualia, id est, obiectiue and materialiter. The Chaplain said not, the
Primacy Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, as though he understood it formally, but
for so much as it belongs to Spiritual, that is to say, obiectiuely and
materially etc. In which sense the same Author page 95. says. Dicimus Regem
gubernare quidem Ecclesiastica, sed non Ecclesiastice: We say indeed, that the
King governs Ecclesiastical things, but not Ecclesiastically.

4. So as if you ask in England, whether the King has Primacy Ecclesiastical
or no? It will be answered you thus: King Henry, K. Edward, and Q. Elizabeth had
Ecclesiastical Primacy: K. James has not Primacy Ecclesiastical, but only so
far forth, as it belongs to Ecclesiastical things. Has then his Majesty
that now is less, then they had? So it seems. Is then the Kings Primacy in
England so nipped and pared in so short a space? So they say. Is it then almost
decayed, and at an end? I doubt not but it is. What is the cause? Hearken to
the common saying: What Is quickly got, is quickly lost: as also to that of the
holy Scripture: Si est ex hominibus consilium hoc, aut opus, dissoluetur. Act.
5.38. If this devise, or work be of men, it will be dissolved.

III. Question Whether the King, by virtue of this Primacy may be called
Primate of the Church?
MASTER Henry Salclebridge does absolutely affirm it. For thus he writes
page 140. Dico, Regem Angliae Ecclesiae Anglicanae Primatem esse. I say, that
the King of England is Primate of the Church of England. Nay, he will have this
point to be so certain, and out of all doubt, that he thinks, whosoever
should deny it, to offend against the public Profession of England. For so he
says page 177. Angliae Regem Anglicanae Ecclesiae Primatem esse, in
professione publica Anglicana Veritatis sa^ris litteris nixae, ponitur. That
the King of England is Primate of the Church of England, is founded in the
public English Profession of Truth, grounded upon the Sacred Letter.

2. M. Tooker, and M. Burhill do absolutely deny it. For thus writes M. Took^r
page 3. Olere autem malitiam ac clamitare audaciam tuam illud videtur, cum
Regem Caput Ecclesiae, Primatemque confingas. It may see^e to ^auour of malice,
and cry out upon your sausines, when as you feign the King Head, and Primate
of the Church etc. And M. Burhill page 133. Nec Primatem quidem omnino Regem
nostrum dicimus; multo v^ro minu^ Primatem Ecclesiasticum. Neither do we at
all, call our King Primate; and much less Ecclesiastical Primate etc.

3. ^eere hence do I frame a twofold Argument. One out of M. Tookers words in
this manner: He that a^^irmeth the King to be Primate of the Church, is a sausy
and malicious fellow. But M. Salcl^bridge affirms the King to be Primate of
the Church. Ergo, he is a sausy and malicious fellow. The other argument I
frame out of M. Salclebridges words thus: He that denies the King to be
Primate of the Church, does offend against the public Profession of the Truth
received in England. But M. Tooker denies the King to be Primate of the Church
of England. Ergo, he offends against the public profession of the Truth
received in England. So (I was) one Mule claweth another.

4. But now it may be demanded, whether of them does judge more rightly in this
case, M. Salclebridge, who affirms the King to be Primate of the Church, or
M. Tooker, that denies it? This controversy depends upon another question,
to wit, whether these two Names, Primate and Primacy, are necessarily co^nexed,
or, as they say, Coniugata? M. Salclebridge thinks that they are. Therefore,
because he has once affirmed the King to have the Primacy of the Church, he
consequently auerreth, that the King is Primate of the Church. For that with
him this argument has force a Coniugatis: The King has Primacy, Ergo, the
King is Primate. As also this: The Chaplain has a Bishopric, Ergo, he is a
Bishop.

5. Now M. Tooker, he thinks the contrary. For page 6. of his book he
expressly says: That the King has the Primacy of the Church; but yet he is
not the Primate of the Church. And contrariwise, The Archbishop of Canterbury
has not the Primacy of the Church; and yet is he Primate of the Church. So as
he denies these two conseque^ces a Coniugatis, to wit. 1. The King has the
Primacy, Ergo, he is Primate. 2. The Archbishop is Primate, Ergo, he has the
Primacy. And perhaps he will deny these in like manner. 1. The Chaplayne has a
Bishopric, Ergo, he is a Bishop. 2. M. Tooker is a Deane, Ergo, he has a
Deanery.

IIII. Question. Whether the King, by reason of his Primacy, may be called
Head of the Church?
THIS Title first began to be usurped of King Henry the 8. as all Authors,
as well our own as our adversaries, do testify. For thus writes Iacobus
Thuanus in his first book of the Historyes of his times: Henricus post
diuortium, se Caput Ecclesiae constituit. K. Henry after his divorce ( from Q.
Catherine) made himself Head of the Church etc. And Polydor Virgil lib. 27. of
his History of England, says: Interea habetur Concilium Londini, in quo
Ecclesia Anglicana formam potestatis, nullis ante temporibus visam, induit.
Henricus enim Rex Caput ipsius Ecclesiae constituitur. In the mean while (to
wit after his forsaid divorce) a Council was held at London, wherein the Church
of ^ngland took to it self a form of power, never heard of before. For that
King Henry was appointed Head of the same Church etc. Genebrard also in the
fourth book of his Chronology has these words: Henricus anno 1534. in
publicis Comitijs se Caput Ecclesiae Anglicanae appellauit. King Henry in the
year of our Lord 1534. in public Parliament, called himself Head of the
Church of England etc. Also Doctor Sanders in his book of the Schism of
England, says: Ex qua dicendi formula, primam occasionem sumptam aiunt, vt Rex
Supremum Caput Ecclesiae Anglicanae diceretur. By which manner of speech, it is
said, the first occasion was taken, of calling the King supreme Head of the
Church of England etc. And again, in the same book: Proponebantur cis noua
Comitiorum Decreta, and iu^^bantur iurciurando affirmare, Regim Supremum
Ecclesiae esse Caput. The new Laws or Statutes of the Parliament were
propounded unto them (to wit, to the Kings subjects) and they were commanded
to swear, that the King was head of the Church etc. John Calvin in like manner
upon the 7. Chapter of the Prophet Amos writes thus: Qui tantopere extu^erunt
H^nricum Regem Angliae, certe fucrunt homines in^en^^derati Ded^runt enim illi
summam rerum omnium petestatem and hoc me grauiter semper vulnerauit. Erant
en^m blasphemi cum vocarent cum summum Caput Ecclesia sub ^hristo. Those who so
greatly did extol K. H^n^y of En^land were men void of consideration. For they
gave unto him the chief power of all things: and this point did ever gall me
grievously. For that they were blasphemers, when they called him the chief
Head of the Church under Christ etc.

2. The same Title did K. Edward Son to K. Henry, and his Successor, usurp,
as it may be seen by his Letters to Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury,
which begin thus: Edouardus Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hyberniae Rex,
supremum in terris Ecclesiae Anglicanae, and Hybernicae, tam in causis
spiritalibus quam temporalibus Caput; Reuerendo Thomae Cantuariensi
Archiepiscopo, salutem. Edward by the Grace of God, King of England, France and
Ireland, supreme Head on earth of the Church of England and Ireland, as well in
causes Ecclesiastical as temporal: to the Reverend, Thomas Archbishop of
Canterbury, greeting etc. The same Title also did Bishop Cranmer give unto the
said King, as appears by his letters written to other Bishops subject unto
him, thus: Thomas permissione diuina Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus, per
Illustrissimum in Christo Principem Edouardum Regem sextum, supremum in terris
Caput Ecclesiae Anglicanae and Hybernicae, sufficienter and legitime
authorizatus; Tibi Edmundo Londinensi ^piscopo, and omnibus fratribus
Coepiscopis, vice and nomine Regiae Maiestatis, quibus in hac part fungimur,
mandamus, vt Imagines ex ^cclesijs cuiusque dioecesis tollantur etc. We Thomas
by Gods permission Archbishop of Canterbury, being sufficiently and lawfully
authorized by our most gracious Prince in Christ, King Edward the sixth, supreme
Head on earth of the Church of England and Ireland, do in his Majesty's Name
and place, which herein we supply, command you ^dmund Bishop of London, and
all the rest of our Brethren Bishops, that Images be taken out of the Churches
of every Diocese etc. And Doctor Sanders also in his book of the Schism of
England says thus: Quamprimum visum est Henrici octaui mortem diuulgare,
statim Edouardus Henrici filius, nonum aetatis annum agens, Rex Angliae
proclamatur, and summum ^cclesiae Anglicanae in terris Caput, proxime secundum
Christum constituitur etc. As soon as it was thought good to diuulge King
Henryes death, by and by Edward his son, being of the age of nine years, was
proclaimed King of England, and ordained supreme Head of the Church of England
on earth, next under Christ etc.

3. Queen Elizabeth, although she were a woman, yet she thought her self no
way inferior to her Father or Brother. She therefore would be also called
supreme Head of the Church of England. For so writes Iacobus Thuanus in his
15. book of the Historyes of his time. Elizabetha, recepto a Patre and fratre
titulo, Ecclesiae Caput per Angliam coepit appellari. Q. Elizabeth having
received the ( former) Title from her Father and Brother, began to be called
Head of the Church throughout England etc.

4. But now adays, under K. James, this title is put in ieopardy. The
Chaplain (to wit M. Doctor Andrews) does admit the same in his Tortura Torti;
but M. Tooker, and M. Burhill do reject it. M. Tookers words, which a little
before I recited are these: Olere autem militiam, and clamitare audaciam tuam
videtur illud, cum Regem Caput Ecclesiae, Primatemque confingas. It may seem
to savor of malice, and cry out upon your sausines, when as you feign the
King to be Head and Primate of the Church etc. And in like manner does M.
Burhill page 133. reprehend a certain person of over much wantonness and
boldness, for calling the King, Head, Pastor and Primate of Bishops.

5. In this debate and Jar then, what shall the King do? If he admit the
Title of Supreme head of the Church of England, M. Tooker, and M. Burhill will
no doubt murmr shrewdly. If he reject it, what then will the Chaplain say?
Perhaps this contention may be mollified, if the King, as he gave to the
Chaplayne the Bishopric of Ely: so he would give to M. Tooker, and M. Burhill
two other Bishoprics. For then, least they might seem ungrateful they would
easily grant this Title to the King, and a far greater too.

V. Question. Whether the Kings Primacy do consist in any Power, or
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical?
HERE now, is there a great Jar and debate amongst our English Adversaries:
nor can the same be easily understood, unless it be first well distinguished.
Ecclesiastical Power is threefold, as the Deuines do teach. One of Order;
another of interior Jurisdiction; the third of exterior Jurisdiction. To the
first belongs to effect or consecrate, and administer Sacraments: to the
second, to govern the Church in the interior Court, or Court of Conscience;
and to the third, belongs to govern the Church in the exterior Court. Now
certain it is, that the King has not the Power of Order, by reason of his
Primacy. For this does M. Tooker confess page 14. where he says: Reges non
habent potestatem administrandi Sacramenta. Kings have not power to administer
Sacraments. It is also certain that he has not Jurisdiction of the interior
Court, or Court of Conscience. For this in like manner does M. Tooker confess
page 63. Omnis iurisdictio (says he) in foro interiori Sacerdotum est, nulla
Regum. All jurisdiction in the interior Court (or Court of Conscience)
belongs to Priests, not any way to Kings etc.

2. All the question then is, whether the King has Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical
in the exterior Court or no? About this point are the Englishmen at a great
jar and variance amongst themselves: some affirming it, some denying it,
others distinguishing. M. Tooker affirms it page 305. in these words: Qui
habet plenissimam and am^lissimam iurisdictionem in foro exteriore, potest
eamdem dare and auferre. Rex eam habet Ergo potest eamdem dare and auferre.
Totum hoc liquet ex V. and N. Testamento. He that has most full and ample
Jurisdiction in the exterior Court, can give and take away the same (at his
pleasure.) But the King has this Jurisdiction. Ergo, he can give and take away
the same. All this is manifest out of the old and new Testament etc. With him
agrees also M. Salclebridge page 140. Reges oleo sacro vncti, capaces sunt
Iurisdictionis spiritualis. Kings (says he) anointed with holy oil, are made
capable of spiritual Jurisdiction etc. And then again in the same place out
of the Laws of England. R^x (says he) est persona mixta, vrpote qui
^cclesiasticam and temporalem iurisdictionem habet, and quidem Supremam. The
King is a person mixed, to wit, that has both Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical and
Temporal, and that in the highest degree etc. And yet more page 144. Per leges
^cclesiasticas in hoc Regno approbatas, vnus Sacerdos duo ben^ficia ha^ere non
potest, nec Bastardus Sacris initiari. V^rum Rex, ^cclesiastica potestate and
jurisdiction, quam habet in vtroque, dispensare potest. By the Ecclesiastical
Laws approved in this Kingdom (of ^ngland) one Priest may not have two
Benefices, nor a Bastard be made Priest. But the King, by the Jurisdiction and
Power Ecclesiastical, which he has, can dispense in both etc.

3. M. Tompson, and M. Burhill do absolutely deny it: M. Tompson page 80. of
his book writing thus: ^rimatus ^ccles^ae non est d^^iniendus per
iurisdiction^m. Ecclesiasticam, sed per gubernation^m supr^mam. The Primacy of
the Church is not to be defined by Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, but by supreme
Government etc. And again page 95. Diximus, Reg^m gub^rnar^ quid^m
Ecclesiastica^ s^d non Ecclesias^i^e. We have said before, that the King indeed
does govern Ecclesiastical things, but not Ecclesiastically. And why I pray
you? Because, forsooth, he has not Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, but only
temporal. And hereunto agrees M. Burhill page 234. granting this negative
proposition. Rex (says he) nullam habet Iurisdictionem Ecclesiasticam, nec in
foro interiori, nec in exteriori. The King has no Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, neither in the interior, nor exterior Court etc.

4. Now my Lord of Ely, he distinguishes in this case, as may be seen in M.
Tookers Book page 305. in these words: Habet Rex omnem iurisdictione^
spiritualem, in foro exteriori, exceptis quibusdam Censuris. The King has all
Jurisdiction spiritual in the exterior Court, except in certain Censures
etc. So as now to this question (to wit whether the King, as he is Primate and
Head of the Church, have any Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical or spiritual in the
exterior Court,) we must answer thus: First with M. Tooker, and M.
Salclebridge, That he has most ample, most full, and supreme Jurisdiction.
Secondly with my Lord of Ely, That he has indeed some, but not all. And
lastly, with M. Burhill, and M. Tompson, That he has none, no not any one jot
at all.

VI. Question. Whether the King of his own Authority can assemble, or call
together Counsels?
1. NOv follow the Iarres and debates of our Adversaries, concerning the
Offices and Functions of the Kings Primacy, and they ^re six in number, which
may be disputed of. The first is, of assembling, or calling together of
Synods. The second of enacting of Ecclesiastical laws. The third, of
co^ferring or bestowing of benefices. The fourth of creating and deposing of
Bishops. The fifth, is about Excommunication. The sixth and last, is about the
decision and determining of Controversies. The question then is, whether these
offices belong to the Kings Primacy? I will speak a word of each in order.

2. First, it may be demanded, whether the King by virtue of his Primacy, may
of his own authority, call or assemble together Synods, and therein sit as
chief and head? This was certainly persuaded that it might be done, in the
time of King Henry, K. Edward, and Queen Elizabeth: but now under King James
the matter is called into question. M. Salclebridge page 121. affirms, that
he can do it, in these words: Christiani Principes in Regnis suis cum laud,
propria auctoritate Synodos conuocarunt, Constitutiones condideru^t, causas
audierunt and cognouerunt. Christian Princes have with great praise assembled
Synods by their own authority, in their Kingdoms, have made Constitu^ions,
heard and examined causes etc. And again page 146. Rex Angliae potest Synodos
indi^^re omnium Ordinum Oecumeni^as, and in ijsdem praesidere. The King of
^ngland (says he) may as^emb^e General Counsels of all Orders or degrees,
and therein sit as President or Chief etc. And page 155. he says in like
manner. Reges Angliae suprema sua authoritate, de iure Synodos conuocarunt. The
Kings of ^ngland have by their own supreme authority, and by ^^ght, ass^mbled
Synods etc.

3 Now M To^ker in this point is very variable: one while contradicting
himself, another while others. And this is manifest out of the diverse
testimonies he produces. The first is page 37. where he has these words: A
quibus magis aequum est indici Concilia^ quam ab illis^ penes quos semper ^uit
authoritas ^a congregandi? Cum autem communit^r triplex pon^ soleat Concilium,
Generale, Prouinciale and Dioec^sanum; Concilium G^n^rale solius Papae iussu
celebrari vultis, sed neque illud nisi ab Imp^ratoribus and Regibus simul
consentient^bus hodie indici debet. Prouinciale a Metropolita^o cum suis
Suffragancis. Dioecesanum ab Episcopo cum Curatis^ R^ctoribus, and Clericis
Dioeceseos etc. By whom is it more fit that Counsels should be assembled,
then by those in whose power has always authority been to call them together?
For whereas commonly there be 3. sorts of Counsels, General, Proui^ciall, and
of a particular Diocese: the General, Council you will have to be celebrated
only by commandment of the Pope; but yet not so neither now a days, unless
Emperors and Kings do agree thereunto also. A Provincial Coun^ell is to be
assembled by the Metropolitan and his Su^fragans: that of the Diocese by the
Bishop thereof togea^her with the Curates, Recto^s, and Clerks of ^he same
Bishopric etc. Out of which testimony we may gat^er, that the K. of England
cannot assemble a Council of his own authority. Not a gene^all, because that
belongs to the common consent of Kings and Emperors. Not a Provincial,
because that pertayneth to the Metropolitan. Not of the D^ocesse, because that
belongs to the Bishop thereof. What then, I pray you, is left unto the King?

4. Another testimony heerof is out of the same M. ^ooker page 41. in these
wor^s: Abunde liquet ex Co^cilijs ipsis, and historia Ecclesiastica,
^r^uincial^a Concilia and Nationalia ab Imperatoribus a^ Regibus fuisse
congregata. It is abou^dantly manifest out of the Cou^^els themselves, and the
Ecclesiastical Historyes, that Provincial and National Councels have been
assembled by Emperors and Kings etc. This now is plainly repugnant to his
former testimony. For there he affirms, that Provincial Counsels are to be
assembled by the Metropolitans thereof: here he says, that they must be
assembled by Kings and Emperors. There, is distinguished only a threefould
Councell^ to wit, General Prouinciall^^ and that of the Diocese: here now,
is added a four^h, to wit, National.

5. His third testimony is set down page 42. where he propo^eth this question:
Quo igitur iure tantam sibi potestat^m arrogat Pontif^x solus? Number diuino? ^y
what right then, I pray you, does the Pope challenge unto himself alone so
great power? Does he do it by divine right? etc. And a little after he adds:
Erat Apostolorum omnium, non vnius tant^mmodo, and indicere Concilium, and
statuere cum verborum solennitate; Visum est Spiritui sancto and Nobis etc. It
belonged to all the Apos^les, not to one alone, to assemble a Council, and
with solemnity of words to ordain; It seems good unto the Holy Ghost, and Us
etc. As if he would say; That as by divine right, not S. Pet^r alone, but all
the Apostles together with equal power did assemble the first Counsel at
Jerusalem, and therein decreed that law, about eating of blood and strangled
meats: so in like manner, by divine right, not the Pope alone, but all
Bishops, with equal power, must assemble Counsels, and decree Ecclesiastical
laws. Surely, if it be so, then without doubt it follows, that the power to
call or assemble Counsels does not belong, by the law of God, to secular Kings
and Princes, but to the Apostles and their success^urs etc.

6. His fourth testimony is page 63. where he says: Mixtum aut^m ius, and
r^suit^ns ^x vt^oque, and iure Regio and Episcopali, est Legum sanctio and
Synodorum indictio, and praes^dendi in ijs praer^gatiu^ and controu^rs^aru^
decisio, aliorumque actuum, qui his finitimi sunt ex^rcitium: quae f^re ab
origin Prima^us R^gij desc^ndunt, and communicantur Sac^r^oti^u etc The
decreing or enacting of Laws, the assembling of Synodes and Prerogative of
^it^ing therein as chief or head, as also the exercise of all other offices in
this kind, is a certain mixed Right, proceeding from both Kingly and Episcopal
power: which things do in a manner come down, or descend from the origin of
the Kings Primacy, and are communicated or in parted unto Priests etc. This now
again, as you see, is contrary to that which he said next before. For there he
will needs have the assembly of Synods or Councels to belong by divine right to
the Apostles: here, forsooth, he will have the same chiefly to belong to
Kings, and from them to be derived unto Bishops. These things do not agree one
with another.

VII. Question. Whether the King can enact Ecclesiastical Laws, or no?
1. IT is clear, that K. Henry the 8. did, as well by himself, as by his Vicar
General ( Cromwell) enact Ecclesiastical Laws. For so says Doctor Sanders
in his book of the Schism of England. His di^bus vigilantissimus hic
Ecclesiae Pastor Henri^us quo in posterum sciretur quae cui rite nupta esset,
legem ediderat perpetuam de Nuptijs, Comitior^m etiam auctoritate ^onfirmatam,
qua statuchatur, vt si quae p^rsonae in L^uitico non prohibitae, solo cons^nsu,
per verba de praesenti, matrimonium, nulla carnis copula subsecuta,
contraxerint^eae vero ambae postea, vel earum altera nuptijs cum altera persona
in L^uitico non prohibita contractis, ca^nali copula easd^m consumma ^erint;
hae post^riores quas firmasset copula, non priores illae, quas solus cons^nsus
sta^u^ss^t, ratae atque legitimae haber^ntur: adeo, vt cum olim iuris Gentium
fuiss^t Regula, Nuptias non concubitus, sed consensus facit; ^am dein^^ps,
H^nrici r^gula esse coeperit, Nuptias non consen^us, sed concubitus facit. Et
tam^n ips^ Legis-lator contra suam ipsius regulam vxorem Annam Cliu^ns^m, cuius
nuptias, non solo consensu, sed sept^m etiam mensium concu^itu firmau^rat, eo
solum praetextu r^iccit, i^saque viu^nte aliam superinduxit, quod alt^ri,
nes^io cui, cons^nsum antea praebuisse fin^^r^tur. Huius ergo legis tantop^re
postea puduit ipsos Prot^stant^s, vt mortuo Henrico, eam ipsi r^uocauerint,
atque irritam f^c^rint etc In these days, the most vigilan^ Pastor of the
Church K. H^nry, that it might be known to posterity, what woman were lawfully
married to another, enacted a perpetual law concerning Marriage, authorizing
the same by public Decree of Parliament: wherein it was orda^ned, that if any
persons, not prohibited in the Leuiticall law, should contract marriage by only
consent, and by words de praes^nti, no carnal copulation following the same;
and that the said persons, or either of them should afterward contra^t with
another person not prohibited in the Leuiticall law, and consumm^te the same by
carnal copulation; that then these later contractes, which were consu^mated by
carnal copulation, not the former, that were agreed upon by only consent,
should be accounted for good and lawful. In so much, tha^ whereas the rule of
the law of Nations in old time was, That consent, not carnal copulation did
make the marriage lawful; now hereafter by the law of K. Henry, it began to
be a rule, That carnal copulation, not consent did make marriage lawful. And
yet for all this, the lawmakers himself K. Henry, did, against his own proper
rule and law, reject Anne of Cleeue his wife, whose marriage was not only
contracted by consent alone, but consummated also by seven months carnal
copulation, upon this only pretense, that she had given her consent to another
before, I know not whom; and upon this fiction, he married another, she yet
remaining alive. And of this law afterward the Protestants themselves were so
much ashamed, that after K. Henryes death, they recalled, and disanulled the
same etc.

2. Concerning his Vicar General (Cromwell) thus writes also the said Doctor
Sanders in the same book. Septembri mense, authoritate sua Vicaria, Canones
quosdam Ecclesiasticos quos Iniunctiones vocabat, sigillo Vicariatus sui
munitos Archiepis^opis, Episcopis, Abbatibus and reliquo Clero praescripsit in
quibus praeter cetera, iube^antur Parochi sub grauissimis poenis vt Orationem
Dominicam cum salutatione Angelica, Symbolum item fidei and december Decalogi
praecepta aliaque huiusmodi, Anglice in posterum in Ecclesijs docerent. In the
month of September K. Henryes Vicar General, by the authority of his Office,
prescribed certain Ecclesiastical Canons, which he called Injunctions, signed
with the seal of his Office of Vicar-Generall, to the Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbots, and the rest of the Clergy: wherein among^t other things the Pastors of
C^urches were com^^nded, under most severe punishment herafter to read in their
Churches, the Lords prayer, the Aue Mary, the Creed, and ten Comaundements in
English etc.

3. Now, our English Adversaries, that write in these days of the Kings
Supremacy, do not agree in this point. For that some of them say, that the
enacting of decreeing of Ecclesiastical laws, does by divine right belong
unto Bishops; others say, that it belongs to Kings and Emperors. The first
opinion holds M. Tooker page 42. of his book, where he says, that the
Apostles in the first Council at Jerusalem did enact this Ecclesiastical
law: Visum est Spiritui Sancto and nobis, nihil vltra imponere vobis oneris,
nisi haec necessaria: vt abstineatis vos ab immolatis simulachrorum, and
sanguine, and suffocato. It has seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to us, to
lay no further burden upon you, then these necessary things: that you abstain
from the things immolated to Idols, and from blood, and that which is strangled
etc. And this, says he, the Apostles did by divine right. The other opinion
holds M. Tompson page 80. where he affirms, that Bishops, and Councels
cannot enact or decree any Ecclesiastical law, which has the force of law,
unless Kings and Emperors consent thereunto. His words are these: Decreta
Conciliorum and Patrum, Ecclesiasticis Censuris, and (...) tantum stetiss^nt,
nisi legum vim Caesarea aura ipsis afflasset. The Decrees of the Councels and
of the Fathers had been held but only for Ecclesiastical censures, and
penalties, unless the Emperors favor had imparted the force of laws unto
the said Decrees etc.

4. Here now the Jar is evident. For without doubt, that Ecclesiastical
law, which the Apostles decreed, had the force of a law: for that so much is
gathered out of these words; Visum est, nihil vltra imponere vobis oneris, nisi
haec necessaria. It has seemed good, to lay no further burden upon you, then
these necessary things etc. But this Ecclesiastical law had not it force from
any favor of the Emperor, seeing that neither Tyberius, nor Pilate, nor Herod,
nor any other fecular Prince, which then lived, did by his favor, authorize
the force of the law; but that it came from the Apostles themselves. For that
they, by their Apostolical authority and power, which they had received from
Christ, did decree, and promulgate that law. And the same power and authority
have Bishops now a days, not Kings, nor Emperors.

VIII. Question. whether the King by his own proper authority, may confer,
collate, or bestow Ecclesiastical benefices?
1. THAT the King may confer Ecclesiastical livings, M. Henry Salclebridge
affirms page 121 in these words: Christiani Principes in suis R^^ni^, (...)
authoritate, ben^ficia contul^runt (...) in their own Kingdoms, by their own
proper authority, have given or bestowed benefices, and that to their praise.
etc. And then again page 150. Audin I^suita, non modo collationes ben^ficiorum
ad Angliae Reg^s sp^c^are, sed ad eosd^m illos spectare, vti Ecclesiae
Anglicanae Primates vel supremos Ordinarios etc. Do you hear Jesuit, the
collation of benefices, does not only belong to the Kings of England, but also
it does belong unto them, as they are Primates or supreme Ordinaries of the
Church of England etc. And yet more: Rex ratione supremae suae Ecclesiasticae
iurisdictionis praesentabit ad liberas Capellas. The King by virtue of his
supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall be able to present unto Free
Chappells etc.

2. Now M. Tooker to the contrary denies it, page 36. where talking of the
Kings of England, he says thus: Beneficia autem curata, vel non curata, non
conf^runt omnino in quempiam, maiora minoraue: multo minus dignitates
Ecclesiasticas, sieve Episcopatus, sieve Archiepiscopatus per vniuersum ambitum
Regni sui. Eorum certe collatio vel institutio est, quorum est destitutio, id
est, Episcoporum Comprouincialium, qui potestat^m habent personas ipsas
sacrandi. Hoc habet iuris Regia Maiestas, quod minor and subordinata potestas
habet, ius inqua^ n^minandi, and praesentandi apud nos etc. Kings do not at all
collate or bestow upon any man benefices that have care of souls, or not care,
greater or lesser; and much less Ecclesiastical dignities, whether
Bishopri^kes or Archbishoprickes throughout the whole circuit of their
Kingdoms. For this truly belongs unto those, whose office it is to dispose
thereof, to wit, to the Comprouinciall Bishops, who have power to consecrate the
said persons on whom they bestow them. Indeed the Kings Majesty
notwithstanding has this right with us in England, which an inferior and
subordinate power also has, to wit, right to nominate and present unto
benefices etc.

3. Behold here a triple Jar or discord between these two Authors, and this
in a daily and vulgar matter. The first is, that M. Henry Salclebridg says,
that the collation of benefices belongs to the Kings of England, in that they
be the Primates of the Church of England. M. Tooker says to the contrary, that
it belongs not to Kings at all, but to Bishops. The second Jar is, that M.
Salclebridge says, that Kings by their own authority, have conferred
benefices. M. Tooker says, that they never do, nor have done. The third is,
that M. Salclebridge says, that Kings by virtue of their supreme
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction may present unto benefices. M. Tooker auerreth,
that in this point, Kings have no more right, then their subjects, and other
inferior persons: for so he says: Hoc ha^et iuris Regia Maiestas, quod minor
and subordinata potestas habet. The Kings Majesty has (in this point of
conferring benefices) the same right that an inferior and subordinate power
has etc. Whether of these two then should King James believe, if he had a fat
benefice, or an Archbishopricke now to bestow?

IX. Question. Whether the King can create, and depose Bishops, or no?
1. MASTER Salclebridge says, that he can. For thus he writes page 121.
Christiani Principes in suis Regnis, cum laud, propria authoritate, Episcopos
crearunt and deposuerunt. Christian Prices, have in their Kingdoms, by their
own proper authority created and deposed Bishops, and that with praise etc.
And then again page 144. Rex Angliae Archidiacono Richmundiae Episcopal^m
concessit Iurisdictionem. The King of England granted Episcopal Jurisdiction
to the Archdeacon of Richmond etc. And yet further page 155. Reges Angliae
suprema sua authoritate, de iure, atque cum laud omnium Ordinum Episcopos
eleger^nt, ac proinde deponere potu^runt. The Kings of England of their own
supreme authority, by right, and with praise of all manner Estates, have
elected Bishops, and therefore they might depose them also etc. And then lastly:
Constat, Christianos Prin^ipes cum laud Episcopos elegisse, and deposuisse,
etiam Romanos. It is manifest, that Christian Princes, have elected, and
deposed Bishops, yea Popes also, and that with their praise etc.

2. Now M. Tooker, he denies in the place before cited that the King can create
or depose Bishops. For there he assigning two things necessary for the
ordayning or creating of a Bishop, to wit, Consecration of the person, and a
Bishopric, adds, that the King can perform neither of these two. For
neither can he confer any benefice^, and much less a Bishopric or
Archbishopricke; neither has he any power to consecrate persons. In so much,
that in another place he confesses, that it is so far off from King James to
have power to create or depose Bishops, that he would rather acknowledge
himself for one of their scholars and Disciples. For thus he writes page
311. Serenissimus ac pientissimus Rex noster Iacobus non habet quicquam
antiquius and honorificentius, quam vt cum Valentiniano filium se Ecclesiae
profiteatur, and cum Theodorico Italiae Rege, se alumnum Ecclesiae, and
discipulum Archiepiscoporum suorum, and Episcoporum libenter recognoscat. Our
most Gracious and most pious King James does esteem or account nothing more
noble and more honorable, then with Valentinian (the Emperor) to profess
himself a son of the Church; and with Theodoricus King of Italy most
willingly to acknowledge himself a foster-child of the Church, and a disciple
of his Archbishops and Bishops etc.

3. This Jar now, as you see, is of great moment. For if the King cannot
create or ordain Bishops, as M. Tooker says he cannot; then it follows
evidently, that Thomas Cranmer who was made Archbishop of Canterbury by the
King ( Henry the 8.) was no true, but a false Bishop; no pastor, but a robber;
one that entered not into the sheepfold by the door, but climbed up some other
way. Whereof again ensue three other markable points. First, that all other
Bishops, who were afterward either created by Cra^mer, or by the King, were
like unto Cranmer himself. Secondly whatsoever was done of them, by Episcopal
authority or Jurisdiction, was of no validity or force. Thirdly, that they, so
ordained, are bound to restitution of all revenues and profits which they have
reaped by their Bishoprics. What coun^^ll now is there to be taken in this
point? Let your Academicks, I pray you, consider.

X. Question. Whether the King can excommunicate his obstinate subjects, or no?
1. HERE now do our adversaries rank their King amongst ordinary men; and
what they granted unto him before, here now they seem to revoke. For they
say, that the King cannot excommunicate any of his subjects and yet himself
may be excommunicated by them, and expelled out of the Church of England,
whereof himself is supreme Head. The former part hereof does M. Tooker affirm
page 15. in these worlds: Rex non habet potestatem distringendi gladium
spiritualem, vel quempiam exco^municandi. The King has no power to vnsheath
the spiritual sword, nor to excommunicate any man etc. And the Chaplain, my
Lord of Ely, page 151. says: Nos Principi censurae potestatem non facimus. We
do not give authority to our Prince to use Censures etc. And again M. Tompson
page 83. Exco^municare nullo modo ad Supr^matum Ecclesiae pertinet. To
excommunicate does no way belong to the Supremacy of the Church. And again
page 84. Omnes fatemur R^gem excomunicandi potestatem nullam habere. We do all
confess, that the King has no power to excommunicate etc.

2. The later part of the former point affirms M^ Burhill page 137. when he
says: Quod Ambrosio licuit in Theodosium idem and alijs in Regem simili de
causa liceat etc. As it was lawful for Ambrose to proceed against Theodosius;
so is it lawful also for others to proceed against the King, in the like cause
etc. To wit (he would say) as it was lawful for S. Ambrose being a Bishop, to
excommunicate Theodosius the Emperor; so in like manner is it lawful for our
Bishops ( of England) to excomunicate King James, if he offend in like manner.
And then again page 242. Supremus Ecclesiae Gubernator, potest eijci ex
Ecclesia. The supreme Governor of the Church, (to wit the King) may be cast
forth of the Church etc. And page 267. Rex etsi iustissime excommunicatus, non
amittit Primatum. The King, although he should be most justly excommunicated,
yet he does not loose his Primacy. etc.

3. Now I do not see, how these things can possibly hang together, or agree
with those which hitherto before have been att^ibuted to the King. For unto him
is attributed, That he is Primate, and the supreme head of the Church of
England: That he is above all persons, as well Ecclesiastical, as temporal in
his Kingdom: That he has supreme, most ample, and full jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, no less then political and temporal. And notwithstanding
all this, being so great a person, yet can he not excommunicate any one of his
subjects, either Laicke, or Churchman, although never so rebellious and
obstinate. Nay, although he be so great, as he is, he may nevertheless be
excommunicated by his subjects, and cast out of the Church of England, whereof
he is supreme Head. I cannot understand this mystery.

4. Heerunto will I add 3. arguments more, which will increase the difficulty.
The first is: He that has supreme, most ample, and most full Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical in any Kingdom, may exercise all the actions, and offices that
belong unto Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical of that Kingdom. But now the King
has supreme, most ample, and most full jurisdiction Ecclesiastical in the
Kingdom of England, as M. Tooker, and M. Salclebridg do confess: Ergo, he may
exerci^e all offices belonging Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical in the Kingdom of
England: Ergo he may also excommunicate: for that excommunication which is
denou^ced by sentence, is an act of Ecclesiastical Iur^sdiction. Or else
contrariwise, if you will thus: He that cannot exercise all acts of
Ecclesiastical Iurisdi^^ion in any Kingdom, has not supreme, most ample, and
most full Jurisdiction Ecclesiasti^all in that Kingdom. But the King of
England cannot exercise (...) of ^cclesiasticall Jurisdiction in his Kingdom
because he cannot excommunicate any man. (...) not supreme, most ample, and
most (...) ^^^l^siasticall in his Kingdom.

5. The second argument is this. He that gives to another, power to
excommunicate, without doubt has power himself to excommunicate, because no
man can give to another that which he has not himself. But the King of
England gives power to his Bishops to excommunicat^. Ergo, h^ has power to
excommunicate. The Minor is proved out of M. Tooker page 304. where he
affirms, That the Bishops (of England) do receive all their Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction of the exterior Court, from the King. But now, power to
excommunicate belongs to Jurisdiction of the exterior Court, a^ the
Chaplain page 41. and M. Tooker page 305. expressly teach us, saying: Rex
habet omnem iurisdictionem spiritualem in foro exteriori, exceptis quibusdam
censuris. The King has all Jurisdiction spiritual in the exterior Court,
excepting certain Censures. But now h^ excepteth Excommunication, wherein you
see is to be noted again a contradictio^ in M. Tooker; for that he refers
Censures (amongst which excommunication is one) to the Jurisdiction of the
exterior Court. True indeed. Bu^ yet he adioyneth two other things, that are
con^radictory. The first, that the King can give unto Bishops all Jurisdiction
of the exterior Court: and the second, that the King has not all Jurisdiction
o^ the exterior Court.

6. The third Argument is: That whosoever is subject to another in
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the exterior Court has not supreme, most
ample, and full Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical of the exterior Court^ But the
King is subject to some other body in Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the
exterior Court, to wit, to the Bishop, because he may by him be
excommunicated, by sentence, and cast out of the Church, as M. Burhill does
confess: Ergo, he has not supreme, most ample and most full Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical in the exterior Court etc. Or, if you will, contrariwise thus:
He that is subject to no other in Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, cannot by any
man be exco^municate^ by sentence. But the King now, if he have supreme
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, is subject to no other in Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical: Ergo, he cannot by any other be excommunicated etc. I doubt
not, but you ma^ke well, that these things do not agree.

XI. Question. Whether the King may be Judge of all Controversies in the
Church?
1. CONTROVERSIES that arise in the Church are of two sorts: some are about
faith and Religion: others are concerning Ecclesiastical affairs. The former
of these questions then, is: Whether the King by virtue of his Primacy, be
supreme Judge of all Controversies, which pertayne unto faith and Religion? M.
Salclebridge says he is page 163. in these words: Sic luce clarius ^st,
Christianos Principes cum laud, Controuers^as fid^i dijudicasse and dir^misse,
etiam in vniuersalibus oct^ Concilijs etc. So as it is more clear then the
su^ne, that Christian Princes, with prais^, have judged of, and decided
controuer^ies of faith, and that in eight General Counsels etc. Which is as
much to say, in the first of Nice, the first of Constantinople, that of
Ephesus, Chalcedon, the second, third, and fourth of Constantinople, and the
second of Nice, wherein diverse controversies concerning matters of faith were
judged of, and decided; especially concerning the divinity of Christ, against
the Heretic Arius; of the divinity of the holy Ghost, against Macedonius; of
one person of Christ, against Nestorius; of two Natures in Christ, against
Eutyches and Dioscorus, and so of others. All these Controversies, says M.
Salclebrigde, were judged of, and decided by Kings and Emperors.

2. M. Tooker now, he affirms the quite contrary, who by no means will have
Kings or Emperors to be Judges of Controversies of faith. For thus he writes
page 3. of his book: Olere autem malitiam, ac clamitare audaciam tuam illud
vid^tur, cum Regem caput Ecclesiae, Primatemque confingas, omniumque causarum
and controuersiarum, quae ad fidem and R^ligionem pertinent iudicem tribuas. It
may seem to savor of malice, and cry out upon you sausinesse, when as you
feign the King to be head of the Church and Judge of all causes and
controversies which pertain unto faith and Religion etc. And again page 50^^
Rex in suo Regno, omnibus superior sit, nulli subditus. Fidei iudex ne
appelletur quidem. Although the King, in his own Kingdom, be above all, and
subject to none: yet he may not be called, in any case, the Judge of our Faith
etc. And page 313. Reges Christiani non sunt ^idei ac Religionis Iudices.
Christian Kings are not Judges of Faith and Religion.

3. So as, if now in England there should chance to arise a dissension or
debate concerning any point of Faith or Religion, as for example, concerning
the r^all Pr^s^nce of Christ in the Eucharist; what should your Academicks
here do? To whom should your Citizens, and the rest of the subjects have
recourse? Should they go unto the King as judge in this point, and ask his
sentence and determination? M. Took^r, you see, would not go to the King. What?
should they go to some other Judge then? But M. Salclebridge he will admit no
other. What then were best to be done in this case? Truly even that, which
hitherto has bin done in the debate of the Kings Supremacy: to wit, always to
braule, and jar therabout, and never end the controversy. And what is the
cause? In very deed no other, but for that some think one thing, some another,
and they cannot, or rather will not find out the certain and true Judge, who
can decide the matter. And this is the property of heretics.

4. The other Question is, Whether the King be Judge of all Controversies, that
concern other Ecclesiastical affairs? M. Salclebridge says, that he is page
165. in these words: Audin, Controuersias Episcopales ab Imperatore dir^mptas?
Do you not hear Sir, that Episcopal Controversies have bin decided by
Emperors? etc. What M. Tooker thinks of this point, is not well known. For
some times he affirms it, as for example page 24. thus: N^mini dubium est,
quin in Primitiua Eccl^sia, d^ r^bus and p^rs^nis Eccl^siasticis ius dic^r^nt
Imperator^s. No man can doubt but that in the Primitive Church, Emperors judged
of matters, and persons Ecclesiastical etc. And yet page 23. he seems to
deny it: Non est Princeps supra res, sed supra personas. The Prince (says he)
is not above the matters, but above the persons etc. And then again page 49.
Rex in suo Regno supremus est, non supra res, sed supra homines. The King in
his own Kingdom is the chief or principal, but yet not chief over things,
but over men. And thus you see every where nothing but iarring and disagreement.

XII. Question. Whence, and by what Title, has the King his Primacy in the
Church?
1. THE sense hereof is, Whether the King precisely in that he is a King, or
rather in that he is a Christian King, has the Primacy of the Church? The
former part of this point, M. Tompson seems to approve page 78. where he
says: Omnes Principes, ^tiam Pagani, obiectiue habent supremam potestat^m in
omnes omnino personas suorum subditorum, and generatim in res ipsas, sieve
ciuiles sint, sieve sacrae, vt in cultu diuino and Religione procuranda, saltem
quoad modum and exercitium. All Princes, yea even those that be Pagans, have
for the object of their supreme power, all manner of persons that be their
subjects, and generally all things, whether civil or sacred, as in advancing
Gods honor and Religion, at leastwise, so far forth, as belongs to the
manner and exercise thereof etc. And then again page 94. Primatus est Regium
honum, quod Censura tolli non potest. Nec est absurdum, Regem v^lut Ethnicum,
esse Primatem E^cl^siae. Primacy is a certain Kingly right, that cannot be
taken away by censures. Nor is it absurd, that a King, as he is an Ethnicke, be
Primate of the Church etc. And yet further in the same place: Rex Ethnicus, cum
Christo initiatur, non acquirit Primatum de nouo. An Ethnicke King (says he)
when as he is instructed in Christ, or the Christian faith, does not purchase
thereby any new Primacy etc. To whom consents M. Burhill page 251. thus: Rex
titulo R^gis temporalis potest sibi vindicare, and assumere Primatum Eccl^siae.
A King, by the title of a temporal King, may claim unto himself and take
upon him the Primacy of the Church etc. And page 267. Rex etsi iustissime
excommunicatus, non amittit Primatum in rebus Ecclesiasticis. A King although
he be most justly excommunicated, yet does he not loose his Primacy in
Ecclesiastical matters etc.

2. My Lord of Fly now, he teaches us a quite contrary lesson in his Tortura
Torti ^ag. 39. where he auerreth, that the Prima^y of the Church does belong to
the King, not because he is a King, but because he is a Christian King; and
therefore Ethnicke Kings have not Primacy in the Church, so long as they remain
Ethnicks; but do then receive the said Primacy, when they are made Christians:
and loose the same again also, when they be excommunicated. His words are
these: An non Regi Ethnico praestare fidem fas? Imo nefas non praestare. In
Ethnico enim est vera potestas temporalis, idque s^ne ordine ad potestatem
Ecclesiasticam. Is it not law^ull then, to yield Allegiance to an Ethnicke
King? Nay rather not to yield i^, is a wickedness. For in an Ethni^ke there is
true temporal power, and that without respect to Ecclesiastical power etc.
And a little after. Rex quiuis cum de ^thnico Christianus fit, non perdit
terrenum ius, sed acquirit ius nouum. Itid^m cum de Christiano fit s^cut
Ethnicus, vigore sententiae amittit nouum ius quod acquisierat: sed retinet
terrenum ius in temporalibus: quod fuerat illi proprium, priusquam Christianus
fieret etc. Every King, when as of an Ethni^ke, he becomes a Christian, does
not loose his earthly right, but gets a new right. And so in like manner,
when as of a Christi^n he becomes as an Ethnicke, ( to wit by
^xco^munication) then by vigor of the sentence, he loses that new right
which he had gotten, but yet notwithstanding he still retayneth his earthly
right in temporal things, which was proper unto him, before he became a
Christian etc.

3. So as according to the opinion of M. Tompson, and M. Burhill it follows,
that all Kings, whether Christians or Ethnicks, or of whatsoever other Sect or
Religion they be, are Primates of the Church in their own Kingdoms. Therefore
all Englishmen and Scots, who live at Constantinople, are (by their sentence)
subject to the Turk in Ecclesiastical matters: as also they that live in
Spain, are subject to King Philip; and they at Rome to the Pope, and so to
others, in other places. What now shall those men do, if the Turk should
command them to follow the Alcoran? The King of Spain force them to he^re
Mass? The Pope to pray for the dead? and some heathen King perhaps compel
them to Idolatry? Shall they then obey these Princes command? ^ut then should
they do against their Consciences. Shall they refuse to obey? Then farewell
Primacy of the Church. Perhaps they will answer, that they will obey, when
they think good. Shall therefore subjects be Judges of their Kings? May then
the Catholics in England, say after this manner, If it pl^ase your Majesty,
in this point we think good to obey your Maiestyes command, but in that not?

XIII. Question. Whether the King may constrain his Subjects to take the Oath
of Prmacy, or no?
1. HITHERTO have we treated of the Iarring and disagreement of our
Adversaries, about the nature, offices, and origin of the King^ Primacy. Now
there remains a certain practical question, which touches the Conscience
to the quick; to wit, whether the King may constrain or force his Subjects to
swear, that they acknowledge his Kingly Primacy, whereof we have spoken before?
Or whether they will acknowledge the King as Primate and supreme Head of the
Church of ^ngland, unto whom, as unto their Primate and supreme Head they will
promise fidelity, no less in Ecclesiastical and Spiritual matters, then in
Politic and temporal? This question has two points. The first, whether the
King of England does de facto exact, or has at any time exacted such an Oath
of his subjects? The other is, whether his subjects are bound in conscience to
take such an Oath, if the King should exact the same? Of both these points
severally I mean to speak a word or two.

The first Point.
2. The first point then is, Whether the King of England does exact, or at any
time has exacted such an Oath of his subjects? It is manifest that K. Henry
the 8. did. For so writes Doctor Sanders in his book of the Schism of
England: Laurentius Cocchus Prior Coenobij Dancastrensis, vna cum tribus
Monachis and duobus laicis, Aegidio Horno, and Clemente Philpotto, quod nollent
Ecclesiasticum terreni Regis Primatum iurato confiteri, exclusi e terris, ad
caelestem aeterni Regis gloriam transmissi sunt. Laurence Coch Prior of the
Monastery of Dancaster, together with three Monks and two Laymen, Giles
Horn, and Clement Philpot, for that they would not swear to the
Ecclesiastical Primacy of a temporal King, being excluded from earth, were
transl^ted to a celestial glory of the eternal King etc. And then again:
Proponebantur eis noua Comitiorum Decreta and iubebantur iureiurando affirmare,
Regem Ecclesiae supremum esse Ca^ut. The new decrees of the Parliament were
propounded unto them, and they were commanded to swear, the King to be
supreme Head of the Church etc.

3. Now that Queen ^lizabeth the danghter, followed heerin her Father K.
Henry, it is manifest by the form of Oath that she exacted of her subjects,
which is this: ^go A. B prorsus testificor, and declaro in conscientia mea,
Reginam ^sse solam supremam Gubernatricem and istius Regni Angliae and alioru^
omnium suae Maiestatis dominiorum and regionum non minus in omnibus
spiritualibus atque Ecclesiasticis rebus vel causis, quam temporalibus: Et quod
nemo externus Princeps, Persona Praelatus, Status, vel Potentatus, aut facto,
aut iure, habet aliquam iurisdiction^m, potestatem, superioritatem,
praeeminentiam, vel authoritat^m ^cclesiasticam aut spiritualem in hoc Regno.
Ideoque plane renuntio and repudio omnes forinsecas iurisdictiones, potestates,
superioritates atque authoritates etc. I A. B. do verily testify and declare in
my conscience, that the Queen is the only supreme Gouernesse, as well of this
Kingdom of England, as of all other her Majesty's dominions and count^eys,
as well in all spiritual and Ecclesiastical matters and causes, as in
temporal: And that no forrayne Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate
has, either by fact, or right, any Jurisdiction, power, superiority,
pre-eminence, or authority Ecclesiastical or spiritual in this Kingdom. And
therefore I do utterly renounce, and abandone all forrayne Jurisdictions,
powers, superiorities and authorityes etc.

4. The very same also does now King James, who byndeth his subjects not with
one Oath alone, but with two; to wit, of Supremacy, and Allegiance. The former
Oath of Supremacy begins thus: Ego A. B. palam testor, and ex conscientia
mea declaro, quod Maiestas Regia^ vnicus est supremus Gubernator huius Regni,
omniumque aliorum suae Maiestatis dominiorum and territoriorum tam in omnibus
spiritualibus sieve Ecclesiasticis rebus and causis, quam in temporalibus: Et
quod nullus extraneus Princeps, Persona, Praelatus, Status aut Potentatus habet
aut habere debet vllam iurisdictionem, potestatem, superioritatem,
praeeminentia^ vel authoritatem Ecclesiasticam, sieve spiritualem intra hoc
Regnum etc. I A. B. do publicly testify, and in my conscience declare, that
the Kings Majesty is the only supreme Governor of this Kingdom, and of all
other his Majesty's dominions and territories, as well in all matters and
causes spiritual or Ecclesiastical, as in temporal: And that no foreign
Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate has, or ought to have any
Jurisdiction, power, superiority, pre-eminence, or authority Ecclesiastical or
spiritual within this Kingdom etc. The later Oath called of Allegiance,
begins thus: Ego A. B. vere and sincere agnosco, profiteor, testificor, and
declaro in conscientia mea coram Deo and Mundo, quod supremus Dominus noster
Rex Iacobus etc. I A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, and
testify in my conscience, before God and the world, that our Sovereign Lord
King James etc.

5. Both these Oaths are set down at large in his Majesty's Apology: and in
both of them, his subjects are required publickely and openly to profess and
acknowledge^ that King James is the supreme Governor, and Lord of all England,
not only in politic and temporal matters, but in spiritual and
Ecclesiastical also: And that neither the Pope, nor any other forrayner has
any power or Jurisdiction in, or over the Church of ^ngland. Again the former
of these Oaths was brought in by King Henry the 8. as his Majesty confesses
in his Apology in these words: Sub Henrico octauo primum introductum est
Iuramentum Primatus sub eo^ue Thomas Morus and Rof^ensis supplico af^^cti;
idque partim ob eam causam, quod Iuram^ntum illud recusarent. Ab eo deinceps
omnes mei Praedecessores, quotquot sunt hanc Religionem amplexi, idem sibi, aut
non multo secus asseruerunt etc. The Oath of Primacy was first brought in,
under K. Henry the 8. under whom Sir Thomas More, and the Bishop of Roc^ester
were beheaded; and that partly because they refused that Oath. From him all my
Predecessors downward, as many as have embraced this Religion, did retain the
same Oath, or not much different, unto themselves etc. Now the later Oath was
invented by K. James himself.

The second Point.
6. The Question then is, whether all the Kings subjects in England, are bound
in conscience to take both these Oaths, as often as the King shall exact the
same? Or whether they should suffer imprisonments, torments, and death it
self, rather then swear? Concerning the former point, the Catholics doubt
nothing, for that they have certainly and firmly determined rather to loose
their lives, together with the glorious Martyrs Sir Thomas More, and the Bishop
of Rochester, then to ad^it the Kings Primacy, and abjure the Popes. Now
concerning the later Oath, there has been some doubt made these years past.
For that some Catholics, who perceived not the force and scope of that Oath,
did a little stagger at the beginning, whether they might with a safe
conscience swear thereto, or no. Which doubt of theirs notwithstanding did not
last long, but was soon taken away by Pope Paul the fifth, and Cardinal
Bellarmine For the Pope forthwith directed two Apostolical Breues to the
Catholics of England, and the said Card. wrote a letter to M. Blackwell then
Archpriest of this affair. Both Pope and Cardinal do deny, that the said Oath
may be taken with a safe Conscience. And their reason is this: Because no man,
with a safe conscience^ can deny the Catholic faith. But he now, who should
take this Oath proposed by the King, should deny the Catholic faith, though
not generally, yet in ^art, so far forth as belongs to some one article
thereof: Ergo, no man with a safe conscience can take this Oath.

7. This reason, being very sound, all good Catholics admit: but our
adversaries do not. I, in favor and consolation of the Catholics, have
determined to adioyne heerunto two other reasons, especially against the Oath
of Supremacy, which by the Adversaries cannot be rejected. The first is this:
No man is bound in Conscience to swear that which is either apparently false,
or at leastwise doubtful: But, that the King is Primate, and supreme head of
the Church, and for such to be obeyed, not only in temporal, but also in
Ecclesiastical matters, is either apparently false, or at leastwise doubtful:
Ergo, no man is bound in Conscience to swear the same. The Mayor is evident of
it self, for that it is not lawful to affirm any thing which is either false
or doubtful, and much less to swear the same. The Minor is proved thus: For
that, is it judged apparently false, as well amongst the Caluinists, as amongst
the Catholics, that the King is Primate and supreme head of the Church. But
now amongst the Caluinists of England, who adhere unto the King, the same is
called into doubt. For that some of them affirm, others deny these points
following: 1. That the King is Primate of the Church. 2. That he is supreme
head of the Church. 3. That he has Ecclesiastical Primacy over the Church. 4.
That he has power and jurisdiction Ecclesiastical. 5. That the K. by his own
proper Authority may assemble Counsels or Synods, and sit as chief Head or
President therein. 6. That he can confer benefices, or Ecclesiastical livings.
7. That he can create and depose Bishops. 8. That he is Judge in Controversies
of faith etc. So as truly, if these and the like points be doubtful and
uncertain amongst those who adhere unto, and favor the King, seeing that some
deny them, some affirm them: it follows necessarily, that the Kings whole
Primacy is an uncertain thing. What rashness then, and imprudency is it, to go
about to bynd Catholics in their Consciences to swear that, which they
themselves do affirm some of them to be false, some others to be doubtful?

8. I will explicate more distinctly that which I have said. The Oath of the
Kings Primacy, does contain so many parts as there be, or are thought to be
Offices and functions of the Kings Primacy. The offices then either are, or are
thought to be diverse, as we have seen before, to wit, to assemble Synods, to
enact and decree Ecclesiastical laws, to confer benefices, to cre^te
Bishops, to determine controversies of faith, and the like. Therefore diverse are
the parts of the Oath of the Kings Supremacy. Of these parts then, let us take
one of them by it self, to wit this: I A. B. do swear in my conscience, that
I will be faithful and obedient unto the King, as often, or whenever he
shall, by his own proper authority, create Bishops, whom he will, and again
depose from their office or dignity, whom he will etc. If this part only of
the Kings Offices should be exacted of all his Majesty's subjects in England,
what, do you think, would be done? Would all, trow you, yea they who most
adhere now unto the King, swear this? Let them swear that would; M. Tooker I
am sure, if he be a constant man would not. For that he denies the creation
and deposition of Bishops to belong any way unto the King. And if so be, that
he, who otherwise acknowledges the Kings Primacy (at least in words) would not
swear heerunto; how then should Catholics be compelled to do the same, who
do in no wise acknowledge it? And what I have said concerning this point, the
same may be also said of the rest.

9. My other reason is this. King James does often protest, that he claymeth no
more right or Inrisdiction over the Church, then did the Kings in the old
Testament in ancient times: and therefore that this his Primacy must be
contained within the same lymits, and terms, that theirs was in the old
Testament. But the Kings in the old Testament could not compel their subjects
to swear such an Oath as this: I A. B. do openly testi^ie, and in my
conscience declare, that Jeroboam is the only supreme Governor of this
Kingdom of Israel, as well in spiritual as temporal matters: And that no
forrayner has any jurisdiction, power, superiority, pre-eminence, or authority
in this Kingdom etc. Ergo, neither King James can enforce his subjects to take
such a like Oath. The Mayor is manifest out of his Maiestyes own words in his
Apology. The Minor I thus explicate. After the death of King Solomon, his
Kingdom (God so disposing) was divided into two parts: whereof one contained
ten Tribes: the other two. So as by this means, they became two distinct
Kingdoms afterward, and therein reigned two distinct Kings, one whereof had no
dependence of the other in temporal government. One was called King of Israel,
the other King of Judah: and both of the^ had successors in their kingdoms.
The first Kings that ruled, after the division of the kingdom made, were
Jeroboam King of Israel, and Roboam King of Judah. In either kingdom were
Priests and Levites. But the high or Chief Priest, could not reside in both
Kingdoms, but only in one, and that ordinarily in Judah: yet notwithstanding he
was Head of all the Priests and Levites that remained in both Kingdoms.
Neither could Jeroboam lawfully say unto his Priests and Levites: You shall not
obey the High Priest, that resideth in the Kingdom of Judah: but you shall obey
me only: for you are exempted from his jurisdiction and power etc. And though
he should have so said; yet no doubt, but he had offended. If now King Jeroboam
could not exempt the Priests and Levites of his own Kingdom, from the
Jurisdiction and Power of a foreign High Priest: by what right then does now
King James of England do the same? especially, seeing he auerreth, that he
claymeth no more right or jurisdiction unto himself over the Church, then the
Kings of the old Testament did?

The Conclusion.
1. ALL then that has been hitherto said, may be reduced unto three heads. The
first is, that the Kings Primacy in the Church is a new thing, and first
brought in by King Henry the 8. nor hitherto has been heard of, or usurped in
any other place then only in the Kingdom of ^ngland. The second is: that there
be so many Iarres and disagreements of the English Ministry among ^hemselues,
concerning this Primacy, that it is not manifest nor certain what the said
Primacy is, nor what force or authority the same has. The third: that the Oath
of this Primacy can neither be exacted by the King; nor may the Subjects take
the same.

2. Heerehence three other questions which might be made concerning the
Subjects, will ea^ily be solued. There be three sorts of Subjects in England.
The first, as some call them, are Henricians, who both a^knowledg, and swear
unto this Kingly Supremacy. The second sort are Puritans, or pure Caluinists,
who indeed do not acknowledge the said Supremacy, but yet do swear thereunto.
The third are Catholics, which neither acknowledge it, nor will swear it.

3. The first question then is, What may be said of these Henricians, which
both acknowledge and swear to the Kings Supremacy? I answer: that they do
unwisely and inconsiderately. The reason is^ Because it is folly and rashness,
as before I have said, to swear a thing that is doubtful and uncertain. But
the Primacy of the King is a thing altogether doubtful and uncertain amongst
the Henricians, as is manifest by their iarres and dissentions, which hithe^to
we have showed. Ergo, to swear to such a Supremacy is both folly and rashness.

4. The second question is, What may be said of the Puritans, or pure
Caluinists, who do not indeed acknowledge the Kings Primacy, and yet if they be
commanded, do swear thereto? I answer: that they are perjured persons and
Politicians. The reason is. Because they believe one thing, and swear another.
They believe with Calnin, that neither Kings nor secular Princes have any
Primacy in spiritual and Ecclesiastical matters, but only in temporal; yet
nevertheless they swear Allegiance unto the King (together with the forsaid
Henricians) as to the Primate and supreme Head of the Church: and this they do,
to make an external and political peace, which is more esteemed by them, then
their faith and Religion; and therefore they are rather to be called Politics
then Christians. Of whom his Majesty gave a most worthy testimony, in his
Preface Monitory, to wit, That he had found more truth and honesty in the
high-land and bordering thieves, then in that sort of people.

5. The third question is, what may be said of Catholics, who neither
acknowledge the Kings Primacy, nor swear thereto. I answer: that they be just
and upright men, who walk before God in truth and verity. They be sincere, who
profess with their mouth, that which they think in their heart. They are wise
indeed, who with good Eleazarus had rather dye, then consent to any unlawful
thing, no not so much, as in outward show. They be like unto the Apostles, who
endeavor to obey God, rather then men. They be like to the Martyrs of the
primitive Church, who freely profess themselves before the persecutours, to be
such as indeed they are.

6. But you will say, they be miserable. For if they refuse the Oath, they are
forced to undergo imprisonments, torments, punishments. Truly they are not
therefore miserable but most happy. For so did our Savior teach us in the
Gospel, Matthew. 5.10. Bl^ss^d are th^y^ who suffer persecution for justice,
for th^irs is the Kin^dome of heau^n. But then you will say: It is a hard thing
to su^^er. How is that hard, which is done with joy and delight? Hear what is
said of the Apos^les, Act. 5.41. And they went from the sight of the Counc^ll
reioycing^ because they were accounted wort^y to suf^er reproach for the name
of Jesus. Hear what ^^e Apostle says of himself 2. Cor. 4. Superabundo
gaudio in omni tribulatione nostra. I excedingly reioy^e in all our
tribulations.

7. And from whence comes this joy? Truly from a twofold gift of the holy
Ghost; to wit Hope, and Charity. Hope of future glory, that makes us joyful
and full of comfort in all aduersityes. Romans 8.18. The sufferings of these
times, are not condign to the future glory, that shall be revealed in us. And
again R^m. 12.12. Rejoicing in hope: and patient in tribulation. And H^br.
10.34. The spoil of your own goods you took with joy, knowing that you have
a better, and a p^rmanent substance. Do not therefore leese your confidence,
which has a great r^ward. For patience is n^^^ssary ^or you, that doing the
will of God, you may rec^yue the promise etc.

8. Nor is the force of Charity less: Romans 8.35. W^o th^n shall separate us
from the Charity of Christ? Tribulatio? or a^stresse? or fami^^? or nak^dnes?
or dang^r? or persecution? or the sword? etc. But in all these things we
overcome, because of him that has l^u^d us. For I am sure, that neither death,
nor life, nor Angels, nor Principali^yes, nor Powers, neyth^r things pr^s^nt,
nor things to come, neither might, nor height, nor depth, nor other creature
shall be able to separate us from the Charity of God, which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord etc.

9. Heerto belong the examples of Christ, and of other Saints, which have great
force and efficacy, to styr up and strengthen the hearts of Catholics, to
suffer patiently in this life, prisons, fetters, torments, yea death it self.
1. Pet. 2.20. If doing well, you sustain patiently, this is thank before God.
For unto this are you called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving you
an example, that you may follow his steps, who did no sin, n^yther was
guile sound in his mouth: who when he was reviled, did not r^uile^ when he
suff^red, he threatened not; but deliuer^d himself to him that judged him
unjustly etc.

10. And Hebr. 11.36. Others had trial of reproaches, and stripes: moreover
also of bands and prisons: they were stoned, they were h^wed, they were
t^mpted, they died in the slaughter of the sword: they went about in
sheepskins, in goate-skins, needy, in distr^sse, a^flict^d: of whom the world
was not worthy: wandering in d^serts, in mountains, and dens, and in caves of
the eart^ etc.

11. And again in the 12. Chapter, and 1. verse. And therefore by pati^nce let
us run to the Combat proposed unto us, looking on the author of Faith, and
the consummator Jesus, who, joy being proposed unto him, sustained the Cross,
contemning confusion, and sits on the right hand of the seat of God. For
think diligently upon him, who sustained of sinners such contradiction against
himself, that you be not wearied, fainting in your mynds. For you have not yet
resisted unto blood etc.

12. And yet more, 2. Cor. 11.23. In very many labors, in prisons more
abundantly, in stripes above measure, in deaths often. Of the Jews five times
did I rec^yue forty (stripes) saving one. Thrice was I beaten with rodds, once
I was stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, night and day have I been in the
depth of the sea, in iourneying often, in perils of waters, perils of
thieves, perils of my nation, perils of Gentiles, perils in the City,
perils in the wilderness, perils in the sea, perils among false brethren;
in labor and misery, in much watching, in ^unger and thirst, in fastings
often, in cold and nakedness etc.

13. And yet more in the 12. Chapter and 9. verse. Gladly will I glory in my
own infirmity, that the power of Christ may dwell in me. For which cause I
please my self in infirmityes, in contumelies, in necessities, in
pers^cutions, in distresses for Christ. For when I am weak, then am I mighty
etc.

14. With these, and the like testimonies of holy Scriptures were armed Sir
Thomas More, and the Bishop of Rochester, when they rather chose to die, then to
take an impious and wicked Oath. With these places were others also animated,
who followed them in their glorious fight. And lastly with these, are they
encouraged, who now in England are kept in prisons, bound in fetters, spoiled
of their goods and lyuings, and purpled in their own blood.

S. Cyprian Epist. 9.

Pretiosamors haec est, quae emit immortalitatem pretio sanguinis s^i Precious
is that death, which buyeth immortality with the price of it blood.

And in the end of the same Epistle.

O beatam Ecclesiam nostram, quam tempor^bus nostris gloriosus Martyrum san^uis
illustrat! Erat antea in operibus fratrum candida: nunc facta est in Martyrum
cruore purpurea. O happy is our Church, which the glorious blood of Martyrs
does in these our days illustrate! It was made white before in the works of
our brethren: but now is it made purple in the blood of Martyrs.

And yet more in Epist. 24.

Quid gloriosius aut felicius vlli hominum poterit ex diuina dignatione
contingere, quam inter ipsos carnifices interritum confit^ri Dominum D^um? quam
inter saeuie^tia saecularis potestatis tormenta, etiam extorto and ex^ruciato,
and ex^arnificato corpore, Christum De^ fi^ium, etsi recedente, sed tam^n
lib^ro spiritu confit^ri? quam relicto mundo caelum p^ti^^e? quam d^s^rtis
hominibus, inter Angelos star^? quam coll^gam passionis ^um Christo, in Christi
nomine factum ^ss^? What can happen unto any man, through Gods divine
bountifulnes, more glorious, or more prosperous, then without all fear to
confess our Lord God? then amidst the cruel torments of secular power, to
confess Christ the Son of God, with a free spirit, though now departing from
the body, yea from the body tortured, tormented, and all to bemangled? then
by leaving the world, to go to heaven? then by forsaking the company of men,
to be conversant with angels? and be made partaker of the Passion of Christ,
in Christ his name?

FINIS.

