A COMMENTARY UPON THE FIFTENE PSALMS, CALLED PSALMI Graduum, that is,
Psalms of Degrees: FAITHFVLLY COPIED OVT OF THE LECTVRES OF D. Martin Luther,
very fruitful and comfortable for all Christian afflicted consciences to read.

Translated out of Latin into English by HENRY BVLL.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautroullier dwelling in the Black Friars by
Ludgate. CVM PRIVILEGIO. 1577.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, GRACE AND PEACE in Christ Jesus.
ALBEIT the reading of the Scripture it self, and the simple text thereof
without further helps, has matter enough to give intelligence and instruction
sufficient for the soul of man to salvation, if with heart and diligence it be
earnestly applied and followed, as it should: yet notwithstanding the help of
good commentaries and explications annexed withal, especially such as be
learned and godly, is not hurtful, but rather is much requisite, and greatly
needful, both for opening of places of difficulty, for dissoluing doubts,
and debating of controversies, such as may and use many times to happen.
Wherefore most highly bound we are to the goodness of our Lord and Savior, who
has herein so well provided for our infirmity, in blessing this time of ours
so plentifully with so many learned writers and worthy workers in his word. As
in all times he has done, but most chiefly in this time of ours is now to be
seen. In which time as we have to give thanks for many other of late memory
famous and singular instruments of Christ's glory, so namely for the author and
compiler of this present work, Martin Luther. Who although of many hitherto
either has not been read, and so not thoroughly known, or of a great number
hated and maligned, or of some lightly regarded, or peradventure misiudged: Yet
to such as either have advisedly redd him, or shall be disposed to take trial
of him, having by experience of infirmities and affliction any skill to judge
of true divinity, shall be found emonges many preachers and teachers of this
our time, most chiefly worthy, not only of just commendation, but also to be
compared with the chiefest: yea and so necessary for these times of the Church
to be seen and read, that the poor mourning souls of the afflicted can not
well want him, and that for diverse purposes, especially for two principal
causes.

First for true comfort and spiritual consolation to such weak minds as in
cases of conscience are distressed, and wrestle in faith against the terror of
Satan, of death, of damnation, against the power of the law, and wrath of God,
wherein I see very few or none (without comparison be it spoken) in these our
days to instruct more fruitfully with like feeling and experience.

Secondly for discerning and discussing the difference between the law and the
Gospel, how these two parts are to be separated, and distincted a sonder as
repugnant and contrary, and yet notwithstanding how they both stand together
in Scripture and doctrine, and yet in doctrine no repugnance. The knowledge
whereof how requisite it is for all Christians to learn the miserable lack
thereof will soon declare. For where these two be not rightly parted, but
confounded, what can follow there but confusion of conscience, either leading
to despair, or else to blind security, without any order in doctrine, or true
comfort of salvation. As by examples of time is soon seen, namely if we look
into the later times of the Romish Church, where for want of right
distinguishing between these two, great errors have risen, and no great marvel.
For where the Gospel is taken for the law, and the law for the Gospel, and
Christ received but only for a law giver: and where things go by works and
law of deserving, what hope or assurance of salvation can be there,
considering our works in their best kind to be so imperfect and unprofitable?
And what shall be said then of our naughty works? but especially* what shall
be said then to the mourning and lamenting sinner, who feleth no good thing
dwelling in him, but all wickedness? shall he then despair, or how else will ye
comfort him? For if Christ in his principal office be but a teacher of the
law and of works, and that be the chiefest thing to be required in a
Christian, to work salvation by the law of working: where is then grace,
mercy, promise, faith justifying, peace and rest of conscience, redemption
from malediction of the law, if we be under the law still? briefly, where is
the new covenant of God made by his son, if the old covenant made by Moses
do yet remain? if it do not remain, then must there needs be a difference
between the law and the gospel: between the old Testament and the new: between
the law of works and the law of faith: between Moses and Christ, between the
master and the servant: between Agar and Sara, and their two children. Now
what difference this is, thou shall not need, Christian reader, by me to be
instructed, having here the book of Martin Luther to read and peruse. Who as
in his former treatise before set forth upon the Epistle to the Galathians, so
likewise in these his commentaries upon the Psalms, does so lively and at
large discourse that matter, with many other things more, full of heavenly
instruction and edificatio^, that having him, though thou had no other
expositour upon the holy Scripture, thou may have almost sufficient to make a
perfect soldier against all the fiery darts of the tempting enemy. Again,
having all other, and lacking this writer, thou should yet want some thing
to the perfect practice and experience of a Christian divine. Although I need
not in the behalf of this treatise use any such commendation, the book being
able sufficiently to commend it self: yet thus much by way of preface I
thought good to notify and premonish, whereby I might the rather animate and
encourage thy studious diligence, good reader, to ouerreade this book. Wherein
if it shall please thee to bestow the labor, as the pain, I trust, will not
be tedious, so in the profit thereof I doubt not, but thy labor shall be
recompensed with no less spiritual consolation to thy souls health, then the
godly translator thereof M. Bull did receive in translating of the same. Who as
he once made his vow unto the Lord for certain causes, to turn this book
from latin into english, so with no less fidelity did well perform the
same. Blessed be the Lord therefore, which both put him in mind first to take
this work in hand, and also granted him life to the accomplishment thereof:
for so it pleased the Lord to continue his life so long, till this vowed work
was fully finished. And not only that, but also after his travel taken, gave
him to receive such sweetenes thereby, as in never thing more in all his life.
Now from him departed to turn to you that remain alive, I mean all studious
readers, as we^ the^ that be well willers to the gospel, as also that be
enemies, and yet not called to the truth: both which sorts I have here in few
words to exhort, and to desire: first, such as have mind to hear and read the
doctrine of truth, that they in life will follow that they hear and read: Of
the other company this I have to crave, that for as much as the gracious
goodness of the Lord has raised up before their face such plenty of preachers,
teachers, writers, and translators, whereby by all means to call them, and to
do them good: they wisely again for their parts will consider what they have
to do: that is, to take the time before them, and not to refuse the riches of
Gods great grace offered, least peradventure hereafter ignorance will not excuse
them, whereas now the light of truth so evidently appearing, wittingly and
willingly they stop their eyes from seeing, and their ears from hearing. The
Lord God of peace and father of all mercy and consolation for Christ Jesus his
Sons sake, open our hearts and senses, that all prejudice and pertinacie set
aside, we may both be willing to learn the right way of perfect faith and
truth: and no less careful in life to follow that we learn, growing up in
grace and knowledge more and more, till we atteyne at length to the full
measure, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Amen.

John Fox.

THE PREFACE OF D. MARTIN LVTHER UPON the fifteen Psalms, called Psalms of
degrees.
YE have heard me before many times declare in the beginning of my Lectures,
for what cause I have taken in hand to expound the holy Scriptures: not for
any desire I have to teach nevve and strange things which have not been
known or heard before (for our divinity is so well known both in the Latin
tongue and also in our own Language, that we may seem now to have more
need of exhortation then instruction): but because the diligent teaching and
setting forth of the word of God is a kind of Gods service or worship
properly belonging to the nevve Testament, being much more acceptable unto God,
more holy and excellent then were all the vvorshippings and sacrifices of the
old Testament, and therefore even when the law was yet in his full strength,
the holy Prophets of God, utterly rejecting the burnt offerings and other
sacrifices of the law, did commend, above all other, the sacrifice of praise.
In like manner also ought we so much the more earnestly and diligently to set
forth this kind of worship, because that, after so great blindness wherein vv
have lived, the wisdoms of God has (as the Sun in the mid day) appeared and
shined unto us again. Therefore, like as it has been counted a manner of
servitude in times past, to hear a godly sermon (which men were wont to do
even as they did their servile labors): so must we now otherwise think,
that they which teach, read, write or hear the holy Scriptures, are Gods
true Priests, which serve their God with a worthy and thankful kind of
worship.

Albeit true it is also that we can not here attain to such full knowledge
of spiritual matters, The word must be continually exercised because of the
continual tentations whereof we are in danger.
but that daily we have need to learn them again, to be exercised and
confirmed therein, because of the continual vexations and assaults of Satan,
that as we are never without occasions of declining and falling from God: so
likewise we should not cease to exercise our selves in the continual
meditation of the word of God, to the edifying both of our selves and of the
Church. For there is nothing so pernicious as the opinion of many at this day,
who as soon as they have gotten never so little knowledge of this heavenly
wisdoms, think them selves by and by to be great doctors. For seeing that
these things do not consist in fine and eloquent talk, in reasoning and
disputing, but in practice and experience, directed, not by man's reason, but by
the spirit of God: they are miserably deceived that rest in bare and naked
knowledge, which is but unprofitable without experience and practice. In the
old Testament God appointed but only the ten commandments, vvherin he
would have his people to be exercised and occupied. But who was there ever
among the Saints of God which could say that he was able to atteyne to the
wisdoms of the holy Ghost set forth in those commandments? And shall we
which in the new Testament have the whole Scripture set forth unto us, glory
in the fulness and perfection of our knowledge? Let us not think therefore so
highly of our selves, but let us humble our selves before the holy Ghost and
confess this wisdoms to be infinite, and such as we could never fully
attain unto, although we should spend our whole life in the study of the
Scriptures. For although by the grace of God we are not without some
knowledge, yet because we are continually oppressed with clouds of
tentations, we must have recourse to this fountain, yea to this fire, that
our hearts may be kindled therevvith, and that we may give no place to Satan
or our own flesh, whereby the first fruits of the spirit might be quenched
in us. This lothing of Gods word, which rises of a false opinion of
knowledge, is (alas) to common at this day. The lothi^g and fulness of Gods
word.
For a remedy therefore against this evil, Moses commands, that the law of
God should be diligently set forth to the posterity, that is to say, should
continually be taught and exercised though it were never so well known
before.

For this cause therefore I have taken in hand to expound the Psalms, that
we might learn to abhor this damnable lothing of the word of God, and also
to confirm, and (as it were) to nourish the good spirit of God in us by the
exercise and practice of the same. But the chiefest cause that moved me
hereunto is, for that we know this kind of worship, above all other to
please God, when we set forth his word in teaching, in reading, in vvriting,
in hearing, etc. And this one thing ought to keep us in the continual exercise
of the word of God. For, to teach, to exercise and to set forth the word,
what is it else, but continually to offer sacrifice unto God, continually to
worship God, continually to be exercised in the three first commandments.
Lamentable it is to see what a multitude there is of such as continually
blaspheme God, either in teaching false doctrine, or in persecuting the truth.
Wherefore very necessary it is that we, which in comparison of them are so
small a number, should serve the Lord our God, and praise his holy name, which
both has given us this life, and promised the life to come. Moreover, our
own danger gives us good warning to take heed, After the lothing of the
word, comes contempt, and then Gods plague.
that vvhiles we thus neglect and loath the word, we feel not his heavy
wrath and plage upon us before we be vvare. For when we are once vveery of
the word, then follovveth the contempt of the same: which contempt the Lord
so punishes, that he takes his word clean away. Hereof the Papacy may be
an example for all posterity, in the which we see it is so come to pass.

I have declared the causes which moved me to take in hand the opening and
expounding of the Psalms, namely that we might consecrate this hour to our
redemer, and offer sacrifice unto him, and by setting forth the mercies of God,
we might, according to the grace given unto us, exercise our selves in the
three first commandments, when as yet all the world in blaspheming of God,
most horribly sins against these commandments. Great cause also has moved
me to exhort and earnestly to vvarne you, to bevvare that ye fall not to the
lothing or neglecting of the word. For if our doctrine be in any danger, it
comes of this evil. The Papists and Sectaries, albeit they anoy and trouble
us very much, yet by this occasion they drive us the more diligently to seek
for the knowledge of the Scriptures. But this enormitie, the lothing of the
word I mean, rises of our selves, and is so much the more perilous and
pernicious, for that we can not perceive the danger thereof. And then makes
Satan sure account of his victory, when we wax negligent and loath the
word.

CONCERNING THE TITLE WHEREFORE THESE ARE CALLED THE PSALMS OF DEGREES.
COncerning the title of these Psalms, first here rises a question, wherefore
they are called y^ Psalms of degrees or steares, or after some translations,
of the ascendings up. Wherein the opinions of the interpreters be diverse, all
which it shall not be here needful to rehearse. Some write that they were so
called because the Levites or Priests did sing them in the ascending up to the
temple, or on the steares of the temple (for in the history of the Kings it is
written that the^ went up by steares to the temple,) and those steps were
numbered to be fifteen, and that there were Psalms appointed to be song on
every steare. Whether this be true or not, it is no great matter, but to me it
seems not to be true. Albeit it can not be denied but the hebrew word
signifies steares or ascendinges upward. Therefore I abide in the simple and
plain sense as much as I may, and judge that they are so called because the
Levites or Priests were wont to sing them upon the steares or some high place:
Even as with us he that begins the Psalms or preaches, stands in a place
above the rest, that he may be the better seen and heard. For it seems not
that these Psalms were song of the multitude which were in the temple, or of
the rest of the quiere, but of certain which were appointed to sing them, or
at least wise to begin them on the steares to the rest, and so have their name:
like as some other of the Psalms have their name and title of the singer. But
how should a man know all their rites and ceremonies, especially after so long
a time, whereby they are now clean worn out of the memory of all men? Seeing
therefore among such a multitude of Psalms, when the law was yet in his full
force and power, some were wont to be song with one manner of ceremony and some
with an other, according to the time and place, as the use and custom then
was, let this suffice us to think that this title pertains to no point of
doctrine, but only to the ceremony of the singers, what manner of ceremony
soever it was.

There were 24. orders of Priests which served in the temple. It might be
therefore that sometimes the quiere song alone, and not the people: sometimes
but a part thereof, and sometimes they song by course, and afterward also the
people song and gave a consent, as it were, unto the other. But of these
things (as I said) we can have no certainty, and also they help little to the
understanding of the Psalms, and therefore I leave to speak any further
thereof, omitting also to show why they are fifteen in number, and why they
have specially this title. For albeit we busy our selves herein never so much,
yet the matter remains in doubt and our labor is but in vain.

Some expound these Psalms of steps or ascendings up, to signfie a
completing or finishing, because they were commonly song in the end when the
people should depart and the divine service was finished, and therefore were
called the Psalms of the ascendings up, for the finishing and closing up of
the divine service: And in deed, because they are brief and set forth very
notable doctrine, therefore they were most meet for the conclusion and closing
up of all.

The 120. Psalm. I called unto the Lord in my trouble, etc.
The argument of the Psalm.
This Psalm I judge to be an invocation or prayer for the help of God against
evil and pestilent tongues, or against such evils as pestilent tongues, that
is to say, heretics bring into the Church of God when they teach any thing
against true and sound doctrine. For that is a most perilous tentation when
doctrine is assailed and impugned. For the Devil has two ways whereby he
vexes the Church of God, heresies and the sword or persecution. For this cause
our Savior Christ also calls him a liar and a murderer. Therefore all the
Psalms almost consist in these two points, namely to call upon God for his
help and protection either against Satan the murderer, The Psalms pray in
two respctes against Satan.
or against Satan the liar: that is, either against pestilent doctrine, or else
under the cross and persecution, against cruel tyrannes. Of murder there be
diverse kinds, whereby Satan afflicts the Church of God. Some he exercises
with the fear of death, Satan how he is a murderer.
some with sclau^ders, some with injury and oppression of enemies, some with
hatred and malice, and some with other troubles and calamities, and these do
belong to persecution and cruelty. How he is a liar.
To lying do belong those things which he works by his ministers, specially
in ye church of God, through false doctrine and wicked opinions, whereby he
troubles men's consciences: also through inward tentations, when he vexes the
godly with the venomous darts of desperation, mistrust and blasphemy, and so
under the name of God, whom he may, murthereth and carries unto hell: for all
these lying comprehends.

Of these perilous tentations we see the church of God to have grievously
complained, not only in the Psalms, but also throughout the whole Scriptures,
that it has be^^^sore assailed with tyranny, error, heresy, etc. But this
Psalm (as I said) does properly pertayne to the former kind of tentation
concerning pestilent doctrine* albeit it touches the other also. For it can
not be, but that false and lying teachers must be also bloody and cruel, being
bent to defend their wicked doctrine and impiety by all means possible. The
Devil also begnileth the hearts of men with lying and falshoode, that he may
thereby stir up occasions of murder and bloodshed, as among many other
examples of the church, the murder of our first parents in paradise does well
declare: Our first parents deceived by lying.
for Satan with lying deceived them, that he might bring them to destruction.
And because the Church of God, through lying and selaunderous conga^es
suffers now every where the like tentation, the cruel hatred of the worl^,
and all calamities for the confession of pure and sincere doctrine, it is
therefore necessary for us to be fervent in prayer against y^ like pestilent
tongues in those our days, that they may have no power to hurt so much as they
would*

Verse.1. I called unto the Lord in my trouble and he heard me.

This verse contains not only an example, but also doctrine whereby we may
learn what we ought to do in these tentations of the lying tongue, namely
when we have to do with such perverse and obstinate heretics as will by no
means be reduced from their false doctrine and errors into the way of truth.
For by long experience and after many and great conflictes have we learned,
that (as Paul says) they are condemned even by their own judgment or the
testimony of their own conscience, and therefore after they have been once or
twice warned, they ought to be given over and avoided. The authors of wicked
doctrine are incorrigible.
And this have we found especially in the chief defenders and maintayners of
wicked doctrine, that for all that can be said or devised, they will never be
the better. It may be that some times they will give place to the truth: for
by the power of Gods word they may be convinced, but they will never be
converted. For if you stop their blasphemous mouths one way, yet will they not
so give over, but seek new occasions to fight against the truth. Arius.
This the histories, not only of the Arians and other heretics do declare,
but also the examples of these our days give witness unto the same. It is
impossible therefore for us utterly to stop the mouths of heretics. To
reprove them and to convince them, is all that we can do: Also to preserve
others over whom God has given us a charge, from their errors and pestilent
doctrine. For a minister of Gods word ought to be well armed and instructed,
that he may be able, not only to teach the simple, but also to reprove and
convince the perverse and obstinate. Herewith let us be content, that such as
are under out charge being thus forewarned, may stand firm and steadfast. But
that we shall be able to convert the perverse and obstinate, let us never hope.
How often did Christ stop the mouths of the Pharisees, not only with
manifest. Scriptures, but also with the finger of God and with miracles? and
yet remained they still as obstinate in their impiety and infidelity as they
were before. Arius was utterly convinced and his heresy confounded, and yet he
set forth his heresy again with greater audacity and success then he did
before. What shall we say of our Papists? Do we not see even the very same
thing in them also?

Such therefore as wilfully strive against the truth, and will not be
converted, after o^ce or twice warning, let us give over, and by the example of
David let us with prayer fight against them: Like as we must pray also for our
brethren, that with the deceitful show of truth they be not seduced. More
then this we can do nothing. For the devil, the father of all heresies, is
such a Proteus, Proteus was one that could change him self into diverse
forms, as now into a beast, now into a tree, and now into some other thing
else.
so slippery and full of sleights, that we shall never know how or which way
to lay hold on him. For if we stop one crest, he will find twenty more
whereby he will wind him self out again, and (as the wind enclosed by force)
will seek and search every way how he may get out. For against him chiefly we
fight when we have to do with heretics. Wherefore by disputing and contending
we shall not prevail against him. Notwithstanding we must do herein what we
may, that the ministers of Satan may be reproved and convinced for the behoof
of the Church.

But to the external word we must join prayer, whereby specially the wicked
spirit is repressed and bridled. This prayer did beat down Arius, Manicheus,
Sabellius. This confounded the Pharisees and unbelieving Sinagoge. This has
subdued the authors of sects in these our days: And they that will not hear
us exhorting and reproving them, shall feel the force of our prayer crying out
unto God for the sanctifying of his name, and ye coming of his kingdom. This
is the only way to obtain the victory: So that these pestilen^ tongues,
although they seem to prevail against us for a time, yet shall they at the
length be utterly rooted out.

We must therefore go wisely and circumspectly to work in this dangerous
case, and cast away all confidence of our own wisdom, yea although we have
the word of God never so much on our side. For we fight not against flesh and
blood, but against spiritual wickedness. If we had to do with flesh and blood
only, we would so defend and fortify our cause with matter and force of
argument sufficient, that nothing should be able to counterueile the same. But
now we have experience, that when they are with arguments and authority of
Scripture utterly confounded, yet do they still with toth and nail hold fast
their error, and labor by all means possible to defend the same. This sin
therefore I am wont to compare to the sin of Judas, who could not excuse his
deuelishe purpose that he went about in betraying of Christ, and yet he never
rested until he had brought the same to pass: for Satan moved him so to do.
Even so when these authors and maintayners of heretical doctrine are
manifestly convinced, yet Satan will not so give them over, nor suffer them to
rest.

Against heresies we must fight especially with prayer.
Wherefore it is necessary that herewithall we adioyne prayer, and with prayer
specially we must fight, according to the notable and most comfortable example
of David here in this place, which says: I called upon the Lord in my trouble,
etc. As if he should say, in this danger of wicked doctrine whilst I sought
the conversion of the false prophets, and to bring them to the knowledge of
their error, all that I did, was but in vain. For Satan who had possessed
their hearts, is so slipperie, that it is not possible to take any hold on
him. Moreover, if ye look to the number, they which set them selves against
me, were both more in number and more mighty in power. What should I miserable
man do in this distress? Even thus do I. After that I have diligently taught
and set forth the word of the Lord, both warning my brethren of the danger,
and the other also of their error, I ascend unto my God by prayer, and show
unto him mine affliction, being undoubtedly persuaded, that he will hear my
prayer.

Thus David sets forth unto us his own example, and shows what he
himself was wont to do. But, to talk of these things and to teach them
unto others, as it is an easy matter, so by experience we find and in our
selves we feel how hard it is to perform the same in deed. For first these
evils which the father of lies styrreth up by wicked doctrine, the godly can
not behold without great grief and sorrow. Besides this, they are without
all hope of remedy, for that the rage of pestilent doctrine is more horrible
then the force and violence of fire and water which suddenly consumes and
destroys all things. The heart therefore is on each side troubled and vexed,
both with fear of the calamity that shall follow, and also with the sense
and feeling of the present evils. Now, if there be joined with all these
things, an inward cross and affliction, Inward tribulation and affliction of
the soul.
so that the heart do also feel the displeasure of God, here it seems
impossible for a man to pray. And doubtless a man inexpert and unskillful in
these matters, and presuming of the word and his own knowledge, shall gain
nothing thereby but infinite troubles and vexation. For, to teach, to reprove
and to convince, is not sufficient, but God withal must give the increase,
that not only we with our brethren may be preserved in sound doctrine, but
also such as teach the contrary may be rooted out and brought to naught. And
this by prayer only is obtained. But how hard a thing this is, we have
already declared. To read the word, to hear the word, and to teach the word,
are in deed excellent and heavenly works, which require the help and aid of
the holy Ghost: The use and practice of faith.
but the inward practice of faith, so to convert unto the Lord, so to pray, so
to presume of Gods favor that thy prayer shall please him, and that he will
hear the same, that is a hard matter in deed. For fearful consciences many
times feel not this certainty and assurance in them selves, but are brought to
such doubting and mistrust, that they can conceive no hope of help or comfort,
especially such as are touched with the remorse of conscience, gilt of sin,
and the feeling of their own unworthiness. For in this case it oftentimes
comes to pass, that the mind begins first to doubt whether prayer will
any thing avail or not. They that are brought to this point can not pray,
especially if they measure the same after the sense and feeling of their own
unworthiness. But here thou must not regard what thou art, but rather look to
the promise of God, the necessity of prayer, the danger that follows the
neglecting thereof, and the thing it self for the which thou ought to pray.
Setting these things before thine eyes, albeit thine own conscience and
unworthiness call thee from prayer, yet shall thou be constrained by prayer to
fly to God for help and succor. For if a man, (for examples sake) have
committed theft, murder or some other notorious crime, and in flying away
falls into the water and so into danger of drowning, shall he not pray
because his conscience accuses him that he has done wickedly? Nay, how much
the more great and grievous the sin is, and the necessity of prayer more
urgent, so much the more earnestly ought the mind to be stirred up and more
ready to prayer.

In like manner must we do also in this tentation and danger of wicked
doctrine. And whatsoever we be, we must rather consider ye great enormities
that Satan raises up by lying ministers, then whether we be worthy to be
heard or no. How the minds of men must be stirred up to prayer.
To this does the promise also allure us. For we have a promise in Christ that
we shall be heard: yea and Christ him self also has prescribed unto us the
very words, syllables and letters which we should use in prayer. We have also a
commandment to pray: so that it is not in our choice to pray or not to pray,
but it is a work commanded of God. Now, when we remember these things, and
then consider on the one side how necessary a thing it is for us to pray, and
on the other side how great the danger is if we do not pray, then are our
minds quickened and the tentation or conscience of our own unworthiness is,
Tribulation stirs men up to prayer.
as it were swallowed up. Like as it happens also in sudden dangers: as when a
man in his journey falls into the hands of thieves or is in great peril of
drowning, here, before he can once think of his own unworthiness, he bursteth
out into these words, or this cogitation: O God, be merciful unto me. And
here the saying of the Phisicians is found most true, that sharp sawces
provoke the appetite. For there is no better scholemaster to teach us to pray,
then necessity. But whiles we walk in security and are not touched with any
feeling of present dangers, no marvel is it if our prayer be either no prayer
at all, or else in deed very faint and cold. For mine own part I can say by
experience, Luther writes that which he has proved by experience.
that I never pray more heartily then in the time of trouble and affliction. And
this is that sharp sauce which stirred up also in David a hunger, as it were,
and an appetite to pray, as he says: I called unto the Lord in my trouble, etc.

We may learn therefore out of this verse that David used this remedy against
lying tongues, that first by doctrine he stirred up him self and others, The
necessity of prayer set forth unto us in the Lords prayer.
and then he prayed. In like manner ought we to do eue^ in respect of ye cause
or necessity, which the Lords prayer also sets forth unto us. For in yt the
name of ye Lord is polluted, men's consciences perverted, and the profession of
the Gospel hindered, we have in deed great cause to say: hallowed be thy name,
that these abominations and blasphemies may have an end: Thy kingdom come,
which by the kingdom of Satan is in a manner oppressed. He that prays after
this sort, shall fill heaven with his sighs and groans: whereas if we live at
ease and feel no trouble, our prayer is so cold that scarcely our mouths are
filled therewith.

This cause and necessity of prayer David expresses when he says: I called
unto the Lord in my trouble, etc. For there must be some great necessity to
constrayne us to pray, as our own salvation, the salvation of our brethren,
death eternal, our sins, our troubles and afflictions, the glory of God, the
kingdom of God, etc. all which are set forth in the Lords prayer, and if we
consider them as we should do, they will constrayne us to pour out true and
hearty prayer unto God with sighs and groans. Let us consider well these
things, and with our prayer let us burst, through the clouds which hide from
us the presence of our most gracious God, Prayer is a service of God.
and think that prayer is an acceptable sacrifice to God, and such a service
as he him self requires of us. Some seek a mean help and trust to other
men's prayers: which in deed are not to be neglected, for the prayer of many
has a more force and power. But thou also must pray as a member of the Church,
which with one voice says: Our Father, etc. For he will not be the father of
this or that man only, but he will be also thy father.

Here is expressly added: How poor afflicted consciences are to be comforted
which dare not call unto ye Lord.
unto the Lord, contrary to that opinion of which I was once my self, and many
poor souls besides in popery at this day are. For thus I thought: I am a
sinner, and therefore I dare not pray unto God being angry with me for my
sins. I will therefore seek such mediators as are in the favor of God, as
Marie, Peter, Paul, etc. For timorous consciences even at the hearing of the
name of God are afraid. And in deed great is the Majesty of God: but yet
thou may not think it so great, that thereby thou should be driven from
prayer. For if thou consider his Majesty, why do thou not consider it in
this respect, that he has commanded thee to pray? The authority of the
commander ought so to be regarded, that it should bind thee to obey. Mark
well this commandment of God, and commend thy self to his grace, and say:
Lord, it is not in my choice to pray or not to pray (as in monkery we did
maintain): Thou have commanded me to pray. I do acknowledge therefore that I
am bound to obey thee. If I be unworthy, yet is thy commandment and thy will
worthy to be obeyed: thy promise is worthy to be believed and trusted. Therefore
I pray not in the worthiness of my self, either else of Marie, Peter, Paul,
etc. but in the worthiness of Jesus Christ, and of him who has commanded and
charged me to pray.

Of this manner of prayer the whole papacy is ignorant. The prayers of ye
Papists.
And by mine own experience this I dare affirm, that as in all the time of my
life that I led in monkerie I never once said the Lords prayer truly: so the
Papists at this day do not utter one syllable thereof in faith. Yet
peradventure the Lord heard the unspeakable gron^ngs of my heart, which I
think many other also had, although they were ignorant thereof. But where
these sighs are not, no part of ou^ prayer is either uttered or understand as
it should be, and as by the grace of God we now both pray and teach others
to pray. There is a saying of a certain Heremi^^, (which the Mon^es are wont
to have commonly in their mouths) that there is no such labor as to pray.
Nothing more hard then to pray.
Which may be truly said of that prescript form and manner of prayer without
fayt^, which was enjoined to the popish Priests: but much more truly is it
verif^ed of that prayer which is made in faith* as when the heart striuet^
against Satan, the terror of conscience and desperation, and with boldness
lays hold on the mercies of God. Albeit, not only the promise of God made
unto us when we pray, joined with the commandment: but also the necessity
that constrains us thereto, makes this difficulty and labor more easy in
the exercise of prayer when it proceeds of faith. For true prayer can not be
without faith. Yea these two, the promise I mean, and tribulation do make our
prayer hearty and fervent. In these exercise your selves and use prayer in your
chamber secretly and with your selves alone, as Christ commands. And if
Satan go about to hinder this prayer (as he is wont) then close your eyes and
say: Behold Lord, here is trouble and anguishe: here am I in danger: such a
brother is grievously afflicted: thus or thus he is vexed of Satan. The time
suffers me not now once to think whether I be worthy to be heard. Help
now in time O Lord, according to thy word, etc. Thus, if we, considering the
danger on the one side, and also the promise on the other, do fly unto God
for succor in our distress, we shall vanquish Satan and get the victory.
After this manner David by his own example stirs us up to prayer, not
only in the danger of deuelishe doctrine, but also in all other troubles. And
if thou do so presume of God, that thou become even impudent and shameless,
it shall please God highly, according to that which follows: and he heard me.
As if he should say: The Lord declares that our prayer pleases him which we
make with a trust and confidence in his promise and mercy that he hears our
prayer.

And here see that thou diligently learn this name and title which David here
gives unto him, God the hearer of prayers
that he is auditor precum, the hearer of prayers, and beware when thou
prayest, that by doubting or incredulity thou take not from him this name, as
many times we do. Against this doubting David goes about to confirm and
strengthen us with his own example, and besides the promises of God, which we
have, he sets before us his own experience, to stir us up to call upon
God in faith, whereby we may assure our consciences, that God will hear us in
that he is the hearer of the sighs and groans of all those that pray unto him
in faith. And if he hear not speedely, yet he will hear in his good time. If
he ^eare thee not in such sort as thou would and do desire, he will
hear thee in much better wise. So says Bernarde. And I do not remember that
ever I read in any of the fathers of the latter age a more godly saying. The
saying of Bernard.
Brethren, says he, as concerning your prayer, have no doubt, but assure your
selves that as soon as the word passes out of your mouth, your prayer is
written and regestr^^ in heaven in the presence and sight of God: and either it
shall be done that ye have asked, or else it is expedient not to be done. What
can be more Christianly spoken? what greater consolation can there be then that
God, as a most gracious, rich and bountiful Prince, should give no other
answer to all the supplications and prayers made unto him* but fiat, that is
to say, be it done that ye have desired.

But ye will say: We see it comes oftentimes otherwise to pass. God gives
not always that we pray for.
For notwithstanding the prayers that be made for women with child and in
^rauell, yet many dye in their travel. Did not Jacob (think ye) pray for his
wife Rachel in that extremity? David also in like manner prayed with great
feruencie of spirit for his son begotten of Bersaba, but it was in vain.
Many such examples we see also daily amongst the Sainets of God. I answer,
that howsoever it be, The prayer of young children.
we must undoubtedly believe that God is the hearer of prayers. This title we
may never take from him. And in this faith young children do effectually pray:
The godly youth in that reformed church being brought up in ye n^rture of ye
lord and continual catechizing, may shame al our reformation, where the youth
is so godles for lack thereof.
which do believe that God hears them and gives them all things. This faith
children have with full assurance, and without any doubting, and therefore
their prayer I both greatly commend, and also do oftentimes set the same before
me as an example to follow. For albeit that children do learn the form of
prayer and words of us, yet the efficacy and power, thereof we may well learn of
them, because of our perverse and corrupt nature, and also our evil education.
First therefore we must believe and not doubt yt our prayer is heard. Secondly
this hearing must be thus defined, not that God gives always that which we pray
for, but that which is profitable for us. For God, in that he is good, can give
nothing but that which is good. But we many times doctraue that thing which is
not good in deed, but seems so unto us. How God hears our prayers.
In such cases God even then hears our prayer, when he grants not that
which we desire. In that prayer therefore which the Lord has taught us, first
we pray for the sanctifying of his name, for the coming of his kingdom, and
that his will may be done, before we pray for the things which do pertayne to
the use and commodity of this life: so that in such things we desire that the
Lord would do, not that seems good unto us, but that which is good in deed.
The difference therefore in asking those things which we pray for, is here
rightly set forth: So that in those things which pertain to the glory of God
and our salvation, we must believe our prayers to be heard without condition.
But in those things which pertayne to this life, albeit we must hope that the
Lord will grant our petitions, yet must we pray with condition, resigning our
wills to the Lords will, to do therein as seems good unto him and profitable
for us. For he knows what is good for us, but we do not, as also S. Paul
says. Thus must we restru^ this title to our most faithful and gracious God,
that he is audito^ precum, a hearer of prayers, as David here speaks of him.

Verse. 2. Deliver my soul, o Lord, from lying lips and from a deceitful
tongue.

This verse shows the matter or argument whereof David entreats in this
psalm. He prays for the prosperous success of the holy word of God and pure
doctrine, against false and heretical tongues. I said in the beginning, that
this Psalm must not only be taken as an example for us to follow, or a
doctrine to teach us what David did in this dangerous case, or what we ought
to do in the like: but also is set forth to comfort and confirm us against
this great offense and stumbling block, that wheresoever the Gospel begins
to shine, there Satan stirs up thieves and robbers, enemies of true doctrine
to hinder the course thereof: and therefore when we see that the Anabaptists
and other Sectaries spring up at the preaching of the Gospel, we should not
think it strange, but rather it should be to us a means to stir us up,
thereby the more diligently to watch and shake of all security, forasmuch as
we see that he which tempts us sleeps not, and to fight against spiritual
wickedness, against the which the children of God have been always at
continual war. Abel was persecuted of Cain, Isaac of Ismael, Jacob of Esau.
Of this enmity Satan is the author, which always persecuteth God and his
truth, not only with slaughter, but also with lying and falshoode. To know
these things it is a singular consolation in such dangerous cases, that we be
not discouraged or dismayed, but may be strengthened and confirmed thereby: and
moreover it keeps us from security, which lying tongues and deceitful
lips will not lightly suffer a man to fall into. We must be ready therefore,
not only with the word of God, but also and especially with prayer, to fight
against false doctrine and deceitful tongues, considering, as David here says,
that the Lord is our deliverer, who only in this danger can deliver us and
destroy our adversaries. For the continual exercise of the word and prayer
must go together.

Deliver my soul: that is, deliver me. It is a phrase and kind of speech
proper to the Hebrews.

Verse. 3. What does thy deceitful tongue bring unto thee, or what does it
avail thee?

Verse. 4. It is as the sharp arrow of a mighty man and as the coals of
Juniper.

In demanding this question he goes about to stir up him self, and to
find occasion to accuse the deceitful tongue: as he does in deed most lively
set forth by two notable similitudes what a pestilent thing wicked doctrine
is, Wicked doctrine.
and what the godly and such as are spiritual do judge thereof. First he
compares it to an arrowe that is not blunt, but sharp: and moreover which is
cast, not of him that is weak and feeble, but that is strong and mighty: so
that there is danger on both sides, as well of the arrowe that is sharp and
able to pearce, as also of him which with great violence hurleth the same. The
Devil therefore the father of all heresies is here plainly set forth unto us
as an old exercised soldier, A lively picture of the Devil.
strong and mighty: who from the beginning has made war against the Church
of God, and albeit he has been often overcome, yet will he never give over,
but returns more fearce and subtle then before, and the better armed, the
more holy and learned they be against whom he fights, so much the more
strongly and fearcely he sets upon them. Therefore the holy Ghost here
speaks according to the sense of man, that is, according to the cogitations
which the godly have in this dangerous case, and he calls a pestilent
teacher an arrowe or dart in the hand of the strong and mighty. For if ye
behold the multitude of the adversaries, their stoutnes, proud bragges,
obstinacy, and fearcenes, with the subtle and deceitful sleights whereby they
avoid or wickedly pervert all things that make against them, be they never so
godly spoken, it seems no otherwise but that they will utterly oppress and
destroy the Church, which appears to be in comparison of them, but a small
number, and that also very weak and feeble. It seems therefore that Satan,
as a dart which no armor is able to resist, must needs prevail and have the
victory. But if you look to the end, you shall see the contrary. As the Church
when she compares the multitude of her enemies with her poor little flock,
through her infirmity is troubled and fears destruction: even so when Satan
sees his practices at the first to proceed as he would, he is puffed up and
swells at the success thereof. For wicked doctrine crepeth like a canker, and
mightily increases every hour: so that if a teacher of erroneous and
heretical doctrine should be suffered in a reformed congregation, he would
soon overthrow altogether: so violently perceth this dart. And why? because it
is hurled of Satan: and the common people are, The common people are the
framehowse or workehowse of the devil. Deuteronomy. 29.
as it were the frame house of Satan, because they loath and despise that which
is daily taught them.

Now, because the heretics do not use the accustomed and ordinary manner of
teaching, but feed the people with new and strange things, therefore (as
Moises says) the drunken and the thirsty are met together, and these arrows
perse through with greater violence.

Moreover it is a figure used in the Scriptures to call the word of God arrows
or darts, as it appears Psalm. 45. Thy arrows are very sharp, etc. And in
our language by a prouerbial speech, when a man uses the words, the counsel,
and judgment of others, and not his own, we say they be arrows out of an
other man's quiver. But properly this name does agree to false doctrine, which
(as I said) perceth swiftly.

The other similitude likewise has a notable signification of power and
swiftnes By coals he means here a hot burning fire and consuming flame: Coals.
As also he does in the 17. Psalm. He uses the similitude of Juniper, Juniper.
because that tree, besides the thicknes of the leaves, has a great fatnes
withal, and therefore is lightly set on fire and burns vehemently. The sense
and meaning hereof is, that heresy and false doctrine which is full of strong
delusion, has a power to pervert and seduce men with no less celerity and
swiftnes, then fire has to burn being kindled in a forest of Juniper.
Likewise the Scripture in another place speaks of a great fire, like to the
flame of thorns under a pot, meaning such a fire as is suddenly kindled and
swiftly increases.

This description therefore is, as it were a complaynt, that the poisoned
tongues of heretics do so suddenly prevail, and with such success work
mischief in the Church of God: as it came to pass after the preaching of S.
Paul. For when he, with exceeding travels had happily planted many Churches,
as soon as he had once turned his back, all Asia was perverted and turned from
the Gospel. The fire of the heretics is more swift then the fire of the holy
Ghost.
This is the calamity of all ages, that whatsoever godly preachers have
builded with great trauells, the teachers of wicked doctrine do suddenly
overthrow. Let us therefore be thankful unto God for that little poor
remnant, which as yet by his special grace remains in the sound doctrine of
the Gospel: and moreover for this his gift, that we are able to judge such
doctrines to be the darts of Satan although they be never so glorious and
agree never so much with the wisdom and righteousness of the flesh: and
further, that they are like to a vehement fire, even such as is the flame of
Juniper which we must labor to quench with all our power. These be the
spiritual battles which the world knows not, far passing all carnal
conflictes: for in those conflicts like are matched with like, that is to say,
men with men, but in these we fight not only against the greater number,
mightily armed with malice and power, but also against Satan him self, and
against spiritual wickedness. Therefore in this warfare we have need of the
help of the Lord and of the Angel Michael, as it is the Apocalypse. And for
this cause the prayers and sighs of the godly in such a dangerous case are
necessary, saying on this wise: O Lord, behold, we will gladly teach and set
forth thy word, but what are we except thou help us? Stand for us therefore
against the enemies of thy truth, and defend thine own cause. This hope we
have in such great success of wicked doctrine, that that which is not of thy
planting shall not endure, and that which suddenly springs up, shall
suddenly be cut down. There has been hitherto no heresy which has not been
confounded, and the word of God has had always the victory. Cain, Ismael,
Arius, Manichee and such other have perished for resisting the Gospel. Luther
prophecieth.
The Papacy also is now falling, but the word of the Lord abides for ever,
according to that sentence of the Psalm: They have fought against me eue^ from
my youth, but they could never prevail.

But here perhaps you will ask what were thief heresies and deceitful tongues
in the time of David, against the which he prays in this place. In his
kingdom there was Achitophel, Seme^, and many others, which spoke cursedly of
him, and with crafty counsel and conspiracy stirred up the hearts of his
subjects against him.

But it appears that David speaks here of some great danger. What is that
you will say? Albeit the holy histories do sufficiently declare what trouble
the true Prophets of God always had with false and lying teachers, as the
story of Jeremy does declare, yet David him self expresses in diverse places
of the psalms, what was ye cause of these his conflicts, as in the fifty
psalm it does appear, in the which he speaks of the merit and deserving
which the unbelieving Jews did trust unto because of their sacrifices. For as
it is now, so has it been in all ages, that many have thought them selves
righteous through their works. And this opinion did maruelously increase and
multiply the Jewish sacrifices: for they thought that by their sacrifices their
sins were forgeuen though their hearts were vnpure and without faith: Even
like to our adversaries the Papists, which do therefore so highly extol and
so mightily maintain and defend their sacrifice in the Mass, because, (as
they say) of it self by the work wrought it is available for the remission of
sins. Against this heresy David fought, and taught that to offer up a
bullock it was no great service unto God, seeing he was both the creator and
giver of the same, and being the Lord of al, has need of nothing, much less
of a bullock, and therefore they that will offer a right sacrifice in deed,
must acknowledge their sins, and also the great goodness of the Lord,
promising unto them a blessing by the blessed seed, and give him thanks for
the same: invoke, praise and magnify his name, etc. Thus David confuteth
this heresy in that place.

But there were many other more like unto this. For the Jews were not only
fallen to the worshipping of the gods of the Gentiles (as it is to be seen in
Jeremy) but forsaking the temple, they resorted to those places wherein their
forefathers were wont to offer sacrifice, whereas the Lord had appointed the
Tabernacle in Jerusalem for a place of sacrifice and prayer. Some, of their
own brain, did choose unto them selves groves and hills wherein they offered
their sacrifice. Because these things were contrary to the will and word of
God, and done of the Idolaters with great greediness, it was necessary that
the people should be warned and taught of the Prophets of God, not to choose
to them selves any other way of serving and worshipping God, or to seek any
other righteousness then that which should come by the blood of the son of
God: whom S. Paul calls the Lamb, because he should be the sacrifice that
should take away the sins of the world. Thus we see that there has always
been for like matter like conflicts between the true Church and the false, and
also like dangers have thereuppon ensued. Wherefore we must use like remedies
also: that is, first by sound doctrine to defend the glory of Christ, and
exhort men to the study and love of the world: Secondly by prayer to fight
against deceitful tongues and lying lips. Now the Prouphet after his prayer
adds a complaint.

Verse. 5. VVoe is me that I remain in Mesech, and dwell in the tents of Kedar.

Hitherto the Prophet has declared the dangers both of him self and of the
church, with prayer to be delivered from the same. Now he adds hereunto a
complaint, for that the church of God being in the mids of her enemies, is
continually vexed on every side, and true doctrine assailed with power and
subteltie. As though he should say: Being in this distress and danger, this
is all that I am able to do: faithfully to teach, fervently to pray and
paci^ntly to suffer. To this end I teach that the word may be publicly
mainteyned and kept: I pray, that the word may prevail and have the victory:
and till it shall overcome, I must patiently abide what trouble or affliction
soever shall happen. He that will not thus do, is but a shrinker and his fall
will be fearful.

In like manner have we been troubled in these our days with Epicures,
Libertines, Anabaptists, etc. We have sustained the cruel oppression of the
word by the power and subtelty of the Papists that cursed seed of Cain, and
amongst us there is also no small number which fearing neither God nor devil,
do not only contemn ye ministry, but would wish it to be utterly abolished.
These are heavy crosses to the godly, when they must be compelled both to see
them and suffer them, and yet can find no remedy for the same. This forces
us to say with David: VVoe is me that I remain in Mesech, etc.

By Mesech and Kedar he means two sorts of people inhabiting near unto the
Jews: of which the first came of Iapheth as Moises teaches, and the second
of Ismael. Both of them were barbarous, cruel and without all humanity,
dwelling in tents. By these he means such as were of his own nation, being
no less cruel and spiteful against Gods people then these were: like as in
an other place the corrupt and degenerate Jews he calls Gentiles. And that
he might the more sharply reprehend Gods enemies and his, of purpose he names
those people which ye Jews knew to be most cruel and barbarous, meaning that
if he dwelt in Mesech and Kedar, he could not be amongst more cruel enemies. As
if he should say: I am compelled to comfort my self with hope and patience, and
would be glad yt the churches were in peace and quietness, and ye pastors and
rulers thereof in a godly unity, but this will not be. Wherefore I will commit the
whole cause of God by prayer, and teach the word faithfully. In the mean
season we must bear these offenses, that by the good we may overcome the
evil. Thus we se then that ye office of teaching is a miserable kind of life:
For besides other calamities which the preachers and teachers of Gods word must
suffer at ye hands of the unfaithful, this also must needs be unto them a great
cross, to see the word of God and true doctrine miserably corrupted, and ye
Church disquieted by false brethren. But for the Lords cause these things we
suffer, and we say with David. VVoe is me that I remain in Mesech, and dwell
in the tents of Kedar, barbarous and cruel people.

Verse. 6. My soul has too long dwelt with him that hates peace.

Here he shows plainly whom he means by Me^ech and Kedar: Kedar and Mesech
signify the enemies of the church.
to wit, those wicked Israelites, which forsaking the ways of their godly
fathers, became spiteful and cruel against the faithful: amongst whom he was
compelled to dwell a long season and to suffer great injuries and cruelty at
their hands. And this is the subteltie of the malignant spirit, that whom he
can not over come by the multitude and greeuousnes of tentations, those he
goes about to weery with tediousnes and long continuance thereof. Wherefore many
being unskilful of this spiritual warfare, fight valiantly at the beginning,
but in the end they faint and cowardly give over. This danger David did
foresee and complained thereof. Long have I dwelt (says he) amongst those that
hate peace, that is, which continually trouble and disquiete the church of God,
and never will be at peace with it, thinking by importunity and long
continuance at the length to get the victory. So Job with one kind of calamity
was not discouraged, but when one messenger followed an other, and one
calamity likewise came upon an other, then his mind by little and little began
to be troubled. And this is the malignity and malice of Satan. Wherefore let us
cast away all hope of peace so long as we live here, and let us assure our
selves, that if this day we overcome one kind of tentation, to morrow Satan
will set upon us again with an other.

And here behold the craft and subtelty of the world. The holy Ghost calls
them heretics which are haters of peace and concord, and this name they
spitefully apply unto us. Thou (say they) art he that troublest Israel. Thus
they which trouble the Church in deed, accuse the true Church and call them
selves the lovers of peace and concord. This must we also suffer, and so
content our selves with the testimony of a good conscience which shall clear
us before God, that we seek the peace of the church, whereunto they are utter
enemies, as follows.

Verse. 7. I seek peace, and when I speak thereof, they are bent to war.

This is the testimony of my conscience that I love pear and seek after it.
Whereof then comes all this trouble? all this deadly war? of me, I grant,
but not by my default. For if I would suffer these disturbers and haters of all
godly peace and concord, to say and to do what they list, then would they not
so rage, then would they not seek my hurt as they do, then would they live
in peace. But how can we hide those things that we have seen, that we have
heard, and that we are commanded to speak and declare, not in our chambers,
but on the house tops? For Christ says: God and preach the Gospel to all
creatures. And again: No man hides a light under a bushel. This is the cause
that the word is in our mouth as a burning cole. which can not be kept in, but
compels us to open our mouths. Hereof then come all these troubles, because
they take away the commandment of God, and yet would have us to hold our
peace. And here we see it come to pass that Christ says in the Gospel: Luke.
11.
when a strong man keeps the house all things are in peace, but when a
stronger then he comes, then troubles arise.

This is then our consolation, that what troubles soever do arise, we rest
upon the testimony of our own conscience that we do nothing else but speak
and declare that we are commanded. It is not our life therefore which they
accuse, but our doctrine abides the blame: which is not ours but Christ's.
Wherefore let us not only contemn all peace and concord, but let heaven and
earth also perish, rather then the doctrine of Christ or ye glory of his
kingdom should be diminished or blemished in any point. The danger whereof
they see not or do little regard, which make so great a matter of the loss of
that peace and tranquillity, which has been and yet is seen in the kingdom of
Antichrist. Notwith standing let us with all our power amplify and set forth
the glory of our God and the fruits that come of the true preaching of the
gospel, and let us contemn all such sclaunders, which these Epicures do most
maliciously and spitefully heap upon us, commending nothing else but that peace
and tranquillity wherewith the devil has rocked them a sleep in all damnable
security: whereby we see what horrible impiety reigns in the papacy. There
is not one word purely taught concerning sin, grace, the merit of Christ,
faith, the exercises of works, concerning magistrates, and other degrees and
kinds of life. All things are miserably corrupted with pestilent gloses and
expositions. Moreover, what profanation and selling of Masses was there? what
deceit and robbery by pardons, purgatory, with such other abominations devised
only for vauntage and gain? When I look into the kingdom of the Pope as it
was before we preached the Gospel, it seems to me that of very purpose men
were cast unto Satan and eternal damnation by false teachers and ministers of
iniquity.

Now consider whether it were not better with trouble to keep and enjoy the
word of God, then with loss of the word, to live in peace and tranquillity,
though it were never so heavenly a peace. As for me I would not desire to live
in paradise without ye word: and with the word to live in hell it is an easy
matter, like as in this world we live as it were in hell, and comfort our
selves only with hope which the word of God shows unto us, and with this hope
we overcome all kinds of troubles and crosses. Let us therefore lay sure hold
on this consolation which the holy Ghost here sets forth unto us: whereof
also all they have great need, that teach the word of truth, namely that they
are not the cause of offense, trouble and sedition. There must needs be
offenses: there must needs be Lucians, Epicures, contemners and scorners of
religion, troublers of the peace and quietness of the Church, but blessed are
they which are not ye cause of these evils, but are preachers of peace, and
seek by all godly means, peace and christian unity. In the number of whom,
by Gods special grace we are at this day, how soever the world thinks of
us, and we will pray unto God that for Christ's sake, he will so keep us even
to the uttermost breath.

Thus are the enemies of God and his word painted out by David in this Psalm,
and also the true state of the Church, teaching us thereby that we should arm
our selves against these dangers, and give thanks unto God for this great
consolation, that whatsoever tumultes and troubles arise in the Church, he does
not impute the same unto them that teach the word, but unto the word it self,
which is not ours but Christ's, wherewith we may comfort our selves whatsoever
follows of the true preaching of the Gospel. Let them stop their mouths
and keep silence that so greatly commend peace: but we will speak and show
forth the wondrous works of the Lord with boldness, and will not be
disobedient in our vocation. If evil tongues be walking and troubles arise, we
will with David fight against them by prayer, commending to God the cause of
his poor Church, wherein he has promised to keep and maintain his word: who
also shall burn and consume all wicked ^ongnes with ye same fire of his heavy
indignation, wherewith they think the church of God shall be destroyed.

The 121. Psalm. I will lift mine eyes unto the mountains, etc.
The argument of the Psalm.
The Psalm going before was a prayer for the preservation and continuance of
the word of God and found doctrine, against pestiferous tongues and wicked
opinions: For that is the chiefest assault that Satan makes against the church
of God. Now this Psalm I take to be as an exhortation to the faithful, This
Psalm contains the doctrine of faith.
for it contains the doctrine of faith. Which faith is a knowledge of things
invisible and to be looked for, and rests in the promise and word of God. But
because Gods word excedeth the capacity of man, and the things which it
promises seem either absurd and unlikely, or impossible or else incredible
and against al reason, therefore they which have once begun to believe, have need
of continual exhortations, to stir them up against ye te^tations of the
flesh, which strive against faith and the word of God, least the spirit being
pressed down with the heavy burden of the flesh, should be utterly unable to
think of spiritual and heavenly things. For our life is full of troubles,
tossed with continual tempests, as they which are sailing on the sea, and we
are carried away every moment with the blasts of tentations, whiles our minds
are assailed either with prosperity or adversity, with wealth or poverty, with
glory or ignominy, with joy or sorrow. And hereof yet do fellow much more
grievous and dangerous tentations: that is to say, security and desperation.
Therefore when these storms blow, it is necessary that we should be stirred
up with continual exhortations out of the word of God, whereby we may learn
to resist the same. And thus do I understand this Psalm, that it is a
doctrine whereby we are admonished and taught that we should have our faith
exercised and stirred up with continual exhortations so long as we live, least
we being overcome with the cares of this world, should forget and neglect the
rich blessings and everlasting treasures of the life to come.

Verse. 1. I will lift mine eyes unto the mountains from whence my help
comes.

These words do include a comparison between the mountains which bring help
and succor, and the mountains that bring desolation and destruction: as every
doctrine of faith and every promise imports also the contrary, if you have
respect to the flesh. The godly have a promise of Christ that he will be their
help and succor: but if we look to the outward appearance, Christ himself
hanging upon the cross, seems to be utterly forsaken. In like manner there
is a comparing together of contraries to be understand throughout this whole
Psalm: A co^paring of contraries
As though the Prophet should say: when tentations and trialls of faith are at
hand, one runs to this place and an other to that, seeking for help and
succor diverse ways: As amongst my people some run to Bethel, some to
Gilgal, some to Bethauen, as mountains from whence they look for help and
succor. Even as in popery they run to every stock and block, as to their
only patrones and helpers, with kneeling, knocking, creping, kissing and
licking. For the reliefs and comforts are infinite which the heart believes and
seeks after when it is in trouble and distress. And it is a wonderful thing
to see how ready it is to receive help and comfort* any way else* saving
only of God. The commendation of faith.
This is then the praise and commendation of faith, that it looks only
toward the healthful and comfortable mountain which is in Jerusalem, and
refuses the succor of all other mountains. Thus the prophet casts his eyes
aside (as it were) upon the wicked, who forsaking the help of the Lords
mercy and goodness which was then in Jerusalem, sought relief and succor in
other mountains.

In like manner in the kingdom of the Romish Antichrist there are infinite feets
and swarms of Monks and other supersticious votaries, some holding of
Augustine, some of Benedict, some of Francisce, etc. which by their vows and
monastical life think to obtain the kingdom of heaven, hoping also by these
comforts to overcome the terror of Gods wrath and heal the wounds of
conscience. And this is always the inclination of man's nature to follow his
own ways and to forsake the ways of the Lord. Therefore David says: Some
forsake the temple and abhor the mount Syon, but I abide in the simple way of
faith and true religion, which is the healthful hill that the Lord him self
has appointed. In that he calls it the healthful hill or the hill from
whence help and succor comes, he rejects and condemns all other hills
which have a show of help and succor. Such I mean as is visibly wrought in
the service and honor done to the idols, but true help they give none. So the
Jews said that Baall showed more present help in the temple then God. So they
cry in Jeremy: We will do sacrifice to the Queen of heaven: but thy
commandment we will not do: for since we left to do sacrifice to the Queen
of heaven, the sword and famine has consumed us: And thus forsaking the
temple and the true worship of God, they ran headlong to all impiety.

But you will say: Why would God that Idolatry should have such success? Even
to try our faith, and whether we do truly believe and worship one God,
according to that commandment: Thou shall have none other Godds, etc. True it
is in deed that Idolatry has great success: Idolatry prospers and
flourishes for a time.
yet is it but for a time. So said King Achas: The gods of the Kings of the
Syrians do help them: therefore will I also seek their favor, and they
shall help me. But what says the Scripture? The gods of Syria were the
destruction both of them and of all Israel. And this is the end of all such
false trust.

So does Mammon likewise help his worshippers: For he is a great god, and
brings to them liberty, joy and comfort. He lifts them up to wealth and
dignity: he makes them to swell with pride and glory. Humane helps and
comforts.
But how long? For the time of this frail and brickle life: but in death he
does not only forsake them, but drives them down to the deep pit of hell.
Therefore whatsoever worldly and visible comfortes and delights the heart of
man can here desire or enjoy, he finds them uncertain and shortly must
forsake them, and yet withal they bring unspeakable torments and afflictions
of mind, and lead men into such blindness that they have no regard of God at
all: who does not delight his true worshippers with vain pleasures of this
world which endure but a moment, but replenisheth them with everlasting joys.
For thus he says: I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and
your joy no man shall take from you. Let us learn therefore to cleave fast to
the Lord our God, and those invisible comforts: and if trouble come (as we can
not look to be without a cross) if we seem to be desolate and distitute of
all comfort, yet God has a time when he will show him self to have a care of
us, and we shall find that the afflictions of this life are not to be compared
to the glory which shall be reueiled on us, as S. Paul comfort us.

This is then the sense and meaning of this verse, that faith is a knowledge of
things invisible, and yet to be looked for, least we should think it to be
but a mere speculation, as some do make it. There are things to be looked
for of the which we have experience in this life, that is to say, a good
conscience, a joyful heart, an invincible faith, which is able to stand
against all storms of tentations, against poverty, envy, reproach and
sclaunder of the world, against errors and false doctrine, and even against
death it self. Thus we must learn to know the nature of faith, namely that it
is a will or knowledge or an expectation resting upon the word of God, which
word shows and sets forth unto us invisible helps, and yet to be looked
for as certain and infallible: and although we think it long before they
come, yet will they come, when it shall be most to our joy and comfort. And
this is it that these words of the Prophet do here express: I lift up mine
eyes to the hills from whence my help comes. Here he shows him self to be
destitute of help and succor, and yet in sure hope and expectation thereof,
he looks up unto those hills and hops for invisible comfort.

In like manner must we do also. I am in distress or affliction of body or
mind: I am in necessity and can see no means how to live, how to maintain my
family, how to escape this danger or that. Here is the heart oftentimes
oppressed with sorrow, and miserably vexed, as though there were no succor, no
comfort, nor remedy to be found. But here must we be certainly persuaded that
there is help and succor prepared for us, and the time thereof also appointed
of God, although we know not when it shall be. But by this we may learn what a
hard matter it is to believe when the heart must yield and consent to any thing
contrary to that which both we se, hear, and feel. I my self have been
oftentimes in wonderful great dangers, when the whole world (as it were)
conspired against me. For the Pope my mortal enemy and the enemy of my Christ,
did not cease to stir up against me, what power and terror so ever he was
able to devise. Here reason would rather persuade me to keep silence and say
nothing, then to teach and bring my self thereby into trouble and danger. The
help of the Lord.
For reason can never see the Lords marvelous help and deliverance, which is
invisible and hidden from the eyes of the world: therefore it thinks only of
that which it sees, that is to say, destruction.

In all these storms, how my mind was stablished in God, what my faith and
hope was, I will here say nothing. Albeit in these great dangers (I grant) my
mind was oftentimes troubled, and yet at the length the invisible help of God,
being hidden from mine eyes, and from the eyes of the whole world, appeared:
so that not only my deadly and mighty adversaries could not have their wills
upon me, but also the preaching of the Gospel had more prosperous success,
and more mightily increased then ever it did before. Therefore, forasmuch as
flesh can not see the invisible things of God, let us so humble our selves unto
the obedience of faith, that we may learn to say: I lift mine eyes unto the
hills. There is sure help prepared, though I can by no means see or perceive
the same, and flesh sees and also looks for the contrary. So do these
words expressly and lively set forth the nature and strength of faith, and what
it is.

Why he says to the hills, and not to the Lord.
But why says he, I lift mine eyes to the hills, and not to God? And again,
why does he mention more hills then one? for that seems to maintain
Idolatry. To the first I answer that this and such like places: as, he send
thee his help from the holy place, do teach us yt God will be heard,
worshipped, looked for, and prayed unto according to his word, and not
according to our imaginations. So says he in Exodus: In what place soever I
shall leave a remembrance of my name, there will I visit thee, and bless
thee. Therefore the Jews were always bound to the temple of Jerusalem, in
what place or country soever they were, and also when they prayed at home in
their own houses, to turn their eyes toward Syon. The prayer of the godly
pleased God even in Babylon, far from the temple and from Jerusalem: but yet
in this respect, because they sunge and prayed to that God which dwelled in the
hill Syon, and there had erected his tabernacle.

And this is the cause why the Prophets condemned all other kinds of service
and worship done unto God in other places. For it was not enough to say: O God
which did bring thy people out of Egypt: For so Jeroboam also spoke unto God,
and said truly of him, and perhaps prayed more earnestly then they that were
in Jerusalem, and in the temple. Such a fair show and pretense of true holiness
hypocrisy is wont to make: and Idolatry is oftentimes more earnest and
vehement then true piety. But why did not such prayers please God? Forsooth
because other hills were not chosen and appointed of God to that purpose,
neither had they the word and promise of God. Wherefore God would not hear
their prayers but only in that place, or at least, turning the^ selves both
with eyes and heart toward Jerusalem, if with their bodies they could not be
present. Daniel therefore being in Babylon, when he was about to make his
prayer unto God, turned himself toward Jerusalem, not only because Solomon in
his prayer unto God besought him that if they at any time should be driven out
of their country, and turning them selves toward this place should make their
prayer unto him, he would hear them and bring them home again: but also
because God will be worshipped in yt place which he has chosen, that all
wandering devotions and worshipping of God after man's imaginations, might be
avoided.

We which are in the time of the new testament, are not bound to any external
place, as Christ says: The time shall come when they shall worship me
neither in this mountain nor in that. Christ is our spiritual Sanctuary: Our
mountain.
for God will hear no man but through him only, according to the saying of
Christ: What soever ye ask my Father in my name. etc. By him therefore we
offer unto God the bullockes of our lips: For without Christ we can neither
believe, trust, nor obtain any thing. This is the principal point of all our
doctrine, and therefore we must lay sure hold on it. There have been many which
have gone about to please God without Christ. So Arius, albeit he robbed Christ
of his divinity, ye he would seem to acknowledge a God whom he professed and
worshipped. Monks and other religious Sectaries think to please God with their
will works, vows, and monastical life: Yea and in the whole kingdom of the
Romish Idol, what other means do they seek to please god withal? yea what
other Christ do they make unto them selves then their own works, inue^tions,
and traditions? All these lift up their eyes, not to the hills, to the which
David looked, that is, they do not look only unto Christ: For he alone is that
hill and holy Sanctuary which we must lift up our eyes unto, that like as the
Jews had no Sanctuary but that in Jerusalem: so we should have no other
Sanctuary to fly unto but this one and alone, even Jesus Christ the son of
Mary.

Thus am I wont to answer to the first doubt, that David fastened his eyes
upon the holy place and thither directed his prayer, which place was in
Jerusalem, in the which was the memorial of the name of God which he had made
unto him self. Before that time it was in Siloc and Gibea where the Tabernacle
was. In these places he heard the prayers of his people, and he received their
sacrifices: but in other places he neither received prayers nor sacrifices: for
there was not the memorial of the name of the Lord which he had made to him
self, but the memorial of Idols and Idolatry, which the impious Jews had
imagined to themselves. But now in the new Testament the name of God dwells
in Christ and his Church, which is one body with Christ, whereas is the word of
God, baptism, the supper of the Lord, and the exercise of obedience toward
God.

To the second doubt thus I answer, that albeit he seems to prophecy of the
church of the new Testament, in the which are many hills, that is to say, God
in Christ hears the prayers of the faithful in every place, neither is
prayer and the worship of God bound to any external place, yet may it be that
the Prophet therefore spoke in the plural number, because there were two hills
in Jerusalem, namely mount Sion, and the mount called Moria, where the temple
was. And moreover (as I said before) the plural number shows a contrariety
betwixt those hills and the hills of the Idolaters. As if he should say: The
Idolaters run to their mountains, but I will abide still in these hills,
wherein my soul deliteth above all other.

Moreover, where he says: I lift up mine eyes unto the mountains from whence
my help comes: it is the voice of faith. For the flesh thinks the cross
and all calamities to come from these hills, and therefore calls them not
the hills from whence comes help and comfort, but desolation and
destruction, when it sees it self in hatred with the world for religion, in
poverty, in tentations, in dangers, in terrors. This seems to be a
desolation and a casting away from the face of God and a descending into hell.
Against his judgment of the flesh fights faith, and judges not according
to that which it feleth and sees, but according to the word which the Lord
has spoken, which bids us lift up our eyes to invisible comfortes, and to
become (as it were) invisible, and by faith, in poverty to behold riches, in
heaviness and sorrow joy and comfort, in desolation and destruction help and
succor, and when we seem to be cut of and to be cast away from God, even then
to believe and by faith to lay sure handfast on Gods eternal mercy and grace
in Christ: As David here did, who was afflicted and felt no comfort, and yet he
says: I lift up mine eyes to the hills from whence comes my help. Thou
must lift up thine eyes therefore, and in no wise fix them upon the present
troubles, calamities, or afflictions whatsoever the flesh sees, feels, or
suffers: for that is to obey and consent to the eyes and the ears, that is
to say, to harken to the flesh, which is always ready to persuade thee that
God is angry with thee, that he has forsaken thee, that thy danger is such
and so terrible that thou can never escape it. Here therefore thou must lift
up thine eyes to the hills of the Lord, and harken to the voice of God, who
says and promises that help shall surely come from those hills: which albeit
for the time it be invisible and can neither be seen nor felt, yet is it most
certain and infallble. They that are in wealth, glory and dignity lift not
up their eyes to these invisible things, and therefore they are puffed up with
pride and carried away with all noysom lusts. But such as are in poverty,
contempt of the world, afflicted in body or mind, are forced to lift up their
eyes, that the help which is invisible may be made to them visible by faith,
according to the promise of God made unto them in his word.

These are the words therefore of a man that felt the same that we feel, that
is to say, our hearts to be oppressed with sorrow and heaviness, when we
thinking our selves to be desolate and forsaken, can see no succor: when we
see, not riches but poverty: not glory but ignominy, shame and confusion. In
these calamities the heart is an heavy burden, weying down to the ground the
eyes and the head, that they can see or think upon nothing else but terrene
and earthly things. Therefore he exhorts us by his own example to lift up
our eyes, and look to invisible things which the word promises we shall
certainly enjoy. Thus we see the nature of faith lively set out in this Psalm.
Now follows, as it were an explication what hills he speaks of.

Verse. 2. My help comes of the Lord which has made heaven and earth.

He speaks here of such hills as the eyes of the flesh could not see. For who
was so quick of sight to see, or so wise to perceive and understand, that the
hill Moria was a holy hill. A heap of earth the bodily eyes might see: but the
holiness, the power and the Majesty of God there present, they could not see,
nor that the word of the Lord was there, that the Lord had promised there to
dwell and abide, that he had put a memorial of his name in that place, and
that there he would be sought, there he would be found, For he that sought not
God in this place, could not find him in heaven: Like as since God has
reueiled him self in yt man Christ, we truly say and also believe that whosoever
do not embrace and by faith lay hold on this man which was borne of the
virgin, they can never believe in God: but although they say they believe in the
maker of heaven and earth, yet do they in deed believe in the Idol of their
own heart, for without Christ there is no true God. Therefore David beholds
these hills in Jerusalem, not with bodily eyes, as the ox does his stall, but
with the eyes of the spirit he sees that God dwells there by his word.
Therefore these hills are now no more earth and molde, but they are the hills
of the Lord and the fulness of his godhead: so that with out these hills,
concerning God there can nothing be found. Therefore it is truly said of the
Prophet, that from these hills comes help and succor, that is to say, from
God dwelling and abiding there by his word. Like as we believe that Christ is
the throne of grace in the which is the treasure of all good things and
heavenly blessings to be found, and without the which there is nothing.

Now, in that he does not only say: My help comes from the Lord, but adds
moreover: which made heaven and earth: he reproves and conde^neth all other
helps which men seek and procure unto them selves besides God, with false
trust and affia^ce in ye same, as Idols of their own imagination. So is Mammon
a god also: that is to say, is worshipped of men as a god and helps them also
sometimes. But in penury of food and vittells what succor can he bring? no man
can satisfy his hungry belly with gold and silver. Likewise in drowth and
barennes of the earth what can he help? What good can he do in diseases and
infirmities of ye body? If then in these corporal maladies he can not help,
what can he do when the conscience is troubled with sin and the horror of
death? It is therefore but a false pleasure and delight that Mammon brings:
which is but only to satisfy and please the eyes, as a picture or painted
table. Against these helps therefore and such like, which ye world seeks
after, the prophet sets the Lord him self, who made not only gold and
silver, not only food and sustenance, heaven and earth, that is to say,
angels, men, and the whole world but besides these, gives remission of sins,
faith, righteousness, joy and peace of heart, with everlasting life. He is (says
the Prophet) my almighty and sure help, of whom I can not doubt, that he will
ever fail me the twinkling of an eye. To this Lord I fly for aid and
succor, who not only in this life can and does give health and welfare for a
few years, with security of conscience and contempt of death and all ye furies
of ye world: but also after this life, eternal felicity and life everlasting.

Thus the Prophet inflameth him self and stirs up his faith for our
example, that we likewise should magnify the blessings and good gifts of God
in us, and also our hope and trust in him. For if the rich men of the world
do glory in their money, if they vaunt of their wealth and riches, why should
not we also glory in the trust and confidence we have in God, which has made
heaven and earth: which has also in his hand all things necessary both for
this life and for the life to come. But because these things are invisible and
can not be seen but with spiritual eyes, therefore we commonly neglect the^.
And albeit the Lord do sometimes hide these helps from us, and let us feel the
lack thereof for a time (as he does in deed, to make us the more desirous of
the^, the more to esteem them when we have them, and to be the more thankful
to God for the same) yet must we learn surely to trust and undoubtedly believe
that they will come.

Verse. 3. He will not suffer thy foot to slip: For he that keeps Israel
will not slumber.

This verse depends upon those that go before. For the Prophet, because he
began with an exhortation to faith, now goes about as it were with promises,
Trust and affiance in the help and succor of the Lord.
to move and exhort the faithful to hold fast this confidence and trust in the
help and succor of the Lord. And very necessary it is for us, to exhort and
stir up, not only other, but our selves also, because of the present
dangers and afflictions. For seeing the things which discomfort us are
present, and they which comfort us are absent, therefore so long as the present
things which vex us do endure, it is needful that we should be stirred up
with the word and exhortation to perseverance and patience. For this
exper^^^ce of trouble and affliction must be joined with doctrine and
exh^^^^tion. For our sight is so dim, that we can not see these inui^^^^^
things and the end of afflictions. Therefore the flesh ever s^^keth means
how it may be delivered, and when it can see non^^as the carnal eyes can never
see Gods marvelous help and deli^^^ance) then is it miserably vexed and
tormented and can find no^est nor quietness. We have need therefore of
exhortations out (...) the word of God, that this streatnes of our heart may be
dilated and enlarged, which he alone can do that sees the end of our
tentations. We must hear what his word says, and not what our own heart
says, which only sees and feleth the beginning of tentations and
afflictions, but the end thereof it can not see.

Therefore the holy Ghost here amplifieth and enlarges the matter, that the
exhortation may be the more effectual. And here is first to be noted, that if
the contrary were not, that is to say, no tentation felt or peril to be
feared, then were this exhortation but in vain. For if tentation should have
an end as soon as it begins, or if as soon as we feel any lack, God
should give us that we desire, wherefore then should God promise any thing?
Therefore neither is doctrine necessary in those things that we know before,
neither exhortation when we are out of danger and feel no tentation.
Therefore where the Prophet says: He will not suffer thy foot to slip, he
plainly shows what is the state of the afflicted. For when they feel them
selves to be in danger through the grieuousnes of tentation, their hearts are
heavy and careful, least they should perish and be forsaken of the Lord for
ever. Here have they need therefore of exhortation, that their faith fail not
or be not utterly quenched. For reason can judge no other wise, but that a man
being in this case is clean rejected and forsaken of God, and after his own
sense feels that to be true which a certain soldier was wont to say: that
there are none which suffer more misery or are in greater danger then such as
serve God and their Prince faithfully.

Here is now no succor but to fly to the word of faith. And first this word
pronounces, that all they which will live a godly life in Christ Jesus, shall
suffer trouble and affliction. It sets forth Christ for an ensample, who by
the cross entered into glory. It tells us that we must be made like unto his
image: that is, we must suffer with him if we look to be glorified with him.
Then we see that troubles and crosses are prepared for us. It shows moreover
what is to be done and what remedy is to be fought in such afflictions:
Remedies in afflictions.
even to resort to the word, to harken to the word, to rest in the word and the
promise. It promises that tentation shall not continue with us for ever, as
our hearts do judge: but rather it tells us, that it is but momentane and
short. And Christ compares the afflictions of the faithful to the travel of
a woman, where death and life are joined together as near as may be. For she
that even now saw nothing but death, and despayred of the life both of her
self and of her child, as soon as the child is borne forgets all her
sorrows past. Saint Paul says: the afflictions of this life are not to be
compared to the glory which shall be reueiled upon us. The judgment of the
word in afflictions must only be followed.
This judgment of the word thou must follow, and not thine own sense, which
so judges of the cross and afflictions, that of a molehill or rather of a
mote it makes a great mountain. So blind is reason and so unable to judge in
matters of faith. For that which God counts but as a moment, a drop, a
sparcle, reason judges to be everlasting, a huge sea and a terrible fire. But
thou will say: I find and feel it so to be. What then? Do thou feel or
does God see and know more perfectly, think thou? We must not judge
therefore according to our own feeling, but according to that which the word
of God pronounces and judges, or rather. God him self in his word.

The stories do record that when Iulianus persecuted Athanasius and threatened
his destruction, The history of Julian and Athanasius.
Athanasius so little regarded the danger thereof, that he likened the same to
a cloud which the Sun by little and little consumes to nothing. What could be
spoken more contemptuously of that outrageous cruelty attempted by such a
mighty Monarke and head of the Roman Empire? which rather might have been
compared to a huge sea or a terrible fire. But as Athanasius said and believed,
even so it came to pass: for Iulianus was slain shortly after, and so
Athanasius escaped the danger. By whose example let us learn how to judge of
our own troubles and perils, and look to the word of the promiser, that we
depend not upon our selves and our own sense, but vpn the promise of the Lord.
Death, pestilence, famine, hatred of the world and sclaunder, with such like,
may well be resembled to an horrible tempest. And here if we follow reason, we
are gone. But we must lift up our eyes to the hills and harken to this
voice: I am the Lord thy God, therefore magnify my word, my help and my
succor. Thus if we do, then begin we to contemn that which to us before
seemed so huge and terrible: then the word and promise begins to kindle in
our hearts and brings such strength and courage, that we are able to say:
Now, be it never so huge a tempest, never so terrible a storm, let it come.
Here is God, here is his word, I will not fear. Thus is all the rage and
fury of the Devil, yea even sin and death it self brought to nothing, and
now is it become, as it were a mote, which before seemed to us a mighty and
huge mountain.

Thus must we learn the distinctions of the holy Ghost. God takes away thy
wife, thy children. Thou fallest into sickness and infirmity of body. Thou
losest thy goods, thine estimation, the peace and tranquillity of conscience,
yea and some time, according to thine own sense and feeling, Christ him self
also. These are great matters in deed. But beware that whilst thou iudgest
these things after thine own sense, thou make not of a drop an infinite
sea, and of a sparcle a flaming fire. Though it be never so great which thou
feel and suffer, yet God is greater. If God and Christ then perish not,
if they still live and reign, what if thou lose thy wife, thy children, thy
goods, yea and thy life also? For what are all these if thou compare them to
the inestimable grace of God and the riches which he has promised in his word,
but mere nothing? Therefore let us lift up our minds to these heavenly riches,
and let us learn rightly to discern between the cross in respect of it
self, that is, of the flesh and the sense of our own heart, and in respect of
God and his rich promise. Which if we consider as it is in it self and without
Christ, what trouble is so small that shall not utterly overthrow us, and so
shall every trouble be unto us intolerable. But if we behold the same in
respect of God with the eyes of faith, though our afflictions and calamities
seem never so great and grievous, yet the super abundant mercy of God in
Christ swalloweth them up all. Who albeit he suffers us to be afflicted for
a little season, yet shall the ent^e be full of joy and comfort. So says the
Prophet Esaias: For a little while have I forsaken thee. This momentane and short
time, to the flesh seems an eternity. But (as I said) our carnal eyes do
but deceive us. Therefore we must judge according to Gods promises concerning
invisible things, and see what God has said in his word.

This is the exercise of faith, whereof David speaks in this place, The
exercise of faith.
admonishing us to look to the word and promise, and to lift up our eyes to
invisible things, and thereafter to judge, and not according to things
present. And here experience teaches us what an infinite wisdom true
divinity is, which in this life we can never fully and perfectly attain unto.
For to what sudden mutations this life is subject, we see. To day alive and in
good health, to morrow dead and gone. Yea how infinite are the troubles,
calamities, tentations and dangers wherewith our life is tossed as a ship on
the sea, which so terrify us that heaven and earth are to little for us, yea
the whole creature is to us a very hell. This is the nature of flesh: which
Satan moreover so inspireth and bewitcheth, that it sees not God, but rather
(as it judges) some great and horrible mischief: not life, but death and
destruction. But this is no judgment, but rather a delusion of the flesh and
the devil: against the which we must fight, yea and believe that even in our
destruction (as to us it seems) God is present with us, and in our death
Christ our King lives: in whose sight our tribulations and afflictions, yea
and death it self are altogether, (as you would say) but one nothing: and if
we compare them unto God by the judgment of faith, we shall feel them so to
be in deed. But who has sufficiently learned thus to do? Somewhat we may
say, Experience and practice makes a right Christian.
and teach other after a sort: but use and experience, with inward practice and
feling is that which makes a right divine and a true Christian in deed, so
that he may be able boldly to affirm and say with David: He will not suffer
thy foot to styppe: that is to say, he will not suffer thee to be utterly
overthrown and perish. But the flesh says the contrary, because it feels,
not only thy foot to slyppe, but it self also to be trodden under foot.

Behold the son of God what he suffered: Behold John Baptist, the virgin
Mary, the Apostles, the Prophets what they suffered. Behold ye church at this
day what danger it is in, what troubles and afflictions it continually
suffers. And this is the state of the godly. Upon the experience whereof
arises this proverb: The more wicked, the more happy. And therefore the
world fearing and shunning these dangers, can never abide the Gospel. And
thus it appears to them not to be true that David says here: The Lord will
not suffer thy foot to slip: but rather the contrary, that he causes thy
foot to slyppe. Albeit it does but seem so (for he does not so in deed) and
that to the flesh only: but contrariwise, to the spirit and faith it is
exaltation and glory before God. They judge that death which is suffered for
the confession of the Gospel, to be a beginning of a better and eternal life,
Ignominy, shame and contempt of the world they count inestimable glory in the
sight of God. The judgment of faith.
This is the judgment of faith, albeit the flesh thinks otherwise. But we
may not judge after the flesh: for if we do, what needs then the doctrine of
the word? what need exhortations? what need the promises? Therefore we must
turn the evil into good, and where the flesh concludes that it is
continually trodden under foot, there faith must confess and say, that by the
cross and by these afflictions we are made like to the son of God and
fashioned like unto Christ: For these things are to be believed as invisible and
also insensible, and not as things to be seen and felt.

But such as will not believe, but follow their own sense and feling, do
rather choose the glory and pleasures of this world, which so little while
endure, and so suddenly vanish away. But how miserable shall their condition
be, when, after these transitory, momentane and vain pleasures they shall find
and feel nothing but anguish and torments, with weeping and wailing for ever
and without end. How much better had it been for them to have suffered for a
while with Lazarus both sickness and poverty, then for a little season to
flourish with the rich glutton in wealth and prosperity, and with him to be
tormented in everlasting fire? This doctrine therefore pertains to those which
desire to believe and not to feel, that they may discern between God and their
afflictions, not fixing their eyes upon the present calamities, but looking up
to the invisible help promised in the word. For those troubles and dangers
where unto ye faithful are subject, do in deed cause the foot to slip: but
yet so that faith will not suffer them to fall, but makes them able to pass
over those rocks, be they never so dangerous, and to compare their momentane
afflictions with those things which are infinite and everlasting, as to God him
self, his power, his grace, and finally eternal life, which God has promised
in Christ to them that believe in him. To know these things it is necessary,
that we may be able to comfort both our selves and our brethren when Satan
begins to rage, when troubles arise, when for the words sake we are hated,
spoiled, persecuted and put to death. In these dangers whither shall we run?
God is greater then all our afflictions and calamities.
Even this must be our refuge: to say and confess that God is greater then all
our miseries: And albeit we perish, or rather seem in our own sense so to
do, yet God perishes not, and therefore we must assuredly trust in his
goodness, mercy and power, and the sense and feeling of the spirit must be
exalted (as ye would say) above the feeling of the flesh and of our own heart.
Thus they that will not do, let them follow their own lusts and pleasures,
and yet let them be sure that they shall drink up the dregs of the cup:
whereof the godly drink but a part, as the Prophet says. Psalm. 75.


Notwithstanding many times the godly do find also temporal help and
deliverance. For God does not so neglect his servant that he will leave them
utterly destitute of comfort in this life. David being driven out of his
kingdom was restored to the same again. Ezechias stricken with a deadly
disease, recovered and was restored to perfect health. The Jews also dispersed
and scattered among the Gentiles, were brought home again. And even here also
faith has her proper office, to wait and look for this help and succor:
for it comes not by and by when we have need thereof or when we desire the
same. Now, as the godly in such dangers find not always help and deliverance:
even so the wicked do not always prosper, but even in this life are horribly
plaged for their impiety. The kingdom of the Pope has flourished long, and
yet we see that much of his power wealth and riches is diminished, and the
terrible vengeance of God is ready to fall upon him and his for their impiety.
Our nobility and gentlemen at this day contemn the ministry, pluck away the
livings of the Church, and spoil the poor pastors and ministers thereof: But
the time will come (I nothing doubt) when one Pastor shall be more regarded
then x. such gentlemen. And thus God shows and will show his judgment in the
defense of the godly, even by corporal or temporal punishment upon the
wicked. Therefore we ought so much the more strongly to cleave to the word, and
to hope and look for succor, lifting up our eyes from this sensible misery to
Gods invisible help and succor. Such things as hereafter follow in the
Psalm, tend to the same sense and meaning: for the meaning of the spirit is,
abundantly with counsel and exhortation to edify the Church.

Ver. 4. Behold, he will not sleep nor slumber that keeps Israel.

These also after the judgment of the flesh are deceaueable words. For is
this to keep and defend, when we are cast into prison? delivered to the
tormentor to be burned? when we are vexed of Satan and of the world with many
and sundry afflictions? yea when as Christ him self is fastened to the cross?
when John Baptist is beheaded at the request of a strumpet? Is it not extreme
folly to call this a keeping and defending, when we see nothing else but an
utter forsaking and desolation? Therefore the flesh understands these words
in the contrary sense: that is for God the keeper and defender, To the flesh
God seems to be no keeper but a destroyer.
God the forsaker and destroyer. These are words therefore of the spirit and
of faith, and not of the flesh or carnal sense. For after the flesh God had
no regard of the Patriarch Jacob, when Joseph was cast away by the cruelty of
his brethren, and yet God did afterward declare that he had a care of him
when he did so advance Joseph that he became in a manner the king of all
Egypt. Likewise God does not so keep us but that we must dye: yea we must see
the departing of our wives, our children, our parents* we must be continually
troubled and vexed of Satan: we must suffer many iniuryes of the ungrateful
and wicked world. How does this care now appear in keeping and preserving us?
wherein does it appear that God watches over us? Wherefore we must lift up
our eyes to the hills where the Lord has published his will and his word.
There must we harken what he speaks out of his holy temple, namely that he
neither sleeps, nor forsakes us, as the flesh peruersely judges: but
keeps us, cares for us and watches over us. This word faith lays hold on,
God is a keeper and still watches over us.
and according to this word it judges, although the flesh say and judge the
contrary never so much, and according to his own sense and feeling do think
that God neither sees nor hears: but is like to those which the Psalmist
speaks of: They have ears and hear not, they have eyes and see not.
Therefore he extolleth his own god Mammon, that he may have always money at
hand, and what so ever may maintain the pleasures of this life. This vanity
is it that the flesh so magnifieth.

But he sees not what shall follow when he must dye and forsake his riches,
and therefore this keeper, this watchman which keeps and preserves us by
faith and by the word, he nothing regards. Let us therefore which do believe,
and see this miserable blindenes of the world, be surely persuaded that this
hidden and invisible protection, under the which we abide by the power of faith
and of the word, is almighty. For to this the holy Scripture leads us, The
kingdom of the devil.
and teaches that the kingdom of the devil is the kingdom of sin and
death, and therefore every moment he causes men to sin, murthereth them,
seduceth and brings them into error, or at least goes about by all means
so to do. Thus are we always in death, in danger of sin, error and
damnable opinions. And what do we whiles Satan is thus occupied? we teach, we
write, we read, we sleep, we eat, we drink, and we exercise such other
offices and functions of the body and of the senses. Here our divinity
teaches us even by our own experience, that if God did not watch when we
sleep, if he were not careful for us when we are careless, we should perish
every moment, we should lose our tongues, our eyes, our ears, our hands, our
feet and our life also. And for as much as these things do many times
chance, and when we little doubt or think thereof, our wives, our children or
our friends dye or else fall into some great danger, it is a minifest token
that the kingdom of the Devil is the kingdom of death and sin.

In this kingdom because we live whiles we are in this world, hereof it
comes, that we often times offend and fall into many sins. Thus David
became both an adulterer and a murderer. So that hereby we may learn that the
kingdom of the devil in this world is to advance sin, to murder and
destroy. Now therefore, that we yet live and breath, that we fall not daily
into grievous and horrible sins, it is the great mercy, goodness, and
protection of this good keeper and watchman whom David here speaks of. Thus
does our divinity teach, and thus do the godly believe: For by their own
experience they prove, and by experience of the whole Church, that Satan will
never rest until he destroy if he may, either soul or body. The destruction
of the soul he seeks by lying, by corrupt doctrine, by wicked and false
worshipping and serving. The destruction of the body he attempteth by infinite
sleights and practices, whereof we have experience daily in our selves and
other. For as much then as these things do not come to pass either in such
sort or so often as Satan would, it is the benefit, not of Satan, but of this
our vigilant keeper and watchman.

Thus we are taught even by our own experience (taking this for a principle,
that the kingdom of the devil is the kingdom of sin and of death) that we
are continually and every moment preserved from death and other dangers both
corporally and spiritually by the singular goodness and grace of Christ, into
whose kingdom through baptism and faith we are translated. And hereof come
these heavenly sayings of the Prophets: The earth is full of the mercy of the
Lord, his mercy endures for ever. etc. In deed sometimes Satan so prevails,
and has such success in that he goes about, that by sudden plagues he
brings men to horrible destruction. Such examples ought to warn us of those
mischeuous practices which he continually goes about, and feign would bring to
pass, as he might easily do if he were not let by the vigilance of our
good watchman in heaven. For, as for the power of this our adversary, I do
believe that he is able in one hour to destroy all the people that are living
upon the earth. Now, if both he be able and also leaves no practice
unattempted so to do, why then is it not done? Because our good keeper
watches over us. But these be matters of faith: they must be believed, and
therefore he adds this word behold. Whereby it may appear that his purpose
is, earnestly to commend and set forth the great vigilancie and tender care of
God toward us, whereby he keeps and defends us that we perish not.

And here note that this care and vigilancie for the safety and preservation of
our life, country, cities, familyes, peace and tranquillity amongst us, etc.
is of the Prophet wholly attributed unto God, when as notwithstanding God uses
to work the same by other means, as first by the ministry of Angels, and
then also of men, as of Princes and other inferior magistrates, etc. Whereby we
are admonished that these inferior means which God uses as his instruments
for our preservation are not able to do us any good at all, except God him
self take upon him to be our chief watchman and defender. God therefore uses
the ministry of these for our succor and relief, even as he does bread,
drink and other sustenaunce. For as bread and drink do not preserve our life
(for then no man should dye, and yet because of the ordinance of God and the
frail condition of our nature, they are necessary for the sustentation of our
life): so do these mean helps nothing avail us except God the keeper of
Israel do watch for our succor and defense. This watching, this defense the
^orde of God does reueile, but the flesh can not see it, and therefore by a
contrary sense thus it expounds these words: The keeper of Israel, that is
to say, the forsaker of Israel does not sleep, that is, he is not only in a
most dead sleep, but also is without all sense, and is in deed nothing. For
reason judges according to every pinch and pange that the flesh feels, and
according to the beginning of afflictions or first assaults, and not according
to the word, and the end or deliverance which God promises in the word.

Verse. 5. The Lord is thy keeper and he is thy shadow (or protection) at thy
right hand.

In this verse he sets forth more at large, the certainty of Gods ready
help and protection. Wherein, speaking to every one privately, he says: The
Lord is thy keeper: that no man should doubt to apply that unto him self for
his own comfort, which pertains to al Israel. He is called the shadow at
thy right hand, to teach thee that he is at hand and stands even by thy side
ready to defend thee. Or else: the Lord is thy shadow at thy right hand: That
is, he prospers all thy affairs, he gives success to all thou take in
hand. If thou be a preacher and a teacher in ye Church of God: if thou travel
in thy vocation uprightly and with a good conscience to provide for thy self
and thy family, thou shall not lack thy crosses. But be of good comfort: for
the Lord has promised to be on thy right hand: he will aid thee and succor
thee in all things that thou shall either do or suffer.

But here again we must remember (as I said before) that these things are
spoken and taught in vain, except we first think our selves to be, as it were
utterly forsaken and destitute of al help and succor. Therefore, when he
speaks of this tender care that the Lord has over his in keeping, in
shadowing, in defe^ding them that they perish not, he means therewithal that
they are such as seem to them selves so to be forsaken and neglected of God,
as if he had no care of them at all. This is therefore a sweet doctrine and
full of consolation, that the Lord shows him self to know and to pity our
miseries and calamities, and commands us to believe that he is our shadow
to cover and defend us against all perils and dangers. In him therefore let us
assuredly trust, with comfortable expectation of most joyful deliverance: who
has promised to be with us, with a fatherly care to provide for us, to defend
us, to strengthen, to succor and to comfort us in all our troubles,
afflictions and calamities.

Verse. 6. The sun shall not hurt thee by day, nor the moon by night.

The heat of the Sun makes men's bodies weak and feeble. So does the Moon
also hurt, not only with cold, but also with moisture. By these speeches he
means all manner of tentations and perils, and that God will be with us in the
midst of them, to succor us and to deliver us, albeit we seem for a little
while to bear all the heat and burden of the day alone: that is, to be
utterly forsaken and destitute of all help and succor. But if we were alone,
then should the tentation have no end, yea it should presently swallow us up:
for we are not able of our selves to endure the space of one moment. Now the
Lord suffers Satan to vomet out his poison and to practice against us the
beginning of his malice: but he will not suffer him to hurt so much as he would
do. Therefore because we have the shadow to cover us, even the presence and
mighty protection of the Lord, we should patiently endure the beginning of
sorrows, that is to say, the light, short, and momentane afflictions of this
life, being sure that even in death our life is hidden and safely kept with
Christ in God, and we shall overcome all the fiery darts and cruel assaults of
Satan.

Verse. 7. The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil: he shall preserve thy
soul.

That which the verse going before has expressed by an allegory, is here
simply set forth and without figure. The soul here signifies the life. Albeit
therefore thou suffer never so great and grievous afflictions, yea even death
it self, yet shall thou not perish because God keeps thy life. In outward
appearance and to the judgment of the flesh thou seem to dye, but in deed
it is not so, because thy life, even the Lord thy God lives, etc. So he says
in an other Psalm: Psalm. 97.
The Lord preserves the souls of his Saints.

Verse. 8. The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in, from
hence forth and for ever.

That is to say: whether so ever thou go, the Lord will be with thee, he
will preserve thee, he will defend and keep thee: he will never forsake thee
nor suffer thee to perish. To go out, is to go to the works of thy
vocation. To come in again signifies to return from labor and travel, to
rest and quietness. What so ever thou shall go about, shall have good success
and prosper under thy hand. Thus the Prophet in this Psalm shows the nature
of faith to be, not as it were a dead affection or quality of the mind, as
the Papists do dream, but a singular work and motion of the holy Ghost,
whereby we judge according to the word, contrary to that which we feel,
which we see, and by experience do prove: whereby also we overcome all kinds
of tentations. Of this faith the Papists can no better judge then a blind man
can judge of colors.

The 122. Psalm. I rejoiced when they said unto me, etc.
This Psalm is a thanks giving for the excellent gift of the word of God. The
argument of the Psalm.
Which virtue is therefore the more rare to be found, for that the word is
every where so horribly contemned in the world, not only of the rude
multitude, but also of those that will be counted both learned and wise: whose
blasphemous tongues are sharpened against this most precious and incomparable
benefit, not only in speaking contemptuously and spitefully of the Gospel,
but also imputing to the wholesome word of life, what so ever mischief reigns
in the members of Satan, as seditious sects, avarice, filthy life, and such
like. It is therefore the great goodness of the Lord that in this horrible
infidelity there are yet some which reverence the word, which gladly hear the
word, which delight to talk of the word and works of the Lord. This Psalm
therefore was not written to those dogs and swine the Papists, heretics and
persecutors of the word, but to the elect souls and holy minds, which exult
and rejoice for this heavenly visitation, whereby the day spring from on high,
through the tender mercy of our God has visited us, lying in the shadow of
death, as Zachary says. For albeit that all men have the word, and all hear
the sound of the Gospel, yet herein they differ, that some have the word only:
some acknowledge and feel them selves to have it and therefore do rejoice and
give thanks unto God for ye same, where as other delight rather in their riches
and in the pleasures of this life, then in that heavenly word, which brings
everlasting life and salvation. Therefore S. Paul counts it for a special
grace of God, not only to have the gifts of God, but also to acknowledge
them, to delight and rejoice in them, and to be thankful unto God for them.

A singular gift of God to acknowledge how in estimable a benefit it is to
have the word.
But amongst all the gifts of God, the gift of his holy word is the most
excellent, and if we take away the word, what do we else, but take away the
sun out of the world? For what is the world without the word: but even hell
and the very kingdom of Satan, although there be in it never so many wise men,
learned, welthy, and mighty? For what can all these do without the word? which
alone brings life and comfort to the soul, peace and quietness to the
conscience: which alone keeps us in the favor of God: without the which
there is no religion, and so no God: whereby also the world is preserved: For
without the word and Christ: the world could not stand the twinkling of an
eye. Albeit therefore there be many and wonderful gifts of God in the world,
given for the use of man, yet the only gift which contains and preserves all
the other, is the word of God, which pronounces and witnesses to our
consciences that God is our merciful father: which also promises unto us
remission of sins and life everlasting. Now, if we should lack these
comforts, what comfort were it I pray you for us to live? yea this life, to us
were no life at all. But these things are spiritual, and the knowledge
thereof is so much the more hard for us to attain unto, because it springs
not out of our own hearts, but comes from above. But now to the Psalm.

When this Psalm was written, the temple was not builded, but the tabernacle
of Moises yet still remained: The tabernacle of Moises.
which, allbeit it continued not in one place nor in one tribe (for it was also
in Silo and Gibion) yet had it one certain promise, that where soever it were,
there would the Lord be present, hear the prayers of his people, accept their
sacrifice and show him self merciful, as the text shows: Where so ever I
shall set a memorial of my name, etc. Therefore so long as it was in Ephraim in
the city of Silo, the name of God was there called upon, the word of God was
there heard, and the Lord was there worshipped with faith, prayer, and
sacrifice, etc, until at length, when impiety and idolatry began to
increase, the arc was carried out of Silo into the host against the
Philistines, and of them was taken. But when the Philistines for this
profanation were diverse ways plaged, the arc was translated to the
Gabaonites. When it had been there a while, David brought it home into his own
city, as it is written, 2. Reg. 6. and there it came into his mind to build a
temple unto the Lord. For it was not meet (thought he) that he should dwell in
a house made with Cedar trees, and that the Lord and King of heaven should
dwell in a tabernacle covered with skins. And this purpose at the first seemed
good to Nathan the prophet: but afterward he was admonished of God by
revelation, that David should not build the temple, for that was reserved for
his son Solomon to do, which was a peaceable Prince and not given to war
as David was. Herewithall was added that joyful promise of the eternal
posterity of David and his true son Christ, 2. Reg. 7. David therefore in
this Psalm, as it seems to me, entreats of the first part of this promise:
wherein he rejoices, not only for him self, but also for the whole people of
God, for that God had appointed a place in Jerusalem both certain and
permanent, wherein he would be worshipped.

Albeit therefore that David does here partly signify that house which Solomon
afterward built, yet specially he treats of the fruit that should come of
the building of that temple, namely that the word of the Lord should there be
published, prayer made, and sacrifice offered. This is that joy and gladness
which David so notably sets forth in this Psalm, whiles he beholds the
inestimable goodness of God toward his people, in giving to them the knowledge
of his word, in revealing his face unto them, in persuading their hearts of
his good will toward them.

The Papists dispute much of God, but without the word and the true knowledge
of God. They neither teach nor yet once think what yt will of God is toward
us, or what he will do with us, for, say they, we know not whether god love us or
hate us. And to this end they blasphemously allege this saying out of
Ecclesiastes: No man knows whether he be worthy of love or of hatred, The
meaning of this place is, that man knows not by these outward things, that is
by prosperity, or adversity, whom God does favor or hate. Eccl. 9.
with other like. For what is it to talk of God, if thou know not what his will
is toward thee, and to what end he has ordained thee? They yt know not God
thus, kn^w him not at all. It is the word of God therefore that certifieth us of
the will of God toward us, what pleases or displeases him, what he would
have us to do, and what he will do with us. The barbarous and brutish ignorance
whereof has brought forth all those monstrous idolatries in the kingdom of
Antichrist.

Theft which is forbidden by ye law of God in the 7. commandment, is thought
to be but a small sin in comparison of the rest, as murder, horedom, etc.
Notwithstanding, suppose that this commandment were not: what great
enormities, what horrible impieties would ensue? We should become like ravening
wolves and bears, What inestimable benefits the word brings.
destroying and devouring whatsoever they may come by: yea-like unto swine,
which when they come to their draffe and swill, if every one could devour so
much as might suffice al, they would leave none for the rest. Therefore, that
our goods are in safety, yea rather all that we have is not spoiled and taken
from us, it is the benefit of the seventh precept. What a life would this be
if our wives were not in safety, if our children were uncertain, if men might
resist the Magistrate, and do what they list? would it not be a continual hell?
That we enjoy therefore true and godly matrimony, that the commonwealth and the
laws are preserved, The benefits of the second table.
in which and by which we live in safety, rest and quietness, all these are the
benefits of the second table. But let us ascend to higher matters* What were
this life if ye first table were not? The benefits of the first table.
if there were no Sabbots, no Church, no place wherein the word might be
published and taught? if there were no knowledge of God, no invocation of God,
but every man had his peculiar idol to worship? These are far greater and
more horrible evils, then those that are committed against the second table,
and yet so much the less regarded because they are spiritual. But if we had
the eyes of the spirit, and did see how many souls Mahomet and the Pope do
carry unto hell, it should be much more grievous unto us then if we were every
hour in danger of losing both goods and life.

We ought first therefore to rejoice for these small benefits which we enjoy by
the second table, whereby both our goods and bodies are in safety. The
spiritual gifts which God gives by his word.
Small benefits I call them in comparison of those which we enjoy by the first
table, whereby God so abundantly opens the treasures and riches of his mercy
toward us in reueiling him self unto us, in certifiyng us what his will is
toward us, what he has decreed to do and how to deal with us, in giving us
his word, faith and the holy Ghost, in hearing our prayers and increasing daily
the Church by his word. These things are so great, that no heart can conceive
them, no tongue can express them: whereby our souls are delivered from the
tyranny of the devil, whereby we enjoy peace and tranquillity of mind, and a
good conscience, whereby also we attain and retain the true knowledge of God,
and whereby many are instructed to eternal life. These things David beholds
with the eye of faith: these things he deeply wayeth and considers with him
self, and therefore is stirred up to thanks giving, which the inward joy of heart
co^pelleth him unto. For such are tha^kful in deed, which do embrace y^ graces
and gifts of God, and rejoice in the giver. But such as feel not this joy,
albeit they set forth this psalm with piping and singing, with organs and mincing
music never so much, yet are they unthankful, because they do not understand
these benefits.

These things I do therefore recite, that all men may beware of that
detestable impiety and headspring of all mischief in the Church of God, the
contempt or lothing of the word: for that is an horrible apostacy and a
falling away from God. When men are once come to this lothing of y^ word, it is
not possible that any true or sincere cogitation of the spiritual life or
remission of sins should enter into their hearts. But alas, we see that
there is nothing at this day more common. For how wickedly do the nobility,
gentlemen, rich and welthy, yea and all other inferior sorts of men at this
day contemn the word of life, the gospel of salvation, the ministry and
ministers, more esteming their earthly possessions, wealth and pleasures, then
all the sweet comfortes of the gospel? These ye children of God are compelled
to behold as Loath did the Zodomites, not only despising, molesting, and
spitefully entreating them: but also living in all fleshly liberty, and doing
what they list. It was an horrible thing for David to fall into adultery and
murder: but how much more horrible is it, thus to offend against the first
table, as the Angels did, and therefore were cast out of heaven? But David
repenting returned unto God and found mercy. And here the godly are so much
the more in danger of this evil, by how much the fall is more easy. For this
venime so secretly infecteth the soul and so creeps in by little and little,
that it can not almost be perceived.

I call it a contempt of the word, not only when the word is despised,
derided, persecuted, but also when it is negligently and irreverently taught,
heard, and learned, according to the saying of the Prophet Esaias: This people
honor me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. And this is the
difference between those that are infected with this poison, the comtempt of
the word I mean, and the children of God, that as they are wholly bent to seek
and advance the glory of the everliving God: so are these either inflamed with
a diuilish desire to maintain and set forth damnable doctrine, wicked
opinions, and false worship, being wholly given over to serve the god of this
world and their god Mammon, seeking with greedines and pleasure their own
perdition and damnation, and so albeit they are already wholly possessed in the
kingdom of the devil, yet are they merry and joyful: but the end shall be
such as for their horrible example is set forth in the story of the Sodomites.
Let us pray unto God therefore that he will preserve us from this impiety, and
let us learn to sing this Psalm with gladness and thanks giving unto him for
this inestimable benefit of his word and the pure knowledge thereof, whereby
Christ the only sacrifice for our sins and the sure hope of eternal life,
is reueiled unto us. Let us continually exercise our selves in reading,
hearing, The word must be continuall^ taught exercised and practiced.
and meditating of this word, and let us never think that we have attained
sufficient knowledge and taste thereof. In deed this word is so plenteously set
forth in these our days, that it may seem to bring with it a lothing and
contempt in many: but it is not enough an hundred times to have read it, and a
thousand times to have heard it, as in the dangerous time of tentations by
experience we feel. Wherefore let us abhor the damnable impiety of lothing
and contemning the word of life, and let us embrace that most sovereign virtue
which is called the Reverence of the word. For Satan sleeps not, and in deed
he is never so strongly armed against us, as when he sees that we loath and
contemn the word, or presume of our own knowledge.

Verse. 1. I rejoiced when they said unto me: we will go into the house of the
Lord.

The like saying he has in the 60. Psalm. God has spoken in his Sanctuary,
therefore I will rejoice. Wherein is contained a comparison between his kingdom
and other mighty and welthy kingdoms of the world. A comparison between the
Gentiles and the Jews.
As if he should say: My kingdom is but a small and a weak kingdom if you
compare it with the power of other kingdoms of the world. But this have I that
all Kings and kingdoms have not, namely, that in my kingdom the Lord him self,
the King of all Kings speaks out of his holy Sanctuary: therefore my kingdom
is the kingdom of God, and therein I rejoice? Even so here, says he, I
rejoiced: And why? Because it was said unto me: we will go into the house of
the Lord. That is, God has promised that we shall be that people which shall
enter into the house of ye Lord. And should not this cause my heart to rejoice?
For when I behold all other nations, I see them go into the house of the
devil, and the temples of Idols: I see they know not the true God, neither do
they worship him. Great cause have I therefore to rejoice, because I have the
promise of God that I shall go with my people into the house of the Lord.

David shows him self here to rejoice and be glad for 2. causes: not only
that the Lord had appointed a place wherein he would be worshipped, even the
holy hill of Sion: but also because he had the consent of his people so
obediently to join with him in the true service and worship of the Lord. Often
times the Lord had before promised by Moises that he would appoint such a place
for his Sanctuary as should be certain and stable for ever: and yet above a
thousand years together the Ark of the Lord was carried hither and thither
from tent to tent, Paralip. 17^
from habitation to habitation, having no certain place to rest in: But
afterward it was showed unto David, that the Lord would have it remain in
the hill Sion, and that he would have there a temple builded, wherein he would
be worshipped. By this example we are admonished that we have double cause to
rejoice when so ever the Lord does not only incline our hearts by his holy
spirit to the obedience of his word: but also does draw other unto the same
with us, that we may be al joined together in ye fellowship of faith. We see ye
stubburnes of man's heart to be such that the greater number always murmureth
when so ever the Lord speaks: and therefore no small cause have we to rejoice
when we all consent together in one spirit and and one mind in the true
service and worship of the Lord.

These words: I rejoiced when they said, etc. seem to be very simple and to
contain in them no great matter. But if you look into the same with spiritual
eyes, there appears a wonderful great majesty in them. Which because our
Papists can not see, they do so coldly and negligently pray, read, and sing
this psalm and other, that a man would think there were no tale so foolish or
vain, which they would not either recite or hear with more courage and
delight. These words therefore must be unfolded and laid before the eyes of
the faithful. For when he says we will go into the house of ye Lord: what
notable thing can we see in these words, if we do but only behold the
stones, timber, gold and other ornaments of the material temple? But to go
into the house of the Lord signifies another manner of thing: namely to come
together where we may have God present with us: hear his word: call upon his
holy name, and receive help and succor in our necessity. Therefore it is a
false definition of the temple which the Papists make: that it is a house built
with stones and timber to the honor of God. What this temple is they them
selves know not. For the temple of Solomon was not therefore beautiful,
because it was adorned with gold and silver and other precious ornaments: but
the true beauty of that temple was, because in that place the people heard the
word of the Lord, called upon his name, found him merciful, giving peace and
remission of sins, etc. This is rightly to behold the temple, and not as the
visured Bishops behold their idolatrous temple when they consecrate it.

These are then great causes of joy and gladness: to have access unto the Lord:
to hear this consolation, that he is our God, which will hear us, which will
deliver us in the time of trouble, which will forgive us our sins, and at the
last will give us everlasting life. For these great benefits (says David) we
give thanks unto God, and we rejoice that we may come together into that place
wherein God works all these things by the power of his word, For it is the
word alone whereby we know God, whereby we come unto God, and whereby he
bestows these great benefits of his favor and love upon us. Thus David
under these words: The house of the Lord. comprehends God him self, his
name and his word, whereunto the Sabbath is dedicated, in the which we should
rest from other business and harken unto the Lord speaking unto us. What David
means by the house of the Lord.
This is to go into the house of the Lord, and for this benefit to rejoice and
give thanks unto him. For this is an inestimable benefit and cannot be
comprehended of the wicked: But the godly only do know the word and what
benefit they receive thereby. And this the Lord also requires of his people
when he so often commands in the law yt they should come together, that they
should rejoice before the Lord, they should praise and magnify his name for
his benefits and great mercies so plentifully poured upon them. And to this
David also provoke us by his own example, that with reverence, and as it
were with an admiration we should exult and rejoice before the Lord.

Verse. 2. Our feet shall stand in thy gates O Jerusalem.

The Prophet David recites here the common voice of the godly, that they
would now abide and steadfastly persevere in ye house of the Lord which he had
appointed in Jerusalem, and would not wander any more from place to place as
they had done, because ye Lord had there stablished his Sanctuary, which before
was often times removed and had no ceraine resting place. This stablishing and
continuing of the Sanctuary in one certain place prevailed much for the
confirmation of their faith. For like as when ye Arc was carried from place to
place, their faith was always wavering and unsteadfast: even so after that God
had chosen unto him self a certain habitation, he gave thereby unto them a
more sure and manifest testimony that he would be their everlasting defender
and protector. Whereby their faith was stablished and confirmed for ever. It is
no marvel then that the people with such great rejoicing and thankfulness unto
God, do promise that their feet should now stand sure and steadfast in the
gates of Jerusalem, which were wont to run hither and thither. Truth it is
that the arc did long continue in Silo. But because the Lord had made no
promise concerning that place, there could be no stabilitie of faith in the
hearts of the people. Psalm. 13^
And again, because it was said of the Mount Sion, This is my rest for ever:
here will I dwell, for I have delight therein: the faithful being surely grounded
upon this word, were bold to say that their feet should never remove again,
but stand steadfast and sure in the gates of Jerusalem and in the house of the
Lord: for this standing signifies a constant and a continual abiding for
ever. Standing feet what they signify.


But now for as much as Christ, in whom dwells the fulness of the goodhead,
and which is ye true Immanuel dwells emongst us, we have a far greater
cause to rejoice then the Israelites had. Wherefore we may seem unthankful,
yea blockish and senseles, if this promise: I am with you unto the end of the
world, do not stir up our hearts to great joy and gladness, especially if we
see it thankfully and with public consent received of the people. For that
which we rehearsed even now concerning the rest of the Lord, is altogether
fulfilled in the person of Christ, as it appears in the 2. chapter of Esaias:
His rest (says he) shall be glorious. Where he speaks not of the burial of
Christ (as some do fondly imagine) but of the excellency and dignity of the
church, which should afterward follow. The glory and beauty whereof since by
the great mercy of God we have seen, Let us be thankful therefore, and beseech
him that he will make perfect that he has begun in us, that our feet may
always be standing in the courts of the Lord, in the Church and congregation
of the faithful, where we may find God, where we may hear him calling us,
teaching us, comforting us, and succouring us.

Verse. 2. Jerusalem is builded as a city where the people may come together
to worship God.

This verse is an exposition or amplication of the verse that goes before. As
if he said: our fete shall stand in thy gates (I say) O Jerusalem, which
flourishest and increasest in all felicity. For where the word of God
flourishes, there shall the commonwealth prosper, according to the saying of
our savior Christ: First seek the kingdom of God, and all things shall be
ministered unto you: and yet so notwithstanding, that this saying also of our
savior remains always true answering unto Paul: 2. Cor. 12.
My power is made perfect through weakness. For albeit ye world does daily vex
and trouble the church many ways, yet notwithstanding ye more the adversaries
go about to destroy and pluck down, To pluck down and to oppress the Church
is to build it up.
the more does the word of God edify and build up. To pluck down then, to
destroy, and to overthrow ye church is nothing else (if you consider ye counsel
and purpose of God, and the end that follows thereof) but to build up, to
plant, to water and to increase the Church. The Decians, Maximines, and
Domitians, those bloody and mighty tyrannes, how cruelly went they about to
abolish for ever, the name of Christ? But the word and the Church of God, as a
palm tree, the more it was oppressed, the more it flourished and increased,
maugre their malice and tyranny, as the figure of the people of Israel does
declare. Exodus 1.
For so says Moises: The more the Egyptians did vex them, the more they
multiplied and grew. To this agrees also the saying of the old Church: that
the Church is watered with the blood of Martyrs. The cause of this miraculous
building is, that where so ever God is believed and his word had in due
reverence and regard, there must needs follow a victory, albeit the Saints
be destroyed, slain, and seem utterly to perish: yea albeit God him self
seem to have forsaken them, and with them to be oppressed and overcome. For so
it is with God, that when he seems most weak, then is he most strong, and
when he is oppressed in his Saints, then specially he lives, triumphs, and
is exalted in them, and in diminishing he most mightily increases.

Of such a manner of building speaks David also in this place: that albeit
Jerusalem was compassed about with so many enemies and idolatrous religions,
Jerusalem set in the midds of her adversaries, notwithstanding mightily
prospered.
notwithstanding there the word of God and true religion flourished. Who then
can prevail against us, when God is so with us? And this is the true building
of Jerusalem. To the which the Kings gathered them selves, and conspired
against it, but they were suddenly driven back and could not prevail. We also
in these our days by our own experience have proved that the more the
adversaries of the word do rage, the less they prevail against it: yea so
much the more it flourishes and increases. And what else does Satan our
perpetual adversary bring to pass by his continual tentations, but drive us
to search the word, to learn to pray, to believe, to hope, etc. Yea the cross
and oppression of the Christians is the exaltation and triumph of the Church.
Let the adversaries then do what they li^t: certain it is that ye more we are
cast down, the more we are raised up. For there is no power against the Lord,
Christ our captain and our head has a power above all power whereby he
lifts up those that are cast down: whereby he raises the dead to life, and
those that are oppressed and overcome, he makes able with joyful victory to
overcome. For in that he is God, it is his proper office to make all things of
nothing, The proper office of God.
and likewise of those things which be, to make nothing.

Thus David sets forth the praise and commendation of Jerusalem. For what a
great benefit and blessing of God is it, not only to leave a certain place
where the people may come together to serve and worship God, but also a
certain sound of the presence of God by the publishing of his word? When he
says: This is my rest, here will I dwell, here will I speak, here shall be my
word and my spirit, then all is safe: then what work so ever it be, though in
outward appearance it seem never so small, it is better then all the treasures
of the world: then the cutting away of the foreskin of the privy members is an
acceptable worship unto God. To take up a straw from the earth, if God so
commanded, is a greater and a more excellent work, and also a worship more
pleasing God, then all the glittering works of the whole papacy, which have no
ground of the word of God. This the heathen understood not, and therefore they
contemned Jerusalem, and marueled why the people should resort thither certain
times of the year, rather then to other cities. Like as Naaman Cirus thought
at ye beginning that the waters of Damascus were no worse then the waters of
Iordane: 4. Kings. 5.
but he had no commandment of the Lord that he should wash him self in
those waters for the clensing of his leprosy. It is the word alone therefore
that makes a difference between the Church of God and the Gentiles, Papists,
and all the Antichristian rabble. By this word it judges, it teaches, it
baptiseth, it distributeth the Lords supper, it comfort, it reproves, it
excommunicateth, etc.

Thus (I say) David extolleth and magnifieth his Jerusalem: first in respect of
the spiritual building thereof, because there is the kingdom and priesthood,
there is the word and worship of the Lord: then also in respect as well of the
material building, as also of those things which pertain to the good
government of a city, as peace and unity, laws and judgment: but principally
he speaks not of that building, and therefore he says: It is edified as a
city where all may participate together, that is, may come together to worship
the Lord. For there was no other place in all the world where the people might
come together to celebrate the name of ye Lord, but Jerusalem alone. So that
this verse is as an exposition of that place in Exodus Where I shall leave a
memorial of my name, there will I come unto thee, etc. As if he said: that
place is Jerusalem, in the which the people of God must congregate together, to
hear his word, to celebrate his name: where also the Lord him self has
promised to dwell: whether the people do fly in all their necessities, to call
upon God for help and succoure, etc. This is the glory of Jerusalem: to the
which all the glory of the world was not able to be compared. Jerusalem the
holy city.
Therefore in S. Matthew it is called holy, and is so magnified here of the
Prophet: Albeit it was afterward horribly profaned of the Gentiles. But why
do the people gather together in this place?

Verse. 4. Whereunto the tribes, even the tribes of the Lord go up for a
testimony, or to testify to Jerusalem, and to praise the name of the Lord.

This verse also contains in (...) the words before recited out of Exodus:
Where I shall put a m^moriall of my name, etc. For this memorial signifies
the whol^ worship of God, together with the word: that is, the preaching of the
promises and the law, with the ministry of the priests, not ^^^ly in the
sacrifices of the law, but specially in the chiefest sacrifi^es of all: that
is, of the celebrating and praising the name of the Lord. In the which were set
forth spiritual consolations of victory against sin and death, and also
temporal, concerning the kingdom and political order. These benefits he
sets forth when he speaks of ascending up, and makes a comparison between
Jerusalem and other cities. As if he said: Other cities may flourish with
riches and power more then this city, but this is it to the which the tribes
do ascend: not as they do in other nations, but the tribes of the Lord, which
the Lord him self has chosen to be his people above all other nations of the
earth, and he to be their God. And here he does not exclude the Proselytes
which were of the Gentiles and did associate them selves unto this people: for
he speaks simply of those that did ascend up to hear the word and to
invoke the name of the Lord: as the words that follow do declare.

For a testimony unto Israel, and to praise the name of the Lord. Whereby he
signifies no other thing but that there was a place in Jerusalem appointed of
the Lord for the preaching of the word and prayer. The chiefest service of God
is to preach the word and pray
And this is worthy to be noted, that David speaks of no more kinds of
sacrifice but of these two only. He says not that the temple was appointed of
God that sacrifices should there be slain, incence offered, oblations made,
and every man show him self thankful unto God with his gifts. Of these
things he makes no mention at all: albeit they were commanded to be done no
where else but in the temple. Only he speaks of preaching the word and
thanks giving, or prayer. And albeit he reproves not these sacrifices, yet he
plainly declares that ye sum of true religion is, to hear the Lord when he
speaks unto us, and to invoke and praise his holy name.

This is it for the which David so highly praises his temple, (which we also
ought specially to behold in our temples) that the tribes do ascend up
thither to testify unto Jerusalem: To testify what it signifies.
that is, to teach and to hear the word of God. For so he means by this
word [testifie] as the Hebrews have many words to signify the ministry of
the word and doctrine. To utter, to promise, to confess, to sit, to judge,
to testify, to teach, all these words in effect do signify as much as to
preach or publish the word. The preachers are witnesses to the people of that
they know: which is not seen nor felt, but believed. They are also witnesses
which he are the word. For when they hear it they testify or bear witness
against the devil, the kingdom of the world, sin and death: also against
adulterers, murderers, thieves, false brethren, etc: for the glory of God, the
advancing of his kingdom, chastity, innocence, charity, etc. For God is
invisible, and therefore when they are heard which teach and preach unto us the
word of God, then God him self is heard. For he can not be heard but by
witnesses, and (as S. Paul calls them) by his messengers. That which is
taught them in the Church is invisible and absent, and therefore can be
apprehended by no other means, but by the testimony of the word. So the whole
Gospel is a testimony: for it speaks of things absent, and it is nothing
else but the preaching of faith. This I speak for the simple and ignorant
concerning this word [testifie].

This is the cause then why David so rejoices, namely that his Jerusalem was
builded to this end, that the word of faith might there be preached, whereby
ye people might learn to know what the will of God is, what he intends to do
with his people, what punishment and plagues he threatens to the wicked. And
this preaching is the testimony which David here speaks of, made unto the
children of Israel gathered together in this place: whereby they were known
to be the peculiar and chosen people of God from all other nations, as he says
in an other Psalm: He has not so dealt with every nation. Wherefore we also
have great cause to acknowledge the rich blessing of God, that ye word of God
is now purely and sincerely preached emongst us, as it was then in Jerusalem,
and the sweet promises of the Gospel sounding in the ears and consciences of
the godly to their singular comfort and consolation: also the threatenings of
God published, whereby the wicked are called to repentance and the godly kept in
the fear of God and mortification of the old man through the assistance of
the holy Ghost, whom the father through Christ and for Christ's sake, pours
upon them abundantly which willingly and gladly receive this testimony.

This is one part then of the true worship of God, to learn the way how to
worship God in such sort as best pleases him, which consists in teaching of
the word and hearing of God when he speaks unto us by his witnesses, and
therefore the Devil desires nothing so much as to hinder ye preaching and
hearing of the word. For this cause he rayseth up, (as ye heard in the first
Psalm) lying lips and deceitful tongues: he stirs up the world with
sword and power to oppress the godly, and even in our selves he goes about to
deface this kind of service and worship of God by our deuilish contempt and
lothing of the same. But contrariwise, to build Churches and gorgiously to
deck them for the maintenance of masses, oblations, false worship and
idolatry, all this he can abide well enough: for by these things he knows
that his strength is not diminished, nor his power weakened. But when the word
of God is preached concerning remission of sins, the righteousness that
comes by Christ and life everlasting, this doctrine destroys his kingdom.
This causes him to rage and to seek by all means possible, how he may hinder
the course of the gospel.

The other part of the worship of God is to praise the name of the Lord. To
give thanks to the Lord is a fruit of the word.
This David makes the second kind of worship, when he commends his
Jerusalem. And here again note that he speaks nothing of the sacrifices of
the law: for albeit he does not discommend them, (as I said before) yet he
reckeneth them but as chafe in comparison of the word and the fruit which
follows thereof, which is thanks giving. And if he had named the sleying of
sacrifices, every man had not been able to serve God with that kind of
worship, Therefore he requires nothing else but that which they were able to
do without great charges, which yet notwithstanding very few did. He did not
condemn the building of ye temple which afterward should be done by his son
Solomon, but did earnestly desire the same, and the cause why he did desire it
here you see, namely that first the name of God might there be preached, and
then that God might there accept the prayers of his people, with praise and
thanks giving for his benefits received.

Hitherto we have heard how the Prophet extolleth and magnifieth the
incomparable gift and benefit of God, the word I mean, with thanks and praise
unto God for the same. For that is a benefit and blessing in deed which is
known and acknowledged so to be. All the world, as we see, is full and even
glutted with the benefits of God: notwithstanding it remains still in such
blindness that it knows them not to be the gifts of God, and therefore it
takes and uses them no otherwise then hogs do their draffe and swill, But
David sees that God had given him a kingdom, wherein the pure word of God and
true religion flourished. This great benefit he acknowledges, and therefore
he so rejoices and magnifieth his Jerusalem, as a place appointed by ye Lords
own mouth where the people might come together to hear the word of God and to
give thanks unto God for his benefits: out of the which place it was not
possible to find God. The Gentiles, because they had not the word, nor this
hearing whereof David here speaks, could not find God. Hereby we may see how
horrible a thing it is, to contemn and to loath the word. For what can be more
horrible then that man a weak creature, nothing but earth and dust, should so
lift up him self in pride, that when the majesty of God speaks and most
lovingly inuiteth him to hear, he will not hear. And yet we see that there is
nothing more common then this impiety, this horrible contempt, this deuilish
lothing of the word of God emongst all sorts of men. The cause is, for that
we hear not the Lord speaking now unto us in his Majesty, as he spoke in ye
mount Sinai, at what time the people were astonished and trembled at the
terrible voice of the Lord, and yet how soon had they forgotten the Lord, and
murmured both against the Lord and against Moises. Thus in his Majesty he
speaks no more, but he speaks now unto us by men, and therefore he is
contemned. Horrible it is that Sodom was burnt up with fire from heaven.
Horrible it is also that the whole world was destroyed with water. Moreover ye
daily examples of impiety and wickedness, as murder, whoredom, etc. are such
that they can not be heard without horror and trembling. But how horrible so
ever all these things be, yet is it much more horrible to contemn God when by
his word he speaks unto us: which all the world does at this day, not only
they which persecute ye word with open tyranny, but such also as are even
emongst us, and at ye beginning seemed to receive this doctrine with great
rejoicing.

Wherefore David exhorts us in this Psalm, with thankefulnes to acknowledge
this singular benefit of the word, and to beware of the horrible contempt
thereof. How much better is it to suffer pestilence, famine and the sword:
how much more tolerable for David to become both an adulterer and a murderer,
so that there remain a reverence to the word (which repentance necessarily
brings with it) then to fall so far as to contemn the word? For this is to
heap wrath upon wrath: like as it is to heap grace upon grace with David, to
hold fast the word, and withal to acknowledge the great benefit thereof.

To be brief, like as there is no greater joy and felicity to the godly, then
to hear and to know the voice of God speaking unto them, offering, grace,
peace, remission of sins and life everlasting: so can there be to them no
greater cross then the contempt of the word. For what do thou else but
contemn God him self, yea crucify again the son of God, and tread thy
Savior under thy feet, when thou contemnest the word of God, which for thy
salvation, is reueiled and offered unto thee? No mortal man can abide such
intolerable contempt, as the Lord our God continually suffers. For he is
patient, and would that we should convert and repent: but he pays home at the
length, as we may see by the fall of the Synagoge and the destruction of
Jerusalem. For Christ plainly shows that the cause of such horrible
calamities was, for that they did not know the time of their visitation. Let
us learn then, by these examples, what a great blessing it is to hear the
Lord our God speaking unto us, and as a tender mother with her children, most
lovingly talking with us: For this is it which David means when he speaks
of the ascending up of the tribes to Jerusalem and to the house of the Lord,
to testify unto Israel, that is, there to teach and to hear the word of the
Lord, and to give thanks unto him for his benefits. This is that city
therefore that is worthy to be decked with all precious ornaments. This is the
people of whom our Savior Christ says: Blessed are they that hear the word
of God and keep it with a good heart. Here is the kingdom of heaven, here is
the true paradise, here are the open gates to everlasting life.

Verse. 5. For there are the seats of judgment: even the seats of the house
of David.

This may be understand both of the civil government and also of the Church,
but specially it is spoken of the church. And here note that judgment is taken
for doctrine. As if he said: This is the glory of this people, that in this
place is stablished the chair and seat in the which the word of the Lord is
published and taught, weak consciences comforted and instructed, and the way
of salvation laid open unto men. Likewise in the first Psalm he says: The
wicked shall not stand in judgment: that is, they do not persevere and abide
in the doctrine of faith, and therefore they are as chafe which the wind
scatters from the face of the earth. The Church of Rome will now be called the
seat of judgment, and even there also the Lord had once his seat: but now
through wicked doctrine and damnable idolatry it is the seat of Satan, the
chair of pestilence and a den of wicked spirits. This is then the true
sense and meaning of these words: In this place the word of the Lord is
fulfilled, promising that he will leave a memorial of his name. For here he is
to be found, here he dwells. Therefore here is life, here is salvation, here
is remission of sins, here is the tyranny of Satan vanquished, etc. For all
these he means when he names the seats of judgment, that is, the
administration of truth, the ministry of faith, the voice of Gods majesty
speaking unto his people. For (as I said) judgment signifies here found and
sincere doctrine concerning grace, faith, works, magistrates, civil
ordinances, etc. Where this doctrine is, there are the seats of judgment. As
we also may now glory of our Churches for the sincere doctrine whereby men are
truly taught out of ye word concerning grace, sin, righteousness, faith,
works, obedience to parents and magistrates. This doctrine is as it wear, a
bright shining sun, from whence the Churches do receive their light. And
contrariwise where the word of God is not, there are the seats of iniquity
and of Satan him self: For the word makes the seat, and not the seat the
word, as the Antichristian Church of Rome most damnably teaches.

Now, whereas with a repetition he adds: Even the seats of the house of
David, this is the cause for that he looks to the promise made unto David,
namely that the seat of the tabernacle or the temple should be builded by his
son Solomon in Jerusalem, where judgment should be exercised, that is to
say, men's consciences comforted, terrified, instructed by the word, and also
because the Lord would that David's posterity should reign after him, until
the eternity of the heavenly Jerusalem should be reueiled.

Here is the image of the heavenly Jerusalem also to be consi^dered. The image
of the heavenly Jerusalem.
The earthly Jerusalem was builded on a hill, so that there was no access unto
it but by ascending upward. The celestial Jerusalem is builded in heaven,
whereunto none can come, but by mounting up with alacrity of spirit, out of
this earthly mansion and corruptible life, and therefore no earthly and carnal
men can come there. The earthly Jerusalem was builded as a city for the people
of God, where they might meet together to serve and worship God. Likewise the
celestial Jerusalem is builded for ye tribes of the Lord, the elect and
faithful people, there to meet together, first in this life by faith, and
afterward by eternal society both in soul and body. Colo. 3.
This Jerusalem Saint Paul means when he says: If ye be risen again with
Christ, seek for those things which are above. And the author of the Epistle
to the Hebrews, admonishes us that by faith we are already come to this
heavenly Jerusalem. Heb. 12.
Ye are come (says he) to the mount Sion and to the city of the living God,
the celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels, and to the
congregation of the first borne, which are written in heaven, and to God the
judge of all, and to the spirits of just and perfect men, and to Jesus the
Mediator of the new testament, etc. The earthly Jerusalem celebrated the name
of the Lord with praise and thanks giving in the congregation. In the heavenly
Jerusalem the Angels and company of holy spirits do praise and shall praise
the Lord for ever more. The earthly Jerusalem had in it the seat of David. The
heavenly Jerusalem has the throne of Christ the son of God, the King of
Kings, the Lord of Lords, of whom David was a figure: The earthly Jerusalem had
tribunal seats where all things were judged with equity. The celestial
Jerusalem has the tribunal seat where judgment is and shall be most justly
pronounced upon the universal world, and upon all men that either have been,
be, or shall be. The Lord grant yt with an invincible faith we may mount up to
this celestial Jerusalem, ye city of God where are such joys and felicity
as neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor tongue can tell, nor yet
heart can think, Verse. 6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, let them prosper
that love thee.



To pray for the peace of Jerusalem, is to pray for the safety, prosperity
and welfare of the Church of God, that Satan have no power to hinder the course
and fruit of the word. David saw, first in spirit this horrible contempt of
the word and ministry: and moreover he saw that this glorious gift could not
be preserved by man's diligence. Therefore he goes about here to stir up
the hearts of men to pray for the preservation of this gift. As if he said: Here
is the Lords own seat and throne of judgment: notwithstanding how few do
reverence and regard it as they should do? Yea, the greatest part of the world
hates it, and wishes the subversion thereof. Wherefore I exhort you* O ye little
flock, to honor and reverence this seat, to pray for the peace thereof,
lovingly to salute it, and to say: The Lord out of Sion bless thee, etc. So
long as this city flourishes, ye have ye Lord him self speaking, saying,
giving victory against all the assaults of Satan, against sin, the terror of
conscience, etc. What cause have ye then to pray for the prosperity of this
city, whereby ye enjoy such heavenly benefits? When the church of God does not
prosper, it cannot go well with any particular member thereof. No marvel then
why David so earnestly exhorts all the faithful to pray for the peace and
prosperity of the Church. Wherefore if we will pray as we ought to do, we must
first and principally commend unto God the common state of the church. For he
that seeks his own welfare and neglects the state and prosperity of the
Church, does not only show him self to be void of all sense and zeal of true
piety, but also the prayers which he makes for him self are in vain and
profit him nothing.

Let them prosper that love thee. He wishes unto them which love the word and
reverence this seat, that God would bless them with all manner of blessing and
felicity. And this prayer is very necessary. For we see daily, how the true
professors of the Gospel are in danger by the ministers of Satan, the enemies
of God and his truth, on every side, which could be content rather to have the
Turk to reign over them, yea the devil him self and all the furies of hell,
then to see us prosper, and the Gospel to flourish, least their cursed works
of darkness and infidelity should appear unto the world.

Verse. 7. Peace be within thy walls and prosperity within thy palaces.

Now that the Prophet has exhorted all men to pray for the peace and
prosperity of Jerusalem, he turns unto the city, and does not only wish
well unto it, but also he shows unto other how they should pray for it. The
sum whereof is that true religion may flourish: the ministry and ministers
of the word may be defended against the false prophets, that concord may be
maintained emongst the pastors and preachers of the word, and that the civil
government may prosper. How necessary this prayer is, experience daily
teaches us. For where these 2. things are, namely concord in the Church, and
peace in the civil state, there can no good thing be lacking, and therefore the
devil so busily labors to trouble the peace of them both. This was the cause
why there was such a multitude of false prophets, rebels, and seditious
persons emongst this people, as ye stories do testify. Wherefore David being
taught by his own experience, prays for these 2. things: without the which
the world is nothing else but a wild desert.

Example hereof may be unto us ye late times wherein we lived under the Pope
before this light of the Gospel began to shine. For then, when the sound
doctrine of the word was lacking, what could the Pope and all his shauelings
do? What one verse did they rightly understand throughout the whole psalter?
Whereby it came to pass that they were not able to resist most manifest
impieties, which by the strong and mighty delusions of the devil ouerflowed ye
world, as in pilgrimages, where they maintained most damnable idolatries and
caused the people to adore the works of their own hands, and if any man spoke
against them, he was up and by taken and burnt as an heretic. So true is it,
that when the word is once lost, the world remains in most horrible darkness
and can do nothing else but abuse the gifts of God, and so falls to most
detestable impiety or else to desperation. This David foreseeth, and therefore
he prays so earnestly for the prosperity of Jerusalem, for faithful pastors
in the Church, and godly Princes in the politic state.

Verse. 8. For my brethren and neighbors sakes, I will wish thee now
prosperity.

Here David shows the cause, as he does also in the verse following, why he
prays thus for Jerusalem. As if he said: In that I wish that peace may be in
thee o Jerusalem, in that I desire thy prosperity and welfare, I do it for my
brethren and neighbors sakes, that is, for my fellows and companions in faith
and religion. And here in his own person he shows the common complaint of
all those that rule either in the church, or in the common weal, or in
families, which is, that the greater part of men is ever perverse and wicked.
The godly pastor when he goes about with great care and diligence to reform
the corrupt life and wickedness of the people, sees notwithstanding that the
more part still remains perverse and intractable. The Magistrate traueling
with like care and diligence in his calling, finds the people disobedient and
incorrigible. Likewise is it in household government. What unfaithful service
shall thou find even amongst those whom thou thoughtest to have found most
true and faithful? Hereof it comes that many are discomforted and utterly
discouraged, seeing so little fruit and success to ensue of their godly
travels. Notwithstanding we see it can not otherwise be: For Satan our
perpetual enemy cease neither night nor day to stir up discord and
perverse opinions in the Church: in the civil state stubborn and disobedient
persons, in household government, negligent and unfaithful families. Here we
must look with David, not to the greater part, which is ever wicked, but to
our brethren and neighbors. So does Paul in the 2. Timoth. 3. For the elects
sake I sustain and suffer all things, says he. For if it were not for their
sakes, who would willingly take upon him the office of a pastor or preacher in
the Church? These, the elect I mean, the Lord has here and there sparsed
among the wicked, as precious stones in the mids of the earth. Therefore thou
must not think to preach to these only, which were to be wished: but that can
not be because they are mixed with the ungodly multitude. Likewise, when thou
art called to be a civil magistrate or a governor of a household, thou shall
not find all to be precious stones, gold or silver: but let it suffice thee if
in a whole multitude (as it chances in mines) thou find but one vein of
silver, or emongst a great deal of earth but one precious stone. For the
greatest part in the Church is heretical and godles: the least part in the
civil state obedient and loving of virtue. Hereof it comes then, that al
things are full of trouble to the godly pastor, the Magistrate, the householder,
because the wicked with such success contemn and disobey all godly orders.

Notwithstanding, thou man of God, stand in thy calling, do thy duty, pray
for peace, exhort, counsel, reprove those whom thou have charge over. For
since that now by the word of God ye church is somewhat purged of false
religion, superstition and idolatry, and the Magistrates better instructed of
their duty and office, Satan rages as a strong armed man, keeping his house
when a stronger comes. Be strong therefore in these tentations, and think
that, as these things are not begun by the power of Satan, so though he rage
against the same never so much, thou must not be discouraged or slack the
Lords business: but first serve the Lord and then thy brethren and neighbors.
For their sakes the Churches must be instructed, the common wealth governed:
not for the worlds sake and the ungodly multitude, for it is not worthy that
a thief should be hanged, an adulterer or murderer put to death: but the Lord
in heaven and our brethren and neighbors in earth are worthy of this service,
as he adds in the verse following. Thus I expound this verse to be a
consolation for pastors, civil Magistrates and governors of families,
against the multitude of the wicked, and the trobles which by them the godly
do sustain.

Verse. 9. Because of the house of the Lord our God I will procure thy wealth.

This is an other cause why he prays for the peace and prosperity of
Jerusalem, for that the Sanctuary of the Lord and the feate of true religion
being stablished in that city, if it prospered not, the worship and service of
God could not there continue. As if he said: The Lord our God has stablished
his seat in thee O Jerusalem, and in the mids of thee has he set up his
worship: For the which cause I love thee, and think thee worthy of all
prosperity.

But why does he add hereunto: Our God? Because God had chosen this nation to
be as his own peculiar people. And this also was the cause why David so loved
them, and was not discomforted with these troubles which he for their sakes
sustained both in the Church and in the civil government: but being chosen to
be a King and a Prophet to this people, he constantly endured all troubles, and
herewithall comforted him self, that first he served the Lord his God, and
then his brethren, and was not an unprofitable servant, but fruitful unto
God that he might be glorified, and to his neighbor and brother that he might
be saved.

Let us likewise pray for the welfare of our brethren, and for the house of the
Lord with David, who as this Psalm shows, did well understand the power and
glory of the word, and therefore he neither gives thanks nor yet rejoices
for the abundance of gold and silver (which notwithstanding he lacked not) but
for the word and true worship of the Lord. Where these two are not lacking, all
other incommodities may easily be borne. For if we have the Lord abiding with
us, if we maintain his word and his true service, and seek the salvation of
our brethren, what can we desire more? But where the word and true worship of
God is not regarded, there is no God, no mercy, no salvation, neither does
there any thing else remain but the cursed multitude which shall be damned in
hell. Therefore David exhorts us in this Psalm above all things to reverence
the word, and by faithful prayer to seek the advancement thereof: Also to
give thanks unto God for peace and true preachers which govern the Church
according to his word: for where these things are not, there must needs be
trouble and vexation, unquietness of conscience, murder, adultery and such other
horrible sins, which the Lord turn away from our Churches, and preserve that
poor remnant emonges the damnable multitude, which serve and worship him
according to his word.

By these two latter verses we are admonished, first how every Christian ought
to regard him which is his fellow in faith and religion, that is to say, as his
brother and neighbor: Then also why he ought to have a hearty love and zeal to
the Church and congregation of the faithful. For my brethren says David, and
for my neighbors. And again, for the house of the Lord our God. These two
things ought to be considered in the Church of Christ. In it are our brethren
and neighbors, in it is the house of God, yea rather it is the house of God it
self, in the which are the children of God and true brethren. O happy is he,
and a right Christian in deed, which being endued with the true knowledge and
faith of Christ, and also with that brotherly love which is according to the
spirit of the children of God, can unfeignedly and heartily say: For my brethren
and neighbors, and for the house of the Lord our God I both seek and I wish
the prosperity and welfare of the Church of God.

The 123. Psalm. I lift up mine eyes unto thee, etc.
This Psalm (as ye see) is but short, The argument of the Psalm.
and therefore a very fit example to show the force of prayer not to consist
in many words, but in feruency of spirit. For great and weighty matters may be
comprised in few words, if they proceed from the spirit and the unspeakable
gronings of the heart, A breife prayer in necessity carries power with it.
especially when our necessity is such as will not suffer any long prayer.
Every prayer is long enough if it be fervent and proceed from a heart that
understands the necessity of the Sainets: not in such small matters as y^
world counts great and weighty, as poverty, loss of goods, and such other
worldly incommodities, but when the Church is oppressed with violence and
tyranny, when the name of God is profaned with wicked doctrine, or if there be
any thing else that either hinders the glory of God or the salvation of
souls, These perils can not well be uttered in prayer, and therefore the prayer
of the faithful is then most effectuous, when with grief of heart and
affliction of spirit they see these things, and earnestly think upon them.

So this Psalm is a prayer against the mighty, rich, and welthy of the world,
which either cruelly molest and vex, or proudly deride and contemn the godly,
as the last verse does declare. And these are not only such as prefer wicked
doctrine, superstition and idolatry before the undefiled word of God: but even
such also as glory in the word and sound doctrine and will be counted lovers
and favorers of the Gospel, and partakers with us of the name and glory of
Christ. Of such there was a great number amongst the people of Israel. For they
had the law, sacrifices, and ceremonies instituted by Moises according to ye
word of God. They had great plenty of Prophets and godly teachers: yet how
they used them, the stories do declare. When Elisha sent the son of a
Prophet unto Iehu: 4. Reg. 9.
the other said: Wherefore comes this mad fellow unto thee? The Psalms
also and preachings of the Prophets concerning faith and true righteousness
before God, do show that they were contemned and derided of the multitude, yea
and condemned as heretics because they seemed; not to attribute so much to ^
sacrifices and ceremonies of y^ law as they should do. Likewise David was
counted a seditious fellow, a rebel, a traitor, and charged with ambition and
greedy desire to reign. And afterward when he went about to bring the ark of the Lord to Jerusalem, and with a good and a zealous mind expressed his joy:
Michol his wife received him with these words: Oh how glorious was the King of
Israel this day: 2. Reg. 6.
which was uncovered in the eyes of the maidens of his servants, as a fool
uncovers him self: Now, we can not think that only Michol did thus
slanderously speak of yt kings doings: but there were (no doubt) other also in
the court, men both of wisdom and dignity which judged the same. For what so
ever he be that professes and loves the word unfeignedly, and zealously seeks
the glory of God, he shall be judged and called of the cursed world and
worldlings both a foolish and a mad man. That it has been always so, the
stories do declare, and also these our days do witness the same.

Wherefore this Psalm sets before our eyes a goodly example: that for as
much as we are compelled to see and suffer this contempt and despite of the
proud and scornful, we should pray with David against al such: that is, first
against the pope and his whole kingdom of faces, for they do not only proudly
contemn us, but also condemn us. Then also against false brethren, such as in
our churches live in all carnal and godles security, and albeit they will seem
to be no enemies but friends unto ye gospel, yet either deride or molest ye
true professors thereof. Against al such this Psalm is vnitte^ for the troubled
and afflicted children of God, which are counted of the world either heretical
or sedicious; or else fools and abiectes. But this consolation they have, that
seeing the holy Ghost in this Psalm does teach them how to pray in these
distresses, they shall be heard, and though they be here contemned and counted
the outswepings of the earth, they shall be made glorious in the kingdom of God.

Verse. 1. I lift up mine eyes unto thee which dwell in the heavens.

This is a vehement groaning of a troubled mind, A vehement groaning of the heart,
destitute of all comfort.
looking about and seeking every way for comfort and succor, but none could be
found. Whether then shall I miserable ma^^stie (says he) in this distress?
Strength to with stand mine enemies I have none. Of wisdom and counsel,
being compassed with such a multitude of adversaries, I am utterly destitute.
To thee therefore I come, O my God: To thee I lift up mine eyes, which dwell
in the heau^^^* Here note that the heavens are called the habitatio^ of God,
not because he is there contained (for as the heavens are his seat, so is the
earth his footestoole): but because he does from thence more manifestly show
the majesty of his divinity. And what so ever he has at any time done upon
the earth by reuela^ions, visions or oracles, he seemed to do it from heaven,
From whence also have come the most notable and severe punishments of the
wicked: as of the first world by the flood: of the Sodomites by the rayning
down of fire with brimstone: of the Egyptians, by ha^se mixed with fire: of
the Amorr^ans by the rayning of stones from heaven. Psalm. 2. Psalm. 116.
And hereof come these sayings: He that dwells in the heavens shall laugh
them to scorn. The Lord looked down from heaven. The Lord has prepared his
seat in heaven. Our God is in heaven and does what soever he will. Tim 6.
Which dwells in the light that none can attain unto. Therefore we read
that Christ commonly when he prayed, Luke. 9.
or when he gave thanks to his father, looked up to heaven: And when he
departed hence unto his father, he was seen to ascend up into the heavens.
These things are spoken to this end that we may know that God our father is
not earthly* infirm, or corruptible: but the Lord and inhabitour of heaven (as
a place without all corruption, and therefore a most meet habitation for him)
almighty and ruling over all, everlasting, incorruptible, seeing all things,
percing all things.

The prophet also calls God here the inhabitour of heaven, to signify that
the earth is full of the proud and scornful, and that the godly are trodden
under foot of those that dwell upon the earth, and are counted the ou^swepings
of the world, and therefore he sees none besides the Lord and inhabitour of
heaven of whom he may look for help and succor. The great danger whereof
the Prophet complayneth, is herein expressed, in that he looking about on
every side and seeking for succor, could find none to help him but only the
inhabitour of heaven. These things make the tentation much more grievous and
terrible, and therefore he prays with such words in his tentation as perhaps
he at that time did not perfectly understand, as Saint Paul also says: We
understand not what we pray. The spirit knows and understands what these
words mean: but man can not conceive the power thereof in the time of his
tentation, whiles faith is infirm and is yet in the conflict. But when our
petition is granted and prayer heard, then faith has her force, and we have
more perfect understanding both of the tentation and also of the prayer which
we therein used.

The Prophet therefore in this verse sets the inhabitour of heaven against
the inhabitours of the earth, and conceiueth comfort and courage, that albeit
the world is great and mighty, yet God is more mighty. This is the meaning of
the Prophet in this verse. And albeit the words be but simple, as ye see, yet
are they full of consolation to him that believes. The spirit which
ministers these words and stirs up these groninges in the hearts of the
afflicted, knows with what majesty and power they are spoken.

Verse. 2. Behold, as the eyes of servant look unto the hand of their
masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistres, so our eyes
wait upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us.

Here the prophet sets forth by similitude the nature of true piety. As if
he said: Great is our affliction, and yet the Lord prolongeth his help,
neither easing our misery, nor revenging our wrong. He suffers the cruel,
the proud and the scornful to trea^ us under foot, and to prosper in our
sight. This delay is tedious and grievous unto us. Notwithstanding we will not
murmr or become impatient in these our afflictions, but as good servant in
their distress look to the hand, that is, for help and succor at the hand of
their masters and mistresses, so will we attend upon y^ Lord our God until he
have pity upon us. God sometimes prolongeth his help in tentation.
Thus we see that the Lord sometimes deferreth his help, neither showing how
nor when he will help, but leaving his Saints in such perplexity as though he
had no regard either of the time or of ye manner of their deliverance so that
they seem to hang (as it were) in the mids between heaven and earth. These
things are grievous and excedingly increase the tentation. Therefore we must lay
sure hold on this consolation which the Prophet here sets forth, that our
tentation shall have an end: but not as we would, lest we seem to appoint the
time and manner of our deliverance, which ye lord reserueth to him self alone.

And here is an example set forth unto us, The patience of the faithful.
patiently to wait upon the Lord in the time of trouble, to be instant in
prayer, and never to let our hands fall, or turn our eyes from the Lord: but
constantly to persevere in sure hope and expectation of his gracious
deliverance, and of his helping hand to be present with us in our necessity:
whereof our Savior Christ also warns us in the Gospel of the woman and the
unrighteous judge, who although he neither feared God nor man, yet because this
woman never ceased to call upon him, he was compelled to hear her cause. For
if the worst man be not yet so wicked, but he may be overcome with instant and
continual prayer, what shall we not hope to obtain at Gods hand, which
willingly offers him self to hear our prayers, and also commands us to
pray: yea and is more ready to grant our petitions then we are to ask. For in
that he differreth his help, he does it not because he will not hear us, but
to exercise and stir up our faith, and to teach us that the ways whereby he
can and does deliver us are so manifold and miraculous, that we are never able
to conceive them. Therefore let us think that the thing which we ask is not
denied but differred, and assure our selves that we are not neglected because
of this delay. The patient abiding of the afflicted (says David in an other
Psalm) shall not perish: yea the Lord will not lose the glory of his name
which David in the same Psalm attributes unto him; namely that he is a helper
in time convenient.

And here is to be noted by the way, that the holy Ghost commends the
government of households and families in this place, and signifies that to
serve is a vocation which pleases him, if it be done in faith. For servants
are here mentioned for the comfort of all good servants, and in them is
commended, not only their patience but also the confidence and trust which
they have in the goodness of their masters, assuredly trusting with patient
tarying to find mercy and favor in their sight in time convenient. But in
deed David speaks here of better servants then are commonly seen at this
day: for there is no kind of people more deceitful, negligent and stubborn,
even when there is great cause of sharp and severe correction. Wherefore let
all such as will be counted good servant, remember the example and rule set
forth here by the holy Ghost, and observed of all good servant: which is,
that they are not froward and stubborn, but patiently endure all things and do
the duty of true and faithful servant, having always a watchful eye to
the hand of their masters.

The humility of the faithful.
And further note how humbly the faithful think of them selves in the sight of
God. They are called and chosen to this dignity, to be the heirs and children
of God, and are exalted above the Angels, and yet notwithstanding they count
them selves no better in Gods sight then servants. They say not here:
behold, like as children look to the hand of their fathers, but as servant
to the hand of their masters. This is the humility and modesty of the godly,
and it is so far of that hereby they lose the dignity of Gods children to
the which they are called, that by this means it is made to them more sure and
certain.

Moreover here is to be observed that David says not simply: We lift up our
eyes to the Lord, but he adds moreover: to the Lord our God: that is to say,
that God which has revealed him self to us in his word: for otherwise he were
not our God. The gods of the Gentiles and idols which men devise unto them
selves, are called gods: but he is the true God and none but he, which has
declared him self to us in his word and promised in the same that he will be
our God, etc. The Papists have devised unto them selves a service and worship
of God contrary to the word of God, and therefore they worship not the true
God in deed, but an idol of their own heart: yea they worship a crea^^^ made
and fashioned with man's hands for the almighty crea^^^ of heaven and earth.
But our God is he, not whom we have devised, but which has painted and set out
him self in his Scriptures, how and by what means he will be served and
worshipped. This our God because he seems oftentimes to estraunge him self
from us, and to have no care of us, the wicked do shun and forsake, and
seek help of Peter and Paul, and many times of Satan through sorcery and
witchcraft and other deuilish means, thinking (because God prolongeth his
help) to find thereby more speedye succor. But thus our God is wont to deal
with us: first (as is said) to prove and exercise us, and so to bring us to the
knowledge of our selves, that we may see our own weakness and frailty, which
are so ready to be led away from him: then also to bring us to the knowledge
of him, whereby we may see both how willing he is, and also how able by far
better means to help us then man's heart can conceive.

Verse. 3. Have mercy upon us O Lord, have mercy upon us, for we have suffered
too much contempt.

Here may we see that the godly do not only feel their own cross, but the
affliction of other also is to them a great cross: and as they suffer
together, so they cry unto God for help and succor as well for other as for
them selves. Yea the common calamity of their brethren is to them a greater
cross then their own.

Have mercy upon us, etc. This repetition as it does declare a great vehemency
and feruentnes of spirit in the afflicted crying unto God for help and
deliverance: so it shows their affliction and calamity to be exceeding
grievous. For we have suffered too much contempt. He said before that the godly
being brought to extreme misery by the tyranny and oppression of the wicked,
did lift up their eyes to God for help and succor. Now he shows also what
despite and reproach they suffered of the proud and scornful. Whereby it
appears that the ungodly sought, not only with cruelty and oppression, but
also with despite, contempt and ignominy to tread, as it were, under foot the
children of God. He says not only: we suffer contempt, but we are filled with
contempt and ignominy, using a similitude taken of a vessel, which is filled
so full that it can contain no more. Thus the children of God do not burst out
at the first into these gronings and grievous complaints when so ever they are
contemned and despised, but patiently suffer in hope that God will at the
length ease their miserye, until they be filled with all manner of despite
contempt, and scorning of the wicked, whereby they are compelled to cry unto
God doubling their complaint, as follows in the next verse.

Verse. 4. Our soul is filled too full of the mocking of the welthy, and of the
despitefulnes of the proud.

When the godly are not only oppressed with injuries, hated and despised: but
also mocked and scorned of the wicked, there can be to them no greater misery.
And this is it that they specially here complain of, as of all their
calamities the most grievous. The cause why he says that the welthy and proud
do so spitefully set them selves against the Church of God, is for that they
which are of power and authority in the world, are always wont to despise and
contemn the godly: which do so much esteem the glory, wealth and prosperity
of this world, that they regard nothing at all the spiritual kingdom of
Christ: yea the more they rise in wealth and dignity, the more their pride
increases. This place teaches then that it is no strange or new thing if
the children of God be contemned of the children of this world which abound in
wealth and riches. And it is not without good cause that here the wealthy are
also called proud: for wealth and prosperity makes men proud, the children of
this world and worldlinges I mean. For David and many other were also rich,
and yet they were so broken with afflictions and so exercised both within and
without, that they could have no such pleasure or delight in their wealth and
worldly prosperity whereby they might wax proud or fall into security. But
the case of the wicked is far otherwise: for their riches, wealth, and
dignity is as a reward of their security and ungodliness. Contrariwise the
godly are in misery and affliction, despised of the world, as abiects, fools
and idiotes: as the example of the ancient Prophets, Christ him self, and his
apostles, with all ye dear Saints of God do teach, and we by daily
experience do prove. For when we go about to draw men from covetousness
blasphemy, voluptuousnes, and such other vices, they laugh us to scorn: and
when they hear of the judgment of God, the reward of sin, the punishment of
the wicked, they count (...) this gear to be but a fable, such as Virgill
imagines of hell to make men afeard. But if they were exercised with
afflictions and calamities as the godly are, and had a scholemaster to teach
them that they are but men (as David prays in the ix. Psalm) they would
learn another song.

The.124. Psalm. If the Lord had not been on our side, etc.
This Psalm is a thanks giving to God for his great mercy in preserving his
people, The argument of the Psalm.
placed (as the stories do show) in the mids of the Gentiles and heathen
people, as a flock of sheep in a wild forest, The people of Israel as a
sheep among many wolves
or in respect of the multitude, as a city compared to a mighty kingdom, being
compassed on every side with the kings of the Assirians, the Egyptians, the
Ammonites, the Ismaelites, the Moabites, whom Satan had stirred up with deadly
hatred, to vex and persecute them, seeking by all means to root them out
from the earth, that thereby he might utterly deface and abolish the word and
worship of the Lord. This danger David saw and thanked God which had
preserved his people from the rage of so many lions and dragons, which
notwithstanding that they never ceased to seek their destruction, yet all that
they went about was in vain. And what a miracle was this, that this people
could so long continue notwithstanding the malice and rage of so many devils?
David therefore in this Psalm exhorts his people to be thankful to the
Lord their God so mightily preserving, defending and delivering them from the
violence of so many nations and kingdoms, hating and persecuting them on every
side.

Which Psalm we also do sing, not only against our adversaries which hate
and persecute the word, but also against spiritual wickedness. For we are
taught by the Gospel that there are now seven Devils which lie in wait for
us (where as we were before in danger but of one) which cease not to stir
up the whole world against us. Yea our case were more tolerable if we had
but only the world, and not Satan also with all his angels and the gates of
hell wholly bent against us. But yet further to molest and vex us, besides all
these we have also the third enemy, which we carry always about with us. which
we nourish also and foster at home with us and even with in us, the flesh I
mean, which gives us no rest, but continually tempts us to sin, fights
against faith, and strives in our members against the spirit.

For as much then as the Church of God is never free from these dangers, let
us also sing to the praise of Christ this psalm: that he preserves us his
members from all these enemies. For it were extreme ingratitude not to
acknowledge this miracle, that notwithstanding all these, the Church does yet
continue, and that there be some which truly teach and confess Christ, and
believe in Christ, though Satan rage, the world and false brethren conspire
against us, and the flesh (as an untamed beast) fight against the word and
faith never so much. This is the benefit then that David so highly extolleth,
and wishes that his people would understand and give thanks to God for the
same.

Verse. 1. If the Lord had not been on our side may Israel now say:

Verse. 2. If the Lord had not been on our side when men rose up against us,

Verse. 3. They had then swallowed us up quick when their wrath was kindled
against us.

Here the Prophet David exhorts the people to consider how mercifully God had
delivered them from the hands of their enemies, and how miraculously he had
preserved that kingdom, and also to praise God with him for the same. Which
words are not to be restreyned to David's time only. For the heathen people had
oftentimes before warred against them with such force and power as was like to
the rage of most huge and terrible floodes of wate^ (whereof he speaks here)
ready to ouerflow them. Therefore seeing he mencioneth here no one kind of
deliverance, it seems that he means in these words of thanks giving to
set forth what so ever God had done for the succor and deliverance of his
people at any time before. Wherein he shows (as it were in a glass) the
dangerous state of the church from the beginning, that the faithful may
learn to know that it has not been preserved by: the strength and policy
of man, but by the miraculous power and hand of God, and therefore in their
troubles and afflictions should always fly to God for help and succor.

Israel signifies the people of God. Let us acknowledge then that there is no
way for Gods people to escape the hands of their enemies, but by the help and
power of God, and that he will have the glory and praise thereof to be given to
him alone. This praise can none give unto God, but the true Israel, having
experience both of their own weakness, the force and power of their enemies,
the dangers past, and of the merciful help and protection of the Lord.

Verse. 2. If the Lord had not been on our side when men rose up against us.

This repetition is not in vain. For whiles we are in danger, our fear is
without measure: but when it is once past, we imagine it to have been less then
it was in deed. And this is the delusion of Satan, to diminish and obscure the
grace of God. David therefore with this repetition stirs up the people to a
more thankfulness unto God for his gracious deliverance, and amplifieth the
dangers which they had passed. Whereby we are taught how to think of our
troubles and afflictions past, least the sense and feeling of Gods grace vanish
out of our minds. And here note how God deals with his people in their
distress, who suffers their enemies so far to prevail over them, and
differreth his help so long, till it seem impossible for them to escape: so
that they are compelled to confess and acknowledge, that they must needs have
perished if the mighty hand of God had not delivered them. These 2. things
then we see the Israelites here to acknowledge: first that the Lord was on
their side, that is, succored and delivered them: then also that it had not
been possible but they must utterly have perished if God had not preserved and
defended them.

By men is here understand what so ever is great and mighty in the world. As
if he said: we are counted as abiects and outcastes of the world. The Princes,
the rulers, the wise, the rich of ye world rise up against us, to destroy us
and to root us out from the face of the earth. If ye behold with how great
and how many kingdoms we are compassed about, which bear a deadly hatred
against us, we may seem like to a seely sheep compassed about with a
multitude of cruel wolves, every moment ready to devour it. That we live in
safety therefore, and that our enemies prevail not against us, acknowledge it
to be the great mercy of God, O Israel, which so miraculously preserves and
defends so small a flock.

In like manner we are compelled to say and confess at this day, that if God
did not miraculously defend and preserve his church, the power of Satan is so
great, that one of his Angels is able in one moment to destroy us all that
either teach or profess Christ, and to fill the world with bloodshed and
slaughter. We see the Princes, the Pope, the Prelates, the mighty and welthy
of the world, yea the whole world in a manner bent to destroy us. Against whom
what have we to defend us, but that the Lord of hosts has stretched out his
mighty arm over us, which as a brazen wall, defends us against all the
cruel darts which both Satan and the world do daily cast against as. That
we live then, that we teach and you hear the word, that we have place and
liberty in the Church so to do, these things Satan can not abide, and
therefore he rayseth the gates of hell against us: notwithstanding he is
compelled to suffer all these things through the power of Christ our King, who
sits at the right hand of God: for by man's strength and power these things
could not be retained and defended. If Satan then at any time have his will in
troubling the Church, in murdering the people of God, and such like, therefore
it is, because God would show what Satan is able to do every moment if he
were not resisted by the almighty power of God, to the end that we should
walk in the fear of God, and acknowledging this inestimable benefit,
continually pray unto God for the same. Let us learn then to sing with David:
If the Lord had not been on our side, etc. whose mighty hand has defended
us, whose power alone has preserved us. And although the world rage against
us, though Satan vex us never so sore, they can not hurt us. Be of good
comfort (says Christ our Savior) for I have overcome the world. Again: I
give unto them everlasting life, and none shall take them out of my hand.

Verse. 3. They had then swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled
against us.

In these words he expresses, not only the strength, rage, and cruelty of
the enemies: but also how weak and unable the Israelites were to withstand
them. And here he uses a similitude taken of fierce and outrageous beasts,
whose property is, when they have taken their prays, to swallow them up
alive. Likewise when we would express the cruelty or malice of any toward
us, we are wont to say: he hates me so deadly, that he could find in his
heart to eat me or swallow me up quick. The Prophet means then that their
enemies were so many and so mighty, that they neded no armor or weapons to
destroy them, but were able, like fierce and cruel beasts, to swallow them up
alive, being so weak and so little a flock.

Verse. 4. Then the waters had drowned us and the stream had gone over our
soul.

Terrible is the rage of fire, but much more terrible is the violence and rage
of water, for that no power can resist. Now, says David, like as huge and
mighty floods of water carried with great power and violence, do suddenly
overthrow and bear down what so ever they meet withal: even such is the
rage of the enemies of Gods Church, which no power of man is able to
withstand. Therefore let us learn to trust to the Lords defense and succor.
For what else is the Church, but as a little boat tied by a river side and by
violence of the water soon carried away? or as a reed which by force of the
stream is easily plucked up and carried away? Such was the people of Israel
in David's time, being compared to the Gentiles round about them. Such is ye
church likewise at this day, compared to the adversaries. Such is every one of
us in respect of the force and power of the malignant spirit. We are like a
reed which is easily plucked up: and he like a raging floode which with
great might and violence overthrows and carries away all things. We are like
a withered leaf, soon blown from the tree, and he like a mighty wind or
tempest, not only blowing down leaves, but plucking up and overthrowing
trees and all. What are we then pore wretches able to do of our own power and
strength for our defense? We must learn therefore by faith wholly to rest upon
the word. For what is our victory but even our faith? Albeit that armor and
munitions have their place, yet can they nothing help at all unless we have a
trust and affiance in the Lord, who has promised to be our God, our strength,
and our defense. Whose power is such, whose mighty arm also is so stretched
out for the defense of his, that albeit never so great a tempest or violent
rage of water should invade the poorest and simplest cottage that can be, if
forces not. Let this be then our assured trust, let this be the rock of our
safety, help and succor, that God will be our defender and keeper, that the
great floodes and mighty waters carry us not away. This sure defense and mighty
protection of our God the wicked neither know nor believe: for they attribute
all their success and welfare to their own strength, wisdom, and riches.
But Solomon, albeit he was a King abundantly endued with all these things,
yet says he: Except the Lord buyld the house, the builders labor in vain:
Except the Lord keep the city they watch in vain that keep it.

Verse. 5. Then had the swelling waters gone over our soul.

He sets out yet more lively and as it were before their eyes, the great
danger from the which God had delivered them. And this vehement kind of
speech which he uses here, has as great force to make the faithful to feel
from what terrible destruction they were delivered by the mighty hand of God,
as if their danger had been present before their eyes, and so to become more
thankful to God for the same. Note who are most thankful.
For he is thankful to God in deed for his deliverance and safety, which
does acknowledge that before his deliverance he saw nothing else but utter
destruction.

Thus David sets out the afflictions and calamities of the Church and of the
godly, whom the world does not only hate, but cruelly persecute. Whereby we
may see that it has not only a greedy desire, but also power to hurt, murder,
and destroy. Satan likewise goes about like a raging lion seeking whom he may
devour. Besides these, there are great and horrible sins sticking in our
flesh. That we fall not therefore every moment into desperation or otherwise
perish, it is because he is greater which is in us, then he which is in the
world, or the whole world besides, as David says: If God had not been with us,
our enemies had swallowed us up alive. Now he adds a notable similitude
wherewith he amplifieth the danger of the godly and power of the wicked.

Verse. 6. Praised be the Lord, which has not given us as a pray unto their
teeth.

He exhorts the faithful to be thankful for their deliverance, and
expresses unto them, how and (as it were) with what words they should declare
their thankefulnes. Wherein he sets forth yet further by an other
similitude, that it could not be but they must utterly have perished, if God
had not miraculously defended them. For they were, says he, no otherwise
preserved then if a man should violently take a pray out of the jaws of a
raging and cruel beast. As if he said: We were in deed like seely sheep, and
as a pray ready to be devoured of cruel beasts: but praised be the Lord our
God, which would not suffer us so to perish. He says not: which has
delivered us: albeit he did in deed mightily deliver them: but, which has not
given us as a pray, etc. For this is it which specially y^ holy Ghost here
sets forth, that the wicked can not hurt the godly be they never so many,
mighty, furious, cruel and terrible, like to raging and violent waters, like
to cruel and outrageous beasts, falling upon them with open mouth, except the
Lord give them into their hands. Let us therefore with David sing praises unto
the Lord our God, which keeps and defends us that the raging and cruel
beasts which have sharpened their teeth to devour us, can not hurt us. Without
this merciful protection of our God, there is no way to stand against Satan
and his cruel members the spare of one moment.

Verse. 7. Our soul is escaped even as a bird out of the snare of the fouler.
The snare is broken and we are delivered.

He amplifieth yet further by a third similitude, the great perils and dangers
of the faithful being in the hands of their enemies, as a bird that is taken
in the snare is in the hands of the fouler, and yet notwithstanding they
escaped by the mighty power of God, no otherwise then the bird that is
delivered out of the snare of the fouler. By the snare is here to be
understand as well the fraud and subteltie of the enemies, whereby the
Israelites were brought into thraldom and captivity, as also the strength and
power wherewith they were long oppressed: So that they had not only to do with
bloody and cruel enemies, but also were entrapped and snared by fraud and
subteltie, and with might and power miserably oppressed. Thus being unable both
in strength and policy to withstand their enemies, they were every way in
danger of death and destruction: whereby it appears that they were
miraculously delivered.

And here have we an image of our spiritual thraldom and captivity under
Satan, in whose snares we were once most miserably wrapped. Now therefore that
we are delivered by the inestimable benefice of Christ, let us acknowledge both
our former calamity, and the liberty of this grace wherein we stand and let
us beware that we cast not our selves into ye snares of servile bondage any
more. For Satan sleeps not but lies continually in wait for us, ready to
draw us into those snares again, out of the which by the great mercy of God we
were delivered: yea and some times is suffered to hurt either our bodies or our
souls, not only to show us that he is able likewise to destroy both body and
soul if God did so permit: but also to stir us up to faith and prayer,
that we should call upon him for aid and succor against these perilous
snares, and being delivered, should give him thanks and praise for the same.

Moreover, every tentation is a snare, whether it be of the flesh or of the
spirit. Persecution, torments, imprisonment, sclaunder, diseases and
infirmities of the body be snares, which as they are permitted of God to
exercise and strengthen our faith: so by the malice of Satan they are wrought
to afflict and to vex men, that he may bring them to infidelity and
desperation, and so into the snares of eternal death. From the which snares,
but by the special grace of God, there is no way to escape.

The snares of Satan.
Thus our life lies always open to the snares of Satan, and we as sely birds
are like at every moment to be carried away. Notwithstanding the Lord makes a
way for us to escape. Yea when Satan seems to be most sure of us, by ye
mighty power of God the snares are broken and we are delivered. Experience
hereof we have in those which are inwardly afflicted, and with heaviness of
spirit grievously oppressed, that when they seem to be in utter despair, and
ready (as you would say) now to perish, yet even at the last pinch and in the
uttermost extremity comes the sweet comfort of Gods holy spirit and
raises them up again. When we are most ready to perish, then is God most
ready to help. Except the Lord had helped me (says David) my soul had almost
dwelt in silence. Psalm. 93.


Verse. 8. Our help is in the name of the Lord who has made both heaven and
earth.

This is the conclusion of thanksgiving, The name of the Lord is our only
Sanctuary and succor in all afflictions.
containing a worthy sentence of great comfort, that against sin, the horror
of death, and other dangers there is no other help or safety but only the
name of the Lord. If that were not (says he) we should fall into all manner of
sin, blasphemy, errors, and into all kind of calamities. But our help is in
the name of the Lord which preserves our faith and our life against the Devil
and the world. And as ye heard in the other verses before, so he shows in
this verse also, that God suffers his Saints to be tempted, and in their
tentation to fall into great distress, as even now ready to be drowned and
swallowed up presently with great floodes of water: yet notwithstanding this
comfort he shows them, that he will not utterly forsake them. By the which
examples we may learn to know the will of the Lord, and to seek our help and
safety at his hands, which suffers his people to be exercised in the furnace
of Egypt, not to their utter destruction, but only to kill the old man with
his vain hope and confidence which he has in his own strength. This is the
cause why God suffers his people so to be exercised. For it is not hearing,
reading, talking, or teaching, nor speculation only which makes a Christian
man, but practice is that which specially is required in a true Christian, that
is to say, the cross, to pluck down the flesh and bring it to nothing, that
man despairing of his own strength and seeing no succor in himself, should
resign him self wholly unto the Lord, looking with patience and hope for
help at his hand: for this is the will of God. Neither must we imagine to our
selves any other God then such a one as will help the afflicted and oppressed
with desperation and other calamities. To know this doctrine is one piece of
the victory. For they that know it not when tentation assayleth them, either
do despair or seek other helps. Let us learn then out of this Psalm, that
it is the will of God to exercise his Saints with troubles and afflictions.
Who suffers great floodes of water to run over their heads: who also
permits them to fall into the snares of the wicked, and tries every way,
not to destroy them, but to show them what they are of them selves, and so to
teach them to trust in his saving health. But the flesh looks to the power
and multitude of the adversaries and her own infirmity: but to look unto God
and to hope for his help and succor, it is not able.

Wherefore this is a necessary conclusion: Our help is in the name of the
Lord. It is a short sentence, but it sets forth most worthy doctrine and
consolation: whereof* specially in these latter days we have great need,
seeing ye Pope, together with the greatest part of the Princes and rulers of
the world so cruelly do persecute the doctrine of ye Gospel. In respect of
these huge mountains what are we small molehills? Yea though there were no
force nor power of man for us to fear, how are we able to stand against, not
only so many devils, but even the very gates of hell also? And yet this
experience we have of the great mercy and goodness of the Lord our God, that
when we are even in their hands and never so much oppressed, yet are we not
forsaken, but are safe through our confidence and trust in his help. But to
this wisdom it is impossible for us to attain without continual afflictions:
The fruit of afflictions
whereby it is necessary that the confidence of all worldly succors should be
beaten down. For vexation and trouble brings understanding (as Esaias says):
whereby we are compelled to cry: Help Lord for else we perish. So in the last
hour when death approaches there is nothing wherein man's heart can repose it
self or find comfort, but his trust and confidence in the help of ye Lord.
There is rest and quietness, there is perfect peace. He that can then say: My
help is in the name of the Lord, dies happily and is out of all danger. Thus
we may learn what it is to have and enjoy God, even to rest in the sure trust
of his merciful help and succor in all dangers. These are the words
therefore of a victorious and triumphing faith: Our help is in the name of the
Lord which made heaven and earth. As if he said: The maker of heaven and earth
is my God and my helper. Show me a God (O ye my adversaries) like unto him What
are your snares and your traynes then, compared unto this God? What are your
threatenings, your power, your policies, etc.

Thus he sets the eternal God, the maker of heaven and earth, against all
terrors and dangers, against the floodes and ouerflowings of al tentations,
and swalloweth up, as it were with one breath, all the raging furies of the
whole world, and of hell it self, even as a little drop of water is swallowed
up of a mighty flaming fire. And what is the world with all his force and
power, in respect of him which made heaven and earth? Let the world fret then,
let it rage, so that this succor never fail us. And if it be the will of God
that we shall suffer trouble and affliction, yet in him we shall overcome at
length.

The 125. Psalm. They that trust in the Lord, etc.
The Psalm going before is a thanksgiving or a sacrifice of praise, The
argument of the Psalm.
because the godly see and by experience feel that the Lord is faithful and
helps them in the time of need. This Psalm following contains also, in a
manner, the same matter: For it perteyneth to the doctrine of faith, and
exhorts the faithful likewise to a sure trust and affiance in the help of
the Lord in all their necessities. Whereunto he stirs them up with great
and excellent promises. It may also be easily understand by that which we have
said before. For herein consists all this heavenly wisdom, that we do
utterly remove out of our sight what so ever flesh can comprehend, and believe
that which the word only tells us, even against all that which either we
know, feel, or see: And therefore this wisdom is against all humane wisdom
and reason. For by reason and all that reason can comprehend, we feel, see,
and conceive all things contrary to that which faith leads us unto.

He that lies sick and at the point of death, can by reason conceive nothing
else but y^ imagination of death. But a christian man leaving that imagination,
knows that in death there is true life. But thou will say: he sees and
feels death in deed, but life he can not feel: I answer, that because he
rests upon the word, and after it he judges, and not after his own feeling,
therefore even in death he sees nothing but life, and in the mids of
darkness most clear light. The power of the word.
For like as God makes all things of nothing; and of darkness light: so he
works by his word that in death there is nothing but life. They then which
stick to the word and promise of God and follow the same, do find it true
which David says: Psalm. 33.
He spoke the word and it was done, etc. But before we can come to this
experience, we must abide some trouble, and therefore have need of such
exhortation as this psalm here sets forth.

Verse. 1. They that trust in the Lord, shall be as Mount Sion which can not
be removed, but remains for ever.

The Prophet uses here a similitude of Mount Sion, because Jerusalem wherein
Sion stood, when the temple was builded had most ample and notable promises of
God (as appears in very many places of the Prophets) that it should stand
sure and invincible for ever against all troubles and calamities, for that the
Lord had his abiding and dwelling there, according to that promise where he
says: here is my rest: here will I dwell, etc. And therefore David in an other
Psalm glories on this wise: Psalm 48.
Lo, the Kings were gathered and went together, when they saw it, they
marueled: They were astonished and suddenly driven back. As we may see it came
to pass under Ezechias in that great destruction of the Assyrians and other
Kings, as the stories witness, which show that Jerusalem remained safe in all
dangers, not by the strength and policy of the inhabitants, but by the
miraculous work of God dwelling in it, and thus mightily preserving and
beautifying his own common wealth.

Now therefore, says he, like as Mount Sion and our holy city Jerusalem is
never moved, but remains sure and safe by the mighty protection of the Lord
in all extremities: so he that trusts in the Lord shall be defended against
the furious rage of the world and the gates of hell for ever. Note how he
commands no work here to be done, as in popery, in the time of trouble men
were taught to enter into some kind of religion, to fast, to go on pilgrimage,
and to do such other foolish works of devotion, which they devised as an high
service unto God, and thereby thought to make condign satisfaction for sin
and merit eternal life: but simply he leads us ye plain way unto God,
pronouncing this to be the chiefest anchor of our salvation, only to hope and
trust in the Lord, To hope and trust in the Lord, is the greatest ^eruice
that we can do to him.
and that this is the greatest service that we can do unto God. For this is
the nature of God (as I have said) to create all things of nothing. Therefore
he creates and brings forth in death life, in darkness light. And this to
believe is the very nature and most special property of faith. When God then
sees such a one as agrees with his own nature, The nature of faith.
that is, which believes to find in danger help, in poverty riches, in
sin righteousness, and that for Gods own mercies sake in Christ alone, him
can God neither hate nor forsake: For he serves and worshippeth God truly
which puts his whole trust in the mercy of God. With this service God is
highly pleased, because he deliteth of no thing to make some thing. So he made
the world of nothing: so he rayseth up the poor and oppressed: so he
justifies the sinner: so he rayseth the dead: and so he saves the damned. Who
so then consents to Gods nature, and obeys his will, there hoping for some
thing where nothing is, he it is that pleases God and shall never be moved.

But thou must beware that thou imagine not to thy self a false hope,
contrary to the word of God and thy vocation. Whereof if thou be certain and
abide in the same, if troubles rise trust in the Lord, and if he help not in
his good time, take me and David also for liars. Satan will trouble, vex and
discomfort thee, yea and peradventure make thee to believe that thou art utterly
forsaken: but if thou trust in the Lord thou shall feel his help with joyful
victory. So in the council of Auspurge when the Princes were bent against us
with one consent, our cause seemed to be utterly overthrown. Notwithstanding
yet we live and enjoy such peace and liberty as we would wish, maugre the rage
and malice of the Pope and all the adversaries of the world. With such
conflictes we must be exercised lest we be discouraged when we see our cause
begin to quale. But the greater the danger is, the more steadfastly we must
trust. So shall it come to pass that when we are overcome, yet we shall
overcome, and the conqueror shall yield unto us triumph and victory.

This is it that the Psalm here sets forth: They that trust in the Lord
shall be as Mount Sion, which can not be removed, but remains for ever. And
here we have a singular promise, whereby we are assured that we shall stand
and abide for ever. If then we do not continue it is our own fault, because
we abide not firm and stable in our faith: For this promise must needs
remain sure and infallible. Yea as it is impossible that God should deny him
self and not be God: so is it impossible that he should forsake those that put
their trust in him. But we may not think the time long, but patiently abide
the Lords leisure. For Gods power takes no place in us until we be utterly
(to speak after the manner of the Scripture) exinanited that is, stripped naked
of all worldly hope and helps that man has in him self, and brought to
nothing: like as when he saves a ship from drowning, now ready to perish and
past all remedy: As the two stories of the Gospel, one of the ship, the
other of the danger of Peter, do testify.

Verse. 2. As the mountains are about Jerusalem: so is the Lord about his
people from henceforth and for ever.

Where many hundred thousands of men are there, are scarsely 7. thousand which
know God or believe in God, and yet for their sakes the whole multitude is
called Gods people.. Even so was it in Jerusalem. Jerusalem called holy by the
figure Synecdoche where a part is taken for the whole.
Albeit the greater part was wicked and godles yet was Jerusalem called holy,
not only in respect of a small number of the godly: but also because God had
his abiding there. So when there was not one just person in Sodom but Loath
with his two daughters, yet could not the angel destroy Sodom with fire so
long as Loath was in it. Likewise where 4 or 5. or 10. godly persons are to be
found, for their sakes the whole city is called holy. For these are the elect
corner stones, these are ye precious pearls which God so highly estemeth, and
for whose sakes he spares the wicked. Therefore says David: As Jerusalem is
compassed about with mountains, so does the Lord compass his people and
mightily defend them on every side. In like manner Zachary prophecieth of a
city whose wall is of fire. These similitudes do set forth unto us the
safety of Gods people, that weak and little por^ flock, against all dangers.
Upon this promise if we also do rest which at this day enjoy the inestimable
benefit of Gods holy word, we shall be defended against the rage of Satan and
the whole world, not by fiery and brazen walls, but by the Lord him self.
These things albeit we cannot comprehend, yet should we believe them so
certainly as if we did see them with our bodily eyes. If we should see our
selves compassed about with brazen and fiery walls, we would be without all
fear, and triumph against Satan. But it is a matter of faith, not to trust
unto that which the eyes see, but which the word offers and promises. This
one thing therefore is lacking in us, that we have not the eyes of the spirit,
but we judge according to the eyes and sense of the flesh. For else we should
be no more afraid then they which being closed within the walls of an
invincible castle, fear not the force and power of their enemies, be they
never so terrible. We must not doubt therefore, but if we believe, we are
compassed about with fiery and brazen mountains, that is to say, we abide for
ever invincible against the rage of Satan and all the powers of darkness.
Blessed therefore is he that believes.

These mountains are the Angels, which compass us on every side, that Satan
with his angels and ministers can not hurt us as he would. Whose malice and
power is such that if they did not continually behold us, continually defend
us and watch over us, he would destroy us every moment. This can all they
testify which know that Satan is a murderer and a liar, which can not abide
to see the godly prosper, and therefore he seeks by all means to root them
out from the face of the earth. That we are not then utterly consumed, it is
the benefit of these mountains, by whom we are so compassed and defended.
Some times Satan hurleth his darts at us as it were through the window to
destroy us, and works us in deed some sorrow, but he can not move us.

This similitude seems to be taken out of the story of Helizeus in the 2.
book of the Kings, where the servant of Helizeus saw the hills about him
full of fiery chariotes and horsemen compassing Helizeus round about, and
mightily defending him. This succor which the servant of Helizeus saw, and
the Prophet believed when he saw nothing, is, says the Prophet, round about all
them which trust in the Lord: as also the 34. Psalm witnesses: The Angel of
the Lord pitcheth round about them that fear him. But our eyes are shut up
and see not these miracles, whereof notwithstanding we have daily experience.

This promise then will never deceive us: only let us not deceive our selves.
If therefore we did believe, no doubt, we should sleep, we should live, we
should dye, yea (that more is) we should suffer what so ever Satan and the
world can do against us, without all fear. For thus should we think: If I
suffer any thing, it is not without the will of God nor without good cause,
well known, though not unto me, yet unto God. Therefore although Satan break
through the wall in one place, yet shall he never be able utterly to overthrow
it altogether. Thus should we think in our troubles and afflictions, and
comfort our selves with the good will of God. But we are afraid when any
trouble comes, and never feel that security which faith brings. Thus do
we worthily suffer the punishment of our incredulity which we nurrishe within
us, although we be called away from it by so many notable places of the
Scripture.

Besides all this, it is not enough that we are compassed about with fiery
walls, that is, with the sure custody, the continual watch and ward of the
Angels, but the Lord him self is our wall: so that every way we are defended
by the Lord against all dangers. Above us he is a heaven, on both sides he is
as a wall, under us he is as a strong rock whereupon we stand: so are we
every way sure and safe. Now, if Satan through these munitions cast his darts
at us, it must needs be that the Lord him self shall be hurt before we take
harm. But great is our incredulity, which hear all these things in vain.
Yet must they be taught and learned, lest the time come that we be destitute of
all counsel and comfort in these matters. For certain it is that the hour
shall come when we must have experience of these things or else utterly perish.

Where he adds: From henceforth and for ever. By these words he shows that
this vigilancie of the Lord our God ever us, is not temporal, but eternal,
according to that which he said before in the first verse of this Psalm: They
shall remain for ever. Let us learn therefore out of this Psalm, that our
constancy and perseverance consists in this, that we are defended by the
power and providence of the Lord on every side.

Verse. 3. For the rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lotte of the
righteous, lest the righteous put forth their hand unto wickedness.

Here the Prophet plainly declares that the people which rest under this
defense and protection, are afflicted and subject to all miseryes and
calamities as touching the flesh: although they be compassed about with such
high and mighty mountains as touching the spirit, as Satan can never
surmount, yet touching the flesh and the old man, they lie open on every side
to the darts of Satan and of the world: For God by these means will afflict
and exercise the flesh, that sin and the foolishnes of the flesh may be
mortified in them, and that spiritual wisdom and the inward man may
increase. This is the cause why we are, according to the flesh, as a broken
hedge, and as a city whose walls are cast down, and so lies open to the enemy
on every side. Wherefore there is no sort of men so vile and abject which do
not think that they may do what they list against the true professors of the
Gospel. Hereof come such intolerable injuries, horrible blasphemies, cruel
torments, and bloody slaughters of the Saints of God. For the flesh has no
walls, no munitions to defend it, but the spirit. Therefore the flesh is in
danger to al storms and tempests, broken and trodden down of the wicked, as
Esaias says chap. 51. Which have said unto thy soul: Bow down that we may go
over. Thou have laid thy body as the ground, and as the street to them that
went over. These afflictions we must needs suffer and by patience overcome
them, and withal we must beware that by these outward afflictions the inward
man be not weakened or overcome resting in this assured hope and trust, that
the Lord will never forsake us, but that we are in the bosom of the father,
and are closed within most sure and strong holds. So that now, although our
goods, our wives, our children, yea and our lives also be taken from us, yet
we shall never be spoiled of our Christ, by whom we are so surely defended
that in the mids of all our tentations he will make away for us to escape, or
else give us strength to bear them.

Thus we see what consolations the holy Ghost sets forth unto them which
believe the word. For unto such as look for a better life then this, all
things are here full of calamities and miseries. Death follows death, as
Paul says, and we continually dye. One tentation follows an other until at
the length by the death of the flesh all miseries shall cease and have an end.
This verse therefore makes much for our comfort, admonishing us that we must
suffer many troubles: yet so, that at the length we shall be safe and set at
liberty from them all, though not in this life, yet in the life to come and in
eternal life. And why should we not thus boldly promise unto our selves,
remaining under this diligent custody of the Angels, yea of the Lord him
self, which is always round about his people. But here (as before I said) we
have need of faith, that we may judge herein, not according to our present
troubles and tentations, but according to the word of promise. And what should
we need any promises if there were no tentations? which tentations whether
they be within in the spirit or without in the flesh, the time shall come when
we through Christ shall have full victory hereof, as this verse full of sweet
consolation does promise unto us.

Notwithstanding this promise seems incredible both to us which suffer, and
also to them which persecute and afflict us. For if we behold the same with our
outward eyes, what can be more false? yea the contrary seems to be most true.
Behold our Savior Christ, was he not so forsaken, hanging upon the cross,
that the rod or scepter of the wicked rested upon him? Did it not rest likewise
upon the Prophets, the Apostles and other holy Martyrs? This matter then, if we
consider it with our outward eyes, has an other meaning then the words do
import. For they promise that the scepter of the wicked shall have no power
over the godly, and yet all stories and examples do testify the contrary.
Therefore the holy Ghost calls us back to the purpose and counsel of God
reueiled in his word, and commands us to wey and consider, not what we
suffer, and with our outward eyes behold, but what is decreed with the Lord in
heaven. And he that can so sequestre him self from the beholding of his
afflictions and tentations, and yield him self wholly over to the will of God,
and there rest, is a right divine: yea he that is ignorant hereof, in true
divinity knows nothing at al. For what knows he which is ignorant that God
is such a God as will not suffer the godly to be oppressed of the wicked? For
seeing he has said: I am the Lord thy God, he will never suffer that which is
his own to be wrested either by the world or by the gates of hell out of his
hands. If he then abide and continue, they shall also continue for ever which
are his. Thus to believe and thus to lay hold on things invisible, is true
divinity and true spiritual wisdom in deed, whereupon we may ground this
proposition out of the invisible counsel of God: God hates the wicked and
loves the just, ergo he will damn and destroy the wicked, and will deliver and
save the just. And here we see that which is the chiefest thing in all the
Psalms and Prophets, to spring out of the first precept: I am the Lord thy
God.

Now have we to learn how we may apply this verse rightly and to our comfort.
For true divinity consists in use and practice. We are vexed on every side
with cruel Bishops, wicked Princes, and others which hate the word of God and
the doctrine which we profess. But these are very trifles, if ye compare them
with those vexations which Satan, sin and our own infirmity raise up in
our consciences. We must learn therefore thus to judge of all these things,
that they are the rod or scepter of the wicked: and to set the Lord against
them, reueiling his will here in his word, and pronouncing that he will not
suffer the scepter of the wicked to rest upon the godly. Seeing then the same
Prince promises thus much unto us which has all things in his hand, what can
we require more? For the will of God is certain, that though he suffer us to
be afflicted, yet will he not see us trodden under foot or perish. Thus must we
apply these sweet consolations.

What the rod signifies in the scripture it is well known. Children when
they are young are corrected with a rod, and when they wax bigger with a wand
or a cudgel, and if they will not so amend, then follows the iron rod.
Hereof it comes that the rod signifies all power and rule which is for
the amendment and correction of such as do offend. So is it taken in the
110. Psalm. The Lord shall send forth the rodd of thy power out of Sion: That
is to say, thy kingdom: For there he signifies such a rod whereby kingdoms
and people are governed. On this wise the holy Ghost permits here to the
wicked, dominion and tyranny over the godly, which they are compelled to
suffer. Like as we are compelled not only to see but also to suffer the
tyranny of Antichrist and the power of his kingdom, persecuting destroying and
murdering the Christians, and raging against them with all kind of tyranny.
Yea we are compelled moreover to suffer the tyranny of Satan vexing and
terrifying my heart and the hearts of the brethren which believe in Christ. This
dominion or tyranny the holy Ghost calls the rod of the wicked, and
comfort us: that as the Lord lives their tyranny shall fall and shall not
rest upon the lotte of the godly.

The lotte of the just is as much to say as the portion, that is, the number or
congregation of the just. Like as Christ calls them the little flock, and
Paul, the poor Saints. Over these, says he, although the tyrannes do rule,
yet shall not their power endure. Although the persecutors of the Church do
oppress the faithful, yet shall they not do so always, neither shall their
counsels have that success which they desire. For they think to root out
this doctrine for ever: but that shall they never be able to do. Therefore
albeit ye suffer in the mean time, faith the holy Ghost, yet know ye, that my
will is, that they which believe in me shall never perish but shall be preserved
to life everlasting. Here then have ye whereunte ye may trust in all your
tentations.

But behold the reason which the holy Ghost here uses to prove that the
scepter of the wicked shall not rest upon the just. God is moved says he, to
help and defend the just. For else it might so come to pass that God should
have no Church at all, and the just should put forth their hands to wickedness.
So we find in Jeremy that before the people were delivered into the hands of
the Babylonians, they had a promise that after seventy years they should
return again to Jerusalem, because they should not be brought into doubt of
Gods mercy and so utterly despair, and falling away from God, should turn to
gentilitie: As it is in the Psalm, lest the godly should turn to folishnesse,
that is to say, should blaspheme and become impatient. This is the cause why
God joins the promise of the word with the execution and performance of the
deed: or else the godly should be driven to desperation. We see how many are
cast down with adversity by the loss of goods, wife, children and other
things which are dear unto them. Except therefore their minds were raised up
again and comforted, first with the word and promise, and then with the
performance and execution of the same, many would say there were no God.
Therefore God must needs show him self to be a God, not only in word but also
in deed.

David had great promises of God, and yet by his own son he was driven out
of his kingdom and so persecuted that he was compelled to fly away barehead
and barefoote. This was a sore tentation. Wherefore the great and ample
promises made unto him could never have raised him up and comforted him again,
except God had in deed delivered him out of this great misery and affliction.
Even so if we had no more but the promises of God to support us against the
Papists and adversaries of the word, yea if God did not in deed fight for us
and defend us against their tyranny, we should be swallowed up with sorrow and
brought even to desperation. God therefore works both ways: he raises up
with the word and promise, and delivers out of troubles and afflictions by
execution of the deed, that according to the saying of S. Paul, the tentation
should not be above our strength, but should have an end, and we learn by our
own experience that the first commandment: I am the Lord thy God, is most
certain and infallible. Therefore when he says: Least the just should put
forth their hand to wickedness, it is as much as if he should say, least the
just should turn away from God and fall to gentilitie. For God has a double
care over the faithful: first that they be not overcome, but may overcome the
tentation: and this he does by the word and promise. The second is that the
tentation be not perpetual. Even so must we be undoubtedly persuaded that
besides the infallible promises which we have of ye good will of God toward
us, and in the end of everlasting life, we shall be also delivered, and our
adversaries destroyed, albeit we can see no manner of way or possible means
how it may be done. This is it then that this verse here sets forth, that
God is so careful for the safety of his people that he seems to fear least
they should put forth their hand to wickedness and fall away from him, whereby
it might came to pass that he should have no people and so there should be no
God. For God is the God of the living, and therefore he must needs have a
people. Wherefore there must ever be some remaining which may praise and
worship him. If there must needs be such a number remaining, God must of
necessity make an end also of tentations.

But here we must beware that we do not appoint the time of this deliverance.
For before that come, God will have us tried to the uttermost and brought to
that extremity, that all our hope and trust shall be utterly spent and we at
the point of desperation. Now, when we are brought into this case that we can
see nothing but desperation, then, even then God sends comfort, in death he
shows life, and even in damnation he brings salvation: briefly of nothing
he makes all things, and when all hope of remedy is past, then begins he
to work, and frames all new again in most perfect wise. Thus can not the
God of this world do. This is the singular work of God therefore, that when
thou think thy self clean cast away and utterly forelorne, even then thou
should be most sure and safe and most gloriously shine as the day star in
the firmament. These things are easily taught, but by experience we find and
feel how far they pass all reason and power of man, and how hardly we can
believe that God makes all things of nothing, that he is careful for us,
whether we be afflicted in the flesh or in the spirit, and that he is more
mindful of our deliverance then we our selves can be. These things therefore
must be often and diligently taught that we may learn that heavenly wisdom
which the first commandment sets forth unto us, namely that our God is
such a one as of old things is wont to make all new, Old things are passed
away: behold all things are become new.
of poor to make rich, of despised glorious. And this last we would all gladly
have, but that will not be except contempt and poverty do go before.

Here have we then a singular promise and consolation. As if he should say: the
rod of the wicked greeueth you, but be of good comfort my people and
patiently endure it, for I will not suffer the tentation so far to prevail
over you that your confidence and trust in me shall utterly fail you. Storms
and tempests shall arise and your dangers shall seem so great as though the
waves should presently swallowe you up: But I will not suffer you to perish. I
will bridle their rage and make an end of the rod of the wicked. If Satan and
your own conscience do accuse you as most wicked and unrighteous, yet will I
not leave you destitute of my righteousness. Thus do tentations teach us the
true use and meaning of the first commandment, the which none without
afflictions and tentations shall rightly know or understand.

Moreover we are here admonished of the great danger that follows these
afflictions and tentations, which they that through impatiencie forsake the
word and faith, do fall into. Therefore the Lord here shows him self so
careful for his people, lest they should fall into this danger. For their
state which have once forsaken the word, is much more perilous then it was
before: and into such (as our Savior Christ pronounces in the Gospel) do
enter seven spirits much more wicked then the first. We must therefore
patiently suffer and persevere in all tentations, and rather abide all
extremities then once shrink from the word of life, lest we be possessed with
seven spirits more wicked then the first. And moreover we must assuredly trust
(as we are taught in this verse) that so long as we have a desire and a purpose
so to do, the Lord will never forsake us or suffer us to fall into this
impiety. For here have we a manifest promise and a lively description of the
Lords singular care and providence over us, namely that he is mindful of the
end of our tentations and afflictions* so that we only continue constant and
patient unto the end* And if the heathen Poet said: Virgil.
Endure and reserve yourselues for more happy things, how much more should
Christians diligently stir up them selves with mutual exhortations to
patience and perseverance, whether they outwardly suffer in things perteyning
to the body and to this present life, or inwardly in conscience. For we have a
God which even in death, in hell, and in the mids of all our sins can save
and deliver us.

Verse. 4. Do well O Lord unto them that be good and true of heart.

The Prophet says not here: do well Lord to the perfect and such as offend in
nothing: but to the good and true of heart. The good and true of heart are they
which are of a single, sincere and upright heart. For these are they which are
most accepted of God, although they also through infirmity do sometimes
offend. Now, where he prays that God will do well to the good and godly, he
means also and secretly complayneth that the godly are in misery and
affliction, and that the ungodly do abound with all worldly felicity: As we
see at this day the enemies of the Gospel to enjoy great riches and dignities
whereby they vex and oppress the godly. This is a great offense and stumbling
block to the godly, and therefore the Church has need of this prayer: that
God would do well unto the godly, which trust in him and seek his glory with
their whole heart, that they by stumbling at this offense do (...) fall away to
impiety. This prayer contains in it a prophecy with a promise, that like as
he prays for the blessing, welfare and prosperity of the just, so at the
length it shall also come to pass.

Verse. 5. But those that turn aside by their crooked ways, the Lord shall
lead with the workers of iniquity: but peace shall be upon Israel.

He says not simply: Such as turn aside, but such as turn aside by their
own wickedness. For to give place to tentations by infirmity of the flesh or
weakness of mind, or else of faith, and so to decline from the right way (which
comes to pass sometimes even in the Saints, as the example of Peter
teaches) is one thing, and to fall away through wickedness and peruersenes of
heart, is another: which can not be in the children of God, but properly
belongs to the wicked and godles. This sort of men has ever corrupted the
Church from the Apostles time, and with a show of holiness has deceived the
simple, which because God punishes them not, but spares them and suffers
them to prosper in this world, become so proud that they will be counted
amongst the holiest, and of the world, are so commonly taken. We see that not
only the godly are mixed with the wicked in this world, but in the Lords
floor also the wheat lies hidden under the chafe. We must pray therefore
that God would bring these hypocrites to light, and give unto them their just
punishment with the workers of iniquity. Then shall peace ensue to the Church
of God. For whiles the Lord pours forth his just vengeance upon the wicked
which vex and persecute his true members, he gathers together the good and
upright of hear, and openly declares his fatherly good will and tender love
toward them.

The.126. Psalm. When the Lord brought again, etc.
The argument of the Psalm.
Touching the captivity whereof the Prophet speaks in this Psalm, the
interpreters do not agree. Some understand it to be means of the captiuities
of Babylon: some of the captivity under the Romans: other some does take
that the Prophet means here all the captivity and deliverances of this
people, according to that promise, Deuteronomy. 40. That if they should at any time be
led into captivity for their transgressions, and by repentance should
return unto the Lord, he would show mercy unto them, and bring them home into
their land again. Of what manner of captivity this Psalm treats.
But in mine opinion they go near to the true sense and meaning of the
Psalm, which do refer it to that great and general captivity of mankind
under sin, death, and the devil: and to the redemption purchased by the
death and bloodsheding of Christ and published in the Gospel. For this kind of
speech which the Prophet uses here, is of greater importance then that it may
be applied only to these particular captiuities. For what great matter was it
for this people of the Jews being as it were but a little handful, to be
delivered out of temporal captivity, in comparison of the exceeding and
incomparable deliverance whereby mankind was s^e at liberty from the power of
their enemies, not temporal but eternal, even from death, Satan, and hell it
self, Wherefore we take this Psalm to be a prophecy of the redemption that
should come by Jesus Christ, and the publishing of the Gospel, whereby the
kingdom of Christ is advanced, death and the devil, with all the powers of
darkness are vanquished. This Psalm being thus generally understand, may
afterward be applied to every particular deliverance.

Verse. 1. When the Lord brings again the captivity [or captiues] of
Syon, we shall be like them that dream.

By Syon is signified that people which had the promise of the coming of
Christ. For redemption and salvation was first promised to the people of Syon
and to the children of Abraham after the flesh. This people was in bondage
under the law, and by the law, under the captivity of death and sin. Now,
if this people complain of their captivity, and sigh for their deliverance,
what ^^all we think of the Gentiles which lived in idolatry, and in their own
lusts without any law, and without God. He could not therefore have signified
a more general and more grievous captivity, then when he says that his own
people of Syon did long for this deliverance, which in outward appearance was
most holy, and under David and Saul did mightily flourish. But behold how
lively ^e sets forth that joy which should follow this deliverance. We
shall be, says he, like them that dream. By this kind of speech he
expresses the greatness of their joy, meaning that this joy and gladness should
be so great, that the heart of man should not be able to conceive it. As if he
should say: when we shall hear of, yea when we shall in deed feel and enjoy
this deliverance from sin and death, so far passing all that we could hope
or look for, the joy thereof shall be so great, that it shall seem to us but
us a ^reame. For so we see it come to pass also even in particular
deliverances, when God suddenly delivers his servant out of an^ great
trouble or affliction. Act. 12.
So it happened to Peter when he was delivered by the Angel out of prison.
Likewise when it was said to Jacob: Joseph thy son lives, and rules over
all the land of Egypt: he was as one raised out of a dream, Genesis 45.
and could not believe it until it was showed unto him by certain tokens to be
true in deed.

Here then is set forth unto us the inestimable grace whereby we are redeemed,
through the blood of the son of God, who did not spare him self and his own
life that he might set us free from the power of the devil the wrath of God,
death and eternal damnation. But man's heart is not able, as is said, to
comprehend these things. The more feeling and ^ast he has thereof, the
greater alacrity and courage has he to go through all dangers. The less
feeling he has, the more he is shaken with terrors, and at the length looking
back to Egypt with the Israelites, seeks other helps* Our heart therefore
must wholly rest in this redemption, and we must labor to have some part of
this taste and feling which the Prophet rightly compares to a most joyful and
pleasant dream.

They that further list to enlarge this inestimable benefit of Christ or this
deliverance, have here occasion to amplyfie the same, first by the person of
the redemer, then by ye person of the redeemed, by their former state and
misery, of the power of the devil, of the hugenes and horror of death, of the
force of sin, etc. For these things had wholly devoured all mankind, and
could not be overcome but by ye son of God. This is that unspeakable and
most glorious redemption, which rauisheth and astonisheth ye mind with joy.
They therefore that feel not this joy, have not truly received nor felt this
benefit, but the word is as a ^ome or a froth in their mouths.

Verse. 2. Then shall our mouth be filled with laughter and our tongue with
joy. Then will they say among the heathen: The Lord has done great things for
them.

This Psalm has in it a singular majesty and therefore the Prophet uses here
many figurative or borrowed speeches. By laughter he signifies ye voice of the
Gospel. For y^ Gospel should be to us nothing else but joy and gladness,
especially if we compare it with ye law. For ye law terrifieth and kills:
whose use ^ office is, to br^^^ and to mollify the hard and stony hearts of the
impenitent, as Ezechiel says. For they must be broken with this iron scepter
(as it were) and beaten down to hell as the Psalm prays: Psalm. 9.
Let the wicked be turned into hell and all nations that forget God. For seeing
they have a heart of iron, and as the Prophet says, a brazen forehead, they
must be terrified with the thundrings of the law, that is, they must be
brought to the fear of Gods judgment and filled with the terror of death, as
it happened to the people of Israel at the mount Sina when the law was published
by the voice of the Lord. But they that have a fleshy heart, that is to say, a
soft and a tender heart, may not be killed with the law, but revived and raised
up with an other kind of doctrine, which the holy Ghost here calls laughter
and joy, that is to say, the Gospel. This is the right dividing of the word
which S. Paul speaks of, 2. Tim. 2.
to preach and set forth to the impenitent and hard hearted, the threatenings of
the law, the wrath of God against sin and the terrors of Gods judgment: but
to the weak and broken hearted, the sweet comforts of the Gospel, that they
which are secure and without fear, may now learn to fear the Lord: and they
that are to much oppressed with fear, may be of good comfort and now begin to
trust in the Lord. This difference between the law and the Gospel is well
known, but by experience and practice it is not so well known. For our
infirmity is such that we are rather touched with the sense of sin and death
then with the laughter and joy, that is, the sweet comfortes and joyful
promises of the Gospel. For, to speak of my self and of mine own feeling,
the redemption and life given by Christ does not so much pearce my heart, as it
is terrified with one word or one cogitation of sin and of the judgment of
God. The cause whereof is for that we can not sufficiently learn this
difference between the law and the Gospel. For although it be both written
and taught, yet is it not so effectually felt in the heart: Else should it
follow that terrified hearts should cast away all heaviness: for to them (as is
said) perteyneth the voice of laughter and joy, and not the voice of terror
and heaviness.

And here also we find Satan to be our deadly adversary, which most subtly
disputes with us touching the law, and uses such arguments as we can not
deny. For when he lays unto us our sins, we are constreyned to confess and
to acknowledge them, which albeit we cover them some times before men, our
conscience as a thousand witnesses pronounces against us, and will not suffer
us to forget them or hide them. Whereof sometimes arises also a doubting or
mistrust even of holy works: I speak nothing of those which are manifestly
wicked. With these darts Satan pearceth and grievously wounds the soft and
tender heart, only because this distinction is not so well known by practice
as it is by speculation. Speculation is a naked knowledge without experience
and practice.
For if we had this practice in deed, we should rightly discern between the
law and the Gospel, also between the disciples of the law and of the Gospel,
and beat back Satan with this answer, that like a lying spirit he seeks
nothing else, but to blind and deceive the heart with falsehood and lies. For
whereas hard and stony hearts be, those he does not kill or terrify, but
flattereth and fills them with hope and fair promises: which do not
perteyne to such hearts. Contrariwise, where as such tender and timorous hearts
be, as are to much terrified already, and therefore should be confirmed and
reised up with the promises of the Gospel, those hearts Satan most of all,
not only goes about further to afflict and terrify, but to beat them down
also to utter discomfort. Wherefore the Christian man must learn and labor by
feeling and practice to make this distinction in his heart, and say unto Satan:
Away from me Satan with thy lies. When I am void of the fear of God, secure
and hard hearted, then come and plead the law against me: then will I hear
thee: for then that is the time to teach the law. But since thou come now
unto me with the law, whereas my heart is terrified already with sin and
death, I will not hear thee: For thy doctrine perteyneth not unto me, but
laughter and joy: not terror and death.

So should Satan be answered when he goes about to terrify us. But by
experience we feel that when most need is, our heart is not able thus to
answer, although we have heard these things before never so often. The cause
is this: that albeit heaven be ours and wide open for us, yet such is our
nature, and such is our infirmity that all this can not make us so joyful, as
the gaping gulf and horror of hell does terrify us: So that one cogitation
of our sins does more afflict us, then all the teaching and preaching of the
merits of Christ can comfort us. Wherefore we must earnestly endeavor to
learn this practice, or at the least to atteyne to some knowledge thereof, and
reyse up our selves with these words: that the Gospel is nothing else but
laughter and joy: which properly perteyneth to the captives, that is, to those
that feel the captivity of sin and death, to the fleshy and tender hearts,
terrified with the feeling of the wrath and judgment of God. These are the
Disciples in whose hearts should be planted laughter and joy, and which only
should hear the voice of joy and gladness in the tabernacles of the righteous,
Psalm. 117.
and that by the authority of the holy Ghost: which this verse sets forth.
For it signifies that this people was in Sion, and after the outward show of
the kingdom and priesthood, did mightily flourish. But if a man consider them
according to the spirit, he shall see them to be in miserable captivity, and
that their tongue is full of heaviness and mourning, because their heart is
terrified with the sense of sin and death. This is Moises tongue or Moises
mouth, full of wormewoode and of the bitterness of death: wherewith he ought to
kill those only which are to lively and full of security. But they which
feel their captivity should have their mouths filled with laughter and joy,
that is, the redemption and deliverance from sin and death, purchased by the
blood of Christ, should be preached unto them. This is the sense and meaning
of the holy Ghost, that the mouth of such should be filled with laughter, that
is, their mouth should sound and show forth nothing else but great gladness and
those inestimable consolations of the Gospel, with voices of triumph and
victory by Christ, ouercomming Satan, destroying death and taking away our
sins. This was first spoken unto the Jews: for this laughter was first
offered to that people, then having the promises. Now he turns to the
Gentiles, whom he calls to the partaking of this laughter.

Then shall they say among the Gentiles, etc. The Gentiles naturally hated and
disdayned the Jews, and could abide nothing less then their religion. Yet
these Gentiles, says he, when this laughter, this joy, shall be published and
preached, shall marvel thereat, and shall praise the great works as the
Lord. Now, the Gentiles would not thus do, or esteem this work of God as a
benefit, except they also should be partakers of the same. Therefore when the
holy Ghost says, that the Gentiles should publish, praise and magnify this
benefit of the Jews deliverance out of captivity, he plainly signifies
withal that they should be partakers of this deliverance, and that they
likewise should extol and magnify this great mercy of God, this deliverance
from sin and death. To this do almost all the Prophets bear witness. In
the 8. of Zachary it is said that out of all languages of the nations should
take hold of the skirte of him that is a Jew, and say: we will go with you,
for we have heard that God is with you. Which place of Zachary seems to be
taken out of this Psalm. In the first of Esaie likewise: All nations shall
flow unto the Lord, and many people shall go and say: Come and let us go up to
the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach
us his ways, and we will walk in his paths, etc. These things do make for
our comfort, which are not of the seed of Abraham after the flesh. For albeit
the promise was not made unto us, yet when it was accomplyshed we were made
partakers thereof, but by the Jews notwithstanding according to the words of
the promise: In thy seed shall all nations be blessed. And sal^ation says
Christ comes of ye Jews. Thus do we Gentiles pertain to this redemption,
although it was not due unto us (for to us it was not promised) but came by the
free mercy of God through this laughter and this joy, which the Prophet
speaks of, published and preached not only in Simon, but emongst the
Gentiles also, which do enjoy all the good blessings and benefits of God
together with his holy people, as it follows.

Verse. 3. The Lord has done great things for us, therefore we rejoice.

Here you see one Church gathered together of the Jews and of the Gentiles,
and with one voice magnifying the works of the Lord, that as Paul says:
with one mind and with one mouth God, Romans 1.5.
even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ might be glorified. For as the Church
of the Jews sings: The Lord has done great things for us: so sings the
Church of the Gentiles also, being both partakers of one fruit, both known by
one true sign to be the people of the Gospel, namely because they are the
people of joy and gladness, as these words declare: Therefore we rejoice.

Consider now the kingdom of the Pope and the horrible abomination thereof. In
the which there was nothing heard, seen, taught, read or exercised but men's
traditions, men's dreams. which of their own nature can do nothing else but
discomfort and afflict the conscience. For our tradition brings forth an
other, one observation follows an other, Men's ordinances must only serve for
the exercise of the body and not to bind the conscience.
and that worst of all is, they are not only burdens to the body (for to that
end tend all the ordinances of men, if there be any profitable use in them)
but are now become snares to the conscience. Wherefore there was not one jot
of this doctrine in the Popes kingdom that ministered any occasion of joy or
gladness to the pore conscience. No marvel then if in this kingdom of darkness
the conscience was terrified and found no comfort. For if it be in anguish and
terror, it can not make that distinction whereof we spoke before. Great cause
have we therefore to be thankful unto God for this inestimable benefit, that
we now know the doctrine of the Gospel to be the doctrine of consolation and
salvation. Through the which doctrine look how much joy thou feel in thy
heart, so much thou do enjoy of life and salvation. But if thou feel thy
heart still oppressed with heaviness, the devil has not yet given over to vex
thee. Wherefore thou must have thy heart well instructed in the true use of the
law and of the Gospel, (as we have said before) that thou may know that
the law ought to be used only against the obstinate and impenitent, and that
therein consists the true and proper use of the law: but when it vexes and
terrifieth such tender consciences as are to much feared already, it is not
rightly used, and therefore terrified consciences may in no case harken unto
the law, for to such pertains laughter and joy, the preaching, I say, of the
Gospel or remission of sins given unto us in Christ: by the which we are
also sanctified, but by the law we are not sanctified, but the power and gift
of sin is thereby rather increased in us.

Verse. 4. O Lord turn again our captivity as the rivers in the south.

Hitherto he has entreated and prophesied of the kingdom of Christ and of the
redemption to be wrought by Christ, and afterward to be published to all
nations, that thereby might be gathered one church of the Jews and the
Gentiles in the which should be preached nothing else but laughter and joy,
praise and thanksgiving, Now he proceeds further to describe this Church, and
shows what follows this fruit of redemption and this communion of the
Jews and Gentiles, namely the great necessity of continual and faithful
prayer: like as the Prophet Zachary also joins with the spirit of grace the
spirit of prayer, that is, with the redemption which was wrought by Christ, the
prayer of the faithful and of the redeemed. For although our redemption be fully
wrought and we redeemed by the blood of the son of God, yet is it necessary
that we should pray for this redemption, as Christ also in his prayer
commands us to do, that Gods name may be sanctified, which notwithstanding
we know to be holy and sanctified already: that the kingdom of God may come,
which is come and is within us already. As Christ says: Father glorify thy
name, John. 12.
and the father answers, I have glorified it, and I will glorify it again.
Phil. 3.
Also Saint Paul says: I count not my self to have attained unto it, etc.
He means the fulness of the knowledge of Christ, and perfect taste of the power
of his resurrection.

This is it which I touched before, that this benefit of the gospel, this
inestimable gift of our redemption and life everlasting is easy to be uttered
with words, but most hard to be belee^^^ with the heart. For we have in this
life, not the tenthes, but the first fruits of the spirit: but the flesh yet
lives fully and wholly in a manner, strong and lusty. True it is that we have
entered one foot into the kingdom of God, and have thereby obtained the
assurance of the promise* But we must not there rest: we must^ draw the other
foot after, that is, we must continually increase and go forward in the
knowledge of grace and of faith: and for this cause the Prophet Zachary says
that the spirit of prayer is poured forth upon us, which spirit requires
this increase in us. And Saint Paul says: that the spirit sigheth with
sighs that can not be expressed, yea and that every creature also groneth for
the deliverance of the children of God. Wherefore whiles we are in this body,
which presses us down as a heavy burden, and hinders us that we can not
fully apprehend these things, we have not only the spirit of grace, but the
spirit of prayer also, that we might be assured of the grace and good will of
God toward us for Christ's sake in whom we believe, and yet should not cease to
pray that God would make perfect in us that he has begun.

Let no man then think that once to have heard these things makes him a true
divine, or that he has now a^teyned to the full and perfect knowledge hereof.
For this arrogancy makes fanaticall spirits, which like to Aesopes dog,
follow the shadow and lose the thing. In deed, if we look to the word, to
baptism, to Christ him self, al is perfect. But we speak not here of the
things but of the apprehension thereof. So life everlasting is perfect. In my
fathers house are many mansions, says Christ. But in these mansions we are not
yet fully settled so long as we live here. In the mean time we are oppressed
with cares, vexed with sin, aff^icted with tentations, terrors and
desperation. Satan never cease to assail our faith, hope, and other virtues
which God has planted in us. Satan's prerogative.
And this prerogative has Satan because the grace which is begun in us is not
yet perfect. Therefore he fights so busely against these beginnings, fearing
least they should come to perfection. Such is the life of Christians, which
have already received the first fruits of the spirit, who by experience do
learn yt these things can not be fully apprehended, but that in the mean
while they shall often times slip, yea and some times daungerously fall, so
that the spark of faith and of the spirit may seem to be in them utterly
quenched, as it happened to David in his adultery: wherein they have need of
help to reise them up again, as Christ answered to Paul: my power is made
perfect in infirmity. The infirmity is theirs and remains theirs whiles
they live, but the power and strength is Christ's alone.

In this dangerous state they fly unto prayer and say: Lead us not into
tentation: Give victory O Lord, that my faith fail not, that my hope be not
confounded. Make perfect the good work which thou have begun in me.
Notwithstanding these are they which not only have received the first fruits
of the spirit (as is said) but also have perfect redemption, sure hope of life
everlasting, remission of al their sins, true deliverance from the devil,
hell and eternal death. All these things have they: and in the things there
is no defect, but the defect is in me and in thee, because we have not yet
fully apprehended these things. For flesh and blood and the remnauntes of
sin do yet live in us. This forced Paul to cry out and say: Romans 7.
I see an other law in my members fighting against the law of God. And this is
the cause why a Christian can not be secure. For he sees that he has not yet
overcome all perils and dangers which the enemy daily deuiseth. But for so
much as pertains unto Christ (as is said) whom by faith he apprehends, on
whom he believes, true it is that he has all things. For in Christ the devil
is overcome, the law fulfilled, the wrath of God pacified, and death it self
vanquished. In this state we stand if we look to Christ, on whom we believe.
But when we look back into our selves, we are forced to confess that we are
not pure, because our faith is not yet perfect, and therefore can not perfectly
apprehend perfect things, Philip. 3.
as S. Paul says: Therefore when we come to the combat, we give place to the
enemy, we suffer our hope to be wrested from us, we are cast into heaviness,
impaciencie, etc. Thus Christians are warriers and Gods true soldiers, which
stand always in the battle, and can not be secure or void of fear.
Therefore they are fervent in prayer and cry unto God for succor.
Contrariwise, they that are secure, pray not, for they think that the devil
is far enough of, and so that faith and feeling of the good gift of God which
they seemed to have, they lose before they be ware, and when tentation comes,
they are like to a withered leaf.

Thus we see the great necessity of prayer, and how it ought to be continually
used among the faithful, if not with the mouth, y^^ with the heart and hearty
sighs unto God, according to the words of S. Paul: Let the word of Christ
dwell in you plentifully: signifying that they ought to be continually exercised
therein, not only by teaching the same to other publicly and privately, but
also by earnest meditation and prayer, when they sit at home in their houses,
as Moises teaches, when they walk by the way, when they lie down and when
they rise up. For as the Devil goes about like a roaring lion, strong and
mighty, seeking whom he may devour: so are we on every ^ide infirm and weak,
pressed down also with the flesh, full of sin, and cariyng this treasure in
earthen vessels: In the which our faith is as a tender plant, which because
it is not yet come to perfect strength, may be easily shaken with winds and
tempests. This know not they which before they have had some trial of them
selves by affliction or wrestling with the enemy, think them selves to be
Christians and sound in faith. We must watch therefore and pray as Christ
commands that in our daily conflictes we may stand steadfastly against the
darts of Satan which would drive us to the contempt of God and man.

So do I understand this prayer, not in the person of the Prophet, as though
he prayed for the revelation of the redemption that should come, but in the
person of the faithful which have need continually to pray, according to this
verse and say: Lord thou have redeemed us out of captivity, redeem us yet more,
thou have forgiven us our sins, forgive us more, thou have killed the devil,
kill him more, thou have taken away the law, take it away more. For we must
pray for that which we have already, until we come to the full perfection
thereof, which shall be after the death of this body, in the which sin here
dwells. The sense and meaning then hereof is: Lord turn again our
captivity, that is, redeem us, which have begun to be the new creature,
that as our redemption by Christ is fully and perfectly wrought, so we may
fully and perfectly apprehend and feel the same: For there be many things
which in this life fight against this redemption. Wherefore it is necessary that
we should be well armed against them, that we fall not again into captivity.
On this wise we must always pray, that the first fruits of the spirit may
continually increase in us, and that we may be redeemed day by day until the
old man be wholly put away by death. Then shall our captivity be perfectly
changed, even as the rivers or waters in the south, which by the mighty work
of God were dried up and utterly consumed. Whether ye understand here the red sea, or else the river of Iordane, it forces little. The similitude is
this: Like as by thy mighty hand thou broughtest to pass miraculously that
the waters were dried up and consumed, so dry up O Lord, and bring to nothing
al our captivity. Some do interpret this verse otherwise: that is, turn our
captivity O Lord, as the rivers in the South, which in the summer are dried
up in the desert places by the heat of the sun, but in the winter are filled
up again with plenty of water.

How necessary ye spirit of prayer is, they that have not sought with Satan do
not know. Let us therefore give our selves wholly to the continual exercise of
prayer and meditation of the holy Scriptures: For negligence and security
increase by little and little, as rust does in the iron, and the word slippeth
(as it were) out of our hands before we be ware. If it so come to pass, then
has Satan gotten half the victory already, who seeks all opportunity to
see upon us, and then specially is he wont so to do, when he perceives our
hearts to be void of the word of God. Here he stirs up of a spark, as it
were, a flaming fire in our conscience, which before we can quench and
apprehend Christ and his word again, either we are oppressed with anguish and
sorrow, or utterly consumed. For he is a murderer, and seeks by all means how
to destroy us. It is necessary then for us to have our senses exercised and our
minds occupied in the meditation of the word and prayer, that the enemy find
us not unarmed or unprovided, which so busily seeks to spoil us of this
redemption. I also am a Divine, which by great troubles have gotten some
knowledge and understanding of the holy Scripture, and yet am not I so lifted
up through this gift, but that I do daily exercise my self even ^mongest the
children in the Catechism, in secret meditation I mean of the
commandments, the articles of the belief and the Lords prayer, etc. with an
earnest and attentive mind, not only recounting with my self the words, but
observing and weying also what every word signifies. And doubtless when I am
not thus exercised, but am occupied with other matters, I find a manifest
discommoditie thereby. For the word is delivered unto us to this end that we
should continually exercise ourselves therein. For without this exercise we
wax dull and forget our selves. We see into what great dangers men daily
fall. And whereof else comes this, but because they are secure, they pray
not, they hear not the word: whereby Satan works in their hearts by little
and little a contempt of the word, and so brings them either in to sudden
desperation, or other horrible calamities. For if the word be once lost and
gone, what has a man to defend him self with all against this adversary? It
is the part of a Christian therefore to be exercised continually in the word
and prayer, not only because it contains such things as the heart is not
able fully to comprehend, but also for that our adversary tempts not once,
but continually: therefore we must continually fight against him with the word
and prayer. Thus we see that prayer pertains to the people of Christ, to the
redeemed and sanctified: for the unbelievers and wicked do not pray.

Verse. 5. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.

Emongst other things which properly pertain to the redeemed, this also is
one, that they are subject to many temptations, according to the saying of
Saint Peter: By many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Therefore the profession of a Christian man is rightly called the profession of
the cross. So it behooved Christ the head of his Church, to suffer. And the
Prophets through ye inspiration of the holy Ghost, did testify before of his
passion and his glorification which should follow. And how can it be but that
Christians must needs suffer, since thou shall find no kind of life in the
world which is without the cross, except thou will be unjust. But if thou
unfeignedly seek to live justly and godly in this world, it can not be avoided
but that Satan will lay a cross upon thee and vex thee. How much more then
will he so do when thou must fight with him touching righteousness and life
everlasting? For if Satan can not abide civil and external justice, home will
he abide eternal righteousness whereby he knows that he shall perish for
ever? Thus Satan continually persecuteth and vexes the children of God.
Wherefore of all men their life is most miserable, whether you look to the
things which they suffer in the flesh, or in the conscience. In civil affairs
and things parteyning to this life, there appears some shadow at the least,
of joy and pleasure: but they that will be true Christians, feel them selves
miserably wrapped in sin which makes the conscience guilty before God.
Moreover in the sight of ye world they are counted as worms, outcastes, and
cursed people, subject to the malice of Satan and the whole world, and
therefore the world rages against them with all kind of cruelty. Who so then
will see the true image of a Christian, let him behold Job, compassed on every
side and oppressed with devils, grievously afflicted and tormented, full of
foul and loathsome sores. What shall we then do? These things must we suffer
if we desire to atteyne eternal life. If we will confess and acknowledge our
redemer Jesus Christ and our redemption, let us be assured that there shall
always be ready which will seek to spoil us of our righteousness and eternal
life.

Let us therefore, as Sirach teaches, prepare our souls to tentation, and let
us offer our back to the plowers, etc. as ye Psalm says. For who so ever
counts him self a Christian, must think him self no better then his
master Christ. For we must be made ^^ke to the image of the son of God. If
we will be partakers of his glory, we must be also partakers of his sufferings
If Christ bare a crown of thorn upon his head, let not us think that we
shall have a garland of roses set upon our head. For our parts we seek peace
and quietness, neither do we give unto the world just occasion to rage against
us. Albeit Satan's malice is not so pacified, but rather increased.

Behold now therefore the miserable image of a Christian, which is redeemed
notwithstanding: he is full of sin, full of discomfort, and full of death. He
is like unto Lazarus lying before the rich man's gate. He is like to Job
oppressed with infinite miseries and calamities. Here thou will say: Who would
then desire to be a Christian? 1. Pet. 4.
Harken therefore what Peter says: Brethren, think it not strange as
concerning the fiery trial which is among you to prove you, as though some
strange thing were come unto you: but rejoice in as much as ye are partakers
of Christ's sufferinges, that when his glory shall appear, ye may be glad and
rejoice. For this is the image of Christ, of his Church, and of all the
brethren, that we should suffer. But look not to the sufferings and
tribulations only, but behold also the fruit that follows, namely that they
which sow in tears shall reap in joy. Wh^^ can be said more comfortably to
those that carry the cross of Christ, which touching the spirit are vexed of
devils, touching the body afflicted of the world. For Satan oppugneth our
faith* causes us to murmr against God: or else so oppresses our hearts with
heaviness and sorrow that we know not what we do, or whether to turn us: and
yet is it true that we are sanctified (...) redeemed. Notwithstanding this
redemption is hidden: but the temptation is felt both in the spirit and in the
flesh. Besides (...) this, the world cease not to vex us, the adversaries of
the wo^^ slander us and our doctrine, and falsely accuse us, seeking a
thousand occasions to molest us, yea to root us utterly from the fact of the
earth.

When a man once feels these things, his heart trembles, and cries: Have
mercy upon us O Lord, have mercy upon us. All this is to sow in tears, to
go forth and weep, and to carry seed: for so the holy Ghost calls it. It
can not be then but that a Christian must needs be such a sower as must reap
not in laughter, but in bitter sorrow and tears. But thou will say: Where i^
then the laughter which is preached to the redeemed, whereof David spoke a little
before? In the spirit. For look how much faith thou have, so much laughter
thou have also. But sometimes this laughter is lost and turned into mourning:
yet are we not forsaken. For the promise is sure, that we shall reap in joy.
Moreover we must not understand here by sowing, the office of teaching only,
as Paul uses it: which sow unto you spiritual things, etc. but it
signifies the life of the godly, with the whole course and all the actions
thereof which they take in hand in respect of their vocation. For these are, as
it were, seeds of the life to come, which life we enjoy and possess in hope.
For our salvation is sure and certain, and the victory over sin, hell, and
death is ours, but yet in hope. Notwithstanding so long as we are in this life,
we remain always in tears and mourning, John. 16.
as Christ says: The world shall rejoice but you shall sorrow, but your sorrow
shall be turned into joy. This must we look for, and with this hope must we
overcome all sorrows and vexations. For we are in the sight of God like unto
wild beasts, whom he suffers continually to be vexed and coursed of the
hunters, so that we never seem to be in safety. For a Christian without
afflictions is nothing. We see how he suffered Peter, Paul and all the
faithful to be persecuted of the hunters, that is, of the Sinagoge, the
Emperors and Princes, to ye end that they might learn to be humble in them
selves, and not to be proud.

Seeing then that all they which will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer
persecution, we must hold fast this consolation, whereby we may, as it were,
season these afflictions, namely that the holy Ghost does here prophecy that
we must sow in tears, but bids us be of good comfort notwithstanding: for
the more plentiful and bitter the tears be, the greater laughter and joy shall
follow: like as he sets forth also a contrary example. The world sows in
laughter, but afterward it reapeth in everlasting sorrow, anguish and misery.
But our tentations and afflictions do here endure but for a little while. Let us
therefore patiently suffer in hope that in steed of this paynfull sowing for so
small a time, we shall hereafter reap everlasting joy and blessedness. And this
also brings great consolation, that albeit our whole life be full of sorrow,
bitter afflictions, and a sowing altogether in tears, yet God will suffer no
tentations always to continue. But like as storms and tempests have their
seasons, and afterward comes fair wether, as also after labor follows
rest and quietness: even so experience does teach us that when our hearts have
been vexed and oppressed with cogitations of desperation, mistrust, impatiencie
before God and the world, for a day, two, or three or else longer, God reyseth
them up again with some spiritual comfort. For if tentations should last
always, who should be able to endure them, yea we should fall away from God
for ever. Therefore our afflictions are tempred with some consolatio^s, that we
should know that God will not suffer us to be altogether swallowed up with
sorrow. He will correct us, as the Psalm says, but will not give us over unto
death. He suffers us to be cast down, but he reaches out his hand to reyse
us up again. But contrariwise Satan and ye world do not cease, with perpetual
hatred and insaciable malice to rage against us. Psalm. 137.
They say: down with them, down with them even to the ground. But Gods anger
is not such, who chasteneth and corrects us for our salvation.

Let us learn therefore to know these things, and that we must suffer
afflictions and sow in tears, lest when tentation comes we be offended as
though some new or strange thing were happened unto us, and so fly from God and
fall to despair: And let us hold fast this consolation, that our harvest is in
heaven, even life everlasting, which we shall reap with joy: and moreover,
that our tentatio^s are so tempred in this life yt we may be able to bear
them, according to the saying of S. Paul: God is faithful, which will not
suffer us to be tempted above that we are able to bear, but will give an ishue
or outscape even with the tentation. Some times in deed it seems impossible
for us to endure the tentation or affliction any longer, but Gods power is made
perfect in our infirmity.

Verse. 6. They go (or going they go) forth and weep, carrying precious
seed: but they shall return with joy and bring their sheues with them.

How could the state of the Church or the passage wherein it walks under the
holy cross be more lively expressed. Whereby we may learn so to arm our
minds that we lose not that laughter which by faith we have apprehended: but
may increase and wax strong, and feel this laughter more and more in us. For
faith and the life of Christians is not hyprocrisie, as their whole life and
religion is which are shut up in cloisters, which seek to come to perfection
by certain speculations of the spiritual union (as they call it): but
altogether in vain, as I have proved by mine own experience. For when I did
most earnestly by this means seek to attain to perfection, I could never
feel any ^ast thereof. Wherefore it is nothing but deceit and hypocrisy. But
the Christian life is that which is here described, that is, to be exercised
with tentations and afflictions under the cross, and to apprehend the word.
This is our true union with God, which consists in practice: In the which
union we must daily increase, because of the flesh, the world and the devil,
which do exercise us with continual tentations. For except in these dangers
we have recourse unto the word and prayer, we are gone. The cross therefore
is the mean wherewith God will have us, not swallowed up and consumed, but
exercised, that we may daily grow more and more toward perfection.

Moreover, concerning the text, it forces little whether ye take this verse as
a repetition of that which goes before, or whether ye divide them, and refer
this verse to the consolation of this present life, and the former verse to the
consolation of the life to come. Notwithstanding it seems to me that the
intent of the Prophet is here, properly to signify that afflictions do not
come unto the faithful once only and no more. For although consolations are
now and then intermixed, yet one tentation follows an other: so that all
their life is in a manner nothing else but a continuance of tentations. So has
it always been that when one heresy was overcome in the church, an other has
sprung up: when one tyranne by the hand of God has been oppressed, there has
risen up an other. So privately also Gods children do feel that one tentation,
one affliction or desperation being overcome, an other follows, and the end
of one trouble is the beginning of an other. This continuance of the cross he
seems also to express by this repetition, when he says: Going they go
forth, For there is no end of tears before we go down into the grave.

Where the Interpreters have translated: Good or precious seed, let them that
are learned in the Hebrew tongue, see to it: for the figure is to far fette.
He seems rather to signify a prolonging or deferring of time, so that he
expresses a continuance of tentations, whereof I spoke before. The sense and
meaning then is, The seed which they carry is long deferred or prolonged: As
if you should say: They live a painful, sorrowful, and a tedious life. Day
by day they are exercised with new troubles and afflictions, which follow them
without ceasing. So that this seed thus prolonged and carried for a long
season, is nothing else but tentations continuing and succeding one after an
other, one still following upon an other. But what is the end of this
continuance? Even this, that they shall possess eternal joy and felicity. As
the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews does notably declare. No chastising
(says he) for the present time seems to be joyous, but grievous (here you
hear of tears): but afterward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness
unto them which are thereby exercised (here you hear that they shall return
with joy). Albeit then that this seed is prolonged and deferred, yet is it not
so for ever: but the joy that shall follow is everlasting. Thus ye kingdom of
Christ consists not in the power and riches of the world, but in eternal
redemption, which we must attain unto through great afflictions and infinite
crosses. Wherein notwithstanding we are supported by the word and prayer,
until we come to the fulness of our salvation in the kingdom of heaven.

The 127. Psalm. Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that
build it.
The argument of the Psalm.
This Psalm bears the title of Solomon, and in deed it seems that Solomon
was the author thereof. For Solomon in all his books shows him self to be a
political teacher, and handles not the principal article of his father David
as touching justification, or as touching Christ the heir and offspring of
David: but he treats of those things wherein he him self was exercised, and
whereunto he was appointed of God: that is to say, of things perteining to
civil government. And this he does in such sort, as in political matters no
Philosopher did ever teach. For he applies all civil government unto faith,
and whatsoever is done either in the common wealth or household affairs, ye
same he refers altogether to ye divine and spiritual government, which
other writers, whether they be Philosophers or Orators, do not. For albeit
both laws do teach, and reason also does show by what means a common wealth
or a family may rightly be governed, yet do they not teach from whence ye
success thereof must be looked for, that ye things which are well devised, may
prosper and take good effect. For reason knows but only the material and
the formal cause: the final and efficient cause it knows not: that is, it
knows not from whence civil and household government comes and by whom it
is preserved, or to what end it tends.

Aristotle, Aristotle and others, how and wherein they err.
Xenophon, Plato, Cicero and others, although they wrote very well of civil
government, yet do they not teach the true efficient and the final cause
thereof. For they think public peace, honesty and glory to be the final
and the principal cause. And the efficient cause they make a wise man or a
prudent Magistrate, or (as they term him) a good man or a good Citizen. But we
shall hear Solomon disputing far otherwise. For they have and do follow
only the judgment of reason: but he has the holy Ghost which teaches him
the final and efficient cause of civil and household government. He has also
reason and experience: for he governed both a common wealth and a family.
Wherefore he is taught, not only by the holy Ghost, but also by experience, to
speak as he does. For he was occupied in great affairs, and had experience of
high and weighty matters. And we ought the more highly to esteem of this
Psalm, for that it is written of so excellent a man concerning true political
and household government. Which Psalm, although it be but short (for it
conteyneth but only six verses) yet is it full of singular doctrine. And as
for the formal and material cause, he touches them not. For he sees that
there are houses already, there are common wealths well ordered and also
furnished with good laws and Magistrates. But is that enough? No forsooth. For
the two principal causes are yet lacking. For as touching the formal cause,
it may be that the Gentiles had better laws then the Jews. And as touching
the material cause, it may be also that some Magistrates among the Gentiles
were better then they which were among the people of God. But these are but
only the matter and the form.

We must go further therefore, The principal causes of the good government of
common wealths and families.
and seek to know the principal causes of common wealths and household
government, who it is that makes a common wealth and family, also to what
end he ordeyneth the same. These causes the Gentiles and natural reason do
not know. For reason beholds but only the matter and the form, and because
she knows not the efficient cause thereof, she goes about to govern commonweals and families according to that end which she her self does imagine.
Therefore she is deceived and all her policies and devises come to naught. So
Demosthenes takes upon him to rule the common wealth of Athens: Demosthenes.
he makes him self the efficient cause thereof, that is, he goes about to
govern it by his own wisdom and policy, as a wise man. To what end?
Forsooth to establish public peace and tranquillity, to win glory and
quietness to himself and his country, and to the end that all things may come
to pass as he by his own policy and wisdom has devised. But God, who
hates proud devises and presumptuous enterprises, works far otherwise. In
the matter then and in the form there is no default, but in the efficient
cause the wisest man of all is deceived.

Cicero.
The same happened to Cicero in the common wealth of Rome. And the same also
happened to Julius Caesar. Julius Caesar.
Now therefore comes this teacher Solomon, which has a far other manner of
spirit joined with great experience, which teaches who is the author and the
end, The efficient cause of the true government of conmon wealths and
households.
that is to say, the efficient and the final cause of civil and household
government: For he comprehends both, and teaches that he which would happily
govern a family or a common wealth, should not make him self ye principal
cause thereof, for then should he overthrow al. For in both kinds of life a man
shall find many troubles, which will vex and torment his mind, drive him to
impaciencie, cause him to despair and to be weary of all together, yea and to
say that Satan brought him into those calamities. And not without cause: For
why does he presume to take upon him such a government, as is far above his
power. So Demosthenes being oppressed with many troubles in the common weal,
said that if there were two ways set before him, the one leading to the common
weal and the other to death, he would choose the way that leads unto death
before the other. Likewise it happens in household government. The abuse of
matrimony and household government.
He that enters into matrimony promises unto him self all easy and
pleasant things. He thinks it an easy matter to frame his wife, to bring
up his children and to order his family as he him self does imagine. When
these things prove contrary to his expectation, and either his wife is
disobedient, his children stubborn and unthankful, his family negligent, or his
neighbors troublesome and unquiet (for the troubles of matrimony are infinite)
he becomes impatient, The burdens of matrimony are infinite.
and begins to complain, saying that if he had known thus much before, he
would never have married a wife. Thus does the foolish man bewail his state
and condition. But what kind of life is there under heaven wherein thou shall
live without troubles? For where so ever thou live, thou must needs be in
some part either of the politic or household government. Wherefore thou must
so arm thy self, that thou may overcome these troubles, and learn to apply
these things to an other cause without thy self, which is stronger then thou
art. Now, the holy Ghost alone is that instructor which tea: cheth us to cast
our selves into the bosom of the divine majesty, and to trust in him, and so
in his name to marry a wife, to govern our family, to rule the common weal,
etc. Which things if they have good success, it is well: If not, yet is it
also well notwithstanding. For this is the will of God, that when he has once
called us either to any public office in the common wealth, or the governing
of a familye, we should with invocation and prayer abide and constantly
continue in the same.

And this is the principal doctrine of this Psalm: which the Papists sing in
all their temples, and yet of all men they least understand those things
whereof it treats. For they fly both civil and household government, and
yet are they drowned in both: yea no man is there in more busy then they are.
For the Pope and his religious rabble have taken upon them most impudently to
govern great monarkes and Princes, and the cases and controversies of
matrimony have been judged and determined by Officialls and Commissaries. Also
they have ruled by their private and auricular confession both families,
kingdoms and Empires. Thus it came to pass that both kinds of life were in a
manner utterly abolished. For they condemned all those that lived under ye civil
government and in matrimony, The Papists did condemn civil government and
matrimony as worldly kinds of life.
as secular or worldly kinds of life, and counseled them to enter into
monasteries and to their monkish religion: like unto the heathen Philosophers,
which commended ye private and solitary life above all other: that is to say,
that kind of life which has to do neither with matrimony nor any affairs of ye
commonweal.

This wicked life of the Papists and the heathen Philosophers God condemns
in the holy Scripture, wherein we see, to our great comfort, that there was
never yet any holy man which has not been exercised in the affairs either of
politic or household government. For God did thrust into the courts of Princes
most excellent and holy personages, as Helias, Heliseus, Esaias, Daniel, etc. I
say nothing of the holy Kings, as David, Solomon, Ezechias and others. God
would also that John the Baptist should be a Courtier and of the Kings
counsel, Mark. 6.20.
as the text says: When he heard John he did many things. So the Lord has
always exercised his Saints and holy servants with the affairs either of
civil or household government, Christ only excepted, who was the wisdom of
the father. He neither married, nor bare rule in common wealth. For it behooved
him to be a singular personage above all others, and yet he honored both kinds
of life, that is, both marriage and civil government.

The idle bellied Monks would have nothing to do with civil or household
affairs
The life therefore of the Monks, and the whole rabble of the popish religious
orders is altogether deuilish, in that they will have nothing to do with
civil or household affairs. And in deed they do wisely, which seek rather
to live in ease, quietness and pleasure, with the name and opinion of holiness,
then to be turmoyled and vexed with the miserable cares and calamities whereof
the life of man is full. They choose that which is most sweet and pleasant,
and leave the dregs, the great cares and troubles of bringing up children, of
guiding a family, of governing the common wealth and such like, unto others.
Like as also with their hypocrisy they have deceived the whole world, and so
snared the consciences of those which lived either in matrimonye, or in the
politic state, that they executed those functions and duties against their
wills, The Monks could nether teach nor comfort me^ in their necessities.
whereunto they were called of God. For if a married man or a Magistrate
complained unto them of the troubles either of their household or civil
affairs, they did not only not comfort or encourage them patiently to bear
those burdens, but persuaded them to forsake those godly kinds of life and to
enter into Monasteries: yea they went so far, that when they dyed, they
buried them in a Friars coule. They knew not that matrimony and civil
government are ordained and created of God. They knew not that such should
rather have been exhorted to patience, comforted and taught that God had
appointed them to live in the state of matrimony and to serve the common
wealth, that their vocation was of God and pleased God, and therefore they ought
not to have forsaken these kinds of life, but if any troubles happened they ought
to have borne them patiently for Gods cause, and to commend them selves and
their affairs wholly unto God. Thus should men's consciences have been
enstructed and comforted. But this could the Papists never do. The cause
whereof is, for that they have no practice or experience of these matters: they
have but only an idle and a naked speculation thereof, and moreover, they are
destitute of the holy Ghost. But Solomon has both the one and the other: that
is to say, experience both of politic and household government, and also the
holy Ghost. By these scholemasters he learned that the affairs of men cannot
be governed by their own policy and wisdom, but that all things are ruled
and guided by the wisdom of God.

Naaman Syrus brought unto the common wealth, Naaman Syrus.
not only great wisdom, but the text says, that he was given for the
deliverance of Syria: that is to say, his great wisdom had been unprofitable
if God had not given good success thereunto. So if any man become a good
Prince or a good Magistrate, he has not this by the gift of nature, by his
good bringing up, or by learning, but it is the singular gift of God. And this
does experience afterward teach, when things come oftentimes to pass
contrary to man's expectation. The same happens also to the married man. For
how often do his devises and purposes come to nothing? True it is therefore
that is commonly said, man purposes but God disposes: Proverb. 16.
and that which Solomon says, The heart of man purposes his way, but the Lord
guides his steps. Thou art in distress and deuisest with thy self by what
means and policy thou may bring thy self out of trouble: but thy purpose is
disapointed and by the same devises and policies whereunto thou did trust,
thou hurtest thy self and ouerthrowest thine own cause. This brings great
impatiencie. Learn therefore that by thine own wisdom and policy thou art
notable to rule thine own body: Now then should thou be able to govern
the bodies and the minds of other in any one house, city or common wealth?
Ierem. 10.
As Jeremy says: The way of man is not in him self, neither is it in man to
walk and to direct his steps. So this body which thou bear about is not
in thine own hands.

This is the true manner of teaching as touching civil and household government,
Doctrine concerning civil and household government.
namely to show the efficient and the final cause thereof. And this doctrine is
so much the more necessary, for that we are all under the one of these two
governments. For although thou be not a married man, yet must thou needs be in
some part of the household government. For either thou art a son, a daughter,
a servant, or thou have servants or neighbors, or else thou are in some place
and calling in the house or in the society of men. Now, it cannot be avoided,
but that many things will happen unto thee in thy vocation, both tedious and
grievous. Wherefore thou must learn how to behave thy self in these kinds of
life, also from whence they come, and to what end they are ordained. But of
all others, they have most need of this knowledge which are placed in
authority or any kind of life above others, to whom it belongs to rule
either in ye common wealth or to govern a family, yt they may know what is ye
end of their rule and government.

This Psalm therefore properly pertains to Salomons Ecclesiastes, and not
only contains the same doctrine, This Psalm contains the sum and effect
of the book of the Ecclesiastes of Solomon.
but in a manner the same words also. In Ecclesiastes he says: I have seen
vanities: that is, I have seen that there has been no success either in
household or in politic government, but vexation of spirit was in them both.
Wherefore there is nothing better for a man then to rejoice in God, and to do
good in his life as much as he is able. This Psalm therefore seems to be, as
it were a brief sum of that book, Eccle. 2.12.
whereby he teaches both what is the efficient cause of politic and household
government, and also to what end they must be directed. He teaches that we
are but Gods ministers and workmen, and are not the efficient but the
isntrumental cause whereby God works these things. As Wisdom it self says:
By me kings rule. So the father is the instrument of generation, But God is the
fountain and author of life. Likewise the Magistrate is but the instrument
whereby God maintains peace and politic laws. The husband and wife are the
instruments whereby both house and goods are preserved. The knowledge hereof
brings great consolation. For if matters fall out otherwise, or if we do not
attain to the end whereunto they were appointed, we may sayt I am but an
instrument, and these things are not in my power, but are governed of a
greater and an higher power. Wherefore if my wife dye, if my children dye, if
any other trouble, affliction or calamity happen, say: These things are not
in my hand, I am but only as an instrument, I do all that I can, I labor and
travel, I am careful and vigilant, but the Lord in whose hands all these
things are, give good success or else all my endeavor, all my travel is in
vain. For if the first cause be lacking, the second cause can do nothing. And
thus teaches this Psalm as touching the efficient cause.

In like manner it teaches also concerning ye final cause: The final cause of
civil and household government.
Whereby we may understand that all things are the mere gift of God, and
perteyne to the glory and the service of God, and not to our own glory and our
own pleasure: So that we ought to say, thus has the Lord done: ht has given
this happy end: To him therefore be praise and glory for ever. Amen.

Verse. 1. Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it.

These are words of great force and power, whereby he generally condemns all
our labor and travel, declaring that it is not the efficieut cause of those
commodities for the which we travel. Here view and consider all the histories,
both holy and profane, of all nations, and ye shall see that God gave such a
gift unto many, that they began to rule both common wealths and families with
great commendation. But when they saw that there followed no good success,
they were utterly discouraged, and often times for their great care and travel,
they gained nothing else, but extreme ingratitude. Many wise and politic
gouerners, deserving well of the common wealth, have been evil used, condemned
and cast into exile.
How many excellent men in the common wealth of Athens, how many emonges the
Lacedaemonians, how many in ye common wealth of Rome were condemned and cast
into exile by unthankful citizens? Yea this is generally the condition of all
men which in their vocation, whether it be private or public, endeavor to live
uprightly, and carefully travel to do good in the common weal, that they
being hindered by the malice and deceitful prac^ises of others, ran never bring
to pass that they take in hand. For Satan deuiseth so many letts, stirs up
so many enemies, such hatred and conspiracies against them, that either they
are overcome with impacience and so cast away all care of the common wealth, or
being moved with great indignation, they become cruel against those whom they
see to withstand their proceedings. Thus either of a desperate mind they
forsake all, or with cruelty and tyranny they will rule all. We must walk in
the midde way, and keep a mean.
But let us learn to keep a mean: and if God have called us to the
government of a family, let us say: O Lord, thou have given me a wife, house,
and children: Over these by thy authority I am made a ruler. I will do
therefore what in me lies, that all things may be well governed. If they have
not such success as I desire, I will write, Patience. But if they come well to
pass and take good success, then will I say, thanks and praise be unto thee O
Lord. It is not my work^, but thy gift alone. And even so must he do which is
called to any office in the common wealth, which has far more need of this
holy counsel, because of the great troubles and trauells which he must
sustain. He that is able thus to do, shall live quietly in matrimony and in
the government of the common wealth and shall enjoy the comfort and tranquillity
of heart and conscience in the mids of all dangers and calamities.

Wherefore this I often teach, and this counsel I give, that such as enter
into any office in the common wealth, They that enter into any public office,
or into matrimony, must begin with invocation and calling upon God.
or into matrimony, should begin with invocation of Gods holy name and prayer:
So that who so ever would marry a wife, should earnestly call upon God and
crave his help, that he would, not only give him a good wife, but also that
he would govern and direct the whole course of his life. For when this is
neglected, he marries a wife upon hope that he shall have such a one as his
new love does imagine. But afterward, when it falls out otherwise, so that
he finds some fault in his wife, or else some other trouble happens, then
either he becomes a lion in his own house (as Solomon says) and is sorry for
that he has done, or else neglecting his family, he goes one way and his
wife an other, and so he wastes all that he has. For when he sees that all
things which he thought should have had most happy success, fall out clean
contrary to his expectation, he rages and lays all the fault in matrimony,
but most wickedly. For thy fauk and thy folly it is, which so do, since thou will needs be the efficient cause of the governing and guyding of thy family:
which thing God has not given unto thee: For thou should have been but
only the isntrumental thereof.

Wherefore submit thy self rather to an other master and gouerner and say: O
Lord, teach thou me, that I may rightly govern my family, execute my office
in the common wealth, etc. Rule thou and he thou my helper, Godly Magistrates
and married folk how they ought to use them selves.
that I offend not: for I will do that in me lies. If it take good success,
I will acknowledge thy gift, thank thee and praise thy name. If it succeed
not, yet will I bear it with patience. For thou art the first cause, and I am
but the second cause: thou art the creator, thou art all in all and workest
all, and I am but the instrument. If we with heart and mind thus prepared
would seek to govern, all things would prosper and happily proceed. But now,
whether ye behold the Magistrate or new married persons, ye shall see great
presumption. For they so begin all things that they take in hand, as though
it were impossible they should come otherwise to pass then they themselves do
imagine. They begin as though they were the first and the efficient cause, and
appoint such an end to their devises and enterprises as serves to their own
glory and pleasure. But God says. Thus shall thou not do, for then shall thou
perish. And worthily: For they are rebels and blasphemers which will presume
upon that which belongs to the first cause alone. For when either the pen
will teach the scribe how to write, or the axe will teach the carpenter how to
square his timber, nothing can be well done. And even so is it in this case,
when we will take upon us such government as belongs to God alone. It is
expedient for you to consider the examples of this great folly, which are to be
seen every where abundantly in Princes Courts, in cities, and families. For
thus do they think: I am the author and master of this family, this policy,
this government, etc. Most worthily therefore are they troubled and vexed when
there follows no such success as they looked for. And hereupon follows (as
I said) either a miserable confusion both in household and politic government,
or else plain tyranny. So in matrimony, if neither the husband will bear with
his wife, nor the wife will give place to her husband, not only the mutual
love and concord in matrimony is broken, but also it so falls out, that the
husband is changed into a tyranne, or else he neglects and forsakes all
together.

What must we here do? The Pope answers and gives this counsel, that we
should fly into some solitary place, or into some monastery. Not so, says the
holy Ghost: This is not the counsel of God, but of the devil. But thus do
thou. Consider that thou art Gods instrument, and believe that there is yet an
other magistrate and principal governor of the house, The principal master
of the household and magistrate is God.
whose name is the Lord. Except he be the principal cause, it shall follow,
as this Psalm says, that the house shall not be builded, and that neither
politic nor householde government shall prosper. So must we judge also of the
final cause. If thou will refer all things to that end which thou have
imagined, and think that thou shall not be deceived, thou errest, as
experience teaches. One man takes upon him an office in the common wealth,
to get estimation and dignity, and finds the contrary. An other by matrimony
seeks pleasure, seeks a bewtifull and obedient wife, but he is deceived and
proves also the contrary. And well worthy. For why do thou presume to rule
either in politic or household government as a God, and think that thy
wisdom and thy policy are able to govern these things, and that thou have no
need to lift up thine eyes to him which is above and to desire his help? When
thou see therefore that afterward it falls out otherwise, then do thou
learn to sing this Psalm. Except the Lord build the city they labor in
vain that build it. Before thou thoughtest that there was no other Lord or
gouerner besides thy self, of whose help thou should have need to govern
thy house. Others which are not come to this knowledge, either are at
continual debate with their wives, or else they forsake both wives and
families and fly away, Worthily, worthily, justly and by the just judgment of
God thus comes it to pass. For why do thou being but vile dunge, presume
as a God, to take upon thee that heavenly government, that (I say) which is
above nature, with a natural affection and earthly mind? Thy clyming and
presumptuous spirit therefore God justly confounds. Why do thou not
rather say on this wise: Lord thou have given me a wife, children, a family:
assist me and help me: Govern thou and guide them, or else in vain is all my
travel. Now, for as much as the holy Scripture teaches us, and experience
also agrees thereunto, that without Gods help all is in vain that we take in
hand, therefore we ought not to be ignorant of these things.

They labor in vain (says he) which build it. The cause is this, that
either they become tyrannes, or else desperate and forsake all together. So
comes to ruin both politic and household government. Now, what madness is
this, so to rule, that either thou or thy family must perish? Why do we not
rather as the holy Ghost here teaches us, that we may preserve both? Which
is, if we learn to know the principal cause and the true master and gouerner
of the house, God the true master of the household.
if we call upon him, trust in him and say: Thou Lord have created me to be a
ruler of a family, and have given me those things which pertain thereunto.
But this burden is to heavy for me to bear. Therefore take upon thee my charge
O Lord, govern thou in my steed: be thou the master of the house, for I
will humbly give place unto thee. Then will God hear thee, and he will say:
All this will I do, so that thou can be content if any thing happen
otherwise then thou do desire, willingly to bear it and with patience to
overcome it, and not to despair of the end and good success thereof,
forsaking thy vocation to the which I have called thee. For since thou do
call upon me, and do thankfully acknowledge those things which I have given
thee, therefore will I preserve thee and thy family. Wherefore if troubles
happen, somewhat thou must bear, and yet must thou not therefore fear that all
things will come to ruin. What state or government was more miserable then the
government of David? David's household government most miserable.
and yet it continued until Christ was borne and came thereof. Wherefore, what
things so ever seem to be lacking, do thou also commit and commend the same
unto me as the Creator and principal governor of all.

So teaches this verse, especially concerning civil government. And here
mark the behemencie of these words: they labor in vain. For hereof comes
either cruelty and tyranny (as is said) or else a confusion of all things,
and either they forsake their office and vocation, They labor in vain that
labor without the Lord.
or else they presume and will rule all alone, they will labor without the
Lord, that is to say, they will rule by their own wisdom and policy and will
be the principal and efficient cause. Therefore Cicero, Julius, and others most
excellent, wise and politic men were overthrown: which notwithstanding if all
things had had prosperous success, would perhaps have fallen into tyranny.
For such as are in authority and govern with great suc^esse, are not lightly
void of tyranny.

Now, To build.
as touching the grammatical sense and meaning of the words, I think ye know
that to edify signifies not in this place to gather together a heap of
timber and stones, but generally all that perteyneth to the house and the whole
family, as to rule and govern, to marry a wife, to beget children, to bring
up children, to nourish the household, to provide things necessary for the
same, etc. So that the building is here taken for the house well ordered, The
building
where are good parents and fruitful, which live in great love and concord
together, which have obedient children, whereof springs up godly youth and
then good men. This is the house builded of parents, children, and a well
ordered family: which is a singular blessing and gift of God. But otherwise
men so live that albeit the master of the house command never so much, yet is
there none that will obey him. And this is a ruinous house and a miserable
government.

To labor.
Thus to labor, is to weary thy self: and so to govern in all things after
thine own will, wisdom, and policy, that no fault be committed, that every
one in thy family do his duty in all points diligently and uprightly, that
thou sustain no loss or hinderance in thy goods or otherwise, thus to govern
(says he) is not to save and to preserve, but to destroy and cast away. What
way then must thou take that thy labor be not in vain? To labor in vain.
Even this, cherefully and gladly to do what in thee lies with all thy
strength, wit and policy, committing thy self and thine, with all thy
affairs unto God, and to trust in him, who made thee a husband, gave thee a
wife, children, a house, etc. If all things prosper and happily succeed, give
thanks unto God, who with these gifts has so blessed thee. If any thing
happen otherwise, overcome it with patience what so ever it be: and thus think
with thy self, that God tries and proves thee, whether thou take him to be
the true master and gouerner of the house, from whom alone come all good
things: or whether thou do attribute the same unto thine own wisdom and
policy. This is therefore the true wisdom of the holy Ghost, that neither can
the house be builded, nor the city kept by the endeavor, wisdom, power or
strength of man.

But in vain are all these things taught, and are as a tale told to a deffe
man. For the world being both blind and deffe, does, as always it is wont,
that is to say, clean contrary to this doctrine. Wherefore this Scripture is
set forth for the instruction of that little number which are godly and believe
in Christ: which suffer them selves to be taught and instructed in the Lord.
Others embrace the pleasures of this world and worldly things, and think they
belong to them alone, and may be governed by their wisdom and policy.
Therefore it comes to pass, that they gain nothing thereby but vexation and
misery, and in the end confusion and destruction. And albeit hereof they have
continual experience and hear it daily, notwithstanding they are never the
better.

Verse. 1. Except the Lord keep the city the keeper watches in vain.

Like as before he called the house such things as perteyne to to the house
and household government, and matrimony it self: so here he calls the city a
common wealth, whether it be a kingdom, a dukedom, a city, or else any common
society, be it great or small. Now, albeit these things seem, according to
the flesh, to be under our government, yet are they in deed far above our
power. And every godly mind must be taught to know that in some part of this
government either private or public, he is as an instrument of God. Wherefore
we must look unto God, and assure our selves that all things are wrought, all
things come to pass by Gods only providence and appointment, above and beyond
all that we can think and imagine. He that will not believe this, shall receive
the reward which is here set forth: to wit, that al his endeavor, his counsel,
his policy, his wisdom and all his labor shall be in vain.

He says not: The good government of households and families, is the founteyne
and headspring of the common wealth.
Except the Lord build the city, as he did before of the house: but he says:
Except the Lord keep the city. For when the house is well governed, then shall
it go well with the common wealth. For household government is the founteyne of
ye common wealth. If father, mother, husband and wife be lacking which should
bring forth children, nourish them and bring them up, there can be no common
wealth. Of a house therefore is made a city, which is nothing else but many
houses and families, of cities is made a dukedom or a shire: of dukedoms or
shires is made a kingdom, which joins all these in one. Household government
was begun of God in Paradise.
Of all these, household government is the founteyne and headspring: which was
begun of God him self in Paradise, where he said: It is not good for man to be
alone: Also, bring forth fruit and multiply. Solomon therefore does not here
teach how common wealths should be planted and laws ordained. For these
were graffed in nature at the beginning: For so says the text: Let us make man
after our own image: And afterward he expounds what is meant by this image.
Rule ye over the fishes of the sea, and over the fowls of the air, and over
every beast that moves upon the earth. Here it appears that at the beginning
there was planted in man by God him self, a knowledge of his creatures and a
law how to rule and govern them, a knowledge of husbandry, of physic, and of
other arts and sciences. Afterward men of excellent wit, by experience and
great diligence did increase those gifts which they had by nature. And this is
but the strength of humane wisdom created in man at the beginning in
Paradise. Wherefore ye holy Ghost cares not for these things: only he does
approve them as excellent gifts and treasures necessary for man's life, Arts
and sciences and such other gifts God approves as necessary for man's life
otherwise he regards them not, and therefore man has no cause to glory in
them.
and says: All these things are of my creation. Moreover he goes about here
to raise up the blind and decayed nature of man, and to call us from all trust
and confidence in flesh, to the end we should not attempt any thing above our
power, nor attribute any thing unto our selves. For by the fall of Adam nature
is so corrupt, that it cannot see the good gifts of God to be gifts in deed:
but the politic head thinks that he enjoys all things by his own
wisdom and policy: he looks not upward, nor glorifieth God, but says: this
have I done. But this doing is in deed an utter undoing.

Wherefore, seeing that common wealths and families are ordained already,
seeing that laws, arts, and sciences by the ordinance of God were at the
first created together with man: the nature of man does wickedly abuse them in
that it says: I will do, I will govern, and I will bring these things to
this end, to this perfection, whereby I will procure mine own quietness, glory
and pleasure. With this presumption of God is highly offended, and therefore he
gives no success thereunto. And good cause why. For as he made the Sun that
thou should have the use of it, and not to the end thou should rule it:
so he gave thee ground that thou should till it, but not to the end it
should bring forth what and how much thou would have, but what and how much
he would give. So he gave thee wit, reason, a wife, a family and other
things. But this is evermore the peruersenes of man's nature, corrupt through
the sin of Adam, that it will not acknowledge the gifts of God. Of Gods
gifts it ought to say, with thanks giving, This I have received, but proudly
and blasphemously it says: This I have done. It ought to say: This has my
Lord God given me: but it says: this have I gotten, and I will govern and
mainteyne it by mine own wisdom.

It is the Lord then which builds the house, which gives ^ wife, children,
living, which keeps the city, gives public peace, mainteyneth laws, etc.
Wherefore these words Except the Lord, should be written with great letters, yea
with golden letters, because the nature of man fights against them (and that
through the sin of the fall of Adam) in that we attribute all things unto
our selves: and those things which we ought to ascribe unto God, we take and
enjoy as if they were our own. And to this Satan also stirs up our
corrupt nature, which of it self is inclined thereunto. Wherefore it follows
that our devises and enterprises are void of all good success, and we our
selves are never quiet. If this vice of presumption were not, we should find
much more quietness and have better success in all our doings. For God would
say unto us: Thou take me for the only creator and geuer of those things
which thou enioyest: therefore will I bless thee.. But because we do not so,
he ouerwhelmeth us with many miseryes and calamities: he lets the devil
lose, and sets hell open (as it were) against us: so that in household
government great troubles are stirred up, and in the common weal wars and
manslaughter. For since we will not hear him teaching and warning by the word,
he will teach us with scourges and with our own calamities, that like unto the
Phrygians we should learn to be wise by our own harms, and know that we
are not Lords and gouerners of these things. The words of Cicero.
So Cicero at ye last was compelled thus to say: Alas, I was yet never wise.
And yet some time I was esteemed to be that which in deed I was not: but in
vain. O people of Rome, how much has thine opinion which thou did conceive
of me, Mark what it is to rule and govern without God.
deceived thee? For he so governed the people of Rome by his own wisdom and
policy, that at the last he lost his head. This is our corruption (which we
have by the first and original sin of Adam). When we will not acknowledge the
Lord giving and governing, but do all things without his fear, and with a
trust and confidence in our own strength. So in household government it falls
out that he gives to some proud young man a fair wife, which is either a
harlot or else unapt to all good huswifery and household affairs, whereby she
is a perpetual burden unto her husband. The like happens also to Princes,
rulers and Magistrates in the common wealth: so that none can wind them selves
out of those troubles which by their own folly they fall into. A worthy plague
and punishment. For why will they have God to be a geuer, when they them selves
will be the builders and gouerners? But the world, although it hear these
things, neither cares for them nor yet believes them.

These words therefore are spoken only unto the godly: Except the Lord
keeps the city the watchmen keep it in vain. As if he said: The Lord is
the keeper, and if he be not present, what so ever is done in the common
wealth, is but in vain. When I was a student at Erford, I heard this saying
of a certain wise and learned man called Martinus Sangerhaufen: Martinus
Sangerhaufen.
that Erford should continue invincible as touching riches and strong
munitions: but the time should come when that strong and rich common wealth
should lack men. This was a wise saying. Whereby he signified that common
wealths are not maintained through wealth, riches and power, if godly and
expert gouerners be lacking. Let men build the^ as much as they will, and let
them fortify their cities if they can with iron walls: let them heap together
mountains of gold, yet shall all these things be but in vain without godly
gouerners, First of all therefore this must God work, that the citizens and
people may be godly and fearing God: Moreover that the Magistrates may be both
godly and expert men: Also that the Princes and higher powers may be such as
serve God and fear God, and such as love and reverence his word. These are
true, strong and mighty fortifications of kingdoms and common wealths. The
true munitions and fortifications of common welths.
When God has given these munitions, then may men devise also strong walls and
ditches. But because this is not done, therefore kingdoms and Empires are
overthrown one after an other. And I am of this opinion, that Empires,
kingdoms, and common wealths had prospered and continued much longer, if
Monarchs and Princes had omitted this pronoune [I]: that is to say, if they
had not been proud through the confidence which they had in their own strength
and wisdom. But now, when the King of Babylon Nabuchodonosor lifting up him
self in pride and presuming of his own strength said, Daniel. 4. The cause of
the destruction of great kindoms and Monarchies.
This have I done, he lived seven years together with grass, and wandered in
the fields, like a brute beast. So the kingdoms of the Persians, of the
Grecians and of the Romans were destroyed and brought to naught, When they
vaunted, and gloried in them selves saying: I have done, by and by followed, I
am undone. Behold and consider all the Monarchs, Princes and common welths
that ever were, and ye shall se that when they added to their acts and
enterprises this proud brag [I have done] they were destroyed, because they
shut God out as a fool through this presumption and set them selves in his
place. Thus all the wisdom, policy and strength of man fails and comes
to nothing. We also at this day should not lack walls and other munitions, if
men were not lacking: Of whom there is now great scarsitie: And they which
govern and are in authority, they specially cannot be centent with their own
state, but swell and wax proud through wealth and power. They trust to their
strong munitions and fortifications, as though it were impossible for God to
overthrow and beat in pieces even iron walls and mounteyns of gold.

I say not this as though cities and commonweals ought not to be defended and
fortified, laws mainteyned, and public discipline retained: but this addition
we condemn, that they write in their foreheads this pronoune [I]. This
addition [I] God neither will nor can suffer. But because the world can not
omit it nor forget it, therefore one kingdom is destroyed after an other,
one Prince after an other, and one common wealth after an other. So in Esaias
Sennacherib glories of his mighty and invincible power against God: Esaias. 37.
Whereupon follows that notable slaughter of his whole army, and he him self
also is slayue of his own sons. Esaias. 45.
Of Syrus also the text says: I have holden his right hand to break open the
brazen bars. For there is no force or violence so great, no munition so
strong, but God is able to overcome it, how easy a matter is it for him
(think ye) to bring the wealthiest and richest common wealths in the world, to
extreme poverty by war, famine, pestilence, etc. These munitions then must
be provided, the house must be buylt, a wife married, and the household
governed. These things the holy Ghost does not condemn, but would that we
should not thereto add original sin. Preserve the creature therefore and use
it, but away with that which is thine own, original sin I mean, whereby
thou offendest God. The creatures are thy wife, children, family and goods.
These are good things and the good gifts of God, the use whereof God has lent
unto us. But thou addest thereto thy original sin, and wilt take upon thee
to govern them by thine own wisdom, condemning God, and not calling upon
him or believing in him who has given these things unto thee. Thou walk
carelessly in this presumption and say: I am he that rules these matters:
Therefore it follows as a just plague, that thy wife, thy children and family
are disobedient. Much good may it do you master gouerner, which will presume
to rule these matters, not calling first upon God.

The same also happens in civil government. Therefore (says the Psalm)
Except the Lord keep the city, etc. Here the Prophet sets the Lord against
our original sin and against our natural presumption. As if he should say:
This say I, that the city is kept in vain except the Lord keep it. But there
is an other Lord, an other gouerner which will rule these matters, that is to
say, our wisdom and presumption, which neglecting God, presumes to govern
these great and weighty matters, and excludes God. And in deed it prospers
some times. But this is a token of Gods great wrath when he gives success to
the wicked. The success of ye wicked.
For it is an offense and a stumbling block unto the godly, and also a snare
to many other, which seeking to atchieue the like things, take upon them the
like government, but all in vain, So Augustus Caesar in governing the common
wealth had great success: He escaped the overthrows and terrible ruins of
many other Kings as touching his own person: albeit as touching his
subjects, his government was most unhappy. Others by his example take upon
them to rule the common wealth and look to have the like success: but see
how few there be that do enjoy it. These things I recite to the end we may
learn that we are not the rulers and gouern^rs of these high and weighty
matters, civil and household gouermnent I mean: much less of the Church of
God where all things, without comparison, are of greater importance and of
much more difficulty.

To keep, what it signifies.
To keep is to bless, mainteyne and preserve. And here he speaks not (as I
said before) of making and ordeyning laws. For those he presupposes to be
established in the common wealth already. But he admonishes and teaches ye
Magistrates to call upon God and to execute their office and duty in the fear
of God. And if their labors and trauells do not prosper as they would, let them
think that God does it to bridle their presumption and to humble them. For if
all things should succeed as they would, it should be an occasion of
infinite evils and enormities. But when they see that their wisdom prevails
not, their policy is disapoynted, their power and authority takes no place,
then do they learn by their own experience, that there is an other Lord and
master to be called upon and taken as the principal gouerner of the common
wealth, who will help them, will govern for them, and give good success to
that they take in hand, that so they may fly to prayer, and say: help Lord,
take upon thee our charge and burden, and govern thou for us. Also that they
may know they have a large promise, that God being called upon, will hear
them and help them. This clause then: Except the Lord keep the city, is
against them which call not upon God, but by their own wisdom presume to
build the house and keep the city. To them it is said, that they shall labor
and watch in vain.

The keeper he calls a King, a Prince, a Magistrate. For in a little word he
comprehends the greatest and highest matters in the world. Kings, Princes and
Magistrates, the Prophet calls keepers.
For God is a great and a mighty God, who has a large mouth, and with small
words he utters unto us mighty matters, Princes and Magistrates therefore he
calls keepers, which are appointed and ordained to govern common wealths.
But they watch in vain (says he) except the Lord him self assist them, and
their trauells take no such effect as they would: but if the Lord be absent,
they do nothing else but torment and crucify them selves in vain. To labor
in vain.
I have seen some which have tired them selves day and might with continual
labor, and yet were they not able to live thereby, They spent no time in
idleness, no time in play: notwithstanding they lived miserably with their wives
and children. Others pitying their case, admonished them y^ by this continual
^oyle they should never wax rich. Wherefore they exhorted them to win
Industry is such a labor and diligence, as is joined with a provident care,
and discretion, in observing of persons, places convenient times, with other
circumstances, that no labor be spent in vain
industry with their travel: so should they the sooner attain to that which
they so painfully sought. For a master of a household in whom there is some
industry, can do more with one pe^ee of gold, then some other can do with
two. A woman skilful of household affairs, industrious and provident withal,
can live with her family a whole year of those charges, wherewith an other
woman not so industrious, provident and discreet, is not able to endure half
a year: For industry has always best success. But they them selves which
gave this counsel to those poor men did not see that industry is also the
gift of God. Now, the cause why industry so greatly helps and brings such
success to our endeavors and labors, is, for that it observes the
circumstances of persons, places, convenient times, and other occasions, that
nothing be done in vain nor labor lost. These things he that does not
observe in household and politic government, must of necessity be many times
deceived. No marvel is it then if great riches are not able to suffice a man
in whom this industry is lacking, Labor with out industry has no good
success.
that is, which does not with discretion observe and consider the circumstances
before mentioned. These men therefore gave this counsel, that industry should
be joined with labor, because labor without industry has no success.

But Solomon speaks more properly, not that industry, but that the Lord him
self is the cause. For even this also is the gift of God, through industry
to govern the common wealth, and to do nothing rashly, but to observe all
occasions, and to seek all opportunity that all things may be done in
convenient time, place, Friderike Duke of Saxony a very wise and discrete man.
etc. Such a wi^^ad that noble Prince Friderike Duke of Saxony, Elector. He was
in deed a man industrious, who said not all things, who did not all things
upon a sudden, which he was able to say or do. He dissembled many things, but
in convenient time and place he did more with a word, then many other without
this industry could do with power and great strength. Such are they which
are, Industrious and provident men.
not only painful and diligent, but also industrious, which can wait for
occasion and time convenient, when one word will strike and pearce more
deeply, then at an other time many swords could do. But this is humane and
not divine wisdom. Wherefore it is not sufficient to govern such high and
weighty matters: but there must be prayer also joined therewith, that the
Lord would be present, that he would keep watch and ward, or else shall man's
industry be all in vain, be it never so great.

So teaches this Psalm as touching the principal cause (whereby all the
endeavors, counsels and policies of men are ruled and directed) and keeps us
that we make no confusion or mixture of causes, and that of the first cause we
make not the second cause, or else in deed no cause at all. For he did not
create things and so leave them (says a certain Philosopher speaking of God,
and very well). He did not so ordain matrimony and civil government as the
shipwright does the ship, who after that he has finished his work, so
leaves it and commits it to the mariner to be guided as he will. God is
still present with his creature.
But God is still present with his creature, and governs both the house and
the common wealth. This men do not know, but think that God has no regard
of those things which we do, but leaves them unto us. Contrary to this
profane and wicked opinion Solomon teaches us, that we should fear God, call
upon him, and so take in hand to govern our families and to serve the common
wealth, as God has appointed us, with a cheerful heart. Also he admonishes
us, not to presume upon our own wisdom, policy, power, munitions or riches.
All historyes are full of examples, and our own experience also does witness
that presumption has never good success, and yet the world will still be the
world, and does not believe. Wherefore these things are profitable for none but
for the godly. But if the world will not hear and obey, let it rage, let it
vex and torment it self, since it sees and feels it self to watch, to
labor, to be oppressed with continual toil and travel, and all in vain.
And this does it worthily, justly and most justly suffer. For here it is
written, that except the Lord keeps the city, the keeper watches in vain,
and this do they reject: Wherefore the Lord also rejects them: he will not
keep nor build their city, and so what remains, but only in vain.

Verse. 2. It is in vain for you to rise early and to lie down late, and
eat the bread of sorrow.

It is in vain (says he) for a man to rise early, to go late to bed, and
with great labor to get his living: for so signifies bread in this place. The
Hebrews call it the bread of affliction. The meaning then of these words is
this: The bread of affliction.
that both in household and civil government all man's endeavor, all his care,
study and travel is in vain except it be blessed from above. For by these
kinds of speech, To rise early, etc.
to rise early, and to lie down late, he signifies great care and paineful
travel. As if he said: It is not thy strength, thy care, thy study and
endeavor that can make thee rich: but the blessing of God makes a man rich,
etc. God will not give success unto thee because of thy labor, like as he will
not give riches to such as are idle and careless. Notwithstanding thou must
labor, and yet must thou commit and commend al to God, which blesses and
gives success unto all.

But it seems (as the text sounds) that the Prophet here forbids
labor, contrary to that saying in Genesis: In the sweat of thy face thou
shall eat thy bread: Also to these words of S. Paul: Romans 10.
Let him rules do it with diligence. Here he seems to say the contrary: For
he pronounces that to labor, to rise early and to lie down late, to be
careful and painful is but in vain, whereas notwithstanding in other places
sloth and idleness are condemned. Here ye must make a distinction between faith
and works, or between the spirit and the flesh. With thy heart thou must
trust in God and call upon him: but if thou have married a wife, or bear any
office in the common wealth, that pertains to the old man, to the flesh and
not to the spirit, to works and not to faith. Here thou must labor and
exercise the outward man: Thou must rise early and lie down late: that is,
thou must be careful as touching the outward man, how thou may provide for
thy family, do good in the common wealth, etc, but thy mind must be free and
void of care, for care ought to extend no farther then to the outward man
only: That is, the outward man ought not to be idle and slothful, but
diligently to do that which he is called unto, in laboring, in studying, in
devising, in providing as an instrument: So the hands must labor, but the
heart must look upward from labor to the Lord, and crave help of him. So that
whiles the outward man is exercised with labor and travel, the heart of the new
man in the steed of care and travel, must f^ye to prayer and say: Lord I obey
and willingly follow thy calling. I will therefore do all things in thy name:
Govern thou and direct my labors. This consolation is so great, that it can
not be expressed. For although no success follow, yet art thou quiet in mind
and say: Thus it has pleased God. I am not the principal cause to do what
I would, but the instrument cause only, and have done what I could. For like
as when thou hurt ^ethy ha^^ with thine axe or with some other tool in doing
thy works, yet thy hand remains the same it was before and is not cast away:
even so, although thy family be disobedient, commend the matter to God and do
what thou can: then shall thou do both these things so as God will be well
pleased: that is, thou shall rise early and not rise early, thou shall labor,
and yet shall not labor in vain. For as touching the old man thou eatest the
bread of sorrow, but thy heart is quiet and at rest in hope of succor and the
blessing of the Lord.

These things we daily teach, and yet is the covetousness of men so great, that
there is no end of heaping up riches by hook or crook, by right or wrong.
Yea they will rather omit the service of God, the hearing and preaching of his
word, then any gaineful labor. They do not see that whiles they neglect the
word and seek their own gain, they procure unto them selves a far greater
loss, which although they do not presently feel, yet shall it come to pass,
that their riches which with so great labor they heap together, by Gods just
judgment shall perish either by thieves, by war, by fire or otherwise: or
else they shall never come to the heir whom they do appoint. But in Popery
this persuasion was deeply rooted in men's hearts, that if they had once heard
a Mass, they believed that what so ever they took in hand that day, should
prosper. How great then is our impiety, which do not give that reverence to
God and his word, which they gave to their own idolatrous work? yea which
prefer our own gain, our wealth and riches above God and the incomparable
rich treasure of his word? Wherefore it shall come to pass, that for the
punishment of this sin, the world shall be brought to greater poverty, and
from day to day there shall be greater scarsitie of all things: like as we
also do see at this day that there is greater dearth of all things then has
been in times past. What is the cause? Forsooth we rise early, we lie down
late, and eat the bread of affliction: We delight in earthly cares, in toil
and travel, be it never so paynefull, to enrich our selves, and in the mean
season we neglect God and his word. Therefore will God heap upon us
abundantly both cares and calamities, end that most justly, for that it is
which we so greedely seek.

But I return to the text. In the which ye see that household and civil
government are wholly committed unto us, but yet so that we must know and
acknowledge our selves to be but Gods instruments and Gods workmen: not
authors or first causes of these divine matters. Therefore the Prophet thought
it not enough to say affirmatively: God him self governs and makes the
city, he builds the house and appoynteth the family, but he sets down
also the negative and says: Ye do it not. And this is the part of a good
teacher. But (as I have said) the world can not abide the negative. For the
world says: This will I, this have I done, and this will I do. It will
needs be the gouerner of common wealths and rule in Gods steed. Wherefore it
receaueth a just reward in that his enterprises are all in vain and his
labors without success: As the Psalm says: Psalm. 77.33.
Their days are consumed in vanity: that is to say, they were dead before
they could bring to pass that they took in hand. For since they will not
believe that God governs all things, they see their own policy to be but
vanities, their labors unprofitable and of none effect. Let every one of us
therefore abide in his degree and calling, and let us know that this God
requires of us, that we say: I believe in one God: that is, God will still be
God, the creator and maker of all things, and us he will take and account as
his workmen only, as instruments and not authors or principal causes. But
because we covet to be authors and efficient causes, therefore we find nothing
but vanity and bread of affliction.

This sentence must be enlarged and applied to all states and degrees of men,
and not only to artificers and men of occupation which rise early to do
their work. Not that it is evil to rise early and go late to bed, not that
it is evil to be exercised with labor all the day: For these things God
requires of all men, but sloth and idleness is accursed. But we must here put a
distinction between labor and presumption. Labor is not forbidden, but
presumption is condemned.
He does not condemn labor, but diuilish presumption he condemns, because
that we, not contented with our own travel and care, do take upon us also
Gods office and care which he has for us: and he will wrest from us his divine
power and majesty which we so presumptuously usurp and take upon us: he will
have us to labor and not to be idle: For this tentation is naturally rooted in
us, that we presume to be as gods. This diuilish presumption began in
paradise when Satan said to Eve: Ye shall be like gods, and it always
continues fast fixed in this flesh, so that it can not be suppressed as it
ought to be, and as we both teach and are taught, but needs we will be gods.
This is therefore a very natural disease and corruption of the creature.
Against this presumption, and this care, which perteyneth to the divine
majesty alone, the holy Ghost here fights, when he says, that it is not our
endeavor, wisdom and policy, but God him self that rules these things, and
we are but his instruments. But the wicked are never the better, Yea the godly
also do offend herein very often. For we are not content with our own state
and condition, but we will be gouerners also, and will appoint the beginning,
the mids and the end, as may best serve for our own commodity. Wherefore we
tire our selves with vain cares night and day, as the examples of the whole
world do declare. One man purposes to marry this maiden or that, and in
ordering of his house, in guyding of his family to use such ways as he likes
best. But afterward the matter falls out contrary to his expectation. Now
his wife lies sick, now his children dye, now one calamity or an other
happens. An other man deuiseth an exact form of governing of the common
wealth: but experience teaches him that he is miserably deceived. All this is
done (and in deed well done) to the end thou should know that God will not
suffer thy presumption unpunished, which go about by thine own wisdom and
policy to take from him his divine power and majesty. But if no trouble happen
to such presumptuous and careless wretches, it is a manifest token that great
and horrible calamities hang over their heads, which at length they shall
feel, and shall not escape.

To be brief, there is no kind of life wherein ye shall not see very many
things come othewise to pass then a man would look for. How many things
have happened to our adversaries the Papists contrary to their expectation? And
of those things whereof they thought them selves to be most sure and certain,
what have they brought to pass? So it happens to every Magistrate and to every
family, that many times they can not accomplish that they take in hand. What
gain they then by their policies and paynefull trauells but vanity, in that
they torment them selves without any profit, and so spend their lives that
there is almost no time wherein they enjoy a quiet mind? So shall ye find
some Princes to be most happy if they would quietly enjoy those gifts
wherewith God has endued them. And this is the mean whereby they might so
do, if they would commend (...) unto God. But what do they? They take upon
them those things which are above their power and not required of God, and
lose that happiness which they did enjoy: and with these cares and trauells they
afflict and torment them selves even unto death. And worthily. For why do they
so arrogantly take upon them those things which God requires not at their
hands, and do not quietly enjoy those things which they possess? Eccle. 6.
As Solomon says: There is an evil which I have seen under the Sun, and it
is much amongst men: A man to whom God has given riches, and treasures, and
honor, and he wants nothing for his soul of all that it desires: but God
gives him not power to eat thereof, etc. For if we could be content with
those things which we have, and quietly use the gifts of God, and so rejoice
with our wife, our children, and families giving thanks into God for the same,
and with a good conscience doing our duty in our vocation, what could be so
happy as we? But we do that which this verse forbids. We rise early, we
lie down late, we torment our selves, and with sorrow we eat our bread,
This is the life of man throughout the whole world, as the holy Ghost here
witnesses. The cause is, for that no man is content with his own state. The
benefits which God has bestowed upon us to use and enjoy, we do mislike. And
as we do not way or consider our own good gifts and commodities: so have we a
love and liking of other men's, and covet the like. And what have we thereby?
Uanitie of vanities, bread of affliction, unprofitable care and travel, lying
down and rising up in vain.

Wherefore the godly alone do content them selves with those good things
which they enjoy. The godly are contented with that they have.
For they know that God is the giver and gouerner of all good things.
Wherefore they labor with an upright heart, and those things which they get
with their labor, they use as the gifts of God, and do not presume to be the
authors and efficient causes thereof: therefore they have quietness and peace of
conscience: And if any trouble happen, they can overcome it with Job saying:
God has given and God has taken away, the name of God be blessed. So can they
both use the good gifts which they have, and also overcome all troubles and
calamities. The flesh can do neither of these, but is occupied only about such
things as it would have, and whilst it seeks and traueleth for the same, it
loses the good things which presently it does enjoy: As did Esops dog,
Esops dog which swimming over the water with a piece of flesh in his mouth,
snatched at the shadow of the flesh shining in the water, and so lost both.
which in snatching at the shadow, lost the flesh which he had in his jaws,
and the shadow withal. This dog therefore is an image of the whole world,
wherein ye may se, as it were, one master of the household, to whom God has
given a wife, children, a family, substance, etc. These things are the flesh
in the dogs mouth. What does he now? The gifts which he has, he does not
regard, but afflicts him self with other vain cares for such things, as
he has not nor shall ever attain unto. But these things can not be learned
out of books* but experience and practice is the only gloss that interprets
this Psalm. For I my self also do understand these matters and can teach them
unto others. Yet often times it so comes to pass, that I weary my self with
vain labors and trauells. The cause is, for that the desire and presumption
to be like unto God* which is in us* and begun in Paradise, can not be utterly
shaken of, no not in the Saints and children of God. Now the more a man has
of this original poison, the less quietness of mind and inward peace he has,
according to that saying of Augustine: A wise saying of Augustine.
Thou have commanded Lord and so comes it to pass, that every inordinate
mind should be a punishment unto it self. For like as drunkenness brings with
it his own punishment, that is to fay, cruditie and headache: so an inordinate
mind brings with it the bread of sorrow and labors in vain.

This is it which I said before, that this sentence is to be understand, not
only of artificers, but generally of all men in all offices and callings, that
it is in vain for them to rise early, that is to say, to be curious and
careful, and to presume of them selves in any kind of life. So the Magistrate
rises early when he has a care that all things may be done as he has
determined. Likewise in all kinds of life to rise early is, when a man has
no quietness, no time of rest from cares and trauells, unless he obtain that
he seeks for. But all this is in vain. Hereof have I seen innumerable
examples, and ye shall see the like if ye live. Young men, because they lack
experience, do not yet understand these matters. But in time ye shall see that
in all states and kinds of life, in husbandmen, artificers, the learned,
unlearned, Magistrates, Kings, Princes, ye shall see (I say) that they rise
early, that is, they are careful, they appoint certain ends whereunto they
direct all their devises and policies. They make them selves efficient causes,
and take upon them to rule all things by their own wisdom. This the Gentiles
also did see, and therefore they said that fortune bears rule in all things.
For if wisdom were enough to bring matters well to pass, then Cicero and
Demosthenes had not been deceived by their wise and honest policies. If wisdom
and strength were sufficient, then Hector had preserved Troy, and Julius Caesar
the Roman Empire. For wisdom, power, policy, and carefulnes was not lacking
in these excellent men. They rose early, they lay down late, and did eat the
bread of sorrow: notwithstanding they were deceived and miserably perished.
Therefore they were constrained to say, that fortune rules in all the affairs
of men, and that all things are done by chance. For commonly the wiser men
they were, the more foolishly they governed in all their affairs. And true it
is, that great wisdom overthrows great kingdoms. And many times (as the
proverb says) wise men commit no small folly. Wise men some times commit
great folly.
Therefore, although the Gentiles (not lightened by the word of God, but only
taught by experience) did confess that the affairs of men are not governed by
wisdom and power, yet did they still presume upon their own wisdom and
power, and needs they would govern common wealths by their own counsels
and policies. But afterward, when they saw that there followed no success,
they acknowledged their error and attributed all things unto fortune. These
words fortune, chance, casualty and such like are not used because any thing
comes otherwise to pass then by the providence of God, but for that many
things fall out otherwise then we looked for, and the cause thereof we can not
see.
But we must not impute any thing unto fortune (except we will call this fortune,
when the counsels, the policies and enterprises of the wise and mighty come
otherwise to pass, then they them selves did purpose or determine): but to the
judgment of God, who after this manner punishes pride, arrogancy and
presumption. For why do they presume to be wise and mighty in those things
which are far above the wisdom and power of man, and are not governed but by
God alone? Why do they not there use their wisdom and power where as God
would have them: to wit, in those things that are under their power? which
are mentioned Genesis 2. Worthily therefore are they deceived, and cry out that
all things are governed by fortune: but to late, when they have destroyed
common wealths and kingdoms. The song of fools to say: I had not thought, or,
had I wist.
For this is the song of fools, to say: I had not thought, and so to accuse
fortune.

For fortune is not the cause that thy devises and policies do deceive thee,
but thine own folly and the ignorance of God and thy self: First for that
thou do not understand who or what thou art: Again, thou do not see what
the commandment of God is, and how far forth he will have thee to rule and
govern. Thou beginnest with to high a note, as the Ass does, and therefore
thou make an ill end. When thou see this, thou cryest out and say:
there is no God, there is no providence of God: For wise and politic Princes
do not accomplish that which they have most wisely devised and determined:
Wise and mighty men bring not to pass that they go about.
mighty Princes bring not that to pass, which they are able to do as touching
their strength and power. Therefore either God is unjust, or no God at all: for
else he would have regard unto wise men, and all things should be done as
they have determined. O blasphemous mouth. As though God must be such a God,
who when he sees that thou have devised and ordered all things wisely, must
come unto thee and say: Master gouerner, you have done all things well: you
are a wise man and able to govern without me. But thou presumptuous spirit,
whilst thou attributest all things to the wisdom, policy and power of man,
where is the glory and the majesty of God? yea where is God him self if thou
do provide, govern, and bring to pass all things? If all things be done
by thy wisdom and power, then is the wisdom and power of God brought to
nothing. Nay rather let thy wisdom, thy power and thy policy be utterly
confounded and brought to naught, that thou may learn by experience, that
the wiser a man is, the less able he is to accomplish that he takes in hand,
yea the more foolish he is and without all success: On the other side, where
less hope is, there God gives best success, to the end thou should know
that the wisdom and power wherein thou do glory and trust, is nothing, and
can do no good, but rather much hurt. Not that God condemns wisdom and
power, for they are the gifts of God given unto men: but this he condemns,
that men of great wisdom and power through the confidence they have therein,
do exclude God from all household and civil government, and take upon them to
rule all things by their own wisdom and power. So Cicero, Julius Caesar,
Brutus by wisdom and policy go about to rule the common wealth. They think
with them selves: Thus will I do, Who? I Cicero, I Caesar, I Brutus. By what
means? By mine own wisdom, policy and power. This arrogancy and pride they
do not know to be sin. Afterward, when they see their wise counsels
disapoynted, their devises and policies overthrown, they become blasphemers,
and think there is no God, or else that God is unjust, which gives no honor
to virtue, no success to wisdom. But why have they no success? Because they
pass the bounds of their own wisdom, and are not content that they are set
as Lords and rulers over the beasts of the field, the fishes of the sea, the
fowls of the air, etc: the government whereof God has committed unto man (
Genesis 2.): but also they presume of them selves to rule man like unto them
selves, house, wife, children, kingdoms. Empires, and that by their own
authority and wisdom, setting God a part, and not asking of him either
counsel or succor.

Wherefore this verse is an image and true resemblance of the whole world. The
whole world rises early in vain.
For what is all the world else, with all his wisdom, devises and policies,
but an early rising in vain. Behold the higher powers, Princes, Magistrates,
behold the rulers and gouerners of families, and ye shall see that they rise
early, but in vain. From the highest therefore unto the lowest, the Prince as
well as the poor handmayden in the hause sing this song: I rise early, I tire
my self, and I eat the bread of sorrow. There are very few lightened by God
from above, which have the grace to know them selves to be but instruments and
God to be the gouerner, or think the success of their trauells to be the gift
of God, and not the work and fruit of their own wisdom and policy. All the
rest do walk in the arrogancy and presumption of their own hearts, and as
though they were Lords and rulers over all things, they attribute all unto
their own work and wisdom. And what gain they hereby but utter ruin and
destruction? So Cicero, Demosthenes and other excellent men in the common
wealth did not offend in that they were wise: like as Achas and Achab in the
kingdom of Israel did not, which, as it appears, were men of great policy:
but in this they sinned: because they thought those affairs and that kingdom
to be subject unto their wisdom. Cicero saw him self to be the only
Orator of the common wealth of Rome, and he saw also what ought to be done
and how all things ought to be governed: but because he lacked the fear of
God, and imputed all to his own devises, his own wisdom and policy,
excluding God: therefore God would show unto him by his own experience, that
wisdom and policy is not enough for the executing and accomplishing of such
weighty matters, but that the blessing of God is required from above.
Wherefore Cicero did not only no good in the common wealth with his wise
counsel and great wisdom, but also procured his own destruction.

The same may we say also of worldly wealth and riches. Riches are not evil,
but they are the gifts of God, as wisdom is. Therefore the Lord gives unto
us the use and possession thereof. But when the rich man will say: these
things are mine, these have I gotten by mine own labor and industry, and
beholds them as his own birth, this is evil, and is that diuilish
presumption and that desire to be like unto God, The natural presumption of
man to be like unto God, or to be as Gods.
the which our first parents, being deceived by the Devil, began in
Paradise, and all we which came of them, do bring with us. As impossible
therefore as it is for us to put of this flesh which we carry about with us: so
impossible is it utterly to cast away this presumption and desire, to be as
Gods. Notwithstanding the godly do fight against it, and from day to day still
they mortify it more and more, until at length it be wholly abolyshed,
together with this life. The godly therefore, to whom God has given worldly
goods and riches, do say: In deed I have wealth and substance, but this is
not my work, but thy blessing O Lord and thy gift, which thou have given unto
me by the means of my labor. But if thou had not given it, thongh I had
labored never so much, I should have had nothing. But the world says
otherwise. The abuse of the gifts of God in the world.
I have a fair wife, I have sweet children. By whose gift and benefit?
Forsooth mine own. Nay says the Lord: Seeing thou do so arrogantly presume
upon these things as thine own, thou lie. And for a token hereof I will
cause that thy children shall dye, or shall be defiled: that thy wife shall lie
sick or become an harlot, or else shall consume thy goods, etc. An other has
fair houses, gay and sumptuous buildinges. If you ask of him: how came you by
these things? by whose mean? by whose devise and policy? He aunsweareth: Even
by mine own. No, not so, says the Lord, and that thou may see it to be
true, I will bring to pass, that either they shall be consumed with fire, or
else before thou shall enjoy them according to thy desire, thou shall dye. An
other quietly and peaceably governs a common wealth, a dukedom, a kingdom.
By whose power and policye? By mine own, says he. Not so. And that thou
may see the same to be true, either sedition, war or some other trouble
shall be raised up, that thou shall wonder and say: who could once have thought
that these things should have come thus to pass?

Against this presumption, this Psalm armeth us, and teaches every one, both
Prince and people, high and low to say: My wife, my children, my family, my
goods, the public peace, the common wealth, etc. are the gifts of God. These I
will use with thankfulness so long as it shall please God and as he shall give me
the use thereof. If my wife or my children dye, if any trouble come either
publicly or privately, I will say: O Lord, I was the possessor of these
benefits, thou gave them and thou have also taken them away, I will therefore
patiently bear this loss. Notwithstanding, the possession there of could not
always have continued, etc, A mind thus ^^med and instructed shall be well able
cherefully to bear all adversities: which the wicked are constrained to suffer
with great anguish and sorrow. But they hear not these things: Therefore they
find and feel that to be most true which this Psalm says: It is in vain
for you to rise early: Yea they are their own tormentors and their own
devils, which miserably vex and torment them selves, but altogether in vain.
For why do they not harken and give ear unto the word? Behold therefore all
common wealths, al kingdoms, either of the Romans, the Athenians, the
Lacedaemonians, the Thebanes, or others, whereof any historyes are extant, and
ye shall see a true image and lively resemblance of this verse.

Verse. 2. But to his beloved he will give sleep [or rest] or else: To his
beloved he will give by sleep.

After that he had before sufficiently reproved that presumption and desire to
be like gods, which is naturally rooted in us, now he proceeds to the other
part of this Psalm, in the which he teaches that all things come from the
blessing of God. For this is in deed the right order of teaching, first to
destroy that which is false, and then to build up that which is true and
sound. For it might be demanded: what is then to be done, if our power and
wisdom do nothing avail? As we see it came to pass in Cicero, in whom
there was as great wisdom as was possible to be in a man, and yet he did no
good therewith, but hurt both him self and others. He did not offend by
ignorance as touching the affairs wherein he had to deal. What then was his
offense? with his wisdom he toyned presumption, because that he thought the
administration of the hardest matter in the whole world, to be the work, the
effect and fruit of his wisdom. Wherefore, although there was in Cicero (as
I have said, and as his works do testify) so much wisdom as can be in any
man, yet was he not able to perform that he took in hand. Therefore he could
not see that end of his labors, devises and polycyes which he looked for.
Like as it happened also to Demosthenes and many other excellent men which
with like presumption took upon them the like government. Whereas then the
end fell out contrary to their expectation, there was in them no lack of
wisdom or wise and prudent government, but their own folly was the cause
thereof, in that they gloried, not only in them selves, but also in others, that
the people might magnify them and say: Behold, we have followed this man, he
has brought these matters to pass, etc. as that verse of Cicero does declare:
O happy Rome (says he) when I was made a Consul thereof. Is not this an
arrogancy intolerable and worthy to be beaten down? In the end therefore he
sings an other song, as in his epistle to Octauius it does appear. And this
is to make of yt gift of God, a work of the pride of man, or rather of the
devil.

If then Cicero and Demosthenes, since their wisdom, their wise counsels and
devises have deceived them, should now demand this question: what is to be
done? Shall wisdom be rejected? Shall the common weal be neglected and
forsaken? etc. Solomon answers: No, not so. But (says he) ye must rule, ye
must govern the common weal with counsel and good advise. So he bids the
master of a household to marry a wife, to till the ground, to nourish his
family, etc. but yet so that this sentence must always stand: he will give to
his beloved by sleep. He will give, that is, what so ever a man has he must
acknowledge the same to be a gift. Also he will give to him which is his
beloved, and he will give also by sleep. So that it shall be a gift, and a gift
given to his beloved, and easily given. This is the sum and effect of this
verse briefly expounded, which he will afterward more largely declare by the
parts thereof: So that what so ever thou beholdest, thy self, thy life, thy
body, thy wife, thy children, peace and quietness, good success, etc, thou must
acknowledge the same to be the gift of the Creator, given unto none but unto
his beloved. In the former verse therefore (as I have said) is set forth a
lively resemblance of the whole world, wherein are men, not beloved, but stark
mad through a carnal presumption and desire to be like unto God, which will
rule all things by their own devises and policies. These men have no gift for
as much as that which they have, they do not acknowledge as a gift, nor say:
These things God has given unto me. And albeit Cicero and other Philosophers
do sometimes confess that these things are Gods gifts, yet they do not so
believe: for they them selves will be as Gods, which with their own counsels,
wisdom and wise policies have defended the common weal, enlarged the Empire,
prevented imminent dangers and troubles, etc. Through this presumption they
provoke God to send amongst them some Annibal, or some Pirrhus, or to stir up
civil wars by Silla, Pompeius, or the conspiracy of Cataline, with other
seditious persons, that so they might know them selves, not to be the
gouerners of so high and weighty matters. Thus the wicked also and the godles
have the gifts of God, although they understand not that they are gifts. But
this must we understand and know. Wherefore if thou have married a wife, if
thou be a Magistrate in the common weal, or live in any other calling, be
wise, hear the word of God, and understand what thou art, and what thou art
not. Adorn thy wife, thy children, thy family, thy substance with this title,
that the Lord has given them: that is to say, think even from thine heart that
they are the gifts of God, which God has given thee, and requires nothing
else again for the same, but that with a thankful heart thou should
acknowledge the same to be his gifts. But this to do is also the gift of God,
as it is said in the.8. chapter of the book of wisdom: I know that I could
not keep my self chaste except God gave it unto me, and that was a point of
wisdom also, to know whose gift it was.

He therefore which certainly persuades him self, that his wife, his children,
his goods are the gifts of God, is not proud through the success thereof,
because he knows them to be Gods gifts, and not his own work or his own
glory. The husband being thus persuaded, has a pure rejoicing in his wife and
children, because he knows that they are the gifts of God, and he enjoys
them with thanks giving, so long as it pleases God. If God take them away
again, he bears it patiently and eats not the bread of affliction, because
he is the beloved of God, and he lives as though he were in a sleep, and
whiles he sleeps the net is drawn according to the proverb, that is, all
things prosper and go well with him. Thus the godly man uses Gods gifts and
that rule, that government which is committed unto him by God. Genesis. 2. He
eats, he drinks, he sleeps, he rejoices in his wife, his children, his
substance with thanks giving, saying: Lord God, it was thy gift, and it is thy
gift: If thou take it away, thine it is again, etc. So rests his heart in
true and godly quietness. But the wicked have the bread of affliction, and
sleep not, no not in the night. But the godly man, not only in the night, but
all the time of his life sleeps sweetly: that is, he has a cheerful and a
quiet conscience, and rests, as it were in a soft bed. He leaves unto God
the chief government of all things, he enjoys Gods gifts, and knows him
self to be Gods instrument, and so has all things in rest as it were by
sleep, giving glory unto God: and in doing nothing he does all things, and in
doing all things he does nothing.

Thus having before sufficiently reprehended and condemned the presumption of
man's wisdom and strength, he shows the true cause and also the chief
master and gouerner of families and commonweals: to wit, the Lord him
self. And here he uses a marvelous brevity: he gives to his beloved (says
he) by sleep. This sleep whereof he speaks must be referred to the rest and
quietness of the mind and conscience, and not to the rest of the flesh or of
the body. We must labor and travel as touching the body, but with a
cheerful conscience, looking assuredly for the blessing of God: as in Genesis
it is written, that all our welfare, and all that we have consists in the
blessing of God and not in our own labor and industry. Now he proceeds,
and that which before he briefly expounded, he declares more at large in the
same order which before he observed, first speaking of household government,
and afterward of politic government.

Verse. 3. Behold, children are the inheritance of the Lord, and the fruit of
the womb his reward.

Not only the words, but also the phrase and manner of speech are divine and
heavenly, which the holy Ghost and the Scripture here uses. The meaning then
is this: Behold, this is the wisdom, this is the rule and the mean to judge
rightly of household government and matrimony, that children are an heavenly
inheritance, that is to say, the gift of God, and that the fruit of the
womb, that is, what so ever is borne of the womb, is a reward, that is to
say, the gift of God. It is not besides the purpose, if, here for a difference
ye set children in the first place as the malekinde, and in the second place
the fruit of the womb, as the femalekinde of all living creatures, but
specially of mankind. But all comes to one thing, that is to say, to be a
Father or to be a Mother is not the work of man, but of God. And albeit the
husband begets children by his wife, and the wife conceaueth by ye man, yet
both are the gifts of God, and both are the blessing of God, as the text says:
God created male and female. He created them (says the Scripture) to signify
that they are not their own gouerners and creators, but both male and female
are the creatures of God. Afterward he adds more over: and he blessed them,
saying, increase and multiply. Out of this place of Genesis is this verse of
the Psalm taken. For in that God gives unto us children, it is no work of
ours, but it is the blessing of God. Notwithstanding the world, although it
has continual experience of this blessing, does neither understand, nor
consider the same. For the procreation of children, because it is a daily
benefit, and a continual blessing, is nothing esteemed. Thus the world
walloweth in voluptuousnes, filthy lust and pleasure, and these inestimable
benefits wherein it lives and walks, it neither knows nor regards.

This is moreover to be noted, that God did not so confusely bless man as he
blessed other creatures: but he adorned man with a peculiar blessing, to the
end we might understand, that it is the gift of God to have sons and
daughters, and that neither the husband should attribute to him self any
thing as though he made his wife friutefull, nor the wife should attribute any
thing to her self as though she conceived through her own strength and the
benefit of nature: but should learn that these are in deed heavenly and
divine works. Therefore some times we see that healthful and bewtifull women
coupled with strong and healthful husbands, and living in great wealth and
pleasure, are barren and fruiteles notwithstanding. Whereby God would show,
that to beget and to bring forth children is the blessing of God, and comes
not of the power of man or the strength of nature. Contrariwise an other man
that lives poorly, and hardly can get a good meals meat, has a house full
of children. It is a true saying therefore of the Germans, when they speaking
of their children do say: God has given me children. But although this saying
be in every man's mouth, yet are there very few that know what this blessing is,
or esteem it as they should do, because it is overwhelmed and darkened with
inordinate lust and other filthiness of the flesh, with labors and trauells,
with troubles, miseries and calamities. These things (I say) do hide and
darken this heavenly benediction, so that it seems to be now not a
benediction, but rather a malediction. For when parents dye and leave their
children without help and succor, when men see their children or their wives
stubborn, intractable and disobedient, etc. it seems to them that the
malediction far passes the benediction. Wherefore the Scripture calls us
back to the consideration and beholding of the matter it self and the substance
of matrimony, which is the blessing of God, that in beholding the same we may
overcome what miseryes and calamities so ever we find in matrimony.

And here appears our infirmity and incredulity. For this is the nature of
us all, that one discommoditie does grieve us more, then an hundredth
commodities can make us to rejoice. We see that he which has an healthful body
is more troubled with a push or a byle in his knee or in his elbow, then
joyful for the health of his whole body besides: according to the Dutche
proverb: If thou carry a man to Rome upon thy shoulders, and hurt him never so
little when thou set him down, thou losest all thy thanks. Example hereof
we see also in unthankful children, that when their parents have brought them
up with great charges, either they desire the death of their parents, or else
they are disobedient, and forget all the benefits bestowed upon them. So it
comes to pass also in matrimony, that the benediction of God is darkened and
overwhelmed with the malediction, as the world counts it. The holy Ghost
therefore does here notably set forth and amplyfie this blessing, to the end
we should rather behold the author and creator him self, then those troubles
wherewith this holy kind of life is hid and overwhelmed. Let us therefore
diligently set forth this word and in that let us rest which we read in
Genesis: And he blessed them. With this word let us arm and confirm our
selves against those troubles and calamities, and say: If this our calling and
kind of life be the blessing of God, I will rejoice in the Lord the giver of
this blessing, how so ever the matter fall out, be it well or evil, and I will
assuredly persuade my self that this work pleases God. For I know that my
wife, my children, my house and family are the gifts of God, that thou may
write this title [it is the gift of God] upon all that thou have and do
possess, and thus wrapping the blessing of God and divine Majesty in thy
kind of life, thou shall overcome all troubles and calamities be they never so
great.

They that lack or neglect the word and are without the fear of God, can not
be thus persuaded of the state of matrimony, but they think that man and wife
are coupled together by fortune, and that children are begotten and borne of
them even as of swine. When they have them that bring them up in wealth and
pleasure. Some time it comes to pass also that the children of wise,
excellent and notable men do myserably degenerate, as many examples do
witness both in holy and profane histories, and as commonly we see also at
this day. Wherefore the holy Ghost calls us back to the word of God, that we
should learn that our bodies are not our own, but that if thou be a man, thou
should think that what so ever is in thee pertaining to a man, is the gift
of God: and even so that children are Gods blessing and his gift, and not
thine own. Wherefore continue thou the creature of God, and persuade thy self
that thy life and thy body, in that thou art a man, do please God. Then may
thou without any great trouble and with a good conscience enjoy those things
which God has given thee, namely thy life, thy wife, thy children and thy
goods, and if any troubles come, thou may overcome them also by comparing the
same with the other benefits, which thou shall find in thy kind of life to
be more and much greater, then all the troubles and calamities are besides.

Moreover by the name of children he signifies not only the fruit of the
womb, but also what so ever is necessary for the bringing up, the clothing,
and the nourishing of the same. For he that gives and creates children,
gives and creates also with them necessary sustenance to feed and to nourish
them, or else they can not continue. To some therefore God gives more, to some
less, yet so that he suffers none to perish through famine, except it be to
show his judgment upon some. Moreover, children do bring with them generally
eue^ in their birth by a divine working of God, what so ever is needful for
their sustentation, that they should not perish through necessity. And
although some times it has so happened that mothers have devoured their
children, yet a few examples do not take away this general rule. For these were
special examples of the wrath and of the plage of God. It is one thing to
speak of God as he is offended and sends plagues, and an other thing to
speak of him as he governs and nourishes us. Wherefore we see the children
of such as live miserably with bread and water to have healthful bodies,
lively, and well liking. Again we see many folks children which live in great
wealth and pleasure, to go like ghostes, lean, pale and pining. And why so?
because children are the gift of God, whom God him self has created:
Wherefore he gives those things withal, which children can not lack, as the
first creation of man does declare. For before that Adam was formed of the
earth, God the maker of the earth prepared the same as a house for him to dwell
in. And this house he left not empty and unfurnished, but replenished it with
all kinds of wealth, riches, and all good things, that he might show unto us
the posterity of Adam, that he would be our father, would keep, guide, and
govern us, and give unto us all things plentifully, so that we would believe.

Likewise, whiles the child lives yet in the mothers womb, it is not able to
help it self, but is nourished by God alone. For what is it able to do,
which lies yet without any sense? After it is come into the world, it has the
mothers breasts to nourish it, as a founteyne ordained to that end and
purpose: It has bathes to wash it, it has clothes to lap it in, it has the
cradle to lie in, and such other things as it has need of. Moreover, there
are not only women at hand to do what so ever is necessary about the
infant, but Angels also, The ministry of Angels about young children and
infants.
as many notable examples do witness: And to what end are all these things
done? To show that God will preserve his gifts and benefits. Wherefore
children are here to be taken, not for children only, that is, for flesh,
skin and bones, but for all other things that perteyne unto children. In
like manner by the wife and the husband we must understand, not their bodies
only, but their habitation, meat and drink, apparel, and all other things
necessary for the maintenance and government of a family. And these are the
excellent gifts of God whether they be great or small: For God does not
distribute them to all men alyke: Notwithstanding although they be but small,
yet in that they are the gifts of God, they are great and liberal. For like
as we rather esteem and regard the rewards of Princes by the bou^tifull heart
and mind wherewith they are given, then by the valewe and worthiness thereof,
be they never so small: even so although God has given unto thee but a small
portion poorly to sustain thee and thine withal, yet let the good will and
the blessing of God content thee, and thereupon rest, because thou know
assuredly that God loves thee and of love has given the same unto thee: which
if he take from thee again, thou shall be more able to bear it patiently,
because thou know it to be, not thine own, but the gift of God. Thus is thy
mind quiet and at rest, Philip. 4.
whether thou have plenty or whether thou lack. When thou do thus cloth and
apparel, and (as a man would say) incorporate God with his own benefits,
then do those benefits become more large and plentiful, how small so ever in
outward appearance they seem to be.

This may suffice as touching ye meaning of the Prophet. Now it remains that
we should say some thing concerning the grammatical sense and signification of
the words: which, because of the Hebrew phrase and manner of spech, is somewhat
obscure. For where the Prophet says: Children are the inheritance of the Lord,
we may say: Children are the gift of God. For in the Hebrew tongue this word
inheritance has a large signification. Inheritance the Hebrews do call the
land divided among the people by Joshua. Hereof it comes that this word is
applied to all donations and free gifts. For the land of Canaan was given only
to the children of Israel. Whereupon all possessions, proprieties, and free
gifts are called inheritance. So is it said in the Psalm: Thy law is mine
inheritance, that is, a gift which thou have given unto me. We use this word
otherwise, for that which is given to us by our parents. But in the Hebrew
tongue it is taken for a gift or a portion given of God.

Where he says: and the fruit of the womb is his reward, we may say:
Children are the bountiful, and the free gift of the Lord. It is a repetition
of that which goes before. As if he said: The benefit which we receive of the
Lord, as it were by inheritance, is children: the gift which the Lord bestows
upon the godly and proceeds from his liberality, is the fruit of the
womb: So that inheritance and reward signify both one thing, that is to say,
the gift and liberality of the Lord. So we read Jeremy 31. Refrain thy voice
from weeping and thine eyes from tears: for thy works shall be rewarded,
says the Lord. Also Matthew. 5. Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward
in heaven. Likewise 1. Cor. 15. Be ye steadfast, for as much as ye know that
your labor is not in vain in the Lord, that is, it shall be rewarded.

This is the doctrine of the holy Ghost concerning the true and Christian
government of households and familyes, to believe that children and all things
else are the gift of God. When we assuredly know^ that we receive all things at
Gods hands as the only giver thereof, then do we learn by a goodly
consequence, which the holy Ghost here teaches us, how we may bear and
overcome all miseries and calamities: so that, if either wife or children dye,
or if any other adversities or miseries happen, we may say with holy Job: The
Lord gave and the Lord has taken away: blessed be the name of the Lord. For
reason being now lightened by the word, does acknowledge Gods blessing, and
gives thanks unto him for the same, and in adversity does not repugne or
repine against the will of God. Not that we can lose the gifts of God without
sorrow and heuinesse of the flesh: for we do not here go about to comfort the
flesh, but the spirit. Albeit the very Saints and children of God also do
feel these troubles: notwithstanding they are not oppressed and overcome
therewith. Like as Jacob was in great anguish when he had lost Joseph: yet he
did not despair, he did not blaspheme, but suffered this calamity patiently,
because he knew that, as Joseph was the gift of God, so he was taken away
again also by God. He therefore that has a mind thus prepared and
instructed, shall not be overcome with any troubles or calamities, be they
never so grievous. But it is not enough to learn these things by hearing and
by reading of books only, but experience and practice thereof is also
required, without the which this household government can never be learned,
this blessing of true and christian matrimony cannot be understand: As we may
see in those which setting God aparte, behold nothing else but fortune and
chance. These men, when they enter into matrimony to no other end but to live
in lust, wealth, and pleasure, Note the end of those men that are not thankful
to God for their wealth and welfare, but attribute all to fortune and chance.
and to advance their children by their wisdom and policy, to great riches,
honor and dignity, do find that all things fall out clean contrary, so that
both they, their wives, children and riches do miserably perish, because they
are ignorant that there is no success without the blessing of God. On the
other side, they that enjoy these gifts as the blessing of God, with thankful
hearts for the same, although they fall into many troubles and afflictions, are
not withstanding of a quiet and cheerful conscience.

Verse. 4. As are the arrows of strong men, so are the children of youth.

This is a similitude taken of war, and pertains to politic government.
The how in ye hand of the strong archer is not drawn in vain, as David says
of Jonathan. The arrow or dart of Jonathan never turned back, that is, it never
missed but perced and wounded. Wherefore Esaias calls the Apostles arrows: and
likewise Zachary. The meaning then is this. It is the gift of God to reign at
home in peace without sedition, and to obtain victory abroad. And without
this gift in civil government there is no success, nor victory in battle.
For in the common weal are always more enemies then friends. Moreover the
greater part is always evil, and commonly overcomes the better, if God do
not help. Wherefore to have a flourishing common weal, it is a special gift
of God. Young men therefore must defend the common weal and stand in battle
against the enemy. For they are like arrows or darts, which strike and perse
because they are sent of God. For old men are not meet for war, according
to that saying: Youth musts travel, middle age must give counsel and old men
must pray: That is, young men must labor and take pains for the defense and
maintenance of the common weal. They that are more ripe in years and
wisdom, must help the common weal with grave counsel and good advise, and
they which are old and impotent must pray for the prosperous state and good
success thereof.

But here note what an excellent title he gives to those that do defend the
common weal, when he calls young men the gift of God: such young men he
means as are virtuous and fear God, whom God makes mighty arrows or darts
to overthrow their enemies and win the victory. For this even the Gentiles
also learned by experience, that victory did not consiste in the strength and
power of man, but was given from above, and that industry and wise policy
were of more force then armor and weapons, So has it often times come to
pass that great armies have been vanquished and put to flight with a small
power. Not that we should not provide armor and weapons, soldiers and men of
war for the defense of the common weal: but because the Magistrate, if he
must needs make war, should neither presume of him self, nor yet despair,
whether he have many soldiers or whether he have few, but considering his
charge and calling, whereby he is constreyned to enter into battle, should
seek and ask from heaven help and victory, saying: Lord in thy hand is
strength and victory: be thou my helper, fight thou for me: Like as on the
other side, if in the strength, power and multitude of men thou excedest thine
enemies, yet may thou not therefore think thy self sure of the victory,
but thou must ask it of God, and say: Lord, victory is thine, which if it be
thy good pleasure to give unto me, I will thank thee and praise thy name
therefore. But if through our overthrow it be thy will to punish our sins,
behold, here I am. Such a confidence, although it be but in the Magistrate,
the guide or captain alone, which acknowledges his charge and calling, and
asks help and succor of God, shall undoubtedly obtain the victory: like as
Iephta did. He in his office and calling would gladly have lived in peace
together with his people: But this could not Ammon suffer. Wherefore Iephta
seeing that he was constreyned to fight, prayed for the help and assistance of
God against his enemies, and so obtained the victory. For he acknowledged that
strength and victory came not of him self, but of the Lord, as his only gift.
So King David had many and notable victories over his enemies, one after an
other. By what means? Forsooth he had armor and weapons, with all furniture of
war, he had mighty armies both of horsemen and footmen. But victory (says
he) consists not in these things. Therefore he prayed that God would give
him victory, and hoped to receive the same no otherwise then at his hands
alone. Upon this confidence and trust followed undoubted victory. Solomon
therefore teaches in this verse that victory is the gift of God. And like as
arrows which are shot with might and violence, do wound and pearce: even so
young men are valiant in war, not by their own strength, boldness and
presumption, but by the blessing of the Lord alone. Children of youth. This is
a phrase of the Hebrew. As much to say as young men. As the child of death they
call him which is appointed to death. Or it signifies young men begotten and
borne of their parents in the time of their youth which are strong and able to
stand in defense of the common weal.

Verse. 5. Blessed is the man that has his quiuerful of them: he shall not be
ashamed when he speaks with his enemies in the gate.

He sets forth the former similitude more plainly, and by the quiver he
understands the common weal, as in the verse going before by arrows he
understood young men. As if he said: That is a happy Prince, and that is a happy
common weal, which has this blessing, and knows it to be the gift of God.
Uictory and peace must needs be there.

To speak in the gate is a phrase used of the Hebrews. And it does not only
signify to speak, but to speak politikely, that is, to make laws, to
govern by laws, to defend the godly, to bridle the wicked, etc. And it is as
much to say as where such young men are, the Magistrates are able to speak in
the gates: that is, they are able to defend the common weal, they fruitfully
travel in the affairs thereof, they mainteyne good laws, etc. But hear what
he adds moreover, that such have always enemies which do not only
withstand them, but also hate them and speak evil of them. But all this must
they learn to bear. For if they will be discouraged through the malice of ye
wicked, if they seek to please and fear to displease, there must needs
follow a confusion of all things. As we may see in Princes Courts, where men
seek to please, and to live in favor, and therefore they will reprove
nothing, least thereby they should purchase the displeasure of the Prince.
They will be in authority and live in the Court for reward, promotion, and
glory, and not to serve the Prince and the common weal. And hereof comes it
that there is no right form of government any where to be found. Wherefore let
such as fear to offend and can not bear the displeasure and hatred of men,
take no office, no rule or authority upon them. Who ever governed a kingdom
more holily then David? and yet when his seditious son Absolon spoke evil of
him to the people, he easily found those which did believe him. And why so?
Because David was a holy King, and did not wink at the sins of his subjects,
but punished them sharply according to their deserts. This thing procured unto
David the hatred of the people. Afterward when his own son took upon him
to be the captain and author of sedition, they were easily persuaded to
forsake him their Lord and King and rebelled against him. For it can not be
but that he which will do his duty uprightly in his calling, not omitting nor
neglecting the fame either for fear or for favor, must needs stir up
against him the hatred of the wicked.

Wherefore this clause, to speak with the enemies in the gate, must not be
barely understand, as of a matter of light importance. For it signifies the
great care and travel, the faithful diligence and vigilancie of godly
Magistrates in their vocation, that is to say, to make good laws and to
execute the same, to constrayne the wicked to obey them with punishment, with
bonds and imprisonment, to stir up the fury of the malicious and
spiteful, etc. So that he which rules must so rule, that he shall never be
without the fear of great dangers if he respect the outrageous boldness and
presumption of the wicked. For he shall find that to rule is nothing else but
to heap upon him self dispite and malice, and to cast him self into the
jaws of a biting and a cruel beast: As Aeschines when he gave over the
government of the common weal of Athens, said that he was delivered from the
common weal, as from a mad and a raging dog. And Bias said, that the
office shows what the man is. For how many commonweals, how many Princes
shall ye see at this day, which keep their people and their nobility in the
reverent and due obedience of their laws? For, to rule, of all the works and
affairs that belong unto man in this world, is the greatest and the hardest.
Moreover, like as he which enters into matrimony and marries a wife to no
other end but to accomplish his own lust and pleasure, is deceived, and
wrappeth him self in great and infinite troubles: even so he that takes upon
him any office in the common weal for reward, estimation and glory, finds
all things clean contrary to his expectation, if he endeavor to rule and
govern as he should do. Wherefore it follows, that they being oppressed
with troubles and trauells, become impatient and forsake all together.

Wherefore the Magistrate must learn that in government these vices are not
lacking: to wit, hatred, rebellion, sedition, discord, ingratitude, and a
thousand dangers: also troublers of the common peace and quietness, which are
enemies to his life, his goods, his name and estimation. What shall the
Magistrate here do? First let him know that power and authority is the
ordinance of God, persuading him self that he is appointed to rule and govern
by the will of God. When he has thus done, let him arm and confirm his mind
against all troubles and dangers, and let him boldly and cheerfully do his
duty in his calling, though the people rage never so much. Then will God add
his blessing unto his labors: he will help and assist him against his enemies
as here he says: He shall not be ashamed when he speaks with his enemies,
that is to say, disobedient, rebellious, and seditious persons. Again, Psalm.
144. which does subdue my people under me. Also, Ps. 7. The Lord is judge over
the people. As if he said: It lies not in my power, policy or wisdom, to
rule this people. It is the Lord therefore that gives obedient people, which
notwithstanding, naturally hates the Magistrate. For every man loves
liberty, and will not be subject to laws. As at this day we may see in the
nobility, which would live in all liberty to do what they list, without any
punishment or regard of laws. If the higher powers go about to bridle them by
laws, they fall away and become traitors and rebels.

Against such great enemies and dangers the holy Ghost comfort the
Magistrate in this place. When thou make laws for the common weal, says
he, and f^ithfully executest the same, thou shall not be ashamed: For God will
give thee young men which shall be able to help thee. For often times we see
that one or two good men by their wisdom, gravity and severity do keep a
whole multitude in good order. But contrariwise, they that wink at all things
because they will not displease, are but painted images and good for nothing.

Here have ye a Psalm as touching both civil and household government,
enstructing a godly man how he shall behave him self in both kinds of life,
to the end that he neither fall into security by too much success, nor be
discouraged by trouble and adversity. Both which things happen to the ungodly,
which rashly and without the fear of God either enter into matrimony or take
upon them any office in the common weal. For since they are ignorant that God
is the gouerner of these things, they will needs rule all together by their
own wisdom and policy. Hereof it follows that they are miserably
ouerthrown in their own devises and practices, or else they fall into such
security that they rule and reign with all cruelty and tyranny: Wherefore, as
this doctrine is most necessary and profitable, so we whom God either has or
hereafter will thrust into these kinds of life, must labor to atteyne, and to
follow the same: wherein we shall be profitable both to the common weal and to
ourselves. Then shall our service, our labors and travels please God, and he,
as he has promised, will give good success thereunto, and will show that he
has pleasure in them that fear him, and in all them that trust in his mercy.

The 128. Psalm. Blessed is every one, etc.
In the former Psalm the Prophet entreated of both kinds of life, The
argument of the Psalm.
that is, both of policy and household government. The same thing in a manner
he does also in this Psalm, but yet after an other sort. For albeit in this
Psalm he joins household government or matrimony with polycie and politic
government, and wishes the blessing of God and peace unto them both, yet has
he here a more respect to household government, because it is, as it were the
fountain and beginning of politic government. For the children which we bring
up and instruct at home the posterity will afterward make gouerners of the
common weal. For of houses are made cities, of cities shires, of shires a
common weal or kingdom. Household government therefore is called the
fountain of policy and politic government. For where housholdes and familyes
are not maintained, there can be no City, no common weal, no kingdom.
Wherefore to this Psalm we will give this title, that it is an holy hymme, or
a song in the praise of matrimony, whereby the Prophets comfort such as live
in that holy state, wishing unto them and promising all felicity and
blessings of God. These things may afterward be also applied unto polytike
government. For as God blesses matrimony because it is the ordinance of God
and a kind of life which highly pleases God, even so is the Magistrate also
ordained of God and has a certain promise of the blessing of God.

And here appears the wisdom of the holy Ghost, which hides from us those
things that in this kind of life are grievous or odious, and speaks only of
those which are most meet to persuade and are good things in deed. The world
does the contrary. For it is not only ignorant of the good things which are
in matrimony, but also if it see any such, it estemeth them as nothing because
of the troubles which presently it feels. No marvel is it therefore, that
when wicked men speak of this kind of life, they speak after an other sort
and with other words, then the holy ghost is wont to speak. For they follow
the sense and judgment of the flesh only, and see nothing else either in
civil government or in matrimony and household affairs, but those things
which seem to be painful, hard, and full of trouble: And not only so do,
but those things also which in these kinds of life are divine and heavenly in
deed, they do not perceive, because of those small troubles and
discommodities which touch the flesh. And hereof come these sayings: There is
no city without a burden, that is, without a woman. A wife is a necessary
evil. To bury a wife, is better then to marry her. If we could be without
women, we should be without great troubles: And such other like sayings
tending to the dispraise and reproach of women.

The cause why men do thus peruersely judge, is this, that the flesh is to
poisoned with original sin, that it can not be content to bear the
punishments of sin. It seeks after such things as are sweet and
pleasant: but troubles and trauells it can not bear. Wherefore either it
flies altogether from matrimony and all civil affairs, as the Epicures and
bellygods do, or else abuses the same to his own lust and pleasure. So blind
is it through original sin with the desire of pleasures* glory and riches.
Necessary it was therefore to apply some medicine unto our corrupt nature, and
somewhat to repress and to bridle the wanton flesh with those troubles which
are both in matrimony and in civil affairs.

Wherefore, when we read these praises of matrimony in the holy Scripture, and
compare them with the judgment of man, we shall see the one to be clean
contrary to the other. We must say therefore that these things are true
according to the spirit, but according to the flesh they are not true. So
where he says afterward of the godly married man: Thou shall be blessed and
it shall be well with thee, the flesh thinks the contrary, and judges the
married person to be most miserable and most unhappy, because he is constrained
to get his living with great labor and travel. For the world knows not the
things that pertain to the holy Ghost, and the good things and great
blessings of God that are in matrimony, it sees not, but rests only in the
creature, and sees not God creating, governing and blessing the creature.

Contrariwise ye holy Ghost looks to ye creator, and magnifieth the blessing
of God, although it be overwhelmed with never so many afflictions and
tentations. And for the troubles and discommodities that are incide^t to these
kinds of life, either he covers them, or else he makes them less then they
be. And this the world can not do. The wisest men therefore (as in histories
we may see) did refuse to bear office in the common weal, or to deal in
public affairs. The same thing comes to pass also in matrimony. For young
men will hardly suffer this yoke to be laid upon them, as the old man says of
them in the Poet. They (says he) which are in love (he means unchaste love
and fleshly lust) can not abide to hear of marriage. They will not forsake their
filthy pleasures to live chastely in holy matrimony. And if there be any which
thorough vehement love are brought under this yoke, when they see no such
success thereof as they looked for, but that some troubles or other do
follow, which they being blinded with love could not foresee, then they
complain, then they repent yt ever they brought them selves into such bondage:
hereupon it follows that the husband will rather bear with all wickedness in
an harlot and a strumpet, then with any little fault in his own wife: as also
the wife, except she be very godly, will sooner wink at the wickedness of an
adulterer, then at the small offenses of her own husband. For nature can not
bear these yokes, if men be not well instructed by the word, and lightened by
the holy Ghost, and so look unto the creator, who has ordained both families
and commonweals, and will have them to be governed and guided by this
miserable and frail flesh. They that have not this knowledge, are soon
provoked to impatiencie when they see that all things have not such success
as they would.

Wherefore even such as are godly minded, must be taught, exhorted and stirred
up, to behold some thing above and beyond these troubles, rejecting the
judgment of the wise men of this world, and to look to the true and
inestimable good things which God has hidden in these kinds of life. Then
shall they more easily bear their troubles, and show their obedience unto God
when he sends diverse tentations. And to this end we will enterprete this
Psalm, this marriage song, that we may behold those spiritual good things
which God has hidden in matrimony, and esteem the same accordingly, to the end
that we be not like to this world, which sees the works of God, and yet does
not understand them, and hears the blessing and sweet promises of God and
does not believe them.

Verse. 1. Blessed are all they which fear the Lord and walk in his ways.

First of all here is to be noted, that the Prophet does not by and by enter
i^ts the promises of God concerning matrimony, as though they were given only
in respect of matrimony: but he begins with the first table, and calls him
blessed that fears the Lord. And this he does, to show that the world does
not understand what it is to marry a wife and to live in the state of Christian
matrimony. Wherefore if any troubles come, it can not bear them patiently, and
therefore it is not blessed, but rather miserable and unhappy. But he that
fears the Lord, whether he be called to any government in the common weal,
or marry a wife, is blessed, what success so ever follow thereof.

For it may be that even they also which fear the Lord, shall have no good
success in matrimony, but shall be coupled either with wicked, or with froward
and disobedient wives, or else they shall be otherwise shaken with one
tentation or other, as with the untimely death of a good wife, or with
intractable and degenerate children, or with barennes and lack of fruit.
Here, if a man be godly and fearing God, he shall soon overcome these troubles
and tentations. For thus will he think with him self: I have met with such
a wife as is unto me many ways a great cross and vexation: with whom no man
else could quietly live one day. But this gift God has given me, that I should
know and acknowledge him to be both my creator and father, and to learn
patiently to endure and abide his good will and pleasure, etc. with this gift
are overcome, not only all the troubles and miseries of matrimony, but all
calamities besides what so ever.

The Prophet therefore begins this holy hymn, or this marriage song after
this manner: If thou will be happy and blessed, and have a mind to live in the
state of matrimony, this shall thou find, that the Lord will give unto thee a
wife, house, and children, with other commodities. But above all things see
that thou fear God, and in the name of God begin this kind of life. This is a
profitable doctrine, which here ye holy Ghost sets forth even at the
beginning, to the end that he which can not live a single life, should begin
his matrimony with the first commandment, and calling upon God for his help
and succor, should come forth into the presence of God, and say: Lord, thou
say unto me in thy word, that thou art and wilt be my Lord and my God. Thou
have made me a man, or thou have made me a woman. This is thine own creation,
and this is thine own work. I did not so make my self, neither was I so made
by fortune or chance. Give good success therefore unto thy creature, and
grant that I may be a happy husband, or that I may be a happy wife, etc. that
so we may begin in the fear of God, that we be not secure and careless, or
presuming of our own strength, nor rashly enter into this kind of life, like
savage and brutish people, and such as neither know nor fear God: but may call
upon him who has created us to this kind of life. Then shall all things come
luckely to pass, then shall they have good success.

The holy Ghost begins his holy hymn after an other manner then other Poets
do. For he exhorts us that we should first of al call upon God, and
conceive in our hearts a sure trust of his mercy. For God will not turn his
ear from thee if thou call him thy creator, but will again acknowledge thee
to be his creature, and will not deny this to be his work, that thou art a
man, or that thou art a woman. But presumption he abhors, and will not have
thee to begin this kind of life trusting in thine own policy, but rather
that thou should suspecte the same, knowing that God will not prosper thy
doings and policies, except thou ask counsel of him. Therefore says he,
Blessed is the man that fears the Lord. For we have daily examples before our
eyes, that at the beginning there is often times vehement and fervent love
between man and wife, which afterward is easily quenched, so that either
they live miserably and unquietly together, or else the one forsakes the
other. Some times they are so drowned in wealth and pleasure, that they live
all together without the fear of God: And this is a far greater misery. But
worthily do these miseryes and calamities fall upon them. For why do they not
join withal the fear of God?

Here thou must learn therefore to live in the fear of God, who has created
thee that thou should be a husband, or that thou should be a wife, and
he will also govern, bless and prosper thy marriage. But if thou will not
acknowledge him to be thy gouerner, but wilt rule thy wife and thy family after
thine own fantasy, without invocation and prayer unto God, it will follow
that either thou shall overthrow all together, or shall be so blinded with
continual success, that thou shall fall yet into far greater evils. God will
be feared and served: that is, he will have us to confess and acknowledge that
what so ever we take in hand, can not prosper or have any good success
without his help and assistaunce.

It is very profitable and necessary, with all diligence to teach this doctrine
to those which are yet young, that they may know it and follow it. The cause is
this, for that matrimony remains in the world and in the flesh, that is to
say, even in the midst of Devils. The husband, as touching the flesh, soon
lotheth or hates the wife or the wife her husband. What is the cause hereof?
Even this is the cause, for that matrimony consists in the flesh, which is
wholly corrupt and poisoned with sin. This (the flesh I mean) Satan inflameth
with hatred and every light offense, or else with jealousy. Wherefore if thou
look not unto the will of God, thy matrimony can never be unto thee either
stable or comfortable.

Wherefore youth must be well enstructed as touching matrimony, that when any
man shall marry a wife, he may live with her in the favor and blessing of God,
and say: Lord, this is thy gift, that I am a man. This wife also is thy gift.
We are in the world and this frail flesh, and in the midst of devils the
disturbers of matrimonial love. Give unto us therefore thy blessing, that
albeit some offenses do rise between us, yet thy blessing and the reverent
consideration of thy gifts, wherewith thou have endued us in this our
matrimony, may vanquish and overcome the same, etc. This is the cause why he
begins this verse with the fear of God, that he may take from us all
presumption, lest we should think that we shall have and enjoy all things as
we our selves have imagined. For so shall it not be: or if it so come to pass,
it shall not be without a greater mischief, even the rejecting of the word and
knowledge of God. The means to escape this, is to fear God and to trust in
him, and so in the name of God with humble prayer to begin matrimony,
committing the success wholly unto God.

In the Papacy they most wickedly defaced this holy institution, For they
called it the secular state, and married folks were taught to recite in their
private confession among other sins, the company between man and wife.
Amongst the blind popish Sophisters and schoolmen there was a disputation as
touching venial and mortal sin in carnal copulation (as contemptuously
this carnal Spirituality calls it between man and wife. But these were both
vain and wicked disputations. And hereof Augustine seems to have given an
occasion when he says, speaking of venial sin, that it is like to the sin
of married folks, for the which (says he) men do pray: Forgive us our
trespasses. True it is in deed that this companing of man and wife together
ought to be moderate, to suppress the feruencie of fleshly desire: And like as
a measure ought to be kept in meats and drinks, so godly married folks ought
not to yield to much unto the flesh. For this burning desire and foul lust
wherewith the flesh is enflamed, comes of sin. Therefore for the punishment
of this lust, is annexed withal the bitter wormwood of many cares and
troubles which men have for living, for children, for the governing of private
and public affairs, besides the offenses of their familyes, their neighbors,
etc. All these things are cast upon the flesh as salt to season the wantonness
of the same: For whose infirmity God by matrimony would provide, but not
increase the desire and lust thereof.

This doctrine then must first be taught (for else can not matrimony be happy,
comfortable and pleasing God) that such as enter into the state of matrimony
should fear God, that is to say, they should cast away the presumption of
their own devises and policies, and give them selves to humble prayer,
desiring of God a good, a chaste, and obedient wife, and also good success in
other things, and that if any thing happen contrary to their expectation, they
may take it in good part that their hope is deceived and their policy
disapoynted.

And here the Prophet does not only require that which is commanded in the
first precept, to wit, that they should give unto God his due worship, that
is, they should fear God and trust in his goodness and mercy, (for this is the
service which we owe unto God) but he adds moreover: Blessed is the man that
walks in his ways, that is to say, which does the works also of the first
table, which yields obedience unto his parents and to the Magistrate, which
commits no murder, which does nothing that may be hurtful unto others,
which defiles not him self with harlots and whoredom, but marries a wife to
this end that he may live chastely and avoid such wickedness. The Papists were
wont to sing and yet do sing this Psalm, but they understand it not. For
they follow Hierome, which unlearnedly and very ungodly thus reasons against
matrimony. If married folks be blessed (says he) it follows that Isaac
before he was forty years old, and likewise other holy men which had no
wives, were not blessed with this manner of blessedness. But we know that ye
psalm speaks not of those which are priuileged, A privilege as touching
continency and to whom it is given.
as Jeremy had a commandment that he should not marry. John Baptist for a
singular purpose abstained from marriage: as our Savior Christ also did. Let
them which have this gift sail on with their own wind and keep the course
appointed unto them of God. But let us which have not this gift, and are
without this privilege of these excellent men, learn this verse: that is, in
the fear of the Lord let them marry and so walk in the ways of the Lord.
And let them know that they may so live in this kind of life, that both they
may fear the Lord and walk in his ways, contrary to the vain persuasion and
deuilish doctrine of the Pope and the whole Papacye, Chaste matrimony can not
stand with the unchaste and filthy religion of the Papists.
which dream that matrimony is such a kind of life as is either clean
contrary to religion, or not agreeable to the same.

Verse. 2. Thou shall eat the labor of thy hands, thou shall be blessed, and
it shall be well with thee.

This must they learn also which are married, that they must labor. For the
law of nature requires, that the husband should sustain and nourish his wife
and his children. For after that man and wife do know that they ought to fear
God their creator, who not only made them, but gave his blessing also unto his
creature, this secondly must they know, that some thing they must do that
they consume not their days in ease and idleness. Hesiodus the Poet gives this
counsel, that first thou should get thee a house, then a wife, and also an
ox to till thy ground. First he would have thee to provide an habitation where
thou may dwell with thy wife and children: then a wife, but yet so that thou
be not without an ox also to plowe the ground: that is, thou must have some
thing wherewith thou may maynteyne and succor thee and thine. For albeit
that our diligence, care and travel is not able to mainteyne our family, yet
God uses the same as a mean by the which he will bless us. So neither to the
husband man the sowing of his seed, nor to the preacher his travel in
preaching the word is sufficient to mainteyne his living: yet God by these or
rather with these, gives unto them wherewith they may live.

Wherefore the Prophet would have all married folks to live in the sweat of
their faces, and to be exercised with labor, that they may tame the flesh and
mortify the lusts thereof. For they that live in idleness, walk in the ways,
not of the Lord, but of the devil. For neither are they, neither live they in
the ordinance of God: for God has ordained labor. And here behold the wisdom
of the holy Ghost. Labor is one of the discommodities of matrimony. But how
well here does the holy Ghost hide this discommoditie, when first he shows
that labor is commanded of God, and afterward promises that although it
seem to be never so hard and so grievous a thing, yet by it God will bless
us. This is in deed to mingle wormwood with sugar: like as also Jesus Sirach
adorneth labor with this commendation, that he says, it was ordained of God,
and he has also a pleasure therein. Great need have we of this admonition
because of our corrupt nature. For most true it is that the nature of all men,
as the Poet says, is prone and ready to fall from labor to filthy lust and
fleshly liberty.

This holy hymn therefore teaches the husband with his spouse, that in their
matrimony they should fear God and put their trust in him, and not in their
riches, their wisdom and policy. Moreover he forewarneth them what
discommoditie they should find in matrimony, namely that they must work and
live with the labor of their own hands. Now, where there is a lust remaining
in the flesh which joins man and wife together, yet is not this the
principal knot. For such occasions and such troubles may follow whereby this
knotte may soon be loosed. But these are the true knots of matrimony, to know
that even this labor of thy hands and care for thy family are an acceptable
sacrifice unto God: that the wife, when she gives the breast unto her infant:
the husband when he labors until he sweat, and tyereth his body with
labor to succor him and his, does such service unto God, as far passes all
the service, and all the worshippings of the Pope and his religious rout. For
mark I pray you what the Prophet says: Thou shall be blessed and it shall be
well with thee.

This consolation therefore is very necessary against this offense, and this
perverse judgment of the world, to the end that they which are married may
know, that God has ordained this kind of life, and that in it they should
labor and sweat, and bear the malediction of original sin, which
malediction began in paradise, and is laid upon us all: and moreover, that
they should know, that the holy Ghost pronounces them blessed which are
diligent in their calling, and labor cheerfully. These things are such, as
are able to encourage the godly to bear willingly all troubles and miseries
what so ever. For what can thou desire more? First thou hear that God will
so bless thy labors that thereby he will give thee a living and all things
necessary for this life. Moreover, thou hear that he has a pleasure in thy
labor and approneth the same, yea and accounts it for a most acceptable
sacrifice. For it is not labor alone, but a work of obedience and of thy
vocation. These things the wicked know not, and therefore either they seek
ease and rest, or else if they must needs labor, they are very impatient: For
they do not see with the eyes of the spirit, but judge all together according
to the eyes of the flesh: which eyes can see nothing but troubles and miseries.
But the spirit reyseth up and comfort the godly with this comfort, that God
will both bless them by the means of their labor (for if he give any thing
to those which are idle and slothful, he gives it but to their destruction)
and that this sweat and this travel pleases God highly. Here are two great
commodities for one discommoditie, which the flesh sees only, and no more.

But here we must note that this is not called labor only when the body is
exercised and weeried, but the care and trouble of the mind is also a labor.
For the Prophet uses here such a word as signifies not only that labor
which is done with the hand, but also the discommodities, the sorrows and
vexations which in our labor and with our labor we do sustain. Such troubles
in families and housholdes do chance very often. Many times it comes to
pass that when the husband does his duty carefully and diligently, his wife
is unquiet and full of strife, his children fall sick, his servant are not
only negligent, but also deceitful and unfaithful. These things we call not
labors, but sorrows and vexations: and yet notwithstanding the Prophet
comprehends both under the name of labor. So that whether we seem to be
afflicted either in doing or in suffering, that is, either in bodily labor or
vexation of the mind, all this should we patiently endure, and think that God
has not given us this life that we should spend it in ease, in idleness and
vain pleasures. For this cause he says to the woman: I will multiply thy
sorrows whiles thou art with child, and in sorrow shall thou bring forth
children. For great are the sorrows and the troubles of a woman even before
her travel also. And in her travel how near death is she? Likewise he says
unto the man: Cursed is the earth for thy sake. In sorrow shall thou eat of
it all the days of thy life. Here thou see that this labor and this sorrow
is appointed to endure, not for a day, or a year, but for all the time of thy
life. Here will some man say: If it be so, it is better to be unmarried and to
live in whoredom. Prove, and see whether thou can bring thy self out of
these troubles. Nay, in so doing thou shall more miserably entangle thy self
therein, and heap more horrible calamities upon thine own head. For by this
means thou shall procure unto thy self the wrath of God and an evil
conscience, and thine own heart shall condemn both thee and thy deuilish life.
For whilst thou followest the pleasures of the flesh, thou shall fall into the
bitterness of the spirit, and what that is, thou shall feel when the time
comes. For one drop, as you would say, of an evil conscience swalloweth up
a whole sea of worldly joys and pleasures. How will thou then do when through
thy wicked life thou shall be compelled to suffer the torment and vexation of
conscience not for one day, but for many years? On the other side, where as a
merry and a quiet conscience is, being well persuaded of the favor and blessing
of God, there is also everlasting joy, which does so swallowe up those
drops of worldly sorrows and troubles, as the heat of the Sun consumes
morning dew.

Is it not then a great madness so to fear and to shun those small drops
and little sparks of labor, when thou see that God has seasoned and
sweetened them with most sweet and pleasant sugar, in that he says here to
all those that labor and suffer the discommodities and troubles of matrimony:
Thou art blessed and it shall be well with thee: That is, where as thou art
placed in this kind of life, whereas thou labourest and art many ways troubled,
tempted and afflicted, and suffer now this trouble now that, this does not
only please me, but to thee also it is very profitable, that by this means
the flesh may be mortified and original sin suppressed, and thou in
matrimony (as in a schole) may learn this heavenly wisdom, namely, to
abide and endure the will of God patiently, and may have thereby a thousand
occasions to declare the patience and love, which out of matrimony and in the
single life thou could never have. They that so live in matrimony, when they
are most miserable, are, even then most happy and blessed. Contrariwise they
that do not so live, are most miserable. For they suffer the labors and
troubles which this life can not be without in such sort that they join sorrow
to sorrow and one calamity to an other. Hereof rises strife and variance
between the husband and the wife. Hereof it comes that the one so abhors
the other, that they will not go, talk, eat or drink together. This is a
deuilish life. Wherefore this exhortation must be diligently learned and
exercised, that through patience we may endure and overcome all labors,
sorrows, and vexations, being contented with this benefit, that we know this
kind of life to be acceptable unto the Lord, and that in it and by it he will
bless us. Thus with a merry and a cherefull conscience we shall overcome all
troubles and tentations whatsoever.

Verse. 3. Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine on the sides of thy house,
and thy children like the olive plants round about thy table.

We have heard two singular commendations of holy matrimony where the husband
and the wife do live together in the fear of the Lord and walk in his ways,
namely that this life is acceptable unto God and that he will bless the same.
Therefore we are here exhorted and encouraged patiently to endure the cares and
troubles which God has allotted to this kind of life, to the end that whiles
we are beaten down, humbled and kept under by these troubles, the corruption
of the flesh may be mortified and the infirmity of nature may be healed. For
where as the idle bellied Monks taught men to sequestre them selves from all
labors and trauells, and from all worldly business, and to seek a solitary
life where they might live in all ease and quietness: the Prophet here teaches
that this pleases not God. But this is it that pleases God, that we should be
tossed with troubles and shaken with tentations, knowing that God has
appointed us here to suffer labors, sorrows and vexations both Active or
passive, that is, which either come unto us by labor and travel, or which we
suffer inwardly or outwardly by any means.
active and passive, which matrimony brings with it. He says not that we
must live in idleness and eat the labor of other men's hands: as the Popes
holy Saints, those Epicures and delicate Martyrs do.

Moreover, I somewhat touched before, that Hierome and some other also after
him, did dispute as touching this Psalm, why David commends the life of a
godly man to be so happy if he have a wife, since that in the holy Scripture
there are so many holy men which lived a single life, as peradventure Helias
and Helizeus did, with other like: albeit of these men he can not thus
certeynly affirm, but Jeremy he may. To this I answer, that the Prophet here
means nothing else but to enstruct the godly as touching this kind of life
instituted of God, and goes not about to compel all men to marry, but
teaches those which are married, or entend to marry, to know and understand
what they have when they have wives: so that both the single life and also
matrimony may have their liberty.

The meaning therefore of the Prophet here is nothing else, but to commend and
set forth the gift of God, and not to compel any man to marry. For one and the
same spirit has distributed his gifts, to some after one manner, and to some
after an other. We are all in one body, and we are all bewtified with one and
the same spirit, Matthew. 9.
but not after one manner. Let them therefore to whom it is given to That is,
to live chaste without matrimony.
receive this, abide still in their single life, and let them glory in the
Lord. On the other side let those that are not so strong, but know and feel
their infirmity, that they can not live both chaste and out of matrimony, let
these (I say) consider more their own infirmity, then the discommodities and
troubles that belong unto matrimony: and let them know that they have an
excellent remedy created of God for their infirmity, and therefore the
Scripture calls the woman a helper unto the man. Wherefore, although we be
unlike in gifts, yet let every one of us serve God in our gift and calling,
show our selves in all godliness to be the true and faithful family of that
great and heavenly householder. This is then (as I said) the purpose of the
holy Ghost, to extol and magnify this gift of matrimony (since it is so
despised in the world, and the true praises thereof are so hid and darkened,
partly by the corruption of the flesh, which can feel nothing but present
troubles, and partly by the suggestions of the Devil and sclaunders of the
world): and yet so notwithstanding that other gifts lose not their
commendation. Let widows, let virgins abide in their calling. The holy Ghost
here speaks nothing of our virgins, but of matrimony only, to the end that
they which live in that state, should know and acknowledge their gift.

Now whereas Hierome, both ungodly and without all judgment obiecteth, that
Abraham, Isaac, and other Patriarchs married wives when they were of great
years, and lived many years also in matrimony without children, and therefore
were not blessed according to this Psalm, I deny the consequence. For Abraham,
Isaac, and others were blessed even before they married wives or had any
children: Like as also widows and virgins which do believe and are baptized,
are blessed. And as touching the Psalm, it speaks of the gift only, and
compels none thereunto, but adorneth and bewtifieth it with this singular
commendation, because it is so miserably defaced and contemned in the world.
The Pope and his Clergy do pretend that they eschew marriage for the love of
chastity. 1. Timoth. 4.
But that is false. We must believe S. Paul rather, who foretold that they
should contemn matrimony, being led with the spirit of error and not with
the love of chastity, especially seeing they have made a law whereby they
forbid matrimony. Therefore they speak a lie through hypocrisy when they say
that the love of chastity is the cause why they abhor matrimony. For neither
are they chaste, neither can they be chaste, as their abominable life and wicked
practices do declare. But this do they that they may live in ease and
security, and be free from all the cares and troubles of matrimony: And
again, that through hypocrisy they may win unto them selves an opinion of
great holiness amongst the people, and be reverenced in the world as spectacles
and very Angels rather then men, and so be counted worthy to eat the labor
of other men's hands. This is the holy, that is to say, the execrable chastity
of our Papists, Munkes, Frears, Priests and Nuns.

They that after this manner absteyne from matrimony, are very Antichrists,
according to the saying of Daniel, who foresheweth that this is a most evident
mark of Antichrist, that he shall not care for the desire of women. The same
place does the ordinary gloss also apply unto Antichrist with these words,
that he shall make a great show of chastity, to the end he may the more
easily deceive. We also add this cause moreover, that they make this glorious
pretense of chastity and holiness, because they would live in ease and idleness,
and eschew the cares and troubles that matrimony brings with it: which are
meet and necessary for a godly man, if it please God to lay them upon him.

Thus ye see that matrimony is a good, an holy and a profitable kind of life,
and is worthy of the commendation which this Psalm here gives unto it*
although the flesh and the world can not praise it because of the incommodities
and troubles which it brings with it, but highly extolleth the single life.
This is not to follow the word of God, but the judgment of the flesh, which
commends gifts and makes a difference of them according to his own
fantasy, and thinks to serve God more truly and purely in the single life,
then in matrimony: as Hierome does in his pestilent books which he writes
against Iouinian: who shows him self to have more learning and judgment in
his little finger then Hierome has in all his body. For he ought not to have
praised virginity with the reproach and disprayse of matrimony: but thus should
he rather have said: that as they which are virgins should serve God in their
gift and calling, so matrimony is not to be condemned, but praised as a kind of
life ordained of God, even then, when nature was yet sound and vncorrupt, and
not yet infected with any sin. But Hierome has neither so much godliness nor
judgment but peruersly bursteth out into these words: 1. Cor 7.
It is good for a man so to be: therefore to have a wife it is evil. But to be
a virgin, and to be married, although they be diverse gifts, yet is God as
well pleased with the one as with the other. For where as they object these
words as touching matrimony: Such shall have trouble in the flesh, this do we
also confess. Notwithstanding matrimony is not the cause hereof, but sin,
which they also have that are not married. Genesis 3.

Thus much I thought good to say as touching the gross error and profane
opinion of Hierome, trifling, and by foolish allegories with his companion
Origin, imagining spiritual fathers and spiritual children: whereby they have
given occasion unto the Pope to make him self the bridegroom or the husband of
the church, and so one error has brought forth an other. But I would rather
wish that this bridegroom were hanged upon a tree with Judas and buried in
hell, then that by this means he should spoil Christ of his name. For Christ
Jesus alone is the husband of the Church. All the Saints of God besides, are
but the friends of the bridegroom, as John the Baptist calls himself. The
Church is the spouse or the wife, the children are the faithful which daily
come unto the marriage. These also are made the spouse, for they become
partakers of the good things and the blessings of the bridegroom, and they
obtain the righteousness of Christ and of his merits. If the Pope be good,
then is he in the number of these, and not the bridegroom, not the husband, but
the spouse, and is partaker of the benefits and the blessings of the
bridegroom: But if he be evil, he is the bridegroom of Satan and the friend of
Judas.

This is then the sum and effect of our answer, that this Psalm compels
none to marry, as though it were necessary that al should live in matrimony:
For it is not against these words of Christ: Matthew. 9.12.
he that is able to receive this, let him receive it. But this is his only
drift and purpose to set forth and commend matrimony, contrary to the corrupt
judgment of the flesh, and the pestilent examples of the world, which do
altogether fight against this kind of life, because of the troubles and
incommodities which are incident thereunto. These troubles they that fly and
will not feel, and therefore abhor matrimony, defile them selves with
whordom and al uncleanness, and so do much hurt by their deuilish and damnable
example. Against these viperous tongues and examples full of offense, this
Psalm armeth us. The world calls the wife a necessary evil. But Peter upon
certain consideration, and yet without reproach, calls her a weak vessel.
But mark what the holy Ghost says in this place: mark how he bewtifieth and
comme^deth the wife, whiles he compares her to a fruitful vine, and the
children which she brings forth to olive plants. Tell me if in any monuments
there are to be found such two excellent similitudes as these are? yea if there
be the like to be seen in all the Scriptures? For he takes two of the most
excellent trees that are to be found upon the earth, the vine and the olive, of
the which are gathered two notable and precious licours, and to these he
compares the wife and the children her fruit, before the world most
contemptible things. The wife, if you consider her condition, is far inferior
unto the man in those things which pertain either to the body or to the
mind, specially as touching ye affairs which are done by the man and can not
be done by the woman. But the holy Ghost considers the gift, and through the
greatness and excellency of the gift he covers what incommoditie so ever is
in the womankinde, and shadoweth the same with most excellent and goodly
similitudes.

Now, that we may see somewhat the causes why the holy Ghost so greatly
commends the woman kind, let us imagine that we are all unmarried: for the
world detesteth marriage, but specially they that are unmarried: Yea let us
presuppose that in the world there is neither man nor woman, but such a one as
is neither of them both, that by this means singlenes of life may be imagined
to be the more perfect. What shall become I pray you, of such a happy world,
pure chastity and singlenes of life? how shall mankind continue? Shall not the
whole world within twenty years be like unto a desert and a wild wilderness?
what use shall there be then of Gold and silver? Yea what use shall there be
of the Sun, the Moon and all things else that grow upon the earth* if,
mankind suddenly decaying, matrimony by this means should be abolished and
singlenes of life only advanced? Yea, where shall the ministry of the word
become? What fruit shall there be of the benefit of Christ? Why do thou
then so praise the single life, that thereby thou should diminish the
dignity and excellent fruit of matrimony? Nay, praise them both according to
their worthynes, and especially mark here how the holy Ghost teaches thee to
behold and to consider of thy wife: that is to say, not as weak flesh, which
does the common offices and duties of nature (with reverence and shamefastnes
be it spoken, for so I am compelled to speak because of the blasphemous
contemners of the creature of God). For why do thou not likewise even in the
vine also? Why do thou not contemn it for the dunge that is laid to the
root thereof? Nay rather, have thou not a more regard of the licour which by
this means is gotten out of the vine? Likewise in the Olive the roughnes of
the rind offends no man, or that the root thereof must be dressed, and as
it were, fatned with doung. For we have all a principal regard unto the
fruit. What madness then is this, that men in smaller matters can chose the
best things, and for a greater commodity wink at those which are evil, and
will not do the same in the woman which is the good creature of God? As though
the woman also did not see some loathsome things (for so these nice and
delicate hypocrites do term them) to be reprehended likewise in their
husbands.

In a child we can discern between the child and his order, his scabbes, his
diseases, or any like thing. For who rejects his child because he has
defiled him self? yea who forsakes him because he is scabbed and scurny, or
infected with the pestilence or any other contagious disease? Is not his ordure
and uncleanness washed away? Is not he carefully tended and tendered in his
sickness that he may recover his health again? Thus we shadow and cover the
faults and deformities of nature, with the greatness and excellency of that
good thing which we know to consist in the health and welfare of our
children. Here who would not detest him which should say that the child should
be cast away because he defiles him self, or because of his desease, be it
never so great? As these holy hypocrites do most spitefully reprehend those
duties of matrimonye which the man shows toward his wife, What? shall we
not think her to be the creature of God, and partaker of the benefit of
Christ? Besides this, that she is given unto us to this end, that she may be
an help unto us. Wherefore they are diuilish words which the wicked do use
against the lawful company and duties that are between man and wife, because
they will seem to be holy and great lovers of chastity, and worthily to
contemn these things. If such men were worthy to be fathers, they should
understand how little it would offend a good or natural father even to kiss
his scabbed and sick child, to handle and to heal his sores. For if infantes
should be cast away either because of their diseases or scabbednes, I pray
you Sir, where should you and I now have been? Wherefore the world is
sharply to be rebuked which even in the best things considers the faults,
but esteems not the virtues. And where as it cannot lack the use of these
virtues, and has them daily even, as it were, in his hands, yet is it so
blind that it can not see them. But this comes of original sin, to be
stark blind even in the most excellent creatures of God, and not to understand
what good things and great blessings are offered unto us in and by them, but
rather to be offended with such small faults or incommodities which in
comparison thereof are in a manner nothing to be regarded.

Wherefore we must here do as Cicero says he was wont to do in pleading of
causes: to wit, that if there were any evil therein, that he passed over with
silence: but if there were any good thing, that he urged, that he amplified,
therein he was wholly occupied. For who will have the less regard of his own
body because he has a sore in his breast, or in his longs, or some other
malady in any other part of his body? Yea have we not therefore a greater care
and regard of our bodies? Look upon our Courtiers, who when they have well
pampred them selves and carry their bellies full of dyrt and dunge, walk in
their silks and other sumptuous apparel, decked with gold and other goodly
ornaments, and smelling as though their body were nothing else but a precious
balm, and yet do they not once think how full of filthiness they are. Thus we
hide our faults and deformities most diligently, and that which is honest or
appears so to be, we set forth and magnify to the uttermost. But now, why
do we not the like in matrimony? why do we not cover the faults and commend
the virtues thereof? Nay, we do clean contrary: So blinded we are with
original sin that in the best and most holy things we pick out that only
which we may reprehend. In like manner we do also in the word of God, and in
all things that perteyne to the kingdom of God. For whereas he gives unto us
the use of the sun, plenty of vittells, a whole body, etc. these blessings no
man considers, no man gives thanks for them. But if God begin to viset us
with the pestilence, if we be pinched a little with dearth and scarsitie of
vittells, or but one of our teeth do ache, by and by we are so vexed that the
anguish thereof either hides or utterly takes away from us the remembrance of
all Gods benefits. Thus goes it with the world and with our own reason, that
we are more moved with one evil (as we esteem it) then with a thousand good
things besides.

But the holy Ghost takes a contrary way. For he covers the faults, and
that which is good he sets forth with worthy praises. Wherefore he so
paynteth out the wife, that he commands thee to consider of her as of a vine
planted in thy house and given to thee of God, whose fruits are divine
plants, much more pleasant and more excellent then the olive tree. For albeit
they degenerate and grow out of kind, and become evil plants, yet can it not
be denied but that they are the gift of God: and that must we acknowledge. Now
let them (as I have said) which have the gift of chastity, be without this
vine, and let them delight in their other vine and other fruits. But we are
now in the praise of this kind of vine. Here the wife is as the fruitful
vine, and the children as the olive plants. For so the holy Ghost teaches us,
and the matter it self testifies the same, although the holy Ghost did not
thus teach us at all. For the very Gentiles did highly commend natural
affections, love and kindness of one toward an other. This do also the
ballets which are used amongst us Germans testify, whereby the faithful and
loving affection between man and wife is set forth with singular praises, and
that this life has nothing more joyful and excellent then is a faithful wife
and loving to her husband. The same also do all wise and godly men confess:
not for the pleasure of the flesh, which is greater in whoredom, fornication
and other uncleanness. For thereby unclean lust is enflamed, but in matrimony
it is quenched. And the greatest pleasure that a man can have is this, when his
wife is of a kind and a loving heart toward him. This is an excellent gift,
and highly to be esteemed, and singularly commended in women. Whereof these
swine are utterly ignorant, which think the wife to be nothing else but a
swinish puddle of filthy pleasures. Nay she is an excellent instrument planted
of God in thy house, that therein she may be as a fruitful vine. For this
cause husbands ought to love their wives and children, yea more then their
own lives.

Wherefore, these high commendations of matrimony are here set against the
venomous tongues both of Satan and of wicked men, wherewith they do so
maliciously sclaunder this kind of life: Also against the corrupt and perverse
judgment of the flesh, whereby we are provoked either to a lothing and
contemning of this kind of life, or else to impaciencie, when our eyes are
blinded in discerning and judging the benefits and commodities thereof, and
are still in beholding of the faults, the incommodities or troubles that belong
to the same. Thus the wiser sort even emongst the Gentiles would not do. For
they did se that there is a natural affection in the man and the wife toward
their children, and a mutual love and faithfulness between them selves, and
both these things they praised and set forth with great commendation. So God
by the small number of the wiser sort even among the Gentiles did overcome the
multitude of these viperous tongues which are so venomous and spiteful against
this kind of life. How much more then ought we to defend matrimony, (we I say)
whom the holy Ghost moves and stirs up so to do by these excellent
similituds: whereby he shows that God is so delited with the life of married
folks, that not only he gives his blessing for the sustentation of this
life, but also the blessing of the belly and of the breasts, as Moises calls
it. This, no doubt would not God do, if he hated such as are married. For he
said unto Adam: All that grows upon the earth shall be unto thee for food
and sustenance. After the floode also he gave unto man the use of clean
beasts. Yea he gives unto matrimony what treasures and riches so ever are in
the world, and what so ever in nature is contained. All these are lively
testimonies that God approves, lyketh and loves this kind of life, although
the holy Scriptures should speak nothing thereof at all. Moreover, who sees
not that the propagation of man and woman kind is ordained of God? Let us
therefore be mindful of these similitudes and therewith arm our selves against
the wicked and perverse judgment of reason, against the devil and venomous
tongues, which magnify and ertoll vanity and abominable filthynes, and these
inestimable gifts they most wickedly dispraise and despise.

Verse. 4. Lo, thus shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord.

Hitherto we have heard those excellent commendations of matrimony which the
holy Ghost sets forth, to confirm and comfort such as are appointed to
this kind of life, that they might patiently suffer the incommodities, the
troubles and tentations of matrimony, and not follow the judgment of the
world, which like unto the mule and the ass follows the fence of the flesh
and is overcome with these troubles and tentations. The good gifts of God it
understands not, but some times it detesteth and abhors them. For ye shall
find many to whom it seems a great misery to have many children, as though
matrimony were ordained for beastly pleasures only, and not to this end
rather, that we might do acceptable service both to God and man, in nourishing
and bringing up of children. These men are ignorant of that which is most
comfortable in matrimony. For what is to be compared unto the love of parents
toward their children? especially since here thou see that children are the
greatest portion of Gods blessing. But here again we have need of faith. For
the world takes it not for a blessing when a man gets his living by labor
and travel, suffers the troubles and vexations of his wife, his children, his
servant and such like, whereof in matrimony there are many. These things, I
say, the world estemeth not as blessings, but abhors them as maledictions,
But the holy Ghost, to confirm the minds of the godly commends and sets
forth all that he has hitherto said, by this sweet and comfortable name, and
calls them blessings, to the end he may stir us up to know God and his
gifts rightly, lest that in the mids of his benefits and blessings we should
fall to a lothing thereof, as the world is wont to do, which regards not
those things which it has and presently enjoys, but desires the things
which it has not. Wherefore this vehement kind of speech is diligently to be
noted, in that he calls this life blessed and happy, which to the judgment
of reason is miserable and full of calamity, when he says: Lo thus shall the
man be blessed, etc. What can thou desire more? In that thou have a wife and
children, and live with the labor of thy hands, it is in deed the blessing
of God. Wherefore thou have not only great cause not to be offended but also to
give God thanks for his great blessings.

But how few are there to be found which do believe this? And if any do believe
it, yet through infirmity they are led away from this faith, and forgetting
the blessing, they become impatient, as if they were in the midst of Gods
malediction. It is therefore to be wished that this saying of the holy Ghost,
as a singular consolation, might be always before the eyes and in the ears of
the godly. For how shall we find a more manifest argument that the life of
such as are married pleases God the^ this, that their whole life is nothing
else but a blessing? In deed it so comes to pass often times that they are
vexed with the sin of impatiency through the offenses of their familye, their
children, and some times their neighbors. But what then? All things cannot be
so pure and so perfect in this our infirmity, but that oftentimes we shall
feel either some excess or some lack both within the house and without. But
this sin of impatiencie the daily prayer of the godly does quench and
overcome. And thus must the godly comfort them selves that they are placed
among Gods blessings, and live a life blessed of God. This faith the greater
and stronger it is, the more joy it brings. For albeit some troubles do
happen, and we some times also are overtaken with sins, yet is the word of
God omnipotent. Wherefore in all tentations the victory is theirs which stick
faithfully thereunto.

These words therefore must be received as the oracles of God, and this kind
of life we must adorn with due praise and honor, since that God does so
richly pour out his blessing upon it. This must we not only know, that we
may set it forth and commend it to others, but all of us which live in this
kind of calling, must commend and apply the same also unto our selves, that
whether poverty, diseases, vexations and troubles of our family or any other
like tentations do oppress us, we may endure the same with patience, resting
upon this most plentiful consolation, that the holy Ghost calls this state
a blessed kind of life: And this they find, this they know, and this they do
which fear God and serve him truly as he says: So shall the man be blessed
that fears the Lord. For the true service of God is to fear God, to trust in
God, and to have thy whole affiance fixed in him. Upon these godly motions of
the mind afterward follows obedience in our vocation and other things which
are commanded of God. For all these things the fear of God does comprehend.
They that fear not God, understand nothing hereof, neither does the holy
ghost here speak any thing of them.

Verse. 5. The Lord out of Sion bless thee, that thou may see the wealth of
Jerusalem all the days of thy life.

Now, after these high commendations of matrimony, the holy ghost adds an
excellent prayer, wherein he desires that God would bless more and more this
kind of life, and that, for such married persons he would give peace and
tranquillity to the common weal. Now all such prayers have a promise
included, that all things shall come to pass as they do pray. Moreover, where
he adds: The Lord out of Sion, etc. he does it because the worship of God was
at that time in Sion. Therefore, not only in heart they looked toward that
place (as before we have declared), but they turned their faces also that way
when they prayed, because God had promised that he would there dwell, and there
would receive the prayers and sacryfices of the people. Hereof come these
sayings, To pray before the Lord: To offer before the Lord: To appear before
the Lord, that is to say, in the tabernacle, wherein was the Arc and the mercy
seat, to the which God had bound him self that he would there be found.
Wherefore they called this place the fortitude, the kingdom, the Majesty, the
glory, the bewty and the rest of the Lord, as in the Psalms and the rest of
the Prophets is to be seen.

After the coming of Christ and the publishing of the Gospel, this place had
an end. Wherefore we say not now, God bless thee out of Sion, or out of his
holy temple, but: through Christ our Lord. For he is our true mercieseat,
whereof the mercieseate of the old Testament was but a shadow or a figure.
For in Christ dwells the godhead corporally. Therefore when we pray unto God,
we desire to be heard in the name of Christ and for Christ's sake, like as by
the example of the old primative Church, public prayers are all finished
with this clause: Through Christ our Lord. But hereof somewhat we have said
before: notwithstanding these things can not be spoken of enough. For this is
true Christian knowledge and wisdom, that our cogitations should not be
wandering and scattered, but gathered to one object, that is to say, unto
Christ, For like as in the old Testament the people was gathered together unto
the Arc or tabernacle, and was not suffered to sacrifice in Dan, Bethel,
Gilgal and other places, which the wicked Idolaters did choose unto them
selves, so now to come unto the Lord, there is no way to be sought by
invocation of Sainetes or any other kind of worship or works, but by Christ
and in Christ alone, according to that saying: Whatsoever ye shall ask the
father in my name, he will give it you. For God will no where else be found or
worshipped, no not in Heaven, but only in this one person which was borne of
the virgin Mary, that is, in Christ Jesus. He is the true mercieseate and the
certain throne of the Godhead where the godhead dwells and is found
corporally as these sentences of the Gospel do teach: No man comes unto the
father but by me: I am the way, the truth and the life. Whosoever have not this
object, their minds do wander in infinite errors and opinions, as in the
example of the religious rabble of Munkes, Frears and such like it appears.
One order chooses Frances, an other Dominicke, an other Benedict, and others
likewise find out diverse other for their Patrones, by whose rule, as a
certain and infallible way, they might come unto life. And what did all these?
Examine their heart, and they will all say with one concent that they sought
God. Now, they thought God to be such a one in Heaven, that if they were
covered with a Munkes cowle, if they abstayned from flesh, if they lived
without wives, if they touched no money, etc. then God would hear them and be
merciful unto them. Thus forsaking the true and only way which is Christ,
they wandered every man after his own way: no otherwise then did the Jews,
who when they had one certain way set before them whereby they might find
God, namely, if they would go into the Tabernacle and there worship God, there
offer sacrifice unto him: they forsook the only and true way, and ran to
woods, valleys, rivers, etc. Thus, whilst they thought to pacify and please
God, they more grievously offended him: as in the Prophets we may plainly see
in diverse places, where God says, that he detested the ways which they did
choose unto them selves, and that he would not be found of them. For why did
they not keep the true and infallible way so plainly set forth and taught by
the word of God?

This have I spoken to the end we may read with knowledge that which the
Prophet says here: The Lord out of Sion. For he is constrained to make
mention of this place for the avoiding of Idolatry. For God did reveal unto
them, that in this only place he would be worshipped. Wherefore under the veil
and shadow of the promise, they worshipped Christ also who was included in the
promise. But now that Sion is destroyed and gone, the treasure is opened, that
is to say, Christ, who then was hid in the promise, as under a veil.
Wherefore let us remember that all such places must be applied unto Christ:
Like as also we are taught by experience that in tentations there is no
consolation whereby afflicted minds may be comforted and raised up, no not in
God, but that only which is in Christ. For it is not only perilous, but also
horrible to think of God without Christ. For besides that Satan is then able
most easily to oppress us with the brightness of Gods Majesty, there is also
great danger even in this, that God will not so be comprehended or found. We
must therefore rest and dwell in this only object in the which God shows unto
us his will, even Christ. But they which seek any thing without Christ, in
their tentations shall feel by their own peril how dangerous a thing that
is.

But you will say, how does God now bless out of Sion any more? Even so, that
thou shall see the wealth or prosperity of Jerusalem, that is to say, God for
the love he bears to godly married persons and such as fear God, will give
politi^e peace, which is a thing most necessary, not only that they may be
able the better to provide for their living, but also and especially to bring
up their children honestly and in the fear of God. And this was the cause why
cities were first builded, that men joining their strength and power to gither,
might be able to defend them and theirs from the force and cruelty of others.
Afterward, when there was not aid and help enough in one city, many joined
their powers together. So commonweals and kingdoms were first begun, to
stablish and mainteyne peace, which married persons have need of. Now that
nature did thus unite and join these things together and taught men so to do,
reason it self does see and perceive. But the true cause the holy Ghost here
sets forth: to wit, that these things come of the blessing which the Lord
gives to married persons, but specially to the godly, who ought to know and
acknowledge that the first blessing is to fear God: the next is to have wife
and children: the third, to enjoy politic peace and quietness. What would
thou have more? Wherefore for thy vine and olive plants which thou have in thy
house, thou shall see that the Lord gives Kings, Princes, laws and whatsoever
is necessary for the defense and preservation of the common weal and peace.

And here we are admonished that since Kings, Princes and Magistrates are
ordained for the benefit of married persons and families, they ought likewise
to yield obedience unto them, and whatsoever else they have need of, whiles
they watch for the preservation of peace. For they are the ministers of God, as
Paul calls them, given of God for this purpose, that we may enjoy his
blessings in peace. Which peace how great a benefit it is, the common
proverb of the Germans witnesses, which says, that a man which has two
kine, should give the one that he may quietly enjoy the other. For what
avails it thee if thou have thy house full of riches and are not able to
defend the same against thieves and robbers? Seeing therefore that this is done
by the Magistrate, yea seeing that judgment and laws do restore that to the
owner which is unjustly taken away, good cause there is why honor and
obedience is to be given to the Magistrate, as the minister of Gods blessings
which he bestows to the married persons. For this third blessing of matrimony
is here recited of David, that they may see the wealth and welfare of
Jerusalem, that is to say, that they may see Jerusalem flourish, first by true
religion and sound doctrine, and secondly by godly Magistrates. For these are
the benefits and blessings, not only of one house, but of all Jerusalem.
Thus the holy Ghost commends unto us the gifts of God in a goodly order.
The first is the fear of God. This fear comprehends the things which are
contained in the first table. Now, for the fear of God, afterward God
gives house and famylye. Thirdly for houses and familyes well ordered, and
governed in the fear of God, follows also the third blessing, that is to
say, a happy common weal.

Wherefore let us learn to understand rightly the benefits which we receive
by godly Magistrates, and for them let us be thankful. Again let us learn
that this gift of God, to have good Magistrates, is given unto those and for
those married persons and those familyes which fear God. Which gift the wicked
also do enjoy, but yet no otherwise then swine do their draffe and swill,
without any thanks giving unto God, or thankful remembrance of this or any
other of Gods gifts. For as the destruction of Sodom was differred because of
Loath, so oftentimes for a few godly familyes or a godly Prince, God blesses
the whole common weal.

Verse. 6. That thou may see thy childrens children and peace upon Israel.

It is given to many to have children in matrimony, and to many it is not.
Therefore we said before, that this is a commendation and not a promise
perteining to every man perticularly, but generally unto matrimony and to the
kind of life it self. So unto some it is given to see the children and
nephews of their children. To some again matrimony is all together barren and
fruiteles. For these things the Lord distributeth to every one as is most
expedient for them. Notwithstanding, the godly married persons must pray unto
God for them, and most commonly also they do enjoy them. And marvelous is that
natural affection and love especially in old men which they bear unto their
childrens children: for they love them more tenderly then their own.
Wherefore, for as much as this Psalm tends to the setting forth and
bewtifying of matrimony, and wishes all felicity to the married persons, the
holy ghost adds this moreover concerning their long and fruitful posterity,
as a singular comfort, because he would omit none of those good blessings
which are given of God to such as are married, though not to all, yet to the
most part. Now, although we said before that all such prayers have a promise
included in them, yet notwithstanding this is the manner of corporal promises,
that God gives them so as is most profitable and expedient for every man.
Wherefore we must apply the promise which is included in this prayer, to the
kind of life it self, and not to every married person, namely, that such as
live in godly matrimony and fear God, shall increase and multiply unto a
fruiteful and a great posterity, and that for their sake the blessing shall
flow unto all the people: as he adds in this clause: peace upon Israel,
that is to say, all wealth and prosperity I wish unto Israel for thy sake.

Thus the Psalm commends and defends matrimony against those spiteful
sclanders and reproaches of the world, which can not judge but according to the
sense and feeling of the flesh. Wherefore, as it is offended with the troubles
and burdens of matrimony: so is it offended also with those things which
happen in civil government, when it must obey laws, pay tribute to the
Prince, or be are any other like burden. For it would so live that what soever
is best or most pleasant in matrimonye, that only it would enjoy without all
grief or molestation. As, we may see, there be many which marry wives,
because they imagine that there is nothing in matrimony but mere love, amorous
delites, and fleshly pleasures. In like manner how many shall ye find, which
through an inordinate love and desire of glory, seek to rule and be in
authority? But afterward, when in matrimony they must suffer troubles and
vexations, and in politic government, envy, hatred, cursed speaking, and
sclaunders, they cry out that they were deceived and become impatient. Yea, it
can not otherwise be but that these things must so come to pass. For that
which is the best and most excellent in both kinds of life, the blessing of
the Lord I mean, they nothing esteem. Wherefore we must have a special regard
unto the blessing: and we must have also the word of God before our eyes, to
the end that when all other things are full of dangers, full of troubles,
miseries and vexations, we may rest and repose our selves upon the good will
and pleasure of our God.

Likewise in the Church, are not all things, I pray you, full of troubles,
vexations, and woeful calamities in so great a multitude of profane and godles
people? Notwithstanding all these things, when we look to the will of God, are
easily borne and overcome. So let us also in matrimony consider first the word
of God: then the gift which the Lord bestows upon us when he gives wife and
children: and thirdly Gods blessing and peace in the politic state and common
weal. For these gifts thus acknowledged, let us afterward give thanks unto
God. So shall God be provoked to bestow a greater blessing upon us: whereas if
these things be not done, we shall provoke him to take from us those gifts
which we have. So great Empires, kingdoms, cities and commonweals might
longer prosper and flourish then they do. But because they be unthankful unto
God and contemn his word, they come to ruin and miserably perish. Let us
therefore learn to be thankful, and the blessing of God shall abound in us.

The.129. Psalm. They have often times afflicted, etc.
This Psalm consists of two parts. The argument of the Psalm.
In the former he gives thanks to God for the defense and continual
deliverance of the people of God. In the later part he makes his prayer
against the adversaries, and in praying he prophecieth withal. Both these serve
for our instruction, and also conteyne an exhortation to patience under the
cross, which perteyneth not to one age or time, but as the continual history
of the Church does show, to all times and to the whole life of man. Moreover we
do here comprehend both Churches, of the Jews and of the Gentiles, as Paul
also in a manner joins them both together when he says: First to the Jew and
then to the Grecian. For as touching the Church or people of the Jews, it
appears by the histories that they were placed in the mids of their
enemies, as a goodly rose in the midst of thorns. On the southside the
Ismaelites, the Arabians and other cruel people vexed them. On the west part
the Egyptians, the Ethiopians, the Troglodites and other like. On the North
side the Philistines, the Assyrians, etc. So the Church after the destruction
of the Synagoge, is compassed every way with enemies, and Christ, according to
the Psalm, reigns in the mids of his enemies. Thus were they often times
and many ways afflicted. But herewithall God showed this miracle, that when
they were so afflicted, he always delivered them. And thus was the kingdom of
Israel a miraculous kingdom, in that the Lord when he would correct and
chastise them, suffered the Philistines, Edomites, Moabites, Assyrians and
Babylonians to have victory over them. Again, when they seemed to be utterly
oppressed, they victoriously prevailed against their enemies. So continued this
kingdom in despite of the cruel nations round about it, and of Satan him self:
as is to be seen in the books of the Kings and also of the Chronicles. Now,
because this people had both threatenings and promises set before them as
touching their afflictions and deliverance, this was unto them a great
consolation even when they were afflicted and spoiled, that they knew that all
these things came to pass not by the will or power of their enemies, and much
less by their righteousness or deserts, but only by the will of God thus
punishing and chastising his people, yea threatening and forewarning them by the
Prophets that he would so punish the disobedient. This is no small
consolation, that in thy affliction and calamity thou may be able to say:
this is ye scourge of God thus correcting me and visiting my sins: It is not
the wrath of God or the merit and deserving of my adversary.

These things must we apply unto our selves also, to the end that when we be
oppressed, we may comfort our selves that we are not oppressed by ye power of
death, sin, hell, or any creature, but by the will of God our creator,
afflicting us and punishing our sins and ingratitude, and yet so that he
leaves unto us this fatherly promise, the he will not forsake us. And such a
figure of ye whole kingdom of Christ is set forth in the Apocalypse. For how
much does is speak of evil angels, of cruel beasts and such other plagues of
the Church which should enter into the Church and the kingdom of Christ, God so
permitting. Notwithstanding consolation follows afflictions and calamities,
and though the Church be never so sore afflicted, yet shall it continue and
endure, and at the length shall overcome and victoriously triumph.

But this Psalm agrees especially unto our time, wherein the Church has been
most grievously afflicted both under the Turks and also under the Romish
Bishops, yea and as it were utterly abolished: So that if ye wey the matter
well, it may appear that the condition of the Jews in Babylon was better then
the state of the Church under Antichrist: where the true use of the Sacraments
was taken away, the benefit of Christ darkened, faith extinguished, no true
service of God used, no true good works exercised: generally all things which
perteyne to true religion were clean abolished or most miserably deformed and
defaced. Wherefore, like as the Jews in Babylon were put from the sight and use
of the temple, the sacrifices, the ceremonies and all politic government: so
the Church under Antichrist had no true ministry, no true service of God, not
her own kingdom and government, but was constrained to observe and keep the
babylonicall and hethenish rites and ceremonies of the Papists. Thus was the
wrath, and thus have been the punishments of God in a manner all one in the
Church of the Jews and the Gentiles.

Wherefore it is most necessary that we lay hold upon this consolation, that,
as the Psalm says, we are afflicted, we are cast down, we are trodden under
foot, but we are not overcome. For the Church shall stand and remain
invincible, notwithstanding that through great incredulity and incredible
infirmity the victory thereof is hidden and can not be seen. As it was under
the Pope, where all Schools and all Churches taught nothing else but the
blasphemous doctrine of the Romish bishops and doting dreams of the Monks.
This was the very same thing that the psalm 73. complayneth of, where it
says: We see not our signs, and yet God had even then his Church, although
it was very little, obscure, and miserably deformed. Before the kingdom of the
Romish Antichrist what a swarm of heretics sprang up? Of whem also the Church
was sore vexed and afflicted, even as the Jews were afflicted of the nations
which dwelled nere unto them. And like as the captivity followed that
affliction of the Jews, so the kingdom of the Romish Bishops was that
captivity which f^llowed the outrageous fury of the heretics, and out of the
which also have flowed all the evils, and plagues which have been ever since
in the Church, as out of a foul sink and filthy pudle. But now by the great
mercy of God the captivity begins to be turned, the temple is repaired,
and the true service of God restored.

This Psalm, after my judgment, speaks generally of all such troubles and
afflictions of the Church, as have been at all times and in all ages: As first
that the kingdom of the Jews when they were yet under good Kings, was
mightily assailed, but yet not utterly overcome: And that the people afterward
were spoiled of the Assyrians and Babylonians and carried away captive, but not
clean forsaken. For they were again delivered out of captivity, and in their
own land enjoyed the promise concerning Christ. Thus speaks ye Psalm first
of the Jewish Church. Afterward it comprehends as a prophecy, the state and
condition of the Church of the Gentiles: to wit, that God would preserve and
defend it against all heretics, against all the rage and fury of the world,
against the kingdom of the Romish Antichrist, and moreover against all the
tentations of sin which vex and oppress the conscience. Thus must we apply
this Psalm to all times and ages of the Church, to all chaunges and
alterations, all dangers of the world, the flesh, sin, the law, death, and
the gates of hell. For the world assaileth it with power and wisdom: the
devil with desperation and dubitation: heretics with errors in faith and
religion, and the conscience with sins. In all these perils we say: Blessed
be the Lord God, who suffers us not to be tempted above that we are able to
bear. In deed we must be tempted and tried, but in the tentation he will give
an outscape: besides this, that he gives us strength also to bear the
tentation until the time of deliverance come. This benefit David here sets
forth, and shows unto us the state of his people, to the end we may thereby
learn this comfort, that like as he preserved that people, even so will he also
preserve us. For we have one and the same God, the same spirit, the same word,
the same promises, and briefly all things else, whatsoever. Wherefore we may
say and sing with David.

Verse. 1. They have often times afflicted me from my youth, may Israel now say:

Verse. 2. They have often times afflicted me from my youth, but they could not
prevail against me.

He names no certain enemy, to the end he may comprehend all. Where he
says: From my youth, he understands all the time from their primitive Church
(as we call it) until Israel began first to be ye people of God. For albeit
we ever praise those things which are most ancient and of greatest antiquity
(as the primitive Church is in deed worthy to be praised) yet God regards
not this difference. For in all times and even in the last ages of the Church
he gave notable Prophets to the people of Israel: as before the captivity
Esaias, of all other the most excellent: after the captivity Aggaeus, Zachary
and others. In the mean time between Moises and these, were Helias, Heliseus,
etc. So we see that the primitive Church was more pure from heretics and
wicked opinions. But yet notwithstanding there were some notable Prophets and
other excellent men even in the later times. And when ye root of Iesse seemed
now to be withered, yet God reised up Anna, Symeon, Zachary and Elisabeth. For
God preserves his Church though it be never so much assailed and oppressed,
according to his promise. Only let us open our eyes that we may see from
whence this comes.

And here we may not look to those things which the world especially estemeth
and magnifieth, but we must behold the Church as it is afflicted, oppressed,
and full of calamity. For this is the true face of the Church of God, that it
is weak, environed with all deadly engines, and compassed with all the furies
of the devil, the world, the flesh* sin and death. These things he that
will not behold, but flies and abhors them, shall never find out the true
Church in deed. For that is not the true picture and image of the Church which
the painters see forth, which paynt her as a goodly virgin, as a city well
armed, adorned and bewtified. In deed that is a true picture, but not
according to the eyes of the flesh. But spiritual eyes do see this great
bewty, that Christ is her husband, and begot her unto him self by the holy
Ghost, bewtified her and made her glorious with his own blood, with his
merits and with his righteousness. Of all these things the flesh can see
nothing, can judge nothing, but sees rather the contrary, how she is subject
to most bitter hatred, malice, vexations and torments. Wherefore if it would
paint her out in such sort as he sees and beholds her, then must it paint
and set her forth as a deformed and a poor maiden, sitting in a dangerous
wood or desert in the midst of cruel and hungry lyo^s, bears, wolves, swine
and venomous serpents: also in the mids of outrageous and furyous men,
attempting with sword, fire and water to destroy her, and to root her out from
the face of the earth: Cap. 12.
As there is in the Apocalypse set forth a goodly picture (then ye which there
is nothing more excellent in that book) that the church as a desolate woman,
flies from the old serpent or dragon persecuting her and her child. Wherefore
these words which David here uses, may very well be applied to her: Many times
have mine enemies afflicted me, many times have they vexed me.

But this affliction seems rather to be an utter destruction, if we follow
the judgment of the flesh: As if the enemies did so prevail and overcome,
that the Church were utterly oppressed and vanquished for ever: As we all find
by our own experience in our conflicts which privately we suffer in our hearts,
when Satan terrifieth and confounds our consciences. For then are raised up
such terrors, that no man can otherwise judge but that the victory is Satan's,
oppressing us with heavy and bitter cogitations, with tentations, vexations and
anguish of spirit, and spoiling us (as to the flesh it seems) of all the
sweet consolations which by the merit of Christ and the word are offered unto
us. According to this sense we may well say: Often times have they afflicted
me. For this seems to be, not only an affliction, but an utter desolation
and destruction. As we privately feel this every one in our own hearts and
consciences: so the whole body of the church in all times does confess that it
is vehemently assailed with strong and mighty armies of most deadly enemies of
all nations, and oppugned with ye engines of all tentations and tribulations,
even from her youth, that is, from the time that, when the people were
delivered out of Egypt, they began to be known from other nations, and to be
the people of God.

But here the church and the children of God comfort and reyse up them selves
again, having good experience that in all these calamities God showed forth
his power, and not only remitted their sin, but also turned away the
punishment thereof, so that still there remained a Church, and the practices of
their enemies were brought to naught. Wherefore the Prophet here, not only
repeteth the danger and calamity of the Church, but with great joy he adds
withal an exhortation, that every member of this body should praise the mercy
and goodness of the Lord, and say: They could not prevail against me. This is
a singular consolation, not only for the whole Church of God, but also for
every one of us perticularly, against the proud bragges of our enemies, and the
great hope which they have conceived, that they shall prevail against us.
Heretics and sectaries do glory that they shall have the victory. The Pope
vaunting of his own strength and the power of Princes, cries out: we shall
overcome. Satan joins with them both and reyseth up such troubles, that it
seems doubtful to whom the victory will fall. This oppresses, not only
every man privately with great heaviness and sorrow, but also the whole Church.
As we by experience did prove in the assembly gathered at August, where it
seemed that our enemies should utterly have swallowed us up. But did not we
there find these words to be full of consolation? They could not prevail.
This consolation we must hold fast even when we are killed, as by the examples
of the primitive Church we are taught. For the Church is as it were watered
with the blood of the faithful, that the greater increase may come thereof.
Now, like as these words of the Prophet are rightly applied to that persecution
which is done with the sword, so must they be applied also to the assaults of
heretics and Sectaries: For it is their property to boast and brag of the
victory, and always to triumph before the victory. But how so ever our
adversaries triumph and glory, let us endeavor to hold fast the word, and what
so ever we do, let us apply it wholly to the amplifying of the kingdom of
Christ and his word. If then (as needs it must be) assaults and battles do
follow, yet let us sing with David: They could not prevail. For albeit they
kill us, yet neither the Pope, nor any other heretics, nor the Turk, nor Satan
him self shall ever be able to quench the word: Neither yet shall they prevail
against us if we steadfastly abide in the word. In deed this will we grant
unto Satan, that he is stronger then we, and vexes us many ways. For many are
the troubles of ye just, but God will deliver them out of all. And why? Because
it is the word of God which they profess and teach: and moreover it is Gods
own cause which they defend. Wherefore although the Pope attempt and practice
never so much mischief, and go about to stir up the whole world against
us: although false brethren which walk not in true and sound doctrine,
continually vex us, although Satan him self never cease to reyse up the gates
of hell against us, yet will we sing with David even to the end: They could
not prevail, yea and that only because of the word.

Verse. 3. The plowers plowed upon my back and they made long furrows.

See what unlike and almost contrary things he joins here together. Before
he comforted the faithful, that the enemies should never be able to do any
thing against the Church, because it is invincible and can not be overcome: and
here he complayneth that they plow upon the back of the Church, and make such
furrows, as seem to be of an infinite length. This is an offense therefore
which vehemently troubles the godly, that God suffers Satan and the world so
long to rage, so long to vex and afflict the Church, that he gives success
unto their wicked counsels and attempts: that he suffers the ungodly even
then to prosper, when they are most worthy to be punished with all manner of
torments, and utterly consumed. On the other side, the godly, the more they
pray and the more they hope, the less seems their prayer and their hope to
take effect: Every day are they more and more afflicted: every day there is
less and less hope left. Wherefore this similitude is well applied unto them
in that they are compared to a grownd which is continually plowed: wherein such
furrows are drawn as seem to have no end: as though there were no god which
either sees their calamity, or the impiety and outrageous cruelty of the
enemies of the word. He signifies therefore that they have need of continual
patience, not for a day or two, but all the days of their life. So that they
which have the word must assuredly purpose and determine, never to depart
from God, although they should suffer the same afflictions a thousand years
together. How mauy have we seen in these our days which have fallen away (yea
and such also as sometime did stand,) when the fruit of the word was hindered
through persecution, like as the Sun dries up and withers the corn that
is sown in a stony ground?

Wherefore we must learn that the patience of the faithful, as it is in this
verse described, is such as is ready to offer their backs unto the plowers, and
to suffer not for a day nor for a year, but for the time of their whole life.
For he compares afflictions to the long plowing in the back of the faithful:
Like as our Savior Christ also signifies when he says: He that continues to
the end, shall be saved. For to begin is not enough. And that patience which
has her bounds and limits prescribed, may be found even among the Gentiles.
But the patience of Christians is perpetual, that is to say, such a patience
as seems to be infinite and without end, for the end thereof does not
appear. Like as on the other side, the end of their consolation appears
not: So that those things which seem to be most contrary, are here joined
together, that is to say, the length and the long continuance of the furrows
in the back of the faithful, and the victory of the faithful singing of those
which drive the plow: They could not prevail.

Moreover this great and long continuance of the furrows in the back of the
faithful includes such an offense as no carnal wisdom is able to overcome:
namely yt the wicked do not only prosper, but their felicity also continues
long, so yt it seems to be as a reward of their tyranny, their persecution and
malice against ye church. For if God would suffer their tyranny but for a little
time, and spedely reward the^ according to their deserts, we should al then say
that God is mindful of his children, and angry with the wicked. But now, since
impiety and wickedness flourishes many years together, and the wicked still
continue and increase in great felicity, without punishment, the same is
verified of them which Diogenes said of Harpalus, that they seem to give a
lively testimony against the gods. Yea the godly are so vehemently tempted
through this long continuance and fall so far, that they think God has no
regard of them. Wherefore we must so arm our selves with Christian patience,
that albeit we feel the tedious and long continuance of these furrows, we be
not therefore offended, but when one tentation is overcome, we must prepare our
selves to an other. For our backs must be always ready to bear the long
continuance of these sorrows.

This is the first part of the Psalm, in the which he confesses the divine
miracles and miraculous power of God, whereby he preserves his children not
only against ye world, but also against sin, death and the devil, and
praises God for that he gives victory to those that are overcome, and puts
those to flight which do overcome. This joyful end and this success he
wills us to look and wait for, and exhorts us to patience. Now he turns
him self to prayer, and not only prays, but also promises to the enemies
of the Gospel, that although they obstinatly continue in afflicting the
faithful without check or punishment, yet shall their ruin and overthrow be
such, that they shall never rise again: as experience does show. For I pray
you, what kingdom from the beginning of the world has always continued and
prospered? The places and spaces of the earth do remain void and desolate and
the kingdoms are gone as though they had never been. Again, the cruelty and
tyranny of the kingdoms of the world was never so great, that it was able to
oppress the church. For the Church still continues and shall continue to the
end of the world, as follows.

Verse. 4. The righteous Lord has cut the cords of the wicked.

These words are so full of consolation, that to the children of God in their
calamities and afflictions, nothing can be more comfortable. For they know
that no munitions, no furniture of war can be so strong. First of all
therefore, wey and consider why he calls the Lord Righteous, and you shall
see that he so does, because that, when a man considers according to the
judgment of the flesh, the things which are here done, and how God governs
and rules the same, it seems no otherwise but that he is unrighteous and
unjust in supporting the tyranny of the wicked with great riches, power,
dignity, etc. When reason sees this, it can judge nothing else, but that, if
there be a God, he is unjust. For first of all thus does reason gather: If
there be a God, he is able to resist the wicked, and utterly to destroy them.
For to be a God is to be almighty. Again, thus carnal reason argues. If
there be a God, he must needs know those things which are done in the world.
For it can not be said of God, that he is ignorant of any thing. Now, what else
follows hereof, but that if God know these things to be cruelly and
unjustly done, and is able to resist them, he ought also to be no less willing
to do the same. For if we think that he will not do that which he knows
and is able to do, it must follow that he is not good, but evil: not just, but
unjust. Now lay these things together. If God have power, wisdom and goodness
in him: if he be able to help: if he know how and also be willing to help,
why are all these things done and governed in the world in such sort, that the
wicked have power, riches and dignity, as a reward of their impiety? and
contrariwise the godly for their piety and godliness are many ways and most
cruelly afflicted? All these things are a lively testimony against God, as
before we said of Diogenes. This argument of Epicurus and such like atheistes,
is to the flesh invincible. Wherefore reason being altogether blinded and
wrapped in these snares, inclyneth to this opinion, that there is no God, or
else that he regards not the affairs of men.

Of this offense and stumbling block the holy Ghost warns us when he
attributes this name unto God, that he is righteous, whom unrighteousness and
impiety pleases not. Therefore although he suffer the wicked to flourish for
a time, yet at the last he cutteth their cords, that is, he destroys both
their power and them, according to that saying: Thou art not a God that loves
wickedness. Psalm. 6.
Wherefore let Christians learn to judge, not by that which presently they
feel, but by that which the word of God promises and shall assuredly come to
pass: to wit, that the wicked when they have long plowed upon the backs of
the faithful and many ways afflicted them, shall perish at the length. For God
is just, and his justice will not suffer the righteous to be oppressed.

Verse. 5. Let them that hate Sion be confounded and turned back.

This (as before I have said) is a prayer. But ye know that in every prayer
there is a promise included, which promise this word Righteous does express in
the former verse with a singular vehemency, to the end we should not murmur,
or blaspheme God, as though he were not mindful of us, or had no regard of us.
Now, where he says: Let them be confounded and turned back, it is an
exposition of that which he said before, that their cords should be cut, that
is to say, their kingdoms, their power, their riches, their laws, and finally
their whole politic body and common weal should be brought to naught: as it
befell to Babylon, Niniuie, Jerusalem, Athens, Corinth, Thebe, Rome, and
briefly to all kingdoms and commonweals which did not submit them selves unto
the Gospel. For when they proudly stretched out their necks and set them
selves against Christ their Ring, and by their power sought to oppress him,
they were destroyed. In like manner must we also pray, and certainly look for
the execution of Gods vengeance upon those which at this day have set them
selves against the Gospel: as the Pope and his Bishops, with all their
faction, and with all the Kings and Princes of the earth which maintain and
defend their impiety: for at the last they shall be confounded. But the
Gospel and the word of the Lord shall endure for ever. For the name of Christ
shall never be oppressed, but being faithfully called upon, shall always be
ready to help the afflicted, and shall cut the cords now of this wicked man,
and now of that.

Thus the holy Ghost comfort us sundry ways. For when we have learned that
Satan is such a spirit as never cease to tempt and to vex us (so that when
he can not overcome us by the greatness and the multitude of tentations, he
goes about to do it by the tediousnes and long continuance thereof) he would
have us to comfort our selves herewith, that albeit these tentations continue
long, yet notwithstanding they shall have an end. And since we are forwarned
both of the continuance and of the end thereof, it is the more easy for us to
bear them. Here is to be noted also that he shows to whom he wishes evil,
namely to those which hate Sion. And that hatred which they bare against Sion,
was an hatred against God. For in that Satan hates the Church, he does it not
only in respect of men, but because he hates God him self whom the church
prayseth and magnifieth. Moreover, Sion was a place which God had chosen unto
him self. Like as therefore God had chosen that place to show his great love
toward it: so had Satan chosen the same to show his malice against it, and
with all his power to vex it. In like manner not only Satan, but also the
malignant Church of the Pope does persecute us, not because we are evil in the
sight of the world. For this they could well suffer, yea and would be glad if
they might hear that we are whoremongers and murderers as they are. But the
true cause why they so deadly hate and persecute us is this, for that it
greeueth them that we in their eyes are innocent as touching the second table,
and also obedient to the first, wherein we are commanded to honor, serve and
praise the Lord, to fear him, to trust in his mercy, etc.

Verse. 6. Let them be as the grass on the tops of the houses, which
withers before it comes forth.

This is a goodly Psalm for the sundry, excellent, and most apt similitudes
contained therein, whereby the holy Ghost painteth out those great majesty's
and principalities of the world, which fight against the gospel. A little before
he compared them to plowers drawing out furrows of a marvelous length. To whom
he so compares them, not in this respect, as though it were granted unto them
so long to abuse their power, wealth and riches, but in respect of the great
tediousnes, grief, and anguish of those which suffer the plowers, the
furrows, the wounds, and treading under foot. For unto them it seems a
tedious, a long, and as it were an infinite plowing. Wherefore they desire to
be delivered, and never so little tarrying, through this tediousnes and anguish
of heart, seems to them intolerable. Against this wearines and this tediousnes
therefore he comfort the faithful with this similitude of grass in the
top of the house. As if he said: Why seems the time so long and so tedious
unto thee? Why do thou not learn to understand what these plowers thy
adversaries be? Did thou never see grass growing in the tops of houses?
Who did ever complain that that grass flourished so long? who ever went about
to pluck it up? As though it were not wont of it self to wither and vanish
away. Learn therefore that the very same is the state and condition of thine
adversaries. He sets ye similitude of the grass in the house topp, against
ye similitude of the plowers.
Thus with one similitude he fights against an other. But if a man could
effectually believe that this similitude was made and here set down by the holy
Ghost and close up the same fully in his heart, he should fear neither y^
Turk nor the Pope, with all his cruel Prelates, nor the tyranny of Princes, but
should contemn them all, and as little regard them as the grass on the tops
of the houses.

But behold the outward show of this grass. If any child should see it, he
would esteem it to be better then any barley (for to barley it is most like)
since it grows not as other things do upon the earth, but in an higher and
more notable place, and lodeth the topps of the houses. But take a man that
knows these things, and he will say it is nothing else but a goodly show
and resemblance without any fruit. Thus has the holy Ghost chosen this
similitude to teach us, not to wish that tyrannes may be like grass, but to
know that they are in deed most like unto grass on the house tops, which
withers away before the harvest time come, or any man go about to cut it
down. Senacherib who besieged Jerusalem, did fly over kingdoms, oppressed and
trod down all things under his feet: therefore he could not be counted of
Ezechia and others like unto grass, and yet before he achieued that he went
about, he was compelled, not without great fear and also much slaughter of his
soldiers, to reise his siege, and he him self also most miserably perished.
So Pharao seemed mightily to grow and increase, not upon the earth, but in the
air and upon the house tops: but the miserable Jews were oppressed and
trodden under foot like mire in the streets. This is a resembla^ce of grass,
not withering, but freshly flourishing. But how quickly did it wither and
vanish to nothing? For when Pharao did verily think to oppress them, he was
suddenly oppressed him self and perished in the waters.

Such an image of tyrannes and tyranny the holy Ghost paynteth out unto us in
this place. Why then should thou fear? Why should thou tremble? Why
should thou despair, as though thou had never seen most flourishing
grass within few days to wither away of it own accord, or did not know
the nature of it to be such as can not long continue? Athanasius when Iulianus
the Emperor did many ways afflict both him and the whole Church, and fought,
not only with cruelty, but also with craft and subteltie against the
faithful, in so much that others, as it were in a terrible tempest, were
utterly discouraged and past all hope of deliverance, said that this
persecution of Julian was not a tempest but a little cloud. In deed this heart
was full of faith which could believe, that Iulianus was like, not to a terrible
and a violent tempest, not to a mighty black cloud wrapping all things in
darkness, but unto a very little cloud which the Sun does quickly consume. In
like manner must we also extenuate and diminish the power of our adversaries,
and set at naught all their proud bragges and all their cruelty: not in
respect of our own strength, but because they are of them selves nothing else
but a buble in the water, grass on the house tops, and a very shadow rather
then men: besides this, that they provoke God also against them selves whose
fury and cruelty compared unto his power, is a thing more vain then grass on
the house tops or a bubble in the water: for it is nothing else but a bare
and a naked show, which seems to be something when in deed it is nothing. So
are all the attempts of the adversaries full of threatenings, but in the end
they come to nothing.

This is the wisdom of Christians, to diminish the power of the adversaries,
and contrariwise to amplify the word and the mighty protection of the Lord.
The devil, sin, death and other spiritual tentations are great: but a
Christian can make a distinction of greatness. For greatness is understand two
manner of ways. The one is according to ye eye, which the eye judges after the
outward show: the other is according to the truth, which the truth judges
after ye word. The greatness therefore of sin, death, wicked kings Princes and
Bishops is that which is according to the eye only: For God which says: Be of
good comfort: I have overcome the world: Also, Fear not those which can kill
the body, but are not able to kill the soul, the same God alone (I say) is the
very true greatness, to the which if you compare Satan and all the fury of the
whole world, what are they else but a bubble? what are they else but grass?
but light straw and stubble? But when they are considered with out God, then
do they terrify with a false fearful show and seem to be great in deed.

Wherefore Christians must judge, not according to their opinion, but according
to the truth. For an opinion is that which reason brings forth besides the
word: but truth is grounded upon ye word, which judges the fury and the
cruelty of the world raging against the faithful to be like unto grass upon
the house ^ops. This judgment that the enemies are like grass and therefore
shall perish, he calls a promise.
This promise being settled and surely fixed in the mind, confirms the godly
against the great power (as to reason it seems) of ye world and Satan. Like
as on the other side, where the word is not, yt mind deceived through a
terrible show of truth and the judgment of reason, is oppressed with terror.
These things must not so be taken as though we did utterly condemn ye power of
Princes and of ye world, which we count to be ye creature of God, but their
presumption and the abuse of their power is it that we condemn, because they
fight therewith against God and his church. Let them be Princes on the earth:
Let them use their power and authority in the world, but when they will needs
make war in heaven, and with their power go about to invade and oppress the
word, this is horrible, this is execrable and damnable. And who so compares
them to bubbles, to grass, to stubble, yea and to nothing, he says truly, he
judges rightly. For why do they fight against God? Think they that we know
not what God is? and what man is? what the creature is, and what the Creator is?

Wherefore they are rightly compared to grass on the house tops: for more
contemptuosly the holy Ghost could not speak of them. For this grass is such,
that it soon withers away before the sickle be put unto it. Yea, no man
thinks it worthy to be cut down, no man regards it, every man suffers it
to brag for a while, and to show it self unto men from the house tops as
though it were somewhat when it is nothing. So the wicked persecutors in the
world, which are taken to be mighty and terrible according to the outward
show, are of all men most contemptible. For Christians do not once think of
plucking them up or cutting them down: they persecute them not, they revenge
not their own injuries, but suffer them to increase, to brag and glory as
much as they list: For they know that they can not abide the violence of a
vehement wind. Yea though all things be in quietness, yet as grass on the
house tops by little and little withers away through the heat of the Sun,
so tyrannes upon small occasions do perish and soon vanish away. The
faithful therefore in suffering do prevail and overcome: but the wicked in
doing, are overthrown and miserably perish, as all the historyes of all times
and ages do plainly witness.

Verse. 7. Whereof the mower fills not his hand, neither the glainer his lap.

Here the holy Ghost makes a comparison between grass which yields no
fruit, and true corn which is fruitful, that thereby he may the better
commend unto us the former similitude and withdraw our minds from the false
dread and terror which that vain and counterfeit show brings. Fruitful
corn (says he) is such, that he which moweth it shall fill his hand, and he
that gathers the sheaues shall have plenty to carry into his barn. Here ye
see, is a truth, and not a vain show. But grass on the house tops makes a
show of that which is not true, because it is fruiteles. So the Pope and his
Prelates, with other tyrannes and persecutors have a resemblance and a
counterfeit show that they are the Church. They hold and enjoy dignities,
Prebendes benefices, as grass has his stalk and ^are, but in deed they are
none of the Church, like as grass is no corn: for it withers away before it
can bring forth fruit.

For this is the chiefest argument wherewith they fight against us, that for
this glorious show whereof I spoke, they usurp and challenge to them selves the
title of the Church. But we are commanded to take heed that we be not deceived
by outward shows. Yea and we are admonished also that such shows are often
times occasions of great calamities. Beware (says our Savior Christ) of false
prophets which come to you in sheep clothing. Also: by their fruits ye shall
know them. Whereas then they challenge unto them selves the name of the church,
and for a goodly show (which the grass also that grows on the house tops
has as well as they), will be counted good corn: this will not we grant
them. For if they be good corn, let them fill the hand of the mower, but this
do they not. They are unprofitable grass, yea worse then grass. For in that
filthiness of their wicked lusts and fleshly pleasures wherewith they are
horribly polluted, and that cruelty which they exercise against the true
Church, they retain not so much as the outward show which they pretend.
Wherefore, since there is nothing to be found in our adversaries but a naked
and an hypocritical show, and the same also miserably and many ways deformed
and defaced, since (I say) there is nothing else in them but mere hypocrisy,
we judge and denounce them not to be the Church of Christ, but of Satan.
Wherefore they are prepared as chafe and stubble to the fire, although under a
show and color of the Church, they afflict and persecute us never so much.

Verse. 8. Neither they which go by, say: we bless you in the name of the
Lord.

This also commends and sets forth unto us the similitude of the grass.
For true corn has this comme^dation, that it is the blessing of God. They
therefore which see it grow, do wish that God would bless and prosper it.
This (says David) shall not be said of that grass, that is to say, of the
tyrannes and the adversaries of the Church, but rather they shall be cursed of
all men, yea the malediction both of God and man shall be heaped upon them:
Like as it has also happened to the Church of Rome, which before our doctrine
and preaching most gloriously flo^rished. But now that the Gospel has plucked
away her visour, and shows that she is without fruit, all her cursed
hypocrisy is bewrayed and her memory is perished from among the godly. Thus
the Prophet comfort the faithful, and shows that the wicked, what
glorious brag and pretense so ever they make, are in deed nothing, and
because God blesses them not, they shall inherit nothing but malediction, and
shall be confounded, like as Judas, the Phariseis, Cherinthus, Arius, and
Pelagius, though they seemed to flourish, most miserably perished, with all
their glory.

Wherefore let us, whose doctrine by the grace of God is sound and agreeable with
the holy Scripture, remember this similitude, that when we must suffer hatred,
sclaunder, reproaches and all manner of injuries for the Gospels sake, we be not
afraid, but may learn hereby to judge the Pope, the Bishops and wicked
Princes with their tormentors and executioners of their cruelty, to be nothing
else but grass on the house tops, which seems to be somewhat when in deed
it is nothing, and therefore it is without all blessing. To such it shall be
said with the rich glutton in hell: Son remember that thou in thy life time
receauedst thy pleasures. Luke. 16.
For if we consider the whole history of the church even from the beginning of
the world, we shall see that God has always so wrought by his secret counsel,
that as grass on the house tops withers away before the harvest come: so
tyrannes are suddenly cut of and never come to their fall time. Wherefore let
us constantly abide and endure with patience in all afflictions, until the
end do show that it was nothing but grass, and suddenly withered when it was
most like to increase and flourish. The wicked do enjoy all good things for the
Churches sake, like as the grass on the house tops has the benefit of the
rain and of the Sun as well as the corn in the fields. But as they shall
not live half their days, and as they shall see their own counsels and
devises to be but vain and withont success, so shall they be as a perpetual
shame among men: in so much that no man shall wish any good unto them: As at
this day the memory of Judas, Pilate, the wicked Jews Dioclesianus, Maximinus
and other tyranns is without honor, yea most execrable and odious unto all
men. This consolation is set forth by the holy Ghost by these gross
similitudes and examples, that we may conceive in our minds some shadow or
resemblance of Gods works, since we can not rightly judge and esteem the
things them selves according to the truth, but we judge the enemies and
persecutors of the Church by their goodly show and outward appearance, to be
good wheat, because they prosper and flourish so long upon the earth.
Wherefore we must rest wholly in the word, which with such simlitudes paynteth
out these things, and we must withdraw our senses from all outward sightes and
shows, and judge no otherwise of the adversaries of the word, then of most
vile grass that grows on the house tops and is contemned of all men. For
so says the spirit and faith: but our senses say otherwise.

In like manner must we do also in spiritual tentations, when our conscience
accuses us and gives testimony against us, as well in the agony and danger
of death, as in other conflictes. Here if we follow that which appears to
reason and our own senses to be true, it shall seem unto us that our enemies
are invincible and almighty, and that there is no remedy, but we must needs
be overcome and utterly perish. The sight and feeling of this greatness
perteyneth to the eyes and to the senses only, and ryseth of the judgment of
reason, and not of the truth. But when we look to the true greatness which the
word sets forth unto us, we are constrained to say that death, sin, Satan,
and the very gates of hell are in deed nothing else but grass on the house
tops, but stubble, but a very bubble swimming upon the water, which with the
least occasion breakith and vanishes away. So must these things be amplified
and set against all kinds of tentations, whether they be persecutors of the
word, as the world and wicked Princes, or else sin, death and Satan. Al which
we must learn to extenuate and lesson as much as we can, because Christ lives
and we have his word. The consolation is able to swallow up all terrors, and
makes us able to say, that all these things are in very deed but one
nothing. But when we consider these things without the word and Christ in
respect of our selves and of our own strength, then are they in deed, not
grass, but such high and mighty mounteynes as can not be passed over.
Wherefore, when we fight against our enemies, we must fight, not as men
consisting of body and soul, but as Christians baptized in the name of Christ,
having the gift of the spirit and the word. Now therefore, when the devil,
death, hell it self, the world and cruel Princes are compared to a Christian,
they are but grass upon the house tops, or if any thing can be say to be
more vile and contemptible. For he has the word which is almighty, and
moreover he has Christ him self. Christians therefore are invincible, yea
even then when they are overcome and trodden under foot. ^. Cor. 12.9.
For the power of Christ is made perfect through weakness. Thus did the holy
Prophets and Martyrs comfort them selves against the world and the kingdom of
Satan, and therefore they did so valiantly suffer all kinds of afflictions,
being persuaded, not that the grass, which withers away of it self without
man's endeavor, but the word of God should have the victory. For true it is that
Basilius writes when he comfort the people of Alexandria against the sury
of Arius, that through the persecutions of the enemies, the Church does more
and more increase and multiply. Which thing we also have proved, and God grant
that we and our posterity may still so do.

The 130. Psalm. Out of the depth I call unto thee, O Lord, etc.
The argument of this Psalm: which amongst all the Psalms is one of the
chiefest.
This Psalm we do also account amongst the most excellent and principal
Psalms: for it sets forth the chiefest point of our salvation, our
justification I mean, and righteousness before God. The true and sincere
knowledge whereof is it which mainteyneth and preserves the Church: for it is
the knowledge of verity and life. Contrariwise, where the knowledge of our
justification is lost, there is no life, no Church, no Christ, neither is there
any judgment left either of doctrine or of spirits, but all is full of
horrible darkness and blindness. That we may therefore preserve and leave this
light to our posterity, we will take in hand, as God shall make us able, to
expound this Psalm also.

And here first of all ye have to note, How the prophets are wont to speak of
God, and how they describe him.
that the Prophets, when they speak of God or name God, do mean their own
God, whose promises and worship they had amongst them, lest ye should think
that we have any access unto God by our own imaginations which we conceive of
God without the word, as the Turks, the Jews and the Papists do, which seek
after God altogether without his word, or else they transform the word from
the right sense and understanding thereof, into a fantasy of their own
imagination. For the Prophets did know that the true God, although he be of him
self and of his own nature infinite and incomprehensible, was included
notwithstanding in the Mercieseat, whereunto he had bound him self by his word
and promise. Wherefore, although they called him the God of heaven and maker of
all things, yet this had they as a more near and proper token of the true
God, that they knew him to have his dwelling in Sion. When they prayed
therefore unto God or talked of God, they did it according to that form and
manner whereby God had reueiled him self in his word and promises. Albeit
therefore the Prophet makes no mention in this place of yt tabernacle or
promises, but seems to speak unto God simply and without all respect thereof,
yet we must understand that he speaks no otherwise to God, then as he is
setts forth in his word and worship: Without Christ God is neither to be
sought nor worshipped.
Like as we ought now no otherwise to think or speak of God, then as he is in
our true Mercieseate Christ. For so Christ himself says unto Philip: He that
sees me, sees my father. No man comes unto my father but by me.

When we have attained this knowledge, then may we safely worship God and call
upon him as he is the maker of heaven and earth, and so shall we undoubtedly
find him. For although of him self and when he is not thus reueiled, he is
unsearchable and not to be found: yet in his word and promises, wherein he
wrappeth him self, he will both be found and known of them that will there
seek after him. The Jews therefore praying before the arc, worshipped the true
God of heaven and earth. For God by his word had promised that he would be
there present, and there would hear the prayers of his people. Even so we
likewise loking unto Christ and worshipping him, do worship the true God: for
he has reueiled him self in Christ. Therefore Christ says: What so ever ye
shall ask the father in my name he will give it you. They therefore that pray
unto God and fasten not their eyes and minds upon Christ, come not unto God,
but worship the imaginations of their own hearts in steed of ye true God, and
are plain idolaters. For neither will god be sought nor found, nor hear our
prayers, but in our mercieseat Christ. Wherefore if we will find God in deed,
know him as we should do, and with boldness come unto him, let us look unto
Christ, according to y^ saying of S. John: He that sees me, sees my father.
Thus y^ word gathers together y^ wandering cogitations of our hearts, unto this
only person Christ God and man, to ye end we should know yt there is or can be
found no God without Christ, Do thou not believe (says he) that the father is
in me, and I in him?

In like manner did the holy Jews pray unto God dwelling in Sion. That place
who so ever neglected, although they used one and the same kind of worship, and
the same words in prayer which they did, notwithstanding they committed
idolatry, because they did contrary to this commandment, namely that he
would be worshipped in Jerusalem. This is then a general rule to be observed in
all the Psalms and in the whole Scriptures, that in the old Testament there
was no God but in Sion: or in the place of the tabernacle, and that all prayers
were made unto God sitting between the Cherubins. Now, when this temple was
destroyed, God set up an other temple, in the which he would be sought, served
and worshipped. Without this temple there is no God, but the devil in steed
of God, is there both sought and found: and therefore men fall either into
desperation if they have an evil conscience, or else through hypocrisy into
presumption, as did the Idolatrous Jews, and as our Papists now do, most
arrogantly presuming of their own righteousness.

Hereunto do these and such like sentences of the Psalms and the Prophets
apperteine: I lift up mine eyes unto the mountains. Again, The Lord out of
Sion bless thee. In like manner are all such other sentences also to be
understand wherein is added no manifest signification of the place or of ye
temple, as in this place: Out of the depth have I called unto thee O Lord. He
does not here call the Lord absolutely ye maker of heaven and earth, as the
Turks also do, but the same God which dwells in Sion, whose word and promises
they had amongs them, that he would there receive and hear their prays. The
Prophet rests therefore wholly and only in the assured confidence of y^ free
mercy and grace of God, but of that God which was in Sion, and which said unto
Satan: I will put enmity between thee and the seed of the woman: For God will
not be sought by our devises. Which if we should do, what should we need then
ye word? To what end was ye law? why was Christ reueiled? Behold our
adversaries the papists whereunto they are come. They pray much. They recite
Psalms often. They say: Pater noster qui es in caelis, etc. But beca^se they
contemn the word, yea and persecute it also with might and maine, therefore
under these good words they maintain plain idolatry. So happens it also to
the Turks, even then when they say they worship the living God the maker of
heaven and earth.

For this cause I do so often admonish you, that without Christ ye should shut
your eyes and stop your ears, and say ye know no God besides him which was
in the lap of the virgin Marie and sucked her breasts. Where this God Christ
Jesus is, there is God wholly, there is the whole divinity, there is ye father
and the holy Ghost. Without this Christ there is no God. I have known many in
the kingdom of Antichrist, which seeking to comprehend God by man's
speculations, have horribly perished, and if God through his inestimable mercy
had not delivered me from this tentation, I had also fallen headlong into
destruction.

Albeit the Prophet (as I said) makes here no express mention of the temple,
The prophet praying for the remission of sins, includes Christ in his prayer.
yet shall ye see how in this psalm he wrappeth the promise concerning Christ.
For this is the whole argument of this Psalm, that there is no salvation, no
grace, no justification, but in that God which forgiueth sins. And is this
God any other then the same which said unto the Serpent: The seed of the woman
shall bruise thy head? Therefore he takes God here as a promise maker, and
shows that Christ was promised of the father to be a sacrifice for the sins
of the world. And here the Prophet sets forth unto us a principal point
of doctrine touching Christian righteousness, Christian wisdom and the glory of
Christ. These things David treats of even then, when the law was in his full
strength, and leapeth over the bounds of the law into Paradise, or rather into
the very heaven of grace and mercy. For why should I not call grace heaven it
self, by the which we have an open passage unto heaven, and the which we can
never atteyne unto by the law, by works or by our own endeavor, but rather,
as a most large heaven it receaueth us believing that by adoption we are made
righteous before God through Christ.

Hereby we may see what the intent and purpose of the Pr^phet is in this
Psalm, namely to teach us the true way to righteousness, life and salvation.
Again, to show us the way how to escape death, sin and the wrath of God,
that out of this life we may pass to life everlasting. And in teaching of
these things he shows his own experience, and lays open unto us his own
heart, which the holy Ghost had exercised and scholed with many tentations, that
so he might atteyne to this doctrine: wherein he goes about here to enstruct
us also. The sum whereof is, that he rests wholly in the hope of Gods
mercy, and in the sure trust of the forgiveness of his sins. But these
things shall more clearly appear hereafter in expounding of the Psalm.

Verse. 1. Out of the depth have I called unto thee, O Lord.

It may seem that the Prophet uses here more words then needs. But he that
considers well the cause which forces him to burst out into these words,
The greatness of the tentation wherewith David was oppressed.
shall see that no plenty of words could express the sorrow and anguish of
his woeful heart, nor sufficiently declare his danger. For it was no light or
common tentation that vexed him. He complained not of ye perils that he was in
by the rage of Saul, by his son Absolon, by ye false Prophets and others, nor
of any other tentations which proceed of malice and hatred wherewith the world
persecuteth the godly: but he sets forth here the grief of a vexed and
wounded conscience and the very sorrows of death, when a man feeling his heart
as it were oppressed with desperation, thinks him self forsaken of God: when
he sees his own unworthiness and deserts accused before God as a terrible
judge: yea when it seems unto him that God has not only forsaken him, but
cast him away for ever, hates and abhors him for his sins. These
te^tations are much more terrible then those which men commonly fall into: for
they are not without danger of soul and eternal salvation. Therefore he
uses here this manner of speech, saying: Out of the depth I call unto thee,
etc. As if he should say: great are the troubles wherewith I am oppressed. For
I feel mine own sins and the just wrath of God upon me for the same,
neither can I find relief or comfort to my restles and afflicted soul.
Against the malice of men, wherewith they molest and vex us, there are
remedies to be found: but this wound is incurable, except the Lord send help
and succor from above.

And in deed such troubles as the godly are commonly exercised withal, as the
loss of goods, wife, children and such other, may yet be overcome or borne
with patience. Moreover, in those which are counted inferior sins, as the
offenses of youth, the deiect and broken herted may more easily be raised up
again: But these afflictions seem to them, and are in deed intolerable, when
they feel them selves oppressed with such horrible and hellish cogitations,
that they can see nothing else, but that they are cast away from God for ever.
They therefore that feel such bitter tentations, It is a great consolation to
see that holy David was exercised with the tentations of the wrath of God.
have here an example that David in him self felt and had experience of the
like. For it makes the tentation much more grievous when they which are thus
afflicted, feel that, (as to them it seems) which none else do feel but
they alone. We must learn therefore that even the godly have ever suffered the
same afflictions, and have been beaten down even to death with the terrors of
the law and sin: as we may see here by the example of David crying even, as
it were out of hell and saying: Out of the depth do I cry unto thee, O Lord,
etc.

But it is not enough for us to know that we sustain not these troubles and
tentations alone, but we must also learn the way whereby such as have
suffered the like tentations, have been raised up again. And here ye se David
what he does. Ye see whither he flies in his great distress. He despaireth
not, but cries unto the Lord, as one yet hoping assuredly to find relief and
comfort. Rest thou also in this hope, and do as he did. David was not tempted
to the end he should despair. Think not thou therefore that thy tentations
are sent unto thee that thou should be swallowed up with sorrow and
desperation. In the tentations of sin and of the wrath of god what we ought to
do.
If thou be brought down even to the gates of hell, believe that the Lord will
surely raise thee up again. If thou be bruised and broken, know that it is the
Lord which will heal thee again. If thy heart be full of sorrow and heaviness,
look for comfort from him who has said, that a troubled spirit is a
sacrifice unto him.

It is expedient also to have some faithful brother at hand, which may
comfort us in these bitter conflictes. For God would that in his Church one
should help to comfort an other as members knitte together in one body: and he
has promised that when two are gathered together in his name, he will be the
third amongst them. And doubtless nothing comfort an afflicted conscience
so much, as to hear some godly brother declaring out of the word of God, that
such terrors and afflictions are sent of God, not to destroy us, but to humble
us, thereby to make us to acknowledge the great mercy of God offered unto us, and
to receive the same with thankful hearts, But if, in this distress we be
destitute of the help of such faithful brethren, we must then do as David
^id in this place: that is, we must cry unto the Lord, and pray as this Psalm
teaches us. Wherein ye see such sorrowful and bitter sighs as lively
express in David the great anguish of spirit: from whence flows such
plentiful matter (and yet nothing superfluous) as compels him, not only to
say, that out of the deep depth he cries and calls unto the Lord, but he
puts the Lord also in mind of his promise, thereby to move him the rather
to give ear unto his prayer.

Verse. 2. Lord hear my voice: let thine ears attend to the voice of my
prayers.

He speaks (as I have said before) to the same God whose seat was in
Jerusalem, like as we now speak unto that God, and call him father whom we
know and worship in Christ alone. On this God with deep sighs he calls,
that he would with the eye of mercy look upon him and graciously harken unto
his prayer. But if we think that we can not pray with such a mind or with
such feruencie of spirit as these words do express, David in his tentation
did not thus pray.
we must consider that David him self did not thus pray in his anguish and in
the extremity of his tentation. The mind oppressed with terror and
desperation, can not pray so long as such desperate assaults do endure, but
bursteth out rather into blasphemy and murmuring against God, and can not
think well or reverently of God. But when the extremity of the conflict is
past, the^ begins this crying unto God and this vehement desire, which the
mind before oppressed with anguish and sorrow, could scarsely once feel. It
helps an afflicted conscience also very much (as I have said) to hear some
faithful brother with comfortable exhortation and counsel out of the word of
God, saying on this wise: Brother, why art thou so heavy hearted? Singular
co^solations against desperation.
Do thou not hear that God will not the death of a sinner? have thou
forgotten that God commands thee to believe in him, to trust in him? Look
upon the first commandment: What is it, what requires it else, but that we
should worship God in faith and hope? Why then should thou not trust in his
goo^nes and mercy? Why should thou despair? This is to heap sin upon
sin: and whereas thou wast a sinner before in the second table and in the
inferior degree of the commandments of God, now thou set thy self in the
first table also, and in the highest degree, adding to thy other sins,
desperation and incredulity, etc. When the heavy and troubled conscience is
thus earnestly stirred up to a steadfast hope and trust in God, and to the
consideration of Gods great mercy and goodness toward the penitent and
afflicted, then begins to arise some spark of faith and groaning of the
heart, bursting out into these or the like words: Oh that I could. These
unspeakable gronings the spirit helps, and at the length there follows
some feeling of relese and comfort. For God can not reject or neglect these
gronings. Of these gronings we see a shadow, as it were, in the first verses.
But why do thou groan? why art thou heavy? Harken what follows.

Verse. 3. If thou Lord wilt streitly mark what is done amiss. O Lord who
may abide it?

This verse in our divinity is well known, David prays that his sins may
be forgiven and his iniquities not marked, therefore he denies all
righteousness of works before God.
neither do I seee how either our adversaries, or Satan him self can avoid
it. For what can they say? or what have we here that may move us any way to
doubt? As for David, it is witnessed of him that he was a man after Gods own
heart: and in deed he is a singular example to all posterity in all kind of
godliness. For although, through the murder of Vrias and his adultery with
Barsabe he is not with out reproach, yet how great was his humility when the
Prophet reproved him, and how fervent was his faith when he raised him up
again? Behold moreover his singular patience in affliction, his careful and
continual travel for the amplifying and adnauncing of the kingdom of God, of
the true service and worship of God. What should I say more? David has not
many fellows, whether ye consider his life and his faith, or the witness
pronounced of him by the Lord him self: and yet he notwithstanding so
excellent and so holy a man is compelled plainly to confess his imperfection,
saying: If thou Lord will straightly mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who may
abide it? Is not this then absolutely to deny all the righteousness, purity and
holiness of men, what so ever they be? Likewise in the 31. Psalm thus he
speaks even of those whom he calls godly and holy: For this shall every one
that is godly pray unto thee, that is, for pardon and forgiveness of their
sins. Where are they then that so highly extol the righteousness of works,
seeing that David him self in the sight of God simply renounceth and rejects
his works and all manner of righteousness, and only desires that the Lord
would not streitly mark his iniquities.

But in deed our adversaries talk now somewhat more moderately in this matter
then heretofore they have done. For they do not now deny that faith
justifies, but yet they say that that faith which justifies must be furnished
with charity. Thus like pies and parrets they chatter and prate that they them
selves do not understand. But furnish faith how so ever ye list, yet is this a
general sentence: If thou Lord, wilt straightly mark what is done amiss, O Lord,
who, who may abide it? Surely no man living. For if any man had been able to
abide it, then David, no doubt, had been able, being so holy a man, so perfect
in the word of the Lord, so often and so many ways exercised and tried with
afflictions, to confirm and stablish him in faith and in the fear of the
Lord. For I do not think that amongst all the Papists there is any one so
impudent, that will not think him self far inferior to David: and yet
David says, that righteousness comes not by works. For, says he: If thou will mark what is done amiss, no man shall be able to abide it, or to stand
in thy sight, O Lord.

Wherefore let no man trust that by his own merits or righteousness he shall
be able to stand against the terror of death and the judgment of God. Neither
do I suppose that amongst our adversaries there is any such as dare presume
to enter into the judgment of God trusting upon his own righteousness: and yet
they teach, The Papists teach that which they them selves do not.
command and exhort other so to do. But we teach a contrary doctrine, leading
the Church from this false trust, to a trust and confidence in the merit and
death of Christ, and for this cause they condemn us as heretics. Is not this
extreme malice? They will not do them selves that they teach other to do. For
when death comes, they dare not trust to their own merits, and yet will they
force other so to do, or most cruelly condemn them for heretics. Thus we are
taught by the experience of all such as are not utterly void of understanding,
that no man living, overcomes by his own works or righteousness in Gods
sight: and yet the whole nature of man, when it is not under tentation, still
looks unto works and seeks means how it may by them please God. But here
is set forth unto us a simple and a plain doctrine: If thou Lord will mark
what is done amiss, none shall be able to abide it? Who would then desire to
enter into judgment, that he may be overcome, condemned and cast away for ever.

This is therefore the sum and effect of all together, We must rest only and
wholly upon the trust and confidence of the mercy of God.
that we all ( David, Peter, Paul, etc.) were borne, that we are, that we live
and we die sinners. But this is our glory, our health and safety, that when by
the Gospel we be instructed of the mercy of God and merit of Christ, we leap
over the bounds of the law and out of our own works, as it were into an
other world, and into a new light, and coming unto God with boldness, we say:
O Lord, we can not contend with thee in judgment, we can not dispute with
thee as touching our righteousness or unrighteousness: but if thou will mark our
iniquities, if thou in judgment wilt demand whether we be righteous, then
must we needs perish. Wherefore we appeal from thy judgment, unto the throne
of thy mercy. If we have done any thing well, it was thy free gift alone.
Look upon us therefore with the eyes of thy mercy, and not with the eyes of
the justice of thy judgment: For if thou do not pardon our iniquities, and
close thine eyes that thou behold them not, we shall not be saved, etc.

This light of doctrine we see that David followed even in the darkness of the
law. By Christ alone we obtain remission of sins: Therefore only faith
where by Christ is apprehended, justifies us.
But our case is now much better, for as much as we see these things clearly
set before our eyes in the new Testament. For what teach we else at this
day, but that we are saved by faith alone in the death and blood of Christ?
that by the merit of Christ only, our sins are covered and taken away,
according to that saying: Blessed are they whose sins are forgiven.
Forgiveness of sins then is that heaven under the which we dwell through our
trust and confidence in the merit of Christ. For he that believes, shall not
be condemned, but shall pass from death to eternal life. David adds here no
express mention of Christ, and yet because he hops for mercy, therefore he
looks straight to this mercy seat that afterward should more clearly be
reueiled in the new Testament. For ye see that he signifies no less, but if
God should mark his iniquities, he must needs despair. For without remission
of sins or knowledge of grace, what have we to rest upon? What safety may
we find? They therefore that put not their trust herein alone, that by the
death of Christ their sins are taken away, and Gods eyes closed that he will
not see their sins, must needs perish. For this only do the Scriptures set
forth, that our life rests wholly and alonely in the remission of sins, and
in that the Lord will not see our sins, but in mercy covers them, and will
not remember them or lay them to our charge: So that we must acknowledge and
confess that we know nothing but the righteousness of Christ: Not that we
should not now work and bring forth the fruits of a holy life: not that there
is no sin in us, or that God does not hate the same: but because God says
and promises that he will not mark our transgressions, because we believe in
Christ and put our trust in him. This shield whosoever holds out for his
defense, and hides him self under it, them God accepts as his children,
because they have a Savior: but they that have not, are driven to despair.
For what can all their works, their merits, their righteousness do, seeing
David says: If thou mark our iniquities, O Lord, who shall be able to stand
in thy sight? In this verse therefore consists altogether, which hereafter
follows.

Verse. 4. But mercy is with thee, that thou may be feared.

This mercy thou shall not find in Moises, in the law or in the works of the
law, not in Monkery, not in a strait and painful life, not in alms deeds,
etc. Briefly, this mercy thou shall find no where, Propitiation or mercy
what it is.
because it is no where, but with the Lord. Mercy therefore is not our merit
or our righteousness, but it is the free pardon of our sins by Christ alone.
Which mercy, although thou should afflict and punish thy self in a
Monastery a thousand years, or do never so many, so perfect or so holy
works, thou shall never find, as the conscience which even in a most streit
and holy life feelleth desperation, does sufficiently witness. But herein
alone the conscience finds rest and comfort, when altogether naked and
without any addition of her own worthynes, it commits it self to the naked
and bare mercy of God, and says: O Lord, I have thy promise that righteousness
comes of mercy alone, which righteousness is nothing else but thy free
pardon, that is to say, that thou will not mark our iniquities.

I commend therefore unto you this definition of righteousness which David here
sets forth, To mark iniq^ities what it is. True righteousness what it is,
that to mark sin, is to condemn. Again, not to mark sin, is to
justify or pronounce a man righteous. And this is true righteousness in deed,
when sins are not marked, but pardoned and not imputed. Likewise in an other
place also he defines a blessed man: and Paul allegeth the same defininition
very aptly: Blessed is the man (says he) to whom God imputes not his sin.
He says not: blessed is the man which has no sin, but unto whom the Lord
does not impute that sin which he has, as here also he says: When sins
are not marked. These testimonies must be diligently collected and noted, that
we may see how that this doctrine is founded upon the holy Scriptures, and
that all the confidence and trust that man can have in the righteousness of
works or of the law, is utterly cut of in the judgment of God.

For this doctrine makes all men alike, and before God leaves no difference.
The doctrine of justification makes all men alike
For if by imputation only we be righteous, it follows that not only we be
all sinners, but that also there is no differenee between the learned and
unlearned, the wise and the simple, the married and unmarried, the Prince and
the plowman, etc. For this difference of degrees in the judgment of God
avails nothing: but this only avails before God, that our sins be
forgiven. Wherefore if this doctriue had been heretofore diligently taught, all
Monkry and such other monstrous kinds of life had not been brought into the
Church, which the foolish people has believed to be more holy then others. For
what soever kind of life a man be in, this is the condition of us all, that we
have need of forgiveness of sins, as Paul teaches in the Acts, where he
shows that God suffered the manners of our fathers, Act. 13.
like as a good husband suffers and bears with the manners of his wife, the
master of his scholars, the Prince of his subjects. Now, if this eiuill life
have need of such discretion and moderation, that men should not be always
extreme and rigorous in dealing one toward an other, how much more need have
we, that God should bear with us in this our great weakness and corruption? If
God should deal sharply with us, then should our transgressions daily and
continually move him to mark straightly, and sharply to punish us. But he will
not mark our iniquityes. This he requires, that we believe in Christ. Then
will he bear with us, then will he wink at our weakness, and pardon our
transgressions, yea in respect of our faith in Christ, he will accept us as
righteous.

Thus David turned him self from desperation, to an assured hope and trust in
Gods mercy. For when we look to our sins, it can not be but we must needs
be vexed and fall to desperation* But we must not fasten our eyes upon our
sins only, When we be hold our sins, we must look unto the Mercieseat.
but must look unto the mercieseate: So that, albeit we can not deny but that
we are sinners, yet the remission of sins we may not deny. And why is the
remission of sins promised, if sinners may not enjoy the same? Moreover, in
that David speaks of mercy, he con^esseth that he is a sinner, and that
mercy does properly pertain unto him. But thou will say: Sins make a man
unworthy to receive mercy at Gods hands: therefore let David, Paul and Peter
hope for mercy, as they which are holy and worthy to receive mercy, etc. Such
cogitations fly th^^ even as a present poison and destruction of thy soul,
and think rather on this wise: Because I am a sinner, therefore remission of
sins pertains unto me. Wherefore I will not despair, I will not suffer my
self to be swallowed up with heauynes: but I will turn unto the Lord, who
has promised mercy, who also has commanded that I should trust and believe
in him.

Thus David sets forth in this verse the sum and effect of all true
Christian doctrine, and that sun which gives light unto the Church. For
whiles this doctrine stands, the Church shall stand and flourish. But when
this doctrine fails, the Church must needs fail and fall to ruin. This
doctrine of Christian righteousness the devil most deadly ^ateth and
persecuteth.
This doctrine I do so often and so diligently repeat, for that Satan
desires and seeks nothing so much as to pluck the knowledge thereof out of
all men's hearts. And this is the special cause of all the troubles which he
stirs up either publicly or privately. We see what mischief he has
brought into the Church by Schisms and factions, not only in that men
contending and striving for new matters have almost forgotten this article:
but many also offended through dissentions and discord, begin now to loath and
contemn the same. It is therefore the part of a faithful Pastor not to suffer
him self by such offenses to be removed from this article: but with an
invincible constancy and continual travel to set forth and advance the same.
Moreover, how often comes it to pass, that in those also which are cast
down with the beholding and consideration of the law and their own sins,
this article of the forgiveness of sins, is either lost or else in great
danger. David therefore in this Psalm sets forth (as hereafter we shall
hear) not only his own experience, but also exhortations and promises,
whereby it may appear that he carefully traueled for the preservation of this
doctrine. And in deed the greatness of the danger ought to stir up a
careful diligence in this behalf, and daily to increase the same in us. For
where this doctrine is lost, the mind is overwhelmed with all kinds of
tentations.

So when in ye Papacy this article was lost, what was so monstrous, that was
not gladly heard and received of all men? The impudency of the Monks and all
the religious rabble was so great, that (I am ashamed to speak it) there was
not, in a manner so much as the crack of their foul panch, but they would have
men to reverence it. But contrariwise, where this knowledge is retained and
this doctrine preached, all heresies may easily be ouerthrown. And hereof the
Papacy is a notable example, The only doctrine of justification overthrows
the Papacy. The works of the law are evil when any part of salvation or
justification is ascribed unto them.
which by the preaching and publishing of this one point of doctrine is now
vanquished and banished out of men's hearts. For although you reprove the life
of the Papists and speak against their whoredom, conetousnes, tyranny and
such like enormities never so much, and by the evil works of the law detect
their impiety, yet shall you nothing prevail: For all this the Pope does not
stick to confess, as in deed he can never deny his manifest abominations.
But, says he, although our life be defiled with sin, yet our doctrine and
our kingdom notwithstanding is holy.

In like manner the devil, in the law and works can not be convicted. For he
can therein so handle him self, that he will easily break out, as it were
through a spyders web, and lose nothing of all his power. But then is he
overcome in deed, when the doctrine of faith is diligently and truly taught,
and that the Papists have not only lost, but also have defaced with their
filthy doctrine and opinions, both Christ and the true manner of justification.
How the Pope and Satan are put to flight.
If we stick to this ankerhold, both the Pope and Satan shall be put to
flight. For if their doctrine be once convicted as false and erroneous, they
have nothing to defend them selves withal. Wherefore, endeavor your selves
with all diligence, that this doctrine may be of you both well known and
surely stablished in your hearts. And let none be so arrogant as to think, that
he has atteyned the full and perfect knowledge of this heavenly wisdom. For
so long as Satan, the world and our own reason can do any thing, we shall
never be perfect in this knowledge: And because we are as it were soldiers
placed in the forefront of the battle, therefore we are in danger of many
perils: which to withstand, it is not in the power or wisdom of man.

God deals not with us according to the law: Therefore we may not deal with
God according to the law.
The sum and effect therefore of all these words: Because there is mercy
with thee, is this, that God will not deal with us according to the law,
because we likewise should not deal with him according to the law, but say
with the Publicane: Lord be merciful unto me a sinner. They that go beyond
these bounds of grace, and leaving this rich and ample grace, will dispute of
the law and works, calling to account what they have done and what they have
left undone, the further they go, the deeper they plunge them selves in hell. I
say not this without good cause. I see what happened to good Bernard, whom if you
examine well, you shall find him contrary to him self. For when he treats of
faith with an inward feeling, he teaches Christ purely, he stirs up men's
hearts to the love of Christ effectually, and sets forth his benefits
sincerely, then smells he of nothing else but roses and honey. But
contrariwise, when he disputes out of the law or of the law, then reasons
he no otherwise, then if he were some Turk or Jew, which either knows not
Christ, or plainly denies him. So is it likewise with all others that take
upon them the office of teaching and preaching: For when they speak with an
inward feeling and practice, and are not carried away with disputations and
contentions, they teach Christ purely. But when they e^ter into the discourse
of the law, they so dispute as if there were no Christ which had instituted the
law, yea, which with his own blood had purchased the remission of sins. This
do we also find to be most true when we fall in matters of the law and men's
traditions. Wherefore we must stand fast in this Paradise or heaven of grace and
seek no further, that we may remain in this simple confession of David: With
thee there is mercy.

But why does he add moreover: Hypocrites do not fear but presume: but we are
justified freely, that we should not presume, but fear.
That thou may be feared? Forsooth to set forth unto us what they are against
whom he fights, and to give a further light to the former sentence by
setting forth the contrary: As if he should say: I have learned by experience O
Lord, why there is mercy with thee, and why of right thou may challenge this
title unto thy self, that thou art merciful and forgiuest sins. For in that
thou shuttest all under mercy, and leauest nothing to the merits and works of
men, therefore thou art feared. But if all things were not shut up under thy
mercy, or that we could take away sins by our own power, no man would
fear thee, but the whole world would proudly contemn thee. For daily
experience does witness, that wheresoever this knowledge of the free mercy of
God is not, there men walk in the presumption of their own merits.

Behold the religious man, but especially the Minorite (which kind of men I
have always abhorred above others for their intolerable pride): He because he
has a rule and a law whereunto he must frame his life, lives without all true
fear of God, and walks in great security. Uery few there be which come to
the true knowledge of sin, or have any feeling of desperation. For they that
feel desperation, are glad to hear, that there is mercy with the Lord. But
these men do persecute this doctrine of mercy, free grace, and forgiveness of
sins, with fire and sword. For the nature of the law is this, that it makes
men proud, presumptuous and contemners of grace, as Paul notably sets
forth in the Jews, Romans 2. Thou art called a Jew and restest in the law,
and gloriest in God, etc. They that are such are not moved with the authority
of the Apostles, nor with the miracles of Christ raising up the dead to life,
but are as insensible as stones. For in this security they are not only
ignorant what this propitiation and this mercy is, but also they persecute the
same. Such therefore do commit a double sin, more grievous then the
Publicanes: and our Savior Christ says well of them: Harlots and Publicanes
shall enter before you into the kingdom of heaven. For they are easily
persuaded, that they are sinners, and that they have need of the free mercy of
God and forgiveness of sins. But contrariwise, Annas, Caiphas and ye other
Pharisees, when they hear these things, do laugh and girne thereat, and can
not abide to be taught of any.

Now for as much as pertains unto them both, the Lord has decreed, that
righteousness should not be esteemed according to our works, but simply
according to mercy and the remission of sins. For if righteousness should
come of works or of the law, Righteousness comes of grace only
then either desperation must needs follow, if the law be not perfectly
observed, or else presumption if it be observed. In desperation there is
greater fear then should be: in presumption there is no fear at all.
Therefore the mean between them both is this, that God shuts up al under
mercy. God takes not away the law, and yet the law avails nothing to
righteousness.
Notwithstanding he takes not away the law: For without the law this life can
not continue. In what a miserable state should the common wealth be, if
murders, adulteries and robberies should be committed and permitted without
punishment or execution of law? Moreover, the works and exercises of the godly
must be guided and ordered by the word of God. For this purpose God will have
the law to continue, and accounts it for an holy obedience in those that do
believe. But as touching sin, he commands that we should cast away all
trust and confidence in the law, and put our trust only in the mercy of God
set forth unto us in Christ Jesus crucified for our sins. By this means
presumption is taken away and fear remains: not such a fear as is in the
desperate, but such as we see in good and well nurtered children toward their
parents. No Monk therefore shall be saved because of his order or strait life.
I likewise shall not be saved because I preach Christ with careful diligence
and faithful endeavor. The Prince is not saved because he faithfully governs
and defends his subjects. But as touching the Monk, you may easily prove
this to be true. For that kind of life is altogether contrary to the word of
God. But to teach and instruct the Churches, to govern the common wealth, are
in deed most holy and excellent works, and yet are they the works of the law,
which of them selves bring either desperation or presumption. Wherefore, though
these works be never so perfect and holy, yet is there no salvation but in this
alone, that there is mercy with the Lord, that he may be feared. To trust in
works, is to lose God, and to shut out fear.


Wherefore God has justly shut up al under sin, that he may have mercy upon
all. For if you leave any thing to the nature of man whereby he may deserve the
favor of God, no man will fear or worship God: but all men will come unto God
as the Monks do with their abstinence, prayer, obedience and such like. But
by this means God is lost, and the idol of man's heart is worshipped in steed
of God. The Monk thinks that his hempten girdle pleases God.
For whiles the Monk thinks to please God with his hempten girdle (wherewith
he ought rather to be hanged up upon a tree, then girded): whiles he thinks,
by the observation of other traditions to please God, does he not depart from
the true God, and set his own imaginations in the stead of God, whiles he is
persuaded that God thinks ye same that he imagines? Of the righteousness of
the law therefore follows plain idolatry, which imagines a strange God,
and loses the true God. For the true God is propitiation and mercy through
Christ. But such as glory in their works, would make their works propitiatory
and available to deserve grace. God is not feared where true righteousness is
not believed.
Wherefore God rejects all works, and sets forth his naked and bare mercy,
that he may be feared, and not contemned of the presumptuous, hereby taking
away all cause of presumption.

Let us learn then out of this verse or this general proposition, that when
the doctrine of the remission of sins, of grace or propitiation is lost, it
follows that in steed thereof Idolatry must needs reign. For take away
grace and the fear of God also, as ye Prophet says, must needs follow. And
what is it else to fear God, but to reverence and to worship God? also to
acknowledge yt he is full of mercy and goodness, and therefore to obey him? This
God did I lose when I was a Monk and walked in the confidence of mine own
righteousness. For by experience I am able to prove, that of the most perfect
righteousness of the law, there can nothing else follow, but either
desperation, which is more seldom, or presumption, which is more common. For
the nature of man and the devil can not beware, but they must needs presume.

Thou will say then: Shall we not keep the law? What the use of the law is if
it do not justify.
shall we not do good works? yes verily we are bound to do them. For God
therefore has a church in the world, therefore has he ordained common wealths,
societies and families, that in no place there should be wanting occasion of
well doing. But who is he, that when he has done these things to ye uttermost
of his power, sees not how much impuritie and vnclea^nes remains, especially
if he should bring his works forth into ye sight and presence of God. Wherefore
our redemption consists wholly and alonely in the mercy of God, which we
apprehend by faith in Christ. And we which through works are unprofitable
servants, through grace which is given by Jesus Christ, are made children,
Ioh. 1. So the true fear, true worship, true reverence, yea and the true
knowledge of God rests only in mercy, in that we assuredly trust that God
through Christ is merciful unto us. To this service of God, desperation and
presumption are more contrary, then fire and water. But because the law
brings either desperation or presumption, therefore it follows that by the
law there is neither righteousness nor true worship of God. Notwithstanding the
law contained in the x. commandments must be kept. For he that rules, must
rule with diligence, and he that is a subject must obey. There is emongst men a
difference of degrees and persons. Notwithstanding all do owe a reverence and
obedience unto God, and with faithful diligence must do what in them lies.
Grace makes us children: but works make us servants.
But because these are works of the law, we are by them no better then
servant, and for them we receive a reward of promise and covenant. But by
grace we are made children and heirs of the kingdom. The works then that
follow, do not make us heirs and children, but are done of heirs and
children, as a witness of thanks giving and obedience.

The consequences or sequeles which follow upon the doctrine set forth in this
Psalm.
Wherefore I commend unto you these consequences, that where no mercy is, there
is no God: Also, where no God is, there is no mercy. Likewise, where is no
mercy, there is no fear or worship of God: Yea there remains nothing but
idolatry and the righteousness of works. These things, whiles the law and
nature do rule and reign, can not otherwise be. Wherefore all Popery, all
Mahomatisme, Iudaisme and Monkery, with such like, what so ever, which does not
know and understand and this propitiation and this mercy, is nothing before God
but plain Idolatry, albeit in show it seems never so glorious. For without
the mercyseate there can be no fear of God, but mere presumption.

Christian doctrine therefore does not deny good works, as our adversaries
falsely and maliciously report of us: but it teaches that God will not straightly
mark our iniquities, but this he requires, that we believe, and trust in his
mercy, because there is mercy with him that he may be feared and continue our
God. Who so ever then do believe that God is merciful and forgiueth sins
for Christ's sake, do yield a reasonable service unto God, they strive not
with God about the law, works and righteousness, but casting away all trust and
confidence in them selves, do fear him because of his mercy, and so are made
children, which do receive the holy Ghost and begin to do the law. Of this
doctrine the practices and exhortations do now follow.

Verse. 5. I wait on the Lord: my soul waits and I put my trust in his word.

Here is plenty of words, and yet nothing superfluous: for they help to
amplify and set forth the matter more lively. First he sets forth him self
in this Psalm for an example of that doctrine which he desires to be
preserved and retained in the Church, and he prays that he may be heard.
After this, obteyning mercy, he perceaueth that he was heard. Now therefore
he adds moreover an exhortation, whereby he stirs up him self constantly
to persevere in this knowledge of grace, and not to suffer him self by any
means to be led away from the same. As if he said: I know that there is
mercy with the Lord. This principal article I have in some part now learned,
and some experience I have had thereof in my self. Now this remains for me
to do, even to wait upon the Lord (that is, To wait on the Lord, is to trust
in the Lord.
to trust in the Lord), and constantly to continue in this knowledge, that I
may find comfort and consolation in that mercy, which by experience I have
proved to be with the Lord, and that I may hold fast this hope of mercy for
ever.

The Prophet shows moreover in this place, The minds of men are easily
carried away from this knowledge of grace by disputations and contentions.
how easily men are carried away from this knowledge, to contentions and
disputations, either publicly or privately. When we took upon us the defense
of true and sincere doctrine, and were in a goodly forwardnes thereof, at the
first we were much troubled with seditious persons, with Anabaptists and other
sectaries. With these spirits whiles we contended, our former exercise and
diligence in setting forth this doctrine was almost forgotten. For the truth is
not lost by teaching, This inconvenience our posterity is also like to feel.
but by disputing and contending. And this evil comes by disputations and
contentions, that the minds of men are thereby as it were profaned, and being
carried away with the heat thereof, they neglect those things which most of all
they ought to regard. So Eve in Paradise, as long as she stoocke to the
commandment of God, endured constantly. But when she was moved by the Serpent
to reason and doubt of the counsel of God concerning the forbidden fruit, she
was led away from the word and fell from God. Moreover, Satan knows that
the gates of hell are not able to overthrow this doctrine: Therefore he
labors by subtle and indirect means to bring that to pass, which directly
and plainly he dare not attempt. He stirs up troubles and contentions in the
Church, which when with godly zeal we go about to repress, he wrappeth us
also in troubles before we beware, and by little and little he leads us from
the care and consideration of this doctrine. We must fight against heresies and
heretics (I grant): but yet so, that we be not wholly occupied therein, and so
forget or neglect this doctrine. This danger David expresses in setting forth
his own example so effectually. As if he said: It is a hard matter to abide
steadfastly in this doctrine. This shall be therefore my only care and
endeavor, even to wait upon the Lord, and to beware that this doctrine be not
taken from me by any means.

Where he says: My soul waits, it is a proper speech of the Hebrews, and
is as much to say, as with my whole heart I wait or will wait upon the
Lord: for it is an amplification of the former words. He says not only that
he will wait on the Lord, but he adds moreover: with my whole heart I will
wait, to signify the vehement desire he has, that this doctrine might be
preserved and mainteyned. But this specially is to be marked which follows:
Our waiting and our hope must rest only upon the word of grace.
I put my trust in his word. The Jews, the Pope and other heretics say, that
they also do trust. But they leave the word and follow their own
imaginations. This may be called trust, but in deed it is nothing: for we may
not depart from the vocal word. For if we so do, what certeintie can we have
of God, From the written and external word we may not depart.
especially seeing that God has given his word, ordained Ministers of his
word, Magistrates, Parents, etc. to this end that we should follow their
voice speaking to us out of his holy word, and commanding us to obey their
authority?

The prophet signifies here also an other tentation, which all they do fall
into that are not diligent in holding fast this knowledge of mercy. For this
Satan seeks and busily goes about, either publicly to take away the word,
or privately to hinder this hope in those that have the word. So the Pope had
the word and Sacraments, and yet notwithstanding he suffered him self to be
led away to pilgrimages, rules, vows, superstition, idolatry, etc. What
trouble we have had with sects, we have before declared. And who is able to
recite the tentations wherewith men are privately assailed and tempted to
depart from the word, to strange opinions which reason deuiseth and imagines.
So great a matter is it to avoid these subtle sleightes of Satan. David says
therefore: I will not suffer my self to be led from the word, but in the
word I will trust for remission of sins, and will not frame my faith after
mine own imaginations, but after the word. There is then a double tentation,
against the which the Prophet by his own example, The first tentation.
armeth us. The first takes hold of those which do imagine unto them selves a
faith, and take away the word, as the profane and godles spirits do. The
second follows those which have the word and lay no hold on it, The second
tentation.
but are led away to idolatries, and such are the Papists. But there is yet
a third tentation, which is the forest of all, against the which David speaks
as follows.

Verse. 6. My soul wayteth on the Lord from the morninge watch, even unto
night.

When Satan cannot prevail by plain and direct means in tempting us to
forsake the word and follow our own imaginations, The third tentation.
as the heretics do: or retaining the word to turn to Idolatry, as the
Papists do: then he goes about to make us weery of all together and utterly
to give over. We must not be we cried or discouraged through the importunity
and continual assaults of the enemy
Wherefore, we must not only have a good courage that we may obtain the
victory, but we must also continually withstand his force, endure his
assaults, and never suffer our selves to be overcome by his importunity. For
oftentimes we see that by long continuance they are overcome, whom no troubles,
were they never so great, could overcome. And in warfare we se, that nothing is
so much commended as to press still upon the enemy. So the Turk, although he
has had many overthrows, yet because he still goes on and never gives over,
therefore he prevails. In this continuance, diligence and travel, al they
must constantly persevere, which will hold this doctrine of justification and
righteousness. And here David sets forth his own example, that like as the
enemy has his continual assaults and never gives over: so he also never
cease to wait upon the Lord and to trust in the Lord, that not only with a
strong and a valiant, but also with a constant faith and invincible hope, he
may gain ye victory.

Satan is a continual enemy, and never cease to assail us.
Wherefore we must learn by the policy of our enemy to play the good
soldiers. For he is never weery in devising and practicing all the means
possible, whereby he may trouble and molest the Church. So at the first the
end of one heresy was the beginning of an other, and one persecution followed
an other. We also at the beginning had many conflicts with the Pope and his
monsters. When they were repressed, by and by new errors ensued, which
notwithstanding did not then first begin to spring up, but the old enemy
(who, as he is never weery, so lacks he no subteltie and policy to do
mischief) raised up again such errors and heresies as had been convicted
and confounded long ago, to the end that the poor afflicted church might have
no breathing time. For we see what swarms of Epicures be now every where: And
there is no small number also of such as seek to revive the heresy of Arius.
This continual diligence and importunity of the enemy it behooves us to know,
that we fall not into security. For it is not enough to have once overcome, but
one battle follows an other, and one victory an other.

This earnest and continual travel of the enemy, we do not only see in the
story of the Church, but we have experience thereof also in our selves and in
our own private exercises. Wherefore, if by prayer thou have this day overcome,
be not negligent and secure, for to morrow he will come again more strongly
armed and prepared then he did before. Wherefore do thou also prepare thy
self to a new battle. So it comes to pass that the same tentation which
to day we were able easily to overcome, to morrow shall overcome us and give us
the overthrow. A Christian therefore must be readily prepared, not only with
strength to stand against the enemy, but with steadfast purpose also to
continue unto the end. Our course and race is as it were in a circle which has
no end.
For he runs not in such a race wherein there is any end of his course
during this life: but he runs as it were, in a rownd circle, in the which he
must have a continual recourse thither where he first began. Therefore our
Savior Christ says: He that continues to the end shall be saved. We must not
then be discouraged by the importunity of our enemy, or overcome with
tediousnes, and long continuance, but we must fight, not only against the
power and subtlety of our enemy, but also against our own weakness and
weerines, and raise up our selves with this faith, that like as Satan
sleeps not, so the Lord our God neither sleeps nor rests.

Thus David sets out unto us his own example, that we being armed against
all tentations which follow the remission of sins, should give no place to
the enemy. For albeit it is most certain, that there is mercy with the
Lord, that our sins are forgiven, that we are baptized into the death of
Christ, that we are called by the word unto the communion of Saints, and that
we, with the other members of Christ, are nourished by the body and blood of
Christ, all these things (I say) although they be most certain, yet are we
still in danger lest we be deceived of the crafty enemy, which lies in
wait for us on every side. He is on our right hand by hypocrisy and
security: he is on our left hand by tyrannes and desperation. Besides all
this, so great is his vigilancie, that he is never far of, but ever at hand.
Therefore the Prophet says: My soul wayteth on the Lord from the morning
watch, etc.

This saying of the heathen is well known: The patience of the Gentiles.
furor fit laesa saepius patientia, that is, patience being often times hurt,
is turned into madness. For if patience suffer any thing, it comes of a
certain desperation, as when a man thus thinks with him self: All that I
suffer is but in vain. This patience is turned into fury and is oppressed with
desperation. The patience of the Christians, and how it differs from the
patience of the heathen*
But Christian patience will not suffer it self to be oppressed: but
continually takes hold upon hope, whereby at length it prevails and gets
the victory. It is a hard thing not to be discouraged with such trobles as
daily happen in matters perteining to the common course of this life. But
patiently to endure those afflictions which David by his own example shows
that Christians which have already received the forgiveness of sins must
suffer: to have a steadfast hope in the bitter vexations of sin and
accusations of conscience, and patiently to suffer all other aff^ictio^s
wherewith Satan vexes and tormenteth the believing heart, this is in deed a
divine and an heavenly virtue, and such a conflicte, that God has promised
unto it an incorruptible crown of glory. Now ensues an exhortation, that we
should follow this example of David and embrace this doctrine.

Verse. 7. Let Israel wait on the Lord for with the Lord is mercy, and with
him is plentiful redemption.

This is in deed a golden verse, worthy to be known and well understand:
wherein David wishes and exhorts all men by his example wholly to rest and to
continue in a sure hope of the mercy of God. Faith is a ^inguler and
inestimable gift.
For faith is not so lightly to be esteemed as the Papists teach, which dream
that faith is a quality remaining in the heart, with the which the heart, after
it can once number these syllables, I believe in God, passes on, as it were in
a sleep. For they that have no experience of those conflictes which faith must
endure, do but laugh us to scorn when we say that faith is a principal
virtue, wherewith only and alone we are justified, delivered from sin, hell,
death and damnation. For it is true that the wise man ^aith: A fool
understands not, except ye talk of those things which are in his own heart.
These things therefore which we attribute unto faith, they ascribe unto
charity, and prefer charity above faith. But if faith be set forth rightly
and in her own colors, it far excels charity. Faith compared with
charity.
For behold the objects of faith. It fights alone before God against Satan,
who never rests, but warreth against faith continually, and that even
concerning death and life everlasting, concerning sin and the accusation of
the law, concerning grace and the remission of sins. Now, if with faith you
compare charity, whose office is to be exercised in releuing the miseryes and
calamities of men, whether they have need of comfort or succor in mind or in
body, who sees not how far faith excels charity? For how great a
difference is there between God and man? between corporal necessities and
eternal death? These are therefore the exercises of faith, even in the greatest
dangers to fight continually against Satan in ye presence of God, For as I said
before, our ^ruel enemy will give us no breathing, no time of rest. Wherefore,
albeit ye charity is not only a goodly virtue, but also extends far in
comparison of other moral virtues, yet is faith, without all comparison, a
far more excellent and heavenly virtue, whether ye consider y^ objects thereof
or other causes.

The end of faith.
For this is the fruit of faith, when the heart feels that death is overcome
by the death of Christ that sin also is put away, and the law abolished by
grace and mercy. These things are of them selves most certain: Yet such is
our infirmity, that we can noe certainly apprehend them, and therefore we are
terrified with the cogitations of death and sin. But if this hope and trust
in the mercy of God were perfect, no heaviness should ever oppress the
believing heart. Therefore David uses this exhortation, that Israel, after it
has once obtained this mercy, why we must still wait and hope.
should still persevere in waiting on the Lord, and not suffer this trust and
confidence in the mercy of the Lord, to be wrested from him. And here he has
respect to that great conflict, wherein the mind oppressed with calamities,
begins to doubt of ye mercy of God. In this conflict, because the mind does
not so soon feel those comforts which the word promises and faith believes,
as it would do, it is ready to despair. Against this tentation David armeth
us, and warns us to be mindful that we must wait on the Lord, and never
depart from the word, or believe any thing against the word, and he shows the
cause why.

For with the Lord (says he) is mercy. With God there is propitiation and
mercy: therefore there is no anger with him.
The flesh in tentations and afflictions, thinks that with the Lord there is
nothing but wrath. The holy Ghost therefore comfort us, and goes about to
pluck this opinion out of our hearts, and pronounces that there is mercy and
goodness with the Lord, if we can but only wait on the Lord and put our trust
in him. This testimony of conscience and of the holy Ghost we have great need
of: for if we follow our own sense, we shall be deceived and find in our
selves the contrary. But we may not judge of these matters according to our
own sense or as we feel in our selves, but we must stand to the word, and
thus think with our selves, that these are matters of faith and not of our
own sense and feeling. For to believe, is not to feel. Not because these
things shall never be felt which we now believe, but because faith must go
before feeling and experience: And we must believe the word, although we feel
in our own hearts and judgment never so much to the contrary. As when our
hearts oppressed with calamities do think God to be angry with us, not to
care for us, but to hate us: then faith clean contrary must thus assure it
self, that with God there is neither anger nor hatred, that he neither
thinks of punishment nor offense: but although he suffer us to be afflicted,
yet he does it not to the end to destroy us. For with him says the Psalm is
mercy. Therefore he is mindful of us to do us good, to deliver us from
dangers, to mortify our sins, and to increase his other good gifts in us.
If these things happen not to the wicked, what marvel is it? For either they
believe not, or else if they do, they continue not. Wherefore let us that
believe, with faith join hope also: so that albeit our own sense and heart
shall work never so much against us, and that God shall seem never so sharp
an enemy in punishing us, yet let us not yield so much to our own sense and
feeling, as to the written word and to the holy Ghost, which pronounces that
with the Lord there is mercy, who loves us and seeks to do us good.

This is the truth of the holy Ghost, that we should think, yea most assuredly
believe, In tentatio^s we must rest upon hope, and believe the word rather then
our own experience and feeling. Romans 5.3.
that with the Lord there is no anger: but if any calamities assail us, as
poverty, sickness, vexation of mind, and such like, we should endure these
tentations with faith and hope, declaring our patience toward God, and hoping
for deliverance at his hand in his good time: Like as Paul also writing to
the Romans wills us to rejoice even in our afflictions and tentations. For if
God did not love us, Satan would not hate us. If we were not partakers of life,
our enemy would not persecute us with death. So those which are most just and
holy, because they hold fast the hope of the remission of sins, Satan
tempts most of all which the horror of sin, yea and that in such wise, as
some times the taking of one little cup of wine, or of one word unadvisedly
escaped, he makes such a sin, that baptism and al other gifts and
blessings which we possess, seem now to stand us in no effect: Yea many
times even those works which are good and holy, he reproves and condemns as
most wicked, that he may bring the tender and timorous conscience into
heaviness. All these things, I say, the godly do find and feel. But if we
should follow our own sense and feeling without the word, how far and how
miserably should we wander from God? Thus Satan deals not with the Papists,
but goes a contrary way to work, excusing, yea highly commending in them most
horrible and detes^able crimes as excellent virtues. Contrariwise, we that
desire and endeavor to live according to the will of God, and moreover do
teach the word sincerely and faithfully, do often times suffer such trouble
and vexation of conscience, as if we lived most wickedly.

We must learn therefore out of the word, that these things h^ppen to the
godly, and must be overcome with such cogitations as the holy Ghost here
sets forth: The experience which the word teaches.
So that we must thus think with our selves: I am called to the Communion and
partaking of the merit of Christ, and am baptized. If in the common course of
this life there be any offenses by me committed, there is mercy with the Lord,
and in hope of this mercy, I will let them pass. Moreover, our doctrine,
although the world sclaunder it and most spitefully persecute it, must needs
be true. This doctrine, after that we once believe in Christ, shows unto us
that with the Lord there is nothing else but mercy. For God can no otherwise
do, but love us and bestow his benefits upon us. Now, if the contrary appear
to my sense and feeling, I pass not, neither if I should die for it, would I
suffer this knowledge to be wrested from me: but I steadfastly believe that in
the earth beneath, and in the heaven above there is nothing else but mercy.
Thus to believe I am persuaded, not by feeling, or by mine own experience, but
by the word, which says: that with the Lord there is mercy for me and all
that do believe. But for them that believe not, there is nothing else but wrath.
I will therefore overcome my tentations with the word, and will write this
promise in my heart, that since I believe in Jesus Christ and doubt not but that
my sins are pardoned through his blood, I shall not be confounded, although
all sense, reason and experience would persuade and prove to me the contrary.
In my self I perceive nothing vut wrath, in the devil nothing but hatred, in
the world nothing but extreme fury and madness. But the holy ghost can not
lie, which wills me to trust, because there is mercy with the Lord, and with
him is plentiful redemption.

Redemption signifies deliverance, Plentiful redemption.
and that general, as well from the fault as from the punishment, but
specially from the fault. This redemption he calls great and plentiful
because the straitnes of our heart is such, that it can not comprehend the same.
For when we pray, we so pray, that it seems we would be content with a
little. So they that are in trouble and heaviness of mind, do wish for the
comfort and quietness of one day. They that are in poverty would be glad to
have bread for the present day. When we pray, we are not able to conceive what
great things God will give us.
But God does not think this enough: for he gives above all that we can
either conceive or ask. And most true it is, that we do not know how or what
to ask. And here I gladly use mine own experience. For what and how much has
he given unto me alone? I wished no more but that the horrible abuse of the
Popes pardons might be taken away: but what a floode of wonderful and
incomparable benefits has followed? So is it always true, that no man dare
ask so much of God, as God is ready and willing to give. The cause hereof is
the straitnes of our heart, the slendernes of our hope, and weakness of our
faith. This plentiful redemption then, above all measure exceeds all our
petitions and desires. Wherefore the Lord has given us all a form how we
should pray. For if we had not this form of prayer prescribed unto us, which
of us durst be bold to ask so many and so great things? We are now therefore,
not only made conquerers of sin, hell and death by the merit of Christ: but
also do feel the bountiful and liberal hand of God toward us even in this
life. And albeit we could never have been bold to ask so much and so many
things, yet notwithstanding, he has given us these things, and will give us
also more.

God both hears us graciously, and gives unto us plentifully.
Therefore the Prophet says that this redemption is plentiful, because it
exceeds our capacity. For like as we slenderly believe, so we slenderly
ask. But our father in heaven rayneth plentifully upon the little poor
sparks of our prayer, and small drops of our faith, and recompenseth his
delay in giving, with great abundance. For although we must still wait, yet is
our deliverance so much the greater. Jacob, which is Israel, waited for the
Lord and what followed? That people so mightily increasing and multiplying of
so small beginnings, afterward changed the whole world: And if Abraham had
seen all his posterity, and all the wonderful acts which God wrought amongst
them, would he not have said (think you) that he could never have hoped or
once have thought, yt this should ever have come to pass? True it is, that
Abraham believed the promise of God: But that there should be such a wonderful
and glorious beauty of his posterity, he could not believe because of the
straitnes of man's heart. So the Church after Christ, prayed for ye advancing of
Gods kingdom, and after this prayer followed the ruin of the Roman kingdom,
which before seemed to be invincible. We likewise pray at this day for
deliverance. The day of the Lord therefore shall come, and shall destroy the
whole world, with all the power of Satan and hell. This only therefore let us
endeavor, that we may continue in faith and hope. Then shall the Lord make a
glorious end of all our troubles. For God will not forsake us, except we first
give over to hope and pray. Let the faithful rest therefore in this comfort,
that their oppression and affliction shall never be so great, but their
deliverance shall be greater: And if they think otherwise, they think not well.
The effect of the first precept.
For this is the sum and effect of the first precept, which David here
expresses: with the Lord there is plenteous redemption. For this is to be a
god in deed, even to redeem and to deliver, yea and that with greater majesty
and glory, then of any mortal man it can be conceived.

Verse. 8. And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.

This promise is a conclusion of the Psalm. Wherein again he shows what
cause he had to pray, and what we also in like danger should hope for. And in
deed it is a sweet and a joyful thing to behold the goodness of the Lord, not
only in that he gives, governs and preserves this life, but much rather in
that he shows him self an enemy to sin and death: and this he does to
save and to deliver us from the danger thereof. For this is it that makes all
other gifts of God more sweet and pleasant. For although we know that we are
the creatures of God, yet notwithstanding, because we are oppressed with
heaviness, fear, death, the gilt of conscience and such other calamities, we
can not enjoy the gifts of God with a free and a chereful heart. This is then
to paynt out God in his own colors, so that this life and Gods creatures may
be sweet unto us, when he is set forth according to this verse, namely that
he will deliver his people from their sins, slay death, destroy hell, and
tread down Satan under his feet. Such a God is the God of those that believe:
that believe I say. For they that believe, although they be weak and feeble
hearted, and vexed of the devil and death, yet they know that God is their
deliverer from all their iniquities. Therefore they are raised up with
comfort and begin to hope, waiting for deliverance promised in the word.

Ye shall therefore apply this verse to this end, A definition of God, and
what he is properly.
that it may be as a definition what is the office of God, and what his will is
properly to do: namely that he will have to do with sinners, that he will
abolish sin and create life, righteousness and all good things. Now, the
mean whereby God works these things, you know is Christ, whom he sent into
this world and laid upon him the punishment of death, that they which believe
on him, might obtain remission of their sins and be made the children of
God. Thus teaches and treats the whole Psalm: not of this external life or
good works, but only of faith and hope toward God through Christ, and of the
final victory over sin and death. For these things are not gotten by the
works and power of man, but by the work and power of God alone: and they are
communicated unto us, because there is mercy with the Lord, and with him is
plentiful redemption. This is the only means and the way whereby this
victory is gotten. The doctrine of works has an other end, and is so to be
taught, that the glory of God and the merit of Christ be nothing thereby
diminished: like as we by the grace of Christ have sincerely and faithfully
every where handled this doctrine. God grant that the same light may shine
also to our posterity. Amen.

The.131. Psalm. Lord mine heart is not hautie, etc.
The argument of the Psalm.
This Psalm treats in a manner of the same matter that the Psalm going before
speaks of, saving that the former Psalm expresses the contrary more
plainly and largely: Whereby he most lively paynteth out an afflicted
conscience, oppressed with the feeling and burden of sin. This Psalm has
been heretofore used of the divines against all manner of pride and presumption,
Pride is a vice common unto all men.
a common vice of all mankind, and from the which there is not one of us free:
neither can it be cured by any other remedy, then either by the grace of God,
or by the wrath of God, that is, when either the godly by afflictions are
corrected with fatherly chastisement, or the wicked are plaged with severe
punishment. By these means presumption the natural vice of all men, is cured:
Otherwise it is not possible but that man should presume, either of his own
wisdom, Wisdom makes men proud.
or of his own power, or of his own righteousness. This pride afterward
brings forth contention. As, for example, we see how many and sundry ways
men are exercised with such matters as perteyne to the ostentation, or to ye
praise and commendation of the wit and wisdom of man. For here one man
thinks better of him self then of an other: one man will be counted wiser
and better learned then an other. What will such wits do (think you) when
they shall afterward come to the handling of Gods matters? Power.
Likewise power bewitcheth men's hearts, that they can make no end of proud
devises and counsels. The same happened to the Phariseis and hypocrites (for
that is proper unto them) when they conceived an opinion of their own holiness
and righteousness. Righteousness.
To be brief, proud and presumptuous men are troublers, not only of them
selves, but also of ye common wealth, of the Church, of households and families,
and of al things else. They that are skilful in histories, do see what great
evils proud and ambitious wits have always raised up. So in the Church,
heretics stirred up with a persuasion of their own wisdom, are troublers of
peace and concord. The same comes to pass also in families and household
matters: A dutch proverb.
whereof rises this proverb among ye Germans: They which attempt that they
can not bring to pass, are worthily plagued. But who are they, I pray you?
Forsooth even ye whole world. For what is he that is contented with his own gift,
and attempteth not somewhiles to do better and more exactly, then he is able to
accomplish? Wherefore ye third evil necessarily follows, y^ like as
presumption breaks quietness and concord, and always as a fruitful mother
breeds strife and dissension: so at the last follows vanity of vanities,
and the attempts of the wicked are all in vain.

This vice reaches and reigns far, Two means to reform the vice of pride
and presumption.
and can not be cured by any other remedy (as I have said) then either by
grace or by wrath. By grace, I mean, when by affliction our hearts are humbled
and we brought to this point, that we can think modestly of our own gift. By
wrath, when God oppreseth ye wicked with punishments and plagues, and takes
them away as he take away Pharao, whose stubbernes and obstinacy could not be
cured, but by destruction in the red sea. So the Beniamites did not cease
from their fury, until they were almost consumed. In like manner Absolon could
never be quiet until he was hanged upon a tree. Arius also and Cerinthus, with
many authors of new sects and errors in these our days, could never rest
until they came to such an end as their acts and enterprises did deserve. Thus
comes it to pass, that when the wicked have once taken their course, like
unto a wild horse, they never rest until they come to a miserable end. The
same ha^^eth also to all those which seek to be justified by works. The
Phariseis never ceased to persecute the Gospel and to trust in their own
righteousness, until Jerusalem, ye kingdom and the priesthood were utterly
destroyed. This is the end of presumption when it is not bridled and repressed
by the word. True it is therefore that this enormitie can not be remedied, but
either by grace or by wrath.

Thus generally, in a manner they understand this Psalm to be written against
pride and presumption. This Psalm speaks of spiritual pride.
But, in my judgment, it may be more aptly applied unto the spiritual pride
of man's own righteousness. For (as before I have said), these three things make
men proud, wisdom, power and righteousness. You may therefore, if you list, make
three kinds of pride according to these three objects. For they are gifts of
God distributed unto men, and have their measure and their mean appointed unto
them. They therefore that are wise, are wise according to their measure, and
can not be more wise. They which are mighty, are mighty according to their
measure, and can not be more mighty. Likewise they which are righteous, are
righteous according to their measure, and can not be more righteous. But pride
makes them desirous to seem more wise, more mighty and more righteous then
they are in deed. Hereupon it follows, that when the matter comes to the
trial, and sin strives with righteousness, exceeding her own gift and
measure, then is righteousness overcome and made desperation, which oftentimes
drives hypocrites to the halter. Pride at the length is confounded.
So it comes often times to pass, that impotency fights against power, and
overcomes: As it happened to the Israelites fighting against the one only
tribe of Benjamin. In like manner foolishnes many times overcomes and
confounds wisdom. And of this strange success what is ye cause? Forsooth
even this, that men do not trust in the Lord, but presume of their own
wisdom, power and righteousness, contrary to the word and will of God. For God
will have us to trust only in his power and mercy. But thus will men have it,
and thus they think, that they are mighty, righteous and wise to this end,
that they should trust in these titles and presume thereof. Wherefore this they
find at length and that justly, that they are most miserable and unhappy. For
why do they not that which they are able, and why enterprise they that which
they are not able to do? Most worthy are they therefore, to be punished and
plagued, according to the Dutch proverb, because they attempt that which they
are not able to accomplish.

Let us therefore abide in humility, and let us think moderatly and modestly
of our own gift. Let us not judge other: let us not oppress other: let us not
be witty and busy in other men's affairs: but let us do that which
pertains to our vocation, and let every one of us so much the more diligently
fight against this vice, by how much we find and feel the same to be fixed and
rooted in our nature and in every one of us: albeit it shows it self in one
more and in an other less, as also the historyes of the Gentiles and heathen
men do declare. For Cicero was more ambitious then Demosthenes, paraduenture
because he lived in a greater kingdom and a mighty Monarchy. Likewise Julius
Caesar was more ambitious then Augustus. So in spiritual matters, Pharao had
an obstinacy joined with pride. To conclude, all the examples both of the holy
Scriptures and also of the Gentiles do show this to be the end and success
of proud and presumptuous persons, that suddenly the wrath of God falling upon
them when they least of all fear it, they are confounded and miserably perish.
But (as I have said) we will leave this general interpretation, and apply this
Psalm to the spiritual pride which consists in the opinion of man's own
righteousness.

Verse. 1. Lord mine heart is not hawtie, neither are mine eyes lofty, neither
have I walked in great matters and hid from me.

In that David thus glories and reioiceth, he does it being taught by his own
experience. As if he said: I have proved what an evil thing it is, to be
hautie and high minded, and to rest securely in the opinion of righteousness.
Wherefore I will no more be now high minded: I will not glory any longer in mine
own righteousness. For the proud Pharisey which braggeth that he is not as
other men be, when his conscience begins once to accuse him, forthwith is
cast down and stricken with terror, and is not able to stand against the least
sin. I speak not of the huge mountains and seas of sins and iniquities,
which in a moment do swallow up and consume the proud and secure. It is good
therefore (says he), O Lord that thou have humbled me, and have schooled me by
afflictions, that I should not be proud, that I should not seem holy in mine
own conceit, that I should not make my self as a Judge and a Censour, The
Iusticiaries judge and condemn rashly.
judging and condemning al men. For that is the property of all Iusticiaries
and such as trust in their own righteousness, holiness and perfection. As the
example of the Pharisey in the Gospel does declare, which is not content to
reckon up his own virtues and good works, but with all he must needs condemn
the poor Publicane.

This is the sin of natural and moral righteousness or of the righteousness
of the law, to condemn others, to presume and to clyme even to the judgment
seat of God, and to pronounce sentence against those whom they think, not to
be so perfect as them selves. He that is a ioly Citizen or alearned lawer
thinks highly of him self, and makes him self as it were a certain idol
unto him self, but others he condemns and in comparison of him self proudly
co^temneth. The husbandman, when he sees any fault in the Magistrate, thinks
as did that servant in the Poet: Oh, why was not I made a King, a Ruler, a
Magistrate? These be but politic matters full of vanities and most fond follyes
and folishnes, and yet there is none of us all which are able therein to bridle
and moderate our selves except the holy Ghost do guide and rule our hearts,
There is no cause why a man should more presume of his own righteousness then
of the art or handycraft which he exercises.
and teach us that this righteousness, whether it be natural or moral, is but
as a work of man's hand, which makes us no whit the better before God. And in
deed there is no man so foolish that will think him self the better
Christian or more acceptable before God, because he is a Tailor, a Carpenter or
a Shoemaker: And yet, although the case be all one, there is no man which does
not presume of this righteousness, whether it be moral or natural, except the
holy Ghost bridle him and bring him into the right way. For it has a goodly
show of holiness, and therefore it puts up the minds of men with pride,
until they be humbled of the Lord, and so learn that there is no help in
this righteousness before the judgment of God.

The most notable personages in adversity are commonly oppressed with anguish
and sorrow.
How often have we seen, that great and notable divines, which lived among men
with a marvelous show of holiness, and with a great presumption of their own
righteousness, at length when death approached, have fallen into desperation, and
fled to most vain and foolish trifles for help and succor, in so much ye not
only yet living they wrapped them selves in a friars coule, but also being dead
were buried in the same. So, I remember, yt a notable man and among lawyers of
name and fame the chiefest, when he was at ye point of death uttered these
words: O si subulcus potius quam iure co^sultus fuissem. Oh (says he) that I
had been a swineheard rather then a lawyer. For he perceived that in that
danger the administration of justice, be it never so exact, helps nothing.
In like case, when Cicero saw him self to be in danger through the power of
Augustus and Antonius his adversaries, he perceived that there was no comfort
nor succor to be found in all his great knowledge and learning: but that all
his learning, and all that great study and knowledge of philosophy vanished
away and auailed him nothing. The same happened likewise to Demosthenes flying
from Antipater.

To conclude, all such examples do teach that to be most true which Solomon
says: Proverb. 17.
He that exalts his house, seeks destruction. But this our Courtiers do
not believe. They clyme and love to be aloft, they seek to rule, and in deed
they rule even as he that drives the cart until it stick fast in the mire,
and can neither go forward nor backward. And this is the cause that kingdoms
and commonweals are, in a manner, nothing else, but ruins and destructions.
Who would think, if he consider the civil government which was under the
first Emperors, that ye Roman Empire, yea and many other commonweals also,
could continue the space of one day? For, as Titus Liuius says, they can
neither abide their faults to be touched, nor remedies to be applied
thereunto, and therefore they fall of their own sway, as an house that is
builded to high.

But the danger is much greater when in Religion men have proud looks and
proud hearts, and walk in such matters as are hidden from them: that is to
say, when they please them selves because of their holiness, and think that
they sit in Gods own lap, and yet know nothing of the free mercy of God in
Christ, and the forgiveness of sins, but walk altogether in their own
works, and say with the Pharisey, Luke. 18.
that they fast twice a week, they give tyth, they are not adulterers,
extorcioners, unjust, although their hearts be full of all manner of filthy
lusts. This presumption continues until they see them selves to be in
danger of death: then all these vain helps, with all their false hopes
vanish away, and these voices of desperation or such like follow: I have lived
wickedly, I have broken my vows, I have not observed my rule, etc. When then
(I say) wast thou made a Monk? was it not because thou should ascend to
righteousness? But by this means thou have descended into hell, because thou
would be exalted. They that rest in the confidence and trust of their own
righteousness, either fall at the length into these tentations, or else they dye
like an ox or a cow.

Verse. 2. When I did humble my soul and cause it to keep silence, then was
I as a child that is wayned from his mother.

Here he shows plainly by his own experience, what danger it is for a man
to trust to his own righteousness. Wherefore let us learn what these words in
the Epistle to the Hebrews: The sin hanging fast on or cleaning fast unto
us, Heb. 12.2.
do importe. And let us not follow the foolish and rash opinion of the common
people, which by a few sermons think them selves to have atteined the
knowledge of the whole Scripture. Thou have peradventure heard all, but thou
have not yet believed al. Thou have not learned those experiences and practices,
which in a Christian are the chiefest, namely of faith, of prayer, and of the
cross, whereof David here treats most effectually and divinely, as the
excellency thereof does require. I caused my soul (says he) to keep silence
and humbled my self. I said unto my soul: be still: glory not, hold thy
peace. When he says: I caused my soul to keep silence, the hebrew word
signifies to confound or bring to nothing: As in Osea it is said: Ose. 4.5.
I will make thy mother, that is to say, the Synagoge, to keep silence. As
much to say, as I will destroy her and make her wast. So in an other Psalm he
says: Be still, that is, provoke not the Lord with your obstinacy and
presumption, but obey and humble your selves. So says he here: When I did not
refrain from presumption and trusting in mine own righteousness and the
righteousness of the law, yea even in God him self, if he be worshipped by
keeping of the law: when I did not desire that God (although after a sort, I
kept the law) would not enter into judgment with his servant: this (I say)
when I did not, then was I in deed even as a child wayned form his mothers
breast.

A similitude of an infant.
The Prophet speaks here of a matter of great importance, and yet this
similitude seems to set forth some light or small matter. For why does he
rather take his similitude of a child, then of a man which is grown to his
full strength? But this is not only a fit, but also a very goodly and a
pleasant similitude. For what greater misery can happen to a child, then to be
wayned and kept from the mothers breast? This seems to the infant a very
death and destruction. So says he here: When I was led away with the spirit
of pride and security, and lost the dugge of Gods heavenly grace, that is to
say, of the remission of sins and of the free mercy of God in Christ, then
was I in deed like unto a child which has lost his mother, without whose
aid and succor he can not live: that is, I was brought to extreme and most
certain danger of death and condemnation.

Wherefore the Prophet leads us here to that necessary distinction between the
law and the Gospel. The doctrine of the law.
For the law is a necessary doctrine to beat down the pride of sin in us,
which rises of yt confidence of our own righteousness. There is also (as
before I have said) a presumption in riches, power and wisdom: but that
presumption may be cured many ways. But this which presumes of our own
righteousness, is incurable except that waining come whereof David here speaks:
by the means whereof our conscience being stirred up through ye terror of ye
law, is forced to examine our life, our manners and conversation. But because we
are constrained to confess, that we have many ways offended against yt law,
it can not be, but that certain desperation must needs follow, except Christ,
as a tender and ^ouing mother, give unto us yt dugge of grace, and reise up our
oppressed and afflicted souls. So Judas was driven to ye halter by ye sight of
his sin. For there is no remedy whereby the seely conscience tormented with
sin, can be healed, but this alone, to believe (as ye former Psalm teaches)
that with the Lord there is mercy and plentiful redemption. This is ye voice of
ye Gospel, The voice and doctrine of the gospel
which must follow ye law: whereunto also there is a way prepared by the law.
For like as our sins must be reproved and accused: so ye terror which this
accusation brings, has need of consolation. Wherefore the true consolation
and the true This propitiation is not for famed or for small sins: but for
true sins and for great, yea and the greatest sins.
propitiation which is set forth in the Gospel, pertains to true sins
which drive a man down to hell, unless they be cured by the mercy of God set
forth unto us in Christ. For mercy pertains not to fained sins, but to
true sins which kill and condemn the soul.

This order therefore is to be observed, that when we glory or presume of our
selves and become secure, then should the law and Moises come with his bright
shining face, which our weakness can not abide, and yet notwithstanding it can
not avoid the same. Now, after that the law and Moises have done their office
in this sort by accusing the conscience and threatening the iudgemence of God
for sin and punishment for the same, then is there place and opportunity for
Christ to come with the dugge of grace, to comfort and refresh the wayned child
crying for suck, and seeking the mothers breast. Wherefore this is an
excellent similitude, which sets forth unto us, first our own weakness,
namely that there is in us no strength at all whereby we may be able to
withstand Satan and to heal our wounded conscience: then also the mercy of
God and power of his word whereby he susteyneth and nourishes us, as a mother
nourishes her child with milk, stilleth it and keeps it from crying. So the
Gospel is both the womb of God in the which we are carried, formed, and
fashioned by the spirit of Christ, and also it is the dugge whereby we are
nourished and fed. Wherefore if we once lose this dugge, we are as children
wayned from the mothers breast.

The difference between the law and the Gospel in use and practice is very hard.
Some think them selves highly learned in these matters, and that they know
them well enough. But take ye heed, and beware of this presumption. Reckon your
selves in the number of scholars and learners. For Satan is so crafty, that he
can easily take away this distinction, and force upon us in steed of the
Gospel the law, and again, in steed of the law the Gospel. For how often
comes it to pass, that poor and miserable consciences in the agony of death
lay hold upon certain sentences of the Gospel, which do in deed pertain unto
the law, and thereby lose the sweet comfort and consolation of the Gospel?
As for example: If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments. Again,
Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.
With such sentences poor and seely consciences are so bruised and broken, that
they can see nothing but what they have done, and what they ought to have done:
Also what God requires, and what he forbids. These things whiles troubled
and afflicted consciences do behold, they forget what so ever Christ has
done, or God by Christ has promised to do for our comfort. Wherefore let no man
presume of the fulness and perfection of his knowledge in these matters. In
words this distinction is easy to be made, but in death and dangers we find
how unable we are to play the good Logicians, when we must dispute of the
things which we have done or ought to have done: when the law obiecteth in
this manner against us: This has God commanded thee to do and thou have not
done it, but have done the contrary: Wherefore thou shall be damned according to
the sentence of the lawmaker. Here he that is a good Logician puts a
difference between the law and the Gospel, and grants, that in deed he has
not kept the law. Notwithstanding (says he) upon this antecedent or former
proposition does not follow this consequence, that I should therefore despair
and be damned. For the Gospel commands me to believe in Christ, and to trust
unto the works, the merits and the righteousness of Christ. He that
understands this, and takes hold on this breast or dugge of the Gospel, is
safe and is sure of the victory: but he that apprehends it not, must needs
perish and despair.

In this doctrine therefore touching our righteousness before God there is great
danger. We must not presume therefore, but walk in fear and humility. For
if presumption in politic and worldly matters, when men are proud of their
riches power or wisdom, is not without danger: in divine matters it is much
more dangerous, yea most dangerous and damnable, and yet notwithstanding there
it reigns most of all. For Satan comes to ye children of God, and labors
with all might and subtlety to bring them to presumption and security.
Wherefore they must fight continually against this hid and lurking poison:
and above all things they must beware that they flatter not them selves as
though they knew well enough the distinction of the law and the Gospel. In
deed thou may know it: but consider well whether thou have sure hold
thereof, so that it cannot be wrested from thee by Satan and thine own
conscience. Paul plainly confesses that he has not yet attained to this
knowledge, Phil. 3.
but follows it as one running in the race and pressing toward the mark.

So it goes with us all. We turn our face unto the mark, and this is the
race we run, that we may attain unto the mark. But that will not be until
this flesh be put of and laid in the earth. Wherefore in the mean season let
us walk in fear and humblenes of heart, with hearty prayer, that the light
which he has opened unto us, he will not suffer to be put out, but that he
will daily lighten our minds and make perfect the work which he has begun
in us. Thus who so do not, shall be overwhelmed and oppressed with
desperation, and shall be like unto children that are wayned and put a part
from their mothers breasts.

Verse. 3. Let Israel wait on the Lord [or trust in the Lord] from henceforth
and for ever.

This verse shows plainly that the Prophet speaks here of that presumption
which is contrary to faith, and is called the presumption of man's own
righteousness. Therefore he exhorts the faithful to trust in the Lord, and
withal to abide in humility. to mortify that trust and confidence which man
has in the law and in his own righteousness. This shall ye do (says he) if
ye trust in the Lord, not only for this day or to morrow, but now and for
ever. So that ye must have a certain continual and a constant presumption
(if I may so say) of the mercy of God, of the forgiveness of sins, and of the
righteousness that comes by Christ. Contrariwise, ye must beware that ye never
presume of your own works: albeit they ought to be holy and according to the
law of God. For this naked, and this only trust ought to remain, which is
called the confidence of the free mercy of God, offered unto us in Christ. This
trust is sure and never deceives us. For God is no liar, but faithfully
performs that he has promised. Do thou therefore but trust, and still
faithfully rest upon his promise, But here we are not without danger of the
devil, which goes about with all his might and power, to bring us from this
assurance and trust of the mercy of God toward us in Christ. Wherefore we
must fight, and with continual battle practice this doctrine against the
devil and spiritual wickedness, which by all means go about, first to lift
us up with pride and presumption, and afterward to throw us down again to
desperation.

But God works a contrary way. For first he terrifieth us and casts us
down, that afterward he may raise us up again. He brings us down to hell,
that he may bring us back again. The dugge of grace also he sometimes takes
from us, that we may learn what our own righteousness is wont to do, namely
to oppress us with desperation. And this he does to the end that we having
experience thereof, should not follow our own sense and reason, but raise up
our selves with a sure hope and trust in Christ, whereby the dead are restored
to life and saved. This mercy is as a strong heaven or firmament over us,
wherewith we being covered, are safe and sure where so ever we be. Esa. 25.4.
So Esaias calls it a shadow against the heat, because we are covered and
defended by the mercy of God, against wrath, desperation, the devil and
death. This shadow who so ever do forsake, shall suffer intolerable heat. Thus
we learn by this verse, that David speaks of that damnable presumption of
our own righteousness, and exhorts us to fight against it with a sure hope of
Gods eternal mercy, and a constant faith. This is the only way whereby we
are saved.

The.132. Psalm. Lord remember David, etc.
This Psalm, The argument of the Psalm.
whether it be Salomons (as it seems) or whether it be David's, it is a prayer
for the kingdom and the Priesthood: for these two are the most principal
gifts of God in this world: Wherefore they have need of prayer and the help
of God, to defend them against the devil, whose double title ye know, which
Christ gives unto him in the Gospel of John when he calls him a liar and a
murderer. For he rests not, but busily labors and seeks by all means
possible, to replenish the world with lies and murders. Against these two
policies and kingdoms of the devil, God has erected two other kingdoms, the
politic state, and the priesthood, the one to fight against murder, and the
other against false doctrine and heresies. So David and all other Kings and
Princes in governing the common wealth, The end of the politic government.
ought to endeavor, that their subjects may live a peaceable and a quiet life,
that marriages, the education of children, and other duties perteining to
howshold government, may be mainteyned and defended against seditious, and
wicked persons. The priesthood is to this end, The end of ye priesthood.
that children growing up, may be brought to the kingdom of heaven: and the
ministers of the Church are as Angels appointed to defend the truth, that the
kingdom of Satan the father of lies, may be destroyed. These be the proper
offices of the ministers of the Church and of the word, which ministers have
been always in the world among the faithful, and have kept continual battle
against heretics and the ministers of Satan. So the Patriarchs before the
flood, fought against the Canaites or offspring of Cain: after the flood against
the Esauites, and others. The Prophets fought against the false prophets, as
their writings do testify, and the Apostles likewise against the false
apostles: for Satan cease not: And besides this, the kingdom of Satan was
always the greater. For if ye consider the church, there were ever more godles
and infidels, then faithful. So in the civil government the greater part
consists of those which are disobedient, which raise up troubles, seditions
and wars.

Wherefore, since the kingdom of Satan (if ye consider the number) is the
greater: and moreover, since both the politic state and the priesthood are
such as far exceed the power of man, and therefore can not be defended and
mainteyned by our strength or policy: hereby we may see how necessary this
prayer is, whereby David desires that they may prosper and continue. And here
first of all mark the difference between David and other Princes of the world.
What ye Gentiles thought as touching the government of Empires and kingdoms.
Other Princes and rulers do also understand and see that commonweals can
not be preserved by man's power. Wherefore they said that he which should well
and happily govern, had need to be endued with some divine and godly power.
And albeit they were ignorant that these things are governed by God, yet they
preferred fortune (for so they called the blessing of God, the cause whereof
they did not know) before wisdom, power, justice and all princely virtues. For
where as just men, for the most part be oppressed, and the unjust do rule and
reign, therefore they thought that justice is not the mean whereby kingdoms
and commonweals are preserved. For then Cicero should not have been
oppressed, nor Antonius advanced to such power and authority. If by power
kingdoms could be preserved, then should not Themistocles have overcome Xerxes.
Likewise many notable Emperors lacked no wisdom nor industry, and yet were
they miserable notwithstanding. These examples and this experience caused the
Gentiles to think that there was a certain divine power in great Monarchs
and Emperors, to rule and govern their earthly power, wisdom and justice,
whereby they did so prosper upon the earth, and this they called fortune.

David knows that kingdoms are preserved by God alone.
But here behold and consider David. He also sees that it is not in his power
to preserve and uphold his kingdom, and yet does he not think, that it is
fortune which supporteth and vpholdeth kingdoms: for he believes that this
perteyneth to God alone. Besides this, he believes (as ye shall hear) that God
for his mercies sake will not reject those that call upon him. But the Gentiles
knew neither of these things. Moreover, the same necessity which moves the
Prince or the Magistrate to pray for the commonwealth, moves him also to pray
for the Priesthood and for the Church of God. So we see that this Psalm is a
prayer for the people of the old Testament, that God would preserve the
kingdom and Priesthood, even for his promises made unto David. It is likewise
profitable for us, and is of us to be applied unto our selves also, for that we
in like manner have our David and our Euphrata, in the which we have found the
Tabernacle or habitation of our God. The signification of the words here used,
as of David, Euphrata, the temple, the priesthood, are changed, but the
things remain.
For the self same things do remain, and there is no more but the
signification of the words to be changed. Now, like as they were in danger
as touching both the kingdom and the priesthood: so is our danger great also
in them both. Wherefore we may well sing with David: Remember, etc.

Here I purpose simply to follow the sense and meaning of the letter, declaring
how this Psalm was used and applied of that people. Afterward it shall be
easy for us to apply the same to our own time and age. Now, like as that was
a double kingdom, that is to say, corporal and spiritual: so is the Psalm
also divided into two parts: For first it prays for the Church, and then for
the politic state or the common wealth.

Verse. 1. Lord remember David, with all his afflictions.

The history of the Kings does declare, that David being persecuted of Saul,
suffered many and great afflictions. But why did Saul thus persecute David?
Because he was anointed of Samuel to be king, whiles Saul was yet living. For
hereof came the deadly persecutions, The Papists do dream that Salomo^ and
the people did pray unto God, yt he would hear them for David's sake, or at the
intercession of David, and thereby would stablish invocation of Saints and
praying to the dead.
the hatred, sclaunders, reproaches and all kinds of calamities which David
suffered. Now, whereas these troubles and afflictions of David were mentioned
in prayer and in the presence of God, either by his son Solomon or by the
people, it was not done, as the Papists think, to the end that David should
pray for them: but they spoke of David in respect of the promises, and put God,
as it were in remembrance of those promises by speaking of David: as Paul also
speaks of Abraham. Wherefore the name of David is not here to be taken
absolutely, as though they spoke of his person only: for (as I said) they
spoke of him as having the promises, and clothed, as it were with the promises
of God: so that here we must rather understand the form then the matter. The
promise I call the form, to teach and set forth the thing more plainly: and
the matter I call David him self, to whom the promises were made.

The name of David includes the promises, and therefore also it includes
mercy.
This is then the sense and meaning of these words: O Lord God, we pray unto
thee for the kingdom, not counting our selves worthy or by any means to have
deserved that we should be heard: but (as Daniel says): We present our
supplications before thee, trusting in thy great and tender mercies, and in
that which thou have promised to David: to wit, that our kingdom shall endure
for ever. Thus he begins his prayer with a remembrance of Gods promises even
at the first entrance. This is a singular example for us, that when we pray, we
should appear in the presence of God as miserable and wretched sinners, not
trusting upon our own merit or worthiness, but clothed, as ye would say, with
his mercies and promises: not as he that bragged: I fast twice in a week:
Luke. 18.12.
but as he which said, Remember Lord thy promises: For the promises of God are
nothing else but mercies and compassions freely offered unto us in Christ.

Thus we see, that he speaks not here of afflictions absolutely, but in
respect of an other thing: for he understands the afflictions which David
suffered for the promises: in the which afflictions he held fast the promises
and suffered them not to be wrested from him. The same promises did God
likewise perform unto David. How he makes mention of David's afflictions.
Like as therefore (says he) O lord, thou did preserve David suffering all
calamities and afflictions for thy words sake and trusting in thy word, so with
like mercy preserve and save us trusting in thy promises, and perform that
thou have begun in us. For all things must be preferred to the promises:
like as Moses also does, which says: Remember Abraham, Isaac, etc. For he does
not call upon Abraham and Isaac, Places of the old Testament which the Papists
allege for the invocation of Saints
as the unlearned Papists dream, but he alleges the promises made unto them
as touching their seed and posterity. Now, how could God be put in mind of
these promises better, then by reciting those persons to whom God had made the
promises? These promises the faithful do set against their sins and against
their unworthiness.

The idolatry of the Papists.
These things must be diligently taught, that we fall not into the absurd and
foolish opinions of the Papists, whose school divinity knows nothing of
the promises of God: but whereas the promises are the chiefest part of the
Scripture, they are utterly ignorant thereof. The other part of the Scripture,
which is the law, they so maime and mangle, that scarsely they set forth the
one half thereof. And hereof it comes that they expound such sentences as
this is, so corruptly and peruersly, as if the Psalm should speak after this
manner: Remember David, how good and how holy a man he was, and for his
merits, for his holiness stablish unto us the kingdom. But this sentence is
plain idolatry: for it looks to the active or working person only: As the
Jews think to obtain their Messiah by their own merits. So the religion of
the Jews, the Turks and the Papists is all one: for they all trust to their
own works and worthiness. But we reject the working person when we come into
the presence of God, and look unto that person which is altogether passive and
clothed with the promises, that is to say, such a David as brings and
distributeth unto us, not his own merits, but the promises given of God, and
by David firmly retained in all afflictions. Such a David the Papists do not
know: and because they know but only the active and the working David,
therefore they make of him nothing else but a plain idol. They know not that
he is holy, as the whole Church is holy: not because it has good works and
merits, but because it has the promise of grace, which is the true bosom and
womb wherein the Church is carried, and all the faithful.

Verse. 2. Who swear unto the Lord, and vowed unto the God of Jacob, saying:

It seems that these words may not unfitly be applied unto Solomon as the
author of the Psalm. For thus he says in effect: Thou have promised unto
David the kingdom. David again promised to build unto thee a temple. This vow
is now performed and accomplished: Do thou also now O Lord, perform thy
promise, and be thou present in this place and with this people. Thus he
offers the temple and the Arc to the Lord in the faith of the promise made
unto David concerning the light which should never be put out, and desires
that this promise may be kept. As touching this vow of David the Scripture
speaks nothing: The vow of David.
but makes mention of that talk and consultation only, which he had with the
Prophet Nathan. 2. Reg. 6. But the author of this Psalm goes about to commend
and set forth the good will of David by the name of a vow, because he had
determined with him self thus to declare his thankfulness and to testify his
faith in the promise of God.

Where the interpreters have translated: the God of Jacob, it is in the
hebrewe: Mighty in Jacob.
the mighty in Jacob. Which name is sometimes attributed unto the Angels, and
sometimes it is also applied to other things wherein is great strength and
fortitude, as to a lion, an ox and such like. But here it is a singular word
of faith, signifying that God is the power and strength of his people: For
only faith ascribes this unto God. Reason and the flesh do attribute more to
riches and such other worldly helps as it sees and knows. But all such
carnal helps are very idols, which deceive men and draw them to perdition.
But this is the strength and fortitude of the people, to have God present with
them. This strength and this power preserved the Jewish people, as a little
handful, in the mids of all their enemies. Moreover, this name is attributed
unto God, to this end, that we should understand that it is he alone which
gives strength and victory. So the Scripture says in an other place: Psalm.
19.
Some trust in chariots and some in horses, but we will remember the name of
the Lord. Likewise Paul says: Ephesians. 6.10.
Be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might. For this power is
eternal and deceives not. All other powers are not only deceitful, but they
are also transitory and continue but a moment.

Verse. 3. I will not enter into the Tabernacle of my house no^ come upon my
pallet or bed,

Verse. 4. Nor suffer mine eyes to sleep nor mine eye lidde to slumber,

Verse. 5. Until I have found out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the
God of Jacob.

This plenty of words is used of ye Hebrews when they would express any great
or earnest desire. Notwithstanding all that is herein contained we may briefty
comprise in these few words: I will not rest until I have found out an
habitation for the Lord. And here we need not to answer that childish
question, how this oath could stand, since that David did not him self build
the temple: And again, if he had builded it, yet he must needs often times
have gone to his bed and slept, before the work could have been finished.
For he speaks here of the good will and earnest desire which David had to
finish this work: and the good will or mind of the workman comprehends
all, as if the work were fully accomplished. Therefore, where as David (as it
appears in the book of the Kings) thought it a dishonor unto the Lord, that
the Arc should remain in a Tabernacle covered with skins, when he him
self did dwell in a house builded with Cedar trees, the manner of speech here
used does declare that great desire he had to take away this dishonor and
reproach from God.

Moreover, ye must here again note, that when he speaks of the Tabernacle of
the mighty in Jacob, The tabernacle of God.
the holy fathers did not simply seek or worship God dwelling in heaven: but
they sought him and worshipped him as he was to be comprehended and found in
one certain place, and, as ye would say, clothed with a certain person. For
God of his own nature is infinite, and therefore can not simply be
comprehended by man's imaginations. David therefore looks unto the word,
whereby God did bind him self unto the Arc, and when he went about to place
the Arc in the temple, he called the temple the tabernacle or habitation of
the God of Jacob. Reason can not see how God, which is infinite and
unsearchable, should be worshipped rather in this place then in any other. But
the spiritual eyes of David, Solomon and other holy men following the word,
did seek and worship God in that place only, where, by his word he had
reueiled, that he would be found. They which offered in that place, were said
to offer before the Lord. They which worshipped there, were said to worship
before ye Lord. So Adam, Abraham, Jacob had their Altars where God did reueile
him self, and with a sign from heaven did testify that he was there present
with them. For seeing that no man can avoid the sin of Idolatry, if God him
self do not show both the place where and the manner how he will be worshipped:
therefore there was a certain place limited unto the faithful, where God had
promised that he would be present with them, would hear them, speak unto
them, etc. We now have no corporal place: but all things are in Christ.
Upon him only must our eyes and hearts be fired. He alone is the God of our
worship: So that we may truly say: Without this man Jesus there is no God. Who
so apprehends him by faith, he it is that has God in deed: but he that
apprehends him not, has no God.

Verse. 6. Lo, we heard of it in Ephrata, and found it in the fields of the
forest.

That is to say, the vow of David is now accomplished: For now God is said
to dwell in this temple builded by Solomon, which is such a one, as shall not
be carried into other places as it was before. Sometimes it was in Gilgal,
sometimes in Silo, and at the last in Gabaa. And where so ever the Arc was,
there was God also: for the promise followed the Arc where so ever it was.
Now (says he) the place where the temple is builded and the Arc shall rest,
is stable and permanent: which if it be not verified of this place, it shall be
verified of no place in the whole world.

But what means it when he says in Ephrata? For we do not any where read,
that the house of the Lord was in Ephrata, that is, in Bethleem. Although
therefore this figure and manner of speech seems to be somewhat hard, yet
certain it is, that by Ephrata is understand the kingdom of Judah, Ephrata
signifies the kingdom of Judah.
whereof David being an Ephratite, was King and gouerner: So that it is all one
to say, in Ephrata and in Jerusalem, to the which David the Ephratite did
translate the seat and throne of the King. Of the King therefore, which was an
Ephratite, by a figure called Metonomia, Jerusalem is called Ephrata. Which
manner of speech we likewise in the Dutch tongue do oftentimes use. As if I
should say: Saxony did boldly and freely confess Christ at August before the
Emperor and the whole empire. Here by Saxony is signified the noble Prince
and worthy of perpetual memory in all Churches, John the Elector of Saxony,
who was by birth a Saxon. This figure the Prophet uses in this place, to the
end we should understand that the temple is exalted and magnified, not because
of Solomon which builded the temple, nor because of the people which resorted
thither, but because of David having the promise, and to whom the promise was
made. For, (as I said before) the promise is that which principally must be
considered in all things. This pomise alone therefore it is, which here he
beholds, signifying that the temple is given for the promise sake, and not in
respect of merits or deserts.

Where he adds: The fields of the forest.
In the fields of the forest, this is a repetition of that he said before. For
the fields of the forest he calls Jerusalem, as the Prophets oftentimes call
it Libanus, because it is builded of the Ceders of Libanus: as though the trees
and timber of all Libanus were translated to Jerusalem. The former appellation
therefore, where he calls Jerusalem Ephrata, is taken of the person of David,
and this is taken of the matter whereof the temple was builded. Now, these
kinds of speech serve to this end that we should know what an inestimable
gift it is to have a place where the word of God may be taught. For there the
church, that is to say, the kingdom of God is preserved and maintained. Such a
place (says he) have we here, where by the promise of God the temple is
builded. For here we hear the word, here God speaks unto us, here we pray,
and here we do all things which pertain to the service and worship of God,
here the devil, with all his assaults, his subtilties, his furies and his lies
wherewith he goes about to trouble and vex the Church, and to hinder the
glory of God, are overcome.

Verse. 7. We will enter into his tabernacle and worship before his footestoole.

These words do plainly show that he speaks of Jerusalem: For he makes
rehearsal of those things which came to pass after David's time when the vow
was fulfilled which he had vowed. This is therefore a voice of gratulation,
containing also an exhortation. As if he should say: Since we have a place for
the word of God appointed and as^ured unto us by God him self, why do we stay?
why do we not go thither to hear the word, to pray, to give thanks, to set
forth the mercy and goodness of the Lord? For these are in a manner the things
which we must do in the house of God and in the temple, To worship*
To worship, signifies a kind of gesture or motion of y^ body which we are
wont to use when we pray, as to bow our selves, to turn our face, and to lift
up our eyes unto the Lord.

Before his footestoole, is as much to say, as before ye mercise at or the
Arc, where God promised that he would dwell. Now, wheresoever the word is,
there is also the footestoole, the habitation, the resting place, and the altar
of God. Like as by the word the Prophets do signify that God is present: as
contrariwise where the word is not, there God is not present, and so are we as
sheep in the desert without a shepeheard.

Verse. 8. Arise O Lord, to come into thy rest, thou and the arc of thy
strength.

Here again he calls the place appointed for the word, the rest, the
tabernacle, the habitation of the Lord, according to that saying of our Savior
Christ: We will come unto him and will dwell with him. John. 14.
And this is a prayer following upon the former verses. As if he said: the
temple is builded, and now we place the Arc therein. Arise therefore O Lord,
and come to thy rest, that thou may dwell with us. For this is thy rest,
which will be worshipped in a certain place and after a certain manner,
Wherefore diverse kinds of worship and diversity of opinions after the
inventions of men, do not please thee. Thou art in deed the God of heaven,
and heaven is thy throne: but yet thou will be worshipped of us. Thou would
have us to know that thou dwell in this place, and that we should seek
thee here and not elsewhere.

It seems an absurd and a foolish thing in the hearts of the worldly wise,
to bind God to this place, and to enclose him in this dark Sanctuary, as
though he would be worshipped no where else. So the Gentiles round about, to
whom the religion of the Jews was known, were maruelously offended that the
infinite and incomprehensible nature of God should thus be shut up in a
corner. But God does not only contemn, but also condemn the imaginations of
men, and commands us to think no otherwise of God, then he prescribes unto
us in his word. Wheresoever (says he) I shall put a memorial of my name,
there will I be. As if he said: I know that this place is to little to receive
or to hold me, whom heaven can not hold. Yea in respect of my Majesty and
person, I need no place: Why God did choose a certain place where he would be
worshipped.
But thou for thy salvation have need that such a place there should be, where
thou may serve me, find me, hear my word, receive my blessing, etc. This (I
say) thy necessity requires, lest that, if I should not appoint such a place
unto thee, the devil should deceive thee, and when thou think thy self to
serve and worship me, thou should serve and worship Satan him self. This
danger moves me to limit a certain place wherein may remain a memorial of
my name.

The Arc was but a corporal thing, The Arc was the habitation of God.
like as our temples have a matter, as timber and stone, whereof they are
builded. But because God by his word had bound his presence to this corporal
place, therefore it was now the true habitation of God. So we know that the
word is incarnate and become flesh. The body of Christ therefore or the flesh
of Christ is a true body and true flesh, and his humanity is a true humanity.
But in this flesh, in this body and in this humanity God is set forth unto us
as in a certain myrrour or a glass. In this flesh God so appears unto us,
that out of this flesh he neither will be worshipped, nor can be known. We
therefore do also worship before that Arc which is now, before our
Mercieseate, even the man Christ: and we believe that they which serve and
honor God out of this Mercieseate, do sin and are idolaters, as they which
at that time sought God and would worship him any where else then in the
temple, did sin and were Idolaters.

Wherefore the faithful, even when they were not at Jerusalem, in prayer
turned their faces toward Jerusalem: Like as now the Church, though it be
dispersed throughout the world, accords in this notwithstanding, that it
prays in the name of Jesus, upon whose passion and merits it wholly rests,
and so by faith in Christ it is but one Church. Wherefore we must diligently
mark those sentences of the Scripture which, after this manner bind God to one
certain place: for they arm us against all manner of Idolatry, and teach us
to judge all kinds of doctrine: Like as the Jews could judge this doctrine to
be true, that all manner of worship which was not done in that place of the
Tabernacle, was Idolatry: So the Patriarchs were able to judge of the Altars
which they made in those places where God appeared unto them. For there might
not be one temple erected against an other, nor one altar against an other: but
there was one temple, one Arc, one altar and no more. Like as we have one
Christ in whom God dwells and in whom he is found.

Therefore by an excellent name and title he calls it the Arc The Arc of
strength.
of strength, that is to say, of the kingdom. Likewise he says: Psalm. 110. The
Lord shall send the scepter or rod of thy power out of Sion. This power
stands chiefly in preaching the word. Read that which follows in the same
Psalm.
Also, Psalm. 8. Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings have thou ordained
strength. So is that called the Arc of strength, where God mightily reigns,
where he helps and defends his people, where he exercises his power for
their succor and safety, in hearing them, in forgiving their sins, in
comforting them against Satan, death, and hell it self. This divine power
(says he) is bound to this Arc, and therefore it is truly called the Arc of
strength. This strength and this power was also bound to the Altars of the
fathers: but now it is bound to the man borne of the virgin Marie. To this man
who so ever comes, shall feel a divine power. Christ our propitiatory and
mercieseate.
If he dye, he shall find life: If his conscience be oppressed with sin, he
shall find remission of sins: If he be tormented of Satan, he shall find
peace: If he be vexed of the world, he shall find security and victory. For
Christ, whose kingdom it is, does not therefore reign, that he may enrich us
with worldly goods, lands and possessions (for these are promised unto us in
the first of Genesis): but that he may set forth his divine power and rich
mercy, and set us free from those calamities, out of the which we are not able
to redeem our selves: Like as he delivered the faithful in those days from
all dangers. For the Arc was unto them as an heaven, where they found
deliverance from all miseries: as the people was the kingdom, and the faithful
were the ^tarres of heaven. Daniel. 8.10.
Therefore Daniel says of Antiochus, that he should cast down stars to the
ground. For whereso ever the word of God is, there is the kingdom of God, of
heaven, of life, of victory over death, sin and all miseries. Thus ought the
word which of the world is contemned and despised, to be exalted and magnified.

Verse. 9. Let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness, and lee thy Saints
rejoice.

This petition is the same which we use in our preachings, when we desire that
the Lord would give unto us godly and faithful ministers of the word, and
suffer no evil teachers to have place among us. For God in his kingdom is
like unto an Emperor. Wherefore as the noble men and chief Magistrates are
Ministers unto the Emperor and are the principal part of his kingdom: so in
the kingdom of Christ are the Angels of peace or the ministers of the Gospel.
They therefore which pray for the kingdom of God must needs pray that the Lord
would give faithful Pastors and Ministers, as he him self commands
saying: The harvest is great: Matthew. 9.
Pray the Lord of the harvest that he would send forth laborers into his
harvest. The labor and travel of these workmen is, to communicate doctrine,
consolation, threatenings, etc. and to minister the Sacraments. That these
things may be rightly done, The righteousness of the person is never without
corruption.
the laborers must needs be clothed with righteousness, and not only with
that righteousness which belongs to every man, and is not without corruption:
but specially with that righteousness which belongs to the ministry and to
the word, which is pure and without all corruption. This is that righteousness
whereby the kingdom of Christ is governed, that is to say, the word and the
Sacraments.

Moreover the Pastors and Ministers of the word are then clothed with
righteousness, The righteousness of the ministry is vncorrupt.
when they execute a righteous office: that is, when they teach the word
sincerely, as Peter says: If any man speak, 1. Pet. 4.
let him speak as the words of God. Also, when they minister the Sacraments
purely and without corruption: so that whatsoever they do or speak, be either
the word or the work of God. So he that baptiseth does no work of his own:
but he baptiseth in the power of God. Likewise he that comfort the afflicted
conscience, does it not of him self, but by the direction of the word and
will of God. Wherefore he also that hears this word, must not take it as the
word of a man, but as a voy^s sounding from heaven. So the ministry is
righteous which is truly executed in the power of God: and this is true
righteousness.

Contrariwise, they which teach men to trust to their own merits, works and
worthiness, and prescribe a certain form of apparel, of eating, of fasting
and such like (wherein all the righteousness of the Papists and the Turks does
consist): such Priests (I say) are clothed with iniquity. The Ministers of the
Pope are clothed with iniquity.
For they have lost the chief ornament and the true apparel of their
ministry, because they do not teach rightly nor govern truly, but seduce
men rather with a false show of their government and ministry, and that by the
malice and motion of Satan, which hates this heavenly ministry and peruerteth
the ministers.

The fruits of the ministry.
The sum and effect therefore of this prayer is, that they which attend upon
the Arc of strength may govern righteously: that religion may continue and
flourish: that the word may be effectual and bring forth fruit: that terrified
and afflicted consciences may be raised up and comforted: that secure, profane
and presumptuous persons may be beaten down with threatenings and the terror
of Gods wrath: that the weak may be strengthened: that the simple and ignorant
may be instructed: Which things by the grace of Christ are diligently and
faithfully done in our Church.

God requires not a heavy, but a cherefull heart.
And let thy Saints rejoice. Here we see that God is not delited with the
heaviness, unquietness and vexation of conscience, which sin and the fear
which naturally follows sin, is wont to bring: but with a chereful heart.
Seeing therefore that there be two kingdoms, namely the kingdom of death and
the kingdom of life, or the kingdom of hell and of heaven, he desires here
that the faithful may be kept in the kingdom of life, and enjoy the peace and
comfort of conscience, which the righteous ministry of the Pastors and
Preachers of the word brings. With this prayer agrees that prayer of the
Apostles wherewith they begin their Epistles: Grace be with you, Grace.
and peace from God the father, etc. Grace is the remission of sins. After
this grace follows peace or a good conscience, Peace.
which here he calls a rejoicing. Let thy Saints rejoice (says he): that
is, let thy people, together with the Pastors and Ministers, hearing the word
of the righteous ministry, be joyful and triumph in that word. He calls
them Saints or holy because of the use of the word and the ministry which
are holy. Saints.
So the Jews are called holy, because (as before I have said) there were
emonges that people which had the arc and the word of God, which were holy
things in deed, and did sanctify and make men holy. So our Church is called
holy, The Church is holy.
not only for the holiness of the persons, but rather for ye holiness which the
word and Sacraments do bring unto those which use them rightly. To those he
wishes joy and gladness, and that they may rejoice and be merry in the Lord.

The meaning then of this clause is this, that Christ Jesus our King has given
unto us his word, has commanded us to be baptized, to use the Sacrament of
his body and blood, not be cause he would destroy us, The kingdom of Christ is
a kingdom of peace and joy.
oppress us with sorrow, and drive us to desperation: but to this end, that
we should rejoice and be merry, having peace and a good conscience by his free
grace and mercy. The kingdom of Christ therefore is the kingdom of joy and
delyuerance (as an other Psalm says) in the tabernacles of the righteous:
Psalm. 117.15.
that is, in the Church and among the faithful it is the voice of rejoicing:
For they know that Christ their King would that they should have comfort, life
and victory against death and Satan. This is then the rejoicing and triumph of
Christians, or (as here he calls them) of the Saints. Why then should a
Christian be heavy or sorrowful, since that he is called into the kingdom of
Christ and of grace, baptized and nourished with the body and blood of Christ,
and daily raised up by the word, against desperation and all terrors? If I
then do yet remain in bitterness and heaviness of spirit, the fault is not in
this kingdom, nor in the word or Sacraments, but in me and in the devil,
because I do not with a true faith lay hold upon the word and thoroughly believe
it. For why should I fear, if I did verily believe that I am baptized, called,
made pertaker of the body and blood of Christ, and so received into the kingdom
of life, Phil. 3.12.
comprehended of grace (as Paul speaks) and shut under the mercy of God?
These are nothing else therefore but the subtle sleightes and deceits of
Satan, which will not suffer us to see our inestimable riches and glory, but
counterfetteth tentations and crosses where no cross is, but health and
victory.

Wherefore it was well said of that Christian virgin, who being tempted of
Satan, answered that she was a Christian, and so rested wholly in that man
Christ. How poor afflicted consciences must be comforted against Satan and all
terrors.
For we may not reason much with Satan. If he object unto thee thy sins, it
shall suffice if thou object unto him again thy baptism, which he can not
deny: Also if thou lay against him the word, whereby thou wast called into ye
kingdom of grace: which, for as much as it is the word of God, how can it
deceive thee? Thus in a Christian heaviness can take no place, if in his heart he
do acknowledge baptism, the word, the communion of the body and blood of
Christ, the grace, the favor, and the mercy of God. How can he then but
rejoice and be glad? But because we often times suffer the word and these
gifts of God to be taken from us, and turn our eyes an other way, it can not
be, but that heaviness and terror must needs follow. And this comes to pass
by the fault, partly of our selves (as I have said) and partly of Satan, who
leads us from the word before we be ware, and makes us to think of our own
worthynes or unworthiness, of our good or evil deserts: also of the terror of
death, of the torments of hell, etc. When we think of these things, if we lay
not hold upon Christ, we perish and are swallowed up with anguish and sorrow:
for this is to lose the Arc of the covenant. They therefore which in these
dangers take hold again of the word, are safe, and are now able to say with
David: Why art thou cast down, Psalm. 42.6.
O my soul, and why art thou unquiet within me? For I am now in the kingdom
of Christ, that is, in the kingdom of peace, of joy and eternal rejoicing,
saving that it is hindered by the devil and by our own flesh, which is more
ready to behold her own sins and unworthiness, then baptism, the word and
the sweet promises of God. And this is the wisdom, yea the poison which is
hid in our flesh, that we are more moved with our own uncleanness, then with
the pureness of the word and the Sacraments. They then which rest in the word,
are in a sure haven of safegarde from all these tempests and terrors. We must
pray therefore that God would give us good Pastors, faithful, wise and godly
disposers of the word of God. For by their means and ministry the Church
does enjoy this inestimable benefit and blessing, whereby it triumphs over
death, sin and the devil. For it knows that it is now in the kingdom of
grace. This is true and perfect peace, namely the peace of the heart and
conscience. Thus the Prophet desires (as an inestimable gift) that the
pastors and Ministers of the word may be clothed with righteousness, and then
that the people also may rejoice. This is the first part of this Psalm. Now
follows the second part.

Verse. 10. For thy servant David's sake, refuse not the face of thine
anointed.

This is a new prayer, which he makes in the trust and confidence which he
has in the promises. For here (as also before) the name of David does not
properly ssgnifie the substance, but ^he quality of David, that is to say,
David clothed and adorned with the promises of the kingdom. He makes mention
here of David because of the promises which were made unto David.
As if he said: O lord, I beseech thee, preserve and bless our kingdom: be
thou present with us: be thou our shield and our defense. And this I do
desire, not for mine own cause only, as though there were any worthiness in me
wherefore thou should grant me this petition: but I desire it in the trust
of thy promises which thou made unto my father David, when thou saydest that
thou would give a light unto the house of David, etc. And here have we both
an example and doctrine set before us, that we also, when we pray unto god,
should look specially unto the promises, as we have said sometimes heretofore.

Moreover this place admonishes us of the difference which is between the
spiritual and the corporal promises. The promises are of two sorts, legal
or conditional, and spiritual.
For the corporal promises have a condition as touching our works, joined unto
them. So ye corporal kingdom was promised to David with this condition: If his
posterity should continue in the word and the will of the Lord, as in Moses it
does appear. But the spiritual promises are grounded upon no condition of
men's works, but upon the only mercy and truth of the Lord. Therefore,
although the people of Israel were deprived of the kingdom and driven out of
their land, yet notwithstanding the promise as touching the seed of Abraham,
was not taken from them. 2. King. 7.15.
For thus says the text: Although I cast them out and viset them with
scourges, yet my mercy I will not take from the^. Esaias. 10.23.
Likewise Esaias says: God shall make the consumption which he has determined
in the whole land. That is to say, God shall consume and destroy the people
for their sins, and yet for his own mercies sake he will preserve a remnant,
out of the which shall rise a new people and a new church. So the promise in
this place made unto ye house of David, is co^ditionall, as ye end declares
in that the whole kingdom is destroyed, Notwithstanding this is also true which
ye Angel says, he shall sit upon the throne of David for ever. The error of
the Jews in that they see not the promises as touching their corporal kingdom
to be conditional.
This contradiction can never be reconciled unless we make such a difference
of the promises of God. And hereof rises all the error of the Jews that they
know not this difference. They see great and ample promises concerning their
land and their kingdom: but they see not that they are conditional. And
again: all those things which are promised as concerning the spiritual
kingdom, they apply to the corporal kingdom. Hereof it comes that they
glory so much and conceive so great hope that their kingdom shall be restored.
But it is an easy matter to judge how foolishly they are deceived. But we will
return unto the Psalm.

The cause why he makes mention of David, we have declared to be the promises
made unto David, for the which he desires of God that he will not turn away
the face of his anointed, that is to say, of the King, which was anointed by
the word and commandment of God. The face of the anointed, what it is.
Now, the face of the anointed he calls the presence of the King, or the
kingdom given and ordained of God. As if he said: Preserve O Lord, thy people:
mainteyne the justice, the judgments, the equity, the whole politic
government of this kingdom, that all things may be done in due order: so that
public peace be not troubled by sedition and civil discord, that discipline
be not defaced and deformed by adulteries and other offenses. For these things
and such like do perteyne to this kingdom. For to enjoy a kingdom, is not to
enjoy a crown or a scepter, but a godly ordered common wealth, in the which
innocence may safely dwell, and contrariwise sin and wickedness may be
severely punished. All these things he prays for when he desires that the
face of the anointed may not be taken away.

Now, the cause why he desires these things is, for that this people had the
word and the Church of God emonges them, which can not prosper and flourish,
where all is full of murder, adultery, war and contempt of laws. So Paul
likewise exhhorteth us to pray for Kings and Princes, that we may lead a
peaceable and a quiet life. To this prayer do we also exhort those over whom
we have charge. Why then do the wicked accuse us as troublers of the public
peace* I am verily persuaded that if peace and quietness be mainteyned by any
means, it is specially by the prayers of our Churches. For how should the
adversaries pray? what should God give unto his enemies and the persecutors of
his word? which are in deed utterly ignorant what true prayer is, or how they
ought to pray.

Verse. 11. The Lord has sworn in truth unto David, and he will not shrink
from it, saying: Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne.

We are entered (as I have said) into the second part of the Psalm, Policy
serves the Church, and the Church preserves policy.
in the which he prays for the politic or corporal kingdom. For these
two kingdoms, namely the politic and the spiritual kingdom, although they be
far unlike, yet are they so joined together, that the one can not stand
without the other. For where politic peace is lacking, there can no piety or
godlynes be maintained without great dangers. Again, where the word of God
is not, there can be no end of errors, blasphemies and other impieties.
Prayer therefore for politic peace and the common wealth, is necessary. Now,
when the word is joined withal, the greater cause we have to give thanks unto
God. And this prayer (as I have said) is also grounded upon ye promise of God.
For in prayer we must ask nothing, but that we are certainly persuaded we may
or ought to pray for, or may be obtained. Now, that we may be certain how to
pray and what to ask, there is not only a commandment as touching prayer
set forth unto us, but also a certain form of prayer, and the very words
whereby we are taught how to pray and what we should pray for: and moreover
certain causes expressed, for the which we may be assured that our prayer
pleases God: As when we pray for the sanctifying of the name of God, the
coming of his kingdom, etc. And here is also to be noted, that this promise
is confirmed with an oath, that it might be the more sure and certain.

This promise as touching the temporal kingdom, The wicked presume of the
promises of God, and cruelly persecute the true church.
as it is great, so was it an occasion to many holy Prophets, of great
affliction and cruel death. For as the promises of God in their right use do
raise up and comfort afflicted and godly minds: so by occasion thereof secure
and profane spirits ware proud and presumptuous, and through the confidence
they have in these promises, they afterward persecute the godly: as we may see
by manifest examples in the Prophets: who, because they reproved the idolatries
of the Kings and condemned their false and damnable worshippings, threatening
the destruction of the kingdom and of the people, unless they would forsake
their abominations and turn unto the Lord, were tormented and put to death as
heretics, for that they seemed to speak against this and other promises. The
argument which the wicked used against the Prophets
And in deed this seemed to be an invincible argument which they used against
the Prophets: If God (said they) have promised that the sons of David should
sit upon the throne of David for ever, it is impossible that the King should
commit any such offense, for the which the kingdom should be destroyed.

How ye Pope has abused the promises of God.
The kingdom of the Pope has not so goodly and so glorious a pretense, and yet
does he also abuse the promises of Christ in like manner, to establish his
tyranny, his idolatries and abominations. How does he brag of this promise of
Christ when he faith: I will be with you unto the end of the world? As though
this pertained to the establishing of the Popes tyranny. So that sweet
consolation: The gates of hell shall not prevail, etc. afterward became
bloody and cruel, and was an occasion of death and destruction of many
Saints, for that the Pope did apply it unto him self, and abused it for the
stablishing of his tyrannical kingdom. For this was the only argument whereby
they proved that the Pope being the head of the Church, could not err. Thus
the wicked do abuse the promises (which God has set forth to raise up the
afflicted minds and consciences of his people) against the true Church. This
was ye cause why Amazia the Priest could not abide Amos the Prophet. Amos. 7.
In the mids of thy house (says he) Amos has conspired against thee. The
earth could not bear his talk. For thus he says: Jeroboam shall dye by the
sword, and Israel shall be led away captive out of their own land. As
though this had been a thing impossible, and that the King might commit
wickedness and do what he list without ehecke or punishment. Notwithstanding
the end afterward declared that this was a vain confidence, and that the
prophet had said truly.

The godly can not so raise up and comfort the^ selves with the promises, as
the wicked do.
Thus the wicked do abuse the promises of God, applying the same unto them
selves, whereas they belong to the true Church only, and so they become
presumptuous and careless. They think not of their sins or of the judgment of
God: but boldly and without all fear do persecute the Saints of God, as we
see at this day in the papacy. So the true church is oppressed of tyrannes,
oppugned of false brethren, suffers the contempt and hatred of the world, and
in outward apperance is every hour ready to perish. Here it is necessary that
the godly should raise up them selves with a trust in the mercies and promises
of God: for to this end the promises are set forth. But they which should
believe and comfort them selves with these promises, do it not: For the
infirmity of the flesh will not suffer them: which Satan also increases in
setting before their eyes their great dangers and terrors. Contrariwise the
Church of the wicked, which for their sins ought to fear and tremble,
presumes, hops, lives in great fecuritie and without all fear. So the Pope
holds fast that promise with y^ which our Savior Christ comfort his
Disciples when he says: Matthew. 28.20
I will be with you always unto the end of the world, persuading him self that
Peter's voate, though it may be in danger, shall never be drowned. But ye true
church, to yt which only these things are spoken, does not so believe them,
nor raise up it self with a trust and confidence in these promises as it
should do. Thus in all times and ages the condition of the true Church has
been always one. The godly in perils and affl^ctions rest upon hope, when the
wicked do despair.
Now, like as ye wicked live in great hope, and comfort them selves maruelously
so long as they are in prosperity: so when they are touched with adversity,
they most miserably despair. But the godly continue and constantly endure in
hope and comfort in all troubles and calamities.

So this promise as touching the kingdom of Christ, was hindered many and sundry
ways by rebellious people, by enemies and wicked Kings, until at the last the
city and the temple were destroyed, the people carried away captive, and none
left but plowmen and such as were of the basest sort. Now the word, the
worship and service of God, the accustomed judgments, and briefly the Church,
the policy, and the kingdom were gone. Here what hope was left, that there
should remain any posterity unto David, as this Psalm here promises? This
promise therefore was necessary, that thereby the godly might be able to
comfort them selves, that it was impossible for this kingdom to fall, before
Christ the true seed of David should be reueiled. Wherefore, when all things
seemed to be most desperate, God raised up certain notable Prophets. He set
up Daniel also emonges great and mighty Princes. Moreover, the time was
appointed by the Prophet Jeremy, Iere. 29.
namely 70. years, after the which they should return into their land. The
remnant of the royal stock, that is to say, of David was preserved even in
captivity. Thus, although the kingdom seemed in outward show to be utterly
forsaken, yet was it not forsaken, and the godly constantly continued in hope
of deliverance, when the wicked despayred and miserably perished.

In like manner do we believe and comfort our selves at this day that Christ
will defend and mainteyne his kingdom and his Church even to the end of the
world, The promises are set forth for the comfort of ye godly, that in their
afflictions they should not despair.
though ye Romish Antichrist triumph never so much, sitting in the temple of
God, and exercising his tyranny as though he would utterly oppress ye Church.
For these promises God left with his Church, that in such necessity and
dangers it should not be without comfort. Which promises, albeit the Church
can not fully and perfectly believe, yet does it not deny or reject the same.
And Christ accepts and commends our faith, although it be no more then a
grain of mustard feed. This to know and this to teach, it is necessary. For
the time will come (if we be not prevented by the later day) when Satan by his
ministers, with might and maine will attempt all ye means he can to quench the
doctrine of the Gospel. Here, although we also shall see the kingdom brought
into captivity, and the Arc carried clean away, as the Jews did, yet must we
trust that God will give us Prophets, and that his Church (although it seem to
be utterly forsaken) he will never for forsake. For ye word of God, whose
promise we have, ought to move us more then the present danger, seem it never
so terrible. For if God, through much patience did preserve his Church under
the Papacy: if he suffered many abuses, which blind guides and wicked teachers
brought into the Church, if at the length, when all things were desperate and
past all hope, he caused the light of his word to shine in the mids of most
horrible darkness: why should we despair? The mercy of God is greater then
heaven and earth, and is able to swallow up all errors, into the which the very
elect, by false prophets, blind teachers and the iniquity of time are often
times led.

There is no man which would not wish for peace and quietness in the common
wealth, and in the people obedience and godliness. So is it to be wished that in
the Church there might be unity and concord, The Church is never with out
dangers and afflictions, and therefore it has need of the promises.
and that there might be no offense either in doctrine or life, that Princes
and Magistrates would not hate or persecute, but like, love and embrace the
word. Notwithstanding such a common wealth and such a Church may well be
painted out of a cunning artificer, but in this world they could never yet be
found. Wherefore let us not look to see the face either of such a quiet
common wealth, or of so pure a Church. But herewith let us content our selves,
that the Church and common wealth, although they are not without great troubles
and dangers, do not utterly perish: that there is some majesty in the common
wealth, and in the Church pure and sound doctrine: and that there are some
which magnify the word, use prayer, and frequent the Sacraments, although the
greater part do the contrary. And to this end do perteine these
consolations, that whiles all things seem to fall to wrack and ruin, we cast
not away all hope and utterly despair.

When I behold the miserable face of the Church at this day, The state of the
Church at this day, what it is.
in that the Pastors and Preachers of the word are so neglected, yea so
contemned and despised, thus I often think with my self, that the whole
ministry, although there were no tyrannes to oppress it, must needs fall
even of it self. But we must more regard the promise of God, then all outward
shows, seem they unto us never so likely. For behold and consider the
histories of all ages, and you shall see that the Church has been always
oppressed and hidden through the tyranny of Princes, and through the lies and
sclaunders of heretics. Moreover, ye godly have never been without their
tentations through the consideration of their sins and vexations of the
devil. These things he that beholds, and still fixes his eyes upon these
evils, shall think that there is no church nor yet any God at all. But of such
shows and outward appearances we must ground no judgment. For such a face ye
church ye shall never see, in the which great offenses, infirmities, and, as it
were great diseases are not to be found. In deed it were to be wished that
these things were not in the Church, and that there were such a face and
outward show of the Church, as is described here and in other places, where it
is compared to a bewtifull spouse, in whom appears neither spot nor wrincle.
But such a Church outwardly ye shall never see. For it is always oppressed of
Tyrannes, vexed of heretics, exercised with afflictions both inwardly and
outwardly, with disobedience, contempt, falsehood, dissimulation of false
brethren, etc. In all these dangers we must hold fast this consolation, that
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, and go on forward with a
valiant mind and Christian courage in teaching, in exhorting, in reproving, and
in other duties perteyning to the ministry. If any be disobedient, perverse
and obstinate, let them go, let them perish in their own sins, and let this
suffice, Luke. 2.
that there are some unto whom Christ and the ministry of the Gospel is
appointed for their rising again and their salvation.

Thus did the holy Prophets which saw the captivity of Babylon to be even at
hand, and that the temple and the city should be consumed with fire. A
consolation for the Church of Israel in the time of her captivity.
This was then the face of the kingdom which should afterward be destroyed
for ever. There was nothing now therefore wherewith they might comfort them
selves, but this and such like promises made unto David, that of yt fruit of
his body God would set up the royal throne, and that even with an oath he had
confirmed the same. And this is in deed a singular promise, in that he names
and points out a certain person, and suffers not ye succession to wander
in an uncertain person. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob had also a promise concerning
Christ, but under an uncertain person if ye respect the multitude of their
posterity. But in this promise is a certain limitation, because there is one
certain person named, to the end, that although the people should be all leede
away captive, yet so long as the posterity of David did continue, they should
comfort them selves with this hope, that the kingdom should never fail.

This I think to be the cause why the genealogies, that is, the line of the
kinredes and progenies of this people were so diligently observed and noted of
the godly, that through this hope of the promise to be accomplished, the
succession of the house of David might be sure and certain. For this family
was as a certain star emonges the people, of whose posterity so long as
they saw any remnant, they continued in hope of their deliverance by Christ,
yea even in the captivity of Babylon, although it were most horrible. For even
in this captivity, although they were without a kingdom, yet had they emonges
them certain persons of the royal stock, as it were certain sparkles of the
kingdom and of the light of David, unto whom the eyes of ye godly did always
look, as unto a pledge of ye promise afterward to be accomplished as touching
Christ. Moreover in this captivity they had the word and the Prophets, Daniel,
Jeremy, Ezechiel, and (no doubt) many other. Now, so long as such persons as
were appointed to ye kingdom and the priesthood were yet remaining, the
kingdom was not clean forsaken or destroyed. Thirdly the number of the years
was also limited, which being expired, their captivity should have an end.
But the Jews at this day have none of all these things. They have no
kingdom, no persons appointed to the kingdom, no certain number of years,
neither yet the word or the Prophets. Therefore they are condemned with all
their religion. And this calamity in the which the Jews have lived ever since
Jerusalem was destroyed by the Romans, is no captivity, but a general
destruction and desolation of that people for ever as Daniel also says: And
after this shall be the end.

Verse. 12. If thy sons keep my covenant and my testimonies that I shall
teach them, their sons also shall sit upon thy throne for ever.

This promise is not general, Because the promise was conditional, therefore
the corporal kingdom had an end.
for it has a condition annexed unto it. There is a difference therefore
between this promise and such as be without condition, as are these: The Lord
said unto my Lord, etc. Again Give thy judgments unto the King, O Lord. There
the kingdom is promised unto Christ absolutely, but here it is not promised to
the posterity of David but with this condition: If they shall keep the
covenant of the Lord. So the kingdom was promised and given unto Solomon, but
afterward his stock was almost clean cut of in Ahazia, Reg. 2.11. 2. Chro. 22.
when only Ioas remained, and all the rest of the Kings seed were slain by
Athalia. This was the practice of Satan, to the end be might hinder the
promise concerning Christ. Afterward the kingdom came unto Ioas, who also was
of the seed of David, and was preserved by the means of his sister, so that
he was not slain of Athalia. Thus was the promise of the kingdom made unto
David to endure for ever, but yet so that God threatens destruction if they
keep not his covenant. So was the kingdom at the length also taken from the
posterity of Nathan and usurped by Herod a stranger, until the time came
that Christ under the reign of wicked gouerners, was born of Mary the
Bethlemite. Thus for sin one posterity was destroyed after an other by the
malice of Satan, and yet the whole line and succession was preserved even unto
Mary.

To consider these things it is very profitable, namely how the kingdom
promised unto David, came unto his son Solomon, but yet for sin it was
taken from him again. The same happened unto Nathan, and yet notwithstanding God
reserved a little spark, out of the which this kingdom should afterward shine
and mightily increase. And these things were done to bridle our presumption.
Such is the promise also as touching ye church: I will be with you unto the end
of the world. But here is a condition joined withal, that is: If ye walk in my
ways. For whosoever neglect ye word, those does God also neglect and reject, and
reiseth up others which shall be his Church. So says our Savior Christ: God is
able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. Matthew. 3.9. Luke. 3.8.
For whereas the promise was made unto Abraham, the Phariseis, because they
were the children of Abraham, thought they should undoubtedly be heirs of the
promise. This confidence made them bold to live carelessly and without all fear
of God. Therefore, says he, it is certain that the children of Abraham shall
be heirs of the promises made unto Abraham: but if ye will be careless and
will not obey the commandment of God, I say unto you, it is an easy thing for
God to reject you, and of the very stones to reise up a posterity unto
Abraham. So this promise depends wholly upon the condition, to bridle and
beat down our presumption.

The covenant is the promise of mercy through Christ. The Testimonies are the
will of God reueiled unto all ages by Moses and the Prophets. Wherefore he
requires faith, and then obedience unto the law. And here is to be noted that
he adds: Which I will teach them. For he will be the teacher and he will be
heard. He will not that the Counsels should be heard, The Church is ye Church
under this condition, if it follow the word.
or such as teach that he has not taught. So we say also of the Church, that
where so ever the promise of God is believed and his word obeyed, there is the
Church. But they that do not believe, brag they of their glorious titles,
their holy vocations, and such like, never so much, are rejected of God and no
members of the Church. For who would believe the Pope because he is the Pope?
And yet for this only cause he will be believed: and no man may ask whether
the things which he teaches be true and sound: but he will have men simply to
believe that that holy sea can not err. Against this who so ever dare once open
their mouths or examine his decrees by the word of God, are drawn and haled
to all kinds of torments. Like as therefore the Jews taught and defended
their errors and impieties by the authority of their Kings upon whom this
promise seemed to be grounded: even so in all ages is the false church wont to
do. But we answer that in deed the promise is true, and yet is it
conditional: namely, If ye keep my covenant and my testimonies. For God did
not so anoint the Kings, that they should do what so ever seemed good in their
sight, or what so ever they ordained or taught, The kings of Israel.
God would approve because they were kings and the anointed of God: but he
adds: If ye keep my covenant. So in the new Testament it is a true saying:
He that hears you hears me: but yet not generally to be understand of all
those which teach in the Church. For some teach not the word of Christ, but
their own word. This word God wills not to be heard, but commands that it
be not heard, when he says: Take heed of false prophets.

So Moses in Deutronomie commands that the king should never lay the book
of the law out of his hands, The commandment given to the kings in the old
Testament.
but should exercise the same continually in reading, in learning and in
practicing the same. If this commandment was given to the Kings under the
law, what shall we then think of the word of the new Testament? In vain
shall the Pope and his Prelates here glory and brag of the Counsels, the
fathers, the Church, the dignity which they have so many years usurped. All
these are so far to be approved and believed, as they teach according to the
rule of the holy Scripture. For the Church, which has authority from God, is
that only and alone which follows the voice and the word of the Lord.

Moreover, Few use their authority rightly.
we learn by experience, that nothing is more common amongst men, then to
abuse the authority and power committed unto them, and very few there be which
do rightly use their authority either in the Church or in the common wealth.
The cause is, for that the greater part serve their own affections, their own
lusts and pleasures, and whiles they should rule others, they suffer them
selves to be ruled and governed of Satan. Hereof comes it, that we see the
Pope, the Bishops, yea the whole Papacy to have no care of the word, nor love
to the word at all: but are wholly given over to seek theor own glory,
dignity, wealth and pleasure. Wherefore their authority binds not us,
although it were the authority of an Angel from heaven: but with good
conscience we depart from them, lest we should be disobedient to the high
authority and Majesty, which is God him self. But if the Pope with his
Prelates would not resist and persecute the doctrine of Christ, if with us they
would believe and teach that we are justified by the only price of the blood of
Christ, and would not teach men to make merchandise of their own merits and
works, we would gladly acknowledge their authority. But since they manifestly
impugn the word, since they defend their impieties and abominations with
extreme cruelty and tyranny, we do not only reject and contemn their
authority, but we say as Paul says, that they are accursed.

It is a common principle amongst the popish Doctors, that the Pope is above
the word and the Scripture, and that in the law of God he may dispense as
pleases him. But God gives no authority unto man above the word. So should
he set man, that is to say, dust and dunge above him self: for what is the
word, but God him self? This word they that honor, obey and keep, are the
true Church in deed, be they never so contemptible in the world: but they
which do not, are the church of Satan and accursed of God. All states of men
are subject to the word.
And this is the cause why it is expressly set down in the text: The
testimonies which I will teach them. For so will God use the ministry of
teachers and Pastors in the Church, that he notwithstanding will be the chief
Pastor, and all other ministers and Pastors what so ever, yea the Church it
self shall be ruled and governed by the word. Amongst the people of Israel
the Kings and Priests glorying and vaunting of their vocation, thought they
might do what they list. So the Pope and his Prelates at this day will not be
subject to the authority and rule of the word and the Scripture. For the evil
conscience which the Pope has, does always cry out and witness unto him that
the holy Scripture is the word of God, and therefore will be against him, and
utterly condemn him. Wherefore there is no prison which he more hates and
abhors then the word of God.

The condition is added because of the wicked and presumptuous.
This conditional sentence is here set down because of the wicked, that they
should not take upon them an absolute power contrary to ye word. For there is
no absolute promise, but that which pertains unto Christ, which says not
with a certain condition, but generally and absolutely, that Christ should
come of the seed of Abraham. Now, whereas the corporal kingdom did endure
until this promise as touching Christ was accomplished, it was so stablished
by the word, that notwithstanding it had a certain condition annexed unto it.
Therefore many wicked Kings, with all their families neglecting this
condition, were utterly destroyed, and others succeeded them: so that the
temporal kingdom endured after a sort, until ye most holy one, the King of
Kings came, who has continued this kingdom until this day, and shall do for
ever. This condition therefore is added to beat down proud and presumptuous
spirits. And if he said: This promise as touching Christ will I accomplish,
and will undoubtedly establish the throne unto my servant David: but do not ye,
which in the mean time sit in this throne and govern this kingdom, presume
of the promise, and think that ye can not err, or that God will wink at your
errors, and not rather condemn and severely punish them. Therefore either
govern your kingdom according to my word, or else I will root you out and
destroy you for ever. This promise he now amplifieth and sets forth more at
large.

Verse. 13. For the Lord has chosen Sion, and loves to dwell in it, saying:

This is an amplyfication of the promise. As if he said: Ye have yt promise.
But do your endeavor, that ye may become righteous and keep my covenant,
showing your selves obedient unto my voice. Then shall this kingdom endure and
I will dwell with you, and will replenish you with all manner of blessings both
corporal and spiritual.

Here, of a singular purpose he uses the same word which Moses used Deuteronomy.
16.26. In the place which the Lord thy God shall choose to place his name
there. For at the beginning there was no certain place appointed wherein the
tabernacle should remain, but it wandered, not only from place to place, but
also from tribe to tribe, as Ephraim, Manasses, Dan, etc. Moreover by this
word, God chooses a place for his service: therefore we may not chose it.
has chosen, he overthrows all kinds of worship, and religion of man's own
devising and choosing, whereof there was an infinite number among the Jews.
For thus they thought: If it be lawful for the Priests to carry the tabernacle
from one place to an other, why may not we also do sacrifice in more places then
one? This was plain and gross idolatry. For seeing that God did bind him
self to the Mercieseate by his word, namely that there he would be, and there
he would be found: therefore it was idolatry to believe that he was any where
else, or to seek him in any other place. Therefore, when the people did devise
or choose any kind of worship which God had not chosen, we see how sharply
the Prophets did reprove them. For there is nothing which God so much
detesteth, as to admit or appointe for the service of God, that which he has
not commanded. Wherefore election or choice belongs not unto us: but we must
yield obedience to the voice of the Lord. Else shall that happen unto us
which Jeremy threateneth: That they have chosen will I reject. These things
destroy and confound the inventions, the devises and devotions, the false and
counterfeit religions which we have seen in the Papacy. For whereas some gave
them selves to this order of religion and some to that: whereas they had
certain days of abstinence, certain meats, certain Saints to call upon,
and such other like, if ye ask who commanded all these things, their own
conscience will constrain them to answer that they were in deed of their
own choosing and their own devising. But this is to serve not God, but Satan.
For God is not served but when that is done which he has commanded. Wherefore
election or choice (as I said) pertains not to us, but to God alone: but
obedience belongs to us, so that what God has commanded, that must we do.

Moreover, the word of Choosing beats down all confidence and presumption of
works. For if he should say: I give unto you Sion for a reward, or this do I
to requite or to recompense you, it were as much as if he said, this do I in
respect of your desert. But when he says: I have chosen Sion according to mine
own will, he shows that he does it without all respect of merits: If God
do choose, then comes it not of our merit.
so that he both condemns all counterfeit religion, and all confidence of
merit. For voluntary worshippings and chosen religions perteine to the devils
divinity. And it helps us nothing, that they are chosen of a good intent.
For there is no good intent which is grounded upon our own judgment, No good
intent but that is grounded upon the word.
and not upon the word of God, which ought to be the groundworke of all good
intents. For he only intends well, which knows that he is constrained to
do this thing or that by the word of God. This word who so has not, although
he seem in all things as holy as an Angel, beware of him, and avoid him as a
deadly poison. This is a most certain and infallible rule for us to follow
(which if we do, we shall never be deceived), if we demand whether God has
required of us or commanded this thing or that. For he approves nothing as
good in his sight, which he has not chosen. And this briefly as touching the
word of Choosing, I thought good to note.

Verse. 14. This is my rest for ever: here will I dwell, for I have a delight
therein.

This is a singular promise, and such as God never made in any other place.
Hereof Esaias and the other Prophets seem to gather, that Jerusalem should
endure for ever, that is, until the Messiah should come, who should make of a
temporal, an eternal Jerusalem: As also the Angel says unto Marie: that
Christ should sit upon the throne of his father David for ever. And here
mark the sequel of this promise. Jerusalem at this day is destroyed and gone,
and yet this promise does plainly show, that this shall be the seat of the
Lord for ever. Wherefore it follows, as an infallible consequence, that he is
come which has established this kingdom for ever. For whereas it was destroyed
in the captivity of Babylon, yet notwithstanding there were certain remnants
reserved: The time also was appointed how long the captivity should continue:
And moreover, there were yet both Kings and Priests remaining emongst them.
But now there is none of all these things, as before we have declared.

This is therefore a notable promise, that this Jerusalem shall be the seat
and throne of the Lord for ever, and shall never be abolished. The Jews
presuming of this promise, did crucify Christ, and committed all iniquity.
For they thoug^t it not possible that Jerusalem should be destroyed, because of
the promise which it had, that it should remain for ever. But we have heard
that these things were promised conditionally: to wit, If they should keep
the covenant of the Lord and his testimonies. Jerusalem therefore continued unto
the coming of Christ. Jerusalem was destroyed: notwithstanding it was builded
up again by Christ to remain for ever.
Afterward it was plagued for sin, as other wicked cities and kingdoms were.
In like manner the Prophets do certainly promise that the Gospel should come
out of Sion and a new kingdom of Christ out of Jerusalem. Notwithstanding
they say, that this Jerusalem should be greater then the whole earth, and the
walls thereof should be the ends of the earth. These things can not be
understand of the corporal Jerusalem, which notwithstanding was the first
occasion of the beginning of the kingdom of Christ: but after wards it was
horribly destroyed: like as also the wicked sort of David's posterity were
rooted out: but the godly remained until Christ was borne.

Moreover, it is evident that this election and choosing began under David: For
before that time the city of Jerusalem belonged to the Iebusites: but under
David it was chosen by the promise of God to be a city for the Kings and
Priests, in such sort, that like as before the persons of the Priests did not
wander from tribe to tribe, but were always certain: so the persons and
successions of the Kings should not now uncertainly wander as the Judges and
the Princes did, which continued not in any certain tribe, and here again he
uses the word of choosing, to confound the presumption and confidence of
merit which was so grounded in their hearts, to the end they might understand
that this city was appointed by the good pleasure of God to be a seat and
harborowe for religion and policy. The Jews presumed of their own merits.
For this deuilish vice was peculiar unto the Jews, that they gloried in their
merits, their service and ceremonies. For this cause Moses also sharply
reproves them, and warns them that they should not think they had obtained
these great benefits through their own righteousness. Not for thy righteousness
(says he) has the Lord brought thee into this land. Deuteronomy. 9. The presu^ption
of the Papists.
This deuilish presumption we see also to be in the Papacy: but much worse
then it was amongst the people of God. For they used that worship and service
which was commanded of God. But in Popery there is nothing but man's
inventions, which are the worshipping of idols.

Now, whereas the Lord promises that he will dwell in Jerusalem, this seems
to be but a small matter. It is a great benefit of God that he has appointed
a certain place for his service.
But we must look to the Majesty of the inhabitour, and then the place, be it
never so base and contemptible, shall become glorious. For this did the word
promise, that he whom the heavens could not comprehend, should be found in
Jerusalem. This is therefore a singular promise, when men may know and enjoy a
certain place wherein God may be found, that they wander not in the
imaginations of their own hearts, every man choosing unto him self a God, or a
place where he may serve God according to his own fantasy, as Jeroboam did,
which is horrible idolatry. Wherefore it is the great mercy of God that he
has appointed a certain place for his word and his whole service, Jerusalem
called the holy city, and why.
to the which place the Scripture attributes this excellent name and title,
that it is called the holy city: not for the holiness of the people inhabiting
the same, but for the holiness of the Lord sanctifying all things by his word.

The glory of ye Church of the new Testament.
This glory has the Church of the new Testament also, in that she has for her
head, not the Pope, (as the wicked Papists do most wickedly affirm): but
Christ sitting at the right hand of the father, who is present with his word
and Sacraments. This is an inestimable glory, which depends not upon our
righteousness, but upon the great mercy of God accepting, approving and
commending all things that we do for Christ his sons sake our head.

But the city of Jerusalem found Satan her deadly and cruel enemy in this
respect also, Satan a continual and a cruel enemy to Jerusalem.
because it was as it were, the workehouse of God, in the which he daily
exercised and wrought all manner of holy works, blessings and benefits for his
people. Yet was it of God notwithstanding meruelously preserved, to this end
that his people should not be uncertain where he would be found, worshipped
and heard. And here again we are admonished, that all these things come of
gift and not of merit, of mercy and not of works. For he has chosen unto
him self this rest, and it has pleased him to dwell in this place. So it
comes not of our desert that we enjoy the Gospel and other great blessings
of God. All these are the gifts of God, through his great mercy and goodness
bestowed upon us for Christ's sake.

Verse. 15. Her vitailes I will bless, and will satisfy her poor with bread.

This word vitailes signifies properly a pray. Why ye Scripture calls our
food and sustenance a pray.
But why does the Scripture so call the sustenance whereby we live? Even for
the same cause for the which Christ calls it our daily bread: So that, like
as beasts do daily follow their pray and find it, they sow not, they
labor not, but by pray they atteyne all that they have: Even so should we not
heap up that through covetousness and incredulity, which may serve us for
many years, but should daily look for and receive at the hands of the Lord,
that which is daily offered unto us, (employing our labor notwithstanding as a
mean to atteine the same) and therewith be content, as the beast is when he
has obtained his pray. For covetousness and incredulity is not content with
present benefits, although ye Lord do never so faithfully promise to feed
us, and give us all things necessary for this life. Thus the Scripture properly
and very aptly calls our food and sustenance a pray which comes unto us
taking no care, but laboring and leaving ye care unto God, as our Savior
Christ teaches us, Matt. 6. who commands us to labor and diligently
endeavor to do that belongs to our vocation: for of the Hebrews that is
counted labor which every day has and brings with it. But withal he
commands us to take no thought for worldly things, but to leave all
carefulnes unto the Lord who promises that we shall no more lack then the
birds and other beasts do, which have that is sufficient, and yet labor not
nor make provision for the same. For this is not the end of our labor, that
in this life we should still seek to enrich our selves and never be satisfied.
For although we have the treasures of this world, yet with this life we must
forsake them. And like as this life is not certain, but is as a pray, which we
so long enjoy as it pleases the Lord: even so is the portion of our
sustenance but, as you would say, a snatch, wherewith we must be content to
live, and not be careful for the time to come. So does this word condemn all
faithless carefulnes and careful incredulity, wherewith notwithstanding we
can nothing prevail.

A saying of Cyprian worthy to be remembered.
Cyprian has a goodly saying to this effect and worthy to be remembered.
Christians (says he) which have forsaken this world, do so little care for
earthly things, that they ask no more but food and raiment. For their hearts
are fixed upon the eternal treasures of the world to come. They seek to live
but from day to day, as strangers having here no continuing city, but looking
for one to come. And good cause there is why yt Disciple of Christ should
desire no more but for the present day, which is commanded not to be careful
for to morrow. For it is an absurd thing that we should desire to live long
in this world, which pray for the spedy coming of the kingdom of Christ.

Bread what it signifies.
That which follows: and her poor I will satisfy with bread, is a phrase or
kind of speech well known. For bread the Hebrews are wont to call meat and
drink, like as we call vitailes whatsoever pertains to our food and
sustenance. These things he promises, but to the poor: for so he calls his
people. For he sees the condition of his Church to be such, that in the mids
of the riches and wealth of the world, it only hungreth and thirsts. The
poverty of the Levites was exceeding great until they aspired to honor and
dignity, as also our Prelates do. For Satan so rules in these matters, that
he never cease to oppress the ministry as much as in him lies, with
poverty and contempt. This many not contented to bear, do fall so far,
that rather then they will lack, they will teach the things that please men,
that so they may attain to wealth and dignity.

The godly must therefore hold fast this promise: that the Lord says he will
give bread unto his poor. For both these things shall come to pass, that
they shall have bread, and yet they shall be poor. And why? Because the
kingdom of Christ is not of this world. Let those therefore which are of the
ministry, and are the principal part of this kingdom, be content to suffer
reproach, hatred and contempt, or else let them be no ministers. For the
inheritance of this world is not promised to the godly, but the assured and
everlasting inhertiance of the life to come. Wherefore Christ calls the poor
in spirit, blessed and happy, which notwithstanding must suffer many
calamities. On the other side, those that abound in wealth and are full, he
calls miserable and unhappy, because the time shall come when they shall
weep. Wherefore let us thus make our account, that if we will be the people of
God, we must in this life content our selves with those things which are
necessary for the back and the belly. All other incommodities let us patiently
bear and overcome in hope of the glory which shall be revealed upon the
sons of God.

Verse. 16. And will cloth her Priests with salvation, and her Saints shall
showt for joy.

This promise is far more excellent then that whereof we have now spoken.
Temporal incommodities of the Church are recompensed with spiritual benefits
and blessings.
For here God promises that he will so govern the Pastors and Ministers, that
they shall be pure and holy through the word and have a good conscience. If we
would compare these things with that small defecte of corporal things, we
should bear it much more cherefully and patiently. When I was a Monk, I lived
in most miserable darkness and infinite snares of conscience: where through the
multitude of men's traditions, sin brought forth sin. I was bound against
nature to that impure and incestuous single life. Here, if a man should have
asked me what I would give to redeem the quietness and peace of conscience, and
those inestimable graces and glory which we enjoy at this day by the word and
the spirit of God: I would humbly have cast down my self prostrate upon the
ground and given my life gladly for this only quietness and liberty of
conscience in Christ.

But now, when we are clothed in deed with salvation through great and assured
promises of the forgiveness of sins and eternal life, we forget these
spiritual riches, and we complain that we are not made Kings and Princes in
this corporal life. We do not prefer our eternal and spiritual glory
before these transitory and corruptible things. And what a foul ingratitude is
it, so to be offended with this external poverty, and not to joy and rejoice
rather in these inestimable treasures of the spirit? Who would not rather
having these gifts of the spirit, beg his bread from door to door, then
enjoy the riches and treasures of all the Prelates and the whole kingdom of the
Pope? Whom we see in this wealth of the world, because they are enemies to the
word, to be most desperate and damnable: For they are without remission of
sins, hope of eternal life, the knowledge of Christ, and all the heavenly
benefits and blessings, which we by the word do so plentifully enjoy.
Wherefore if we be never so poor, afflicted, vexed, full of anguish and
heauynes, contemptible and abominable in the sight of the world, yet let us
comfort our selves with this, that we have the treasures of the kingdom of
heaven, that by faith in the word we shall have the victory over sin,
death and hell, and that we are wholly clothed with salvation. How many were
oppressed with desperation before this happy age wherein we live? But if they
had had this knowledge of grace and these consolations which we now have by the
word, would they not, think ye, have sustained the loss of all the riches
in the world and all worldly felicity? For when a man feels the wrath of God
and desperation, then infinite riches and treasures are nothing esteemed. What
does knowledge, learning, wisdom, what do possessions, kingdoms and
dominions then avail? All these things who would not gladly forsake and cast
away, that only he might have his conscience quieted and at peace with God?

Wherefore Paul very aptly calls the knowledge of grace, an absolute or a
full perfection, because all good things are contained in this knowledge. A
singular consolation against poverty and contempt.
For if we live here by begging our bread, is not this well recompensed in that
we are nourished with the food of Angels, eternal life, and Christ him self?
Who so favors not these things, let him seek for a Cardinals hatte with
the ministers and soldiers of Satan. Let him seek the wealth, the riches and
glory of this world. As for me, I seek other riches, which I esteem above
all worldly wealth and treasures. Thirty years ago, if I had had the true
knowledge and understanding but of one Psalm, I should have thought my self
to be a God: for then all things were full of gross ignorance, horrible
abominations and all kinds of idolatry. But now, when the Lord has opened
unto us, as it were a flood of heavenly wisdom and knowledge, we are
unthankful and become so worldly, so fine and so delicate, that we will lack
nothing that the world has. God and mammon can not dwell together.
But Esaias says, The bed is strait, and there is no place for both. Albeit
the things we do not condemn: for they are the gifts of God, and therefore
let those which have them, being lawfully gotten and in the fear of God, Esaias.
49.20.
use them with thanksgiving and without offense: and let those, to whom they
are not given, bear their want and necessity with christian patience and
without grudging: Philip. 4.
As Paul says, that he is able through Christ to do or to bear all things,
to abound and to lack, to be full and to be hungry, to be praised and to be
dispraysed, etc. and that because we have a kingdom in heaven, and we look for
a Savior, who has begun to give unto us these things by the word and
Sacraments: And if he leave unto us no more but the ministry of the word
sincere and sound, we care not much for all other things.

This is therefore a singular promise and consolation, that the Church and the
word shall endure to the end of the world, not by the counsel or wisdom of
man, but by God him self clothing his ministers with salvation. Albeit
therefore that under Achas and other ungodly Kings all things were full of
idolatry, yet were there certain Prophets by whom the word was preserved. And
in the time of Christ the blindness of that nation was incredible, and such as
(I think) never was before. Notwithstanding there was Anna and Simeon which
then acknowledged and preached Christ. This is in deed the great work of God
thus clothing with salvation, that is, with his mighty and victorious word,
with his true and holy worship, his ministers, that out of the mouths of men
our salvation and our glory may be heard. This is a far more excellent
clothing then were those Aaronicall garments of Moises, that the Pastors and
Preachers of the Gospel are furnished and adorned with the words of salvation
and the doctrine of truth, whereby they may be able, not only to instruct the
people committed to their charge, but also to confu^e and confound the
adversaries. For to this end serves the garment and the clothing of
salvation, that is to say, of victory which is obtained by the pure word and
holy ministry.

The second part of this promise is, that he will give success and fruit unto
the word: to wit, that so many as hear these Priests, these Pastors and
Preachers and believe the word, are sanctified and their hearts are replenished
with peace and joy: they faithfully trust in God, whom they know to be well
pleased with them, The peace of conscience is an inestimable gift of God.
and of whom they believe that they are beloved. This peace of the heart is our
kingdom of heaven which we have in this life. For it is an incomparable
treasure: in comparison whereof all the kingdoms and riches in the world are
but dyrt and dunge. So the Psalm joins these two things together, that by
the Preachers and Ministers he will give his mighty and victorious word and
faith unto those that hear them, that so all may be saved, and with joyful
heart may praise and magnify such a gracious and a merciful God.

The spiritual blessing of ye Church must not be esteemed according to the
outward show and face thereof.
He that beholds the outward show and face of the Church, will judge these
things to be false and far otherwise. For these words are spiritual, and
must not be understand according to the flesh. For if a man follow the outward
appearance, he will rather judge the Pope and the ministers of Satan to be
clothed with salvation. For they triumph in great security even when they
think and speak those things which are most contrary to Christ and the true
Church. On the other side the Christians or the true Church are afflicted,
vexed, tormented within and without of Satan and cruel persecutors. No man
will think these things to be salvation or joy, but miseries and perpetual
calamities. But turn thou thine eyes away from the outward show and
appearance, and behold that Majesty which speaks to thee in the word and
promises to be merciful unto thee. If therefore thou be in the favor of God,
if he hate thee not but love thee, if he cherish and defend thee, I pray thee,
what are all the calamities in the world? Are they not all, be they never so
terrible and intolerable, swallowed up in that bottomless sea of the infinite
and unmeasurable mercies of God?

Verse. 17. There will I make the horn of David to budde: I have ordained a
light for mine anointed.

He continues in the promise of the kingdom and the priesthood, A promise
concerning the defense and preservation of the Church.
that not only the salvation and joy of the Priests and the faithful people
should be defended against fantastical spirits which that nation was never
without, but also that this kingdom should be defended against outward enemies
and other nations abroad, and at home against seditious persons. For like as
among the Levites there were many fantastical and heretical spirits: so in
the other estates there were also many seditious heads, as the histories do
show. How many had Saul which would not acknowledge him for their King?
After that Saul was killed and David was saluted and taken of the trybe of Judah
for their King, 2. Sam. 2.10.
all the rest of the tribes forsook him and followed Ishbosheth the son of
Saul. This dissension endured seven years and six months as it is declared
2. Samuel 2. Now who knows not what storms of seditions and battayles David
afterward suffered in the kingdom? Again, after the death of Solomon this
kingdom was vexed with infinite seditions by wicked Jeroboam. Against these
enormities the Psalm armeth and confirms the people, and promises that the
horn of David shall endure, being exalted and stablished by the Lord him
self. Such was the condition of this kingdom, that the pure and holy
Priesthood Satan corrupted by sects and schisms, to overthrow the sound and
true doctrine of the word: and in the civil government he stirred up
rebellious and disobedient persons. Thus Satan rages with lying and falsehood
against the spiritual kingdom, and with murders against the politic
government, that offenses of lying and murder might no where be lacking.

Wherefore, as this kingdom must not be esteemed and judged according to the
outward face thereof (for then it shall appear to be a weak, The outward show
and face of the Church.
a seditious and a miserable kingdom): so the Church has also certain
promises of peace: but yet so, that for the most part it is vexed with
offenses, with persecutions and other afflictions. Wherefore we must rest in
the greatness and the excellency of the promise, in the Majesty of the word,
and in the authority of the promiser, who has promised salvation, but yet so
notwithstanding, that in the common wealth there shall remain seditious and
rebellious persons, and in the Church heretics and sectaries. Here have we
need to be of good courage and comfort, assuring our selves, that if we were
of the world, the world would love us. If we would flatter the Pope and teach
the things that please him, he would love us, he would not persecute us, he
would not throw out the thunderboltes of cursing and excommunication against us
as he does. They therefore which will be of the true Church, must prepare them
selves with a valiant mind to bear and overcome these offenses, resting upon
the promises of God, which do wholly consist in this, that he is and will be
loving and gaatious unto us, that he will never leave us comfortles, and that
the enemies of the word, rage they never so furiously, shall not prevail
against the Church, because the Lord has promised that he will there make the
horn of David to budd. Some do understand that by this word [to budd] Christ,
in whom the kingdom of David is truly established, is covertly bear shadowed
and signified. Against this interpretation I will not greatly stand: and yet I
rather rest in the simplicity of the letter, which seems plainly to promise
unto David a certain place and posterity. The name of budding he uses here,
to signify an increase: and to increase is to be preserved. So the Church
buddeth and increases (although outwardly it seems to be diminished and
defaced) because God preserves and increases it daily by his word and his
spirit. The sense and meaning then is this, that God will bless, defend and
preserve the horn of David, that is to say, the kingdom, the strength and the
power of that nation. For here he would specially notify the person, to this
end that the posterity might be certain of the house, of the person and of
the place of this kingdom.

That which follows: I have ordained a light for mine anointed, is an hebrewe
phrase: which kind of speech we also do use: As when we say that John Hus
was the light of the Church of Bohemia. Leonard Kesar, for his singular
confession of the faith, and constancy in the truth of the Gospel, was the
light of Bauaria. This manner of phrase is used also 2. Samuel 21. That the
light of Israel be not quenched. And in the 2. Chronic. 21. as touching Ioram.
For God would not destroy the house of David, because he had promised to give a
light to him and to his children for ever: For Ioram was the last of the
posterity of Solomon. They that reigned after him, were of the posterity of
Nathan, which at the captivity of Babylon, when the City was destroyed and
the King in captivity and bands, seemed to be utterly extinguished. But the
Lord chastised both the place and the person: he neither changed nor rejected
them. Again, at the birth of Christ the kingdom was translated from the
stock of David to the Machabees and the Romans. Wherefore as touching the
outward appearance, this light was utterly quenched: but to the spiritual man
and to the eyes of faith, it was yet glorious. For there were certain persons
remaining of the tribe of Judah, of whom afterward Christ was borne.
Wherefore he calls the preservation of the kingdom, a light: but in respect
of the thing it self, and not of the outward show: for thereby it seemed that
both the place and the person were clean gone: for God through idolatry and
presumption was constreined to destroy them. So the kingdom was taken from the
tribe of Judah. Then came Christ, who builded a new Jerusalem which shall
remain for ever.

There is also a certain vehemency in this word: To prepare a light, what it
signifies.
have prepared: for it signifies that this kingdom was defended, not only
against all enemies and conspiratours at home and among them selves: but also
against all the devils and the gates of hell, even to the coming of Christ.
Yet notwithstanding the history shows how it was humbled through many
calamities and afflictions. Likewise we have a promise as touching the Church,
that it shall continue unto the end of the world, and that the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it: and yet who knows not how it has been
humbled, oppressed and in a manner abolished under the Pope? There was taught
and worshipped, not Christ, but the virgin Mary, the Apostles, etc. So that
according to the saying of Christ, except the Lord had shortened those days,
Mark. 13.20
no flesh should have been saved. Wherefore we must regard the Majesty and
power of the promiser, more then all the offenses that either the world or the
devil can raise up against us: and let us not be discouraged when the Pope
with his curse, and the world with the sword do rage against the Church. For
although the Church neither in number nor in power be like unto ye adversaries,
yet shall it endure and the adversaries shall perish. 1. John. 4.
For he is greater that is in us, then he that is in the world: and the word,
because it is the eternal power of God, shall easily overcome Satan and all
the furies of hell.

Verse. 18. His enemies will I cloth with shame, but on him his crown shall
flourish.

Not the King of Babylon, not of Syria, not of Edom, not of Moab, not of
Egypt, briefly no enemy shall prevail against this kingdom: but this kingdom
shall stand immovable and mightily established even unto Christ, and the
enemies of this kingdom shall be all clothed with confusion. This light shall
never be quenched until he come which shall fulfill all things. This throne,
although it be never so contemptible and odious to the whole world, shall
remain in glory, not only before men, but also before the world. Neither
could Satan yet ever bring to pass (although with all his force, power and
policy he has continually attempted it) that the posterity of David should
be extinguished before Christ should be borne. To these promises, as unto a
sure staff, yea as unto a strong rock, the Saints of God have always leaned
in great calamities, wherewith Satan exercised this people to the end he might
hinder the promise concerning Christ. And in deed Antiochus, above all other
labored with maine and might, to root out and to destroy this people for
ever. But, as the Psalm here promises, because he was an enemy to this holy
nation, therefore he was clothed with shame and confusion.

But on him his crown shall flourish: That is to say, although the crown of
David often times shall seem in outward appearance to decay and perish: yet
by a secret and a divine power it shall be renewed, plenteously fructify, and
gloriously flourish. But the truth of this promise rests in Christ, of
whose kingdom there is no end. For upon his head has flourished a crown
which could never decay as the crowns of worldly Princes do. For the crown of
the son of God is far otherwise: to whom all power is given both in heaven
and in earth. Matthew. 11.
In the mean time the Lord preserved this temporal kingdom, until that was
accomplished in the person of his only begotten son, which he would ^ignifie
under those shadows and figures. But because this external kingdom of David
was of this world and earthly, therefore was it but temporal and for a time.
But the kingdom of Christ, because it is not of this world, but heavenly and
spiritual, is eternal and shall endure for ever.

This Psalm conteyneth a prayer for the preservation of the word, and public
peace: For this must we specially desire in our prayer, except we will be found
unthankful. Moreover, we must not be offended when we see that the common
wealth is disquieted through the disobedience of the people or wickedness of the
Magistrates: or the Church vexed through false brethren and heresies. For thus
will it be and no otherwise, that where so ever the word, joined with public
peace and concord, is found, there Satan that lying and murdering spirit will
always go about to trouble them both. And this is the cause of seditions, of
wars, of sects and heresies. Wherefore we must be well armed, that seeing
our adversary slepeth not, we may valiantly oppose our selves against these
offenses, and think that they are certain warnings, and often times also
rods or punishments which God sends to amend us, and not to destroy us. Our
sins have deserved more grievous punishments. Better it is therefore to be
afflicted of the wicked world, then to be condemned and perish for ever. God be
merciful unto us, and turn from us that we have so justly deserved.

The.133. Psalm. Behold how good, etc.
In this Psalm the Prophet commends love and concord in both the kingdoms,
The argument of the Psalm.
corporal and spiritual, but specially in the spiritual kingdom, and for the
same he gives thanks unto God. For this is not only a singular gift of God
when there is unity in the Church and quietness in the common wealth: but it is
also the founteyne and headspring of inestimable benefits and blessings. David
had learned by experience that there is nothing better the^ peace and concord*
Here peradventure you will ask where David learned that these are so excellent
and so profitable things. But he which marketh the history of David, shall
easily perceive that the masters of whom he learned this knowledge, were Saul,
Doeg and other monsters in the Court of Saul his predecessor: also Absolon,
Achitophel and such like: that is to say, David by many tentations and by long
experience did learn; that nothing is better then love and concord. But they
which have not felt that David did, do think that nothing is better then
dissension and discord, according to the proverb: War is sweet to those
which have not tried it. For young men, which are yet full of ho^e and youthful
blood, think nothing more excellent then the glory of war and victory,
whereby they may win praise and fame. These carnal motions and affections
afterward are easily quenched when men have felt the calamities both of them
selves and theirs. But before the calamities be known and felt, the
commodities of peace are not known unto the world, and so war is sweet and
pleasant to those which have not felt the miseries thereof: as the histories
do witness, wherein we may see that often times seditious heads have
complained of peace, saying that in rest and quietness men be come sluggerds,
cowards and dastards. Therefore they desire war as an increase of glory and
occasion to set forth their manhood and courage.

This poison is rooted in our nature through original sin, that those
things which are most excellent and necessary, we loath and shun: and those
things whereby Satan seeks our destruction, we greedely desire, according to
that dutch proverb: Men often strive and take great pains to bring them
selves into misery and danger. Prove. 20.14.
It is naught, it is naught, says the byer. For the minds of men do commonly
mislike and loath the most excellent things when they have plenty and are full
thereof. Wherefore it is an enestimable gift of God, to have peace both in the
Church and in the common wealth. A great gift of God, to understand and to
acknowledge the gifts of God.
And this is also a singular gift, to acknowledge that it is a gift. For how
many do we see among the enemies and persecutors of the Gospel, which have
an outward and worldly peace, and yet they enjoy not this gift? For in the
midst of this quietness their minds be unquiet, and they have no rest nor
inward peace, whiles they being inflamed with an hatred against the Gospel,
devise and continually seek new occasions to condemn and utterly to root
out our religion. Let us therefore be thankful unto God for this gift, and let
us not be like unto the unthankful world, which understands not this gift
and great blessing of God, but in the very use thereof forgets God. God
hasten his kingdom, and give us a better life: For I protest that this life is
naught: in the which we neither regard the great gifts of God, nor yet
acknowledge them to be his gifts,

To maintain this gift, it is not in the power of the temporal or the
spiritual Magistrate: but men being both blind and deffe, will needs do,
Satan joining with ye original sin and corruption of nature, draws men to
that which they know to be evil.
not that they like and approve, but that sin and Satan provoke them unto.
It is the Lord alone therefore which is both the giver and maintayner of peace:
which preserves kingdoms and common wealths, that they fall not to utter
ruin by wars, vprores and tumultes. This gift the Psalm commands us to
acknowledge, and exhorts us to be thankful for the same. For it is the
mighty hand of God that there is any peace or concord amongst us. And thanks
be unto God, that we have this knowledge, that peace is the gift of God,
although we be not able of our selves to maintain and defend the same. For
this is a means, not only to stay us that we despair not in these outrages
and hurly burlyes of the wicked world, but also to drive us to hearty prayer,
that God would preserve that peace which he has given us, and defend us from
the power of Satan and wicked men.

Verse. 1. Behold how good and how comely a thing it is, brethren to dwell
even together.

David had been in many and great dangers, and by experience had learned in
the troubles which he suffered through great and long seditions and other
afflictions, not only what mischief there is in discord and the doctrine of
error: but also what inestimable good things do proceed of concord and
sincere doctrine. Wherefore he assures him self that God preserves, governs
and blesses these things. For the Psalm treats of both kinds, that is, of
the peace and concord of the common wealth, and of the Church: like as they
also in nature are coupled together. For the peace of the common wealth is also
the peace of the Church, for that in the time of peace the word of God may be
freely published and preached. Brethren he calls as well those that live in
any society together, Brethren.
as also the Ministers and Preachers of the word. These live in unity and
concord, when they feed the people with one uniform and sound doctrine, when
the people obey and believe the word, and when there is no contention among
them. This is a singular gift of God, and not only a joyful, but also a
profitable and a comely thing in the Church. So is it also in the common
wealth, when the laws are obeyed and the Magistrate has a care of the people:
and again, when the subjects do love and reverence the Magistrates and obey
their authority. These gifts the Psalm exhorts us to acknowledge and to be
thankful for the same.

Verse. 2. It is like to the precious ointment upon the head that runs
down upon the bearde even upon Aarons beard, which went down on the borders
of his garments.

This is a homely and familiar phrase of the holy Ghost. The place is known
30. of Exodus, where Moses was commanded to make a certain precious ointment,
with this inhibition, that it should be made of none else but of him, nor
employed to any other use then to anoint the bearde of the high Priest. With
this ointment the Psalm compares unity and concord as an holy and heavenly
thing: Concord is compared to a precious ointment.
which by no power or policy of man can either be gotten or kept. For
although it be given even to the wicked also, as we may see in those kingdoms
which are out of the Church, yet is it the gift of God, and a most holy gift,
which ought to serve especially unto holy uses, for the aduauncing of religion,
for the confirmation of matrimony, for the education of children, and for the
maintenance and continuance of all honesty and godliness.

In that he says: from the head, he shows the nature of true concord. For
like as the ointment ran down from the head of Aaron the high priest, upon
his beard, and so descended unto the borders of his garment: even so true
concord in doctrine and brotherly love, flows as a precious ointment, by the
unity of the spirit, from Christ the high priest and head of the Church, unto
all the members of the same. The beard what it signifies.
For by the beard and extreme parts of the garment he signifies, that as
far as the church reaches, so far spreads that unity which flows from
Christ her head. Or by the beard we may understand those to whom the office of
teaching belongs, because the bearde is joined unto the mouth, which is the
instrument of doctrine, and by the extreme parts of the garment the rest of ye
church, which is the garment of Christ. This similitude expresses most lively
how great the virtue of the spirit of concord is wherewith all the members of
Christ are anointed: For it makes their life sweet and pleasant, in so much,
that whatsoever they do, it gives a sweet odor in the sight of God.

If the unquiet spirits which trouble the Church at this day, could believe that
the peace and concord of the Church is such an holy and a pleasant ointment to
the Lord, Against the Anabaptists and other Sectaries, enemies to the peace and
quietness of the Church.
separate from all profane uses: they would be more sober and circumspect then
they be. But because they believe it not, therefore they employ this holy
ointment to unholy uses, seeking thereby their own glory. Yea, they turn the
Psalm clean contrary, and say in their hearts. Behold how pleasant a thing it
is to trouble the brethren: they would not have them to enjoy this holy
ointment, that is, to dwell and live together in this heavenly concord. These
we must fly: to these we must in no wise be like, but must learn that the
unity of the Church is the gift of God, which we must defend and maintain
with all our power. For there is nothing more pleasant in the sight of God and
his Angels, then when the Pastors and gouerners of the Churches do dwell
together in godly concord, teaching and following with one consent, one true,
sincere and uniform doctrine.

Between the Pope and his rabble there is great concord: The concord of the
Papists.
for there is a concord even amongst thieves: as there was between Judas and
the Phariseis. But this is not the concord which the Psalm here speaks of:
but the Psalm commends that concord which is amongst those that have the
pure and sincere word. Therefore the Prophet here uses a similitude which
only pertains to Aaron, named to be y^ high priest by Gods own mouth,
signifying thereby that this concord is spread by the preachers of the word,
throughout the whole body of the Church: so that, not only the body it self
is refreshed with this ointment, but also the sweet smell thereof is dispearsed
every where, and the fame of the Church is glorious both before God and men,
those I mean which understand and acknowledge this heavenly benefit.

Verse. 3. As the dew of Hermon which falls upon the mountains of Sion: for
there the Lord appointed the blessing and life for ever.

Hermon.
Hermon is a mountain joining upon Libanus. Hereof it comes that in an
other place he calls Judea, which is compassed with mountains, the land of
Hermonijm. As touching this similitude, I think the Prophet uses the common
manner of speaking. For whereas the mountains often times seem to those that
behold them a far of, to reach up even unto heaven, the dew which comes from
heaven, seems to fall from the high mountains unto the hills which are under
them. Therefore he says, that the dew descends from Hermon unto the mount
Sion, because it so seems unto those that do behold it a far of. And this
clause, after my judgment, pertains to civil concord (like as the former
similitude pertains to the Church) because God, through peace and concord,
makes common wealths and kingdoms to flowrish: even as seeds, herbs and
plants are fresh and flourish through the morning dew. The beginning of this
peace comes from the Princes and Magistrates, as from mount Hermon* From whom
it flows unto every particular person, and to the whole common wealth, which
is refreshed therewith as it were with the dew of heaven: whereby all things do
prosper and flourish. For like as by the dew, all things that grow upon the
earth do spring and increase: even so small things through peace and concord do
grow to great increase. Contrariwise, like as in ye time of great heat and
drowth all things wither away and perish: so wars, seditions and tumults,
su^uert and destroy commonweals and kingdoms. Wherefore we have need, not
only of diligent exhortations, but also of continual, hearty and faithful
prayer unto God, that he would graciously continue this heavenly benefit of
peace and concord among us, as the Prophet now adds.

There the Lord appointed the blessing and life, or lives, for so it is in the
Hebrewe. As much to say as: There will God dwell where concord is. This is in
deed an excellent commendation wherewith he so bewtifieth and extolleth peace.
And with this commendation ought the hearts of all men to be stirred up to the
love of peace, The comme^dation of concord, and that God will dwell there where
concord is.
since they hear, that God will dwell with such Princes, such Pastors and such
people as love peace and defend the same. It follows then that where the
enemies of peace are, and such as delight in unnecessary wars, as are those
monsters which are idly and wickedly brought up in the Courts of Princes and
courtly life, together with the profane and godles multitude, there dwells
the devil with his angels, and there has God appointed malediction, death
and destruction.

There is a certain vehemence in this word life, or lives in the plural
number. For it signifies all kinds of life, as the Priests, the Levites, the
faithful, the Magistrates, artificers, citizens, husbandmen, etc. As if he
said: All states of life shall be blessed with this peace. This is in deed a
notable promise. But do not we most wickedly contemn this promise? Many of
purpose seek occasions to trouble the Churches. In the common wealth likewise
we see what great contempt of ^awes there is every where. By these enormities
we do, as it were, constrayne God, not to bestow upon us this blessing and
life. This is the cause that we are vexed with sundry calamities, for that we
do contemn this blessing so graciously offered unto us. Notwithstanding the
world through calamities and scourges will not amend. For what did it profit
the Jews to be so often exercised with all kinds of calamities? God therefore
was constrained at the length utterly to destroy them. In like manner Loath
preached to the Sodomites in vain: as Noah also did to the first world. The
same danger hangs over our heads. For neither with pestilence, war nor
famine can we be brought to amendment, or be any thing the better. Therefore
shall destruction follow.

This Psalm therefore is a commendation of peace and unity, to the end we
should esteem of it as a most excellent and holy gift, and that we should
rather suffer the loss of all things else, then give occasion of dissension
and discord. For if we must suffer any loss, it ought to be borne patiently
in this respect, that all other things through peace are recovered and
restored again: Nothing better chepe to the byer the^ peace.
as one said very well: I never bought any thing better chepe then peace: For
to the byer it brings most plentiful fruit. We see often times in our
private affairs, that if a man be content to lose ten or twenty crowns that
he may live in peace and quietness, he wynneth thereby great gain and
commodity: whereas an other neglecting this quietness, and by strife and
contention seeking ten crowns, loses many times an hundredth crowns or more.
If these things so fall out in private matters, what happens (think you) in
ye affairs of common wealths and kingdoms? Let us learn therefore highly to
esteem of peace, and to be thankful unto God for such a singular gift both in
the common wealth and in the Church. So shall it come to pass, that we shall
feel and enjoy this blessing and life, as the holy Ghost has promised.

The.134. Psalm. Behold, praise ye the Lord.
This is the last of the Psalms which are called the Psalms of degrees. In
the which ye have heard many weighty and profitable points of doctrine as
touching all the articles in a manner, What points of doctrine David entreats
of in the Psalms of degrees.
of Christian doctrine, namely of Justification or remission of sins, of the
cross, of charity and brotherly love, of matrimony, of civil government,
etc. as though the Prophet had studied to comprise in these short Psalms the
fumme and effect of all such things as are to be taught unto the people. Now
therefore he concludes in this Psalm, the whole matter which he took in hand
to entreat of: As we also do when in the end of our preachings we pray that
God would preserve his word among us, and that we may continue in the same
unto the end. For when the word is purely taught, all things are safe, holy
and pure, although the gates of hell rage against us never so much, and we
lose, not only our goods, but also our lives. For what harm have we thereby, so
that our souls may be saved? It is the word therefore alone that preserves
all good things. But if that be lost or corrupted, then all good things are
lost. For like as, if the Sun and light of the world should be taken away, he
that walks walks in darkness: so if the word be darkened and corrupted, in
what misery and danger is the common wealth? For then neither Magistrate, nor
subject, nor servant knows what he ought to do, but all things are wrapped
up in error and horrible darkness.

Wherefore this Psalm exhorts us to pray, that the Lord would preserve and
continue his word amongst us, and every one of us to endeavor with this
service to help the Church. For although the Church is never without
heretics, like as also the common wealth is never without seditious persons:
yet so long as the word remains found and vncorrupt, it can not be but that
many good things and many good men also will remain. I take this Psalm
therefore to be as a conclusion of those things which were spoken of before.
This Psalm is as it were a conclusion of those things that go before.
In yt which he exhorts us to give thanks unto the Lord for the benefit of
his word, and to pray for the preservation and continuance thereof, for as much
as, if it flourish, there will always be found some good men which will lead
a godly and a holy life. Therefore he says: Verse. 1. Behold, praise ye the
Lord all ye servants of the Lord, ye that by night stand in the house of the
Lord.



To bless signifies not only privately to give thanks unto the Lord, To
bless what it signifies.
but also publicly to praise the Lord, to preach and to publish his word. And
this can not be done without the praise also of the mercy and goodness of the
Lord our Creator, our defender and our redeemer, which has provided for us and
gives unto us all things perteining not only to this our corporal life, but
also to our everlasting life and felicity in the kingdom of God. And albeit
this clause: servant of God, belongs here properly to the ministers of the
Church, yet generally it comprehends all those which profess and embrace the
true and sincere doctrine of the Gospel. For it is the duty even of those
which are not in the ministry of the word, to confess the word, and to
acknowledge and praise the benefits of God. Wherefore with one heart and mind
(says he) join ye all together: continue in the word, confess, preach,
praise and magnify the word, that whiles all the world befids dishonoreth
and blasphemeth God, ye may bless him, because he is merciful. Then shall it
come to pass, that ye shall overcome all your enemies, though ye be to them in
number far unlike.

But what means he by these words? which by night stand in the house of the
Lord? Did they observe certain hours in the night after the manner of the
Papists? You must note that it is a kind of speech proper unto the Hebrews,
and is as much to say, as morning and evening, that is to say, continually. As
he says also in an other Psalm: From the morning watch even until the
night. Psalm. 129. Coloss. 3.16.
Paul expresses this sentence with other words: Let the word of Christ dwell
in you plenteously, says he. And our Savior Christ teaches, Luke, 18.1.
that we must pray always. For whereas the night season is appointed for
sleep, he that will bless in the night, will do ye same also in the day, and
so he will be always blessing.

Verse. 2. Lift up your hands to the Sanctuary and praise the Lord.

As much to say, as when ye pray in the Sanctuary, lift up pure and holy hands.
For he that prays in that holy place, must offer up pure and holy prayers. So
says S. Paul also: lifting up pure hands, 1 Timothy 2.8.
etc. for else ye shall pray in vain. Pure hands signify innocence, from
blood, extortion, spoil and robbery. The Prophet therefore sets forth here
two sorts of men coming to the temple and praying. Some there be that come
and pray in innocence and holiness. Some again pray in hypocrisy, having
their hands defiled with blood. 107.7.
The prayer of such is sin, as the Psalm says. Paul teaches in like manner
concerning prayer: Timo. 1.2.
Pray (says he) without wrath or doubting. Also our Savior Christ says: If
thou bring thy gift to the altar, Matthew. 5.25.
and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, go thy way and
first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. For this
is a common thing, that hypocrites, when they have done all ye injury they can
against their brethren, are not only without all remorse of conscience, but
also they make a great show of religion and holiness, and brag of the Gospel
more then the true Christians do. Against these the psalm speaks and
warns them that when they pray in the holy place, they ought to be pure and
holy. For who so ever prays, and is possessed with the sin of covetousness,
fleshly lust or any other devil, Psalm. 50.16.
to him the Lord says: What have thou to do to declare mine ordinances, that
thou should take my covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be
reformed, and have cast my words behind thee? For when thou see a thief,
thou runnest with him, and thou art partaker with the adulterers etc. Such was
ye prayer of the Pharisey, Luke. 18.14.
which departed out of ye temple unjustified. For this is a common evil among
men, yt they which are most impure and wicked, do glory more of God and his
word, then such as are godly and fear God in deed. Wherefore the Scripture
expressly declares, yt such there be as take ye name of God in their mouths,
and yet in heart and life are polluted and wicked. And in this place the prophet
inueyeth against hipocriets, which think that when they pray, God sees not
ye uncleanness of their heart. This is therefore a necessary prayer, ye first God
would give unto us his word, and defend the same against all vain spirits and
heresies: and secondly that he would preserve us in innoce^cie and keep us
from hypocrisy.

Verse. 3. The Lord that has made heaven and earth, bless thee out of Sion.

As touching Sion we have said before, that God would have, not only certain
ceremonies and certain persons, but also a certain place for his service and
worship, lest the people should wander vncerteinly, and choose unto them selves
peculiar places to worship God in. Now, for as much as this thing was not
without offense, (for what can be more absurd and contrary to reason, then that
the God of heaven and earth should be shut up in that darkness?) therefore to
confirm their minds herein, he says that the Lord which dwells in Sion, is
the maker of heaven and earth.

This have we often declared, and necessary it is that it should be often
repeted, lest we should chose unto our selves strange and peculiar kinds of
worship. For as in the old Testament there was a certain place, certain
persons and certain times to the which God had bound, as you would say, his
service: so we in the new Testament do find the father in Christ. In Christ
the father is worshipped: but without Christ he can neither be worshipped nor
found: but what so ever is devised for the service of God without Christ, is
damnable and accursed.

The sum and effect therefore of all together is this: O ye Priests, ye
Pastors and Ministers of the word, to you I speak, you I do admonish, that ye
follow the word faithfully and do your office purely. For whiles the word and
the ministry are sound and vncorrupt, there is nothing that can hurt us. For
although Satan and the world do assail us, what then? If God be with us, who
can be against us? Let this be therefore your special care and endeavor, that
the word may remain pure and vncorrupt, and pray that the Lord would assist
you herein and bless your labors, for of all the blessings of God this is
the greatest. Which might be said in more words, but let this suffice. Now it
is our duty likewise in this light of the word, to endeavor by all means to
do the same, lest that through our unthankfulness the word be taken from us
again: and to pray for the Churches, that God would bless them for Jesus
Christ his sons sake our Lord and our Redemer. Amen.

THE END.

