A Note of such things as were stolen in Lions, on Monday night the eleventh
of June 1630. in the house which is known by the sign of the Sunnes-rising in
the Street de la Poullaillerie in the said City of Lions.
ONe string of great round Pearls, containing thirty and nine Pearls of
eighteen or twenty Crowns a piece, there being at the two ends of the string
Carnation silk, and a little hard wax upon a paper, without any mark.

One Chain of sixscore Roses, in every one of which there are six small
Emeralds, and one little Diamond in the middle.

Two strings of round Pearls, containing fourscore Pearls of ten Crowns a
piece.

One hundred thirty and one round Pearls of ten Lyvers a piece.

One chain of Diamonds, with Ragge Pearls of the value of one hundred and
twenty Crowns.

One little string of Pearls containing five and forty Pearls of ten Crowns
a piece.

Three and thirty Buttons of ten Crowns a piece.

Three strings of Pearls of six Crowns a piece, but we know not the number.

One pair of Eare-pendants of four hundred Crowns where there are two great
Pearls.

Two Bodkins, the one with a Diamond, the other with Saphiers, that with the
Diamond is of one thousand Lyvers, and that with the Saphiers of fifty Crowns.

One Chain of gold weighing six Ounces.

Two Chains of Pearls, and one Collar of Diamons of the value of eight
hundred Lyvers.

Two great strings of Pearls of ten Lyvers a piece.

One chain of Pearls of seven Sous a piece.

One Relicke of Diamonds of two hundred Lyvers.

One ounce and a half of grain gold.

Four great Pearls of the value of 400 Lyvers.

One Agnus of Crystal.

One Cross of gold of the value of eleven Lyvers.

More, our Lady of Diamonds of the value of one thousand Lyvers.

Seven Jewels wherein there are three Diamonds, one Saphier, one Garnet, one
Ruby, one Lapis: one pair of Bracelets of Currall, with marks of gold,

One Collar of Diamonds, with Pearls of the value of five hundred Lyvers.

Six ounces of Ragge Pearls of the value of six and fifty Crowns the ounce.

More, four strings of Pearls of forty Sous a piece, and two other strings of
five and thirty Sous a piece.

Fifty Pearls of the value of eight Lyvers a piece, two strings of Pearls of
the value of four Lyvers and ten Sous a piece.

More, in a Box, one Rose of Diamonds of the value of twenty Crowns, one
Diamond, and one Ruby of the value of ten Crowns, and diverse other things
which are in the said Box.

Three Collers of Diamonds of diverse prices.

One great chain of Diamonds of the value of six hundred Crowns, wherein there
wants one Collet in the middle of one of the pieces, and also one Bodkin,
with a Diamond of the value of one hundred Crowns.

One Holy Ghost with a Diamond of the value of eight Crowns, and one Watch of
Cristall.

One Collar of Diamonds and Pearls of the value of two hundred Crowns, one
little Chain of Pearls weighing one ounce, three penny weight, of the value
of sixteen Crowns the ounce.

More, many Pearls on fourteen strings, and fourteen strings of Pearls
more of the value of one Sous a piece, and many Ragge Pearls weighing about
two ounces sealed at the two ends to a string with a seal.

One Hatband of great flat Pearls with three Roses seven Pearls in every Rose
fastened to a Card.

Whosoever shall bring these things, or the form of them to be praised, or
sold, let them be stayed, and the persons.

Two men are suspected clothed in Gray: the one of them having small silver
Lace upon his apparel: and the other Buttons, his face swartish, and beard
black pointed, and he is bigger then his fellow.

Those that can bring any news of this Robbery shall have one hundred Crowns
given them to drink.

If any such thing shall be heard of, let them repair to Mr. De la Bar in
Crutchet-Fryers, and they shall be contented for their pains.

God save the King.

