Instructions for the wars.

Amply, learnedly, and politiquely, discoursing the method of Military
Discipline.

Originally written in French by that rare and worthy General, Monsieur
William de Bellay, Lord of Langey, Knight of the order of France, and the
Kings Lieutenant in Thurin.

Translated by Paul Iue, Gent.

printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON Printed, for Thomas Man, and Tobie Cook. 1589.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable, William Dauison Esquier, one of her Majesty's
principal Secretaries: and of her Highness most Honorable privy Council.
Having deuested out of his French attire, this learned and martial work, of
that famous and experienced Captain, Mounsieur de Bellay: (the attempting and
perfourming whereof, being by me taken in hand, through the commandment,
and cheerful encouragement of your Honor) I thought my self tied by duty
to present you with the ripe croppe of that reaped grain, which by your own
good direction was sown and manured. Yea, a point of unpardonable ingratitude,
might it be noted in me, if that which was hatched under the shelter of your
fouourable protection, and delivered unto me by your Honors own hands, to be
translated, (for the benefit of your loving countrymen, whose weal you have
always most carefully respected) should now as a fugitive run away from your
Honor, elsewhere to seek any other master, friend, or patron. Acknowledge
therefore, I most humbly beseech you, your own: and vouchsafe favorably to
accept my poor self, and these my simple travels herein employed, according
unto the generositie of your worthy mind. As I during life, shall remain a
daily petitioner unto the Almighty, for his graces bountifully to be powered
upon you, to the advancement of his glory, the benefit of your country, and
your own comfort.

Your Honors most humbly ready to do you service: Paul Iue.

To all Gentlemen Soldiers, and others, the Readers of this Book.
A Lawful use of Arms there is,
a time of wreckfull war,
When Countries cause does crave defense,
from force of foreign jar.
Else should we not our lives, our Wives,
our Babes ne goods enjoy:
From rampaunt clawe of greedy Gull,
that thirsts for our annoye.
And Prince might seem in vain to sway
the Sword and regal Mace:
If that he should not curb the rage
of foes deuoid of grace.
Let us therefore in egall Skales,
all circumstances way,
Why, when, where, how, and under whom
we dinting Sword assaye.
And we shall find in sacred lore,
how war from God above,
Good warrant has, who does the same,
by sundry texts approve.
The Israelites great slaughter made, Number. 31.

of them of Mydian land:
And all the pray and spoil was dealt
among their warlike band.
The Amalechits by Joshua stout, Exodus 17.

in war were overthrown:
And Moses this from Gods own mouth,
made clearly to be known.
Psalm. 18, and 144.
King David ioyed in his skill,
of warlike feats at large:
And says that God taught him to fight,
and know a Warriors charge.
And wars were so accounted of
by God in time of yore:
Deuteronomy. 20.
That Militare decrees were made,
in great abundant store.
Yea, not so much omitted was,
as Trumpets how to frame,
Number. 10.
And how to use: when need requird,
the force of foes to tame.
What praise for constant faith and life,
did Christ himself confess
Matthew. 8.
To be in that Centurions heart,
who warfare did profess?
Cornelius, he that Captain was
unto the Italian band:
Act. 10.
And lived by Wars, much favor found
at God almighties hand.
Luke. 3.
John Baptist bidding Soldiers live,
contented with their wage,
Allows their trade, so that they show,
to no man dire outrage.
This and much more shall plain appear,
by Langeys stately style.
And by the reasons that have past
his brave and lettred fyle.
With policy and valor eke,
he rites religious brings,
And no man's duty leaves untouched,
ne other needful things.
The General Chief his office here,
beholds as in a Glass:
The Marshall of the Camp his charge:
and (so from him to pass)
The Master of the Artillarie,
the Treasurer, the Judge,
The Colonel, the Corporal,
that at no pains must grudge.
The Serieant Mayor, Victailer,
the Master of the watch:
The Ensign bearer, Drumslade, Clarke,
and Shot that serve with match.
And every other petty charge,
most lively set abroach:
As they shall find, that to this Book
with heedfull care approache.
Both how to muster, how to martch,
and battle how to give:
On Horse with Lance, on foot with Pike,
each way their foe to grieve.
How Wings to place, how Flanks to plant,
and how for to retire:
At vantage how to sallie out,
to pay the foe his hyre.
With each appendance unto war,
and that so passing well,
That Langey now by doom of best,
does bear away the Bell.
Here may we learn how to enskonce,
in Barbican, or Pyle:
In Castle, Fort, or walled town,
and how to drop a wile,
Or plant an Ambush, to surprise,
the Enmie in a snare:
And catch him in a net, ere he
be once thereof aware.
These helps are now new brought to light
by Iuies painful quill,
Who published has in English phrase,
through entire hearty will,
And loyal zeal to Countries weal,
this rare and learned work,
Not suffering it in foreign tongue,
from us (unknown) to lurk.
Such painful works, such Captains good,
such Soldiers at our need,
As herein are describde and taught,
God grant this Realm may breed,
So should that venimd Vipers brood,
that gapes for Englands spoil,
Be quickly brought to know themselves,
and easly put to foil.
Tho. Newton, Cestresh.

The Author his Preface: wherein he disputes whether it be lawful for
Christians to make Wars, or not.
ALthough that the question, to weet, whether it be lawful for Christians to
make wars among themselves, does yet hang in controversy, not having at any
time bin fully decided, because it is hard to judge in a difference, where the
reasons that either party alleges for himself, do make it so doubtful,
that hardly it may be resolved: notwithstanding I dare believe that those
wars which are taken in hand neither for ambition, nor for the desire of
revenge, nor voluntarily, nor to the intent to usurp other men's goods, are
just and lawful; especially for a Prince, if it be to defend his country and
subjects, for whose safety he is bound to hazard his life. And in mine opinion
it serves to no purpose that some allege out of the holy Scripture to the
contrary, saying, that a good Christian ought patiently to suffer the injuries
and wrongs that are done unto him, without making resistance unto those that
would take away his goods, or would strike him. For I hold opinion that that
was only spoken unto the Apostles, and their like, unto whom it was necessary
to have humility and patience in all their business, if they would that the
doctrine which they preached should bring forth good fruit, and take root,
because it was not in them to use force, and that in truth those things which
we persuade with humility, are of much more virtue then those things which are
constrained to be believed through violence. But as for us which faithfully
believe the Gospel, and are not called to preach, and those that do govern a
people, I think it is lawful for us to use arms against them that would
ouerrunne us; and that the sword was given unto Princes to defend their
Subjects and good men from the devouring of the stronger and wicked: and
consequently, authority to help themselves by arms, and through the force of
their subjects, to make the royalty which God has given them to be of
estimation; for it is not without cause that they do bear the sword, nor
without mystery. Wherefore in mine opinion, Princes may justly take arms in
hand for the defense of their subjects, and the subjects likewise for the
maintenance of their Princes authority, and that to this intent it should be
lawful to leuy men, and afterward to make wars. Not that this taking up of
men should be handled, after the manner of those people which do enrowle
themselves voluntarily, and which go to the wars for a bravery; or to the
intent to make a hand thereby: but I mean, that this leuy should be made by the
commandment of the Prince, and that the subjects should neither have liberty
to offer themselves, nor refuse to go whither it shall be his good pleasure to
send the^ within his country to drive out an enemy only, and not to assault
him. As we see in France the King does leuy his Rierban, and may compel them
to go into any of the frontiers of his country, for the defense of the same,
in which case, there is no Gentleman that may refuse, or excuse himself; but
must be there at the day appointed, if the excuse be not very lawful. So that
me think, these Rierbans may then go against the Kings enemies, and enter
into battle against them, without charge of conscience any way; as well for
that natural reason would that every man should defend his goods and country:
as also, because it is the King that commands us to go, unto whom we are
bound by the laws of God to obey, and unto all other Potestates having charge
from him. The leuy then which is made in this order, and to this intent, is not
(as I think) reprouable; and so likewise is to be thought of the service which
the common people do unto their Prince, which in my judgment, is so
reasonable, that I dare affirm, that those that happen to be slain in this
quarrel; shall not be reproved for the same before God: which I will not say
for those that go out of their Country to seek their adventures, what
likelihood of good title so ever they have, for their excuse can not be
grounded upon any coulor of reason that I do know. So it is then, that if the
Prince do compel them to go, they shall be mutch more excusable, then when
they go of their own free wills, forasmutch as we owe (as is above said) all
obedience unto our King; and who so resists the King, resists the ordinance
and will of God. Wherefore if we commit any fault in obeying him, that is to
say, if we offend his enemies as farre-foorth as the laws of arms will
permit, and no further, we must think that the fault shall not be altogether
ours, but that he shall have his part in it; but peradventure the government
may be handled so graciously in moderating of our quarrels, that one of our
wars may rather be called a threatening, or a correction, then otherwise:
because it cannot well be termed a war, for that the controversy, or
quarrel, that those that are of one party have amongst themselves, is called a
Mutiny, and we are all belonging unto one, to weet, unto Christ. Therefore the
controversies which we have sometimes amongst us, are very mutinies, and ought
not properly to be called by any other name: in consideration whereof, as often
as we fall into this inconvenience, we ought to use the matter in such sort,
and with such modesty, that from an outward sedition, we fall not into a
right cruel wars: and that we which do carry one name, and make profession
to preach perfect amity, saying, that we all are one only body in Christ, do
not become divided, wholly contrary unto the signification of our name, and the
sufferance of our law. For in truth, in troubling one another as we do, our
forces diminish, and the infidels wax stronger, who know so well to make
their profit of our said mutinies, that they from day to day do enlarge their
Empire, and assure it to themselves, while we fight together, and consume one
another forces for a thing of naught. Wherein they use so great industry, that
it is to be feared that in time they will by little and little take from us the
rest which we enjoy. And yet there is none that does look into it, or if any
do foresee, none that do make show to withstand it, so that every one trusts
unto them that are the nearest borderers, saying, let them defend if they will,
and that it will be long ear they come unto us, but that is an opinion that
may as well deceive us one day, as it has done others that trusted thereunto,
especially those that made no account to quench the fire that was kindled at
their own doors, as has been seen amongst the Greeks, who were slothful to
help one another, when the Turks came first down into Greece, at which time
they were of small force, but after that they had once put in their foot, it
was then too hard to drive them out again, and therefore they have continued
their masters, and the first inhabitants were forced to seek other
habitation, or to abide their tyrannies. The Hungarians likewise looked to be
entreated to send aid against the same adversary, and it is seen what they
have gotten thereby. The Polonians, Bohemians, and Almaigns, were long time
negligent to succor Hungary for their own particular quarrels, and therefore
the Turk is at their gates. Italy, Spain, and France, have suffered for to
spite one another, that many strong Towns, Islands in the sea, and Countries,
have been lost within this forty years unto their great shame, for which they
do already suffer a certain penance, to weete, by the courses and pillages
that are made upon their sea coasts, besides the fear that each one of them
has to receive a worse turn, how long soever it be deferred. Truly it is
against that unbelieving people that our Princes should declare themselves
enemies, for to keep out of their hands that which yet remains unto us, and
to recover from them that which they unjustly hold from the Christians, for
that for a more just or holy quarrel, they cannot require to take arms in
hand, and in truth such a war as would not offend God, since it should be but
to make resistance unto a people that do seek to put down our Religion, to
advance theirs, and our common wealth, to make themselves lords and monarks of
all. Suppose that our said Princes should do no other good, but deliver the
poor Christians, which they do tirannously and outrageously use at all times,
and hinder, that little infants should not from henceforth be taken out of the
arms and laps of their fathers and mothers to be circumcised as they are, and
instructed in countries unto them unknown, in that most damnable sect of
Mahumet, their parents never hearing what is become of them; and which is
worse, of the members of Jesus Christ, are made members of the Devil; should
not this be enough for our said Princes? me think yea, and to their great
honor, whereas it is to their great shame that they do no better indeuer. Well,
I doubt that they shall one day yield an account for it, and not only they; but
also those that have any authority amongst us: principally my masters the
prelates of the Church, who little regard to declare it unto them, unto whom it
appertains; and furthermore to employ a good portion of their own goods,
seeing they have wherewithal to do it, and very good occasion to speak of it.
Notwithstanding they are cold, and make no reckning (as is above said) of the
danger that they are in, nor of the servitude that the poor Christians which
dwell in Greece and Asia, are held in, under the hands of Infidels, to the
great prejudice of our Religion, for the which all faithful Christians ought
to take arms in hand against our common adversary rather to day, then to
morrow. And to that end I believe firmly, that it is lawful for us to make
wars, if it be not lawful for any other intent. Provided always, that the
cause that moves us thereunto be such as it ought to be; and that the
determination be not to kill those that will not by and by believe. For it is
not with the stroke of the sword that Infidels are converted, and become
Christians; but it is example and conference that may do more then force: and
the force (I say) which we may do unto them, is only that we should defend our
marches, or deliver the Churches of the abouesaid Countries, out of the
captiuities that they are in: or if so be that the said infidels would enter
further upon us, or would not freely depart out of the countries which they do
vsurp, I am of opinion that we might go upon them for these causes, and make
the^ a most cruel and sharp war; and yet notwithstanding having the victory,
use them as gently as we do use one another in our wars, forasmutch as
peradventure they might hereafter be converted: and in truth no man was ever
reproached for making of honest wars, and for showing mercy unto the
vanquished. This then is the most just wars of all that a Christian may make;
the defense of our Prince and his Realm is the next. Likewise a Prince may go
out of his Country to assault another, so that it be to get his own again,
if so be that it were taken wrongfully from him, or that any people his
subjects did rebel: for since Princes have charge of their subjects, and
therefore may punish those that do wrong one to another; who is it then that
shall forbid them to ask their own, and to recover with force that which is
kept from them by force? seeing that they have no body to run unto greater
then themselves, or that is their superior. I speak of a king of France or of
another his equal, specially after having made the requests and demonstrations
unto the withholders that in such a case are necessary. In which case if it
were not lawful to have recourse unto arms, it would thereof ensue; that the
world would be so full of vprores, and of those that seek to surprise one
another, chiefly the subtle sort, being assured they should not suffer smart
for the violence they commit: a thing not tolerable, because the common peace
would be too mutch disquieted. I say further for the subjects, that if the King
do compel them to enter upon the lands of another man, under what title so
ever it be, that they are not to enquire whether it be good or evil, nor are
so culpable as so me perhaps will say that they are, so that they do it to obey
him, for they ought to depend upon him all in all. But as concerning the King
who is the occasion, it shall be his deed, and those that counsayled him
thereunto. Then to play surely a Prince which pretends to make wars, ought
to handle the matter so, that his pretenses do not savor of any of the
conditions aforesaid, or else he cannot so well color his fact, but that his
cause would be wrongful. And suppose further that he has some color to make
wars, yet is it better, first before any thing be taken in hand, to have
recourse unto arbitrers, then to be the occasion of the great mischiefs which
do follow a war: but if so be that his adversary refused conference, or would
not put his controversy to arbitrers that are not to be suspected, and that it
behooved him with all speed to take arms for his refuge, and to invade his said
adversary, or those that do him wrong, it ought to be done with a maxim, to
make the least outrageous and bloody wars that he might, and the shortest. In
consideration whereof, a Prince which at any time finds himself driven unto
the necessity to assault his neighbors, or to be assaulted himself, ought
betimes to furnish himself with good soldiers, which should not only be
valiant men, and well practiced, but moreover should be men of good life, to
the intent he might in short time overcome his enemies, without too great a
loss of his own people, or of his aduersaties, but as the equity of a
gracious war requires. But for that it would be impossible to conduct a
war of great importance soon to an end, without the having of very good
Souldyers, and further to keep them from endomaging himself and others,
except they were men of very good life, it should be necessary that the said
Prince should have a care, that those whom he pretends to employ in this
business, should be the least vicious, and most expert in the feat of arms that
he possibly could find. And that he should seek by all means possible to
make them so perfect, which cannot be done without reading of the Authors that
have given rule for it, wherein I have somewhat spent my time, because I would
gladly be the occasion of some profit unto the King if I might. And having
seen and read the said Authors sufficiently, at least the most renowned, I
have in fine assayed to show by this work, how the said Lord might recover
such Souldyers as are spoken of, and to that end I have distributed this
work into three parts. The first shall show how to levy a great number in
France, and how to train them to have service of the^ in every place. The
second shall treat of all the points that a Captain General ought to know
how to conduct the wars to his honor, and to overcome his enemies. The third
shall also treat of the same matter, and shall likewise speak of the laws
that ought to reign amongst Souldyers. Of all which things shall be so largely
spoken, that peradventure I shall be found too troublesome unto those that
shall see my work, specially for that I determine to make ample mention of all
that appertains unto this science, except it be how to defend a place. For I
do presuppose that the host which I will make, shall be always so strong,
that it shall not at any time be constrained to enclose itself where it may be
besieged: but I mean to make it such a one, that it may besiege and assault
al others. Which to do, throghout the whole book I have chosen for my chief
guide the uses and customs which I do find have bin observed of the ancient
Soldiers, after whose example I do govern my self more then after the manner
that is now in use amongst us, because ours is too far differing from that
Military discipline, which ought to be observed among us for the better. And
the reason that makes me to believe that it is so contrary, and of mutch less
value then theirs, is, that all things concerning this matter were mutch better
done by them, then they are by us, and that their Soldiers were more orderly,
more painful, more virtuous, and better men of war then we are, as the
deeds both of the one and the other would make show, who so would compare them
together. Wherefore I would frame them of whom I intend to speak, after the
ancient manner, and according unto my small capacity. And although I follow
the ancient manner in most part of the actions which a Camp does,
notwithstanding it is without rejecting our own fashions in any thing that I
think them to be surer then theirs. And if I put too any thing of mine own,
it is not without due examination, and that I know that there is some advantage
to be had in using the manner I do speak of. If then mine opinion be thought
anything worth, let it be taken in good part, for I have done it for the desire
I have to see our Discipline in better state then it is at this day. But if so
be it be found to be worth nothing, let it be then left wholly unto those that
I have borrowed it of, and unto me. And if peradventure the affairs of France
do stand at any time in ill state for want of foresight (which God forbid) let
the fault be laid upon their necks, that might have remedyed it; if they had
would, and not upon his that would have remedyed it, if he might.

The Contents of the Chapters contained in this treatise, are these following.
The Chapters of the first Book.
HOw the King ought to make his Wars with the force of his own subjects.
Chapter. 1. The number of Souldyers that might be levied in France. Chapter.
2. The manner how to leuy Souldyers, and to inrowle them, and the qualities
that are requisite to be in a new Souldyer. Chapter. 3. How Souldyers ought to
be armed and weapened, both according unto the manner that was used in the old
time, and the manner that is used at this present. Chapter. 4. The manner how
to distribute a great number of Souldyers into many bands, and how to bring
many bands into one principal. Chapter. 5. How new Souldyers ought to be
exercised in diverse exercises, and the bands perticularly exercised before that
the Legions should be assembled. Chapter. 6. How to raunge one Band alone in
battle, and the order that it ought to keep in travailing thorough the
Country, and the manner how to lodge it in Camp, in his quarter apart, and a
Legion together. Chapter. 7. How certain number of Horssemen should be joined
unto every Legion. Chapter. 8. How it is necessary to divide every Battaillon
into three battles, the one separated from the other. Chapter. 9. How to
raunge a Legion in battle, and after what manner it must be practiced.
Chapter. 10. How from point to point to raunge four Legions in battle,
wherein, the Author does give the best order that may be observed. Chapter. 11.
The Author shows by a feigned Battle, how an army of four Legions raunged
after the manner that he teaches, should use their fight against their enemy
upon a day of battle. Chapter. 12. The Author yields a reason for every
thing that was done both before the battle and after. Chapter. 13.
The Chapters of the second Book.
How a General may raunge his Battles after diverse manners unto his
advantage, with certain policies that may do him pleasure when as he shall be
at the point to fight with his enemies. Chapter. 1. What a Lieutenant General
ought to do after the winning and leesing of a Battle, and what consideration
he ought to have before that he do enter into Battle. Chapter. 2. How a
Captain General ought to defer to come unto the combat with his enemies as
mutch as he may possible, when as the said enemies are entered into his Princes
Country: and whether is the greater danger to attend for them at home in his
own Country, or to go seek them in theirs: and likewise if the said
General should be importuned by his Souldyers to fight, how he might avoid it,
and how to encourage them, if so be that they were afraid of their enemies.
Chapter. 3. The order that a Lieutenant General ought to keep in marching
through his enemies Country, and the manner how to raunge a square battle
with four faces, leaving an empty place in the midst of it. Chapter. 4. The
order that a Lieutenant general ought to use for the victualling of his Army,
and how the ancient Chefs did use their booties: with diverse means that a
General may use to endamage his enemies, and to keep himself from surprice.
Chapter. 5. How a Lieutenant General ought to govern himself when as he
finds that he is too weak to abide his enemies, with certain polycies to
escape their danger when as he is fallen into it, and how to have the advantage
of them. Chapter. 6. How to lodge four Legions together in a Camp, and what
watch they ought to keep, with other points concerning the said manner of
lodging in Camp, and whilst the Camp is making. Chapter. 7.
The Chapters of the third Book.
How a General may help himself with diverse policies in the wars. Chapter.
1. The order that a General ought to keep in the besieging of a town.
Chapter. 2. How Souldyers ought to govern themselves according unto the laws
of Arms: with the chiefest laws, and manner of proceeding in judgment
against an offender. Chapter. 3. After what manner diverse crimes have bin
seuearely punished in times past, and how it is necessary for a Lieutenant
General to be somewhat cruel, if he would be well served. Chapter. 4. How
Souldyers ought to be recompensed after that they have done good service, with
the Author his excuse. Chapter. 5.
FINIS.
The first Book of Military Discipline.
How the King ought to make his wars with the force of his own Subjects
The 1. Chapter.
THe authors, which heretofore have busied themselves to give rules
appertayning unto the wars, would by their sayings that those men of whom a
Prince would pretend to have service, should be levied in temperate countries,
if so be he would have them to be both valiant and wise. For they say that
hot countries do bring forth wise men, but they are cowards, and that cold
countries do bring forth hardy men, but they are fools. But I suppose that
they have left us this counsel only to serve the turn of some monarke, or
puissant king, whose dominions do stretch so wide, that both these qualities
may be found seperably in the countries that are under his hands, and has
power to levy and choose his men in what part he will, as the ancient
Emperors did at that time when almost all the whole world was in their
obedience. But to give a rule that princes of mean power may help themselves
withal: although their countries be situated in extreme hot or cold regions,
I do affirm that this consideration shall nothing hinder such a prince to
serve himself with his subjects, but that he may make them hardy which
naturally are cowards, and those wise which of themselves are fools, for that
we may plainly see by old examples, that in all places, whether they be cold
or hot, there may be very good soldiers, so that there be exercise used and
diligence: for that which by nature wants may be supplied by industry and
exercise, in this art specially which consists more in this point then in
any other, by means whereof the Lacedaemonians commanded long time over all
Greece, the Thebans delivered them from the obedience of the Lacedaemonians,
restoring them unto their former liberty: and the Romans (as says Vegetius)
surmounted through their exercise and discipline, the multitude of the Gauls,
the pride of the Germans; the force of the Spaniards, the riches and warines
of the Affricanes, and the wisdom and subtilties of the Greeks; although
they were inferiors unto the said nations in all things, only except exercise,
and skill to make wars. Furthermore, I say that if a Prince pretend at any
time to prevail, that he ought to levy his men of war amongst his subjects,
whether that his kingdom were situated in the midst of the frozen sea, or in
the midst of Libia, which in mine opinion, are the two extremest hot and
coldest climates that are: so that he would employ a little diligence to
fashion them as appertains. Chiefly having occasion to take up men for to
make wars, except he do take his own subjects, it will be doubtful that he
shall receive a shrewd turn by them, for that strangers can never serve a
Prince so loyally, but that his own subjects will serve him more faithfully
then they, and with a better heart: because the Princes quarrel that has them
in charge, is not a matter that touches one particular body, nor a third, but
it concerns all those that shall feel the smart of it for their Lord:
forasmuch as if he receive any loss, of necessity it must redound unto the
great loss of his subjects, because they are the pray of the vanquisher, if
their Prince be vanquished. And on the contrary part, let them make themselves
all rich, and not strangers, if their Prince be victorious. Besides, the good
name and reputation that they shall get, which is a point that sometime makes
the greatest coward hardy; and the shame which is to be looked for if they
leese is theirs also. For it will not be said that the mercenaries have lost;
but the nation of the Prince will be named: as in the conflicts which the king
has had in his time, it has not been said, that the Lanceknights, or the
Switzers, or the Italians have been overthrown: although there have been few
others in our camps; but it has been said that they were the Frenchmen, and
notwithstanding it may be that there have not been three thousand Frenchmen,
whereas the strangers have been fifteen, or twenty thousand persons. And if
at any time we have had the upper hand of our enemies, the glory has not been
attributed so wholly unto us, but that every one of the other nations have
looked to have had their parts in it. And if perchance any man has said the
Frenchmen have had the victory in such a battle, it has been by and by cast
in his nose, thank such and such, and there is reason it should be so, seeing
it is so that they have done it. So much a do there is to keep our good name,
as there were no better way then to let them alone, that from henceforth they
should neither be the occasion of our winnings nor losings: but that every man
should meddle with his own quarrel, and that we Frenchmen should be let
alone to debate the controversies we have with our neighbors, without
intermingling other nations, which have but a little care to dye for us. And
who make so little account of the matter as we see that they do, because it
touches them nothing, for all the thought that they have, is to find many
occasions to lengthen the wars, to the intent that they may always be set a
work. And for to be without them there is no order taken, because of the
little account that we do make of our selves. I say then, that a Prince ought
to serve him self with his own subjects, for the reasons before alleged.
And if we will be warned by things past, we have many examples before our eyes
for this matter. As by Empyres which are come to ruin through this fault, (to
weete) both that of the Romans, and also of the Greeks. For the Roman Empire
after it was mounted unto the highest in the time of Augustus Caesar, began to
descend, when the Roman citizens were rejected out of the hoasts which the
Emperous did make. And that they grounded themselves upon the force of
mercenaries, and those whom they before time had conquered. And although the
great virtues and judgment that were in the said Caesar, maintained the
majesty of the Empire while he lived: yet is it so, that his successors
learning of him to wage other nations then Romans: as Frenchmen, Spaniards,
Almaignes and others, have been the occasion of the ruin of the same: for all
the Emperors that were after Augustus Caesar, would keep an host of
strangers hard under the walls of the city of Rome, which was called the
Pretorie, and was such as we would say the guard that kings have for the
assurance of their persons: but this guard was of ten or twelve thousand chosen
men, much like unto the Mammeluks of the Souldane, or the Ianissaries of the
Turk: which manner although it seemed at the first sight to have been for the
profit of the Empire; notwithstanding it turned it oftentimes vpsidowne:
because that this number of Soldiers disposed of that dignity at their
pleasure, being upon the place and in arms, against naked men and unarmed. On
the other side, the other armies which were in France, Barbary, and elswere,
would stand in their own conceits, the one naming one to be Emperor, and the
other another: insomuch that sometime there were two or three pretendants: who
in thinking to consume one another, consumed the Empire, which had cost so much
the getting: a thing that they were ignorant of. But after that, most of the
Emperors were of strange nations, as the soldiers which had made them, were:
it was an occasion that they had less care of the preservation of the Empire:
then if they had been borne within the city. Whereof insued, that as well
those that were declared Emperors, as those that had elected them, marched
against the said city with one consent as against their enemies, with intent
to triumph over it. And God knows whether that these things might be handled,
without the committing of many robberies, and insolences in those chaunges,
and also of many murders as well of the Emperors them selves, as of the
Senators, and other great personages in Rome. Certainly we must say that it
was impossible, seeing that we may believe, that if the institutions which the
Romans had at that time that their virtue flourished, had been always
maintained, that was to make war with their own people, and not to have
waged strangers, nor likewise to have suffered their neighbors and alliance
in their camps, in greater number then they themselves were, their Empire had
not been divided, nor had not been transported out of their hands, nor their
city so many times destroyed, and abandoned as it has been. For if they had
maintained their first manner of war, they had escaped all their
inconveniences, and had brought all their enterprises to as happy end, as
they did while they served themselves with their own citizens. Michaell
Paleologus the Emperor of Constantinople, may likewise be an example: who
calling a number of Turks to his aid to make wars against certain princes
of Greece that rebelled against him, showed them the way to pass out of Asia
into Europe, and thereupon the said Turks took occasion to come upon Greece
with great force, and to invade it by little and little. Of which mischief the
said Emperor was cause, for that he chose rather to cause strangers to come
to his assistance, then to take up in his country those that were necessary
for him to make his wars withal, with whom, if he had would, he might with
little labor have vanquished a Lord of Bulgarie, his subject, and have
chastened him without thrusting an army of Turks into his country, who if
they had not come there, Greece had not suffered the miseries which it has
suffered in time past, and which it must yet every day suffer. And therefore
without having regard unto the old opinion, that is to say: whether the
country be cold or hot, and to withstand the manifold inconveniences that may
happen unto those that may make their wars with the help of strangers, me
think that every Prince ought to strengthen himself with his subjects,
without making any account to hyer others: or at the least if he would be
served with strangers, not to make them his principal force, for the danger
that might happen. As for to commit the person of a king, or of the greatest
personage of a kingdom, unto the trust of those that are not his subjects, and
who love him not, and the service which they do him is but for a few crowns:
is a counsel grounded upon no reason, because it is to be thought that
strangers are much more easy to be corrupted, then those that are borne and
bred in the same country that their king is. The preservation of whom, ought
to be more dear unto them, then unto those that serve him but for his money:
which once failing, they abandon him as if they had never known him. Hereupon
I may allege that which a great troop of Launceknights did unto Monsiure
Montpensier in Naples: who left him there at the mercy of the Spaniards, only
because his money failed, and that the enemies promised them payment at their
first arrival and as soon as they were turned from that part, which was cause
of the loss of the same kingdom the first time. And not to accuse the
Almaignes only, I say that the Switzers left Monsiure de latrec at that time
that the term of their payment was expired: because they doubted that they
should have borrowed upon the month following. And although that the said
Switzers did not go from us unto our enemies: yet every man knows well that
they forsook the said Lord when as his enemies were equal unto him in
strength, which was cause of the loss of the Duchy of Millain. Since that
the Grisons departed from our camp before Pauie, and abandoned the King his
person, even at that instant that the Spaniards were determined to hazard the
battle, and to assault him, which happened within few days after; so that the
going away of those bands did greatly weaken our army (for they were six or
eight thousand) and was cause that the enemy did enterprise more boldly to
assault us, and that our men were more discouraged to receive them, in so much
that putting thereunto the evil behavior of our Switzers, who went away
without striking stroke we lost the battle. Whereby appears plainly, the
little trust that is to be given unto strangers: and how dangerous it is for
us to repose our state in their forces. Whosoever he were, I will not be of
opinion that a King should make his force of strangers, nor that he should
entertain so many, that they should be of equal force with his own
subjects, if it were so that he were constrained to take any. For if the
strangers be as strong as his own people, and that it were necessary that
the said strangers should do any thing that were contrary unto their minds,
which they refused, they must be fought withal, or there will be no
obedience: but if they find themselves the weaker, they will never have the
heart to disobey nor to busy themselves with the authority of a Captain
General, as they are when there is no mean to bridle them. For which cause a
Prince that might find himself in extremity, not to be obeyed of the
strangers which he might retain, ought to have in his camp such a number of
his own subjects, that if he were driven to use force, they might be of power
sufficient to constrain the rebels to accomplish his will. For otherwise there
will be nothing done, because the service of the said Prince will be slacked,
and sometime a disobedience may be cause of many great domages, as was that of
the Almaignes which Monsiure de Humiers had with them in Italy, which made the
King not only to loose all that season, but also was cause of the loss of
diverse places that held for us, and put all Piemount in great danger to be
lost without recovery. And this is most certain, insomuch that if the Lord
Constable had any whit deferred to succor them, and had not used his
accustomed diligence, that which was left had fallen in few days after into
the Spaniards hands, without striking stroke. Yet he arrived so luckely, that
the towns that had but the news of his coming were preserved, and part of
those that were lost were recovered, and others also, but not without a
merueilous charge: and all to repair the fault of the foresaid Almaignes, who
had conducted the wars, both according unto their own appetites, and against
the will of the said Lord of Humiers, as every man knows, who besides that he
was disobeyed in his charge, being Lieutenant General for the King, was also
in hazard of his life, which is a thing that I cannot so much meruell at: nor
likewise at the arrogancy of the said nation. But I must much more meruell at
our negligence, seeing the injuries that strangers commonly do unto us, and
that we notwithstanding cease not to dispraise the service of our countrymen,
to become tributaries and subjects unto strangers: as if we could not do
without them now, as well as we have done at other times, and always until
the time of King Jews the 11. who was the first King of France that did give
pension unto strangers, especially unto the Switzers, for he kept ordinarily in
wages six thousand. King Charles the 8. followed him, who carried a great band
to Naples. King Jews the 12. served him self long time with them, and with
Almaignes, and other strangers. So likewise has the King that reigns at this
present in all his wars: yet in the end he perceived that his subjects were
as fit to serve him as strangers; so that they were practiced, or if he has
not had yt opinion of the Frenchmen, yet he has made a proof of it. And to
that end (as I think) have a very great number of Legionaries been levied in
this realm, which number if it had been levied by a true election, had been
sufficient to have withstood all our enemies. But the Frenchmens fortune would
not that this levy should have had his perfection: for that if this levy had
been made as it ought to have been, we should have been become their masters,
unto whom we now are subjects. Wherefore it has left us in the same state that
we have been learned to live in many years ago: and for that we make so
little account of our own forces, and do so much esteem of strangers, it may
one day happen to be the occasion of our ruin, if our neighbors should
enterprise jointly to come upon us. For one part alone has put France in
great fear: to weet, the Switzers, when as they came down into Burgundy, so
yt to make them to retier back again it cost us great sommes of money. And so
much failed we of the courage to present our selves in battle to resist them,
that the greatest part made their account to make them place, and to run out
of the country. O almighty God! what was become of the ancient valor of
France? At the name whereof all the nations both on this side, and on the
other side of the sea did tremble: and which was in possibility to assault
other countries, and not to be troubled at home, but by her own: nor
constrained to buy peace, since those that sold it unto us, were in few years
before not able to resist in their own country, the army of King Charles the
7. under the conduct of Lewis his son, being at that time Daulphine, and
since king. We may believe that their coming down was for our profit, since
they serve us for an example, for by the great troubles that France was in:
for 20. or 30. thousand Switzers, all a foot ill furnished with artillery,
and with all other things to invade such a country, may be coniectured what
it would do if the same Switzers should come again. And furthermore, if the
Almaignes, Flemings, Englishmen, Spaniards, and Italians, should come upon us
with one common consent, who could want nothing but good agreement, I could not
imagine how we should find mean to withstand such a coniuration. For to tarry
to make head unto them, were a much worse counsel then that of Monsiure
Tremouille was, to appease the Switzers with crowns; because that disordred
people, ill trained, and ill furnished, cannot serve for any other purpose
against people well ordered, well trained, and well furnished with arms, and
withal that appertains unto such a business: but to harten and to encourage
them the more. And as for us to trust unto, that the frontiers are well
furnished with strong towns, is a hope evil assured: for whosoever is Lord of
the plain country, I mean of so great and large a country as France is,
shall easily afterward have the upper hand of the places that they keep:
principally when so great a number, or a great part of those that I have spoken
of, shall enter in at diverse places, every nation upon his quarter, and that
they had divided the country before hand. For else we might have some reason
to hope yt in forbearing, they might separate themselves through discord, or
that a part taking might be practiced: notwithstanding these things must have
time, and in the mean while we should suffer many evils to be committed
before our eyes without remedy. And suppose that to see such a desolation to
come to pass upon so noble a realm, were almost a thing impossible: yet is
there none more apparent remedy to withstand it, and to take away from our
said enemies all the occasions that might hinder them from the conceit of this
impossibility, then to make our selves strong with our own people: I mean so
strong, that those that now do take pension of us, should be very glad to be
simply allied unto us: and others which privily have showed themselves to be
our enemies, should be constrained to dissemble: and those which dissemble,
should openly show themselves to be our friends by good proof. Which to bring
to pass, I would not counsel that our force should be any whit mingled with
strange soldiers, as well for to have the credit unto our selves, when as our
soldiers should do any good service, as also to avoid the great dangers that
might happen by an army made of many nations: for that is the occasion often
times that our enemies do know our secrets almost as soon as they are spoken:
except it should be to weaken our enemies, or to content our confederats, and
to get the good will of the country where the wars should be made, as I
think the King does by the Italians: in waging of whom he thinks to get the
hearts of all Italy, and in waging the Switzers to keep them: and moreover to
take away the forces of Germany from those that might use them against him,
except they retained a great number. And if so be that the King would be
served with any number of these nations, he may do it (as I think) forseeing
that his own be always the stronger: and that he use strangers as
assistants, but not to give them the preheminences and advantages that they are
accustomed to have amongst us: as to have the charge of the Artillery, and
commonly to make the battle, not being subject unto labors and assaults, as
the Frenchmen are, who are always appointed unto the Auantgard, or Areregard,
so that those of least value and strangers, have always the credit of the
battle, as those whom we ought to trust above all others, without whom we
have not the courage to enterprise the least thing that may be. I do not envy
them for the honor that is done unto them, knowing well that the places wherein
the Frenchmen serve be very honorable, and that in them they may show
themselves to be such as they are, as well in the Areregard, as in the battle,
and in the battle as in the Auantgard; it is all one: for there may be enough
to do in every place. But I would that the King should have so good an opinion
of us, as to think that he might be as well served of us as of any other
nation: and that he would not determine to make himself strong rather with
Switzers and Almaignes, then with us. For if they do now excel us for order,
we may either be equal unto them, or better then they in a short time. And
for other points, I see no reason to esteem them more then our selves: and who
so would narrowly look into them, shall find that they do rather serve us
with their name then with their deeds, and rather to make number then
otherwise: for that at this instant there is almost no battle given; for which
they say they serve, and are waged only to that end. Moreover, they go not to
assaults nor skirmishes, nor such other services; but all these services are
for us, which manner of war is now more used then other: so that they serve
and take their wages, not putting their persons in danger. They take it not as
the Frenchmen do that serve the King: for they have the pain and the danger,
and the strangers the profit and the reputation. One thing there is that
makes greatly for the Switzers and Almaignes, which is the good order that
they have amongst them, as well for the raunging of their men in battle, as in
obeying their Chiefs: whereof we have a great want. Therefore we must prove to
take their course, or any other more sure, and therein employ such diligence,
that if the king would be wholly and every where served by us, he might find
himself to be well served, and not repent the leaving of strangers for us.
So it is, that by the ordaining of the legions, every one thought that the
custom to wage other then Frenchmen, would have bin laid aside. But the king
perceiving that the levy had many imperfections in it, and that it should not
have been wisely done immediately to reject the service of others; has
therefore kept them, and a great part of our legions, and also certain bands
of adventurers, both to content the one and the other, and to assure himself on
every side. But if the kings meaning had been well executed in that which they
should have done after these legions were ordained, we might have hoped that it
would have bin a very good time for us. But whereas the Captains and officers
should have taken pains to train their soldiers well, they have done
nothing. It may be also that they had no express commandment to do it: and
those that have no great good wills of themselves, do quickly find an excuse.
I doubt also that the legionaries being levied in that order that they were
levied in, would not well have agreed unto it: so that the fault proceeded of
more causes then of one, but principally hereof that every one was a
voluntary, and that there was none inroulled but of their own freewill. And
the custom at this day is, that those that offer themselves, are commonly the
worst of the country; for very hardly will a good householder inroule
himself, or a quiet man that fears God, and justice, and loves his
neighbor: for these conditions agree not with the voluntary soldiers of the
time present, who are so vicious, that it is to be feared that their service
may do us more hurt then our own ill fortune; forasmuch as God is offended by
them in all manner of sorts. Besides, they are but too valiant; but so evil
conditioned, as it is not possible that they might be more. I will not say
that all the voluntaries are so; because I should do wrong unto many honest
men: but I speak of the greatest part, and not of all: and as I say that they
are ill conditioned, so I dare say that there is no good order in them, and
they are not so obedient, as it is requisite they should be, to exercise the
art of the wars as it ought to be. Wherefore it is impossible that a
Captain, how virtuous or diligent soever he be, should make his Soldiers to
imitate the manners of the soldiers of the old time, who were men of so great
a valor. Nor likewise can one of our Lieutenants General for the king, bring
into his host, the manner which the armies in time past observed, as well in
ordring, and raunging their battles, as in fight: without imitating of which
manner, it will be impossible to do any thing ought worth. The reason is, for
that the stuff, whereof our hoasts are compounded and framed, is so evil of
it self, that to think to apply it to any good use would be in vain, and to
hope to bring the art Military unto her first state would be all one: for
with less labor would new soldiers be forged, then those which already
have their shape, be reformed as they ought to be. But if it pleased the king
to make a new levy according unto a true election, which might afterward be
instructed diligently in Martial discipline; I believe assuredly that those
Soldiers would imitate the ancient Soldiers in all things, wherein they were
thought to have been more excellent then those, that have been since the feats
of arms are come to nothing. And furthermore, a General might easily
establish the ancient customs in his host, and by that means the king should
find himself to be the best served that ever was prince, and might brag that
he had the best soldiers, and the best ordered men that were upon the earth:
and for to have them to be such, it were necessary for the first Item, that
those which should be chosen should be the most honest men, and men of best
life that were possible to be found in the king his country, and for the
rest to leave that unto the Chiefs which should have the charge to train them:
for they might make them afterward such as they would have them to be. And for
to levy these honest men of whom I speak, the king should at the first make
a small force, and constrain them to inroule themselves, or the election would
not be perfect. And to the intent that this force should give no man
coffeehouse, they must be won unto it, with the hope of some profit, and
honor in time to come, and of some privileges, which must be promised unto
those that shall do their endeavor: and that during the time that they shall
serve, they shall have wherewithal to maintain themselves honestly. Through
this means, it should not be needful to draw any man by the ears:
especially if they knew that the king would be discontented with those that
should look to be prayed. In this doing the art Military would return to
her first force, and the king should be the first that should find ease in
it, and consequently his people. The thefts which many Captains do commit in
their musters should have no more place: and the yearly pensions which
strangers have, would make their end, neither would they run as they are
accustomed: because he should have enowe of his own: besides, the ordring of
them would be such, as he should not need to doubt any thing but the
displeasure of God: as for men they could not hurt him. And to be short, the
people should be no more driven away, eaten, nor pillaged by our own
soldiers as they are: also we should be so much the more assured against our
enemies, and furthermore enriched, or at the least, the money that the said
strangers do carry away, would tarry with us. All which things do make me to
conclude, that the King should do well to employ his own people, as often as
it shall be necessary to make war for the profit and preservation of his
realm: and should repose all his defense in the virtue of the French armies,
seeing that he has better means to do it then any prince living may have, or
any prince that has been ever had. And this my conclusion is so well proved,
that I need not to stay longer upon this matter: but go forward to speak mine
opinion of the course that must be taken to make a new levy in France, and
to conduct it from degree to degree, unto that point it must be brought unto,
to make the soldiers to be such as I have promised, and the army to be
invincible, and incomparable.

The number of Soldiers that might be levied in France.
The 2. Chapter.
THis kingdom is so environed on every side with diverse nations, ye love it
but a little, that to assure it against them, it had need of a very great
number of soldiers, and such a number as our legionaries were; but the charge
that this multitude would cost would be insupportable: and on the other part,
the pay of four franckes, and the exemption of another francke scot and lot
yearly, would not be sufficient to make them to be contented and bound unto
the duty that this business requires, to do service with them neither for
fair nor foul: so that to make such a levy would cost much, and yet our
force should be nothing thereby augmented, for that they would serve against
their wills, seeing the payments to be so little. Wherefore it were better to
take a less number of people, and to give them reasonable wars, then to take
a great number, and to have them the better cheap. And that the said people
might be of ability to apparel themselves honestly twice a year, and defray
their own charges in going and coming from the musters they should make,
without eating the people, as the soldiers do at this present. And moreover,
if they were called out to go to the wars, that from the day that they put
themselves in a readiness to march, their pay should be so augmented, that it
might maintain them in apparel and victual, according unto their quality.
And the Chiefs, Members, and Officers, should be maintained both in time of
peace and war, with the same wages that the Legionaries had heretofore. As
concerning that, I say we should take up so many the less: I mean, not that
this number should be so greatly diminished, but that being assembled, it
might make the just form of an host: as some five and twenty thousand
footmen, or there about. For otherwise it would be a leuying of men for to
spend money, but not to do service: specially for that a small number in short
time would come to nothing, because of the infinite mishappes that oftimes
happen unto men, so that there must be ever and anon new men inroulled, to
fill the bands that should lack. And for that the said number could not be
raunged and exercised as they ought to be, if they were levied in places far
distant one from another: because they could not be assembled, when they should
be trained and exercised, without great expenses: and it is a thing necessary
to bring them oftentimes together: for not being practiced, they could not be
made serviceable.

It were good that the first levy that should be made, should be ordained upon
the frontiers, who are most subject unto the courses of their neighbors, in
those countries which lie nearest adjoining together. As if we doubted the
Almaignes, this levy might be made in Campaigne, Burgundy, and Daulphine.
And who so feared the Spaniards, might provide in Languedoc, and Guyne: for
these are the countries borderers: and so likewise in others. Upon which
countries borderers the said 25. thousand men should be levied, and should be
practiced a year, two, or three, until that they might be thought to be
sufficient good soldiers. And that term expired, a new levy might be made
in other places: who also should be practiced as long. And afterward to
follow in order throughout all the other countries and frontiers of France,
until that all had been gone through, and then to begin a new to bring into
order those that were first inroulled: and consequently the second, and
afterward the others. And that those that should rest while the others were
trained (for I mean that there should be but the number abouesayd maintained
at once) should be bound upon pain of great punishment to exercise themselves
perticularly in their houses, and together, if they might do it without
expense, to the intent that they might always remember and keep that which
had been showed them touching the feate of the war. The roules likewise of
those that lie still should be kept in their intiere, not suffering any man in
the mean while to be discharged, nor that any man's name should be blotted
out, but with the leave of the Lord Constable, although the king do give him no
wages for the time; because that they might tarry while their turn did come
about, or be employed, if we had need to defend our selves: for that they
would be readier to be sent for, and levied, then if upon every occasion there
should be new men, and new roules made. This done, the king should find that
there would be a great number of men of war levied, and practiced within six
years, which would be so well ordered and fit for the war, that the one
half (to weet fifty thousand, for so many would the one half mount unto, or
very nere) would suffice to make resistance unto a whole world of enemies, and
the King should not feel how: since that he should not wage but 25. thousand at
once, or thereabout.

But if this counsel were misliked, it would be sufficient to withstand the
sudden courses of our neighbors, if the said 25. thousand should be levied
upon the four frontiers, that are most in hazard of this danger; which number
might be ordinarily maintained as is aforesaid. And put case that this were
done, or that I spoke of before: we must not therefore fear that the said
soldiers might do any disorder in the countries that they are levied in:
(although me think it were to be doubted) for that all the disorder that such
sort of people can do is after two manners: to weet, among themselves, or
against others. As for the disorder that may happen amongst themselves, while
they are under their Ensigns, the laws that are provided for those men that
are levied by way of ordinaries, do forsee into it; who punish grievously
quarrellers, mutins, and all other sort of people that commmit any crime, as
shall be showed toward the end of this book. And there is nothing that can
save or defend them from grievous punishment what armies soever they were;
because the King shall always be stronger then they, and they must rather be
taken at the holding up of a finger, then that one offense should escape
unpunished. And when all is said, the Almaigne soldiers do govern themselves
well under a law, and do well maintain justice amongst them, who use in their
country (I mean out of their great towns) a more greater liberty to do
evil, then the most corrupted of ours in France: and notwithstanding,
contrary unto their nature and custom, they submit themselves humbly unto the
justice of a Provost, when as they have occasion to go into a strange
country, or when as they are levied to tarry at home upon their own
dunghill. What would then in truth our soldiers do, who are bred in a country
that is governed by laws, and which does punish offenses more rigorously then
any other that is known: truly me think that they would live at the least as
honestly as the Almaignes do, and also would not be less obedient unto their
Chiefs, and unto those whom they ought to obey. Touching the faults that they
may commit at home amongst their neighbors, the ordinary Justice of the place
where they dwell will punish them: as the King his declarations made upon this
point do instruct us: by which he prete^deth, that the justice of the Colonells
should take place for the offenses of their Legionarie soldiers, but only
while they were in camp, or elsewhere under their Ensigns: of whom they are
to execute good and short punishment: but when they are returned, or that they
are not levied to go into the feeld, the ordinary justice should punish them.
But if so be that the said soldiers would exempt themselves from the
ordinary justice by force, and that through their great number they would be
the readier and boulder to do mischief, in joining themselves together, or
make any show to levy themselves without express commandment of their
Colonells, to the intent to ouerrunne and spoil the country, or to use force
unto any man: in these cases it may be lawful for the people to rise, and to
put themselves in arms to strengthen justice if it were required; without
whose authority, or the commandment of some royal officer, and that also of
the chiefest sort, I am not of opinion that the people should rise: for it is
to be feared that they would do more insolences then the soldiers themselves,
as did those that lately rose at Tours and thereabout: who in few days did
more hurt and damage unto honest men, and unto the places they passed through,
then the malefactors whom they pursued, had done in all the time that they
kept the feelds.

And after this manner I believe we ought to understand the king his
institutions made in the year 1523. by which he permits the people to
defend their goods against a company of hen eaters, which do sometimes
thrust themselves upon the country without commission. But for that it is a
most hard matter that soldiers should commit any offense but that the Chiefes
should immediately be informed of it, who oftentimes make show not to
understand of their faults, being negligent in reforming them: yea and
sometimes give them example to do evil: so that the misdemeanour of the
Soldiers does proceed as much of the Captain his fault, as of the evil
disposition of the Soldiers. Therefore I say, it must be narrowly looked
into, that those wicked Chiefs may be punished with rigor, to the intent that
they may be an example unto others their like to amend themselves: and unto
the good to be more careful to punish their evil doers. And if this levy
should be thought dangerous, for the advantage it might give unto Colonells,
who might so win their Soldiers hearts, as that they might use them at their
wills, through their long authority over them, and continual frequentation.
The surest way would be oftentimes to change Colonells, and to give such
charges unto those that before had made some proof of their loyalty unto the
king, and then it would not be to be feared that they should help themselves
with their forces against the king, nor his subjects, as I think. For there is
no man in France, but had rather continue poor in his obedience, being
accounted for an honest man, then to serve his enemies to become rich, and to
be accounted for a traitor and a wicked man. But if perhaps there were any
Colonel that would make proof of any commotion by means of his authority,
the King should always be strong enough to overthrow him, and to cut his
followers in pieces with little difficulty. This inconvenience then need no
more to be doubted; because that those that heretofore encouraged the people to
rise, are extinct, and their Dutchies and countries joined unto the Crown:
insomuch that there is no man in France that dare persuade any Soldier to put
himself into the feeld, to diminish the King his authority, nor to enterprise
against his Majesty. And although he should think to do it, who is there to
favor him against the Kings power?

The manner how to levy Soldiers and to inroule them, and the qualities that
are requisite to be in a new Soldier
The 3. Chapter.
TO levy the aforesaid number of 25. thousand Soldiers, it should be first
necessary to consider in what countries the said levy should be made; and
withal it behooves to name the Captains that should govern them: unto which
Captains the said countries must be assigned either by Bishoprics, or
Stewardships, where every one of them ought to levy his men by themselves. And
this done, they may be sent unto the places with their commissions, which
should be addressed unto some notable personage of the country, or royal
officer, who should be enjoined to assist the said Captain until his number
were complet, causing him to be obeyed in every point according unto the tenor
of his commission, compelling all the inhabitants of the towns and villages
under their charge, to show themselus before him. And this ought to be done,
not touching them that are exempted from such public services by the laws, or
by express privileges; as Churchmen, Gentlemen, Royal officers, and
Maiestrates; but to choose amongst all others, not exempting any of those that
shall be thought most fittest for the wars, taking the number that may be
levied according unto the householders, be it of every 20. one, or of 60. one,
as it was handled at that time that the Kings of France served themselves with
free Archers. And that in these cases there be no subtlety used, nor that any
one be supported by favor, or otherwise, but that without exception the
fittest men should be chosen, and those that have some patrimony: and the
reason why I would have them to be somewhat worth is, because that they are
readier to be found, then those that have nothing to lose. For when any of
these should commit any crime, or should run away, his goods and lands might
then pay the reckoning, which might be inroulled in the kings book: the
service of whom ought to be preferred before a particular profit. For this
levy is not only profitable unto the king; but also most necessary for all
his subjects: for that we have not the worth of one hair well assured, without
arms: because that strangers are rather like to hurt, then help us; without
whose aid (having no soldiers of our own) we should at all times be eaten,
and tormented by our neighbors. Since then, that arms are so necessary for
us, as that we cannot be without them, who is he that would have all set at
six and seven? We may exercise arms, and yet not leave our own business
undone, because the soldiers may be bound to assemble only upon idle days to
practice their arms together: which would neither be hurtful unto the people
nor country: but rather recreate young men, that otherwise spend their time
upon holidaies in running to the Tauernes, for want of other honest pastime,
especially the exercise of arms, whereunto I am sure they would go more
willingly. For as it is a great pleasure unto the beholders to see the managing
of arms: so likewise would it greatly delight young men to handle and to
exercise them. Moreover, I say that it is not so new a thing, but that the
like has been heretofore used in France: to weet, the exercising of arms,
throughout the towns and villages of the kingdom, and prizes set up for the
best deseruers: and therefore my sayings ought not to be thought strange nor
hurtful: for I speak not of any thing that has not been before ordained by
the kings of France, and in our time, by the king that reigns at this
present. But leaving that aside, let us say that in the election of the people
here spoken of, there ought to be a regard had of their age: we must choose
them then from 17. years old, to 35. For it was forbidden by an ancient law
made by Caius Gracchus when he was Consul in Rome, to choose any younger then
17. years of age: and in my judgment, any younger could not endure the labors
appertayning unto the wars. And who so should inroule them of 35. or at the
uttermost 40. should take them too aged to instruct them well in the feats of
arms, and to serve himself with them afterward 15. or 20. years, or more,
according unto the Kings affairs, or his good pleasure. For in times past the
soldiers followed the wars sometime twenty years, and sometime thirty, or
forty years, as is to be seen in the first book of Cornelius Tacitus, where
he speaks of the chaunges of the Legions that were in Hungary, who during
all that time of their lying there, nor at any time else, could not withdraw
themselves from their bands, except they would incur ye pains that fugitives
deserved, without the leave of the Senate, or of the Emperor: likewise they
were in the end well recompensed for their long service, when the legions were
discharged, either in money, or in lands, which the Senate distributed unto
every one according unto his quality, or the Emperor himself sometimes of
his own, not touching the common treasure. And as for the looking into the
faculty, and to conjecture thereby the goodness, or lazines of a soldier, it
makes no matter so that he be fit to exercise the labors of the wars. Yet
in truth I would somewhat forsee to serve my self with the greatest commodity
that I might: for there are occupations that are very necessary for an army,
as Bakers, Armourers, Spur-makers, Carpenters, Wheele-wrights, men that are
accustomed to work in Mines, Shooemakers, Taylers, Sadlers, and such like, of
all which it would be good to take a great number: for they may serve with
their occupations when need requires, and do the duty of soldiers also.

As touching the knowing of them by their phisnomie, that are fit to bear
arms, that shall be left unto those that have no experience of the wars, for
it will suffice the others that have experience, to look that they have sound
limbs: and whether they be reputed to be honest men in the towns and
villages where they are taken up. The best tokens to know them by, that are
fittest for this occupation, are lively and quick eyes, straight headded, high
breasted, large shoulders, long arms, strong fingers, little bellied, great
thighs, slender legs, and dry feet; all which points are comely in any man
who so might find them ordinarily: because he that is so shaped, cannot fail
to be nimble and strong; which are two qualities to be greatly required in all
good soldiers: notwithstanding, we must not refuse those that have not all
these qualities before spoken of, so that otherwise they be sound. Above all
things we must have a regard that these new men be honestly conditioned,
according unto their quality, and that they be not such as make of vice a
virtue: for else it would be a choosing of instruments to make new disorders
every day, and to corrupt others that of themselves are worth nothing: since
that in an ill mind, a dishonest body, and a cankered heart, there can never
enter nor dwell any point of virtue. If then the soldiers may be found well
conditioned at the first, there must be order taken that they may so continue
while they are in their bands, and therefore it should be necessary that they
might always be occupied to keep them from idleness: and this occupation
should be either in doing their own business, or in exercising their arms,
which they might use upon holidaies, and upon other days attend unto their own
business, and labor in their science: and they that have no occupation, ought
to be constrained to learn one within a certain time. I speak of those that
are no gentlemen, to the intent that they may have maintenance, when as the
wars are ended, that have no lands. In this doing the king should find
himself without comparison to be better served of them, then he is of those
who make the wars their occupation. At the uttermost, if the danger that
might happen by this levy should be thought to be as much as the profit, or
more, and that the king his counsel rested upon this conclusion, that it were
more sure for to let his commons to sleep in time of peace, then to awake them
by putting arms into their hands. At the least, me think that when wars did
happen, and when there is question to levy men in France, we ought to help
our selves in choosing soldiers after this manner: and that they should be
compelled to inroule themselves in such sort as I have said, for which there
must be good authority given unto the Captains, and likewise good time to
choose and levy them in. As for to levy them, as we are accustomed, it has
no order in it; I mean if we will have men of service: for in this case the
Captains are constrained to receive all that come unto them, as well the good
as the bad: and sometimes the worst do make themselves to be entreated, and to
be bought dearer then if they were any thing worth, and notwithstanding they
must be had if it were but to fill up the number. I would therefore that the
Captains might have more time to make their bands then they have, in which
time they should be bound to use great diligence in trayning their men: and in
trayning them to march toward the place of meeting, making small iornies to
exercise them upon the way.

How Soldiers ought to be armed and weaponed, both according unto the manner
that was used in the old time, and that which we do use at this present
The 4. Chapter.
AFter that these men are chosen, and inroulled, they must be armed the best
and surest way that may be devised, and in such sort, that they may have an
advantage of all other men. For which cause, me think it were good to examine
what arms the ancient soldiers did bear, and those that we do use at this
day, to the intent to take those yt might be thought most surest. The Romans
divided their footmen into heavy armed men, and into light armed men. They
called their light armed men Velites, under which word were understood all
those that used Slings, Darts, and Bows: the greatest part whereof (as says
Polibius) were armed with a Sallet, and carried a Target upon their arms to
cover themselves, and fought with out order a good distance from their heavy
armed men. Those that were heavy armed, had a head-peece yt came down to their
shoulders, and were armed upon their bodies with curets, whose tasses did cover
them unto the knees. Moreover, their arms and legs were armed, and they
carried a Shield that was four foot long, and two foot broad, which Shield
was bound with iron aloft and below, to keep it from cleaving and wearing,
and in the midst of it was a bosse of iron fastened, to abide blows the
better. Besides that, they had a sword girt to their left sides, on their right
sides a short dagger, and in their hands a Darte called Pilum, which they
threw when they began the combat. Some wrighters do say, that besides the
foresaid Shield, they carried a Pike, namely the soldiers of Greece; but that
should seem impossible, for as much as they would have been troubled enough to
have used one of those weapons alone: and as for to use them both at once,
would have been but little for their ease, for the Pike alone requires both
hands. On the other part, the Shield served but only to cover them, because it
was not very maniable, nor likewise would the Target be handled very well: for
it would be too combersome, except that at the beginning of the combat they
should use the Pike, hanging their Targets upon their backs, and entering the
approach so near that the Pike might stand them in no more stead, they then
casting it from them, might help themselves with their Targets and their
Swords. And as for those that do carry the Pike, as if they could carry
nothing else: I say that if they did but thrust with their Pikes, the Target
might hinder them nothing at all, although they should bear it in that manner
that it ought to be borne. The Greeks laded not themselves with so heavy
harnes as the Romans did, but they gave themselves more to the use of the
Pike, principally the Phalanges of Macedonia, who carried Pikes of ten cubits
long, called Sarisses, with the which they enforced their enemies to beat
their ranks, and yet kept themselves in order: but since the Romans did
conquer the whole world, we may believe that they were the best armed of all
others.

The fashion at this day is to arm a foot man with a corselet co^plet, or with
a shyrt of male, and a headpiece, which me think is suffcient for the defense
of a man, and I find our manner of arming to be better then the Romans. And
as for our offensive weapons, we do carry the sword as they did, but somewhat
longer: the other weapons are the Pike, the Halbard, the Pertisan, the
Harquebusse, and many others less in use amongst Souldyers, and the Target,
but that there is but little account made of it, except it be for some assault,
neither is there almost any man that will lade himself with it, except
Captains. The Harquebusse has bin invented within these few years, and is
very good, so that it be used by those that have skill, but at this present
every man will be a Harquebusier: I know not whether it be to take the more
wages, or to be the lighter laden, or to fight the further off, wherein there
must be an order taken, to appoint fewer Harquebusiers, and those that are
good, then many that are worth nothing: for this negligence is cause that in a
skirmish wherein ten thousand Harquebussados are shot, there dies not so
mutch as one man, for the Harquebusiers content themselves with making of a
noise, and so shoot at all adventures. The Halbards are arms newly invented
as I think by the Switzers, which are very good, so that they be strong and
sharp, and not light, as those that the Italians do carry, more to make a
fair show (as I think) then for any goodness that is in them, because they
are too weak, and so likewise are the Pertisans, which being stronger and
better steeled, might do good service against naked men, but against men that
are well armed, they can do no great deed. Amongst other weapons least
accustomed, are the Bow and the Crossebowe, which are two weapons that may do
very good service against unarmed men, or those that are ill armed, specially
in wet weather, when the Harquebusier loses his season. And were it so that
the archers and crossebow men could carry about them their provision for their
bows and crossebowes, as easily as ye Harquebusiers may do theirs for their
Harquebusse: I would commend them before the Harquebusse, as well for their
readiness in shooting, which is mutch more quicker, as also for the surenesse
of their shot, which is almost never in vain. And although the Harquebusier
may shoot further, notwithstanding the Archer and Crossebow man will kill a C.
or CC. pases off, as well as the best Harquebusier: and sometime the harness,
except it be the better, can not hold out: at the uttermost the remedy is that
they should be brought as near before they do shoot as possibly they may, and
if it were so handled, there would be more slain by their shot, then by twice
as many Harquebusiers, and this I will prove by one Crossebow man that was in
Thurin, when as the Lord Marshall of Annibault was Governor there, who, as I
have understood, in five or six skirmishes, did kill and hurt more of our
enemies, then five or six of the best Harquebusiers did, during the whole time
of the siege. I have heard say of one other only that was in the army that the
King had under the charge of Mounsieur de Lautrec, who slew in the battle of
Bycorque a Spanish Captain called John of Cardone, in the lifting up of his
helmet. I have spoken of these two specially, because that being employed
amongst great store of Harquebusiers, they made themselves to be so known,
that they deserved to be spoken of: what would a great number of such do? But
let us pass further to speak of the Pike, of which, although the Switzers
have not been the inuenters, yet have they at the least brought it again into
use, for that they being poor, and desirous to live at liberty, were
constrained to fight against the Princes of Germany, who being rich, and of
great power, did maintain many Horssemen, which the said Switzers could not
do: and therefore making their wars afoote, they were constrained to run
unto the ancient manner, and out of it to choose some arms wherewith they
might defend themselves from the enemies Horssemen, which necessity has made
them either to maintain, or to find out again the orders of times past,
without which Pikes, footmen are wholly unprofitable. They took therefore
Pikes as weapons not only fit for to withstand Horssemen, but also to vanquish
them: by the help of which weapon, and through the trust they have in their
own good order, they have taken such a boldness, that fifteen, or twenty
thousand of their men dare enterprise upon a whole world of Horssemen, as they
have made proof at Nouare, and at Marignan, although the one battle fell out
better on their side then ye other. The examples of the virtue that these
people have showed to be in them for their feats of arms afoote, have caused
since the voyage of king Charles the 8. other nations to imitate them,
specially the Germains and Spaniards, who are mounted unto the reputation that
we do hold them of at this day, by imitating the orders that the said Switzers
do keep, and the manner of arms they do carry. The Italians afterward have
given themselves unto it, and we lastly: but we are so far off, that we shall
never be like unto them for order, except we do make the use of these weapons
to be of more estimation amongst us then it has bin hitherto, so mutch there
is also, that they can learn us no other point. We must therefore take pains
to get this order, or if it be possible, to find or frame a more sure, by the
means whereof we might defend our selves, and excel other nations. And to do
this, we must arm our Soldiers well, to the intent that they may be less in
danger of blows, and the harder to be overthrown: principally those that
should serve in ye first fronts of the battles, and also all others if it
were possible, every man according unto the weapon that he does carry. The
arms that we must carry must be these, first of all the Corslet complet, with
the tasses down to the knee, hose of male, a codpeece of iron, good vambraces,
and gauntlets, or gloves of male, and a good headpeece with a sight almost
covered. The other harness for the body must be a a shirt or Ierkin with
sleeves, and gloves of male, and a headpeece with the face uncovered. The
weapons must be these, a sword of mean length, which should be worn of a
reasonable height, neither wholly after the manner of the Frenchmen, nor
altogether like unto ye Almaigns: for the wearing of it too low does greatly
trouble a Soldier. The short dagger also is one of the most necessariest
weapons, wherewith in a prease a man may better help himself then with a
sword. The Pike, and halbard, and amongst many halbards some Pertizans are also
called weapons. The Target may not be called a weapon, notwithstanding it is a
very good piece. The Harquebusse likewise must be accounted amongst weapons,
and the Bow and Crossebowe also. True it is that I would that these two last
should be carried by the people of the Country where they have their most
course, and but a certain number of them. Those that do carry Pikes, should be
divided into ordinaries, and extraordinaries. The ordinaries should be armed
with a Corslet in manner as is abouesaid, and should moreover carry a Target at
their backs, wherewith they might help themselves after that they are come so
near unto the enemy that the Pike could do them no more service, they might
therewith also cover themselves from Bowmen and Crossebowes, and at assaults,
for as much as ye Pike is there a thing almost unprofitable. And my saying must
not be thought to be strange, for that I lade these men with so many kinds of
harness, for I seek but to arm the^ surely, as men that must tarry by it,
ought to be armed, and not like unto those that arm themselves lightly; who
being ill armed, do think rather to run away then to vanquish. I take also
mine example from the Romans, who armed their soldiers which they appointed
for their battles, as heavy as they might possible to make them to stand the
surer against their enemies, and that feeling their bodies so laden with
harness, they should not hope to save themselves by flight, but to dye in the
place, or to win the victory. Vegetius complains yt the Soldiers in his time
were too light armed, and followed not the ancient Romans, who commonly did
surpass and vanquish their enemies, because they were always well armed, and
the others ill armed. If our soldiers will then be accounted for to be
valianter men then their neighbors, it is necessary that they should arm
themselves as sure as they might possibly, chiefly those that should be the
force of the battles, and so likewise should ye others that are for
skirmishes, to give their enemies the more trouble to defend themselves, and to
be of the more force to resist them. And for this intent I say that the
extraordinary Piks should be armed with curets, sleeves of male, and with a
good headpeece. The halbards should be armed likewise after ye same manner: and
the Harquebusiers, Archers, and crossebowmen should be armed with a shirt and
sleeves of male, and with a good headpeece: or for want of a shirt of male,
they should have cotes of plate, and good Iacks, yet they are almost out of
season, but that makes no matter, so there be any advantage to be found by
them. They ought to be furnished of all these arms by the King, but the arms
should be better chosen then those were that were given unto the other
Legionares. The Captains must have a care to disperse these arms, and to
distribute them as they ought to be, giving the heauyest arms, to weet, the
Pikes and Halbards, unto the greatest and strongest men, and those which were
meet to be handled by nimble fellows, should be given unto the lesser sort of
men, not forgetting to inrowle the arms and weapons that every man does take
upon him to bear, to make them to be coumptable for them, and to punish those
that should alter their arms without leave: for that after a Souldyer has
taken upon him to carry a Pike, he may not take upon him to carry a
Harquebusse, without leave of the Colonel: nor the Harquebussier may not take a
Pike or a Halbard: for that if the Souldyers should be at liberty to change
arms at their pleasure, the number of every sort of arms would increase, or
decrease at all hours: and I do intend that the number of every sort of arms
should be always one, to raunge the Legions in battle the readier. And if it
should happen any of those that should make the body of the battle to dye,
or to be sick, or to run away, because the place should not be empty, there
must one of the Pikes of the flanks be put in his place. Of these Pikes of the
flanks shall be more spoken of hereafter. When as the arms are distributed,
every Captain ought to furnish himself with certain honest men, amongst
whom, he shall choose one of the most virtuous for his Lieutenant, and another
for his Ensign bearer, and the other for Officers: and for that these Offices
ought commonly to be served by Gentlemen, and I have said before that Gentlemen
should be exempted out of the leuy, at the first they must not be offered any
wrong. But if so be that they do once inrowle themselves, they shall be bound
afterward to serve the King in the same sort, and as long as the simplest of
the Legionaries, and not be discharged after they have once given their names,
until the King do give them leave. It were good that a certain term should
be limited, as 15. years, or more, at the King his discretion.

The manner how to distribute a great number of Souldyers into many bands, and
how to bring many bands into one principal number
The 5. Chapter.
THe nations which heretofore have had ordinary bands of footmen, did make
one principal number of the people which they levied, which number although it
has been diversely named, yet has it been almost one, because that they have
all instituted it to be betwixt six and eight thousand men, and this number by
the Romans was called Legion, by the Greeks Phalange, by the Frenchmen
Caterue, and the Switzers and Almaignes do term it in their language Hourt,
which is as mutch to say, as Battailon in ours: and the Italians and Spaniards,
do use this word Battailon: but for that men chosen by election do deserve to
be called Legionares, the King himself having used this term as the most
fittest, I will use it likewise as he has done. And for that the Romans (as
says Vegetius) made their Legions of six thousand and one hundred men, I will
make these Legions which I do ordain, to be of the same number, and will
afterward divide the said number into twelve bands, and therein I shall differ
from them: for they divided their Legions into ten bands, of which they made
their Battailons, and I will do as they did, and yet have two bands for the
Forlorn hope, for so I will term them that shall begin the Battle. Every
one of the ten Bands shall be governed by a Captain, and under every
Captain there shall be a Lieutenant, and an Ensign bearer, one Sergeant of
the Band, a Clarke, two Drums, and one Phife: and besides these members, and
officers, every Captain shall have five C. and ten men under his charge, the
which shall be divided into six small companies, which six Corporals or
Centeniers shall govern, of which Corporals, five shall be reserved for ye
body of the Battailon, and the sixth shall serve for the flanks. Under every
Corporal there shall be four Chefs of Squadrons, under every Chief there shall
be two Deciniers, and under every Decinier shall be nine men, so that every
Chief of squadron shall govern twenty men, and he himself shall be the one
and twentieth. The Corporal shall be Chief of 85. with his own person. Four
of these Corporalls shall have all their men to carry Pikes, and the fifth shall
have all his to be Halbardiers, except that for to arm the flanks of the
Halbardiers, every one of the Deciniers under this Corporal shall have three
Pikemen, and all the rest shall be Halbardiers. Those of the sixth Corporal
shall be the one half Pikemen, and the other half Harquebussiers, except that
we would mingle some Archers amongst them, and make that the one chief of
squadron should have all his men to be Harquebusiers, and that the other chief
of squadron should have one Decene of his men to be all Archers, and the other
Decene to be all Crossebowes, to the intent to have service of these people, in
places where the Harquebusiers should be unserviceable, as in the rain, as is
aforesaid, or to make any secret charge where the fire might discover them, or
in any other place where these two weapons might serve more sure then the
Haquebusse. The two bands of the Forlorn hope shall be 868. men, so that
either of them shall be 434. men, one of this number shall be Captain, and he
shall have the like number of members and officers that one of the ten
Captains have in charge, and the rest shall be divided into five small
companies, which shall be governed by five Corporals, every one of which shall
have as many squadrons and men, as one of the abouesaid Corporals has. Four
of these Corporals shall have all their men Harquebusiers, which may be mingled
with Archers and Crossebowes who so would. And the fifth shall have all his
Pikemen, which shall be called extraordinaries, because they shall fight out of
order, not keeping rank. The number of the Souldyers of all these twelve
bands, is six M. and seauentie. Besides all which, there must be one chief
Officer, above all the Captains, who shall be called the Colonel, and he shall
have for his officers these that follow, to weete, a master of the Camp, a
Sergeant Mayor, a Provost, and under the Provost some wise man to assist him in
his judgments, and to counsel him touching the administration of justice.
The said Provost shall also have a Clarke, certain Sergeants, and a Hangman.
Furthermore it is necessary that the said Colonel should have a minister or two
to do the divine service, and to administer the Sacraments unto all ye Legion.
There must also be a Physician, a Pothecary, and a Surgeon, and some one
that has skill to make fireworks, and powder, and an Armorer, and the rest
until the number of 30. places, with those that I have now specified, may be
reserved for the Colonel his guard. After yt the number aforesaid is so
distributed, there must be names given unto the Captains, the one must be named
the first, another ye second, and another the third, fourth, fifth, sixth,
seventh, eight, nine, and tenth: and the other two shall be called Captains of
the Forlorn hope. And all the 12. Ensigns ought to be of one color, and to
have some difference in fashion, or some bars to be known the better, and
the readier to find the places that they ought to keep in battle. It were not
amiss that the Soldiers were apparrelled like the color of their Ensigns,
to be the better known, and had some token or cognizance whereby the soldiers
of the one band might be known from those of the other. The Chefes and
officers should have their head-peeces covered with some color, or should have
skarfes whereby they might be known a far off. In the manner aforesaid would
I distribute a Legion: for it is the best way that I know to raunge a
Battailon in such sort, that it might be as it were invincible. And if it
should seem too hard to raunge this Legion in battle in that form that I
will speak of here following, and that the form which we do use at this
present, in raunging our Legions, were thought to be more easy and sure, and
likewise that their manner and order were better liked, then the Legions that I
pretend to erect; yet I am of opinion that the bands of the said Legions should
be divided in other sort then they yet have bin, for they would be in better
order to do any good service, then they now are, although their order be not
evil such as it is. As for me I would order them after this manner, that is,
that every one of the 6. Captains which the King has appointed unto every
Legion, should have 4. Corporals or Centeniers, all of ordinary Pikes, and 3.
other Corporals, whose me^ should have ye one half Pikes, and the other half
Halbards, to weet, 2. Squadrons of the one, and 2. squadrons of the other:
every one of which 6. Corporals should have under him 4. Chiefs of squadrons,
and every Chief of squadron 2. Deceneirs, and every Decenier should have charge
of 11. me^, by this means every squadron should have 25. men, and the six
Centeniers should have every one 100. soldiers under him: which Centeniers
should be for the body of the battle. And as for the flanks every Captain
should find a Centenier which Centenier has four Chiefs of squadrons under
him, and under every Chief of squadron are two Deceniers, and under every
Decenier 10. men. Two of which said squadrons should be Pikes, and the other
two Harquebusiers, the one of the three Centeniers, which rest to make up the
ten, which are under every one of the abouesaid Captains should have all
Pikemen, which should be 93. in number, the person of the Centenier
comprehended, and the two other Centeniers of equal number, should have all
Harquebusiers, and all those three Centeniers and their men shall be called the
forlorn hope, and shall serve for that purpose: so may every band of a
thousand men be distributed, and yet there would be left 28. places, the which
should be for the Captain and his two Lieutenants, the two Ensign bearers,
four Sergeants of the band, two Harbingers, two Drommes, and two Fifes. And
for that the six Centeniers that were reserved to make the body of the
battle are not comprehended within the number of their people, they shall be
accounted with this number to fill up the the 28. places: and yet there will
remain five places, which may serve the Colonel, for the officers, and guard
that he ought to have: and by that means there should be in every band
504. ordinary Pikemen, 102. Halberdiers: and to arm the flanks 46. ordinary
Pikes, and as many Harquebusiers, besides the person of the Centenier. And for
the forlorn hope there would be 93. extraordinary Pikes, and 186.
Harquebusiers: which make in all 978. the 22. places yt remain are for the
Chiefs, Members, officers, and for the Colonel his guard as I have said before.
By that account there would be in a Legion, 3024. ordinary Pikes: 612.
Halbards. For the flanks there would be 282. Pikes, and 282. Harquebusiers, and
for the forlorn hope there would be 358. Pikes, and 1116. Harquebusiers. The
over plus is for the places of Chiefs, Members, Officers and others as is a
foresaid. Touching the manner that I would observe to range one of these
Legions in battle, shall be showed after the speaking of certain small
particular things, and after that I have ranged one of these Legions in
battle, which I will order after the ancient manner, which being divided as I
have showed before, should consist of 3600. ordinary Pikes, herein
comprehended the 240. Pikes which should arm the flanks of the Halbards, and
600. Halbards, all which serve for the body of the Batailon. Now for the flanks
there should be 420. Pikemen, and 420 Harquebusiers: and besides these ten
Corporalls to govern them. As for the forlorn hope, there should be 680.
Harquebusiers and 170. Pikemen, all which do amount unto 5900. men, the rest
are Chiefs, Members, and Officers, of the whole Legion, who are not
comprehended in this number. And if so be the said number of Harquebusiers
should be thought to be too little, they may be augmented and certain bands
made a part, besides the Legion, which Harquebusiers may be named properly
adventures, or extraordinaries, forasmuch as they should be levied and
entertained, during the wars, and no longer. That which is here spoken may
suffice, touching the division, but we must come lower to speak of the
excercises that every soldier, and band ought to do perticularly, without
which exercise, there may be no service done (by these people thus chosen,
armed, weaponed, and distributed into bands) in any good action; for they have
need of more then all this.

How these new Soldiers ought to be exercised in diverse exercises, and the
bands perticulerly exercised, before that the Legion should be assembled
The 6. Chap.
FOrasmuch as the excercises wherein these new soldiers should be practiced
are of diverse sorts, and yt to speak of the^ at length, would be too long a
work, I will speak briefly of the most necessariest, which are these: as how
to harden their bodies unto labors, to know how to use their arms, to keep
their order in passage through the country, and at that time when they must
fight, and how to lodge one of these Legions, or many together in a Camp,
which in my judgment are the chiefest points that an army ought to know. And
therefore it is necessary that the Soldiers should be accustomed therein, as
often as they might possible, especially upon Sundays and holidays, wherein
the Corporalls or Centeniers, Chiefes of squadrons, and Deceniers, must be
diligent, and must assemble themselves with their people as often as they may.
Also they should be levied so near together, and those that are companions,
that the Corporals might assemble them together in short time without great
trouble or charge, to make them to exercise to run, to become swift to
assault, to make them to be active, as to throw the stone, dart, or bar of
iron, and to wrestle, to make them strong, without which qualities, a Soldier
can be worth nothing; because that swiftness does make them ready, and able to
endure travel, to win a passage before an enemy, how hard soever it be to
be gotten: it makes them diligent to surprise an enemy, when he doubts it
least: and if an enemy do fly, they will be the better able to overtake him,
if they be active and nymble, they will the better bestow their blows, and
leap the lighter to pass a ditch, and mount the readier at a breatch, or upon
a ladder: their strength will make the^ to bear the burden of their arms the
better, to strike and force an enemy the more violenter, and to withstand and
resist his assaults the more firmer. They must also be accustomed to carry
heavy burdens, to the intent that if any voyage should be taken in hand, for
the execution whereof, they should be forced to journey many days without
victuales, they might carry a good quantity at their backs, for that
Victuallers may not always be at their tails: moreover, if it should be at
any time requisite for the^ to carry wood, earth, or other thing to rampaire
with all, it would be doubted that they could not do it when it should be
needful, for lack of use. Furthermore, who so would not have his people to
be hindered by any river, not having with them any bridge or matter whereof to
make one, should cause them to practice to swime, for this exercise is
comprised amongst the most necessariest. As for the other exercises, as to
know how to handle the weapons which they do carry: every Decenier, Chief
of Squadron, and Corporal, ought to be diligent to practice their men with
sword play: and those that have charge of Pikemen, should practice them with
the pick, and those that have the Halbardieres, and Harquebusieres in charge,
must show their Soldiers how to help themselves with their arms, and to
carry them well in the exercising of them. These practices must be exercised,
the soldiers being armed, to the intent that through this custom, they might
esteem the weight of their harnes to be no heavier then the weight of their
dublets: nor should feel it more troublesome unto them, how long voyage soever
they do make, or how long soever they should be armed. They must observe these
things if they will be accounted good Soldiers, yet this is not enough to make
them to deserve to be called good Soldiers, albeit that they were as fit to
labor, swift, active, and as well practiced as you could imagine: for it is
necessary that they should learn how to raunge themselves in single order,
and to understand the voices of the Captain and Sergeants of the bands, to
obey readely: also to know the signification of the sounding of the Trumpet,
and stroke of the Drum, and to use these exercises willingly and often. For
(except this discipline be diligently observed and used almost every day) these
new men could do no service ought worth, how hardy and courageous soever they
were: because ye hardines without good order is much weaker then cowardlines
well ordered, for that order does chase away fear from men's hearts, and
disorder does plant it there, which very hardly will come upon these men, when
they are instructed and ordered as they ought to be, to wit, the soldiers of
every corporal together at the end of every month: and the squadrons by turns
every Sunday one: and the Decens by turns every holiday one. And the bands
shall assemble every three months with their people and officers each band a
part: and the Legion twice a year. The Corporals shall assemble their
Squadrons every three months as is aforesaid, and shall bring their people unto
the place of meeting which the captain shall appoint, where he himself shall
be attendant to receive his soldiers: to instruct them in ye other points
which they ought to know, to the intent yt afterward they do not find yt to be
strange to the^ which they ought to do in general. For in the exercise of the
wars, the greatest study of all is, for the Soldiers to know what they
ought to do in their particular bands, and what a band ought to do being
assembled with others in a Camp, for they that know the first, will easily
observe the second: but not knowing the first, it is impossible that they
should attain unto the second. Every band ought then to learn well by it
self, how to keep order in all kinds of moouings: as to martche slowly or
hastilye, and moreover to learn all the sounds, signs and cries, by which
they are commanded in a battle, and that every man should know their
meaning, as those that are in the Galleys do understand the blowing of the
whistell: wherein these Soldiers ought to be ready and wiling to obey
incontinent, at the first stroke of the Drum, whether it be to march forward,
or to stay, or to turn back again, or to turn their faces and arms toward
any part. And for this cause, the Colonel ought to give order, that all his
Drums should strike one stroke, and use one manner of sounding in the field,
whether it be to sound an alarm, or to make a Cry to put themselves in
battle: for to march forward or backward, for to turn toward any part, and
for a retreat, and in some, to signify all those other points with other
Drums, which by the sound of one Drum alone, cannot so well be made known, as
by many: who make themselves to be heard in the greatest tumult and preases
that may be. The Soldiers likewise ought to be so attentife to listen unto
that which they are commanded, that they should never fail. The Drums ought
also to be ready to sound according unto the sound of the Colonel his
Trumpet, by whom they must govern themselves in all that they do. The Colonel
his Trumpeter ought to be expert in all his soundings, and to handle them so
clearly, that one thing be not mistaken for an other: but to express the
Colonel his commandment, as he ought to do, and to be always attendant upon
him, and not to be from his hand. And to tell you the reasons that make me to
ordain a Trumpet amongst footmen, is, that it might be better understood in
a great noise, then the Drums, or that when as the Drums should alter their
stroke, they might govern themselves by the sound of the Trumpet: whose sound
is much louder then the Drums, which the Switzers knowing, who are the
inuenters of the Drums, do use Trumpets before their Bataillons, whereby their
Chefes do signify what the Batailon ought to do: and it is not long since
that they used great Horns. All these small things ought to be showed unto
every band a part, before that the Legion should be assembled together, to the
intent that they might know to keep their order and ranks, that no force
whatsoever might disorder them: and that the sound of the Trumpet might be so
familiar unto them, that they should not err, nor take one thing for another:
but afterward might easily learn all that the Bataillon ought to do, when
they are assembled totogether. And forasmuch as we put an army into battle,
either for that we see our enemies, or for that we doubt them, not seeing them:
every band ought to be practiced and instructed in such sort, that it might
march upon the way surely, and fight if need require, and every Soldier to
be taught what he ought to do, if they should be assaulted upon a sudden. And
when you do instruct them in the manner that they ought to keep, to resist
their enemies upon a day of Battle, it shall be necessary to show them how a
battle does begim, and after what manner one Batalilon does encounter another
of the enemies: and unto what place they must retire being repulsed, and who
they are that should put themselves in their places; unto what signs, sounds
and cries they ought to obey: and what they should do when they hear those
soundes and cries, and see those signs: and to accustom them so well with
those fained battles and assaults, that afterward they should not only dare
to abide an enemy, but desire the battle: which boldness will rather
proceed of the good order, and raunging that they do find to be in
themselves, then of their own proper hardines: and specially because their
battles shall be ranged that the one may succor the other easily, which is a
thing of no small importance to imboulden Soldiers. For that if I be of the
first battle that fights, and know unto what place to retire when I am
repulsed, and who it is that should come in my place, I shall always fight
with a better courage, seeing my succor near, then when I see them not, or
know not of them. Likewise, if I be of the second battle (although the first
be repulsed, and that I see them to give back) that shall nothing dismaye me:
because I know before what that giving back does signify, but shall be more
desirous that it might be so, to the intent to be of that number that should
win the victory, and that the first should not have all the honor alone.
These exercises here spoken of, are necessary both for our new men, and for
those that are practiced also: for we find, that although the Romans knew all
that they ought to do in a particular band, and also in an army, and learned
all those points in their youth: notwithstanding they were practiced as well
in time of peace, as when their enemies were at hand. Josephus says in his
History, that the continual exercise of the Romans army, was cause that the
multitude of those that did follow the Camp, did serve upon a day of battle
as well as the men of war: for that they did know as well as the others to keep
their ranks, and to fight well. But for an host of new me^, whether it be you
leauie them to have present service of them, or to have service of them
hereafter, it would be worth nothing without these exercises: wherefore sith
that order is so necessary a thing, it must be showed unto them with double
industry and diligence, that understand it not, and maintained in them that
do know it, as we find that many excellent Captains have taken pains to
teach and maintain this discipline. But this matter has brought me somewhat
out of the way, for yt I do speak of the practicing of the whole army,
before I have declared how to exercise the bands particularly, but it is the
affection that I bear unto this matter that is the cause; wherefore I will
return unto my first purpose.

How to raung one band in battle, and the order that it ought to keep in
travailing through the country: and the manner how to lodge it in a camp, in
his quarter a part, and a Legion together
The 7. Chapter.
THe first thing of importance, in the exercising of these bands, is to teach
them to keep their ranks well: wherefore they must be first raunged in single
order: that is three and three together, or five and five, or eight and eight:
as it will best fall out, without respect of the number, wheather it be even
or od: for that does nothing in this matter: but is an observation without
any ground, and Vegetius him self can give no good reason for it, but
custom. I have said before that every one of the ten bands that shall be
appointed for the body of the Battailion, of every one of the new Legions,
which I do ordain (for I leave a side the Legions heretofore levied) shall
have 510. men, not coumpting the Captains: which 510. ought to be brought into
102. ranks, that is five men in every rank, and afterward their ranks
augmented either marching slowly or in have: as of two ranks of five, to make
one of ten, and of two of 10. to make one of 20. and soddainly to reduce them
out of this rank into their first single order, and to advertise them that the
second should always follow the first, not leesing them, and the third the
second: and the others likewise following until the last. This done you may
order every one of these bands, in that order that they must be ranged in,
when all the Legion is in one Battailion together. And for to do this, the
Pikes for the flanks shall be taken out of their order and shall be put one the
one side: and two Corporalls of ordinary Pikes shall make the head, the one
Corporal and his people first: and the other Corporal, and his people
afterward: and the Corporal of the Halbardiers shall follow them, with the
Ensign in the midst of the Halberds. The other two Corporalls of ordinary
Pikes shall make the tail, each one with his men: and they shall be rancked
five and five, and every Corporal must be showed, what place he must keep at
al times: and the Corporalls must afterward show the Chiefes of squadrons, and
the cheifes of squadrons, their Deceners. The Captain must be at the head of
the band, and the Lieutenant at the tail. The Sergeant has no place of
abiding, except the Captain do give him one: but must trot up and down from
place to place, to make the ranks to keep good order, and to command that the
Captain wills to be done. The Clarke of the band shall be there also out of
rank to take view of those that want, that they might be punished afterward,
according unto the laws that the Colonel shall make for that purpose. The
second rank shall enter with in the first: the fourth within the third: the
sixth within the fifte, and the other afterward following, so that the 85.
ranks, which the five Corporalls with their Chiefs of Squadrons comprised, do
come unto 42. ranks, in every one of which ranks are 10. men besides their
Corporals, which are ranged before their people. These 42. ranks shall be again
redoubled in making the on rank to enter within the other as is a foresaid:
and then whereas they were before but 10. me^, they shall now be 20. with every
one of which ranks, their Chief of squadrons shall range themselves in the
midst, so that he shall have ten men upon his right side, and ten upon his
left, which is a just squadron. Every Corporal shall place himself before
his four squadrons: so that the Soldiers of this one band, shall make 20.
ranks: every one of which ranks shall have 21. men. The first 8. ranks, and
the last shall be all Pikemen: and the four in the midst shall be all Halbardiers.

diagram of troop formation

Or otherwise all the soldiers of one Squadron might follow one another: and
to make so many Squadrons as you intend to make ranks: For my meaning is that
every Squadron should make but one rank. So that if they be ranked, five and
five, and that you would range the 20. Squadrons in battle, the Squadrons
must be brought up the one by the side of the other, until that they be all
ranked the one nether before nor behind the other. The first of every rank
shall be the Chiefes of the Squadron, and the second one of the two Diceneres;
and after him all his Dicenere. The other Dicenere shall be in the last rank,
and he shall serve for the guide behind. His Soldiers shall be joined unto his
companions in such order that the last of the one, and the last of the other,
shall make the two middle ranks. And as I did before place Halbardes in the
midst so I pretend here also to have as many, and these shall be the last of
every Dicenere that shall carry Halbards, and so there shall be no express
Squadrons of Halbards. By this reckoning there shall be in this little Batailon
21. ranks of 20. men in front: every one of the Corporalls shall place
himself before his Soldiers.

diagram of troop formation

And whether the first manner be better then this or no, allwaies it is evident
that the Soldiers should be practiced in such sort that they might know how to
range themselves in battle: and must be made to martch hastily forward and
backwarde, and to pass through troublesome passiages not loosing or breaking
their order: and if they can do this they deserve to be called practiced
Soldiers, although that they never saw enemies and on the contrary part,
those that cannot keep these orders, although they had bin in a thousand
wars, ought to be called but new soldiers. It is also a hard matter, for
men to put themselves suddenly into their first order, after that they are
once broken either through ill passages, or by their enemies: except they have
had great exercise and long custom. But to help them it wear necessary to
have two things done, the one is, that the Ensigns might be easily known,
and that the Chiefes, Members, and officers should have some cognissance upon
their arms, or their garments, and the other is, that every band should be
ranged in the Battaillion in one accustomed place, and not change at any time:
and that the Corporalls should know their places with their troops, not
altering at any time: so that if a Corporal were accustomed to be in the
first rank, he should allwaies continue there: in the place appointed them
at the beginning. And if a band be accustomed to be on the right side it
should there continue, and that on the left side likewise in his place. By
this means if the Soldiers wear accostomed to know their places (put case
that they should be out of order) they would quickly bring themselves in
again: for the Ensigns knowing their accustomed places in the Battaillion, and
the Corporalls knowing every one their place, might soon see where they ought
to range: for those of the frunt would retire unto the frunt, and those of the
tail unto their places also. Moreover the Chiefes of Squadrons do know into
how many ranks they should range themselves, and as well they as the Corporals
do know who should go before, and who should follow. Wherefore the
Soldiers having nothing to do but to follow their Chiefes, would range
themselves readily every one in his place, without Sergeant or any other to
place them: for that the custom would make them perfect. Thse things hear
spoken of do teach themselves, so that there be diligence used and custom:
and after that they are once well learned they will be hardly forgotten. It
shall be also necessary to make them to turn all at once: for sometime the head
must be made the tail, or one of the flanks, according unto the enemy his
force, and the place he will assault them on, and for to answer on that side
that shall be necessary, there needs no more but to turn their faces, and
that part that they turn toward, shall be called the front. But who so would
that a whole Bataillon should turn all together, as if it were a massy body,
must have therein great practice and discretion: for as if they should turn
toward the left hand, those of the left corner should stand still, and those
next them must go but slowly, that those in the right corner should not be
constrained to run, or else all would come to a confusion: but this may better
be showed by effect, then by writing. As for ye two bands yt should make the
forlorn hope, their Pikemen may be ranged in battle, to learn them to keep
order: for I would use them, and those of the flanks in particular factions,
to wit in skirmishes, and other extraordinary service, where it should not be
needful to send any great number of people, but principally I will have those
of the flanks to defend and cover the Bataillon: and as for the forlorn hope,
I appoint them both Pikes and Harquebusiers to begin the Battle, and to fight
amongst the Horssemen, without keeping any order. And to that intent I have
armed them lightlye, for their office shallbe to fight not standing firm, but
running from one place to another, be it yt they have the enemy in chase, or
are chased themselves, wherein the Pikes may do great service: for they may
reskue the Harquebusiers, and may show their faces unto those that would force
them, whether they were on Horseback or a foot, or to follow those that
should fly, and to force those that shrink. So that as well the one as the
other, whether they be of the body of the Bataillon, or of the flanks, or of
the forlorn hope, have need to be well exercised, to the intent that they
might know how to keep their ranks, and to put themselves readilye again
into their places if they were broken, by means of ill and straight passage,
or that the enemy should put them into any disorder: and if they can do this
in their particular bands, every band will afterward easily learn what place
it ought to keep in the Bataillon, and also what they ought to do in a Camp.
As for the bands of these legions that are already made in France, which are of
a 1000 men, to bring them into order: first make their single order of 6 and 6,
and afterward reduce the six Corporals men, which are for the body of the
Batailon into 96 ranks, not comprehending the Corporals, nor the Chiefes of
Squadrons; then double them, and make them of 12 in a rank, causing the one
rank to enter within the other as is abouesaid, so that the 96 ranks shall
come unto 48. Moreover, they must be doubled again, and from 12 in a rank
they will amount unto 24. and the Chief of the Squadron shall join with them,
so that every rank will be 25 men. The Corporals shall put themselves before
their Squadrons, every man before his own, two Corporals of Pikemen shall make
the forepart of this small Battailon: and two Corporals of Halbardiers shall
make the midst, and he that is foremost of them, shall make one rank of
Halbardiers, and then two ranks of Pikes, and after them one rank of
Halbardiers. The other corporal that is behind him shall also make one rank
of Halbardiers: then 2. ranks of Pikes, and after them one rank of
Halbardiers: by which accoumpt there shall be 2. ranks of Halbardiers together
in the midst, and the Ensign in the midst of them. The other two Corporals
shall make the tail of this Batailon, and each of their troops shall make
four ranks. Touching the other four Corporals, that remain, one must be
appointed for the flank, and the other three for the forlorn hope. And this
is the form that I would keep in ranging one of the bands of these Legions by
it self, wherein the Soldiers must be often practiced.

diagram of troop formation

And if the King would permit that these orders, should be diligently executed,
and put in practice, he should have many good Soldiers in his kingdom in
short time, but the disorder that is amongst our men of war at this present,
is cause that these things are dispraised; and therefore our armies can not be
good: albeit that the Chiefes were naturally virtuous, for that they being ill
followed and obeyed, can neither show their knowledge nor their virtue. It may
be also that the number of Chiefes which I do ordain in a Legion, should
seem superfluous, or might make a confusion amongst themselves: because of the
number which I do institute, which thing would be to be doubted, except they
should refer themselves wholly unto one Chief: but having one principal
Chief above them all, the great number of officers will cause good order: for
if there should not be a great number of Cheifes, it would be impossible to
govern so great a multitude of people: for as a wall that over hangs, does
require rather to be vpholden with many shoores, although they be not very
strong, then with a few of great strength: for that one alone, how strong
soever it be cannot assure the wall but only where it stands; so likewise
must it be in a Legion, for it is necessary that among every ten men there
should be one of more courage or at least of greater authority then the rest,
to keep the other Soldiers firm and in order to fight, through their good
courage, examples, words, and authority: specially the Deceniers are
necessary, if they did but serve to keep the ranks right and firm, and in
so doing, it were impossible that the Soldiers should disorder themselves,
and if so be that they should be so far put out of order, that they could
not immediately find their places, by means of these Chiefes, who should have
regard thereunto being by them, the Chiefes of the Squadrons are to command
the Deceniers, and the Corporalls are above them: who look into al things that
does concern the duty of the Soldiers and theirs. But at this day we serve
our selves with all these officers, to no other effect but to give them more
wages then unto other men: for that they have credit to bring certain
compagnions unto the bands, which is cause of many Leagues amongst Soldiers.
We use likewise Ensigns at this present, more to make a great show, then for
any military use: our auncetours did use them for guides, and to know how to
bring themselves into order by them: for every man after the Ensign was
placed, knew his place by it, and placed himself incontinent, they knew also
that if it moved or stayed they ought to move or to stay. Wherefore it is
necessary, that in an host there should be many bodies, that is to say
bands, and that every body should have an Ensign to conduct those that are of
the same body: and so the host shall have many souls, and by consequent many
lives. The Soldiers ought then to govern themselves by their Ensigns, and
the Ensigns by the sound of the Drume, which being well ordered as it ought to
be, does command a whole Legion, which Legion marching in such sort, that the
steps of the Soldiers do agree with the stroke of the Drum, shall easily
keep their order. And for this purpose had the ancient Soldiers Flutes and
Phiphes perfectly agreeing with the sound of their Drums: for as he that
daunceth according unto the steps of his music, does not err; so likewise
a Battle in marching according to the sound of the Drum, can never put it
self in disorder. And therefore when they would change their gate, or would
encourage, and appease their Soldiers, they changed their sound; and as the
sounds were variable, so likewise their names were differing: for they had the
Orique stroke, and the Phrigian stroke; the one animated the Soldiers, and the
other appeased them. They had besides many other; as the Aeolian, Iasian,
Lydian, and others: all which served to appease and to inflame the hearts of
men. We have in our time Drums for footmen, and Trumpets for horsemen: either
of them has strokes and sounds to revive Soldiers when need requires, and
are invented to the intent that they might command, and be understood a far
of. But I believe that Drums were invented for a measure for Soldiers to
march by, for all the times of their strokes are true stoppes and measures, for
to hasten and slake the goings of men of war. Now, when as the Bands are
instructed in the exercises which they ought to know perticularly, and therein
have many times been exercised, it is time to put them into the feeld, in some
place where the Legion might meet most commodiously. In which place all the
Captains shall meet at the day appointed, every man bringing his band with
him, and as little carriage as possibly he may, and the Captains themselves
must lessen their estate, if they were accustomed to carry any tail.
Moreover, they must have a regard that the Corporalls, Chiefes of Squadrons,
and Deceniers, do not mount on horseback, nor likewise the simple Soldiers.
The Captain and his members must forbear riding as much as may be, I do not
mean that if he had any sick men that they should not ride; but all others:
for since they have taken the estate of footmen upon them, it is necessary that
they should execute it wholly. And as for the carrying of their baggage, one
horse shall suffice for a squadron, which shall carry two Mattresses of course
canuas, two couerings, and one tent for the one Deciene, and as much for the
other, with some linen, pots, and vessel, and tools to make Trenches and
Bulwarks, and also a ladder of good length made of pieces. Every Deciene may
have a servant; the Chief of Squadron one, and the Corporal two. The
Corporal and his four Chiefs of Squadron shall have a Tent and a horse to
carry it. The Captain shall bring with him as few horses and servant as
possibly he may. The Lieutenant and Ensign bearer may have either of them
two, every officer one, and the Drummers shall have none: but they must be
lodged near unto the Captain, and his members. The Colonel and the Officers
of the Legion, shall keep as few as they may: for of a great baggage
proceeds oftimes many disorders, and the ruin of an army: and as well the
horses as the servants should be chosen to be such, as might serve more then
one turn at a need: and above all things there must be none suffered to
carry Trunckes, Coffers, Wagons, nor Whores. And in this doing, all the bands
of the Legion will be the better given to do all honest exercises, then if they
should be troubled with all these lets. Moreover, the whole Legion will pass
four days for a need, with the victuals that the whores, pages, and horse,
that one of the bands that are now ordained do carry with them, do consume in
one day. Having so provided for the baggage, the Captains shall put themselves
into the feeld every one a part with his company, and shall go toward the
place where the general muster is appointed to be kept, making small
iournies, and in the best order that they can, finding their Soldiers to be
good and honest men. And to be so thought of, they shall march through the
country in good order sounding their Drum, and not in troop as vanquished
men, and shall lodge themselves without the towns.

The form of a Camp for to lodge a Legion, distributed into 12. bands, being
660. paces square.
EAST.

NORTH.

SOVTH.

WEST.

This space betwixt the trench and the lodgings is 60. paces large to exercise
the Soldiers, and to raunge them in battle.

For six bands of footmen.

These two places shall serve for the horsemen.

Streates of 300. paces long and 60. paces broad for merchants and artificers.

For the Colonel.

For six bands of footmen.



The ground that this one band will occupy to lodge in a Camp, is in length
two hundred and forty paces, and thirty and five in breadth: which length
must be divided into seven parts, every one of which parts shall be thirty
paces, and betwixt every two, there shall be a way left of five paces broad:
the middelmost of these places shall be to lodge the Captain, his members, and
officers: the other six shall serve to lodge the six Corporalls, and their
people: every Corporal with his Chiefes of Squadrons and Soldiers: the
Corporal and his Chiefes of Squadrons Tent shall be in the midst of the same
place, and the Tents of his eight Deceniers shall be round about him. This
length may be divided without breaking any ground: for it will serve the turn
to line it out with cords, without making ditch or other thing, but only
placing the bands every one in his quarter. But if the Camp might be
environed with a small trench, such as is used in the country where it does
lodge, to keep the same form that it should do if an enemy were near, it
would be better. There must also a night watch be set, and above all things
regard had of surprise, as carefully as if it were in time of war; and in the
morning there must be a discovery made, before that the watch be discharged,
and afterward they must dislodge altogether: but before they depart, the
Captain must cause all those to be satisfied that have furnished his
Soldiers with victual, or other thing; that it be not said that they took
any thing not paying for it, or without the good wills of the people of the
country: but that they and their Soldiers should govern themselves every
where so orderly, that the country should not feel that there had any band
passed. And in this manner they shall go toward the place where the muster
shall be kept, behauing themselves like honest men, and good Soldiers: and
when they approach near unto the said place, the harbinger shall go before to
seek for the quarter where the band shall lodge in the Camp, the Legion being
assembled and lodged together, who must repair unto the master of the Camp
of the said Legion, whose office amongst other things, is to choose the most
wholesomest place to lodge the said Legion in Camp that he can find. And
having found some commodious place, he must lay out the quarters, and appoint
in what order the Camp should be fortified: and therefore it shall be
necessary that the master of the Camp should go before for to divide and lay
out all the quarters before the bands should ariue, where it is meant that they
should lodge. The Colonel shall be attendant in the said place, to see the
bands come in order, and the Provost ought to be abroad to understand of the
Soldiers misdemeanour, or of any other under their color, to the intent to
punish those that do commit any offense. Furthermore, certain men must be
appointed to follow after the bands foot by foot, who should look into
their behavior toward the country, and shall inform the Colonel of all
that passes. And if there be any complaint, the Colonel shall lay it upon the
Captain his neck of the band that has committed the offense, if so be that
the fault was committed through his negligence, or that he used no industry to
punish the offenders: then he should be houlden to make satisfaction of his
own purse, if it were any thing that might be recompensed with money; and if
it were any fault that deserved bodily punishment, the said Captain should be
driven to seek out the offender, and to deliver him into the Prouosts hands:
and if he were fled, the pursuit after him should be made at the Captains
charge: for by the means of this rigor, the Captains would look very near
unto their people, and would be more diligent to make them to live honestly,
or to punish them more grievously then they are.

But we must lodge the bands as they ariue, and speak of the form of the
Camp that shall lodge the whole Legion. Then for to lodge the twelve bands,
putting them in one Camp together, we must choose a square place of six
hundred and sixty paces in length, and as much in breadth: in the midst of
which great square shall be a lesser square made, which shall be every way
forty paces; within which square must the Colonel be placed, for he must
keep the Camp as well as his Soldiers: and I would inuiron this said square
with a small trench, within which trench I would lodge the master of the
Camp, the Provost, the other officers of the Legion, and the Colonel his
guard. And those that follow the Colonel for their pleasures, having no
charge, I would lodge them without round about the said trench. And for to
order the rest well, I would appoint that the front of the Camp should be
toward the East, and the back toward the West, and the flanckes toward the
other two Regions. For to divide the quarters, stretch a line from the Colonel
his lodging Eastward, which must be three hundred and ten paces long, and
afterward stretch two other lines of either side of it one, which must be of
the same length that the first was, each of them thirty paces distant from it,
to the intent that the breadth of this space may be forty paces. At the end
of these lines I would make a bar or gate, which I would name the Eastgate:
the distance betwixt these two outtermost lines will make a fair streate, to
go from the Colonel his quarter out of the Camp, which streate will be
threescore paces broad, as is aforesaid. On the other side of the Colonel his
quarter Westward, must three other lines be stretched of like length and
distance, as the three first aforesaid: so likewise upon the South and North
sides shall be two other streates made of like length and breadth. I make all
these streates so broad, to the intent to lodge in the^ all sorts of buyers and
sellers, artificers, and victualers that do follow the Legion. Furthermore, I
do make four square places, betwixt these four streates, every one of which
places shall contain two hundred and forty paces in length, and as much in
breadth. The Camp shall be enclosed with a trench, betwixt which trench and the
quarters for the lodgings shall be a space left of threescore paces broad round
about, which shall not be occupied with any lodging, but shall be empty to
serve to set the watch, and to raunge the Legion in battle, if need were. As
for the four places abouesayd, those two that are betwixt the East and North
streates, and betwixt the South and West streates, shall serve to lodge the
twelve Bands: to weet, six in one quarter, and six in another. Each of these
two quarters shall be divided into six parts, every one of which parts shall
be two hundred and forty paces in length, and five and thirty paces in
breadth, and every one of these parts shall be furthermore divided into seven
parts, as I have said before in the lodging of a Band alone. Betwixt the
quarters of every two Bands there shall be a way left of six paces large,
which shall serve for to come and go unto the particular quarters: the other
two parts which remain undivided, shall by and by be set a work: but for the
twelve Bands this is sufficient. So that after this, or some better manner, may
every Legion be lodged as often as it shall be assembled to make a general
muster.

How certain number of horsemen should be joined unto every Legion
The 8. Chapter.
FOrasmuch as the Romans in all their leuies of footmen, have always
incorporated certain number of horsemen with them, and that their perfect
Legions consisted of these two manner of Soldiers; I think it also convenient
to join some horsemen unto the levy of these new Legionaries, which horsemen
should be incorporated with the Legions, and should be with them at the
general musters, to exercise themselves together, and to learn the science of
the wars one with another: for except that they should jointly practice
themselves, it would not be possible that any one of these two sorts of people
should do good service: forasmuch as they both do make but one whole body,
which ought to be so compounded, that either of them should do service in
their due time, and consequently every part of them. And if so be that this
were done, you shall find that one intier Legion shall do more service then
three other Legions accompanied with a multitude of horsemen, whose footmen
and horsemen do not understand one another. Therefore it would not be amiss
that the King should ordain, that certain of his ordinary companies of
horsemen should be joined with these Legions, and be with them at the general
muster: and that there should be two Bands incorporated with every Legion,
each of which Bands should have 100. men of arms, one hundred light Horsemen,
fifty Hargoletiers or Scoutes, and fifty Harquebuziers. And if they were
companies that the king did newly take up, the most modest and most expert men
should be chosen for men of arms: and afterward the other must be preferred
from degree to degree, accompting the light Horsemen before the Hargoletiers,
and the Hargoletiers before the Harquebuziers; so that the Harquebuziers are
the worst of these four sorts of Horsemen. There must also a regard be had
unto the error that is committed at this day among our ordinary bands: which
is, that young men are made men of arms, which are but newly come from being
pages, or from school. But for to have these companies in better order the^
they now are, it should be necessary to make an order, by which all young men
above seauenteene year old that would be of the bands of the Horsemen (not
excepting one) unless he were a Prince, should be constrained first to be
Harquebuziers two or three years, and afterward they should be Hargoletiers
as long, and after that light Horsemen: amongst which three sorts they might
learn those things that were necessary for every good horsemen to know; and
that before their departing from them they might pass the fury and fire of
their youth, and become cold and modest to govern themselves wisely amongst
men of arms, with whom they should be constrained to serve the space of
three or four years without discharging, and that time being expired, if they
were bound to find a man of arms by the tenor of their lands, they should
then be exempted from the ordinary bands, and go home unto their own
houses, to be ready as often as they should be commanded. This rule ought
generally to be kept, with all those that should employ themselves among the
ordinary bands, although they were of greater age: for otherwise the service
of the Rierban, which the gentlemen of France, do owe unto the King, would in
short space come to nothing: which at this instant, as may be seen, is brought
into very low estate. And the reason is, that every man will be of the
ordinary bands of men of arms, to be excused from the Rierban; so that the
governors that were wont to make five or six hundred men of arms of the
Rierban, can hardly now bring one hundred together: and those also if they
should come to the muster, would be so ill furnished, that it is a mockery to
see them in so poor estate. But may this service be had in more contempt? when
as those which are subject to this duty, and which do not excuse themselves by
the ordinary Bands, exempt their own persons, and send some servant in their
places, whereas heretofore all the principal of France thought it a great
honor for them to be there in person: notwithstanding at this instant, not only
the greater sort, but the lesser would think to be dishonored, if they should
appear at the Muster. And therefore those that are bound unto this service, do
put themselves into the ordinary bands, to be free of the Rierban: and as they
cannot all be there, so it is also that the greatest part do find some excuse
to exempt themselves: and if so be that their excuse be not receiuable, they
will then come so evil furnished, and with so ill a will, that it is
impossible that they should do the King good service, which is an occasion that
the Nobility is no more esteemed as it was wont to be: but if so be it were
maintained as it has been in times past, it is certain that we should be
mutch more feared of our enemies then we now are: moreover, the King should not
be charged with the mainteining of so many Horssemen as he is, but might
discharge more then the one half of his ordinary Bands, to convert that
money, for the maintenance of certain ordinary Bands of footmen. Moreover,
the King should compel his Nobility to furnish themselves better for the
wars then they are: and forbid them rather their pomp, then to suffer a
Gentleman of France to be an ill horsseman, ill armed, and ill practiced: and
to that end should ordain, that the Rierban should muster in arms twice a
year at the least: and there should be certain seueare men appointed to take
the view of those Musters, who ought to let none pass, but the persons
themselves which are bound to this service, except they were Magistrates, or
sick men, for they are excusable, principally the Magistrates. But for the
sick men, although they be exempted for their persons, yet must they show
their furniture, and for default thereof, their lands should be seized upon
immediately, as well as theirs that are in health, and do not appear, or as
those that do appear not mounted, or furnished in arms, according to their
charge. Moreover, it should be necessary to punish all those that are not
practiced, so that they might be an example unto all those that are negligent
to mount, arm, and to practice themselves as they ought to do: this doing, the
King should restore his Nobility, and make an excellent Chivalry. And to the
intent ye Gentlemen should not excuse themselus through the great dearth that
we have of Horse in France, the King should cause some good and fair brood
of Horses and Mares to be brought from other Countries, and afterward
distribute them unto the Prelates, and Governors, and unto men of great
Benefices, to have a great brood within the Realm, whereof the said Prelates
and their successors should be bound to give an accoumpt yearly, and to cause
the said Mares to be ordered and cherished as they ought to be, and their Colts
to be managed at their own proper charges; by this means I would not doubt to
see France in short time better furnished with Horse, then any neighbor she
has, besides, their maintenance should cost the King nothing: and it would be
an occasion that the said Prelates should do the common wealth of France some
service, whereas at this day they do stand it but in little stead (I mean
those that are busy with the world, and not with the Church) and when as the
King would pursse up again the money that the Mares and Stallions had cost him,
he might do it, giving the best Horse ye might be taken out of the Raunges
unto his men of arms ill mounted, rebating it upon their wages, causing the
rest to be sold: and to find buiers, he might ordain, that no man of what
condition soever he were, should keep Moyle, Sumpter-horsse, or Hackney, if he
keep not likewise a good Horse, or if he kept but one Horse to ride upon,
the same might be fit for ye wars. Moreover, it might be forbidden that no
man should wear silk, except he kept a good Horse. And in mine opinion, the
number of those yt desire to be ritchly clad, is so great, that I know not if
there would be horses found enough in 6. realms for to furnish the^:
wherefore there is no doubt to be made, but that there would be buiers inow,
how great abundance soever there were of horses: besides, the Rierban would
need a great many, so that if these things had place, and furthermore that it
were permitted every man to keep a brood that would, we should see horses
sold so good cheap in France, that we might have more reason to think the^
rather to be given then sold; which would be an occasion that the men of arms
(which dare not abandon nor hazard themselves in places where their Horses may
either be slain or lost, more then they needs must, seeing them to be so ill
to be recovered) would put on their old virtue, and show themselves to be
others then at this day they are esteemed to be, and it would make me^ to be
better cheap then the horses are at this instant. Moreover, if the King would
that his horssemen should make less account of their lives, and have horses
better cheap then if they should buy them, he might furnish them at the first,
and as often as they lack horses, so yt their horses were slain in fight, or
lost by any inconvenient, and not through their own default; for in this case
they should be bound to put so many others in their places, and to give an
account of them at their muster: and if so be that they would discharge
themselves, or yt they should be discharged, they should then be bound to
restore the horses which the King had given the^, if they were alive, and
having lost the^ through their own negligence, they should be bound to buy
others in their places, as good as they were. The like also should be done when
as ye Harquebusiers should become Hargoletiers, or the Hargoletiers light
horsemen, and light horsemen men of arms, that every man should leave the
horse that had bin delivered to him by the King, unto him that should succeed
in his place: for I suppose that a man of arms has need of a stronger horse
then a light horseman, and a light horseman a stronger then a hargoletier, and
a hargoletier stronger then a harquebusier. And therefore there ought to be
broods of diverse sorts of horses, as Coursers of Naples and of Flanders for
men of arms, and Turks, Valacks, Polacks, Coruaks, and horse of Spain for
light horssemen, Barbares, Moors, and small horses of Spain for
Hargoletiers, and the least might be chosen out of all these for the
harquebusiers, so that they were light and quick. But this tale has laited
long enough, let us therefore return unto the Rierbans, and let us say, yt in
their goings and commings from their musters, they would beggar ye common
people, if they were suffered to live at their own discretio^s, and to keep
the feeld without payment, as they do at this present. In consideration
whereof, it should be necessary to ordain that their charges should be borne
by the Nobility, and not by the common people: and that the musters should
sometimes be made in the midst of the Provinces, sometime in one place, and
sometime in another, so that ye Gentlemen who are far from the place where the
muster is kept at one time, might be nearer at another, to the intent that no
man should be more charged, nor eased then other. But this is not that yt I
would speak of, yet I thought good to touch it in passing. But to return unto
that I spoke of young men, that they should be harquebusiers a horssebacke
before that they attain to be Hargoletiers, and be Hargoletiers before that
they become light horssemen, and should spend some time in these three estates,
before they should attain to be men of arms. And to speak somewhat of those
that do find this term to be too long, and to take away all hope from them
that would think to come unto this last estate by favor or otherwise, except
it be that their turns do come, or that they should be advanced for some
virtuous act: I am of opinion that none should leap from the one of these
estates unto another, but that he should follow them one after another their
full time, or else that he should never attain to any charge, nor bear office
among me^ of arms, nor likewise have any other estate, or royal office, so
that the Gentlemen should keep themselus to serve in the Rierban, and of this
order would many proffits proceed, for first of all young men would give
themselves more unto the exercise of arms then they do: moreover, the bands
would be filled with better men then they are at this day, and there would be
no man in yt ordinary bands, who were mounted to the estate of a man of arms,
but he should be able to govern a good charge; and therefore it would be a
rich treasure to have companies of horssemen in France, whose men of arms
were able to conduct themselves and others. Finally, the offices and estates
appertaining unto the wars, as Stewardships, Prouosts, Majors, Castellins,
and other offices of commandment, which are in the Kings gift, should be
mutch better employed upon these men, and be better executed by them, then
they may be by those that never saw any thing, or that had never done him
service. But let us pass further, the hundred men of arms, and the other
horssemen distributed as is aforesaid, should be put under the charge of a
Captain, who should have under him a Lieutenant, an Ensign bearer, and a
Guydon (as we have at this instant) the men of arms should follow the Ensign,
and the light horse, hargoletiers, and harquebusiers, should follow the
Guidon: these four Chiefes, or members, should be more then ye 100. men of
arms. Moreover, they must have a Marshall to lodge them, and to divide their
quarters. They must have also 2. harbingers, and certain Trompets over and
above this number. And as I have appointed amongst the footmen certain
particular Chiefs, so also there must be some appointed amongst the horssemen,
but not of so many sorts: for it will suffice that the horssemen should have
over every nine a Chief, who shall be the tenth man, and shall be called the
Decurion. Furthermore, there shall be a Chief over the Hargoletiers, and
another over the Harquebusiers, who shall be called by the name of Benderal,
although the Italians do understand by this word their Ensign bearers, for I
will help my self with this term, to signify the Chiefes of these small
bands, who likewise may be called Conductors, and they shall be over and above
their number, and under the charge of the Captain, and of his members, and
officers as well as the others. Wherefore in a company of legionarie men of
arms, there shall be 309. horssemen, besides the Trompets; every one of these
horssemen shall be armed according unto his charge: for the men of arms shall
be better armed then the light horssemen: and the light horssemen better then
the Hargoletiers or harquebusiers. First of all the men of arms shall be armed
with soulleretz, whole grefues, cuisses, curets with tasses, gorget, pouldrons,
vambraces, gauntlets, helmet with beuer, gossets, and great pieces: all which I
have specified perticularly, because of the men of arms at this present, who
will be called me^ of arms, and notwithstanding are armed and furnished but
like unto light horssemen: and you know that a man that is armed light, shall
never do the effect that a man may do that is well armed, who can not be hurt
by hand-strokes, where as the light horsseman is subject unto blows upon many
parts of his body, because that his harness is not so heavy, nor so sure as
the men of arms ought for to be, and not without cause, for the pains that a
light horsseman and other light armed ought to take, there is no man able to
endure with a complet harness, nor horse able to carry him: but as for the
men of arms, who are appointed to abide firmly the assaults of their enemies,
and not to run from the one side to the other, may be laden with heavy
harness; and to carry such a weight, they ought to have strong and great
horses, for besides this, the horses must be barbed. These men of arms ought
to have arming swords by their sides, a mase hanging at their saddle pomell:
their lances must be strong and of a reasonable length, their coats must be
of the color of their Ensign, the which as also the Guidon, ought to be of
the same color that the Ensigns of the footmen of the same Legion are. The
light horssemen must be good soldiers, and armed with curets, and tasses that
shall reach to the knee, with gauntlets, vambraces, and large pouldrons, and
with a strong and close head-peece, the sight being cut; their cassaks shall be
of the color of their Ensign: they must carry a broad sword by their sides,
a mase at the pomels of their saddle, and a lance of good length in their
fist. The Hargoletiers shall be armed like unto the light horsemen, saving upon
their arms; in stead of vambraces and gauntlets, they shall have sleeves and
gloves of male, a broad sword by their sides, their mases at the pomels of
their sadles, and a Iaueline in their hands of 10. or 12. foot long, headed at
both ends with a sharp head, or may carry a lance as the others: their
garments upon their harness ought to be very short, without sleeves, and of
the color abouesaid. These hargoletiers may serve for skirmishes, and may do
great murdre with their Iauelins among unarmed men and horses, and when as
they would set foot on ground, they might do the same service that Pikemen do:
and if they do carry lances, they may use them as others do. The harquebusiers
shall likewise be well mounted, and their armor shall be like unto the
Hargoletiers, except the head-peece: for they only shall have Murrions, to the
intent to see the better round about them, and to have their heads at more
liberty, a sword by their sides, a mase at the pomell of their saddles on the
one side, and a harquebusse in a case of leather on the other, which must be
made fast that it stir not: which harquebusse may be 2. foot and a half, or
3. foot long, or rather more so it be light: their coats shall be of the same
fashion and color that the Hargoletiers are. The harquebusiers wages in time
of peace, may be 3. crowns a month, the hargoletiers 4. the light horsemen 5.
and the men of arms 7. The Decurions of men of arms ought to have somewhat
more wages then a simple man of arms, and ye Decurions of light horsemen more
then an ordinary man, and so likewise the others: which wages may be augme^ted
or doubled in time of wars, if that I speak of be thought to be too little.
Touching the estate of Chiefes and members, it might continue such as it is at
this instant, but the Marshals must be raised, and the Harbingers ought to have
as much as the light horsemen, and the Trompets as mutch as ye hargoletiers:
and as for ye 2. conductors, they should have as much as the Decurions amongst
me^ of arms, and if so be that their wages were paid to the^ at the end of
every 3. months, or at the Legion his passing muster, it should not be greatly
needful to put them into garrison in time of peace, as we are accustomed to do
in France: for that I do think this wages to be sufficient to maintain them
at home or elsewhere, without oppressing the people through great charge. For
what garrison soever they have, or how long so ever they do continue in it, you
see not that they do the King any whit yt better service when the wars come,
then if they never had bin there. I do not say, but if that they did use it in
yt sort that it ought to be used, that it were not well done to keep the bands
in garrison always, to use and exercise their arms together: but at this day
the greatest part of horssemen do make their proffites of their garrisons, as
the Merchants do of their merchandise, and there is almost no difference, but
that the Merchants do sell their commodity unto the first that do offer the^
reason for it: and the horsseme^ do compel the people to buy the victuals
which the King does ordain for their maintenance, at such prices as they will
themselves, so yt their dealing is rather a manifest ransom, then a
merchandise. And albeit that they should be exempted from garrison, it must be
ordained yt the bands should meet together at general musters, mounted, and
armed according to ye order, and that betwixt the musters they should exercise
themselves at home: or if they should be lodged in garrison, to make them to be
longer resident then they are: and also that the Captains themselves should
keep in garrison, as they did in the time of King Jews the 11. at which time
the horssemen of France carried the name above all other, as well for their
readiness, as for their furniture: not for their readiness in dancing after
diverse fashions, (and yet a dance that a man might profit by, were not to be
disliked) nor likewise for trimming up themselves minion-like, nor for stuffing
themselves with feeldbeds, or with diverse sorts of garments, for then there was
no account made, but of him that handled and rid a horse well, and that did
run with a lance, fight best with the sword, wrastled, lept, threw the bar,
and vaulted better then other; was most esteemed, and he also had the praise
above his companions that was mounted and armed better then they, so that there
were few horssemen but they were mounted with 3. or 4. great horse at least,
and one of them, or all were barbed. As for their persons, they were wiser then
to destroy themselves with apparel, as Gentlemen do at this day, but they
were armed like S. George, and as full of Crowns, as dogs are of fleas.
Furthermore, they should be forbidden to sell their aforesaid garrisons, or
their victuals appointed, and to take up other provision then that which the
King does ordain. I understand that this was forbidden them not long since,
but whether these horsemen be in garrison or not, they must exercise themselus
to be nimble, to have their bodies to be at ease in their harness, and
accustom themselves thereunto, for ye necessities that may happen: for
sometimes it may so fall out, that the horsemen shall be constrained to travail a
long way a foot, whereunto if they were not accustomed, they could not endure
the weight of their harness, nor do their endeavor at a fight. Moreover, they
should exercise themselves to mount a horseback armed with all their pieces,
and the lance in their fist, and to light without help, advantage, or stirrup,
and therefore it should be necessary for the^ to have some horse of wood, to
exercise themselves upon, at the least one hour in a day, that they might be
ready to mount and light at the first sign the Captain should make the^.
Furthermore, they should exercise to pass great rivers a horseback and armed,
and also to climb the hardest and raggedst mountains that are, and to run or
to go down them in great haste, principally the Harquebusiers, Hargoletiers,
and likewise the light Horssemen. As for the men of arms, they must continue
fyrme, and must not serve for the purposes that they do at this day: but
should be as a Fort to resit all assaults, and to overthrow and break all
those whom they should assail, but because of the runnings and skirmishes
wherein they are ordinarily employed, which are fyghts wherein often times of
force a man must sly in steed of tarying by it, they have learned to show
their heels: and therefore it is necessary that men of arms should be
forbidden from skirmishes and from all other places where it should be
requisite to fly, and and where they should spoil their Horses and do no
service. The Baron of Gramont, who died in ye voyage to Naples, willed that men
of arms should never be employed in these light fights, except it were when as
a battle should be fought thoroughly: for that they had learned by the custom
and order of skirmishes, to turn their backs unto their enemies, without
fear of reproach, and to speak truth, a Skirmish is a service that
appertains better unto light Horssemen then unto them: and for the same
purpose only are the light Horssemen appointed. But I would have them to be
exempted from all other services as well as men of arms: and that the
Hargoletiers and Harquebusiers should be skoutes, and serve for discoueries and
skirmishes, and keep company with the light Horssemen in all places: and that
the light Horssemen should serve to back them, and the men of arms to be the
chief force. For to speak that I think concerning the exercises the
Horssemen ought to do, I say first that the Harquebusers should exercise their
Harquebuses, and practice to shoot sure with both hands, and to discharge
both forward and backward, their horses running, and also to light to keep a
straight, as Harquebusiers a foot should do. The Hargoletiers ought to use
their Iauelings with both hands, sometime using it one way and sometime
another, or as is abouesaid, but if they do carrye lances, they must use them
as other men do. The light Horssemen should practice to ride well, to manadge a
Horse, and to run well with a lance, to use their swords and mases when they
shall be needful, the men of arms must do the like, all which Horssemen
ought to have judgment in all the deseases that belong unto a Horse for to
find remedy therefore: and it would be for their credit if they could bit and
shoe them, to have no lack of any small point belonging unto their occupation.
These Horssemen armed and practiced as is abouesayd, must be at the muster with
the Legion to exercise themselves together, if it were but to know and to be
acquainted one with another. As for the Horssemens lodging and baggage, must be
as well entrenched as the footmens, but they must bring as little with them as
they may possible, and that they do bring must neither trouble nor lade them
in going unto the muster. They must live upon their own purses, without taking
any thing from other men, and must march all day armed in good order, keeping
watch at night: and when it is day, before that they do dislodge, the Captain
shall send out Skouts to discover the passages upon the way where the company
shall pass. And this charge shall be given unto certain Decurions of
Harquebusiers, and of Hargoletiers, who shall be followed with certain
Decurions of light Horsemen to succor them: after whom the baggage may march,
and then the Horsemen; and after them the men of arms, and if it were thought
to be better to put the baggage behind then before, it may be done, and behind
it shall ye rest of the Hargoletiers and Harquebusiers follow. The ranks of
every one of them in marching through the country, shall be of whole Decuries,
except the way be too narrow. In the manner beforesayde may every band of
Horssemen march in their going and coming from the muster: but before they
come thither, the Marshall and the Harbingers shall go before to provide their
quarter, which shall be ioining unto the footmens, and they both together shall
lodge in Camp, in this manner following.

diagram of military camp The form of a Camp 660. paces square, for to lodge
a Legion of footmen of 12. bands, with two bands of Horsemen, each band
containing 100. men of arms, 100. light Horsemen, 50. Hargoletiers, and 50.
Harquebusiers.
EAST.

NORTH.

SOVTH.

WEST.

This space betwixt the trenches and the lodgings must be 60. paces broad, to
practice the Soldiers, and to range them in Battle.

For six bands of footmen.

One Deccurie Of me^ of arms. The Ensign.

Two Decuries Of light horse. The Guydon.

A streat 40. paces broad.

The Captain.

Two Decuries Of Hargoleters.

2. Conductors.

2. Decuries of Harquebusiers.

One Ducurie Of me^ of arms. The Lieutena^t.

Horsemen as above.

For six bands of footmen.

Streates of 310. paces long and 60. paces broad for mercha^ts and artificers.

For the 40 Colonel.



The horsemens quarter, must be square every way 240. pases. For the just
dividing, whereof you must first seek out the very midst of the place, and
there make a square, to lodge the Captain which shall be every way 20. pases.
From this square, draw a line eastward, which shall be 110. pases long, and
afterward draw two other lines from the said lodging one either side of the
first line one, which shall be equal unto it in length and equedistant unto
it 20. pases, and from each other 40. pases: which breadth shall contain the
Captain his lodging in the midst of it, and shall serve for a streate. On the
other side of the Captain, his lodging west ward: shall three other lines be
drawn of like length and breadth that the abouesaid are, for to make another
street like unto the first. The like shall be done toward the South and North
Regions: so that there shall be four streets, and at the end of every
street, there must be a gate or bare of a reasonable breadth. All this quarter
should be enclosed with a small trench which may be made by the servants of
the company, and thus I would fortify ye Horsemens quarter, that they might
rest the safer, and be the surer from thieves that might steal away their
horses, as we see often done, when that footmen may come amongst horsemen. The
space comprised within this small trenche, and betwixt the four streets,
divided into four small quarters, every one of which conteyneth 100. pases
square, shall be to lodge the horsemen in: to wit the men of arms in those
two places that are betwixt the East and South street, and betwixt the North
and West streets. The space which is betwixt the East and North street shall
be to lodge the light horsemen; and betwixt the Southe and West streets shall
the Hargoletiers and Harquebusiers lodge. In the Captain his quarter, shall
the Marshall, Harbengers, and Trumpes be lodged: and the two conductors shall
lodge in the quarters of the Hargoletiers, and Harquebusiers. The Guido^ shall
lie amongst the light horsemen and the Ensigns shall lodge in one of the
quarters of the men of arms, and the Lieutenant in the other, concerning the
division of the four quarters, it shall be after this manner: that is every
one shall be divided into five parts, each of which parts, shall contain 100.
pases in length, and 16. in breadth: and betwixt every two of this places
there shall be a streate left of 5. paces in breadth, each one of these places
shall have roomth enough to lodge 100. horse and more. Moreover there may be
raised ten great tents, along the same, if the men of arms will every man
have his tente, as for the other they shall lodge two and two together. The
places which are in the men of arms quarter, will every one easily receive a
whole Decury of men of arms: and in the places in the other two quarters may
lodge two Decuries of light horsemen, Halgolbetiers, and Harquebusiers at ease.

How it is necessary to divide every Batailon into three Battiles, the one
separated from the other
The.9 Chapter.
Since the Legion is assembled and lodged, we must proceed unto the practicing
of the bands together, as well the footmen as the horsemen, to the intent to
have service of them against our enemies: which is the intent, for which this
discipline is ordained, and for whose well ordering we take all these pains.
To speak that I think, we must understand that the greatest disorder that
those that frame a Batailon can make, is that they have no other regard but to
make a good head, wherein they place the Captains, and all the most valiantest
men, and the best armed of their bands, making no reckoning of the backs,
flanks, nor ranks in the midst, as if the first ranks were all the hope of
the victory, and that the other served but to make number. For by this means
they make all the hazard of the Battle subject unto two or three ranks, as
if they were immortal, or sufficient of themselves to resist an enemy,
without the help of those that are behind them: which is directly contrary
unto the order that the ancient men of war did use; for they ordered their men
so that one rank might be received within another, and one Batailon within
another, and so to fight resolutely until the very last man. For without this
manner it is not possible to succor the first ranks or to defend them, nor
likewise to retire them within the other ranks to come to the fight in their
places. With which manner of combat, the Romans helped themselves oftentimes,
and for this purpose they divided their Legions into three sorts of people,
which were called Hastaries, Princes, and Triaries. The Hastaries made the
front or first battle, and their ranks were furnished thick with men. The
Princes made the second battle, and their ranks were opener then the first.
And the Triaries who made the third and last battle, had their men ranged so
wide, that at a need they could receive the two first battles. Moreover
their Velites, who were light armed, did the same service that our
Harquebusiers do at this present, and were placed upon the wings betwixt the
Batailon and the Horssemen; and they began the battle. And if it were so that
they overcame their enemies, they followed the victory, and if they were
driven back, they retired unto the flanks of the Battailon. After whose
retreat the Hastaries came to fight with their enemies, and if they felt
themselves to weak to resist their enemies, they retired by little and little
betwixt the open ranks of the Princes, and renewed the battle with them: and
if they were then too weak, they both retired unto the Triaries, with whom
they began the combat again. And if these three sorts were overthrown, there
was then no remedy to help them. Me thinks that this manner of releeuing
three times is invincible, because that fortune must thrice abandon you: and
moreover your enemy must of necessity fight, and vanquish you thrice. The
Greeks used not this manner of relieueng with their Phalanges, for although they
had many ranks and many Chiefes in their ranks; notwithstanding there was
made but one only head, and one only body of them all. And the manner which
they used to succor one another, was not to retire one rank within another as
the Romans did: but that one Soldier should enter into another place, which
they did after this manner. The Phalange was ranged by ranks, as our Batailons
are, but it was not so confusedly as ours are: for every band did know his
place. The Decuries (that is the Deceins or Squadrons) were so ranged that the
Soldiers followed one another in rows, and not in front as we place ours.
The first man of every row was called the Doien or Decurion, (but I will term
him the Dicenier) and the last man was called the Guide behind. The second man
of every row was called Substes and he that followed him was called Prestes,
and so throughout they were Substes and Prestes, until the said Guide which
was ye last man. Of these rows they had so many, that one Phalange had 256.
men in front, or more, and 64. ranks in length. True it is that they were
distributed unto four Colonels, but they marched all in front with a little
distance betwixt them. Let us suppose that every rank has 256 men, and let
us say that they come to join battle with their enemies. If it happened that
either in going or fighting that any one of them was slain or overthrown, he
that before I have termed Substes, put himself presently into the first man's
place: so that by that means the Soldiers of the first rank were always
their full number. And to fill the second rank, they of the third rank which
were called Prestes, put forward themselves into their emptied places; and
those of the fourth rank did furnish the third, and so following: so that the
last ranks did furnish the first, in such sort that the first ranks were
always entier. And there was no place left empty but in the last rank, which
wasted because theee was no man to supply it, so that the loss that the first
ranks suffered, was cause of the consuming of the last. By this means the
Phalanges might sooner be consumed then disordred, for to overthrow them was
impossible, because of their great number. The Romans at ye first used
Phalanges, and instructed their people after the Greeks manner, but it is long
sithence that they misliked of their order: and therefore they divided their
people into many bodies: to wit, into Cohortes, and Manipules: for they
thought, as I have said before, that that body which had many souls, and was
compounded of many parts, ought also to have many lives. The Batailons of the
Switzers, Almaignes, ours, and others do somewhat imitate the Phalanges, as well
for that we do range a great number of people together: as also that we do
place them in such sort that they may enter one into another his place. But why
this manner should not be so good as the Romans, many examples of the Roman
Legions do show: for that as often as the Romans fought against the Greeks
their Phalanges were overthrown and consumed by the Legions: for the
difference of their arms, and the manner of releeuing three times, had a more
force in it then the great number, or the diligence of the Phalanges. Being
therefore to frame a Batailon after all these examples, I have thought it good
to imitate partly the fashions of the Greeks Phalanges, and partly the Roman
Legions, and partly these that we do use at this instant: and therefore I
would that in every one of our Legions there should be 3600, ordinary Pikes
for the body of the Batailon, 420. for the flanks, and 170. extraordinary
Pikes for the forlorn hope, which are arms that the Phalanges did use.
Besides I would have 600. Halbards, 420. Harquebusiers for the flanks, and
680. for the forlorn hope, all which are arms invented in our time.

I have divided the body of the Batailon into 10. bands, as the Romans did
theirs into 10. Cohortes, and have appointed the Harquebusiers, and the
forlorn hope to begin the Battle, and for skirmishes, as the Romans did
their Velites, and have given them two Captains, and two Ensigns, to the
intent to have better service of them then if they had none: and also for to
imploye them in the labors of the wars, as the other bands. And for that the
arms are borrowed of diverse nations, the bands must also be perticipants of
the orders of diverse nations: and therefore I have ordained, that every one of
the ten bands should have 8 ranks of Pikes before the Ensign, and 8 behind,
and 4 ranks of Halbardes in the midst: so that by that means every band
does make 20 ranks, and every rank has 21. men. The Pikes do serve for to
resist Horssemen, to break into the footmen, and to withstand the first
assaults of their enemies: which Pikes I will use only to defend my self,
and afterward use the Targets (which the Pikemen do carry at their backs)
and Halbards to vanquish mine enemies. And who so would consider of the force
of this order, shall find that every sort of arms shall do his office
thoughlye; for the Pikes are profitable against the Horssemen: and when the
footmen do meet Batailon against Batailon, they serve to a good use before
that the ranks are throng together, but after that they are once at the close,
the Pikes can do no more service. Wherefore the Switzers, to avoid this
inconvenience, after every three ranks of Pikes do place one rank of
Halbardes, which they do to the intent to give their Pikemen space and place
to fight in a prease; but yet this is not enough, but as for us, we will have
our Pikemen both before the Ensign and behind to carrye Targets: and there
shall be Halbardes in the midst, by means of this order, to resist both
Horssemen and footmen, and to break into an enemy: for you know that Pikes
may serve no turn after that the ranks are preassed together, because that
the Soldiers are then as it were one in another neck: and therefore if the
Pikemen had nothing but their Pikes and Swords the Pike being abandoned they
should be naked: for which cause I have given them Targets to cover themselves
from blows, and to fight in all places, what prease soever there were.
Moreover the Halbardiers may also fight better in a prease then the Pikemen,
which Halbardiers are expressly appointted for this purpose, and likewise they
may follow the said Targets at the heels, who are heavily laden, to reskue
them with their Halbards. And as for the Target men, I would have them but
only to thrust at the face and legs, or at any other part that were
unarmed. But leaving these small things. I will go range the ten bands in one
whole Batailon.

How to range a Legion in battle, and after what manner it must be practiced,
The 10. Chapter.
WHo so would range ten bands in a Batailon, must first put a side by
themselves the Pikemen, and Harquebusiers that are appointed for the flanks:
those of the one 5 ba^ds on the one side, and those of the other on the other.
And likewise one ba^d of the forlorn hope on the one side, and the other on
the other side, in such sort that the said bands of these two flanks shall
leave a great void space betwixt them, for to range the batailon in, which
shall be done after this manner. The first band shall go before the second, and
the second before the third, and the third before the fourth, and so likewise
the others. They shall march in their single order that is five and five in a
rank as I have said before. Afterward the Colonel shall command his trumpet
to sound, that the King commands them to double their ranks. And then the
ranks of five shall be doubled and made 10. This done the Colonel, or Sergeant
Mayor shall command the trumpet to sound again, that the King commands
them expressly to redouble their ranks, which at this second cry shall be 20. in
the midst of every rank shall the Chief of Squadron place himself to
make it to be 21. The Trumpet shall sound the third time by commandment as
before, and at this sound the first band shall go forward unto the place where
the front of the Batailon shall be placed, and shall stay there in that order
that I have ranged the particular bands. The space which every Soldier must
occupy marching in single order must be three paces, in bataile 2, and when
he fights 1. The distance from one rank unto another being in single order
must be 4. paces, and being placed in battle 2. and in fight one. So that the
said 21. men being in battle will occupy 42. paces in front, and the 20.
ranks will occupy 60. in length, here in comprysed the space that every
Soldier does occupy which is one pace. The first band being so ranged, the
second shall march as far forward as the first, and place it self upon the
right hand of it, and shall occupy as great a space in breadth and length as
it does. Their ranks shall be straight in the flanks one by another, and
the two bands thus ranged together, shall make 42. in front, and their order
shall be all one, they must have a space left betwixt them of 5. paces broad.
The third band shall be brought forward upon the left side of the first
band, and shall be ranged like unto the other two, and not otherwise, and
betwixt it and the first shall also a space be left of 5. paces broad. The
fourth band shall be brought forward upon the right side of the second, and
shall be ranged in ranks and spaces like unto the others, and shall always
make the right corner. The fyft shall be brought forward upon the left side
of the third band, and shall be ranged as the others, and shall always make
the left corner. These five bands thus ordered do make 105. men in front, and
do occupy in breadth 230 paces, and 60. in length. at the tail of these
bands, we must range the sixth, seventh, and eight band, right behind the
other five, and distant from them 25. pases, and in such sort that these three
bands must occupy as great a breadth in front as the other five: and
therefore the men must be ranged much opener the^ those in the first five. The
sixth band shall be in the midst, the seventh upon the right side of it, and
the eight upon the left: which three bands do make 63. in front, and the
space which they occupy in length is 90. paces. At the backs of these three
bands shall the ninth and tenth band be placed right behind them, and distant
from them 25. paces. The ninth shall be on the right side, and the tenth on the
left, and they shall occupy as much breadth as the first five. True it is that
the ranks of these two bands shall be opener then those of the second
battle are: but it is necessary that they should be so, for the reason
that I will show you by and by.

Their order shall be like unto the other bands, but that the distaunce of the
ranks of these two bands, shall be more then the distance of the ranks of the
others: for whereas the ranks of the second battle does occupy but 90.
paces from the first rank unto the last, these shall occupy 120. paces:
wherefore all the 10. bands together will occupy 230. paces in breadth, and
320. from the first rank of the Batailon until the last. Moreover I would
that these three battles should have certain express names: for the Romans
did so distinguish theirs, naming (as I have said before) the Soldiers of the
first battle Hastaries, those of the second Princes, and those of the third
Triaries. For to arm the flanks, first for the right flank I would take the
Pikemen of the first, second, fourth, seventh, and ninth band, and would range
them along the Batailon two and two, so that the flank should represent as
great a number of men as the front does. The Harquebusiers of the five bands
aforesaid, shall also be ranged two and two together along the flank of
these pikes, five or six paces distant from them. The Pikemen of the third,
fyft, sixth, eight, and tenth band shall be on the left side and shall be ranged
like unto those upon the right side, and the Harquebusiers like unto the other.
The Corporals of both flanks shall be by themselves before their men. The two
bands of the forelorne hope, shall be the one upon the one flank, and the other
upon the other. The Harquebusiers shall be ranged in 16 ranks, and their Pikes
in 4, every one of which rank shall have 21 men, their Ensign shall be in the
midst of their Pikes. The one company of 100. men of arms shall be upon the
one flank, and the other upon the other flank, and shall be like unto two
wings. As for the light Horsemen they shall be ranged before the men of arms,
or at their sides, who so would, in such sort that they both to gether might
make one front: or if you would range them both by two Decuries, and two
Decuries, you may do it. The Hargoletiers shall be before them and the
Harquebusiers a horseback foremost, the Captains shall be before the men of
arms, the Lieutenants before the light horsemen, and the Conductors before the
Hargoleteires, and the Harquebusiers; either of them before his charge. The
Colonel shall place himself in the void place betwixt the Hastaries, and the
Princes, or at the head of the Batailon, at one of the corners betwixt the
fourth band and the Pikes upon the right flank, or betwixt the fyft band and
the Pikes, upon the left flank, as it shall seem best. I would that he should
have with him in his Squadron, the Sergant Mayor, and some chosen men, that
knew wiselye to execute a commission of importance. His Trumpet and Drum
Mayor, shall be always by him to sound and to signify his commandment
speedilye. When the Battailon shall be thus ordered, the Colonel shall
command his Trumpet to sound, that his men should march easilye, and in a
while after shall sound to make them to go faster, and afterward shall sound
the combat. The Hastaries must not be forgotten to be taught how they should
retire themselves within the Princes: nor how both these Battles of Hastaries
and Princes, should retire unto the Triaries, which must be done without
disordering or breaking themselves. The Pikes upon the flanks ought to retire,
as the Battles do retire: to wit, the first rank into the second, the
third rank into the fourth, and the fifth into the sixth, and the others
consequentlye. The forlorn hope, and the Horssemen shall do so likewise. This
done a retreat shall be sounded, and every band shall fall of a part, and
put their men into single order, to reenter the Camp as they came out. And if
it should seem better to range the Princes and Triaries in one front, they
might be so as well as the Hastaries: for then there need no more to be done,
but to make the ninth and the tenth band, to put themselves betwixt the second
and third band, in whole bands: and that the said Princes and Triaries should
keep the same order that the five bands of Hastaries do keep, and occupy as
much ground in breadth and length as the said Hastaries do occupy: or
otherwise four bands of the Hastaries might make the front, and the fyft might
be placed in the middle Battailon, with one band of Princes, and both these
bands might range themselves in ten ranks, 42. men in every rank: and the
seventh and eight band of the said Princes might be ranged with the Triaries:
and so there should be as well four bands behind, as four before, and two in
the midst all ranged like unto the Hastaries: or these two bands may be
behind occupyeng the place of the Triaries according unto Polibius his order,
who would that the Triaries should be always the one half lesser then the
Princes or Hastaries: so that in each of the other Battles there should be
four bands, and in this but two, provided that whereas these two bands before
made 20. ranks, they should then make but 10: to the intent that their frontes
should stretch as wide as the frontes of the other Battles.

We might also range one of these Legions in form of a Phalange, but to make
it just square as the order of the said Phalange requires, we must alter a
great part of the order of these Legions, for to do it so that there should be
no difference. But as concerning one of those Legions that I have framed here
before, I have showed the order that I would observe in ranging one of them in
Battle or many: notwithstanding if I should range one of those Legions which
the King has ordained in France, I would proceed after another manner, if so
be that the manner of Hastaries, Princes, and Triaries before spoken of, were
disliked: for in this case I would make but two Battles, in the first I would
place three bands and their Ensigns; and in the last three bands and their
Ensigns: and this I would do according unto the manner that I have spoken of
in the seventh Chapter, where I have showed how to range one of these bands
alone: so that the three bands should make 75. men in front, which bands with
the two spaces of 5 paces broad left betwixt every one of them, will occupy
160. paces in breadth: and the 24. ranks will occupy 70. paces in length. I
would place the other three bands behind them in the selfsame order, that
they are in, but as they should make the force behind, and stand even in rank
with the first: so I would have a distance of 20. paces broad betwixt them and
the first: by this means the length of the Battailon might be 160. paces. The
extraordinary Pikes of three bands, should serve for the one flank, and these
of the other three for the other, ranged two and two together: and the
Harquebusiers for the flanks a little distant from them. The forelorne hope
shall march before upon the wings, and the horsemen shall keep the same
place that they keep in the Legions above said; and the Colonel shall be at
one of the corners, betwixt the bands and the Pikemen in the flank, or else
where it might be thought most expedent. And although that this form might
seem to be very good, yet is it so that the manner before spoken of is much
more sure: because of the means that it has to relieve it self three times,
and to fight thrice; which this Legion here last ranged cannot do: for if it
fought well once, it would be all; notwithstanding it might be taught
through long exercise, how the one rank might fight after the other, which to
do it should be necessary to teach the first rank to retire within the
second, and so the others unto the very last man, not putting any men out of
his place, which may be easily done; so that those which should make place for
them to pass do put themselves a little aside, and immediately come into their
places again. The like must be done when the second should retire, and the
other also: so that this manner might be observed I would much esteem of
this last manner. And at the uttermost which soever of these manners you range
them in, it may serve: so that the Soldiers be often practiced therein.

But to repeat my sayings from the first unto the last, the Legion which I have
framed after the ancient manner should be exercised in diverse exercises
every day, as long as it contineweth together, and by this means the Colonel
should find the diligence, and negligence of the Captains, in the practicing
of their Soldiers: to the intent to praise or blame them in the presence of al
men according unto their deserts: and the soldiers shall learn also to range
themselves together, unto whom shall be showed all the exercises that they
ought to do in general being before accustomed, unto their particular
exercises. And for their better instruction it should be necessary that the
Legion should assemble twice a year at the least, and that the bands should
exercise themselves perticularly every month or oftener if it were possible:
and the Soldiers by themselves every holy day with their Deceniers, Chiefes
of squadrons, and Corporals. The Colonel ought to exhort them unto this, and
unto all other virtuous exercises both publikly and privately: and afterward to
give them leave to turn unto their own houses: which retourning shall be in
every point like unto their going to the muster, keeping the same manner of
matching, lodging, and well lyieng that is spoken of. Which ought to be
observed as often as the Kings does levy a Legion for his wars. I have
caused in this place the form to be showed that one of these Legions
abouesaide shall have being ranged in battle.

Here must the figure be placed, which does show the form that a Legion
shall have: being ranged in battle. diagram of military camp This figure must
be placed after the page 80.

A The flanks: to wit, Harquebusiers, ranged two and two together, and Pikes
likewise ranged two and two together.

B The Forlorn hope ranged in 16 ranks of Harquebusiers 21 me^ in every rank
and 4. ranks of Pikes.

C Men of arms under their Ensign, and light Horsemen under their Guidon.

D Hargoletiers.

E Harquebusiers on Horseback.



How from point to point to raunge four Legions in battle, wherein, the
Author does give the best order that may be observed
The 11. Chapter.
Since we have instructed the Legions severally, it follows that we should now
speak of the manner of raunging of one whole Battle together. And for to do
this, it were necessary in this passage to declare amply after what manner the
Greeks and the Romans ordered their Battles, but since that their manner may
be found and considered of by every man in the ancient Authors that do write
thereof: I will leave many perticulars of their fashions, and will speak only
of the most necessaryest, and of that which we ought to borrow of them, to give
some little perfection unto the Military Discipline of our time. This doing, I
will show all under one, how an Army must be ordered upon a day of Battle,
and in what order one Host does approach and assail another, being their
enemies, and the manner how to exercise them in feigned Battles. We must
understand, that in an ordinary Host of the Romans which they called
Consularis, there were but two Legions of the Citizens of Rome, which were in
number 600. horssemen, and 10000. footmen: besides, they had as many of their
assistants, as of their own, who were divided into two parts, the one was
called the right corner, the other the left. They would never suffer that their
assistants should be more in number then their Legionaries, but as for the
horssemen, they made no great account, although they were more in number then
theirs. With such an army of 20000 footmen, and about 1500. horse of service
at the uttermost, a Consul of Rome did enterprise all factions, and did
execute them. True it is, that when as they were to deal with a very great
force of their enemies, they assembled two Consuls, and caused the two Hoastes
Consulares, to join together. We must note moreover that in all the three
principal actions that an army does, as in marching, lodging, and fighting,
the aforesaid Romans did put their Legions in the midst, because they would
that the force which they trusted most, should be most united: yet their
confederates were not inferiors unto them, because of the great practice that
they had together: for in truth they were practiced and raunged after one
manner. As they had two Legions of their own Citizens, and two of their
assistants in every one of their hoasts, so likewise I will take four Legions
of Frenchmen, or two at the least, and they shall be of 6100. footmen, for
this number likes me best, for that Vegetius has used it in the framing of
his Legions, and of the two abouesaid Legions I will make my principal force.
If so be that we would have strange souldyers amongst them, I would place the
said strangers at the two corners of the army as the Romans did their
assistants. But I suppose that there shall be no strangers in the host that I
will make at this present, or if there should be, I would not have the number
of the Legions which I require to be diminished: but that there should always
be four: by the ordering of which four, may easily be understood how a
greater army should be raunged: for if there should be a greater number of
people then the said four Legions, there were no more to do but to make many
small Batailons, and to place them behind and at the sides of the Bataile, in
form of Subsides, to succor any part of the Batailon that might be oppressed:
of which Subsides it shall be necessary to use for the diverse forms of
Batailons that enemies oftentimes do make, to the intent that without changing
or taking any thing out of place, we might at all times have wherewithal to
resist them: as if any of the enemies Batailons should be raunged in Point,
that is, with a narrow strong battle, we might immediately bring forward those
that are behind, and those upon the flanks, and range them in the form of two
united forces, to receive and enclose betwixt them the enemies Point when it
shall approach: or if the said enemies should march with their front of great
breadth, they then might march in Point, and force to break into them. These
people would be also good to repulse those that should suddenly charge upon
the flanks of the Batailon or behind, they may also serve to relieve those that
are in danger, or to strike down those yt run away: and for many other good
actions (which I leave to speak of) wherein we might employ those that might
be in our Camps over and above the said four Legions: notwithstanding for these
purposes there need none to be levied, since the Forlorn hope, and those of
the flanks might serve the turn. Furthermore, I think that it shall not be
needful to recite again the number of people that I have appointed for every
Legion, nor that there are ten ordenary bands, and two extraordinary: nor
what arms and weapons they should carry, nor the diversity of Pikemen, nor
what officers and Chiefs there should be in every Legion: because that I have
before recited them perticularly, wherefore without any more repetition, I say
that the first Legion (for they must all be distinguished by degrees) ought at
all times to be raunged in the Batailon in one place, and the others likewise.
Therefore I would that the first Legion should keep the right side, and the
second the left, and that the first ranks of the Hastaries of these two
Legions should be raunged as far forward the one as the other, and all the
other ranks following. And for a more manifest demonstration, suppose that the
enemies be toward the East, and that we do raunge the fronts of our battles
toward them, the first Legion being upon the right hand on the South side, the
second Legion upon the left hand on the North side, and their backs toward the
West: and the Hastaries one right against another, and one as far forward as an
other, and ye Princes and Triaries of both these two Legions, must likewise
keep one and the selfsame order, ranks, spaces, and distances: there must a
space be left betwixt the two Legions from the front unto the tail, which must
be thirty paces broad: these two Legions shall occupy the place that the two
Legions of the Citizens of Rome did occupy. I would have the third Legion to be
placed on the right corner, and the fourth on the left, and raunged in the
selfsame order that ye two Legions betwixt the^ are, with spaces betwixt the^
of 30. paces broad: so that the four Legions should occupy in breadth a
thousand pases or more. The Forlorn hope shall be at the head, and the
horssemen of the first and third Legion shall be on the right wing: and the
horsemen of the second and fourth Legion upon the left wing. And for to
govern this army well, it would be necessary to have certain principal
Chiefes; and Officers, who should be subject and obedient unto one Lieutenant
General. There shall be therefore two Chiefes, to weet, one Captain general
of the horssemen, unto whom, all the Captains that have charge of horssemen,
must be obedient. The other shall be Captain general over the footmen, unto
whom, all the Colonels and Captains that have charge of footmen shall be
obedient. The dignity of these two Chiefes is equal, because that the one
commands over the one kind of Souldyers, and the other over the other: and
they are the highest degrees that are in an army (excepting the General
chief) and unto which estates all other degrees may aspire, each one in his
faculty, as he that is a horsseman, may attain to be Captain general over
horssemen: and he that is a footeman, may attain to be Captain general over
the footmen: to arise unto which dignities, there must be as many degrees
passed in the one faculty, as in the other: for I make twelve degrees in
either of them. First amongst the footmen there is ye Forlorn hope, amongst
whom, I would place all those which I would inrowle to fill a Legion. The
second place is to be of ye flanks, and in these two places they should pass
through all offices except the Corporals, before that they should be of the
Battailon, and being of ye Battailon, they should first be Pikemen or
Halbardiers amongst the Hastaries which is the third place, the fourth, are the
Princes, the fifth, Triaries, the sixth to be Decenier, the seventh to be chief
of Squadron, the eight to be Corporal, the ninth to be Ensigne-bearer, whether
it were of the Batailon, or of the Forlorn hope, the tenth Lieutenant, the
eleventh Captain, the twelfth Colonel. And for the Horssemen, the first point
is to be Harquebusiers, the second Hargoletiers, the third light horssemen, the
fourth a man of Arms, the fifth a Decurion of Harquebusiers, the sixth a
Decurion of Hargoletiers: the 7. a Decurion of light horsemen, the eight, a
Decurion of men of arms, or conductors of hargoletiers or Harquebusiers, the
ninth Guydon, ye tenth Ensign, the eleventh Lieutenant, and the twelfth
Captain. Concerning the other places as Harbingers, Sergeants of Bands,
Sergeants, Majors, Marshals of Legions, Masters of Camp, or Provost (for it
is all one) and others, theirs are offices, but not degrees, whereby a man
ought to attain unto the estates of the two Sovereigns, except the King did
appoint it to be so, who may alter and change all orders. As concerning the
officers that ought to be in an Host, besides these that I have here spoken
of, there must be first of all some wise man who should execute the office of
Chauncellor or Councellor, as you will term him: and a master of the
Ordinance, a Threasorer, and a Marshall of the Camp, we might appoint also a
Provost general. Now to appoint unto every one of these principal Chief
their places, the army being ready for the Combat, and likewise unto the other
officers here above named, we must say that the Lieutenant General ought to
be upon the right side, betwixt the footmen and the horssemen, for that is the
fittest place to govern an army. The Kings Lieutenant General may have in his
company a 100. or 200. chosen men, some a horssebacke, and some a foot, of
which number there shall be some sufficient to execute a charge of importance,
he himself must be a horssebacke, and so armed, that he might help himself
both a horssebacke and a foot, according unto the occasion that might be
given. His Cornet must be by him, which is the Ensign of those that are
Chiefes of Armies, and ye Kings Trompet, generally after whose sound, all the
Trompets of the army must govern themselves, and the souldyers likewise. The
Lieutenant general of the army ought then to be upon the right side, for it is
the fittest place to give order unto all parts of the battle, and to
ouer-looke them with least trouble, except the situation of the place were
fitter upon the other side: but I suppose that this Host is raunged in some
fair plain. The Captain general of the footmen shall be at the head of
that space, that is left betwixt the two middle Legions, to govern all the
four Legions, and to remedy the accidents that may happen: and therefore he
shall have about him certain extraordinary footmen, or may use certain
Pikemen and harquebusiers of the flanks if he will: specially those of the
flanks betwixt the two middle Legions, for it will be long before that they
should be assailed there. The Captain General of the horssemen shall be upon
the left side to govern there as the Lieutenant General does govern the
right side: and may have about him certain footmen, Pikes, and Harquebusiers,
which he shall take from the Forlorn hope, and shall cause them to fight
amongst the horssemen without keeping order. The Ordnance ought to be placed at
the front of the Army, except the ground were such that it might be placed upon
the flanks, or elsewhere in some sure place where the enemies might not easily
come to it. The master of the Ordnance ought to be with his charge, and his
Officers and Gunners with him: a good number of the chief Officers ought to be
about the King his Lieutenant General, and the rest behind the Battles, to
have a regard unto that might happen there. As for the Baggage, it should be
placed in some place either strong by nature or by art, and the servant of
the Host may keep it, and for this purpose I required that they should be
chosen to be such as might serve for souldyers at a need. And an Host ranged
after this manner here spoken of, might in fight do asmutch as the Greeks
Phalanges, or as the Roman Legions might do, because that there are Pikemen in
the front, and upon the sides: and moreover, the Souldyers are ranged in such
sort, that if the first rank should be slain or beaten down in fight, then
those that are in the second, might presently supply their places, and fill
their ranks, according unto the use of the Phalanges. On the other part, if the
first ranks of Hastaries were so violently charged, that they should be
enforced to break, they might then retire unto the Princes which are at their
backs, and range themselves anew betwixt their ranks, who are not so thick
placed as the Hastaries, for they are two bands less then they. Moreover,
there is a greater distance from the first rank of the Princes unto the last,
then the said Hastaries do occupy in their order, and therefore they may fight
anew, and show their faces being ranged with the Princes. And when as this
would not serve the turn, they might retire the second time, as they did the
first, and enter betwixt the Triaries, and fight the third time, so that this
manner of relieuing, and furnishing of the places of those that are stricken
down, is both according unto the Greeks and Romans manner. Furthermore, it
were not possible to frame a more stronger form of Battle then this, because
that all the sides of the Battles are most excelently well furnished with
Chiefes and good arms, so that they can not be assailed at any part that is
not strong and well governed, heerewith considered that the enemies are very
seldom so great a number as they might assail those with whom they should
have to do alike upon all parts. And if it were so that they were strong
enough to do it, I would never counsel the weaker to offer the Battle, nor
to accept it, nor to go out of his Fort into an open Country. But if the
enemy were so strong, that he had three times as mutch people as you, and as
good Souldyers as yours, and should assail you in diverse places, if you could
repulse but the one part, the others would do no great deed: for who so should
assail his enemies upon diverse sides, must of necessity weaken and diminish
his Battayles, and be constrained to range them so far asunder, that if one
part should be repulsed, having no body to succor it, the other parts would be
dismayed, or at least would but weakly resist. And as for the enemy his
horsemen, if they were stronger then you, yet are you assured from them, by
means of the Pikes which enuiron your Battayles upon every side: for what
side so ever should be assailed, you have Pikemen to defend the same: moreover,
the officers, numbers, and Chiefes, are distributed into such places, yt they
may easily command their people, and obey their Captain general. The
distances betwixt ye ranks, bands, and battles, do not only serve for to
receive one another, but also to make place for those that come and go, to
carry and re-carry the commands of the Chiefes. Furthermore I have said that
the Romans had in four of their Legions the number of 21000. footmen, which
were all the people that they commonly had in one of their armies. This Host
which I frame here, has 25000. not accompting the principal Chiefes, and
Officers, who also have some followers. Finally, they had horssemen, so
likewise mine have a good number, who are better armed and furnished then
theirs were: wherefore since the battles are raunged in all points ready to
fight, there rests nothing but to set these people aworke. I do require
therefore that I may be here permitted to give battle with these four
Legions, against another great Host of Enemies, to the intent to show after
what manner I would have them to fight: afterward, I will give a reason for
that I cause them to do during the battle, which battle I do feign by
imagination.

The Author shows by a feigned Battle how an army of four Legions raunged
after the manner that he teaches, should use their fight against their enemies
upon a day of battle
The 12. Chapter.
WE do suppose that every one does sufficiently understand the ordering of this
Host, and do imagine to see it ready to begin battle, when so ever it shall
be needful. Or else let us put case that our enemies are come out of their
Fort, and our men also, and that both the one and the other mean nothing else
but to mere, and are approached within Cannon shot. Let us also suppose that
the said enemies are raunged in very good form of battle, and that they have
a great force of all sorts of people, as well footeme^ as horsemen, and besides,
good store of Ordnance. And furthermore, yt the place wherein these 2. armies
do atte^d, to enter into battle is large and plain: so that the situation
cannot help the one to annoy the other. The matter being in these terms, and
the two armies in sight, there rests no more but to give fire unto the
pieces, and to discharge them. You may now see that the gunners do not sleep
on neither side, and also hear how the cannon does rore. Let us mark what
murder it does. Have you seen how little hurt our Ordnance has done unto the
enemies at the first vollie? Hereupon the King his Lieutenant General, does
cause his Trumpet to sound to begin the battle. This done, you see our
Forlorn hope, and our Harquebuziers of the flanckes do go forwards out of
their places, and our Harquebuziers on horseback, and Hargoletiers likewise:
and they altogether assault their enemies without keeping any rank,
approaching them most furiously, and with the greatest cry that they can make.
The enemies Ordnance has passed over our footmens heads, not hurting them, and
to hinder it for shooting the second time, our Forlorn hope, Harquebuziers on
horseback, and Hargoletiers do run upon it, and do all their endeavor to
win it, and the enemies to defend it: so that neither their Ordnance, nor
ours may do any more service. You see how our horsemen and footmen mingled one
with another, do fight valiantly and to good purpose, succouring one another
(the practice which they have had, and the trust that they repose in the
Battailons that are at their backs, are causes of it:) which Battailons have
already kissed the ground, and march orderly as you see, a good pace, with ye
horsemen at their wings, every rank of men of arms being one hundred horse.
And the light horsemen, who do make as many ranks as they, are upon the
outside of the men of arms, and are one rank after an other, and do march
all very close: mark how our Ordnance is retired into the spaces that are left
betwixt the Legions, for to make place for our Battles, and to leave them the
way free. Do you see how the King his Lieutenant General, and the Captain
Generals of the horsemen and footmen, do go before the Battailons, encouraging
the Soldiers to do well, and the Captains also calling every man by his name,
or by his office, declaring unto them the victory to be in their hands, so
that they abide and resist the enemies charge without fear? Do you mark how
our Harquebuziers on horseback, and our Hargoletiers do open themselves to
make place for our battles, and how the Harquebuziers of the flanckes do
return into their places? The Forlorn hope of the right side do return unto
the right side, and those of the left unto the left, and do retire without
fear or flight, although they have the enemy at their heels, and a far
greater number then they are, and how they do return all at once: to weet, the
Forlorn hope of two Legions together toward the one side, and the Forlorn
hope of the other two Legions together toward the other side, to put themselves
into a new order, the Pikemen by themselves, and Harquebuziers by themselves:
which Pikemen of each two Legions do rank themselves in eight ranks, and
every rank is a Squadron of 21. men: for they are all of this number, which is
a sufficient number to represent a small Battailon. But these two small
Battailons are raunged as you may see behind the Triaries, each of them right
behind the space that is betwixt the two Legions, and the Harquebuziers do
raunge themselves in troops by them to defend them behind, while the fronts do
fight.

They do also remain there for to be employed when as the Lieutenant General
should have occasion to use them. But whilst I appoint our Forlorn hope their
place at the tail of our Legions, I do see that the two armies are come
together unto the push of the Pike. Mark how resolutely our Battailons do
withstand the violence of the enemy, and with what virtue and silence they do
it. The King his Lieutenant General commands the men of arms stoutly to
resist, but not to assail, and that they should not separate themselves from
the footmen: and thereupon commands the light horsemen to assail, and after
they have executed their charge, they should return again into their places.
On the other part, I see that our Harquebuziers on horseback, and the
Hargoletiers and Harquebuziers of the right flancke, are gone to charge
certain troops of the enemies Harquebuziers, who would charge our men upon
the flanck: and I see that the enemies light horsemen have succored their men
immediately, and that at this instant the horsemen on both sides are so
intermingled, that the Harquebuziers can do no service with their Harquebuzzes,
but are constrained to retire unto their people. Whilst this is in hand, two
of our Guydons go to succor our horsemen, and charge the enemy so
courageously that they force them to retire: and having repulsed them, our
light horsemen do afterward return to their places. Mark how our
Harquebuziers on horseback and Hargoletiers do trouble the enemies without
cease? Do you not see that our Pikemen do fight bravely? Our men and the
enemies are so near together that they can no more use their Pikes: so that
our first ranks of the Hastaries (according unto our Military discipline) do
leave their Pikes and take their Swords and Targets, which they do use only in
thrusting. Herewithall you may see how a great troop of the enemies horsemen
have repulsed our Hargoletiers upon the left side, who do retire toward the
Pikes of the same flancke, with whom and the Harquebuziers they turn their
faces and do resist their enemies. Do you see how our light horsemen do go to
succor them? See how they charge the said enemies one band after another.
Hark how they break their Lances: see how they are mingled: behold the
murder which the Pikes of the said flancke do make of the enemies horses,
running betwixt our horsemen, who do back them against the enemies assaults:
and our said Pikes do also help to defend the light horsemen. He has good
luck that is overthrown, if he escape the footmens hands without death. Do
you not see how the enemies men of arms come to assail our men of arms of
the said flancke, whilst the light horsemen and others are busied other where?
Do you see how the Forlorn hope of the two Legions of the same left side of
the battle, do go in great have to succor our men of arms? But they are
somewhat too far of to come time enough, notwithstanding they make as much
have as possibly they may do, in the same order that they are raunged in. In
the mean while the enemy his men of arms do charge ours as much as the
horses can run, but mark well the manner of our men who stand still to
receive them. But as soon as the Captain general his Trompet does sound, they
do run all at once: although the raze be not above twenty or thirty paces.
And this they have done (as I think) to resist their enemies the more
forciblie. Have you seen how our men of arms have with their Lances galled
the enemies horses in their breasts and sides? being sure that the enemies
could neither hurt their persons nor their horses, because that they are very
well armed themselves, and their horses are barbed and garnished with
Chamfrings and Criniers, which the enemies do want: which is the cause that you
do see so many of the enemies slain, and so few of ours. Mark how our men
with the force of their horses, and with the thrustes of their swords do
repulce their enemies, killing their horses as long as they may, and laying on
upon the men at all places where they may find them unarmed. The mase does his
office there also, and the Captain General of the horsemen does command the
men of arms to keep them selves firm together, and not to break their
ranks, or to suffer their enemies to enter within them by any means. Hereupon
the pikemen of the Forlorn hope do ariue, and the men of arms seeing them
arrived, do make way for them to pass through the midst of their ranks, and
the pikes al at once do fall in amongst the enemies, and the men of arms
likewise upon their flanks, and do charge altogether, and the Harquebuziers do
go toward the flanckes to charge. But mark how the Lieutenant General does
send a company of men of arms to charge the flancke of that Battailon, that
makes the enemy his left corner, and he himself is suddenly lighted a foot,
and with those that do follow his Cornet, does give a fight unto one of the
corners of the said Battailon, who co^ducteth our footmen ill in that point. Do
you see how he makes them to give way, and how our men do begin to take heart,
and do charge them so rigorously that they do repulce them? This done, the
Lieutenant General does mount on horseback again, and his men also: and
seeing certain companies of the enemies horsemen, which went to charge upon
the backs of our Battles to put them in disorder, has commanded the
Hargoletiers, and Harquebuziers on horseback, and part of the Harquebuziers of
his side, to go speedily toward them to resist them, and does send the light
horsemen after them. Do you not see how our Harquebuziers on horseback and
Hargoletiers have stayed them, and how they fight together in skirmish? But the
enemies seeing our light horsemen coming, and Harquebuziers at their tails,
do run away as fast as they can gallop. But let us look no more upon that
which is done on the sides, but let us behold the Battailons, who do fight so
near together, that their ranks are almost one upon another neck: so that
their Soldiers can very hardly use their swords, but are constrained for the
most part to fight with their daggers. Mark how the enemies are murdered, and
fall by heaps, who have nothing but pikes and swords, which at this instant do
them no service, specially the pikes, because of the prease and their great
length, and although that the sword be not altogether unserviceable in a
prease, yet is it of little value: for that the said enemies are ill armed upon
their bodies, and have no Target or other thing to covet them from the thrustes
that our men do give them in the faces, thighs, legs, feet, and other places
unarmed, they do therefore fall dead and maimed on every side as you do see.
Now may you see the enemies upon the right point to shrink, also I do see
manifestly that they do fall one upon another, and that the tail does fly.
Behold how those upon the left point do the like, and those in the midst also.
Do you see how the Lieutenant does send after them all the horsemen that are
upon his side, except two hundred men of arms, who do raunge themselves again
in their first order, like unto the Forlorn hope: the Pikes and Harquebuziers
of the flanckes do also put forth themselves to follow the victory, to give
them no leisure to join together again, and the four Legions do raunge
themselves in all points as they were before the combat: and after that the
pikemen who threw down their Pikes to use their Targets, have taken them up
again and amended their ranks, they march a good pace after those that pursue
the victory, until that they do see that the enemies have no mean left to
defend themselves, but that they do all flee, who best can best may, scattered
like partridges. I do think that the retreat will sound immediately, if it do
please the Lieutenant General to think it time. We have gotten the victory,
and happily overcome the Battle, not having been occasioned to make the
Halberdiers of the Hastaries to fight, but only the first eight ranks of
pikes: neither have we been enforced to retire the Hastaries within the
Princes, nor to make the Triaries to feel of the wars: for the Hastaries
have been strong enough of themselves to abide the enemy his forces, and to
overcome them. Wherefore there rests no more to be spoken in this matter, but
to show the reasons that made me to raunge these Battles in the manner
aforesaid, and what moved me to order the things that are happened in this
Battle, as I have ordered them: which I will do as well and as briefly as
possibly I may.

The Author yields a reason for every thing that was done, both before the
beginning of the battle, and after
The 13. Chapter.
TO give a reason why I made our Ordnance to discharge but once, and why I
caused it immediately to be retired betwixt the Battles, and what has been
the occasion that I have made no mention of it since, and likewise why I said
that the enemies had shot too high: for it should seem that I had laid the
Ordnance at mine own pleasure, to make it to shoot high or low as I would my
self. As concerning the first point, I say that all men ought to have a more
regard to defend themselves from the enemy his shot (and that it is a thing of
more importance) then to offend them with theirs. For if so be you would that
your Ordnance should shoot more then once, of force your enemies must have as
great leisure to discharge against your battles, as you have to discharge
against theirs: which cannot be without the hassarding of your people, unto the
danger of the said Ordnance, which may do you many great domages before you
come to handie strokes. Wherefore it is better that your Ordnance should cease
his effect, then that in using of it your enemies Ordnance should weaken you,
in killing your good Soldiers: for you must take heed of the blows that do
come far of, being assured yt through the good order that your men are in, so
that your ranks may aborde the enemy, you shall easily obtain the victory,
for that your people are better practiced, raunged, and armed then your enemies
are. So that you ought to have care of nothing so much as to bring your
Soldiers to encounter with your enemies their ranks being whole. And for to
keep you from being indomaged with your enemies Ordnance, it would be
necessary that you should be in such a place whereas it might not offend you,
or behind a wall or a rampar: for there is nothing else that might save you.
Yet to be well assured, it were necessary that they should be very strong:
but forasmuch as Captains that will give battles may not be covered with
walls and rampars, nor likewise put themselves into places where Ordnance may
hurt them: it must be therefore of necessity, that since they cannot find a
mean to wholly assure themselves, that at the least they do find some one
mean which may save them from being too much indomaged. And the best remedy
that I do see herein, is that that I am about to tell you, which is presently
to seek to hinder the use of the said Ordnance, by assayling it speedily
without keeping order, and not slowly or in troop: for by means of the
diligence that you use herein, you shall give them no leisure to double their
shot. And for that your men are scattered, it shall hit the fewer when it does
shoot: and you know that a band being in order may not do this, because that
if it should march in so great have as it were necessary it should do, it is
certain that the ranks would put themselves into disorder. And if so be that
the said band should be spread wide, the enemy might break it easily, because
the ranks are broken of themselves without using any other force unto them. To
withstand which peril, I have ordered this army after that manner that it may
do both without danger: to weete, the Forlorn hope and the Harquebuziers of
the flancks, who with the Hargoletiers and Harquebuziers on horseback, are
appointed expressly for to charge upon the enemies Ordnance, and to hinder the
use of it: which cannot be done if that the Ordnance should shoot always, for
the reasons that I have above alleged: which is, that you cannot have that
leisure your self, and take it away from others. It follows then, that to
make the Ordnance to be of no value, there is no other remedy but to assault
it speedily. And if you can enforce the enemies to abandon it, then you may
use it your self, and although they would hinder you from the using of it, yet
they must leave it behind them: so that being inioyed by you or troubled by
them, it shall remain unserviceable. I conclude then, that if you will defend
your battles from the Ordnance, you have no other remedy but to surprise it
with the greatest speed that may be possible. As concerning that point that
it might seem that I had guided the enemies Ordnance at my pleasure, making
the shot to fly over our footmen, I answer, that great Ordnance does oftener
miss footmen, then touch them; for that the said footmen are so low, and the
Ordnance is so troublesome to be used, that how little soever it be raised,
the shot does fly over their heads: and if it be laid a little too low, the
shot liteth upon the ground, so that it comes not amongst them. If the ground
wherein they are raunged be any thing bowing, it saves them also, but if the
place were plain, I would put the horsemen behind the battles, chiefly the
men of arms and the light horsemen, until such time as the Ordnance were
unserviceable: for by means of their height and close raunging, for that they
are raunged closer then the Hargoletiers, or Harquebuziers on horseback, they
may be sooner hit then footmen. One thing there is, the enemies small shot may
greatly annoy us, but we have it as well as they. But to avoid the worst, there
is no better remedy then to come to the combat, although that at the first
assault there are always some slain, as some always must dye at the first
encounter, yet the particular danger is not so much to be feared as the
general: for that the loss of five hundred or a thousand men cannot be so
domageable, but that the loss of a greater troop would be more, except the
loss should fall upon some of the Chiefes, and yet in such a case we must not
be too much amassed, nor account the battle to be lost: for that for the
default of one principal Chief there are so many other Chiefes distributed
and raunged in so good order, that the loss of one particular Chief could not
be mist so much as a man would think it should be. But this business cannot
be done with out peril, and all being well waied our manner is the least
venterous that may, be so that you do begin betimes to foresee that your
enemies do not hurt you afar of, for therein does the greatest danger lie:
for as for hand blows they may be avoided with less danger, by means of
arms, and good order, then those that come from far, as shot which nothing
can resist, against the which we must use the Switzers custom, who bowing
down their heads do run and assail the Ordnaunce wheresoever it be
placed, as I have heard say they have done many times, but specially at the
battle of Marignan, and they do not refuse battle at any time against any
man whosoever he be, for any doubt that they have of the ordnaunce: but have a
law amongst themselves to put them to death, that should go out of their
ranks, or should make any show to be afraid of it. I have caused our Ordnance
to be retired unto the tail of our battles after that it had once
discharged, which I have done to the intent that our Battailons might have the
way free before them. And the cause why I made no mention of it since, was
because I thought it to be inseruiceable when the troops were at it, hand to
hand. I must here reply in this place unto certain people, who judge the
Harnis that we do use, and the ancient order in ranging of a battle to be
unprofitable, having respect unto the violence of this instrument: for it
should seem by their words, that the men of war of the time present have
found some better order, and that they would have men to be slain or hurt at
their pleasures. Of those, you shall find but few in mine opinion, but they had
rather to show their heels unto their enemies then to receive hurt. For
wherefore is it that they do blame harnes, since that being naked they are
subject to blows, but to the intent rather to fly then to be hurt; and to
abandon their Prince at his most need? I would but understand why the Switzers
and the Almaignes do make Battails of 1000. and 15000. men all in one piece,
after the ancient manner: and for what occasion all the other nations have
imitated them, since that this form of battle is subject unto the same peril
of the Ordnaunce, that the others that are raunged after the ancient manner,
are subject unto. I believe they know not how to answer this point, but who
so should ask any Soldier of mean judgment, he would answer, that those
that would not carry Harnes, are ill counseled: for although that Harnes be
too weak to resist ordnance or Harquebushes; notwithstanding, it does defend
a man from the stroke, of Pike, Halbard, and Sword, Crosse-bowe, Long-bowe, and
from Stones, and from all other hurt, that may proceed from the enemies hand,
and sometimes a Harquebuze may be so ill charged, or so hot, or may be
shot so far of, that a Harnes if it be good, may save a man's life. The said
soldier would also answer unto this other demand, that men of war do go
so close together, as we see they do: and as the said Switzers and Almaignes
do, the better to resist horsemen, and to give their enemies the more trouble
to break them: so that we see that soldiers have many things to fear besides
ordnance, from all which, they may be defended, by the means of arms, and
good order: whereof insueth, that the better that an army is armed, and the
better that the ranks are closed, so much the better it is assured: so that
whosoever is of the opinion above said, is skant wise, or his conceit is not
great in this matter.

Wherefore, since we see that the least piece of arms which they used in times
past, (which we now use, is the Pike) and the least part of their orders,
(which are the Battailions of the Switzers) do us so much good, and give so
great a force unto our armies, why should we not believe that the other arms,
and orders which they used should not be profitable? so that if we have a care
to defend our selves from ordnance, placing our men close and joint together,
as the Switzers and Almaignes do, we need not doubt any other thing: as in
truth we ought to fear no order of Battle so much as that wherein the
soldiers are kept close and joint together. Furthermore, if the ordnaunce do
not dismay us in placing of a siege before an enemies town, which may annoy us
with a more certaintye, and which we cannot attain unto, because of the walls
which do defend it, neither is it possible in short time to take away the
defense of it with our ordnaunce, but that they may redouble their shot with
ease: why then should we be afraid of it in the field where it may be won
incontinent?

To be brief I rest upon this, that the Ordnance may not any way hinder the
Soldiers of the time present, to use the ancient manners almost as well as if
there were none at all. And am also of opinion, that we ought not to leave our
bodies unarmed, although that Harness cannot defend us from Ordnance: for (as
I have showed) we are subject unto many other more dangers then to be hit
with a shot of great Ordnance. To proceed, I am well assured that it will
seem that I have ranged this Battle, and won the victory at mine own
pleasure: notwithstanding I replye hear unto, that it is impossible, but that
an army ordered as I have spoken of, should overcome at the first encounter
all other Hoastes, that should be ordered as the armies are at this present:
for the Battailons that are framed at these days, have never but two or three
ranks armed in the front, wherein the Chiefes and all the valiantest men are
employed, not making any great accoumpt of the rest. So that if these two or
three ranks were overthrown, the other would make but small defense.

Likewise the Battailons of our time have no Targets, and very few Halbards or
none, or if they have any, they keep them only for the defense of their
Ensigns, and not for to break into their enemies. Moreover they are unarmed,
and therefore being at hand strokes with those that are surely armed, and
have also a Target, they will easilye kill them, and so likewise will the
Halbardiers do. In sum, our said Soldiers do range themselves at this day to
their disadvantage, after one of these two manners: that is, either they range
their Battles of two great a breadth, and place them one at the flank of
another, to make the front to be so much the larger: and in so doing the
Battles are too thin, and therefore are in danger to be entered with little
difficulcie, or they place them one behind another, wherein if they have not
the cunning to ritire one band within another, and to be received without
disorder, you may be sure that the host will be easile overcome, and it helps
not that they do give it three names, and divide it into three battles, yt
is, into Auantgard battle, and Kiergard: for this division serves for no
other purpose but to march on the way, and to divide the quarters for their
lodgings. but for the giving of Battle this division may give none advantage,
no more then if they were not divided: for all the hazard of the combat
depends upon one of these three battles, whosoever it is that shall fight
first, and according unto the fortune that that one has, the other two do
govern themselves: for if it be overthrown, the other two are dismaide, and
leese their hope of well doing, and perhaps they shall be brought into disorder
by those that fly, retyring unto them to be saved. And if so be that the
Battle which is first assaulted do repulse their enemies that did charge
them: yet is it but one part of the enemy that is overthrown, for that the
rest continue in their entire: so that it is to begin again, as also it is to
be doubted, that if those that have overcome their enemies, should follow them
any thing, that they should be enclosed by their other Battles in the sight
of their friends. But to proceed in our business, you have seen before, how our
Hargoletiers and Harquebusiers a Horseback on the left side of our Battailons
were repulsed by the enemies Horssemen, and how that they retired unto the
Pikes of the same flank. I say unto you that I have caused it to be so
handled, to show wherein the Pikes of the flanks may be employed, who are not
only appointed always to keep the sides of the Battailons, but may serve for
more turns then one.

Likewise I have made the men of arms to fight after that manner that I would
that they should fight, without breaking their order, and that they should not
bestow their labor upon men heavy laden with harnes, for that would be time
lost: but the surest way is to bend at the Horses, who so will have the men at
their commandment. And as concerning that I made them to stay at the
meeting, is, for that I do think it to be much better then to charge running,
as well for to continue them in good order, as to keep their Horses in breath,
and for to have them to be fresh at the combat. True it is I have made them to
run all at one time, and that was because that they should resist their
enemies the better: yet it is very hard for Horsemen to keep their ranks
how little soever their Horses do run, for that Horses are some swifter
then other some: therefore there is less danger for them to keep themselves
firm, not seperating themselves, then there is in being too forward. Our men
of arms at Rauenna did use the same order: and did easily overthrow the men of
arms of Spain. Moreover I have caused the Forlorn hope, to put forth
themselves to succor the men of arms, to the intent you should know the
service that this order of forlorn hope might do, who after that they have
begune the battle, do range themselves in good order either behind or upon
the flanks; to serve for Subsides, until such time as they may find some
occasion to anoye their enemies. In the mean while the Harquebusiers a
horseback, are always seeking to endamage their enemies. But to tell you the
reason what moved me to make the Kings Lieutenant general to light a foot;
you must understand that in times paste the Captains Generals of Hoasts did
give order themselves through out all the army, whether it were to range the
Battles, to give the signs: to begin the combat; or to send the Subsides
one into another place, and in some all that was done from the first unto the
last, was governed by their commandment, and hereof I can aleadge a number of
examples. And yet this was not all, but if their people were at any part
distressed they succored them speedily, and lighted a foot when it was
needful, or fought a horseback when as they might do it: which was cause
that their battles were better fought then ours are now, forasmuch as the
Chiefes left no little piece of their office undone, were it in playing the
Chief or the Soldier. But these that are at this present do think to do no
more after that the Battle is once begun then a simple valiant Soldier
ought to do: where as it is the part of a good Chief to ouerlooke on every
side what the enemies do against his people, to the intent to remedy all
inconuences and to be careful that his people receive no damage through his
defaulte, where in it were necessary that he should employe any of his
Soldiers, and sometimes his own person: yet this ought to be done as seldom
as maybe possible: or if that he did fight it should be at an extremetie as
our Captain General did, who lighted to relieve a Batailon that his enemies
oppressed: and to resist the enemies force the more surer, you have seen that
one band of men of arms did go to charge the enemies upon the flank, and
the other bands in the mean while have turned their faces unto the enemies
horsemen, making show to assail hem to trouble them from going to succor
their footmen, and when he had relieved the said Batailon he lept a
horseback immediately. And so likewise would I have our Chief to do, who
ought to determine never to fight except he were forced there unto, but
should leave that charge unto them that have no body to govern, but their
own persons, or particular bands, or that are not of that quallitie that a
Lieutenant general is. And in so doing he can no ways be reproched that he
has not virtuously acquitted himself of his charge although that he lay not to
his hands: for it is to be thought that he aspired not unto that estate but
through his virtues, and that he has before suficiently proved himself to
be a valiant, and hardy man: and therefore a Lieutenant general ought not to
be reputed for a coward although he fight not. And when all is said there may
more mischief happen in playing the hardy man then in playing the cowarde: as
many ancient histories do make mention, as of Fabius the cowarde and Mutius
the hardy, and of many others, specially of Monsieur de Foix, who was slain
through his too much hardienes, whose death was more hurtefull unto the
Frenchmen then the victory that he got was profitable.

But let us proceed and not stay at that which is too manifest: and let us
speak somewhat of the form of our Hoaste: as for to speak of the rest that
happened at the end of the combat would be superfluous, since I have spoken
already both in the beginning of the battle and before, of the causes that
do give our men the advantage, and the victory, after that they do come unto
the fight of the Sword. I have likewise taken the one half of our horsemen
from our Batailons, to succor those that have the enemies in chase, if
paraduenture any ambushe should charge them, or that the flyars would put
themselves again to defense, and should repulse them. And as concerning that I
have kept the rest of our men of arms, and caused them and the battailons to
be brought again into their order, it was to this intent to have always the
greatest strength of mine hoaste ready to fight if so be that the enemies
should join together again, or that fresh people should come upon them: for
the not doing of it, has oftentimes happened vnluckely unto diverse Chiefes: as
unto Coradin in Naples in ye year 1268. who thought that he had won the
victory against Charles the King of ye country, because he saw that no man
made any longer resistance: but the said Charles coming out of an ambush with
fresh men, charged the others that were busy in kiling and striping of his
men and overthrew them, and the said Coradin also. It might seem that I had
not ranged our Battailons well, forasmuch as I have placed five bands in the
front there in the midst, and two at the tail: for we might think that it
were better to order them otherwise: because that a Batailon is woorst to
break when he that does assault it does find it the stronger the further
that he does enter into it, and it should seem that the manner that I have
framed should be always the weaker the deeper it is entered into, although that
I do know that the Romans did appointe but 600. men in their third battle
which are the Triaries, yet I have put two bands into the said battle, each
of which bands has 425. men, which are 850. in all, besides the Captains and
other members, and those of the flanks. Wherefore in following the Romans, I
do rather fail in taking too many men then to few: and although that in
imitating so good a form as theirs is I do nether think to fail nor to be
reproved, yet will I give a reason for it. You do understand yt the front of
every square Battailon ought to be made sure and thick, because it must
withstand the first assault of the enemies, and so ought likewise the midst,
and the tail, except that they be ranged after the manner that I have ranged
these here spoken of. But to order the midst, and the tail in such sort; yt
the one may receive the other within their ranks, it is necessary yt the second
which are ye Princes, should be a great many fewer in number then ye first
which are the Hastaries. And for this cause I have put in every rank of
Hastaries 105. men, and in every rank of Princes there is but 63. men, which
are 42. less in every rank.

Furthermore, I have appointed the ground that the said Princes should
occupye in length, to be the one half longer then that which the Hastaries
do occupy: to the intent that the ranks and spaces that the Princes do
occupy, might receive the Hastaries, when as they should retire unto them. The
ranks of the Triaries are thinner, for they are but 42. men in a rank, and
the place that they do occupy in length is twice as long as yt the Hastaries
do occupy: because that this last Battle should receive into it the
Battles aforesaid. Now for that it might be said that how much further the
enemy does enter in, that so much the weaker he shall find the Battailons,
because that the Battles (as I have said) are deminished of people, and their
ranks thinner and thinner. It must be understood, that in keeping of this
order, an enemy can never fight with the Princes, until he has first
overthrown the Hastaries, who by our discipline ought not to stay until they
were quite overthrown. So that when as they should find the enemies so strong,
that it were not in their power to make resistance: I say that then the
Colonel of the said Battailon ought to command his Trumpet to sound to this
effect; that the King does command the Hastaries, to retire within the
Princes: which sound being heard, the Hastaries shall retire (but not before)
easilye, not turning their faces from their enemies: and to the intent that
this retreat may be made without disorder, the last rank of the Hastaries
shall first retire, then those next them, and the others following. All which
ranks shall range themselves betwixt the ranks of the Princes, the last rank
of the Hastaries, with the last rank of the Princes, and so consequentlye the
other ranks shall range themselves with the other ranks their like. And for
that the ranks of the Princes should not be too thick, I mean that those
that might place themselves in their ranks should do so, and that the others
shall range themselves betwixt their ranks and make new ranks: for they shall
have place enough to do it in the length that the Princes do occupy.

If then the first do range themselves with the second, and that of these two
Battles there is made but one: is this, to find the Battles, the further
that they are entered into the weaker: for you see that the enemies cannot fight
with the second Battle, but the first must be joined with it, so that an
enemy shall always find the midst of the Battailon stronger then the
front, and not weaker, forasmuch as they shall now have to deal with eight
bands, whereas before they had to do but with five. And so likewise if this
second Battle be forced to retire unto the third, for an enemy shall not
only deal with fresh men, but with all the Legion together, for that this
last Battle of the Triaries must receive the Hastaries and the Princes. And
for this cause they must be ranged thinner and of greater length then the
second Battle was: and therefore I have made the ranks but of 42. men, and
their place in length twice as long as the Hastaries, to receive the first and
the second the more easier betwixt them. And if this space seem to be too
little to receive the eight bands, understand that the ranks being in their
first order, do occupy much more place then when they are retired: because
that the ranks do shrink together or open when they are too much preased. I
mean that they will open themselves when as they will run away, and when
they will tarry by it, they will close themselves together, to the intent not to
be opened or entered hastilye. Moreover if it be so that the enemies do come
unto the Triaries, it must be thought that there are a great many slain and
overthrown: and therefore there needs not so great place for the two first
Battles as if they had remained in their intier. Furthermore I suppose that
our said Triaries will have a good will to defend themselves, and the others
that are retired unto them also, and therefore they will occupy less place:
and at the uttermost the place is great enough to receive the ten bands
altogether; besides that they have the back and wings at their commandment.
I must hear declare one other thing, that is, for what intent I caused the
Forlorn hope, the Harquebusiers a Horseback, and the Hargeletiers to depart
with so great a cry when they went to assault their enemies: and also why I
made so great silence to be kept when our Battailons approached the said
enemies; for it is to the matter to know the causes of these two varieties,
whereof many ancient Captains have had diverse opinions: to wit, whether they
should hasten them in making great noise, or march easilye without speaking
word: although that this last manner serves better to keep order more firm,
and to understand the commandments of the Chiefes, and the first serves to
kindle and heat the hearts of Soldiers. Notwithstanding I do think that we
must have a regard unto both these things, and that it is the necessary that ye
one should make as great a noise as they might, and that the other should be
as silent as might be possible: for I do not think that to cry continually
should be done to good purpose, my meaning is that Chiefes should be
understood. And for to begin a battle without cry is a token of fear, for
commonly the voice serves for an index of the effect of the battle, whereby
they may hope the victory, or mistrust the obtaining of it. So that I think
that it is good that a battle should begin with great cries, I mean only
at the first assault, and not after the Battailon are near approached: for we
may see in ye Roman Cronicles that Soldiers which were flying have many times
tarried through the words and comfortes of the Cheifes, and have immediately
changed their order, which could not have bin done, if the noise had bin
louder then the voices of the said Chiefes: or if that the cry had always
continued.

Touching the hasty proceeding in the beginning of the Battle I have showed
in what manner we ought to begin it. Concerning the Battailons it is
necessary that they should assault with great haste, specially if the Ordnaunce
do much indomage them, and sometimes it will be good that they should attend
the coming of an enemy: to wit when as the place is unfit, or that they might
break off themselves not being very skillful soldiers. Now I do think that
I may pass further forward having aquitted my self reasonably well here
before of my promise in showing the reasons why I ranged the battailons, and
gave battle after that manner that you have seen, and take in hand to speak
of the other points which are no less necessary then those above spoken of,
which I will do after that I have recyted that our Legions must oftentimes be
exercised and brought together, and ranged after the manner above said, that
as well the Soldiers, as the officers, Members and Chiefes might know what they
ought to do. For the Soldiers in every band ought to keep their ranks
well, and the officers, Members, and Chiefes to keep their ranks in their
order, and the bands well ordered; and they should know to execute the Captain
General his commandment, and therefore they ought to be expert to join
one band with another, and to teach the Soldiers to know their places
readily. And to do this with little difficulty; the Ensigns must be marked
to know who they are, as well for to be there by commanded, as for to be
easelie known, for if so be that the Ensigns do know their places and the
Soldiers their places, you shall see that a Battailon will quickly range it self
after that manner that it ought to be ranged, as soon as the Trumpet does sound:
and consequently ye whole army as soon as the Lieutenant General, shall make
sign. And this is the first exercise of four, that an army ought to know,
wherein it ought to be exercised every day that it does lie still and many
times in one day. Secondly an army ought to be exercised to march in
battle, and to keep their ranks well, going an ordinary pace, trot, and
course. The third exercise is that the Battailons should learn what they
ought to do upon a day of battle, as to discharge the Ordnance, and to
cause it to be retired, and to put forth the Harquebusiers in the flanks, and
to cause them to go forward with the Forlorn hope. And after that the
Harquebusiers have discharged three or four shot every man, running here and
there without order: and although that they do join with the Pikes, and
horsemen whom this charge does touch, yet they shall retire, unto the
flanks, through the spaces betwixt the Battailons, each to his place: to weet
the Harquebusiers of the flanks unto the flanks, and the Forlorn hope behind
for to range themselves there as I have said: for if they should tarry before
the Battles, they would hinder the battailons to fight. The Horsemen likewise
shall retire upon the wings, and the Hastaries must retire within the Princes
as if they were forced: and afterward the Princes and Hastaries, must retire
together with in the Triaries: and this done the Hastaries should return unto
their first place and the Princes likewise unto theirs.

The fourth exercise is that every man should give himself to understand
the commandment of the Chiefes, and the meaning of the sounds of the trumpet,
and the strokes of the Drums: by whom shall be signified al yt should be don in
general, that is, when it shall be time for them to put themselves together in
battle, and when they ought to march, or to stay, to go forward, or to
turn their faces toward the one side or the other, to kiss the ground and to
fight. Likewise there shall be signified by the said Trumpet when it shall be
necessary to discharge the Ordnance, when it shall retire, when the
Harquebusiers, Forlorn hope, and others, should go forward, and at what time
they should do it: and also at what time the Hastaries ought to retire toward
the Princes, and afterward when the two Battles ought to retire toward the
Triaries, and finallye when it shall be time that every man should retire from
the Battle: all which things must be done by the commandment of the
Lieutenant General, and immediately signified by his Trumpet: his sounding will
easilye be heard by the other Trumpeters that are nearest him, and so the
sound will go from one to another, unto the furthest Trumpet in the Hoaste.
Most part of these things may be signified by signs, without using of
Trumpets or Drums, and likewise by voice, yet me thinks that the sound of the
Trumpet is the most surest, because that every man cannot see a sign, but
they may easilye hear a sound, a voice sometimes may be misunderstood, wherein
there must be good heed taken: for many times the commandments of the
Captains being ill understood, or ill interpreted, have brought the hoasts
that were under their charge to an ill end. Wherefore the voices or soundes
which are so used in commanding, in places of great danger, ought to be
clear and sharp: and both the soundes of the Trumpet and strokes of the
Drum, ought in themselves to be so differing the one sound from the other, and
the one stroke from the other, that the Soldiers should not be deceived in
taking one thing for an other. And if so be that the General would command
with voice, he must avoid those voices that may be doubly understood, and must
use particular voices: and yet he ought not to use particular voices, except
they be expresselye invented for one only thing, least yt they might be
misunderstood: for that a voice cannot always be well understood because of
the noise of the arms, for the neighing of Horses, for the noise that the
Ordnance does make, and for the sound of the Drum. One the other side a Chief
may not always help himself with signs in this case, because that dark
weather, mist, or rain, or the sun in men's faces do trouble and hinder
their fight, and likewise the changing of places if the ground be any thing
bowing or covered with trees: besides it is almost impossible to find an
express sign for every thing, specially for that there may oftentimes happen
new matters, wherewith the Soldiers had never before been acquainted:
therefore we must have recourse unto Trumpets as I have said, and
notwithstanding both signs and voices may be used in time and place. It would
not be amiss if we did use at this present a Cornet, or Hunters Horn for a
retreat, and a Trumpet to begin the Combat or otherwise: for it is a hard
matter that Trumpetters should make so many things to be understood by one
only Instrument, considering also that the sounding of a retreat, is somewhat
like unto the sounding to the standard, so that when a man is troubled, and as
it were besides himself, it is much for him to discern which of the two it is
that the Trumpet sounds.

The end of the first Book.
The second Book of Military Discipline.
How a General may range his Battles after diverse manners, unto his
advantage, with certain policies which may do him service when as he shall
be at the point to fight with his enemies
The 10. Chapter.
IN ye first book has bin showed how to leauie and practice a great number of
Soldiers together, of whom we might have service when as it should be the King
his good pleasure that a Leauie of people should be made in this realm,
according unto the pattern given in the same book, or after any other
exsample: wherein has bin so far proceeded that an Host has bin assembled
and ranged in battle, and finally brought unto the combat against their
enemies and have so well behaved themselves, by the means of their good
ordering, and discipline, that they have gotten the victory. There rests now
to speak of other things which an Host ought to know at their fingers end,
that is after what manner they may always have the advantage of the wars on
their sides, and finally continue victorious in all points: which is the thing
that they all do pretend that busy themselves to make wars against others.
To attain whereunto there is no better means then to give the foresaid
Soldiers, a good General Chief: who are so well instructed that they need
nothing else but good conducte. Which Chief must have had great experience in
the wars and must perfectly understand all the aduauntages that may be had
in the exercise of the same: for without that, he deserves not this charge,
neither can he at any time do any thing ought worth. But if he have had
this experience and besides that be a man of virtue, be may then be trusted,
because it is most certain that he will leese nothing through negligence, nor
hazard any thing wilfully, but do all in good time: and to the intent he may
the better acquit himself in his charge, I have taken in hand following my
pretense, to register in writing those things that I have found here and
there amongst good authors necessary for the office of a Captain General,
and have thereunto added certain things of mine own, least I should be
altogether found naked, if perhaps the said authors should come to the
knowledge of their works and take them away: which is a thing easy enough to
be done, sith that almost in all places, I do nothing else but translate the
Latin and Italian word for word: and have gathered together all the cheifest
points that I have found written for this science, whereof I have made
certain Chapters in form of aduertisements: which shall stand instead of
remembrances, which may one day happen to do him some service, that might
have the like authority, if it were but to put him in mind of that he has
forgotten through discontinuance, or that sometimes his other business
appertinent unto his charge might trouble him from looking into the depth of
these matters. So that if any thing should happen upon the sudden, or whilst
he is so occupied, it would be a great comfort for him to find immediatlye a
mean to help it, and that remedy which the ancient Chiefes have used in like
cases. And although there may fall out inconveniences not heard of, and of
which there might be no mention made neither in their books nor in mine: yet
is it so, that the most common, and those which have happened very few wanting,
are heerin contained, and the remedies also, and at the uttermost, the
soldiers are compounded of so good stuff, and so well practiced, that if he
have any good wit of him self, he may easily find new remedies for new
accidents.

Moreover I do not see that it were greatly requisite to speak of the good
qualities that a Lieuetenant General ought to have in himself, since that the
King does so well know men that he creates none but he has in him all that
a Chief ought to have or the greater part. But yet not to leave this point
altogether unspoken of, and so in order briefly to treat of the other things
which he ought to know, I will name a Lord in France (with out going further)
in considering and beholding of whose divine conditions, we may see clearly
all those tokens to be in him that ought to be in a perfect Lieuetenant
General: in so much, that who so would govern an Host, ought to take example
of none but of him: for in my judgment, he is such a one as he ought to be,
and this I may affirm, not deserving to be called a flaterer, having the truth
and opinion of those that are of understanding on my side. It is the Lord
Constable whom I do speak of, upon whom God has bestowed so many graces, as
that he is an excellent man of war, in time of war, and none more ready
to maintain peace then he: Insomuch that me think, I never saw any man, that
could so well fashion him self unto both those times as he does, and does
addict himself no more unto the one, then unto the other, whereby we see that
he respects himself indifferently. And therefore God made him to be such a
one as we ought to have, for to exercise the estate that the king has given
him, as it ought to be exercised. For he knows how to make wars, for to
have peace, and to maintain peace, for the avoiding of wars: so that he
favors not the one, more then then the other, albeit that he have both in
his hands, and that the Realm does depend wholly upon him, because of his
virtue, for that he is accompanied with all the qualities necessary for the
handling of both those times. But let us leave the peace alone, has he not in
him all that appertains unto a good Lieuetenaunt General, if it should be
requisite to make Wars? Is he not sproong of noble parentage, to win the
good wills of Soldiers, (if so be the Nobility of blood may do any thing?) Is
he not rich, and of great ability, to win men's hearts by gifts, and by
maintayning great state? Is he not modest, sober, painful, wise, politic,
liberal, of good age, affable, well spoken, a man of reputation and of renown?
Yes verily. Are not these the principal conditions that a General ought to
have, as to be temperate, to the intent that pleasures do not disorder him, nor
hinder from following the affairs of importance that are under his hand;
sober, to have his wits at liberty to understand hard matters, for a man
that gives himself to live delicately, and to eat and drink too much, does
dull and bury his understanding, that he shall want it when he has need of
it; painful, forasmuch as it is necessary that of all men he should be the
least weary of taking pains, and be the first that waketh, and the last that
sleeps; wise, and of condition to discourse all his business in himself, to
the intent to foresee, understand, or invent a policy; liberal, for by that
means he shall make of his enemies his friends; of strangers unknown, his
familiars; the best about him will amend themselves, if they do see that he
does use liberality toward those that do good service, and so will the least
valiant also, which he shall not bring to pass if he were covetous and
sparing: but also it would be feared least he should be overcome with
covetousness, and so become corrupt and disloyal unto the King; of good age,
that is to say, neither young nor old: for that the one will believe no body
but himself, and will be too bold: and the other is too weak, and fearful
in the executions of arms; affable, for there is nothing to be more disliked
in a Chief, nor that makes him to be more hated of every man, then when as he
is troublesome or strange to be spoken unto: on the contrary, there is
nothing more commendable in him, then to be gentle and affable unto all men: I
do mean that this affability and gentleness should be moderated, and measured
according unto men's worthiness, for he must show a more familiarity unto one,
then unto another, and yet he should give all men contentment if it were
possible; well speaking, to the intent that he might persuade his Soldiers
through fair words, to make but little account of dangers, for to attain
unto great matters, and to win all those unto him that shall hear him
speak, to be a man of reputation, and well spoken of. For that if he were not
so, his Soldiers would obey him at their pleasure, every man would find it
strange to obey him yt is thought to be worse then himself, or to be as
little worth. It might also be requisite that he should have children, for
they would be an assurance unto the realm, that he would practice nothing
against it, and if they be little they will serve for pledges, and be as it
were a bridle unto the father to restrain him from the taking of any thing in
hand that might be hurtful unto his country, yea although he had determined
to do any such thing: yet the affection that he bears unto his children will
persuade him from it, who if they were in state to carry arms, would serve
him with counsel, strength, and diverse other things, more faithfully then
others. All which good points, are as I have said in the Lord Constable, and
many others, which I do leave to speak of, whereof his deeds have made proof
in all places where he has been. Wherefore, he that will make himself worthy
of the charge of a Lieutenant General, ought to imitate him, and to frame his
Soldiers to be such, as those that are spoken of in the first book. And if
he do so in all points, the king may boldly commit a good host into his hands,
and refer himself wholly unto him for the execution of the same war,
except the concluding of a peace or of a truce with an enemy. For concerning
the giving of a battle, or refrayning, the marching forward, or staying, the
besieging of this town, or that town, and in sum, the handling of the war
as it shall seem good unto him, the king need not to trouble himself; but
only to furnish him with things necessary for the maintenance of an army: for
otherwise if he would conduct the wars being out of the Camp, and a far
of, by Posts and messengers, he should make his Lieutenant to be slow and
slack, in stead of being vigilant and ready, for if he should do any good
service, he should not carry away the praise of it so: but that he that
counseled him thereunto would have the better part. Furthermore, it avails
nothing except the king himself be most expert and skillful in the art
Military (as in truth he is more then I can express) if so be that he would
govern it, only by the report of the estate of his affairs: but no man can
use it better then he that is in the field with the army, because of a
thousand small points that must be narrowly looked into, for many accidents do
happen every hour, without the sight and understanding whereof, it is
impossible for him to give his counsel, but at all adventures. And therefore
the King should let his Lieutenant handle the wars according unto his own
mind, that the honor might be his own if he did well, and the shame also if he
behaved himself ill: for the one would be as a spur to prick him forward,
and the other a bridle to restrain him from doing any thing that he ought not
to do. Notwithstanding, the matter is used otherwise at this day in may places,
for the Captain Generals of hoasts are appointed the manner how they ought to
govern themselves: insomuch that if there be question to remove a Camp out
of one place into another, or to besiege a place and assault it, or to fight
with the enemy, or to do any other good action, they dare scant to do it,
before that they have given aduertisment unto those that have given them the
charge of the host. Which manner has been borrowed of the Venetians, and
therefore their armies are called Camps of safety, because they seldom or
never come time enough: for when as their Generals have any good opportunity
to fight, or to assault a town, they loose it, whilst they are constrained to
send unto the Senate for counsel, and stay for answer, and so the time
passes, and their enemies provide in the mean time. If the King therefore do
permit him that shall be his Lieutenant to use his own will, he shall be much
better served then if he do limit unto him his charge, and the said Lieutenant
likewise will not at any time do any thing but to his contentment, if the king
do make choice of a man of the good conditions spoken of before, and the said
Lieutenant have regard unto that that shall be spoken of after that I have said
somewhat of the matter which I left before, which to take in hand again to
proceed further, I pray the reader to remember that which has bin spoken of
before: for it is necessary for the understanding of that which follows. For
that I do think the manner of raunging of an army in battle by me showed in
the first book, to be better then all the other used until this day, I have
made choice of it. And although it be a good and sure manner, notwithstanding
we must look if the ancient men of war have not used some singularity in
this matter, wherewith the Captain General, which may have charge of these
Legions or of other better ordered, may help himself at this day: and then
immediately we must speak of certain considerations that he must have before
his eyes at all times before that he do give battle, and all under one I will
speak of the accidents that sometimes do happen in that point, and of the
remedies that may be found, for it is a matter of no small importance to have
the government of this business: for although the combat betwixt two armies
cannot continue much longer then two or three hours; yet the repentance of the
evil government, is of too long a continuance, and of a merueilous
consequence. Note, that of all the manners of raunging of a battle that may
be used, there is none more dangerous, then to make the fronts of the
Battailons broad: and by that means to make the fewer ranks, except you have
a great number of people, and that they likewise be good Soldiers: for else
you must rather make the Battailon thick, and not too large in front, then of
great breadth, and so much the thinner: because that the thickness of a
Battailon is that which does resist an enemy and overthrow him: for the
number of ranks do serve to amend the foremost rank, and to come to the
combat in their places, and likewise to give horsemen the more trouble to
break through them. And if the general Chief have too small a number in
comparison of his enemies, then must he seek to bring his army into some
place which may be environed on some side, either with river, or marish, or
other place naturally strong, and there range it in battle, having a regard
not to be assaulted on every side, nor to be enclosed. And if the place were
such ye none of all these commodities might be found, he must then make
trenches upon the two flancks of his battles, and behind if he will: and take
this for a general rule, that is, to enlarge or to narrow the fronts of his
Battailons, according unto the number of his people, and according unto the
force of his enemies, having always regard unto the place that he is in: for
in a narrow place you must narrow the ranks, and in an open place not enlarge
them too much. These Legions may at all times keep one form, for they have
their ranks so ordered, that they are no wider nor narrower then they ought to
be; notwithstanding the place does rule all. But let us put case that the
enemies have a less number then our General has, he ought then to entice
them into a large and open ground, to the intent not only to have scope to
charge them upon every side, but also to stretch out his ranks, and order his
battles according unto our Military discipline, which is an advantage that
he cannot have in straight and troublesome places, for that he might not order
his people unto his will, nor according unto their order: whereof the Romans
in times past were very careful, and avoided as much as they might narrow and
unfit places, and sought open and large places. If so be that this General
have too few people, or that those which he has were not well practiced
Soldiers, he must do the contrary: for then he must seek out those places
that are fit to preserve a small number in, as mountains, provided that he
might find victuals, and not suffer want: for so a strong country might
preserve a small number, and he must always make choice of the higher ground,
to have the better mean to offend an enemy: and be well advised never to
plant his army upon the side of a hill, nor in any low ground near unto any
bancke or hill: because that the lower ground would be subject unto the enemies
Ordnance, if they should occupy the higher; against which inconvenience there
could no other remedy be found but to change the place and to get further of.
Moreover, he that does order an army to give battle, must have a regard of
the Sun and the wind, to the intent that neither of them should be in his
Soldiers faces: for they would greatly hinder their sight: to weet, the Sun
with his brightness, and the wind with that it drives before it. Moreover,
the violence of the wind oftimes is such, that it does trouble the pikemen,
horsemen, and archers, that they cannot help themselves with their Pikes,
Lances, and Bows so well as when it is calm. Imagine how they should be
served if they had it in their faces. The Romans thereby lost the battle at
Canouse against Anniball. And as for the Sun, it is requisite to take heed
that it be not in the faces of the Battailons when they are ready to give
battle: and also consideration must be had, that in mounting or descending,
it do not trouble them, and therefore the Battailons must be raunged at the
Sun rising, with their backs toward it, and give battle before the Sun
should decline to be in their faces: or if the enemy had the advantage of the
Sun in the morning, then must they defer to enter into battle until
noone, and so they might have the advantage of the Sun at afternoon.

This was observed by Marius against the Cimbres, and by King Phillip Augustus
against the Flemings. If this General had a less number of people then his
enemies, he might raunge them amongst vines, and trees, and other such like, as
did the great Captain of the Spaniards at Serignolle, when the Frenchmen were
overthrown. For by that means horsemen could not hurt them, nor footmen very
well; because that trees, bushes, and such other like, do hinder an enemies
approaching, without breaking their ranks, and the General his army which do
stand firm to receive them, shall have the advantage, so that the place where
they are raunged be open and plain forty or fifty paces before the
battle. It has been seen heretofore, that by those selfsame Soldiers that
Battles have bin lost, victories have immediately after bin won, by
changing their order or accustomed manner of fight, as it came to pass
amongst ye Carthagenians, who having oftimes been vanquished by Marcus Regulus,
were afterward victorious by the counsel of Xantippus the Lacedemonian, who
only by changing and altering of the place, turned the fortune of the Punicke
war, and lifted them up again: for he seeing the Carthagenians to be
stronger of horsemen then the Romans were, and also to be well accompanied
with footmen, and to have many Elephants, and notwithstanding all this to keep
themselves in the mountains, and yt the Romans who were strong only but in
footmen, kept the plain, caused the Punickes to go into the plain, and there
fought and overcame the Romans.

Me think that almost all the ancient Captains when they knew that their
enemies placed all their greatest forces in one of the points of their armies,
have not placed before the said enemies their greatest forces; but have offered
them the weakest battles that they had, and given commandment unto their
best forces that they should only stand firm to resist their enemies, but not
repulse them, commanding the said weakest battles who^ they esteemed least,
to assay to vanquish their said enemies, and to retire unto the battles
behind them. And this they did with great reason, knowing that this policy
might bring their enemies into two great disorders. The first was, that the
said enemies should have their best Soldiers enclosed betwixt their
adversaries battles. The second was, that when they should think to have
gotten the victory, it would be greatly to be merueiled at, if their bands
did not put themselves into disorder, as well for the victory which they
thought to have gotten, as for to fall to pillage.

Cornelius Scipio being in Spain against Asdruball, knowing that the said
Asdruball was advertised that he was accustomed to raunge his Roman Legions
in the midst of the front of his Battles; and that he raunged upon the
two points or corners those whom he made least account of: and that for this
purpose Asdruball had placed also in the midst the best Soldiers that he
had to make front with them unto the Roman Legions, the said Scipio altered
his custom upon the day of battle, and placed his Legions upon the corners
of his army, and placed his light armed people in the midst; of whose force
he made no great account. Afterward when they came to the fight, the said
Scipio caused his middle Battailons to march fair and softly, and caused the
two points or corners to march forward with great diligence and haste, so
that the two corners of both their armies fought only, and those in the
midst approached not each other: and so the strongest Battailons of Scipio,
fought against Asdrubal his weakest: and the stoutest Soldiers that Asdrubal
had, served but to look on: for the Romans army with their two corner
battles marching forward, and their middle battles retyring, were like unto
a new Moon: by which policy the Punickes were overthrown.

When a Captain General does find his Soldiers to be a more greater number
then his enemies, and would inuiron his said enemies upon every side before he
should perceive it, he must raunge the front of his Battles of the same
breadth that his enemies are raunged: and when they come to join, the two
points or corners might stretch themselves out, and inuiron their enemies, not
looking for it: as were the Romans at Cannes by the Soldiers of Anniball. If
a Lieutenant General will fight in safety, and without hazarding to be quite
overthrown, he must frame his Battailons near unto some such place, as might
serve him for a refuge to retire unto, if so be that they should be forced: and
this refuge must be at the backs of his Battles, as some marish, or hills,
or some strong town: for although he should lose the Battle, yet they could
not be utterly put to the sword: which advantage his enemies should not have,
but he might follow them if he thought it good. Annibal oftimes helped
himself with this foresight after that his fortune began to change, when as
he had to do with Marcellus.

Diverse Chiefes to bring their enemies into disorder, have commanded their
light armed Soldiers to begin the battle: and the battle being begun that
they should retire themselves in the spaces left betwixt the Battailons, and
that when the armies were come to aboard one another, and the enemies attentive
unto the fight, they should then issue out at the flanckes, and should assault
the said enemies upon the sides of the Battailons. I would think it not amiss
sometimes to place a rank of Target men before the first ranks of the
Hastaries; which Target men should be furnished with fire pots, balls, and
other such like fire works, which they might throw amongst their enemies,
when they are approached within ten or twelve paces one of an other. And this
done, it might be thought that these fireworkes would spoil many a man, or at
the least break their order. And put raze that this do no effect, yet it is a
most certain thing that the Targets will greatly anoy the enemies Pikemen, in
cutting off their Pikes with their Swords, which they might do without any
great danger, because of the Targets which do cover them, and the Hastaries
are at their heels to defend them: for if the Targets should get under the
Pikes, they might easily cut their throats, whilst the Hastaries do occupy
them in fight. Concerning this matter I have heard say that at the battle of
Serignolle, the Spaniards with their Targets entered within our Switzers under
their Pikes, and constrained them to forsake their Pikes, and to take their
swords, because the Pikes for their length might do them no more service,
whereof insued, that the Switzers were overthrown. It failed but a little that
the like did not happen unto our Lantsknights at the battle at Rauenna, for
the Spaniards with their Targets had taken away the use of our Pikes, and did
cut them at their wills, so that if our horssemen had not come to their
succor, they had slain them all. If a Lieutenant General had too few
horssemen, he might place Pikemen to back them, and appoint that when they
should come unto the fight, the horssemen should make place for the said
Pikemen, to the intent they might fight against their enemies horssemen in good
order. And therefore the said Lieutenant General should always have a
certain number of footmen, both Pikes, and Harquebusiers, who should be
practiced (as I have said before) to fight among horssemen: for it may stand
him in great steed, and many good Chiefes have heretofore helped themselves
by that means, and specially the Harquebusiers at this day may do great
service therein. Caesar overcame his enemies in Pharsalia, by means of
mingling footmen amongst horssemen. Likewise Scanderbeke Duke of Epire, has
won many good victories within this 90. years against the Turks by this
manner of fight. Forasmutch as we do speak of those that have found
advantages, by altering the form of the ranging of their men in Battle, I
must say, that Scipio and Anniball were the two most expertest men in this art
in their time, or that have been since, Caesar excepted, unto whom, I dare
attribute this commendation, that he was the best man of war that ever was:
and the other two were the most excellentest next him, who showed their good
wits, chiefly at that day that they fought in Afric, for which they have
been commended of every man, and shall be eternally. For these two Chiefes
being ready to give Battle, which they could not with honesty avoid,
ordered their Armies in these forms that I will show you.

Anniball having in his Army diverse Nations, placed 80. Elephants in the fronts
of his Battles, behind whom, he placed his aids or pertakers, and behind
them the Carthagenians, and raunged his Italyans (whom he trusted not) behind
all. He ordered them after this manner, to the intent that his assistants being
betwixt his enemies and the Carthagenians, might not fly: so that the said
assistants being constrained to fight, should either vanquish or weary the
Romans, meaning afterward to overcome the said wearyed Romans with his
Carthagenia^s, who were fresh men. Against which ordered Battle, Scipio
placed his Legions after their accustomed manner, and made the front full of
distances or spaces left betwixt his Batailons: and to the intent that these
spaces should not be seen, but that the front might seem to be furnished as
it was wont, he filled the said spaces with his Velites or light armed men,
giving them commandment to make way for the Elephants to pass when the
Battles did approach near together, and to retire themselves into the spaces
betwixt the Battailles, meaning thereby that the force of the said Elephants
should come to nothing, and it happened so. This done, the Battles of Scipio
came to fight hand to hand with those of Anniball, and ouerthrewe them, during
which combat, Scipio joined his Princes and Triaries together, and caused the
Hastaries to open themselves to make way for the others to pass betwixt them,
and placed the said Hastaries upon the sides, seeing them to be wearyed with
fighting against the first Battles: and that the greatest forces were yet
behind, which were the Carthagenians themselves, who were placed in the second
Battle as is aforesaid. And because that Anniball had placed all the force of
his army in his second Battle, Scipio to present him the like force, caused
his Princes and Triaries to come forward, for he accounted not his Hastaries to
be of that valewe that his Princes were, and in truth it was so: for the
Princes were reputed to be more valiant then the Hastaries, and the Triaries
more then the Princes, by this assembling of his three Battles into one, he
overthrew his enemies. This direction both in the one and the other proceeded
of a very good wit. And if we at this instant should have wars with a people
that would use Elephants, we might imitate Scipio: yet they are subject unto
Ordnance how great and strong so ever they be. As for the order that Anniball
used, it might be imitated as often as we have an Host framed of many Nations,
and such as we did give no great credit unto, but only unto our own.
Mounsieur de Lautrec (whom I may well name amongst all the most excellent
Chiefes that have been of long time) ranged his Battles in another order, as
that day that he presented Battle unto the Emperor his army in the kingdom
of Naples before Troy. For although that he had diverse nations in his army, as
Italyans, Almaignes, Switzers, Gascons, and Frenchmen: notwithstanding, to make
show that he mistrusted no more the loialty of Strangers, then of the Frenchmen
themselves, made but one front of all these 4. or 5. Nations togethers, so yt
the one could not say that he was more preferred then ye other, nor more kept
back, yet there were amongst them that did require the first point, or to
term it better, to make the Forlorn hope. And I heard it spoken that this
new order (which I term to be new with us, who are accustomed but to hear
speak of a Vantgard, Battle, and Reregard) was such, as the Lord
Dartigueloue, then Lieutenant to Mounsieur Negrepelisse, of whose company I
was sometime, told me, and certain other his familier friends, that this
Battle was raunged according unto the ancient manner, the which is the best
and most surest that may be, as I have before said. And likewise that the
aforesaid Mounsire de Lautrec knew well that the nations whom he governed,
had each others honor in great jealousy: for the Switzers were jealous over
the Almaignes, and the Frenchmen over the Italyans, and contraryly: therefore
he could not have preferred the one, without discrediting the other: so that to
make his profit of the malice that was amongst them, it was better to place
them all in one front to see what they could do for to spite one another, then
to use the accustomed manner: for it is no small occasion to move Souldyers
withal, to tell them that such have vanquished those with whom they fought, or
when as they fear they should do it before them, had it pleased God that the
enemies heat had not been so cooled as it seemed it was at that time, but
that they had come out of their Fort: for through the good will that was in our
men, and the good order that was as well amongst the footmen as the horssemen,
it is most certain that there has not been a battle given in many a day,
that had been better fought, then that was like to do: but he that orders all
things, had determined that it should happen otherwise, and therefore it was
not fought: but to return to my purpose. Heretofore in Asia they used
certain Waggens, garnished with sharp sythes, made fast unto the sides of the
same Waggens, who served not only to open a Battle by means of their
violence (for that the said Waggens were drawn by the swiftest horses that
might be found) but also the sythes were good to cut as many in pieces as they
touched: which Waggens might be resisted after three manner of ways: first,
with ranks of the Pikes: secondly, by making them way through the Battles, as
has been spoken of the Elephants: and thirdly, by placing somewhat upon the
way that might keep them from approaching the Battles, as Silla did against
Archelaus, who having many of these Waggens, caused great plants of Pine trees
to be set in the ground behind his Hastaries, in the place left void betwixt
them and the Princes: and seeing the Waggens approaching near, he gave a sign
that the Hastaries should retire within ye Princes, who being retired, were out
of danger to be slain with the said sythes, and the Wagons were stayed from
approaching the Battles. Moreover upon the same day Silla invented a new
manner of ranging of an Host, for he put all his light armed men behind his
Battles, and left many spaces betwixt his said Battles for them to pass
through to go forward as often as it should be needful. And when the Battle
was begun, he caused his light armed men and his horssemen to come forward to
charge his enemies, who being out of their course because their Wagons were
repulsed, were broken, and overthrown in short time. There is yet many other
forms to be used in the ranging of a Battle, of which I will speak as the
matter will lead me thereunto, not staying otherwise: to the intent to speak
in few words a little of every thing that concerns this discipline, and that
which is needful to be known, for to have service of these Legions ordered as
I have showed, it is necessary that I should ouerpasse them all briefly, and
yet not so briefly as to leave those points unspoken of that ought to be
touched, or at the least the most necessaryest: therefore I will begin with
those things that ought to be done during the Combat, and will speak of other
things that may trouble and discourage an enemy whilst he attends for the
Combat.

A General Chief may cause a voice to be given out, that he has a new supply
of men coming unto him, and may make a show of some matter like a truth, that
may signify his succor to be near, and it may happen that through this
brute, his enemies would be discouraged at the likelihood of the said succor,
and being discouraged, he might overthrow them with little difficulty.
Minutius Rufus, and Acilius Glabrion, two Roman Consuls, helped themselves
with this subtletie. Sulpitius put all the servants and laborers of his Host
upon Moyles and other Beasts, unfit for fight, causing them to be ranged in
such sort that they seemed a far off to be a great number of horsemen, whom
he sent up upon a Mountain somewhat near unto his enemies Camp, commanding
the^ to keep themselves close, until the Battle was begun, and that then
they should show themselves in many troops like horsemen, faigning to come
down upon the Gauls, who thinking that certain new bands had come unto the
Romans, retired notwithstanding that they were in a good forwardnes to get the
victory: whereby we see, that feigned assaults do help to amaze enemies while
they are in fight. And therefore it may be thought that the assault that might
be given them in good earnest, would do mutch more service, specially if they
were given upon the flanks or behind at unawares, when the fight is at the
hotest. Truth it is that this can not be done but very hardly, except the
ground be very fit for the purpose, for if the country be plain and open, it
will be impossible to hide your people in any place, which is a thing necessary
in such like enterprises: for ye ground must be bowing, or full of bushes and
hedges, or otherwise fit for the purpose, in which places the General might
lay part of his people in ambush to issue out, and suddenly assault his
enemies, not giving them leisure to provide for it. And this must be handled so
secretly, that his enemies do not perceive it: for if the said ambush do wisely
execute their enterprise in due time, it shall never fail to obtain victory.
This manner of war did Scanderbeg oftimes use against the Turks, who has
overthrown more Turks with his ambushes, and surprices, then any other Prince
that I do know, how great a number of people so ever he has had. It has
ofttimes served to good purpose, to give out a voice during the Combat, that
the Captain General of the enemies is slain, or to encourage souldyers with
crying that they have the victory. An enemies Horse may also be troubled with
horrible sights, and unaccustomed noise, which policy Craesus used, placing
Camels before his enemies horssemen, and Pirrhus placed Elephants before the
Romans horsemen, the sight whereof so feared and disordred their horses, that
they could not be masters of them. Semiramis caused many artificial Elephants
to be made, which representing natural Eleplants, put the horsemen of
Staurobates King of India to flight, because the horses were feared with that
new shape, and with a smell that was contrary unto the Elephants that they had
been accustomed unto. It is not long since, that the Turk Soltan Selim
ouerthrewe the Sophy in Persia, and the Souldan in Siria, principally with the
noise of the Harquebusery, which was a thing that they had not bin accustomed
unto, and therefore so skared their horses, that it was not possible to keep
them in order to fight, but did put them to flight incontinent, he that best
might fastest. The Spaniards to vanquish the army of Amilcar, placed before
their Battails diverse Wagons full of light wood and brimstone, which were
drawn by Oxen, and when the battles approached, they put fire into their
Wagons, whereupon the said Oxen to fly from the fire which they perceived at
their tails, thrust into the battles of Amilcar so forceibly, that they
opened them, and put them in disorder. An enemy may be deceived, if in fighting
he may be brought unto an ambush, as is abouesayd. But if so be that the
country be not fit for ambushes, there may be diverse great ditches made, which
may be covered with bushes, and earth lightly laid over again, and certain
firm places be left betwixt the ditches, with good marks for to find them, at
which places those may retire that are sent to charge their enemies, faigning
to be afraid in their returning back again, to cause their enemies to follow
them the faster, and to fall into the snare. A King of the Etheolytes, which
are a people near unto Persia, used this policy against Perosas, King of
Persia. The Egyptians also at a day of Battle, having certain quagmyres
near them, covered the said quags with an herb called Alga, to hide the
evil places from the sight of their enemies, and when the battle began, the
said Egiptians faigning to fly, retired unto the quags, and passed through at
certain sure passages, and their enemies who pursued them in great haste,
soonke into the mire up to the throats, and so were overthrown. Viriatus did
as mutch against the Romans.

If any accident should happen unto the General during the combat, which might
dismay his soldiers, it is a point of great wisdom to cover it, and to make
the best of it presently: as Tullius Hostilius, who seeing that his assistants
which ought to enter battle with him, went their ways without striking
stroke, and that their departure would have greatly dismayed his souldyers,
caused it to be given out through all his Host, that they went away by his
commandment, which did not only apease his people, but did moreover so
encourage them, that they were victorious. The like did Silla when a great part
of his horsemen forsook him. And another time when as he had sent certain of
his assistants into a place where they were all overthrown and slain except
one person, fearing least his Army should be dismayed, said incontinently that
it was done by his own will and counsel, because they had conspired against
him, and that therefore he had sent them unto that place to dispatch them, to
prevent their mischief. Sertorius being in Spain in battle against his
enemies, slew a messenger that brought him word of the death of one of his
Captains, doubting that this news should have discouraged, and taken away his
souldyers good wills for to fight. Titus Didius having lost many of his people
in battle against his enemies, who on both sides had given over, not known
who had the better, to hide the loss he had sustained, caused all the night
long his dead men to be carried away, and to be buried: the next day his enemies
seeing a great number of dead men on their side, and very few of the Romans,
imagining thereby that they were greatly weakened, forsook the place, not
offering battle any more. It is a hard matter to stay and to bring an Army
back again unto the Combat when it is fleeing, I mean, if they be all in
going: but if it were but part of them, there might then some remedy be found,
and such a remedy, as diverse Captains have helped themselves withal
heretofore, which has been, to place themselves before those that fled,
showing them the danger and shame that does follow a flight. Of which Captains
was Silla, who seeing that a great part of his Souldyers chaced by Mithridates,
had turned their backs, got before the^ with his sword in his hand, and used
these words unto them in a loud voice, as in reproach: You Roman Souldyers
that fly away, when you are returned unto your City, if any man do ask you
where you have left your Captain, answer them that you forsook him in
Boetia fighting against his enemies. Attilius the Consul, seeing that a great
part of his army did fight valiantly, and that another part began to fly,
took those that made no show to fly, and placed the^ against those that were
flying, saying unto them, that those that would not return again unto the
Combat, although they had escaped their enemies hands, should not escape their
friends. Phillip King of Macedon, knowing that his souldyers feared greatly the
Scithians, against whom he was constrained to fight, appointed that a great
number of his best horssemen, and those whom he trusted most unto, should be
placed upon the wings and tail of his battles, commanding them to kill all
those that would make any show to turn their backs: whereof his people being
advertised, chose rather to abide the adventure of the Battle, then to trust
unto the flight, and by that means overcame them. The Romans not only to stay
a flight, but also the more to animate their soldiers in the fight, have
sometimes taken their Ensigns from those that carried them, and thrust them
forward into the thickest prease of their enemies, who remembering the shame
and punishment that might come upon those that should suffer their Ensigns to
be lost, have fought manfully. At other times it has happened that the Roman
Consuls seeing their Ensignebearers to march too slowly and coldly against
their enemies, have caused them to be slain upon the place, and if it chanced
that all ye army did fly before their enemies, they did then shut the gates of
their Camp, saying, that no soldier should enter before they had vanquished
their enemies, which caused them to re-enter in battle, and to begin the
Combat in better order. I do here remember my self somewhat as touching the
form of ranging of an army in battle: there have bin heretofore Captains
that have ranged their battles in point, that is to say, narrow and strong,
their chiefest forces before, thinking by that means to open the enemies Host
the easier, against which manner, has bin invented a form of battle like
unto a pair of sheares, or forke, for to receive the said point and to enuiron
it, and to fight with it upon every side: in which cases, this general rule
must be used, that is, that the greatest remedy that a man may find against his
enemies pretense, is to do that voluntarily which he shall be enforced to do,
for that doing it voluntarily, it may be done in good order to his advantage,
and unto the prejudice of his enemies, whereas if he be enforced to do it upon
an extremity, it will be his manifest perdition. And to verify this, I must
repeat certain things spoken of before, if our enemy do make the head of his
battles sharp and strong before, to open our battles, and that we attend,
or assail him, having ours open, we are sure to put our enemies into disorder
without any doubt, and they shall not be able to put our men to any foil. To
prove it to be true, Anniball placed Elephants in the front of his army, to
open Scipio his Battles, which Scipio marching with his Battles open, did
thereby overthrow him. Asdruball placed the best soldiers that he had in the
midst of the front of his army, for to enforce Scipio his men, but Scipio
commanded that they should retire of themselves, and so overcame them: so that
we do see that an enemy may be frustrated of his imagination, when as we do
provide for it betime, and when as we do that voluntarily which we think we
must do either by force, or extremity.

What a Lieutenant General ought to do, after the winning or leesing of a
Battle, and what considerations he ought to have before that he do enter into
Battle
The 2. Chapter.
IT shall not be amiss, to add unto this discourse the chances that may
happen after the winning or leesing of a Battle: specially for that those
things which I do mean to entreat of concerning this matter are so
appertinent thereunto, that they ought not to be left unspoken, and may be
written briefly. Let us say then that Battles may be won and lost (as every
man knows) who so wins, ought to follow the victory with all diligence,
imitating Caesar in this case, and not Anniball, who lost the opportunity of
having the upper hand of the Romans, after that he had vanquished them at
Cannes: because that he rested too much, and Caesar would never rest after that
he had the victory, but followed his enemies more fearcely after that he had
broken their forces, then he did assault them being in their intier. But when a
battle is lost, a Captain General must see if by his loss he may not have
a mean to hurt his enemies, and to repair his loss, specially if he have any
people left to do it withal. The oppertunitie may be given through the small
care that an enemy has oftimes after a victory, for that many times he does
become negligent, having no care of watch, nor regard of being surprised:
wherefore a Captain General may then have means to repair his loss, as did
Martius the Roman, after that the two Roman armies were overthrown, and the
two Scipios dead, who overthrew the Carthagenians at that time they thought
themselves to be most surest, and when as they doubted not that ye remnant of
two vanquished hoasts durst assault their vanquishers: so that (through the
great trust that they had in their own assurance) they neglected to keep good
watch the night following, in which the said Martius assailed and overthrew
the^: for every man knows that there is nothing so easy to be brought to
pass, as that which an enemy thinks dare not be put in practice, and they do
oftimes take hurt on that side that do least look for it. And if a Captain
General could not help himself by this means, because of the vigilancie of
his enemies, yet he must study to make his loss as little domageable, as he
may possible. Which to do, it were necessary yt he should handle the matter so
that his enemies might not follow his men, nor overtake them flying from the
battle, but find some policy to hinder his said enemies upon the way. As
concerning the flying without being followed, or being followed not to be
overtaken, and utterly overthrown, he must imitate the example of Sertorius,
who being vanquished by Metellus, knowing that it would but little avail him
to fly away, commanded his Captains and men of war, that they should retire
unto diverse places, as skattered and dispersed as they might possible, having
before advertised them of the place where they should all meet together again.
Viriatus did as much. In our time happened almost the like amongst the Spaniards
which retired from Marcellus in great disorder, who having the King at their
tails, knowing that he made haste to cut off their passages to arrive at Milan
before them, and to enjoy all the strong towns of Italy, could not imagine a
better remedy to help it, then to name the places unto which every man should
retire, and to dispearse themselves diverse ways for the speed and safety of
their journey, for all the country was full of French souldyers: but what one
way and other, they did so get through, that they assembled at the towns that
were appointed them by their principal Chief, and there made themselves
strong, namely, at Lodes, Pauie, and Cremona, which was the cause that we could
not recover the Duchy of Milan, but received diverse losses. This advertisement
might ofttimes be given before the beginning of a Battle, if it were thought
that the end of the Combat might happen to our loss: but this advertisement
might be given unto the principal Chiefes that have the greatest authority in
an Host, who afterward might advertise the Captains when as they do see no
likelihood of victory, and not before: and thereof might this profit ensue,
that is, that the General of the enemies doubting to divide his army, might
suffer either all or the greatest part of the vanquished to escape.
Furthermore, to stay an enemy that should follow those that fly, he might cast
his gold and treasure in the way as he flies, and it is sure that the enemies
will stay to gather it up, and in the mean while his army may have time to
escape, and to win ground of them. By this means have diverse Princes and great
Captains helped themselves, and amongst others, King Mithridates, to escape
from the hands of Lucullus, and Triphon King of Siria, to escape from the hands
of Antiochus. Frotho King of the Danes being landed in England, did as mutch to
deceive the Englishmen that pursued him, who were so laden with the baggage of
the Danes, that when they should have defended themselves being assaulted, they
were scattered here and there to gather up the spoils that the Danes left
behind them, so that the Danes had as good a match at their hands as they did
desire, and slew them at their pleasures. It rests yet if I do well remember
my self, to speak of the considerations that a Captain General ought to
have, before that he come so far as to give battle: for I have promised
before to speak somewhat thereof. Unto which point I do say first of all, that
a Captain General ought never to hazard a Battle, except he see an
advantage, or that he be constrained thereunto. The advantage proceeds of his
enemies weerynes, ill ordering of his Battles, of the having of a greater
number of people, then the said enemy has, or of the having of better
souldyers. The constraint proceeds of an assurance that we have to leese if
we fight not: as if so be that the want of money should cause an army to
break, or if so be that the assistants should force the said General for to
hazard the battle, as it happened unto Mounsieur de Lautrec at Bicocque, where
the Switzers being the strongest, enforced him to fight with the Spaniards, and
to assault them in their fort, threatening the said Lord, and protesting that at
that very instant they would return into their country, if so be that he gave
not battle. And herein they did so greatly importune him, that he was forced
to yield unto their wills, and to fight at his great disadvantage: at which
time he was repulsed, and consequently chased out of Italy. It is also
requisite to hazard a battle when an army is in danger of a present famine,
or that the enemies do look for a new supply within short time: in such a case
a General ought to give battle, although that the advantage be not on his
side, for it is better to try if fortune would favor him any thing, then not
trying it, to abide the arriving of his ruin. And a Lieutenant General
deserves as great a check when he falls into these inconuenients, as if he
had a fit opportunity to vanquish his enemies, and had not known it through
his ignorance, or had lost it through his sloth. These advantages are
sometimes offered by an enemy, and sometimes our own wisdom does give us
them. The advantages which an enemy does give, are after diverse manners, as
when they are separated, and far distant one from another, having their enemies
near unto them: as were the souldyers of the Duke Destoutuille upon ye day
that they were overthrown at Adrian: for the Auantgard and the greatest part
of the army were so far from the battle and the Arriergard, that they could
not be advertised in time to return to join themselves together: wherefore
being separated so far off, the Spaniards made of them what market they would.
A Lieutenant General does likewise cause his own overthrow, when he does send
any part of his people out of his Camp, lodging them far off in weak places at
the mercy of his enemies: for there needs no man but the enemies to know of
it to cut their throats, as it happened unto Mounsieur Bayard, at Rebethe, who
lay there unfortified by the commandment of the Lord Admiral Bonniuet,
looking every hour when the enemies should assault him, which they did in the
end, and slew both him and his. It has many times happened that an army has
been overthrown in passing over great rivers, through the good aduisement of
the Captain General, who has stayed until the one half has bin past, and
afterward has charged upon that part yt stood best for his hand, as Caesar did
against the Switzers, being come down along the river of Sone, where he
stayed until 3. parts of the^ were past, and after charged upon the fourth
that was behind, and ouerthrewe the^, the others by no means able to succor
the^. Sometime an enemy does ouer-trauaile himself, at which time if he should
assault us being fresh and rested, we ought by no means to let this
oppertunitie to slip, for we should have the^ as good cheap as we would our
selves, as the Englishmen had the Frenchmen at the battle of Cresye.
Moreover, a General may spend a good part of the day before his issuing out of
his Camp, when he thinks that his enemies have bin long armed, and after that
they have lost their first heat. This manner did Scipio and Metellus use in
Spain, the one against Asdrubal, and the other against Sertorius. A Captain
General may likewise hazard ye Combat, if he knew that his enemies have
diminished his host, as did the Spaniards in Navarre against the Lord of
Espattez, or that he had divided the^, as the two Scipios did in Spain, whereby
they were overthrown and slain. We did likewise weaken our host at Pauy, to
send unto Naples and other places, which was cause that the enemies did the
bolder assault us, and that we were so much the weaker to defend our selves
against the^. A wise Captain ought rather to resist the violence of his
enemies, then to assault them furiously: for fury is easily resisted by fast
and sure men, and if it be once withstoode, the rest is nothing, both because
they do put themselves out of breath, and also their battles out of order,
how little so ever they martch hastily, as also for yt the first heat does
cool, when as they see ye consta^cy of the attendant to be other then they
looked for before. By the means of this patience in staying to receive the
enemies army without stirring foot, did Fabius Maximus overcome ye Gauls and
the Samnits: and the Englishmen overthrew the Frenchmen at the battle of
Poitiers, only because they stayed for our battles, and received them
standing fast: yet that staying to receive an enemy without moving foot, may
sometime be dangerous, specially when those that assault are good soldiers and
expert men, and that their hasty marching does not put them out of order: for
all men have a natural heat in them, and a bravery of mind, which is set on
fire through ye desire yt they have to fight, which must be maintained by the
Captain General, and not be cooled. Since then, marching hastily does increase
it, because one man does encourage another, and going does heat them more and
more, therefore this manner to assail, is better then the other to resist:
true it is, that practiced and expert soldiers may use it, and not others, for
ye reason that I have showed, and if Caesar his soldiers had not bin so good
as they were, Pompey his manner had prevailed in Pharsalia, who commanded his
soldiers to stand to receive their enemies: and if the Frenchmen had bin well
practiced being so great a number as they were, the Englismen had abidden
their fury but a while, notwithstanding that they were enclosed in a strong
place. Certain good Chiefes, when as their enemies soldiers have bin more in
number then theirs, have given battle in the evening, to the intent that if
they were vanquished, they might save ye greatest part of their me^ through the
darkness of ye night, as did Iugurtha against Metellus. Others knowing yt their
enemies host was governed by superstitions, and that they would not fight but
on certain days, have chosen at that time to give the^ battle, and have
vanquished the^: but this policy would take no place amongst us at this day,
for that superstitions have no more that course that they had heretofore in the
time of Caesar, when he fought against Ariouistus, and when Pompey fought
against the Jews. The wisest point that a Captain General can do, is to
keep a good number of faithful men commonly about him, who are wise and expert
in yt feats of the wars, with whom he may consult at all hours, and confer
with the^ touching his own force and his enemies: to discern whether of them
has the greatest power, best soldiers, best armed, and best practiced men, or
which of their two armies can best abide the extremities of the wars.
Likewise he ought to debate with his said counsel whether he might trust
most, unto his horsemen, or unto his footmen, and whether it were for his most
advantage to put himself in the plain, or to keep the hills. Furthermore,
whether the place that he is in be of more advantage for him, then for his
enemies, and to consider whether of the two armies may be most commodiously
victualled, and whether it be good to defer the giving of battle, or to come
to the fight immediately, and what advantage the time may either give or take:
for many times when souldyers do see the war prolonged, they wax
discontented, and therefore being wearied with pains and grief, and moved
with a desire that they have to return unto their own houses; they might be
like enough to forsake the Camp, and to go their ways. Above all things he
ought to know the Captain General of his enemies army, and what people he
has about him, and seek to understand whether he be rash or wary, a coward,
or valiant, and whether his men be new souldyers, or hardened, and with what
enemies they have had to do, and whether the said enemies were men of war or
not. Furthermore, the said Lieutenant ought to consider whether he may repose
his most trust in his assistants and other strange souldyers, or in his own
countrymen, and consider in which of the^ there is the greatest likelihood,
and if so be that he see his Host dismayed, or out of hope to vanquish their
enemies, he ought then to have the greatest care that may be not to give
battle: for the greatest token that may be of the loss of a battle, is,
when as soldiers have a conceit in themselves that their enemies cannot be
overcome. Therefore all occasions yt might bring a Chief unto this point against
his will must be avoided, and Fa. Maximus imitated herein, who always placed
his Camp in strong places, which was the occasion that Anniball had never the
heart to assail him. And when a Captain General does doubt that his enemy
has so great power that he might, or would assail him in his trenches, there
is no better remedy for him then to leave the field, and to retire his men
into strong Garrisons, parting his bands some one way and some another: to the
intent that the trouble of the besieging of many towns and strong places,
might weary his enemies, so that they should be constrained to loose their
time altogether, or at the least he himself have respit to strengthen himself
to go again into the field when he should see time, or else I do not think
that it were possible for a Chief to avoid the battle (whatsoever should
happen) if so be that his enemies had will for to fight: except he kept
himself always twenty or thirty miles from them, to the intent to have time
enough to raise his Camp before his enemies coming, if so be, that they
would assault him, as did the aforesaid Fabius Maximus in keeping himself
far from Anniball. And although that the distance was not above twenty or
thirty miles, yet the country was so fit for to avoid the combat, that if so
be he would have fled he might have done it, although he had been hard
followed, which Fabius never meant to do: for he did not so much avoid the
combat for the fear he had of his enemies, as to constrayne them to assault
him in his fort at their disadvantage, or to weary them in deferring to come
to the combat, and thereby to constrayne them to abandon the country, or at
the least to keep themselves the closer together, and to make less spoil and
wast of the country, then if he had left them alone. And on the other part,
Anniball (through his obstinacy) attended to vanquish the Romans patience,
until such time as they should come down into the plain to fight with him,
putting his men in greater danger, then if he had tried to vanquish Fabius by
assaulting him in his fort with the loss of a few men. We must think that he
should have been forced to come to the battle, or to have gone his ways, how
unwilling soever he had been to fight. Phillip of Macedon father of Perses,
having wars against the Romans, placed his Camp upon a mountain, to the
intent that he would not be constrained to fight but with his own freewill:
but the Romans how dangerous soever it was, went and fought with him in his
fort and overthrew him. The Venetians when they were at Pandin, since they were
not determined to fight, ought betimes to have removed far of from the host
of King Lewis, or at the least to have assaulted the Frenchmen whilst they
were in passing the river of Add: but they tarrying too long, could not depart
when they would without strokes: for in the removing of their Camp the French
men charged them and overthrew them.

How a Captain General ought to defer to come unto combat with his enemies
as much as he may possible, when as the said enemies are entered into his
Princes country: and whether is the greater danger to attend for his enemies
at home in his own country, or to go seek them in theirs. And likewise, if
the said General should be importuned by his Soldiers to fight, how he might
avoid it, and how to encourage them, if so be they were afraid of their enemies
The 3. Chapter.
IT is a great point of wisdom to defer the coming to battle, when as a
man is assailed in his own country, his enemies having better soldiers, and
a greater number then he has: for if the battle should be lost through the
assayling of them, the country would be in hazard to be lost. The example of
the last King of Hungary may prove it to be true, who being assailed (in the
year 1526.) by the Turk the^ reigning, thought it better to hazard the
battle and to fight with the Turks at their ariuall, then to forbear and to
stand upon his guard; which was cause that he himself was slain, and his
kingdom lost. Wherefore, the surest way is to make a defensive war in
providing for the towns that are upon the frontiers, and to cause the
victuals to be spoiled yt cannot be brought safely away: and this doing our
enemies shall be famished, or constrained (if they do not retire) to seek to
fight with us, how greatly soever it be to their disadvantage. And we shall be at
choice to accept or to refuse the battle, as we shall see it to be for our
advantage. As concerning this point of forbearing an enemy, and wisely
defending of a country: I cannot allege a more fresh example, then the
manner that was observed by the Lord Constable in Province against the
Emperor: for after that he had well furnished the towns upon the frontiers,
that were defenceable, and those that might hinder his enemies coming forward
(if so be that they would have entered far into the country) having caused
all the milles and ouens to be spoiled, and the corn and fruit to be
destroyed that could not safely be carried away, and likewise the wells and
springs to be corrupted: the said Lord Constable made himself strong in
Auignon, and there determined to attend to receive the Switzers and other
Soldiers that came for to aid him, and also the coming of his enemies if they
had will for to fight with him, which act was commended both of the one side
and the other, for the most surest counsel that might have been used at that
time: considering the force of our enemies, and how ill accompanied the King
was, and that the war was stirring in many places within his country:
therefore to deceive the Emperor his pretense (for he made his account to have
had a better match at our hands at home in our own country then abroad) it
was the best remedy that might have been thought upon, not to fight at the
first ariuall, nor at the will of the said Emperor: but to suffer him to
cool, and to weaken himself of men, victuals, and money: whilst the said Lord
Constable did make himself strong of all things necessary, attending for a
time convenient to make him to know in what danger he puts himself that
enters into another man his country, with a wrong conceit: which danger (to
say truth) is greatly to be feared. As for me I would never be of the opinion
to assail a Prince in his country, that is so mighty and so well obeyed, as
the King of France is, what reason soever is alleged unto the contrary. As
for to say that he that does assail has many advantages upon his side, I
find that he that is assailed has many also upon his side: and it little
avails that some maintain, that those that assail have more courage then
those that are assailed: for although that this may sometimes be true, yet is
it not always so, for a General may embolden his men many ways, to make but
little account of those whom they feared at the first. Moreover, the just and
holy quarrel that binds every man to defend his country, may be laid out
before them; which is a thing that has a more force in it, then the desire or
hope of the enemies to be rich by other men's goods. And if we will say that a
Prince that does assault another, does take from his enemies the commodity
which he had before of the assistance of his subjects, for that the country
will be destroyed, and his subjects; so that he may be no more assisted by
them: it may be answered, that although ye goods be lost, yet ye loss of
goods does not alienate, nor turn the peoples hearts from the affection that
they bear unto their natural Prince. But it is an occasion to root them in
it more and more, and to stir them up and hearten them against those that
have endomaged them, so that one of those that have lost their goods, are worth
four of them that have lost nothing, or that make wars for their Princes
particular quarrel. Every man knows what damage those of Province did of
late unto the Spaniards, that spoiled them, which damage had not been so great,
if they had not misused the country people, or had not been the occasion of
the destroying of their fruits that could not be saved. As for to ground upon
that, that a Prince which is assaulted, is constrained to have the greater
regard in taxing of his subjects, or in commanding them to do any thing, least
his people should refuse or deny to do it, upon the hope they might have to
join with his enemies, if their said Prince should misuse them, or never so
little threaten them, is an argument that may be resolved in one word: to weet,
that this assistance cannot be taken from a Prince, except that he do leese
all his lands and all his friends, for otherwise he shall be succored in
despite of his enemies, as appears by the succor that the Kings of France
have had of their subjects at all times: although that the Englishmen,
Nauarrians, and a great number of the Princes of the realm were almost
possessed of al France, so that the Kings of France knew not where to set a
foot for theirs: yet notwithstanding they were always obeyed, none of all
those that were left theirs, refusing to be taxed, or to be employed at the
King his pleasure, so that this patience prevailed, and in the end chased his
enemies out of the realm. I do believe that if a Prince did use himself
toward his subjects like a Tyrant, always evil entreating and misusing them,
that if an enemy did assault him in his country, he might then be in hazard
to be ill followed and obeyed of his people: but in doing the contrary, there
is no doubt to be had in this matter. One thing there is for them that do
assail, and which is a great point, that is, that Soldiers who find
themselves in a strange country far from any refuge to retire unto, seeing
themselves in that extremity, do fight so much the more resolute, making a
virtue of necessity: but this necessity may not be compared unto the need
that those have to fight virtuously that are assailed, because that they are in
danger to abide many extremities more then the assailants, if the said
assailants should overthrow them: for the loss of life, ransom, or
imprisonment, do pay the reckoning for them: whereas those that are assailed,
do lose their goods, the honest reputation of their wives and daughters, and
their lives: and if so be that they do escape killing, yet do they look for a
perpetual servitude, with an infinite number of other mischiefs: so that the
advantage on both sides is clearly seen, and the assailant cannot have one
reason so strong for him, but the assailed may have a better. Wherefore I do
make no doubt to rest upon this conclusion, that is, that every Prince ought to
have a regard, before he enter into the country of another Prince his
neighbor that is as mighty as himself, and moreover makes himself to be
well beloved and obeyed of his subjects, as we see the King is. And besides
the reasons aforesaid, he that is assailed may attend the coming of his
enemies into his country with a great advantage: for that he may famish the^,
and take from them the use of all things appertayning unto a Camp, without the
danger of having any lack of victual on his side. Moreover, he may withstand
the enterprises of his enemies, and impeach them to be executed, if the
assailed have better notice of the country and passages, than the assailants
have. To be brief, he may make great store of people in short time: for there
is no body but will be ready at a need to enter into battle to defend his
own, and of these there will be found an hundred to one of those that are
content to leave their own dunghill, to the intent to make wars against
other men. But let us suppose that a Prince that is assailed in his own
country is overthrown, every man knows well that he may recover it again
in short space: because that the vanquished cannot be so utterly overthrown,
but that there will a great many save themselves, because of the retreat they
have so nere them: moreover, his succor is not far of to come unto him. In
sum, he that is assailed in his country can hazard little but part of his
forces: but if the assailant be overthrown, he does not only put his people
in hazard, but also his state, goods, and subjects; notwithstanding that he is
out of his country: for being taken, he shall be constrained to remain
prisoner all the days of his life, or to accomplish the will of the vanquisher,
and God knows what conditions of peace are used to be given unto those that
are in hands if they make peace, and what raunsomes they must pay for their
delivery before that they be let go. Besides all this danger, into what
inconvenience would the assailant his country fall into if he were slain?
Would it be possible that a battle might be lost upon another man his ground,
without the slaughter of all the best Captains and Soldiers? Or that his
country being advertised of his death, and of the overthrow of his men, would
not loose all their hope to defend themselves, if they should be assailed upon
the heat of this trouble? All these things considered, I may conclude that he
is in greater hazard that does assail his neighbor, then he that does stay
for to resist him: as the coming of the above said Emperor does give me
occasion to speak, which is the fittest example that I may allege for this
matter. And although that the said Emperor did not taste of the inconveniences
that might have insued of such an enterprise; yet he was upon the way to have
proved them all, if he had stayed any thing longer in the king his country.
And this is so well known, that there is no man that can speak against it,
how little judgment soever he have.

Concerning this matter, I must here make answer unto some that misliked at
that time (as it was told me) that the said Lord Constable went not forwards
toward the mountains to stop the passage of the Emperor: saying, that
because of the difficulty of the passage, five hundred men had been sufficient
to have stopped ten thousand, and that therefore the one half of our people
had been strong enough to have repulsed our enemies: or if that the aforesaid
Lord Constable had been forced, he might have retired time enough unto Auignon
(if so be that he would have encamped there as he did) and that in so doing
Province had not been destroyed. But those that used these words did not look
near enough into the dangers that we might have fallen into, if that their
opinion had had place: for first of all it had not been wisely done to have
stayed to defend a passage against such a power, as that was that came against
us: nor likewise for him to have enclosed himself in a naughty barren
country, out of which he could not have retired, and have had safe going and
coming at all times: except the place had been so large, and besides so fit
for the attendants, that they might have placed a great Camp easily, and there
have raunged their battles in order to fight. If it had been so, their
counsel had been good, specially for if that the enemies would have assailed
them, they must have done it in disorder, our men attending in their fort in
good order to receive them: but it is so (as it has been told me) that there
is no place in all that passage, wherein it was possible for us to find that
commodity, or to impeach the said assaylants from coming diverse ways upon
the backs of the attendants. Wherefore considering of the sudden coming and
of the great force of the said assaylants, who were masters of the Sea, and so
mighty upon land, as every man knows, that it had been in their powers to
have enclosed and assailed on every side all those that should have showed
their faces in those straights: it was better done of the said Lord to keep
himself far from them, then to have been there and to have lodged himself
in this danger. Suppose that he might have made a good retreat at all times;
yet is it so that if he had been driven away by his enemies, his reputation had
been less worthy by a great deal. And when as a General does make his
account to keep a place or passage, and that his Soldiers do trust thereunto:
if it happen afterward that his enemies do enforce him to forsake it, it is
sure that such a fear will come upon them al at once, that it will be hard in
long time after to put them in heart again, specially if there have been some
small number beaten: for that will make others that shall but hear of it to be
as much a feared, as if they had carried part of the blows themselves.

The Spaniards that kept the passage at Suze, albeit that they were a great
number, yet the Lord Constable overthrew them easy enough: so that thereby may
be known that it is not so sure a match to stay and keep these straights,
specially the attendants not having many advantages on their sides, and an
enemy of great force in his teeth, which does assail him fiercely as the said
Lord and his did. The said Spaniards might well have perceived the error which
they did commit in reposing all their trust in the keeping of the said passage:
for being driven away by force, they were so scared that hardly they durst
look behind them to see who perused them: and not only those that had been
beaten were so astonished, but also they were so afeard that besieged Pignerol,
that they ran away secretly by night, and all those that were of the league
were afeard, until such time as we ceased to pursue them. Moreover, the Lord
Constable did wisely to leave the straight, and to keep himself at large: for
by that mean he might have made resistance unto the said enemies, if that they
had come any other way then that they did: which he could not have done, if he
had busied himself to keep one passage expressly, for that it is not said
that there are no more passages through the mountains to enter into France
then that which they came: nor likewise that they should have lacked guides to
have showed them some entrance: so that although that the said Lord had kept
them, yet it had not been possible for him to have kept all the other: and
consequently to have kept himself from being enclosed, or that his enemy
should not have been far entered into the country, before that he could have
gotten unto his refuge.

The Switzers in the year 1515. did ceaze upon many passages in the
mountains, to the intent to keep the King from entering into Italye: but so it
was that they kept them not all, or it may be that they knew them not all, or
that they would not divide themselves into too many bands. It may be also
thought, that the King would never have passed his army whereas they did
pass: but be it the one or the other, no body hindered them from looking unto
it. The said Lord found one passage free, at which he and his passed, and it
failed but little that he had not surprised a great company within Coulny: yet
they understood of his coming in so good time, that they saved themselves in
running away. I say that the retreat of the said Switzers, who made their
accoumpt that the Frenchmen should not pass, was cause that many towns in
Italy turned unto us incontinent: for having reposed all their trust in the
Switzers promise, and finding immediatlye after that our army was within the
country, and had passed contrary unto the opinion of all men, the Lombards
were so discouraged, and in that extremity that they knew not unto what
saint to bequeath themselves, or to take any other counsel, but to render
themselves at the hearing of it: as (it may be thought) the towns in the
plain country of Daulphine and Province would have done, if our army had
been placed to keep the passages, and that the Emperor should have driven
them away. To be short, those that thought it to be strange that our Camp
was lodged so far from the mountains, do show that they have not greatly used
this occupation. For a General ought never to stay in such like places, except
he have means (as I have before said) to plant all his forces, and that there
be no other place to pass far from that he does keep: and yet it is
necessary that the place where the Camp should stay, should have all these
commodities that are necessary for it, as wood, water, forage, and the
passages for victualers to come to the Camp free and open: and moreover that
the scituatio^ should be wholly as necessary as might be. A Lieutenant General
lying near unto his enemies Camp, may sometimes be importuned by his
Soldiers to give battle: although that he knows by the number of his
people, or by the situation of ye place, or by some other reason, that it
should be to his great disadvantage to fight. It may likewise come to pass,
that when either necessity or occasion given do constrain him to fight, that
he shall then find his Soldiers discomforted, and not disposed to do well:
therefore it is necessary to know how to bridle their desire in the one
case, and how to animate them in the other. As concerning the first case, if
persuasions would not suffice, there were no better remedy then to suffer some
small company to leese themselves at their own desires, to the intent that
the rest might give him the more credit, which happened unto Fabius Maximus
unlooked for: for when as his host was desirous to fight against Anniball;
Minutius the Captain General of the Romans Horsemen, being himself as
forward in the matter as the rest, which although it was contrary unto the
opinion of the said Fabius being Dictator, yet proceeded so far in this
variance, that they divided the army: and the army being divided, Minutius
presenting battle unto his enemies, who accepted it, had bin utterly
overthrown, had not the Dictator helped to succor him. Which the said
Minutius and his Soldiers seeing, governed themselves ever after by the
counsel of Fabius, as the most surest, without enterprising at any time after
any thing of their own heads. Sertorius, when he could not bridle the bouldnes
of his men, was content to suffer part of them to be well beaten: yet least
that they should be utterly overthrown, he succored them at their need, after
which correction he was ever after better obeyed. Concerning the animating of
Soldiers unto the Combat, it is not amiss to make them to have their enemies
in contempt, and to account but little of them, by giving them to understand
that their enemies speak reproachful words of them, or to make show to have
intelligence with some of the chiefest of their army, and that a great part of
them are corrupted, and also to lodge the Camp in some place where the
Soldiers may fee their enemies, and skirmish with them: because that those
things which men do daily see, they do acquaint themselves withal by little
and little: but we must handle these skirmishes so wisely, that our Soldiers
may always have the better hand of their enemies: for if they should have the
repulse at the first, it is a thing most certain that their fear and want of
courage would be much more increased: and so it might happen quite contrary
unto the General his meaning in approaching so near, and skirmishing with his
enemies, to wit, for the imbouldening of them, and not for the dismaying of
them: wherefore a General must employ his study, that nothing may take away
his Soldiers hearts from doing well, what accident soever might happen. And
nothing may more discourage them then to be beaten at the first; and therefore
all the remedy that I can see in this matter, is so to proceed against his
enemies, that his may have the better hand of them at their first arrival, if
it be possible. And to do this, he ought not to skirmish at all with his
enemies, but to keep his men within his fort, until that he see an
advantage, and seeing the advantage manifestly, that then they might issue out
of the forte upon their enemies, and vanquish them. A Lieutenant General may
likewise make show that he is angry with his people, and may make unto them
some oration of purpose, wherein he may reprove them for the little valor that
is in them: and to make them ashamed, he might say that he would fight with
his enemies although he should be left all alone, or if he had but such and
such to follow him: and this may be an occasion that the one to be accoumpted
of no less estimation then the other, will present themselves: and the other
to maintain their reputation, will show themselves the readier to come unto
the Combat.

Caesar helped himself by this means in France, his soldiers being afraid
of the Almaignes, to make them to fight resolutely, and be the better served
of them in the Battle. Soldiers ought never to be suffered to send any of
their booties, or of their own goods home unto their houses, or out of the
Camp, until such time as the war be ended: to the intent that they might
know, that although in running away they might save their lives, yet they
could not save their goods: the love whereof will be an occasion to make them
to fight as resolutelye, as the danger of the loosing of their lives. And as
touching the persuading and diswading of a small number to do any thing, is a
thing easy enough to be done: for that if they will not obey the Lieutenant
General his words, he may use his authority and force: but the greatest
difficulty is, when as it shall be expedient to remove a multitude from an
evil opinion, which might be contrary unto their common welfare, or unto his
will: in which case for that he may but use persuasion, he must do it
publicly in the hearing of all his Soldiers, because the matter does touch
them all: and for this cause good Captains ought to be good Orators: for that
not knowing how to exhort a whole army, it will be hard to do any thing ought
worth. But at this day we make no great account of it, and yet it is a thing
so necessary, that to do well without it is almost a thing impossible: I
mean, for to do any act of importance. Who so would read the life of
Alexander the great, and of many other Princes and Chiefes that have bin
heretofore, he should find that it has often times been needful for them to
speak publicly unto their armies, and to use exhortations unto them, when as
they would have any great matter done: for many times there may accidents
happen in an army, by means whereof it might be overthrown if the General
could not play the Orator, or if he should not speak unto them publicly, as
the ancient Chiefes were accustomed to do, the reason is, that speech has
many and sundry effects in it self: for it takes away fear, it enflameth
the hearts of Soldiers; it makes them the more firm and resolute for the
Combat; it discovers deceits; it promises recompense; it shows danger and
the mean to avoid them; it reprooueth, entreats, exhorts, fills full of
hope, praises and blames: and in sum; a Lieutenant General may by his speech
do all those things, wherewith men's passions are either mortified or kindled.
Wherefore if the King were determined to maintain his first Legionaries, or to
leauie other, after the manner spoken of in the first book, or a better, he
should command his Colonels to accustom themselves to speak publicly to
their soldiers, that they might be accustomed to hear them to speak, to the
intent that they should not find it strange to come together unto the
declaration that their Lieutenant General would make them, whenever they
should be called thereunto by his Trumpet. Heretofore the reverence that men
had unto religion, was much worth to keep Soldiers in fear and obedience,
and likewise the oath whith they made when they were led into the field: for
then those that committed any offense, or those that did contrary unto their
oaths and promises, were not so greatly threatened to incur corporal pains,
which equity and law ordained: as they were threatened that they should fall
into the indignation of the gods whom they worshipped, which being mingled with
other superstitions, was oftentimes an occasion that the Chiefes who were at
that time, came more easily unto the end of their enterprises: and at this day
it would do no less, if so be that God were feared better then he is, and
that we made a greater account of Christian religion then we do. Sertorius
did make his Soldiers to believe that a tame Dear which he had, did advertise
him of all things touching the pleasure of the gods, which was cause that the
Spaniards gave too great credit unto his words: specially for that they
believed that he knew their news secretly before that they did themselves, and
as for those things that were done far from the Camp, and those things that
he took in hand with an assurance to bring to pass, he made show that he
understood them by the said beast. Silla said that he had intelligence by an
Image that he had out of the Temple of Apollo in Delphos, which he carried
always in his bosom when he entered into Battle. In the time of King
Charles the seventh, in the wars which he had with the Englishmen, was
Iahane the maiden of France esteemed to be a divine person, and every one
affirmed that she was sent from God: but some will say it was the King that
invented this policy, to encourage the Frenchmen, giving them to understand
that God had a care of the realm, and therewithal the King took great pains
that the said Iahane might be found veritable in her words, and that the most
part of her enterprises might come to good effect, for the execution whereof
she armed her self, and was always amongst the knights in the combat. The
Frenchmen were so encouraged through the trust that they had therein that from
thenceforth the Englishmens force did diminish, and theirs did augment.
Moreover there may be means found to make Soldiers to make but little
account of their enemies, which to do Agesilaus King of the Lacedaemonians
showed unto his Soldiers certain Persians naked, to the intent that they
seeing the bodies of the said Persians white and delicate, should have no
occasion to fear them, but to esteem of them as soft and effeminate people.
Diverse good Captains have hitherto made their Soldiers to fight through very
force, taking from them all the hope that they might have to save themselves if
they should break, or seek to escape otherwise then by the victory.
Agathocles helped himself by this means in Affrike, and it is also the most
surest to make Soldiers resolute: which resolution will be augmented through
the confidence that they have to get the victory, and also through the love
that they do bear unto their Captain General, and unto their Prince: which
confidence proceeds of that they are better armed, or better ranged, then
their enemies, and of their getting of some battle of fresh memory, and
likewise of the good opinion that they have of their captain General. As for
the love which they do bear unto their natural Prince and country, it is
nature that is cause of it, as virtue is cause of the affection that Soldiers
do bear unto their Captain General which may do much more in this matter,
then gifts or any other thing: and although that a man may use other means to
win the hearts of men of war: yet the reputation that a General Chief has to
be a valiant and good man, passes all ye other that may be thought upon.
Concerning the constraining of an army to fight against their wills, may be in
diverse manners: notwithstanding that is the greatest which constrains an
army to vanquish or to die in the field, which is a fit remedy for those, who
fight not for ye love that they do bear unto the Prince that does pay them:
nor for the confidence that they have in their General. Of which sort are all
the mercinaries properly, who would never give one only thrust with a Pike, if
they should not be forced thereunto, or that it were not too great a shame for
them not to do it, as for any other cause they will never put themselves in
danger: wherefore it is most certain, that the service of those who fight for
the love of their natural Lord, and their country is much better and more
assured: for besides this bond of amity, they shall be renowned to be
valiant men, which is of no less value with them, then force and constraint is
with the other.

The order that a Lieutenant ought to keep in martching through the enemies
country: and the manner how to range a square Battailon with four faces,
leaving an empty place in the midst of it.
The 4 Chapter.
I Have heertofore spoken of the manner that an host ought to keep in giving
of a battle, and after what manner it ought to be governed, having their
enemies hard by them: and also the manner how to vanquish them. Moreover I
have spoken of many circumstances appertinent to this business, wholly according
unto the accidents that might happen before the giving of a battle, in
fighting, after the vanquishing of an enemy, or the receiving of an overthrow:
and as I think I have said so much therein, that it were now time to change
purpose, and to show how four such Legions as these which I have ordained,
ought to be ranged in traueling (although no enemies be seen) when as a
Leiutena^t General that has four such legions in charge, is continually in
doubt to be assaulted: which may happen when as he marches through his enemies
country, or through a country suspect. First of all we must understand that
the Romans army being in this case, did always send out certain troops of
Horsemen far before their battles, for to discover the ways; and after them
marched the right point of their Battailon in order ready to sight, and at the
tail of it marched all the baggage of the same point. After that marched
another Legion and their baggage behind them, and afterward the third Legion
and their baggage, and last of all ye left point and their baggage at their
tails, behind which baggage marched all the horsemen: and this manner did the
said Romans ordinarily use in going through the country: and if the host were
assailed either before or behind, they caused their baggage and carriage to be
retired all at once either upon the left side or upon the right side, as came
best to hand, and when the Soldiers and place were free of all encumbrances,
the Battles turned their faces toward that side that their enemies came to
assault them on. And if so be that they were assailed upon one of the flanks,
they put their baggage one the other side, and made head unto their enemies. Me
thinks that this manner of marching through an enemy his country, should be
the best that might be imitated in this case: we might likewise send out before
on every side a good number of Hargoletiers and Harquebusiers a Horseback to
discover the ways round about our host, and send part of our light Horssemen
to follow the said Hargoletiers and Harquebusiers somewhat near to succor
them, if they should have any encounter; the battles (as is aforesaid)
marching in good order with their ranks at large, so that the way were broad
enough, or at the least that in every rank should be ten me^. As for to march
at length being in an enemies country, is an evil counsel. The Legions ought
every one to march by themselves, with their cariages at their backs, after
the manner of the Romans. And for that there are two sorts of baggage, to wit,
one that pertains unto the Soldiers particularly, and the cariages which do
appertain unto the common use, as the provision of victuals, arms, and
Ordnance; it would not be amiss to divide the said carriage into four parts,
and to give unto each legion besides their particular baggage, the one fourth
part of the publke cariages. Moreover it would be well done to divide the
Ordnaunce into four parts if it were but to avoid the envy that would be
amongst men of war, if the one part of the army should have it in charge and
the other not, or if the one should have more then the other. And likewise the
unarmed people ought to be divided equally, such as Pyoners, Carters,
Victualers, men of occupation, and other poor people that do follow a Camp to
get their living: to the intent that every number of armed men might have
justly their charge, that the one should not be more aduantaged and charged
then the other. But when as it does happen that an hoaste does travail
through a country that is not only suspected: but also is such an enemy as
the said Hoaste does look every hour to be assailed, then the form of
martching before spoken of may be altered, and the host ranged in another
order, which order should be so good, that neither the people of the Country,
or an enemy his army might at any time find the Lieuetenaunt General, nor
his battles in disorder, in any one poinct: nor likewise give him any
repulse, or to do any damage unto his men. To avoid the danger of these
sudden assaults which are made by stealth, the ancient Chiefes, were
accustomed to martch with their hoastes square, not that they were altogether
square: but they were raunged with four faces, and by that means they
martched through their enemy his Country, being ready to defend themselves,
whenever that they should be assaulted, and used no other form, except they
were constrained to fight with their Battles raunged, or that they were
charged with too great a force of enemies. This manner of marching will I use
in this place, and will show how to order four Legions after this manner, by
immitating of whose example a greater army may be conducted, to martch
through out all Countries, without danger af enemies, and to make head one
what part soever that it should be assailed. The Battles must be raunged in
such sort, that the first Legion must be at the right corner of the said
square, and the Hastaries of this Legion, should occupy their accustomed place
toward the east: (for it shall be supposed, that they do martch toward the
east) and afterward the Princes and Triaries must place themselves toward the
South: so that they and the said Hastaries shall make a right angle which is
one fourth part of a quadrant.

The second Legion shall be placed upon the left corner and the Hastaries of the
said Legion, shall be raunged on the east part, as the Hastaries of the first
Legion: so that the Hastaries of these two legions, shall make the front of the
said square upon the east side, leaving a space of ten paces distaunt betwixt
the said two legions. The Princes and Triaries of the second legion must be
raunged on the north side, who being joined unto their Hastaries, shall make
another angle, and by that means, these two legions are the one half of the
quadrant. and to finishe it, the third Legion must be raunged behind the
first, in such sort, that the Hastaries of that legion shall make the one
half of the angle toward the West, to show their faces that way if it should
be needful: and their Princes and Triaries, shall make the other half of the
corner, and shall have their faces toward the South, if it should be needful,
and shall ioyn unto the Princes and Triaries of the first Legion: reserving the
space that ought to be left betwixt them, which shall be ten paces as is
aforesaid: and these spaces shall likewise be observed betwixt the people, and
the other Legions, to the intent that they do not touch one another: and there
must be a regard had, that those spaces may be kept. The fourth Legion shall be
raunged behind the second, placing the Hastaries on the west side, and the
Princes, and Triaries on the north: so that the Hastaries of the first and
second Legions, shall make the front, and the Hastaries of the third and fourth
shall make the tail. The Princes and Triaries of the first and third Legions,
shall make the right side, and ye Princes and Triaries of the second and
fourth, shall make the left side: and these two said sides, when need
requires, shall turn ye faces toward their two Regions, to wit, those upon ye
right side toward the South, and those on ye left side toward ye North.

All which four Legions shall make one quadrant, not that it shall be perfectly
square, forasmuch as it shall be a little more in length then in breadth, for
from the front unto the tail, there shall be a more space left, then from the
one side unto the other, which square or quadrant shall be ordered in such sort,
yt the spaces which I have said, yt shall be left betwixt the bands in the
front, when they are in their first order, should likewise be left now: and the
distance from the one rank to the other, should be alwais kept according unto
the form of the Hastaries, and as I have said before. By this means, the
place that this square btttaile will occupy, may have in breadth 470. paces,
and 590. in length.

Within the said battle, there shall be an empty space, which shall be in
length, 470. paces, and in breadth 340. and within the same place, shall the
four Colonels be placed, to wit the Colonel of the first Legion, in the
right corner of the front, and the Colonel of the second Legion, within the
corner of the second Legion: and the others likewise within the corner of
their Legions with their guard, to the intent, that every man might be near,
and have an eye to over look his people. The Lieuetenant General may be
within this empty place, right against the space which is betwixt the
Hastaries of the two Legions in the front, accompanied with his guard, and with
those that do follow his Cornet. The Pikes of the Flanks may be raunged within
the said empty place joining unto their bands, and the Harquebusiers of the
flanks by them, who shall leave the spaces betwixt the bands, as the bands
them selves do. As for the Captains, and other members and officers, they
shall be in their places appointed them before, and the forlorn hope shall be
without upon the four sides of the Battle, in their order, or they may be
with in: and likewise the baggage and carriage shall be within the empty
place, which the four Legions do make. And the Ordnaunce may martch alongest
the Flanks, or at the head and tail. The Pieces upon the Flanks, may
martch one after another: but those in the front and at the tail shall martch
one by another, for otherwise, they could not help them selves with it, when
it shall be needful, nor easily to defend it, if it should be assaulted.

Concerning the Horsemen, the Harquebusiers, and the Hargoletiers, must be
raunged on every side, a good way off, that the light horsemen might be betwixt
them and the men of arms, and that the men of arms might be at the least,
fifty paces from the battle, raunged upon the four ancomminges, by simple
Decuries, or double or more, to wit, one of the companies of the first Legion
shall be at the front, and the other upon the right Flank, the one of the
companies of the second legion, should be likewise at the front of the battle
before the said legion, and the other upon the left Flank: and the companies
of the other two legions should be likewise behind, and upon the Flanks each
of them by the legion they belong unto. One thing a Lieuetenant General must
note in this place, for a general rule, yt is, that as often as he shall range
his army for to fight, he take heed, not to range his horsemen before his
battails, except he do place them so far of, yt being repulsed, they may have
space enough to retire beside ye footmen: for otherwise he might ouerrune
them: Or else he must leave many spaces in the front of the said footmen, to
the intent that the horsemen might return with in them, without breaking or
disordering their ranks. And of this advertisement, he ought to make no small
account. For many Chiefes which hertofore have not regarded it, have found
them selves deceived, and their people have been broken, and mingled one among
another, when as their horsemen have been repulsed by their enemies.

Our four Legions being ordered in that form that I have spoken off, may
put them selves forward to martch upon the way, when as it shall please them,
and may keep the said order going a good pace. I do not say that in
traueiling, not being troubled by an enemy, that they should always keep the
ranks of their Hastaries so near together nor ye soldiers of the, Princes and
Triaries, likewise as I have spoken before: for they could not carry their
Pikes upon their shoulders, but should be constrained to bear them right up an
end, for it would be impossible to carry them otherwise, because of the little
space betwixt the ranks. But my meaning is, that when as they would resist the
assault of their enemies, that then they should join together in such order
as is spoken of. And if so be, that their enemies did but skirmish with them,
to trouble them upon the way, and notwithstanding were always ready to assault
them, and that the said four Legions, would win ground and not fight: in
such a case, the Soldiers must carry their Pikes right up, although it be
more painful: for the necessity, which they should have to martch close
together, would ease their pains. But if that they should not be enforced,
there would be no danger, if the Hastaries ranks should follow one another
at more scope, and that the princes and Triaries should occupy more grownd in
length to c^^tch their Pikes, and to march at more ease: for the horsemen and
the forlorn hope which do enuirone this square battle, would be sufficient
enough to stay the assaulters, until such time as the battle were brought
near together into their order, for their would be no more to do, but stay the
first ranks, and to cause the others to come forward nearer them. Moreover, it
is not to be doubted, that people who assault without keeping order and rank,
should ever have the courage and good will to approach them that are well
ordered and ranked within the length of a Pike, nor the Harquebusiers within
the shot of a Harquebusse, except they had some advantage of ground, as if it
were that these Legions kept the lower ground and their enemies the higher, or
that there were some great river betwixt them: my meaning is that this order
is only for a plain country, for in troublesome passages it is not good, but
when as they should pass near or betwixt mountains, the plain being large
enough to receive them in this order: the remedy must be to get the highest
ground, and drive away their enemies. For otherwise although that the Legions
should keep the form of a square Battle, or of Battailons ranged by
themselves, I would never be of opinion that they should put themselves into
straight passages, except that they were masters of the higher ground. The
Lord of Montpezat when he returned into France with the bands that he had
under him at Fossar, being constrained to take his way through the valley of
Pratgella, the entrey into which is most difficill, seeing that the mountains
were held by the people of the country, and certain men of war which were
joined with them, and that he was not entered far within the said mountains,
without the loss of a certain number of his people, which were slain and
maimed by their enemies, who kept themselves in the higher ground, being there
placed to have done him mischief enough, if it had not been speedily looked
into: the said Lord sent immediately part of his people under the charge of
Monsieur Dambres, to get the higher ground, to drive away his enemies, which
thing those that were sent did so well execute, marching always upon the
higher ground on the wings of his Battles; that there was not a Frenchman
hurt afterward, whereas before they were a mark for their enemies to shoot
at: it is all the remedy that may be used in such like passages. But if it
were in a plain, Horssemen with the help of Harquebusiers, may stay an
enemy far off, without hindering of the Battles in loosing of their time,
for that Horsemen may maintain a skirmish with an enemy, winning ground
always, not running far from the battle, nor forgetting themselves
otherwise. True it is, that in marching in this order square, it were necessary
that the Country should be even and open, that the battle might always
continue as it was ordered: and therefore it should be necessary to have a great
number of Pioners, to make the way plain and open, whereas it should pass, and
the said Pioners might be defended by the Hargoletiers, and other discouerers,
if their enemies were not able to repulse them: but if so be that their enemies
were of force sufficient to repulse the said discouerers: the other horsemen
following at their backs, would relieve them, or if it came to the worst, the
Pioners might retire within the battles, and the horsemen unto the flanks, if
they could not stay their enemies otherwise: for which enemies there need no
jot of this order of martching be changed, except that they were so great a
number that they might assail these Legions ranked in battle: but this
assault cannot be done so suddenly, but that the General shall have time
enough to retire the Pyoners, and to range his people in order to give
battaille: for as he in marching on his way, does go but an ordinary pace, so
an enemy in coming toward him does martch but an ordinary pace: so that the
one as well as the other, do go so leasurelie, that they shall always have
leisure enough to provide on both sides. Besides the discouerers who are
abroad, will advertise the said General time enough: and then he may bring
the Legions into the same order that is taught in the first book: and if he be
assaulted upon the front, he may turn the mouth of the Cannon, toward his
enemies, and put the horsemen upon the wings, and cause the third Legion to
range themselves in their first order and accustomed place, and the fourth
likewise: and the Princes and Triaries of each Legion to take their places.

In the mean while, the ordnance may play their parts, and the forlorn hope
with the Harquebusiers a horseback, and hargoletiers many likewise do theirs.
The Baggage must be retired behind the Legion with the Pyoners, and the
unarmed men, who may make themselves strong with wagons, coffers, packes, and
other carriages, with all which, they may entrenche themselves, if so be that
they had no strong place near to retire unto, or time to fortify. Yet if
leisure would serve, it would be better to stay and to make some place strong
before the battle, then to hazard a battle before a Camp were made to
retire unto if need were. And if so be that the said enemy would assault
these Legions behind, the Lieuetenant General must make the head of the
Battailons that way, or toward any other part that he looks to be assaulted
upon. And if so be that the said enemy should assault him upon two sides, and
that he were of force enough to do it; this General ought to take Soldiers
from the other two sides that are not assaulted, to strengthen those that are
assaulted, or else he must use another manner of order, to wit, to raunge the
Princes and Triaries all in one front, or to do otherwise, that is in every
Legion to retire one band of Hastaries, and to place it with another band of
Princes, and that those two bands should raunge themselves in 10. ranks at the
backs of the said Hastaries: and the other two bands of Princes, should
retire backwards to be ranged with the Triaries: so that at the front their
should be four bands, and at the tail as many, and the two bands in the
midst should stretche out their ranks, and should occupy as much ground in
breadth as the other four, and this must be done throughout al ye Legions:
and so their would be two fronts well furnished, and the Flanks also would be
sufficient enough of them selves, besides the Pikes of the Flanks for to help
them. And when as the front were broken they might retire unto the two bands in
the midst to make an enemy to fight again with them.

I have spoken before of these two forms, and therefore to return to my
matter: I say that if the General of our enemies Army should assail these
our aforesaid four Legyons upon two or three parts: that either he or we
were not be thought wise. For if a General Chief be wise, he will never
put him self into a place where an enemy may assail him with a great power
upon so many sides, or parts.

For so it is, that he that will hurt another man, and be sure to take no
hurt him self, but deal upon the advantage, must needs have upon every side,
that he would assail his enemy, as much people, or very near as much, as his
said enemy has in all his: if so be then that our General should he so evil
advised, as to enter into a Prince his Country, his enemy, who had three or
four times as many Soldiers as him self, and should take any hurt: there
were no reason, but that he should blame his own lack of understanding, and
not put the fault in his ill luck. But let us put case, that the General of
our enemies host, has but a few Soldiers more then we have: and not
withstanding, thinking to put us into disorder, he charge us in diverse
places: you may say then, that the folly is his, and the advantage is ours: As
for to assail our four legions, in which of the fourmes abouesaid soever they
should be raunged, he shall be forced to make his battles so thin and
small, that our army might easily resist the one, and beat the other, and by
that means get the victory.

Our General might also (if he thought it good) raunge his Legions two and two
together, or every one a part, in manner of a square, and leave a place empty
in the midst, which he might do after this manner: that is, that one Legion
should make the front with his Hastaries, and the left Flank with his Princes
and Triaries, and that the other legion should make the tail with his
Hastaries, and the right Flank with his Princes and Triaries, and so these two
Legions should occupy 230. paces in breadth, and 350. in length: and the square
that should be left empty in the midst, should have 110. paces in breadth, and
230 in length. Touching the raunging of these legions by themselves, three
bands of Hastaries might make the front, and the other two should be placed,
one band upon the one Flank, and the other Band upon the other Flank.
Likewise two bands of the Princes, might raunge themselves upon the Flanks
behind the other two bands of the said Hastaries in a right line, and the
third band should make the tail with the Triaries: for by that means the space
that one legion so ordered would occupy, might be 136. paces in breadth, and
219. in length: the space which is left empty in the midst, should have by this
reckoning 16. paces in breadth, and 99. in length.

This form might serve, as often as it should be necessary that the Legions
should march through the country one after another, or one alone, not being
accompanied with some good number of horsemen, if so be that they would be
provided against the surprises and sudden assaults of their enemies, and have
their sick and hurt men, and also their baggage out of danger of the said
enemies. For that this manner of martching does require that the way where it
should pass should be large and even, and is also invented but to withstand
people that should assail it without keeping order, and at unawares, to the
intent to put those that travel into disorder, if they could, or at the least
to make their hands with the baggage: the chiefest remedy (as I have above
said) is to raunge the Soldiers in such order that they might defend
themselves on every side: and also have their baggage in a sure place, for
otherwise it would not be possible to defend it so well if it should be
without the battle, but that in martching and staying there might be much
lost: wherefore this order of martching, for doubt of our enemies whom we see
not, is most necessary. And it would be a most profitable thing to accustom
our Legionaries to put themselves together, and to martch in this order. And
upon the way to take them out of this order, and raunge them according unto
their first manner of battle, or like unto the others which we have showed:
and immediately to bring them again into the order of martching that is here
spoken of. Moreover, to cause them to make the tail of their battles the
head, and the head the tail: and afterward to make of either of the two
flanks sometimes the one, and sometime the other. This done, they may then be
raunged again in their first order: and it shall be necessary to exercise them
often in these exercises, if we will have them to be right good and expert
Soldiers: for Military discipline is nothing else but to know how to begin
and to execute the things above said: wherein all Captains and others that
have charge of the government of Soldiers ought to take pains. And I believe
that an host so ordered, should be always the vanquisher, and could never at
any time be broken and vanquished. If so be that the forms aforesaid do
seem any thing hard, it is most certain that the difficulty will become
easy enough by means of exercise. Moreover, who so does know how to raunge
an host and to order them in these forms, shall know the easier how to
raunge and order an host in others, which are not altogether so hard.

The order that a Lieutenant General ought to use for the victualling of his
army: and how the ancient Chiefes did use their booties, with diverse means
that a General may use to endomage his enemies, and to keep himself from
surprise
The 5. Chapter.
A Lieutenant General ought to have a care so to provide for his host, yt it
might be free of all incombrances as might be possible, and ought to look
into all those causes that might hinder the compassing of his enterprises.
Amongst all which, there is none greater then this: to weet, to keep a Camp
furnished with bread and wine. The ancient Chiefes were not careful for wine:
for when the wine failed them, they drank water mingled with a little vinegar
to give it color and savor. And amongst their provisions for their hoasts,
there were no speeches made of wine, but only to have water and vinegar.
Moreover, the ancient Soldiers had not their bread baked in ouens, as we have
at this instant every where, but baked cakes themselves of a certain quantity
of meal that was delivered unto them day by day, out of the store, and besides
that, a certain quantity of larde; and this was all: so that the victuals
whereof the ancient Chiefes made their provision for the sustentation of a
Camp, was only meal, vinegar, and lard for the Soldiers, and barley for the
horses. They had moreover a great number of cattle both great and small, that
followed their Camps; which cattle (for that it needed not to be carted or
carried, nor likewise was fed with any thing that was carried) was not
chargeable, nor troublesome unto an army: which was the occasion in times past
that their armies went many iournies through deserts and solitary places,
without lack of victuals, for that they lived of victual that might easily
follow a Camp.

The Turk his Soldiers need no wine, because that their law does forbid
them to drink it, and also they go long without eating bread, if so be that
they may have water and rice, and seldom it is that they do suffer want: for
they carry ordinarily sackes full of poudered flesh minsed so fine, that it
seems to be a powder, and to eat this poudered flesh, they take but a little
at a meal, and temper it in warm water, and afterward sup it up, and so do
the said Turks live. Moreover, if they have great want of victual, the said
flesh being spent, they do let their horses blood: for they are almost all
horsemen, and do live certain days with this blood. And if so be that the
famine do too much oppress them, they do kill their horses, and eat them
before they do forsake to do their Prince loyal service, and the uttermost of
their power; which our delicate Soldiers will not do: for they will very
hardly serve one day without they be in wine up to the ears, or full crammed
ready to burst: but when I say our Soldiers, I mean those that are at this
instant, but not those that might be levied in France: for that they might
easily be made temperate enough, so that ye Chiefes themselves would give them
example, and that they were not so much given unto disordinate eating and
drinking as they are. The Scotchmen (as says Froisard) have a very good manner
to live in time of war: for first of all they do carry no provision of bread
and wine with them. Moreover, they content themselus long time, so that they
may have flesh but half sodden, which they do eat very well without bread,
and drink water. And moreover, they are not troubled with the carrying of
kettles or pannes, because that they do see the their flesh in the skins of
beasts when they have flayed them: nor have no care to carry provision with
them, because they are sure to find in the country where they do pretend to
make war. One thing they have care of, that is, to carry a plate of iron,
and a bag of meal, to the intent that when they feel their stomachs weak
and feeble with the eating of too much raw flesh, they might comfort them with
cakes, which they do make after this manner. They temper a little meal in a
dish, and cast their plate into the fire, and when the plate is hot enough,
they do make little cakes of their paste, and bake them upon the said plate:
and by this means they do make great iournies to surprise their neighbors,
without rumor of their enterprises, and without any great cost. As for us
Frenchmen, we will have a regard not to live so soberly what need soever there
were: for hardly will we one hour endure the lack of good wine or good bread,
nor of any other dainty, no more then if we were at home in our own houses,
and that every man were of ability to have all that he desired. And therefore
our armies are quickly famished, as well for that it is hard to make provision
for many days of so many things as we do require, as also for the marvelous
spoil that are made of our provisions when we have them. Wherefore we must
reform our hoasts after a new manner, that is, never to suffer men of war to
eat other bread then that they should bake themselves. And in so doing, it
should be necessary to furnish the said Soldiers, every man with a quantity
of meal, whether it were by gift, or in rebating it upon their wages. As for
wine, the General should not trouble himself to provide any, nor impeach the
victuallers from bringing it abundantly, and yet he should use no great
diligence on his part to cause any to be brought unto the Camp. As for the
other provisions, they may be used altogether according unto the ancient
manner. This doing, all well considered, you shall find that a Lieutenant
General shall free his army of a most great charge, and ease himself of a
great burden. And to the intent that our Legionaries should find the want of
victuals to be the less strange unto them, if that they should lack at any
time, and that they might pass at a need without wine, and choice of meats:
I am of opinion, that in going and returning from their musters they should be
forbidden to drink wine, and to eat bread baked in an oven, and likewise the
eating of flesh, except lard, whereof only I would cause provision to be made
at the places where they should pass and lodge: and for the rest they should
carry upon their backs as much meal as should serve them during the voyadge,
if that they would eat: for other provision I would make them none of any
thing.

Through this order the Soldiers would learn to suffer all necessities at a
need, the country should be eased, and the Soldiers would not be so ready
to make quarrels and debates amongst themselves as they are, when they have
great abundance of victuals. To treat of the booties that are gotten after
the winning of a battle, or in going through an enemy his country, or in
getting any town by assault, or by the raunsoming of the town or country
where an army does pass, and for prisoners that may be taken: first it shall
not be amiss to examine how the ancient Chiefes did govern their armies in
the like business. And consider what is the cause that the wars at these days
do as well impouerish the Princes that are vanquishers, as those which are
vanquished: for that if the one do loose honor, and any part of his lands, the
other does spend his treasure, and his goods: which was not so in times past,
because that the vanquisher enriched himself always with the goods and
spoils of his enemies, and at this time we do make no such account of the
booties which we do get as they did then: but all is abandoned unto the
Soldiers, which is cause of two great disorders: the one is that which I have
spoken of touching the impourishing of a Prince; and the other is, that the
Soldiers do become the more covetous to get, and less careful to keep the
orders of the wars. For many times it has been seen that the covetousness
of the pillage has overthrown the vanquisher: as happened unto the Frenchmen
at Guyngate, where the victory was wholly ours, if the French Archers had not
given themselves unto pillage; which they paid for dearly, for they lost all
their lives there.

The Romans who without doubt have been the masters of this exercise, did
provide wisely for these two inconveniences: for it was ordained amongst them
that the booty that was gotten, should appertain unto the common use, and
that the Consul should distribute it as he thought good in the name of the
Senate and people. And in this case they had Questors, which were as we would
say Treasourers, into whose hands were assigned all the booties, and raunsomes
that were made: wherewithal the Consul did help to pay his Soldiers, to
succor sick and hurt men, and to help to support the other charges of the
host. But yet the Consul might suffer his men to ransacke, and they did it
sometimes; but it never caused any disorder: for that their enemies host being
overthrown, all the spoil was placed in the midst of the army, and
afterward it was distributed unto every man according unto his quality and
virtue: which manner was cause that the Soldiers gave themselves unto the
fight, and not unto pillage: and also that the ordinary bands raunged in the
body of the Battailon, did not pursue those that fled, but continued fast in
their ranks without danger: for the light armed men only had the charge to
follow the victory; so that if the booty should have appertayned unto those
that did first gather it up, it had not been possible nor agreeing unto equity
to have kept the battailons in order, and have given others liberty to make
their profit. By this means the common treasure augmented merueilously, and
that was the occasion that a Consul carried so much treasure at his triumph,
having gathered it together of his booties and raunsomes. The Romans did also
another thing with great consideration, that was, that the one third part of
the wages that they gave monthly unto every Soldier, was delivered into the
hands of the Ensigne-bearer, which he might not render unto them again until
such time as the wars were finished. And this did they, being thereunto
moved by two reasons, the one was to the intent that the Soldiers might have
some profit of their wages: (for being young men, and without care, the more
goods that they had, the more they spent without need) the other reason was,
that the Soldiers should fight the more resolutly, and with the better wills
defend him that had their goods in keeping. So that by this means they became
rich and valiant, which manner we must use, and also the others before spoken
of, if we will reduce the exercise of the wars into it first estate. But to
return to speak of the office of a General that would surely conduct an
army marching through an enemy his country from place to place: because that
sometimes there may happen many accidences wherein there are great danger:
which to withstand, me think that it were requisite yt a Lieutenant General
should employ his wits and his Soldiers their virtues: and therefore it
shall be necessary to speak somewhat thereof. Wherefore, I say that as often as
a Lieutenant General does travel with a great company or a small, that above
al things he ought to provide for the sudden assaults, and ambushes of his
enemies, into which he may fall two manner of ways: for either he falls
thereinto of himself in travailing, or else he is entised thereunto by his
enemies, for lack of taking heed. To withstand the first manner, it shall be
needful to send out two or three troops of discoueries before. The first
troop ought to be but a small number to run on the one side and the other to
discover. The second should be of a reasonable force to back them, if they
should be assailed. And the third ought to be stronger then the second, for to
resist a good force of their enemies, if that they did meet them in the teeth.
And how much the fitter the country were for ambushes, as full of woods,
hills, and such like; so much the greater should the troops of the discouerers
be: for ambushes are most commonly made in a wood, or behind a hill, and
sometimes in caves and ditches, along the banks of rivers, if they be high
enough, sometimes in valleys and houses, and behind old walls. In brief,
ambushes may be laid in all places how little covered soever they be: specially
for that footmen may lie down flat upon the ground to be the less perceived.
But as an ambush where there is no heed taken may do great hurt: so being
provided for and discovered it can do nothing at all. The fowls of the air
have oftimes discovered ambushes, and so likewise has the dust of the ground
discovered the coming of an enemy, because of the dust which an army does
cause to rise in travailing. Paulus Aemelius Consul of Rome, being to pass
through a forest with his men near unto a water, seeing a far of that many
foul rose up suddenly, coniectured that in the water there were men hid;
because that the foul rose wholly afeard and flewe over the water to and fro
without cease: he therefore sending discouerers to see what it was, and
finding that there were 10000. Bohemians in ambush for to have surprised him in
passage, caused his Legions to turn back again, and took another way that his
enemies doubted not of, and surprised and overthrew them that would have
surprised him. Likewise Thyamenus the son of Horestes being advertised that
his enemies lay upon the top of a high mountain, where he and his men should
pass: having sent to know the truth by his discouerers, who reported unto
him that it was otherwise then had been told him before: as the said Thyamenus
was proceeding upon his way, he saw a great number of foul rise from the
place that he doubted, which flewe round about not lighting: whereby he
understood of his enemies ambush, and sought another way to pass through. As
concerning the second point, that is to be enticed upon an ambush: a General
ought always to stand upon his guard, and ought never to give credit unto
things that are but like unto a truth: as if an enemy does place before him
some troop of cattle or other thing to pray upon, he may believe that it is
but a hook to catch him with all, and a covering of his deceit. Likewise, if
a great number of his enemies Soldiers, should fly before a small number of
his men; or that a small number of his enemies dare assault a great number of
his, he may be assured that it is not done without a consideration. Moreover,
if an enemy do suddenly fly without cause, a General may be assured that it
has a subtle meaning in it. True it is that these things may oftimes be done
without thinking of any evil, specially when as they that make these shows,
have as much reason to doubt on their sides, as the others on theirs:
notwithstanding, the surest way in these cases, is to take all that is done by
the enemy at the worst, except a man had a most certain advertisement.
Moreover, a General must not believe but that his enemy can do his business
with wisdom. Wherefore if a General would take heed for being deceived, and
endomaged, he ought to esteem of his enemy most, when he perceives him to be
weakest and worst counseled: and in this business he must use two contrary
terms. First of all he ought to doubt his enemy in his own thought, and in
the government of his army; but to dispraise him in speech, and by all his
outward demonstrations to make show that he makes no account of him. This
doing, the last manner will be an occasion to animate his Soldiers to
conceive the better hope of the victory against their enemies: and the first
will make him the more wary and advised to keep himself from surprice: which
is a thing more then necessary, when as a General is in an enemy his country,
because that an army is there a thousand times more in danger, then it may be
upon a day of Battle. And therefore he ought to be circumspect, and ought to
have all the country described unto him, and platted in such sort, that he
might know all the places in the country, distances from one place unto
another, ways, footepaths, mountains, fluds, marshes, rivers, and all other
qualities. And for to understand all this the better, he must get those about
him that know the country, and must interogat them severally from point to
point: and afterward having penned their answers, he must confer them
together, to try whether they be like or contrary. And to be the better
assured, he must send out horsemen somewhat before into the country, and
certain wise Chiefes with them, to discover the force and estate of his
enemies, and to see if the description made unto him by the others, do agree
with the truth. He must likewise have a great regard that his guides be safe
kept, for many times false and traitorous guides have bin the occasion of the
loss of many a good man, and so likewise have false spies: of whom, to be
well served, he must promise to give them great recompense for their pains in
doing their duties faithfully: and also must threaten them with death, if that
they should fail, and deceive him: and above all things his army must never
know unto what place he does determine to bring them: for in all the exercise
of the wars, there is no one point more profitable, then to keep secret that
which is pretended. And to the intent that an army should not be troubled or
astonished through any sudden assault, the soldiers ought to be always in a
readiness to receive their enemies, that is to say, to be advertised and
taught what they should do, if that they should be assailed either by night or
by day, while they rest, or are upon the way, for things that are provided for,
do least hurt. We must also note this advertisement to use it when as we do
travail through the country, that is, that the one part of the army should
not be too far from the other. And for that some do go sometimes too fast,
and others too slow, it should be needful to place certain express Chiefes
both before, behind, and betwixt the battles, who should have charge to
cause them to march all of one form and time, keeping back those that go too
fast, and hastening those that go too slowly: for if a General do not cause
that to be done, they will fall into a disorder, which might happen to cause
their overthrow. Every man shall measure his pace according unto the stroke of
the Dromme, and so their gate will be all one. The single order of every Legion
for the time that they do march together, (I mean when they do march one after
another, and that they be far from enemies) must be 21. men in a rank, who
so would raunge the Legions readily in battle: and therefore there must be
order given that the ways where that they should pass, should be at the least
broad enough to receive the said number. A General ought also to consider of
the custom and quality of his enemy, to weete, whether he use to assail in
the evening, or in the morning, or in the night, and whether he be strongest of
footmen, or of horsemen, to the intent to provide for him.

How a Lieutenant General ought to govern himself when he finds himself
too weak to abide his enemies, with certain policies to escape their danger
when as he is fallen into it, and how to have the advantage of them
The 6. Chapter.
I I happens sometimes that a General does raise his Camp being near unto
his enemies, because that he does perceive himself to be too weak, and
therefore is neither determined to offer, nor to accept Battle, but would
avoid it by all means possible: but so it is, that his enemies are always at
his back, and endeavor to follow him as much as they may; and therefore the
said General seeking to avoid the danger he is like to fall into, does get
away as fast as he can, until at length he does ariue at the edge of a river,
which does hinder him for want of ready passage, so that his enemies may
overtake him whilst he is at this point, and enforce him to fight, how
unwilling soever he be. The remedy in this case is to imitate the example of
Sertorius; who having his enemies at his heels, and being arrived at the edge
of a river which he should pass, devised to stay his enemies whilst he did
pass to enclose his Camp with a trench in form of a half Moon, and placed
wood and other things apt to burn, round about the said trench, and afterward
set it on fire, the flambe whereof was so vehement, that his enemies durst
never adventure to make way through, and by that means he passed over the said
river at ease, and saved himself. Pelopidas of Thebes did the like in
Thessalia. Hanno being enclosed with his enemies, environed the place where he
would issue out at with a great many fagots, not making any trench at all, and
causing the wood to be set on fire, whereupon his enemies assembling to keep
the other issues (for they never thought that he could have passed that way) he
went through ye fire with his people, having admonished the^ that they should
cover their faces with their targets, and their thighs with their skirts.
Quintus Luctatius being near pursued of yt Cimbres, and coming unto the edge
of a river that he should pass, made show to tarry for the^ to have yt safer
passage, and feigned to place his Camp there, causing trenches to be made, and
certain tents to be raised, and sent out certain boys for forage, by reason
whereof, the Cimbres thought that the Romans would have lodged all that night
in that place, and therefore they camped also, dividing themselves into many
parts, some going for forage, and other seeking to recover victuals, which
when Luctatius perceived, he caused his forragers suddenly to be called back
again, and immediately passed the river without impeachment: for his enemies
being scattered as is said, could not assail him at that instant, for they
could by no means have been assembled so suddenly to follow him.

Craesus seeing that he could not pass through a river called Halis, and that
he had nothing to help himself withal to make a Bridge, caused a great ditch
to be made, which came from the said river behind his Camp: which ditch was
made so deep, that all the water in the river, or at the least the greatest
part thereof, might issue out of the first current into it: which being done,
the river was drawn so low, that his soldiers passed through almost dry
shod. And as for the passing through rivers with horssemen and footmen, that
are but of mean deapth, but run marvelous strong, there is no other thing
to be done, but to place the greatest part of the horssemen which are best
mounted, uppermost toward the stream, to resist and break the force of the
water, and to place another part beneathe them, leaving a broad passage
betwixt them, for the footmen and the other worst horses to pass through
without peril: and if so be that the force of the water should overthrow any
of them, those that were lowermost should succor him, and take him up. But
rivers that are not to be waded through, must be passed over with bridges
placed upon boats: which bridges and boats may be both carted and carried
along with an army, as we have seen in our time one, which the King caused
to be made, which was strong enough to pass all carriges, and the great
Ordnance passed surely upon it also, and notwithstanding it was portable, and
easy to be carted, for one Wagon carried one of those boats easily, and the
planks that were laid upon it. There may be many sorts of bridges made to pass
rivers, but that with boats is the surest: and if there should be enemies on
the other side of the river to impeach the laying of a bridge, or to keep the
river, and to stop the passage, which often times does happen, I do know no
better remedy therein, then to imitate Caesar, who having his Host at the edge
of the river to go into Auuergne, perceiving that Vercingenberix did keep the
other side against him, who had caused all the bridges to be broken, so that by
that means he could not pass. He travailed certain days along the said
river, waighting an opportunity that might help him to pass: but for that
his enemies marched on the other side of the river right against him to hinder
him for passing, Caesar could find no means in certain days to do it,
until at length he found a place covered with trees where he lodged: and in
the morning he stayed in that place with part of his army, and sent the rest to
follow their way, coasting the river as they did before: and this he did to the
intent to repair a Bridge there which was broken but a few days before: and
when his enemies were dislodged, Caesar fell to work: for Vercingentrix
thinking that the Romans had been altogether, continued his way, and never
perceived Caesar his policy, until the Bridge was laid and fortified. Let us
also speak of the enclosing of an army betwixt two high Mountains, where
there is but two issues to pass through, to weete, that before the said army
and the other that it is entered in at: and let us suppose that both these ways
the army being entered are ceazed upon by their enemies, and the tops of the
Mountains also: the best remedy in this case is, to make a great ditch toward
that issue that the army is entered at, to the intent that their enemies might
think that it were done to stop those behind them from assaulting them,
whilst they did assay to open the passage before them: and to confirm their
enemies the better in this opinion, they may make show to march forward to
repulse those that keep the passage before them: and it will be a great
chance but that both those that are behind, and those upon the Mountains,
will make haste to succor the others at the place where they think that the
army will seek passage: and if so be that they do forsake the place where the
army entered, there is no more to be done, but speedely to make passage over the
ditch, and to return that way that they are entered. After this manner escaped
Pericles from the Peloponesians. Quintus Fabius, Consul of Rome, being
enclosed in the Mountains of Genes, not knowing how to get out, except he
might help himself with some policy, sent a good company of his Numidian
horsemen toward one of the straights that his enemies kept, who at the first
sight ranked themselves in battle, to keep the passage against them: but
seeing that the Numidians did make no great show, or to be of no great force
to win the passage: and that they were in poor estate, and their Horses
very lean, they made so little accoumpt of them, that a great part of those
that had the passage in charge went home, and others stood gaping upon the
Numidians expressly to see them: whereupon the said Numidians perceiving the
evil order and little accoumpt that their enemies did make of them, pricked
their horses all at once, and charged their said enemies so violently, that
they passed through the straight, and after that they were past, they ran
upon the country to spoil it, so that their enemies were constrained to leave
the passage open for the said Consul and his men to reskue their own goods
which the said Numidians did make spoil of.

Brasydas the Lacedemonian, being assailed by a great number of Athenians, did
keep his men close up together as near as he could, that his enemies might
the better enuiron him: but seeing himself enclosed, he charged with all his
men upon the weakest part of his enemies, and made them to make him way by
force of arms.

Mark Anthony, as he marched in retyring out of the country of the Parthians
where Crassus had been newly slain, seeing that his enemies did assail him
ordinarily early in the morning, and skirmished and troubled him all day long,
until that he lodged, and that then they let him alone, and lodged themselves
far from his Camp: to pass the rest of his way with the less trouble, he
determined one day not to dislodge until it was very late, and did so:
whereupon the Parthians being dislodged, and seeing that the Romans remained
in their Camp, thinking that they would not have sturred that day, returned
again unto their lodging, and Mark Anthony removed immediately after, and had
leisure enough to march all the rest of that day without trouble. In this place
I must make mention of one thing which his soldiers did through his counsel,
to cover themselves from the great number of arrows that the Parthians did
shoot amongst them, that was, as often as the said Parrhians did charge them,
they kneeled down upon one knee, and those of the second rank did lay their
targets upon the heads of those of the first rank, and those of the third upon
the heads of those of the second rank: and those of the fourth upon the heads
of those of the third, and so following, so that all the ranks were covered as
if it had been under a roof, which manner might be observed by our
Legionaries, by means of their targets, if so be that at any time they were in
danger of archers. During the wars with the Englishmen, Shields were in use,
which at this instant would not be ill so that a Harquebusse could not pearce
them, for to have one rank of men that should carry them before the battles,
to the intent that the first ranks of the battles might continue whole, when
as they should come hand to hand with their enemies. I will not forget in this
place, this one rule of the science of the wars, which is of great
importance, that is, to make ouerture and passage for an enemy on some one
side, when as he is so enclosed, that he can escape no way, except a man have
some great advantage of them: for it is to be feared that they would do some
great mischief, seeing themselves out of hope: for that all good Souldyers,
which do make their reckoning to dye but once, will sell their lives so dear,
that the remembrance of it may continue long after: and sometimes this
desperation is cause of their safety that are in this danger, because that then
they do make of necessity, a virtue: as the Englishmen did at the battle of
Poytiers, where they were but a handful of people enclosed by a great number
of Frenchmen, who would take no reasonable compositio^ at their hands:
wherefore as men out of hope to escape from the place, the said Englishmen
stood all upon this resolution, that it was more honor for them to be
overthrown in fighting virtuously, (although that they should all dye) then to
escape, and to be reproached ever after: and upon this deliberation they fought
so well, that the Frenchmen who were ten to one, were foully overthrown, and
King John taken. Therefore in such a case it is good to be somewhat gracious,
specially when we are at that point yt our enemies must defend themselves of
mere force: for it were better to give the^ passage upon some one side, and by
that means to give the^ some hope to save themselves, and the less will to
resist, then by thinking to overthrow the^ quite, to fall into the danger to be
ouerthrown, or to leese many men: for this passage which I speak of is not to
give the^ leave to depart for altogether, but is to have a better mean to
break the^, for yt in thinking to escape quite and out of danger, every one of
those that would defend themselves stoutly, being constrained thereunto, would
not seek or hearken to any other thing, but how to save themselves: wherefore
they would all think to escape, some one way, and some another: and in this
doing they would break, for as much as every man would have care but of
himself. A General ought likewise to let an enemy his army to pass, when it
seems to be strong enough to defend it self in the plain field, and does
forsake the place without fighting, mistrusting it self not to be strong
enough, or dare not stay the coming of their enemies: for the departure only
is greatly for his reputation, unto whom the place is left: and how much more
secretly that his enemies do depart, so much the greater is his credit that
does fear them away. It is well known what retreat that the Spaniards did
make at their departure from Troy, without sounding Trompet or Dromme, and that
the said retreat was as great an honor unto Mounsieur de Lautrec, as almost the
victory would have bin. And that he looked into before, which was the occasion
that he constrained not his enemies for to fight, least that he should have
fallen into any danger by that constraint: also to show apparently that his
enemies were no ways equal unto him, he did not force them so much as to
amend their gate: and being advertised time enough of their flying, and
persuaded to pursue them, he answered with Scipio, that a man ought not only
to leave the way free before his enemies to fly, but also to amend and open
it. This matter requires that we should here speak of another great point,
that is, how an Host might retire from another, when as it feels it self
too weak to fight with an enemy, or to abide his coming: for all good
Captains affirm, that in all the actions of the wars, there is none more
dangerous. For that when a General does retire without Combat, being near
unto his enemies, he does take away the value of his soldiers, and give it
unto their enemies: but so it is that these things do happen often enough, and
therefore I will show how we may retire with the least danger. Above all
things the soldiers may not know that their General does retire to avoid
the Combat: but they must be made to believe that the retreat is made to draw
their enemies into some other more commodious place, to have a more advantage
of them: or that it is done to make their enemies to follow them, to bring the
said enemies upon some ambush: for who so would not allege unto his Soldiers
some reason like a truth for his sudden departure, should make them to think
that their General does retire for the fear that he has of his enemies,
being out of hope of his ability to resit them if he should come unto the
combat: by means whereof, they would fall into such a fear, that how little
force so ever their enemies should do unto them, they would immediately fly,
cheefely if it were by night: for the proverb is, that shame shuts her eyes
by night, and sees not one iotte. We must therefore in such cases dislodge so
stilly, that our enemies do not perceive it, for it would be to be doubted,
that in the raising of the Camp they would give us an assault, in which
doing, those which before were in fear, would by and by put themselves into
disorder: therefore they that heretofore have been constrained to use such
retreats, placed their Horssemen upon two sides like unto two hedges: and left
away betwixt them, through which way their footmen did retire being covered
with their Horssemen, so that they could not be perceived by their enemies.
And after this manner they caused their battles to pass one after another:
and when one battle was eskaped, it fortified it self in some place out of
the enemy his sight, staying whilst the others came, who retired in like
manner as the first did: and in the end all the army did put themselves in
saftie. We must note, that if this were done by day, that it ought to be in
some covered place, or plain country: for how little a hill soever that their
enemies might have upon their side, they might easily discover this departing.
The order that an army observed heretofore in remoouing by night, was this:
first of all, after it was determined what way that they should take to save
themselves, and at what cry or sound of the Trumpet that they should be ready
to depart, the General sent a good number of light armed men before, (as we
would say the Forlorn hope, which I have appointed in this work,) to ceaze
upon all the places of advantage, and of all the straights that the Camp
should pass through in retyring: and when the General thought that they had
ceazed upon them all, he then set forth with the rest of his army, and
followed the first with as little noise as might be possible. Now if his
enemies understood of this departure, they immediatlye used all the diligence
possible to ceaze upon the passages which were taken before, and kept by the
light armed men, not breaking their order: and if they were followed in this
retreat, the rest of the light armed men that were with the army (for it is to
be understood they had remaining with them the one half or more) kept at the
tail, and upon the flanks with the Horssemen: who resisted their enemies with
all their power, skirmishing in retyring, not stayeng long in a place, but
following the battles as near as they could: as for to stay behind them
there were no great wisdom, and with these skirmishes both the Battles and
they went forward upon their way, being little endamaged by their enemies,
nor hindered to arrive at the passages that their men kept for them.

At which passages when they were arrived, having all their men together they
encamped: if the place were fit to do it, and that they knew an advantage by
it, and might have in it things necessary for them without danger, and might
be relieved in despite of their enemies, or else they passed further: and
their light armed men that were before at the tail of their battles, marched
now at the front, and all the hoaste followed them, and those who had kept the
passages before, who were fresh, and had rested, kept at the tail, to
maintain skirmish against their enemies, whilst the others did go their
ways, they themselves following them, skirmishing, and resisting their enemies
all day long, until such time as they did come unto their lodging. And this
is concerning those that do retire in the sight of their enemies, which is
more hard, then when as they do depart, not being discovered in a good while
after that they are removed, or until the next day: for in such a case they
shall have time enough to get away far enough off from their enemies.

And those that would so dilslodge, that their enemies being near should not
perceive it, ought to use all the means that they may possible, to make their
enemies to think, that they do still remain in their fort, they must dislodge
by night, and their fyers must be refreshed that they should not go out in
long time after their departure: but continue burning until it were day.
Moreover they must place the bodies of their dead if they have any, round about
their trenche: which should be underset with shoores, and clothed and weapened
as if they were alive: or they should plant some bushes, and clothe them with
Soldiers apparel: or stuff the said clothes with grass, and leave certain
head pieces placed upon the trenche, layeng stakes by them, with match
burning, for to represent Harquebusiers: the one of these devises will serve by
night, and the other by day.

Moreover, they might leave Dogs, Bullockes, Asses, and Horses made fast
within their Camp: whose cryeng, neyeng, and howling, might make their enemies
to believe that the Camp were not removed: and Cocks also would do the like
(if there were any in the Camp: the Almaignes do carrye good store) I think
not but these policies would cover the departing of an army. And when as the
Ordnaunce could not be saved, it might be broken in pieces, and carried away
to be new melted afterward, or might be buried so, that it might afterward
be hard to be found: or if it should come unto the woorst it could be but
lost, although it should fall into our enemies hands: the loss whereof
could not be so great, but the loss that might fall upon the men would be
more to be feared: because that Ordnance might be easier recovered then the
men that would be lost to defend it: notwithstanding at this day we do
make such accoumpt to preserve it, that we do almost forget all our other
business, making our accoumpt that if it may be saved it is all that we do
care for: and that if it were left behind, all were lost: for which cause we
leave often times to give order for many things of great importance, being
troubled with a great quantity of Ordnance, which may not be left without a
great guard to keep it: notwithstanding the estimation that we do make of it,
if it were requisite for an army to make any extreme have, whether it were to
indomage an enemy, or to keep us from their hands: through these occasions we
must either abandon the said Ordnance, or do our business ill, as we did ours
at Landrian, for the desire that we had for to save a naughty Cannon.
Wherefore as often as we are in this extremity, it were much better for to
save the men (albeit that the ordnance, baggage, and other mooueables, should
be lost) then to hazard men for a thing that may so easily afterward be
recovered. Sith I have before spoken of a retreat made in the sight of an
enemy, I will now speak of a retreat made which an enemy does not see. Let
us put case that a General does retire by night so secretlye that his enemies
do not perceive his going, until long time after his dislodging: it is to be
thought that in short time he will be far on his way, and so far as it were
not possible for his enemies to overtake him, what have soever they should
make: whether they should pursue him, or might pursue him if they would, the
said General can use no better counsel then to travail day and night
without rest, until such time as he were out of danger, and in resting by the
way, to take great heed not to be one minute of an hour without good watch,
nor without Horssemen, skouting out upon the ways a good way of from his
Camp, and not suffer his Soldiers to go out of their quarter: but to be
ready with their arms at every hour for to resist those that would assail
them, and to set forward upon the way when they should depart: and this order
must be kept at the meals that they do make by day: and as concerning their
night resting, it must be as short as it may be possible, the Soldiers having
continually their arms in their hands: that every man might be ready to
defend himself.

If the stay that they did make by night should be any thing long, I would
counsel the General to lodge his men in some strong place of advantage: but
the surest and safest way is not to stay: but to win ground as much as he
may possible: thinking upon the danger that he was in but a little before, and
the danger and grief it would be unto him to be overtaken through his own
default. It were therefore better for him to use diligence, whilst he may do
it without let, then to tarry the coming of his enemies, and to be
constrained to fight, or to fall into their mercy: this doing he shall save
himself and his people, and give his enemy no time to overtake him, or to
force him to fight: but the pursuer must take heed, least in pursuing foolishly
and rashly he fall into the ambushes that are made in such cases against the
pursuers, who often times become so audacious, that they do think scorn to
foresee into any thing that might hurt them: so that those whom they do
pursue might easilye surprise, and greatly endomage them: and sometime put
them utterly into disorder, if the Lieutenant General who is pursued be a man
any thing hardy and aduenterous: into which inconvenience they do sometimes
fall that are fullest of policy: but those good Chiefes which will avoid it,
pursue as coldlye as they can, and the colder that they do pursue, the more
they do stay the gate of their people: which stay does give them the more
leisure to get a way that do retire. Moreover it is better to be too slow in
this business then too hasty: for those that do retire, have many ways to
annoye them that do pursue them, specially if their way do lie through a
strong country, or forest, for that they may cut down trees, and fell them
cross the ways: and likewise may lay ambushes, which they may make unto
their advantage, being in strong and covered places, and in ways fit for
ambushes: which said ambushes must be made by those that are the beast
footmen, or if that they should make ambushes of Horssemen, they must be of
those that are best mounted, to the intent they might retire in safety when
they have executed their charge: and in their ambushes they must not tarry or
stay to long behind the host, least their enemies perceiving them should cut
them off from the army. But if the retreat be wisely handled, the troops not
staying too long behind the army, the pursuers shall be in danger to take
more hurt through their pursuit, then those that do retire through their
retreat: for the retirers shall better succor one another at their need being
near together, then those that do pursue indiscreetly, he that best may
fastest. And if that those that retire do diligently take heed of these small
points, and do ceaze upon the troublesome passages through which they must
pass, betime not delaying until that their enemies should get them: it is to
be hoped that they should save themselves in despighte of their enemies, except
that some other inconvenience do happen unto them upon the way, which must be
foreseen into after one of the manners spoken of before, in showing the means
that a General might use to eskape from a dangerous place. And although I had
not spoken of all the perils into which they may fall sometimes that do
exercise the wars: I suppose that having spoken of the most commonest, a
General Chief (if he be ought worth) will find a remedy of himself for
the other. In the manner aforesaid in mine opinion may those retire that find
themselves too weak to abide the adventure of a battle. On the contrary
part if the pursuers have kept so ill watch that they have not understood of
their enemies departing, until that they were gone a good part of their way:
there is no other remedy but to take pains to repair that negligence by some
other means. But if it were so that they did before hand understand of their
determination to depart, they should seek to ceaze the passages, and to break
them with trenches, and to fell trees in their ways, or other things that
might trouble the passage. And must moreover keep their Battailons in good
order ready to fight, and the host ready to depart at all times, and to have
them the readier, to cause them to eat their meat as they ranged in Battle
not breaking their order, to the intent that they might be ready to assail
their enemies, at what time soever that they should make show to put themselves
upon the way, for to follow them at the heels, and to enclose them at the
passages which are stopped and ceazed upon before. And if so be that the country
were so open that there could be no means found to stop them upon the way,
me thinks that in this case there were no way to stay them, but to charge
them behind thick and often: and to trouble them in such sort that the
hindmost should be constrained to stay to defend themselves, and consequently
the foremost to succor them: and those charges should be made by the
Harquebusiers a Horssebacke, and by the Hargoletiers, amongst whom there
should be a good part of the Forlorn hope, or some other extraordinary bands,
if there were any at that time in the Camp. And if the enemy were too strong
of Horssemen for these skirmishes, then part of the light Horssemen must be
sent to succor them: and the battles must march diligently in very good
order to fight with their enemies, with the lightest Ordnance that they have,
leaving their heauiest in some strong place, and also their baggage to make
the more haste, that nothing might hinder them to pursue their enemies, nor to
fight with them when they have overtaken them.

And when as the said enemies are dislodged so secretlye that they are so
far upon the way before it be known, that by no means they may be
overtaken in a whole day: I know no other remedy but to follow them, and
that the General who pursues, do it wiselye standing always upon his
guarde, that he fall not into his enemies ambushes: and in persuing them, it
may happen that his enemies will think, that they are eskaped out of his
hands, and become so negligent of themselves that they will give him time
enough to overtake them, and peradventure be the occasion of their own ruin:
for those who think to be in safety, and are careless to look unto their
business, do often times tryfle away the time upon the way for small
occasion, and thereby are overtaken, and sometimes they are found out of
order, whilst that they do eat, or sleep: as our men were at Brignolle, or
are out of their quarters here and there for forage: as sometime happened
unto Simon the Roman in Calabria, and unto many others both before and since,
and will happen: except that he that retyreth, foresee before all things to
keep good watch on every side, and to fortify himself where he means to
stay any time: if it were but to withstand the assaults that his enemy might
attempt against him every hour, which is a thing that ought one both sides to
be looked into: for the pursuer is as much subject unto this inconvenience, as
he that does retire: specially if their enemies have any spies whom they may
entrap, for that of force those which do pursue others hastily, do weary
themselves with the great iourneys that they do make, and being wearied and
tired, they will have the less regard of themselves: by which means the
others who have already gotten the advantage of the way, are at liberty to
go forward, or to stay, and therefore may do either of them which they will.
For that I have spoken enough of this matter, I will go unto another: that is
to show how to lodge an army in Camp, to the intent it might rest in quiet
without danger of enemies.

How to lodge four Legions together in a Camp, and what watch they ought to
keep, with other points concerning the said manner of lodging in Camp, and
whilst the Camp is making
The 7. Chapter.
Whosoever will lodge an hoaste surely, ought to place his Camp where it may
be strong and well ordered. Concerning the ordering of it; that does depend
upon the industrye of the Lieutenant General: and as for the making of it
strong, it is the situation, and art that does it. We have a custom at
this day to lodge in no place except there be ditches or rivers, or a great
number of trees or mountains: or some other natural rampar that do make the
place strong of it self. Notwithstanding I find that the Romans used a far
better manner: for they regarded not so much the strength of a place that was
naturallye strong, as to place their Camp where that they might help
themselves by their art, in which they trusted above all things: and sildome
would they camp in any place, how strong so ever it were, if it were not large
enough to range all their Battles in, according unto their military
discipline, in which doing they might always keep one self same form of
lodging: for the place was subject unto them, and not they unto the place. But
we which do observe no general rule herein, are constrained to make our Camp
of many fourms: sometimes to make it crooked, at other times to make it
triangular; of too great a length, or round, or square, acording unto the
situation which seldom does fall out fit. And if we should remove our Camps
often, and march sometime amongst mountains, and sometimes through plains,
and change our manner of lodging, and the fourmes of our Camps as often as we
do find the situations far to differ; we should not only fail in this
poinct, but also (which is worse) order our Camps with in so grossly, that
almost nothing should be placed in his right place, nor to purpose, so that a
man might think our Camps rather to show us to be a confused assembly and
without order, then to be men of war orderly governed, which is a thing of
no less importance, then to make a camp strong round about: for as the
fortress does serve to defend men against the assaults of their enemies, so
the well ordering of a Camp within, serves for to distribute and place them,
so yt every one might know what part he should defend: without which order we
had need to make Bulwarks and Trenehes about a Camp; for we may better want
this Fortification, then the defense that the Soldiers may make within it, who
being lodged as they ought to be, may for a need pass without fort, and be
always in order to resist all assaults.

There are also many other small things requisite, besides the strength of the
place, and the orderlye distribution of the people that should keep it: for in
the placing of a Camp there must be respect had of more then one thing: for
not only ought a man to be careful to be surely defended against his enemies,
but also to have a care that it may be delectable within, and commodious for
all necessary uses, so that the pleasantnes of the place might delight the
people, for by that means it does keep them the better, and does make them
less weary of it, then when as it ill quallited and distributed, as we do see
yt our Camps are: which are moreover so fowl and stinking, how little soever
they continue in a place, that the aier is by and by corrupted, whereof do
proceed afterward plagues and other grievous diseases, which we do see to
reign amongst us when we are in Camp. God does know the delight that men
have to be in them, and whether the Soldiers do no tarry in them often times
against their wills, how great a desire soever that they have to follow the
wars. Wherefore we ought to order and divide a camp in such sort that it
might keep them from sickness that should dwell in it, and fashion it so well,
that the commodity and pleasantnes of the same, might make the soldiers the
more willing for to tarry in it. And for that we cannot find places ordinarily
so well situated, as to be both strong and delectable of themselves: we must
therefore use industry to supply that by labor, which the situation wants.
As for the fortifieng of a Camp, we do take as great pains as is possible to
do: but we leave our Camps within, somewhat confused. Wherefore I am
determined to speak mine opinion in this matter, and to lodge my four
Legions, whom I have conducted hithertoo, with all their carriages and
followers, who are in all 24400. ordynarye footmen, and 2500. horsemen, not
counting the principal chiefes, and officers of the Camp, and their train,
nor likewise the ordnance, provision, baggage, nor other followers, which Camp
shall be great enough to lodge them all, and more then they, if need were.

After that we have chosen the place where the army shall be lodged, we must
begin in the very midst of the same, and there plant a Halbard, and mark
round about the said Halbard a square place, which shall be 170. paces in length,
and as much in breadth, with four sides, every side toward his region. This
said square must be divided into four other squares, each one of them
containing 65. paces, every way making a cross in the midst of them, which
may serve for a separation of the one place from the other: and likewise for a
streat which shall be 40. paces in breadth. The one of these squares must serve
to lodge the General chief of the host, and his guard: another shall serve for
the Captain General of the footmen, and for all those that do follow him
without wages. The Captain General of the horsemen shall be lodged in the
third, and his provost: and those yt follow him for their pleasure. The fourth
shall be for the marshall of the Camp, the Chauncelour, chief Treasurer,
Mustermaisters, and Controwlers, every one of which four quarters may be
enclosed within a small trenche. And for the lodging of the Legions, we must
begin and streatch a line from the aforesaid Halbard toward the east, which
must be 600. paces long, and another toward the west of the same length; so
that these lines may pass through the midst of the streat which I have before
ordained within the four small quarters abouesaid.

There must likewise two other lines be stretched from ye said Halbard; the one
toward the South, and the other toward the North, and of the same length
that the others are: at the ends of which lines, shall the four gates of the
Camp be, the which shall take their names of the Regions toward which they do
stand. The principal streates shall be laid out along these four lines, and
shall keep that breadth I have given unto the camps that do lodge the legions by
themselves, to wit, 60. paces every one.

I must also take from every one of the Legions, one of their four quarters
described in their camps where they are lodged by themselves, and turn those
four quarters into void places, and those quarters shall be taken from the
horsemen, so that ye horsemen that lodged in those quarters shall be lodged with
the other bands of their Legions. Then the horsemens quarter shall be divided
like unto one of those wherein the footmen are lodged: in which quarter, two
bands shall have room enough, without pestring horse or man. The Colonels
lodgings shall continue in their first state, and also three of the quarters of
the Legion. So that then I may say that the first Legion shall have his quarter
betwixt the East and the South gate. And the second shall have his betwixt the
said East, and North gate. The third legion shall be lodged betwixt the South
and the West gates. And the fourth betwixt the West, and the North gate. So
that these four legions shall furnish the circuit of the camp, having in the
midst of them their General and principal chiefs, and on the outside of them a
rampar with many bulwarks defending each other, betwixt which rampar and their
lodgings, must be a space left round about the camp of 160. paces broad which
shall serve to place the ordnaunce in, and the watch, and to raunge the
Legions in battle if need were, and also to practice the Soldiers in. The
Soldiers may likewise put the cattle of their booties there, and Victualers
may keep al theirs by night, if so be that they be of our own nation: for else
I would put them out of the forte, or into some place out of the danger of
their enemies, because that they should not know after what manner I did keep
my watch, nor likewise see the quantity of mine ordnance, nor should approach
near the place where I do keep my provision.

To be short, this distance betwixt the rampar and the quarters, may serve for
to keep the Camp from burning by fierworkes that those without might throw
in, which is a thing easy enough to be done, and may trouble a camp
maruelously. Concerning the four quarters which I took from the Legyons, I do
mean to employ them for the common use of the Army: and first, that quarter
that I took from the horsemen of the first Legion, shall be for the provision
of the ordnaunce, to wit, for powder and shot, which quarter shall be environed
with two or three trenches, and there must no fire be suffered to come near
but as far of as may possible. The quarter that was taken from the second
legion, shall serve for all the smithes in the Army: by whom the master of
the ordnance shall lodge, and his Gunners, Pioners, Carters, and other
attendants upon the ordnance. As for the quarter of the third legion, I do
ordain it for the provision of victual and arms, and for the market to sell
catell in. In one corner of this quarter shall those be lodged that come in
Embassage unto the General, and all others of whom there is any doubt to be
had, who ought to be forbidden as soon as they do ariue, not to go through,
or about the camp, nor to stur out of their quarter, without being conducted
by one of the Trumpeters of the said General, or by some other whom he should
appoint. Likewise the General must forbid, yt none of his host should have
conference with them in any manner, whosoever it were, except it were those
that were appointed to keep them company, or such as had leave expressly. The
fourth quarter shall be to keep the market for all necessaries: as bread, wine,
wheat, oats, hay, and other victuals. The butchery shall be kept there also, I
mean not that the beasts should be killed there, for no man must be so bold
as to kill, fley, or open a beast within the Camp, nor to bury horse, dog,
nor any other thing that may smell il: nor go to hie business in the long
public streats, nor in the particular little streates, (I term them to be
little streats that are amongst the quarters) nor no where else, but in
certain holes which every one shall make in his quarters but it were better
that they should go without the Camp, and when as any one should do the
contrary, he ought to be grievously punnished: and if any skorner, do laugh
at my words, because that I do speak of those stinking things; I answer
him, that he was never in camp: or if he were, it has not been when as the
camp has stayed long in one place, for he would quickly have perceived
what hurt infection does unto a camp, and negligence in causing foul and
unclean things to be thrown far without a camp. And hereof the ruin of
that camp, that Mounsieur de Lautrec, had before Naples can witness, which
perished through a plague, that was engendered of the corruption of the air
which was infected through the carrian, and panches of beasts that were left
here and there in the camp unburied: which negligence, brought us the plague,
and finally our ruin, and in mine opinion, we ought to put the fault in
nothing else whatsoever we do say. The places taken from the legions being
employed to the use of the camp, we must appoinct the streats for their use
that do follow the army, and place every one of them in a place by himself:
to wit, in the east streate, the shopkeepers, tailers, hosiers, and shomakers,
in the West streat, the taphouses, cooks, bakers, pi-makers, and such like
sellers of victuals. In the south streat, the Physicians, Apothecaries,
surgeons, Barbers, Chandelers, and pouther-makers. And the north streat
shall be for Sadlers, Spurmakers, Armorers, and other their like. And these
people must lodge all along the said streates hindering their breadth as
little as they may, and one lodging must not be any thing before another. The
gates (as I have said) shall be at the ends of the streats, and shall be shut with
bars, and the trenches that are round about the camp, may be commonly three
paces broad, and two deep: and if the enemies did lie near, they might be
made much brother and deeper, or if so be that the camp should stay long in one
place with out remoouing, and the earth of the same Trench must be cast
inward, and the corners of the Trench and fort must be laid out in the form
of Bulwarks, and at diverse other places, so that there may be bulwarks and
flanks round about, and by that means I dare say, that the Trench of the
Camp shall be strong enough to resist the enemy his assaults without, and
within it will show like a little City, equally divided, and aptly
distributed, as well for the lodgings, as for the public places, so that to
liken it wholly unto a City, there would be no other difference, but that the
stuff whereof the walls and houses are built would be different, for the one
is mooueable, and the others do not stir from their place, for in the other
points they have many things alike: and also a camp must be governed by laws
as a City is.

Moreover, it must have a certain number of Magistrates and officers to
govern it. I will speak hereafter of ye laws, but now I must speak
summarilie; yet orderly of the charge that the chiefes and principal officers
ought to exercise in a camp. And touching the General of the army, for as much
as I have promised that this second book should wholly concern him,
therefore I will not mingle him with the other. The Chiefes whereof, I will
speak here are these: the Captain General of the footmen, the Captain
General of the horsemen, the Colonels, the Captains of a hundred men of
arms: and as for the officers are these, the Chauncelour, the Marshall of the
camp, the Threasurer, the master of the ordnance. Of other chiefes I pretend
to say nothing, for as much as their office and charge is well known unto every
man, that it would be time lost, to speak of a thing so manifest and plain.
But to come to the matter. I say that it were not amiss, that those two
estates, to wit, that of the Captain General of the footmen, and of the
Captain General of the horsemen, to be exercised by two marshals of France,
or others of less quality might be deputed thereunto, since it is in the
king, to choose whom it shall be his pleasure, and he that must name them:
for it suffices, that they are advanced unto these estates, and created by
his hands: nor we must not dispute whether these, of whom I speak here, are
those which in times past were called Magistri Militum, and Magistri equitum,
or Praefecti Militum, and Tribuni: for it were better for us to imitate the
ancient Romans, in that they did duly exercise their charge, then to spend
time in these curious matters.

Therefore I will speak of the charge of their offices, which is this: the
Captain General of the footmen, ought to have a regard that his Legions
should be lodged the most commodiously that they might be possible. He ought
also to have a care to keep his men from mutinies, or if so be that any did
happen, to quench the^ immediately by some good means. Moreover, it is his
charge to judge controversies that come before him to be determined, and to
give such order therein as appertains.

Also he ought to cause the Legions oftentimes to be raunged in battle, to
view whether they have their full number, and be in state to fight: for not
doing this, he shall think himself to be strong enough to vanquish his
enemies, when he has not enough to defend himself against them, nor skant the
one half of those be made his account of: because that men do dye, and
deminish by diverse means, so that the Legions do want their numbers: insomuch,
that who so does not take heed, shall find himself greatly weakened of
Soldiers in a short time. Wherefore the said Captain General must look unto
it, as often as he may, causing the Colonells to show their rowles, who must
give him reckoning of the number that they do want in their Legions: and it is
his duty to make report unto the Lieutenant General, for to have order that
the Bands may be speedily furnished with their full number, if so be that
they be in place where it may be done: or to take counsel thereupon, for
to measure his enterprises and power, with the force and strength of his
enemies: this doing I doubt not but that his business will fall out according
unto his will and desire.

I would that this manner of visiting the bands, from time to time, had been
in use at that time when as the king held his siege before Pauy, for he had
known his estate better then he did.

The charge of the said Captain General of the footmen extends also unto the
practicing of soldiers, unto whom he ought to be assistaunt, as often as
the said legions shall be exercised together, or one alone. In sum, he is
appointed to have a care of all that appertains unto the footmen, to
counsel the Lieuetenaunt General of the army, and to ease his burden
as much as possibly he may.

Concerning the charge of the Captain General of the horsemen, he ought to
look into all ye passes amongst the horsemen, as the other does into al yt
passes amongst footmen, as well for the necessary lodging of them, as for
reuewes, exercises mutunies, and other things, and likewise that every horseman
should be furnished according unto his estate. Moreover, as well this Captain
General as the other, ought to be expert in the wars, and the one to know
how to exercise the others office, for that it is not said, but that at a
need, they might put their hands unto both. To be short, these two chiefes
shall sometimes visit the watches round about the camp, and either of them, of
himself shall be as much worth in a day of battle, as a General chief might
be: not that they should command, or should do any thing of themselves, but I
mean that they should be ready to do it, when it were needful, in absence of
the Lieuetenant general. They shall take the watchword of the Lieutenant
General, and the one of them must afterward give it unto his Colonels, and
the other unto his Captains. As for the Colonels they must give the watchword
unto their Sergeant Majors, after that they have received it from the captain
general of the footmen. The Colonel his charge is to be circumspect that the
captains or soldiers, do make no false musters, and to have a regard of the
sick and hurt men, to the intent, that they may be diligently dressed and
cherished. Moreover, a Colonel ought to have a care of the suppressing of
Mutinies, and to appease Soldiers, when as they are moved for any thing, and
ought also to have a regard that the Legion should be well armed, weaponed, and
in state to fight, and should be as ready, and practiced, as might be
possible: wherein every Colonel must be diligent, and must raunge them in
battle himself, to the intent that they should never refuse to do any thing
that should be commanded them, how hard or painful so ever it were. And to
have them to be so, I say that there is no better mean then to accustom them
betime to abide hardness: and better it were to do it in time when as they
have no need to do it, then to defer them until such time as they must do
it, how unwilling so ever they be, and by that means they would not be
discouraged, although they should abide great extremities, for as much as they
should be accustomed unto necessities and labor.

A Colonel ought to have intelligence of the crimes that those of his Legion
do commit, and to proceed in judgment upon them after the manner that I will
show hereafter. Finally, amongst other things he must take heed to see good
watch kept in his quarter, and to govern his Legion in peace and justice. A
Captain of the men of arms has the like charge over his horssemen that a
Colonel has over his footmen: and is charged as well to exercise his men, as
a Colonel is to exercise his footmen, and to have a regard unto their arms
and horses that all should be in good order, to weet, that their arms should
be whole and bright, their Horses well harnessed and shod to have service of
them hourly, and that the said Horses should be serviceable, swift, long
breathed, good trauailers, as gentle as may be, or at the least no strikers,
for such horses are dangerous in a prease, for that one stroke of a Horse
foot may spoil a most valiant man. Me think I have spoken enough of these
four Chiefes, when as I have said that they ought to ease one another
burden, and to keep their people in good quiet, for as much as these two
points do comprehend a great number in general, but since I have spoken mine
opinion of many other perticularly, me think I have fully satisfied this
matter. But yet I will say further, the four aforesaid Chiefes ought to
govern their people in such sort, that there might no one Soldier be found
who should be the occasion of any disorder: but that all things should be so
governed and moderated, that the Camp might be the harbor of all honest men,
and their refuge and Sanctuary, within which, all things ought to be as safe,
as in one of our Churches: and therefore there must a regard be had that the
Souldyers might live well within the Camp: and is also necessary to give order
that they should keep their hands from taking other men's goods without the
Camp, either near, or far off, except it be from their enemies, and yet not
from them, without leave of the General of the Army, for it is he that must
permit (before that any thing may be done) that the Soldiers might spoil and
bring away that they could find, and use it afterward as their own. But this
rule is not observed at this day amongst our Soldiers, they will not stay
while the spoiling of a town or country be permitted by the General, for
they will take authority of themselves: and they do not only use this liberty
against their enemies, and in a conquested country, but also they handle those
that yield upon the brute of their coming, long time before the army do come
near unto their country, as ill as those who have stood obstinate until the
coming of the army, and until they are declared Rebels and enemies.

Yet if we will indifferently consider of the robberies, raunsomes, thefts, and
violences which they do in France, not far from their own dwellings, we
shall think that the hurt that they do after that they are out of France in
another country, not to be strange: but I leave that for this time, to take in
hand to speak of the charge of four principal Officers of the army, the one
of which is a Ciuilyan, and does execute the office of Chauncellor properly,
for that he is an assistant unto the General, as often as there is cause to
speak of the administration of justice, be it in Civil causes, or in
Criminal, and in cases of complaint, whether it be one particular person that
complains, or a whole country: and for to answer the demands of
Ambassadors, and the requests of a particular person, town, or country: and
if any Proclamation should be made, it is he that ought to pen it, specially
for that the knowledge of the laws of the Emperors which are necessary, are
not commonly in the heads of the Lieutenants Generals that are now adays.

This said Ciuilyan is to assist the General when he will make any new
orders, concerning any matter of consequencie, and finally, to make answer
unto Letters that do come from any great personage, chiefly, if it be matter
of importance: in sum, he is called to all counsels wherein there lies any
difficulty. And moreover besides all these services abouesaid, he may busy
himself to cause victuals to be brought into the Camp, and to all other
places where any provision ought to be laid, whether it were to victual the
Camp, a Town, or for a passage: and yet this charge is more fit for the
Marshall of the Camp, or for the Provost general, or for an express
commissioner of the victuals, then for a long gown; yet I have seen the Lord
Chauncellor that is at this instant execute this office as well within France
as without, continuing the wars that we have had within these four years.
Before him I never knew any of his quality execute that office: but to be a
Counselor unto ye General as is abouesaid, I do not deny, for I have seen
one with Mounsieur de Lautrec, who used the title and office of Chauncellor.
Now to speak of the Marshall of the Camp, who is one of the principal
officers of an host, unto whom it apperteineth to place the Camp, and to
distribute it into quarters, and to fortify it: he also is to regard that ye
victuals should be equally distributed throughout all the quarters of the
Camp, and that every thing should be set in his place. The controversies which
are not under the Colonels, or of those that are not of the Camp, the
complaints of victualers, of artificers, and of other me^ of occupation which
do follow a Camp, do come before him: he also must have care of the sick men.
The third principal officer is the master of the Ordnance, who is of no small
estimation at this day, because of the estimation that we do make of that
instrument. His charge is, to cause his pieces to be well mounted, and to have
them furnished with great quantity of shot and powder.

Moreover, he ought to have good Gunners, many Pioners, Smithes, Carpenters,
Carters, and other people fit for the occupation of the Ordnance. It
apperteineth unto his office to be expert, to make the approches before a
place, for to batter it, to have judgment of himself, and also to be
inquisitiue of them that know the place, where it may be best approached, and
beaten, is weakest, and easiest to be taken.

Moreover, he ought to have understanding in Mines, to devise them, and to
cause them to be made as they ought to be: which being made with judgment, may
do them great service that do besiege a strong place, and hardly will they be
prevented. The County Pedro of Navarre had the best skill in these Mines of
any man in his time and ours: and by the means of them has taken many Towns
and Castles, as well against the King, as for him.

We may say that the Lord of Bury has succeeded in the said County his place,
for he in mine opinion does understand this business as well as any man in
France, or if I durst say, better: I should not greatly fail if I said better
then any other nation. Concerning the Ordnance, it ought to be accoumpted
amongst the most excellentest arms, as in the use of it we do see the effect,
but leave that to it self which does sufficiently commend it self: I do say,
that he that does exercise the office of the Master of the Ordnance, must have
an eye unto all those that do belong unto it, and to punish those that do
offend.

It had bin necessary that I had followed my Lord great Esquyer, who is at this
present to speak further in this matter: for every man knows that he does
understand this occupation better then any other man, but I have neither had
leisure to follow him, nor time to learn after other, wherefore I will content
my self with these Generalities which I have spoken of, without passing
further. Now it is necessary to speak of the Threasurer, who is one of the
necessaryest Officers in a Camp, because of the charge that he has under his
hands, to weete, the King his money, which is the maintenance of the wars,
without which, it is impossible that an Army could be maintained long, having
to do with a strong, and obstinate enemy. The said Threasorer is to employ the
Kings money many ways for the preferment of his service, moreover, he ought to
receive the tributes, and taxes that the towns and country conquested do pay
unto the King, and that those that are under his obedience do contribute: or if
so be that there be any league, and that the said league should furnish money
and no people: he must also provide that the Camp should be furnished with
store of victual, and must have a care that every man as well the great as the
small, the Pyoners, as the principals, should be contented and paid their wages
at the term that they ought to be paid, if you would that the King should be
well served, and that the soldiers should obey their Chiefes, and be men of
good life. For if money do want, I do not know how a Camp could be maintained,
nor the soldiers kept from robbing, and committing of a thousand mischiefs:
for I see no means how to correct them for any fault, when as necessity does
constrain them thereunto: but I do not say but that they ought to have
patience, and to have a care not to offend, although that money be long a
coming: for I do know well enough that it cannot always be brought at the
time appointed, because of the lets that they have often times that should bring
it, or that the threasurie is sometimes so near emptyed, that there must be a
time to recover new: and therefore the soldiers ought to have patience until
it be leuyed, and do ariue: but if the attending for it be too long, there is
nothing more iniust then to have men to live by the wind, or without money,
like unto gray Friars. But then there must be daily a certain quantity of
victuals distributed unto them, and other things necessary for their living,
and apparel to maintain the^, until that their pay do come: or for to
abandon them to their own discretions (that is to say, that they may take
where they can find it) which is a thing that ought never to be permitted but
in an extremity, and when as all other means do fail, for that this liberty
is cause that the soldiers do fall into such insolency, that it will be
almost impossible to bring the^ afterward again into their right course: yet
it is less dangerous then to see them to perish with famine, and to see the
army to decay before our faces. The one of which two will happen if so be that
it be not foreseen speedely, and the fault hereof must not be attributed unto
Chiefes or Captains, when as we do know that they cannot have wherewithal to
nourish themselves and others, seeing that their wages is behind as well as the
soldiers, and are as needy, or more needy, then the simplest soldier. If we
will say that the speeches of the Chiefes do appease, and prolong the soldiers,
I do confess it to be true: but it is but for a few days, and whilst the
soldiers do give some credit unto their words: but afterward when they do see
that they are led from day to day with bare words, there will be no mean to
keep the^ contented any longer, but they will murmur after diverse manners, and
will give no more credit unto their Chiefs afterward: it might also be an
occasion that they would not credit the^ at other times when as they do tell
them the truth, and when as it shall be very necessary to use speeches unto
them: for one of the principallest point yt a Chief ought to have in
recommendatio^, is, not to lie unto his soldiers, if that ye untruth may be
found and discovered afterward, because that at another time he shall have
much to do to persuade the^ to believe him in speaking the truth, for that he
has deceived them before. And although that there ought a regard to be had in
this matter, yet at this day we would that lies should stand in stead of
payment, and that soldiers should be pacified with words, and by ye means the
Captain is discredited for a thing yt may be remedied another way, and when
all is said, to cover ye Threasurers faults by another man, who often times do
play the Dukes in good towns, whilst ye soldiers do sterue in a Camp, or do
employ the money that is due unto soldiers, to their particular uses, whereas
they ought to leave all other business undone to be at the Camp in due time.
The Threasurer for the wars ought to provide in such sort, that the
soldiers, and all others that do take wages, might be paid at their term:
and if so be that the payment do stay certain days after that term, that at
the least the soldiers do not loose those days, for reason would that the
workman should be paid his hyre. And when as the said Threasurer does know
that it will be longer before money do come then were needful it should be,
he must advertise the Lieutenant General incontinent, that order may be taken
how every man should live: and that provision of victuals might be made before
hand, to be distributed afterward unto every man according unto his estate, to
attend whilst that money does come. And there would be no great hurt done if
that the soldiers did know how long it would be ere that they should be
paid, for some would save their money and have to spare that make no reckening
to spare, thinking to receive new money at the end of the month, such as do
live but from hand to mouth, without care what shall come after. By means of
this advertisement, the Captains should not need to content their people with
words, and the soldiers should have as little occasion to mistrust their
Chiefes. And this is all that I do pretend to speak of the four Officers or
Magistrates aforesaid, who are to have to do with many other things, but these
that I have spoken of are the most general. I will therefore return to my
matter which I left before, concerning the placing and ordering of a Camp: for
division whereof, it were necessary that those that should have that charge,
should be expert in the art of measuring, to the intent that immediately after
that the place is chosen, they may give the Camp such square form as is said,
and afterward distribute the quarters, places, and public streates, and in
sum, all that is requisite in a Camp, which doing, they shall never be
constrained to stay long for the ordering of a Camp, for that they must keep
always one selfsame form, and manner of lodging, without variety at any
time: and by that means every man should know his place after once lodging,
although that no body do show him his quarter, because that of himself he
shall easily understand what space, and how much place every man ought to
occupy in his quarter, which may not be understood and observed by those that
do seek to lodge their Camps in strong places, because yt they are constrained
to alter the forms of their Camps, according unto the variety of the
situation, whereunto the Romans would in no case be subject, for as I have
said before, they did always fortify by their art the scituations which were
weak of themselves, as we may do if we will, and use it in the same sort that
they did, or in better: for we have Ordnance which they had not, albeit that
they had certain other engines, which never have been put in use since the said
Ordnance has been invented: neither were they of that violence that it is, nor
so easy to be carried too and fro. For the rest, it is known that the greatest
part of their fortresses were made of wood, which might not endure against one
shot of those pieces that we do use to beat places withal at this instant:
against which there is no other remedy, but to make rampars of earth, and of
the greatest thicknes that is possible, which yet can very hardly withstand
them: and were it not that it does yield unto the shot, and by that means does
kill it, a man should make but sorry work in ramparing with earth, or with
other matter, for it would be time lost, I do mean for the strengthening of a
Town, but not of a Camp: for that Camps do think themselves to be as strong
in the field as their enemies are, and consequently will not suffer themselves
to be besieged and beaten with Ordnance, so that they need not to make any
such great rampars as I speak of, except that they be very weak, and fear to
be forced to fight, or do forbear attending succor: for in these cases they
must seek by all means to fortify themselves, and to have all the advantages
that might be thought upon: as to make plat-formes of earth, and caualiers
raised high to beat round about the Camp a far off. The Lord Constables
Camp that was before Auignon, was of the most incomparable force of all other
that ever I have seen in my time for a camp situated in plain ground. By
this appears, that we have the means and industry to fortify a Camp as well
as ye ancient Romans had, if we do consider of the little force of their
engines, and of the marvelous violence of ours. And furthermore, that our
rampars being of earth, we need not to build towers or castles of wood, to the
intent to be the surer against the violence of the Cannon, which breaks and
shiuereth to pieces all that it does meet withal: wherefore we must not think
yt it would be hard for us to keep always one form of camp if we would: but
also we must believe that it is as easy for us to do it, as it was for the said
Romans, and easier, because wood is hard to be found, but there is earth
enough to be had every where.

In this passage I must speak somewhat of the considerations, that a
Lieutenant General ought to have when he will incampe near unto his enemies:
before that he enterprise to approach so near unto his enemies, that the two
armies cannot afterward depart the one from the other without shame or
battle. He ought to have consideration of his estate and force, to know
whether his men have a good will to fight or not, or if they are strong enough
to do it whenever his enemies should assault him, or else I would not be of
opinion that he should put himself into that danger: forasmuch as it would be
to be doubted that his enemies would assail him, at such time as he would
think to lodge, and before that his Camp could be fortified. Suppose that he
were not fought withal at that instant, I cannot think but that the said
enemy atttendant would famish him, or else the situation of the country must
be very favorable. For to avoid these incoueniences, the aforesaid General
ought to look unto his business: and if so be that he be strong enough to
deal with the^, there is no danger if he do approach them within Cannon shot:
having viewed himself the place whereas he will plant his Camp, or caused it
to be viewed before that his Legions do ariue. And the Legions being arrived, he
must cause the Hastaries and Princes to keep themselves in order of battle,
with their faces toward their enemies, and must help himself with the
Triaries to make his trenches upon the flanks, when as he is not sufficiently
furnished with Pioners: and to enclose the other sides, he might employ the
servants and boys with other followers of the army: all which should labor
at the back of the battle being covered by the Hastaries and Princes. The
Forlorn hope should be in their order of battle, and the horsemen likewise.
If the enemy would fight in the mean time, the Triaries should always have
time enough to leave their work and to take their arms, and to raunge
themselves in their order whilst that the Hastaries do make resistance, and so
his battles should by no means be surprised. But let us suppose that his
enemy do make no great show to assail him raunged in battle, but does give
him skirmishes all day long to trouble his people, and to keep them in arms
to hinder the fortification of his Camp: this brag must be no cause of stay,
but they must do the like by the^, and give them good store of great shot
withal, causing the Hastaries and others, as I have said, to keep themselves
continually in battle, and the Triaries to continue at their work, not
stirring from it until such time as the Camp were fortified and the quarters
made. This done, the said Triaries must be first lodged and the provision
immediately. And after them the Princes and the Ordnance which must be brought
into the place where it is accustomed to be placed. The Hastaries must
afterward take their places, and afterward the horsemen: to weet, the men of
arms first, the light horsemen after them, and the Hargoletiers and
Harquebuziers on horseback after them, and last of all the Forlorn hope: so
that those that ought to be foremost when they should enter into battle
against their enemies, shall be the last that shall be lodged: and in lodging
them after this manner, there might be no disorder nor cryings as there is
amongst us. For when our Soldiers are to be lodged in Camp, every man
runs to be the first lodged, crying and making such a noise that it is a
confusion, ofttimes lodging themselves before their turns, making no account
to leave their Ensigns and to abandon them, having their enemies in their
teeth.

The Lord Marshall of Montian was in great distress through this disorder,
with his Auantgard before Montcailer: for that even at that instant that we
looked that the Spaniards should have assailed us, our Ensigns were left from
time to time without people, who were gone to seek lodgings: albeit that they
had no leave of him nor their Captains, and in lodging themselves, God knows
what a noise those gapers and cryers did make: and what was the cause of this
disorder, but the disobedience that is amongst us Frenchmen, who are so
delicate that we cannot suffer want one whole day, but we wast with grief of
it as snow against the Sun. Certainly the said Lord did his endeavor to stay
them, and it was needful for the danger that we were in: and at that time was
seen (as much as in any other place) the great want of order that is amongst us:
specially in the morning in passing a little brook, for except it were some of
the first ranks of the Battailon, ye others made no difficulty at all to
break, and put themselves out of their ranks, to pass at their case one after
an other over a little planke that was in the same place: so that it was our
good fortune that we were not assailed at that instant: for the first should
have suffered the smart of the others negligence and disorder: and perhaps
there might have insued some great inconvenience, as it was told me within two
days after when as I did ariue at the Camp, for at that time I was not there,
because of the Commission that the Lord Constable had given unto the Lord of
Roberual, and the commandment that he gave me by his letter to accompany the
said Roberual with my hand, to ceaze upon the valleys of S. Martin and Lucerne
to the King his use, and by that means I was not there: notwithstanding, I was
told of it afterward of all that happened in the Camp by men of credit, who
were in the danger before said very near unto the person of the said Lord: to
weet, the Barron Castelnan, and the Vicont Dorth, and since much better by the
Lord Dambres, who told me all: and helped to repair and cover the disorder, as
others have told me. Those cryings must not be used amongst these Legions of
whom I treat: they must be always lodged timely before night, if it were
possible. Which doing, using the manner that I have so many times spoken of
before, that is, the Camp having always one selfsame form: it shall not
be needful for the Soldiers to seek their quarters, or where the bands
should lodge, for they shall know ye places of themselves, for they shall see
where their Ensigns do stay, and by them know their places easily, and the
Ensigns shall know their places as easily by the General his lodging, and the
gates which shall be toward the four Regions, as I have said. All that may
make any alteration in a Camp, is, that the first and second Legions shall be
always lodged next their enemies, and thereunto the Soldiers must have a
regard every man unto the place that he shall lodge in. Further, it must not be
forgotten to appoint certain bands to watch: for that without watch, the
fortification of the Camp, and all that may be said or done for these Legions
would be labor lost. But since I am fallen into this matter, I will speak
mine opinion of the Skoutes and Sentenells that are placed by night without a
Camp, which is a custom that I cannot judge to be either good or serviceable:
neither can I find upon what example they were grounded that were the first
inuenters of this manner: for it is not after the manner of the ancient
watches, at the least those that I have read of, I do think that they had a
more care to avoid the mischief that might happen through the renewing and
changing of the Skoutes and Sentenells: for that they might perhaps be
sometimes corrupted with money, or be surprised so near, that the watch might
not be advertised by them of the coming of their enemies: specially if it
were so that the watch were kept after the French fashion, that is to say, if
the Soldiers did sleep their bellies full, in hope to be wakened by the
Sentenells, it should be in danger to be surprised and to have their throtes
cut. For which cause the ancient men of war made their watches within their
trenches, and had no body to skout without: and by this manner of watch they
were always so well preserved, that they altered it not, but used very great
diligence in it, and very good order, and punished all those with death that
failed of their duties in the same, as we may see in Polibius: unto whom I
send all those that would see the manner of their doing at large. Me think
that the reasons above said may suffice to show the profit of sending of
Skoutes out of a fort: which is, that they do serve for no other purpose but to
make the watch within to be the more careless and negligent: for they do give
themselves unto nothing but to play, drunkenness, and sleep (as I have said)
whilst peradventure the Sentenells do keep as ill watch as they. But is not
this a great fault to commit the safety of a whole army unto two or three
roysters, who have neither regard of honesty nor any other thing: and albeit
that those that are Skoutes on horseback, are gentlemen, and men of credit:
and likewise those that visit the watch do their endeavor as much as is
possible, may not both sometimes be surprised by their enemies, or may they not
sleep as well as the others, and forget their business, and by that means be
slain by their enemies: but may it not happen that their enemies might have
the watch word, or that they might guess at it, and approach the Sentenells
with false tokens given them to understand that they are of their Soldiers: I
know not who has showed us this manner, nor what reason we have to observe
it at this day, men of war being more subtle and politic then they were in
times past, except we will be void of reason to persist in a most evident and
manifest error, whereunto I will not from henceforth, that a Lieutenant General
should consent, but that he should forbid it expressly. And furthermore, that
for his ordinary night-watch he do appoint the one third part of his people,
which are 16. Ensigns of footmen, to the intent that the Soldiers might have
two nights free: the one of which Ensigns must watch round about the General
his quarter, and another must guard the Powder: two other Ensigns must be
placed upon the two market places: for the master of Ordnance his quarter is
well enough furnished with gunners, carters and pioners. By this account there
should be in the midst of the Camp one band of every Legion, who shall guard
the General and principal Chiefes, and also impeach the mischiefs which
oftimes do happen by night, and the excesses and thefts that are done more at
time then by day. The 12. bands which do remain, three of every Legion shall
keep watch along the rampars in the empty space that I have left betwixt
the rampar and the quarter: I do mean that three bands of the first Legion
shall keep watch against the quarter of the fourth Legion; and those of the
fourth against the quarter of the first; those of the second Legion shall keep
watch against the quarter of the third; and those of the third against the
quarter of the second: so that by this means the Soldiers should have the
less opportunity to steal from their watch unto their lodgings, which they
would do perhaps if their watch were near their quarter.

The greatest strength of the watch must be at the gates, and at the four
corners of the Camp: and in stead of the Skoutes which we do send out to be the
better advertised of our enemies coming, the fourth part of the said watch
must be kept waking, and so by that means the watch shall be divided into
four watches: and to proceed in this watch the more equally, so that the one
watch might not be more grieved or burdened then the other, the General his
Trumpet shall signify by his sound, at what time they ought to be changed,
and for to do it justly, he ought to have some sure clock, or the Marshall of
the Camp should give him the advertisement. This charge might be given unto
one of the four Colonells, who ought to watch every man in his turn, every
night one: and each of them in his turn should have the whole charge of the
watch throughout the Camp. As for the horsemen, their office shall be to
search the watch, and should be divided into five night watches, that is, two
Decuries of every company of men of arms, and the accomplishment of other
horsemen after that rate. And if this number be thought to be too great (for it
does amount unto 480. horse for every night) there might be but the one half
of them appointed, or any other number that might be thought sufficient, and
they might be divided into two watches, or more. Vegetius would that the
horsemen should keep Sentenell without the Camp by night: but he does
allege no reason for it, which is the occasion that I do not ground my self
any way upon his saying, since I have very good reasons on my side, and that I
do presuppose that the Camp is a very strong place: but if it were in an open
place, and without rampar, I do not say that I would not put horsemen out upon
the ways. As concerning the watch by day, they must do it that watched by
night, or a great part of them. And then I would keep horsemen abroad round
about the Camp to see who goes and comes, and in so doing, the Camp need
not to fear surprise. Concerning the giving of the watch word, and the
renewing of it every evening, and sometimes to change it four or five times
in one night, I will say nothing, nor of many other small points that we are
accustomed in this matter: for they are well enough known unto every man. Of
one thing I do mean to speak, which may do them some pleasure that do make
account of it, and contrariwise may do them some great mischief that do not
regard it: that is, diligently to look into all those that come into the
Camp, and those that go out: and likewise unto those that do want by night,
and unto new comers: for this is a thing of great importance, and may be
easily done, by the means of the divisions of the quarters and lodgings, for
that it is not only known what number of people should lodge in every
quarter, but in every tent perticularly, by which means it may be easelie
found if any do want, or if there were any new comers. Those that do want, or
do lodge out of their quarter, shall be punished as fugitives, except that they
had leave of their superiors: and those that should be found over and above
the number, should be demanded what business they had there, and should be
constrained to give an account of their quality thoroughly. This industry will
be an occasion that our enemies could not practice, or have conference with
our Soldiers, how secretly soever they should go to work. And moreover, there
would this commodity proceed of it, that is, our enemies should seldom know
any sure news of our estate, so that this observation might have place, which
is a great point: and hereof the Romans made a very great account, as we do
find written in many places expressly by that, which Claudius Nero did once in
his Camp, being lodged near unto Anniball in Calabria, who departed so
secretly from his Camp to join with Salinator, who was at Anconne against
Asdruball, that he went unto his companion and helped to overthrow Asdruball,
and returned with his people back again into his Camp, Anniball not
understanding of his going or coming. Hardly could this be done at this
present in a French Camp, for that all manner of persons are suffered there,
and because yt those are not punished that go out without leave, what
commandment soever is given that they should not abandon their Ensigns: and
we may make what cries we will either of this, or other things, since there is
no regard had to cause them to be straightly observed, nor to punish those
that do contrary unto the cries: and yet there is nothing in this world that
we ought to keep so much in obedience as an host. And therefore Military
laws ought to be most sharp, and he that has the charge of Justice to be
most rigorous. Of this matter there shall hereafter be spoken in his course.
To make an end, I say that in the old time when as they would raise their
Camps, the Captain General his Trompet sounded three times. At the first
sound they took down their Tents, and made their packes: at the second they
did lade: and at the third every man went into the field, and martched toward
the place that the General did appoint them. In our time the first sound
commands to saddle, and serves in stead of their first. Our second
commands to put foot in the stirrupe, and so was theirs. It would not be
amiss that we did keep amongst us the silence that the Turks do use in
their departing from their lodgings, who do dislodge so quietly, that it is
almost impossible to perceive it by the little noise that they do make: and
their silence likewise in lodging is such, that a man might think them rather
to be dumme, then otherwise: whereas we do far differ from them, that whether
it be in lodging, or whilst we do abide in the Camp, or in our departing,
we could not well hear if God should thunder amongst us. A Lieutenant
General ought yet to have diverse other considerations in the placing of the
Camp: principally two; the one is to lodge in a healthful place; and the
other, that his enemies may not besiege it, nor cut it off from victuals, and
water. He ought never to lodge in a marish ground, or in a place of ill air,
for the avoiding of diseases: which is easily known by the situation of the
place, and the evil color of the inhabitants that dwell there. As for the
other point to be free from siege, he must consider of the nature of the place,
and how he may keep the way open toward his friends, and where his enemies do
keep and may annoy him: and thereupon to make his conjecture, whether he may
be besieged, or recover victuals and other things necessary in despite of his
said enemies. An army may be besieged and overthrown without striking stroke,
if it be lodged where an enemy may drown it, by breaking of Sluses, and
fludgates: as happened unto the Christians in the year 1221. being along the
Nile nere unto Caire against the Souldan: this matter must be looked unto. And
certainly, a Lieutenant General ought to have great knowledge of ye countries
he must pass through, and to have those about them that do know them. The
sickness and famine that ofttimes do happen unto an army, may be avoided by
taking heed unto the excess that the Soldiers do use, and to keep them the
better in health, there must be provision made that they may lie in tents, and
a care had to lodge them in places where there are good store of trees to
shadow them from the Sun and wether, and for to boil their meat. It is
also necessary to take heed that they do not travail in hot wether: and
therefore in Summer they must depart from their lodgings before day, and be
lodged again before the great heat of day: and in winter they must never be
made to martch through snow and ice, except they may find upon the way
wherewithal to make fire. Moreover, they must not be suffered to drink ill
waters, nor to be ill clad: for all these do cause great sicknesses, and they
must be all carefully provided for, of how base condition soever they be: and
this care does bind the hearts of Soldiers more unto their General, then any
other benefit he can bestow upon them. And in so doing it shall be for his
own profit: for if that he should have wars with sickness, and likewise with
his enemies, he might quickly be overthrown, in resisting two such
adversaries. Exercise helps much to keep men's bodies in health: wherefore
the General must cause all the Soldiers of his host to exercise themselves
in arms once a day at the least, until that they do sweat, if not longer: for
there is no better mean to keep an army in health, and to make it victorious
over their enemies, then this.

Concerning the famine that may happen unto a Camp, it is not said that a
General ought to take heed but of his enemies only, that they should not cut
off his victuals: but furthermore he must foresee from whence it might be
brought unto him, and to give order that the victuals which he has, do not
too hastily consume, except he know incontinent where to have others. And for
to do well, he ought always to have one months victuals in store for his
whole army. Suppose that he has in his Camp of men of war, and all other
manner of people 40000. persons, and more: 35 Muys of Paris measure will suffice
them a whole day honestly: out of every one of which, as says master Bude,
will be made 1152. loafes, every one of which loafes will suffice one man a
whole day. By this account the provision for 30. days does amount unto 1656.

Concerning horse meat, Oats and Barley is good: but if that these cannot be
had, there would be no great danger if that they lived sometime without them,
provided that they did not want other food, if it were possible, that is, hey,
chafe, or grass: yet grass does weaken them greatly. The leaves and small
boughs of trees are good for them, when as there is no better to be had, and
the staulkes of vines: and for that they are hard, they may be broken with
mallets, and so the horses may eat them the better. But to come again to my
matter, I say that a Lieutenant General ought to tax the towns in the
country where he makes his wars, or his aliance, if that they be near, to
bring a certain great quantity of victuals unto his Camp to feed his
Soldiers, if that money do want, or to cause them to sell it at a reasonable
price, both to refresh his provision, and to keep it for a need: for as all
things that concern the wars, may be trained long: so also famine without
help, will bring a Camp low, and overthrow it in time: and an enemy if he
can have means to overthrow it by famine, will never prove to overthrow it
by battle; because that the victory would be so much the less bloody and
dangerous, although it be not altogether so honorable. That which is said may
suffice to avoid this incouenience: and Justice, if it be observed, will do
service in an host: and the order which may be given to bridle Soldiers from
living after their own wills, is likewise as necessary as any other that can
be named. And to prove this to be true, concerning the one, all men do know
that if Justice do not govern in an army, all things will go quite contrary,
and there is no victualler or other that will bring any thing unto it. And as
concerning the other, if there were no order, a months victual would not last
one day: wherefore Justice ought to be maintained, and whosoever should use
force against a victualler, ought to be grievously punished. Therefore every
Soldier must have daily given unto him some such quantity of victuals as he
may spend in a day: and moreover, they must be forbidden to eat but at
certain hours. This would be an occasion that the victuals would be the
better spared: and that those that do live this soberly, will be much more
peaceable, watching, and healthful, then if they should eat and drink at all
hours, as we don, which causes many particular quarrels, and the brave
muti^ies that we see do reign amongst us. Furthermore, if we had more people
to lodge, then the number above said: I say that they may be lodged in the
places in the midst of the Camp, and along the streates, or with the
Legionaries themselves: for they are lodged at large. But me think that these
four Legions with their horsemen, Chiefes, officers, and others, which I have
appointed to follow the host, are sufficient to enterprise any act of what
importance soever it were, for to fight with twice as many enemies as
themselves. The best is, every man may use his own free will, and make his
wars with as great a number of people as he will himself. Wherefore if the
number were much greater, the Camp must be of greater compass then that here
before spoken of, and notwithstanding it must be distributed like unto it. If
it were not that this second part would be greater then the first; and the
third part too little in respect of them, I would proceed further: wherefore I
will breathe and rest my self here, to treat the better of the third Book.

The end of the second Book.
The third Book of Military Discipline.
How a General may help himself in the wars with diverse policies
The 1. Chapter.
IN this third book shall be showed what means a Lieutenant General may use
to bring his wars to an end in short time. Suppose that after he has
ouerthrown his enemies in battle (as is aforesaid) that there does yet
remain a certain number in the field, or that there are certain towns who do
stand upon their guard like enemies, or others which are not to be trusted:
the means how to have an end of the one, and to be assured of the other, are
these. First of all, if there were any part of the country to be suspected to
revolt, if so be that it should be left in it intier: the Lieutenant General
must excogitat some practice that may be for his profit, and domageable unto
those whom he does suspect: as to command them to beat down the walls of
their towns, and to banish certain of their citizens: (I mean those whom he
doubts most) and this commandment must be given in such sort, that no town
so commanded might think this charge to concern others then themselves
perticularly: and therefore the said commandment and charge must be given in
all the said towns at one instant, to the intent they might immediately obey,
and not have respit to co^ferre and take counsel one of another. And as for
the banishment of those whom he thinks might make any co^motion or rebellion
in a town, they must be deceived in some manner, as to be made to believe they
shall be employed in some business, wherein the Lieutenant will do them good,
in giving them commission to do certain affairs far of, in some such place
where they should have no means to trouble him: which commission might stand
in stead of an honest and covered banishment. And as for those towns that are
of great power, and so inclined to disobey, that for every little occasion they
might refuse the commandment of the General, there is no better means then
to assure himself of them, assaying to surprise them at unawares. And to color
his pretense, he must make a relation unto them of some enterprise like a
truth: for the execution whereof he is to use their helps, and must make
show that he reposeth great trust in them, and that his intent is to some
other purpose then to deceive them. And in mine opinion, they will be persuaded
without any great difficulty: and being once entered into this opinion, they
will give any such number of their towns men as he will require. And if the
General do but sometimes smile a little upon some of the principalls, they
will be forward enough to levy the greatest part of their people to do him
service: of whom he may make his profit afterward, as if they were given him
for pledges. Furthermore, to be assured of a town, of whose loyalty there is
no good opinion to be had, the remedy that I see, whether it be before the
battle, or after, is to imitate Pompei and others, which heretofore have had
the like business: for Pompei having some doubt of a town which is in Spain,
prayed the inhabitants that they would lodge the sick men of his army in
their town: which request being consented, he sent them under color of sick
men, part of the most valiantest Soldiers that he had: who when they were
entered, made themselves masters of the said town incontinent, and so
constrained them to continue in his aliance. Publius Valerius in like case to
assure himself of the Epidaures, caused (as we would say) a general pardon to
be brought from the Pope into a Church without the town, and at the day
appointed for them to obtain the said pardon, all the people went out of the
town, and left but few in it to defend it, but the said Publius and his men:
who seeing themselves to be strongest, did shut the gates, and would not suffer
afterward any man to enter, but those of whom they were well assured. Some say
that he caused all the chiefest men to be given for pledges, before he would
suffer any of the inhabitants to enter. Alexander the great, when he made his
voyadge into Asia, foreseeing that the people which he left behind him should
not rebel after his departure, (specially the Thracians whom he had newly
subdued) took all the principal of the country, and the flower of the
fighting men, and gave them many honorable offices in his army, and all the
places of credit, and carried them in his company: in whose places at home he
established over the people of Thrace certain men of small quality: in which
doing, he contented first of all the Princes of the country by using them
well, as I have said: afterward he unfurnished the country of the best
Soldiers they had, giving them to understand that he would be served by them
in his enterprise (although that that was not only the end of his intent) and
moreover he took from the common people all their hope of rebelling, by taking
from them all their good Chiefes and good Soldiers. We see then by these
policies after what manner a General may assure himself of those whom he does
suspect. As for the taking of the towns which hold strong of themselves, or
which have garrison of enemies, is a matter that shall be spoken of hereafter.
At this present I will continue these matters of policy and foresight: for
they may stand our General in some stead in time and place. If so be he
should have any suspicion in any of his counsel, to weete, that he did
discover his secrets and his estate unto his enemies, he cannot use a better
policy, then to help himself with the fraud of this traitor, in imparting
that unto him that he has no intention to do, and fayning that he has doubt
of things that he fears nothing at all, and that he desires that his enemies
should do those things which he would in no case yt they should do, and this
may be an occasion that his said enemies may take some enterprise in hand,
thinking assuredly that they do know his secrets, and thereby he may surprise
them at his advantage, having deceived them voluntarily. Ventidius helped
himself with this policy against the Parthians. If the General have
determined, or if he be constrained to send part of his people out of ye Camp
to succor any man, as I have said, Claudius Nero succored his companion, and
that they both were lodged very near unto their enemies; if ye said General
would that his said enemies should not perceive that his Camp were weakened of
people, he must leave the lodgings of those that are departed in the same state
that they always were in, and the Ensigns likewise and the same number of
fires that were there accustomed to be made: and furthermore, the watch must be
made as strong as ever it was. On the other part, he unto whom the succor is
sent, if he would deceive his enemies, ought to take heed not to enlarge his
Camp, nor to suffer any new lodgings to be made, nor to make show of any other
Ensigns then those which were accustomed to be seen, but those which come
last must lodge with the first: to weet, Captains with Captains, Lieutenants
with Lieutenants, Ensigne-bearers with Ensigne-bearers, and consequently
officers with officers, and simple Soldiers with their like, like as those of
the said Nero did with those of Salinator. If our General desire at any time
to know sure news of the enemies business, he may imitate Scipio, who being in
Africa against the Carthagenians, sent certain of his men in Embassage unto
Siphax, fayning to treat of an agreement betwixt them; with whose servants he
mingled certain Captains of his of the most expertest he had, who were simply
apparelled like unto servants, expressly for to spy the state of his enemies
fully: when as the said Ambassadors were arrived before Siphax, and doing their
charge, the spies in the mean while took occasion to do their business by one
of their horses which they did let escape, to the intent to follow him
throughout the host, and to mark all things at their pleasure: whereof they
made their report unto the said Scipio; who being advertised of all, surprised
two mighty Camps in one morning. A General might likewise banish some one of
his familiars, and feign some great displeasure against them, which might
retire unto his enemies, and from thence give advertisement of their estate: he
may likewise sometimes understand their secrets by prisoners, and by spies
that he sends into their Camp, under color of bringing victuals, or to
serve there for some other turn. And sometimes some of the chiefest of the
said enemies army may be corrupted, in such sort that they may give
advertisement. For what is it that covetousness will not do amongst men? True
it is, that for to maintain these spies and traitors, the General ought to
spare nothing, because that the want of not having ofttimes news of enemies
proceedings, does make us sometimes to feel the smart of it: whereas only
good advertisement might be the occasion of the winning of a whole war. For
to prove what trust a man may have in a town, or in a whole country, he may
help himself with the policy of Marius, who being occupied in the wars
against the Cimbres, and willing to make proof of the faith of the Gauls,
which dwelt in the parts of Italy, which we call Lumbardie at this day, and
who were in aliance with the Romans at that time, he sent them two packes of
Letters, the one open and the other sealed: In the open Letters it was
forbidden them, that they should by no means open the sealed Letters, but at a
certain day: but they could not so long forbear but did open them before
their term: and thereupon the Letters being demanded again by the said
Marius, he perceived manifestly that he ought not to trust them no more then
needed.

If a Prince were assailed in his own country that would not attend at home
for the wars, he may enter upon another part of his enemies country, and by
that means constrain him to return for to defend his own: I mean, if the
said Prince have his towns stronger and better provided for, or his country
stronger and more difficile then his enemies. If our General do find himself
to be besieged by his enemies in any part that he could not escape without
shame, or loss, in this case he may practice to agree with them, and to take
truce: for in mine opinion they will then become so negligent, that easily he
may escape their hands, or in the mean time while such agreements are in hand,
or whilst he has truce, he might practice to do his enemy a mischief: for
it is then that the scourge will be given better then at any other time: and
when the mischief is once happened, he may say: I have been deceived under
shadow of true meaning: but to think that an army overthrown, or a place
gotten, whilst the intercourse does continue, should be repaired or restored
by the deceiuer, is a vain hope: for I know not what we would do our selves if
it were so that we should at any time have the like advantage of our enemies.
When the General should find himself at any time in that danger not to depart
out of a place without using some policy, he must excogitate all the
inventions that may serve his turn, and prove them all one after another,
until such time as some one may do him good. Amongst others he may prove these
two, the one is to assail his enemies on the one side with a small number of
soldiers, and the most resolute men: and with the others in the mean time to
do all endeavor to open the passage on the other side, whilst the enemies are
busied to resist their assaults; the other manner is to invent some new thing
to amaze his enemies, to cause them to keep themselves close upon their guard,
doubting that this novelty has some dangerous tail after it, and this must
be done by night to amaze them the more. Anniball escaped the hands of Fabius
by that means, causing faggots to be made fast unto the horns of a great
multitude of Oxen that he had in his Camp, which being set on fire, he caused
them to be driven toward Fabius his host, and this sight was thought to be so
wonderful and strange unto the said Fabius, that he doubted to be surprised,
specially being in a dark night, he durst not start out of his fort until it
was day. The said General ought to study by all means possible to make his
enemies to be jealous, and to suspect and mistrust one another, and bear as
great an envy one to another as might be possible: and this may he do, by
preserving the goods and possessions of some of them, and by spoiling all that
may be found of the others: and moreover, by restoring their children, parents,
and friends, that he has taken in the wars, unto their own fathers and
parents, without taking any ransom of any of them: and it cannot be possible
but that this good deed will proffit either to win the hearts of those unto
whom the good has bin done, or make dissension amongst them that have
received it, and others which will mislike it. He may likewise cause diverse
persons to be ill thought of by certain feigned letters, which may be made to
fall into ye enemies hands directed unto certain of ye principallest amongst
them: by which letters there may be show made of the handling of some practice
with them, which may be an occasion that those unto whom ye letters were
directed, should no more be credited as they were before, or at the least be
looked at over the shoulder: of which mistrust this profit will proceed, that
ye chiefest which are most esteemed, shall be holden suspect, and therefore there
will be but little credit given unto their opinions, which is one of the
chiefest goods that may happen unto a General: and peradventure it may be that
those that shall be so wrongfully suspected may be of that nature that they will
think to revenge the wrong that is offered them, or may cause them to absent
themselves from counsel. Their Prince might likewise be so suspicious, that
he might reject the^ from his person, or might cause them to be slain, as
Iugurtha did cause ye chiefest of his Counsel, because of the letters that
Metellus did write unto them, albeit they were nothing in fault. Anniball after
that he was overthrown by Scipio, retired unto King Antiochus, with whom he
was always well entertained, until the coming of the Ambassadors from Rome,
who frequented him so often, and after so many manners, that the said Antiochus
thought they had intelligence together, and therefore would never after be
counseled by him, and so poor Anniball lost his credit through the subtletie
of the Romans. It shall likewise not be amiss for the General to employ his
care to divide the forces of his enemies, if the assembly be of diverse sorts of
people, specially having mean to make a course upon some of their countries,
for in sending thither a sufficient number of soldiers, those which are left
in the country will quickly call their men back again for to defend their
own country. The Spaniards used this policy against our people, while the
King was at Pauy: for knowing the number of the Grysons that were there (the
which wanting, our camp was greatly weakened) for they sent the Castelein of
Mur then being, or otherwise the Marquess Mortane, to run into the country
of the said Grysons, for which occasion, they did abandon us at our need, to
go to defend their own country, yet they might have done well enough without
going, if they had willed, considering ye force of the country where they
dwell, which in my judgment is one of ye most strongest and hardest that may be
seen: and besides, so well peopled, that the number of ye people which the
Castelein co^ducted upon their frontiers, were not to fear them in that manner
that they made show: neither for the loss of one Castle ought they to have
abandoned us as they did: notwithstanding it is one of the tricks that
strangers do play ordinarily with those which ground themselves too much upon
ye waging of other people, then their own proper nation. If the General
should be in camp so near his enemies yt those of both parts did look for the
battle from time to time, and that there were other people coming unto his
assistance, if he feared that his enemies would go and meet them upon the way
to fight with them, to cut them off before they should join with him, he might
make the brute to run throughout his host, that every man should be ready by
an hour, or the next day to enter into battle, and might let escape some
prisoner that might advertise his enemies of this determination: and in mine
opinion this will be a mean to keep them together within their Camp, without
sending any body out, nor diminishing their forces, making their accoumpt to be
fought withal at the hour spoken of, and by that means the bands which are
to come, might ariue safe and whole. To give an enemy an occasion to weaken his
army, the best way were to let the^ to come far into the country, and to
abandon all the towns unto him that could not be kept out of his hands: and it
is to be thought, that to keep the^ all, he would put garrison into them, and
by that means his forces would be deminished, and then he might be fought
withal upon the letting go of his people, to embrace more things then he
could well defend. And furthermore, a General may sometimes use dissimulation
in his enterprises: as when he is determined to go into one country, to make
the brute to run that he pretends to assail another, and must use extreme
diligence to conquer the same said country which looked in no manner of wise
for his coming before they might be provided for to defend themselves, or
before his enemies might be transported thither for to keep it. If a General
do understand that his enemies are oppressed by famine, or by any other
necessity, that for this cause they are as it were desperate, and offer
battle in this rage: he ought to keep himself within his fort, and to defer
the combat as long as he may: and it may be that within few days he shall have
them all at his mercy without striking stroke. A General may sometimes have to
do with people ill practiced, and too courageous: who so much abandon
themselves to pursue those that fly, that oftentimes there is no mean to
retire them, until such time as they are foully beaten, so that if the said
General will look to his business, he may easily find an opportunity to do the^
a marvelous damage in a small time, for as much as he may lay his ambushes on
yt part of his enemies camp yt seems to be most stro^gest, and where at no
time there has bin any fight or skirmish offered, so that the place be fit to
hide his people: and ordain his skirmishes toward the other part where they
are accustomed to be fought withal, and must entice them so cunningly, that
they may come all out of their Camp if it be possible: or at the least that the
watch on that part that his men are hidden might come to see the pastime:
wherein there is no doubt that they will keep themselves from running out, so
that the said General his men do retire sometime to entice them out so much
the more, and to draw them the farther from their fort. Which being done, the
said General may give a sign by certain shots of the Ordnance, or by some
other mean, unto those that are in the ambush: at which sign, they must
charge upon their enemies camp so swift and fiercely, without being perceived
of their enemies, or of very few, that fort may be gotten before the said
enemies do see into their own error. It shall be necessary sometimes when two
armies are lodged near one to another, that the said General should send out
certain of his people to ouerrunne and pillage the country that is in his
subjection under color of enemies, to make his adversaries to think them to
be their soldiers, or new succor that does come unto them, and so running to
meet them in hope to have their part of the pray, may be endomaged and
surprised. A General may also make great destruction of his enemies, in giving
the^ occasion to eat and drink disordinatly, I mean, having to do with those
nations that are subject unto Wine. He might make show that he dare not abide
them: and for a color abandon his Camp, which he might leave in as great
disorder as might be possible, to the intent to dissemble his pretense the
better, and might leave his bagage, tents, and all the rest in their estate,
and his Camp as well furnished with Wine, and meats ready dressed, as he might
possible, to the intent that his enemies entering after his departure, might
fill their bellyes with the victuals that his men had left: and when as the
said General shall think his said adversaries to be overcome with Wine, and
sleeping like Beasts, he may return upon them, and overthrow them: for it is
to be presumed that having them at that point, he might have of them as good a
market as he would himself. Grimault, King of the Lombards did once overthrow
the Frenchmen at Ast by this policy, and many others have used it. For to
deceive the enemies, we ought oftentimes to change our manner of doing, or if
not often, at the least sometimes: I speak not of the order of the Battles,
nor of the lodging of a Camp, nor of other generalties: but I speak of little
small things, which have but small show a far off, and at hand do serve more
then we think for: as this of a certain Captain, who to have it signified
that his enemies marched through the country, caused a sign to be made with
fire by night, and with smoke by day, and knowing that his enemies were
advertised of these signs, and therefore were the more wary, knowing that they
were discovered: wherefore to take them in the snare, he was driven to use some
policy, which he did after this manner: that is, he appointed his people to
make fire and smoke as well by day as by night, without ceasing, whether they
saw enemy or none: and that when as they did see the enemies army, they
should make neither the one, nor the other. This being ordained as I have said,
was executed from point to point by those which had the charge, and when as his
enemies were in the fildes, the signs ceased, and thereby the Captain of
whom I make mention at this present, knew that his enemies approached: the
which on the other part seeing the accustomed signs to fail, thought they
were come the watches not knowing, and therefore they were so much the less
careful to march in good order: whereas the said Captain was wholly provided,
and comforted in his business, waighting to charge upon his enemies, which he
did, overthrowing them quite, and destroying the^ utterly. Mennon of Rhodes
finding no means to draw his enemies out of a most strong place that they
were in, to cause them to come to the Combat in an open place; sent unto the
Camp of his adversaries one of his household servants, under color of a
fugitine, who gave them to understand that the people of the said Mennon were
mutined together, and that for that cause the greatest part went away at that
instant: and to the intent that there might be the greater credit given unto
his words, there were sent away certain bands, whom they saw to depart from
the said Camp: and so understood that there was a great tumult, which was
done of purpose: and being persuaded by the said fugitive to take that
opportunity, and moved through the disorder that they thought for a certainty
to be in the Camp of the said Mennon, they were so evil advised, that they
issued out of their strong place to assail those who afterward overthrew
them. There are many other policies to be used then these that I have spoken
of heerebefore, that have bin put in practice to hurt an enemy, which I might
have inferred in this place, as well as those that I have spoken off.

The order that the General ought to keep in the besieging of a Town
The 2. Chapter.
I Have showed before how towns suspected might sometimes happen to fall into
our hands without striking stroke: those whom we do mistrust. But suppose that
there are Towns, not only suspected, but also have declared themselves to be
enemies, so that there is no remedy but to proceed against them in this
business by arms, and to prove to conquer by force yt which we have failed to
get by policy. In this business there are two means to be used, the one is,
to overcome the towns either by assault, or by composition. In the first we
may likewise use two other means, to weete, force mingled with fraud, or
manifest violence: I call it force mingled with fraud, when we have any
intelligence with the soldiers of the garrison, or with the Citizens: by whose
means we attain to get or win a good part of the inhabitants, or of the men
of war who keep the towns, to enter into them the rest not knowing. I term
it to be manifest violence when as we assault a town unlooked for, or at our
first arrival, not staying whilst the Ordnance has beaten the walls: or when
we do assault it, after that there is a breach made. As touching that point
that the towns do fall sometimes into our hands by composition, we must note
that this composition is voluntary or forced. Voluntary has place when as a
town does deliver it self from the jurisdiction of one, to give it free unto
another, as Geneua has done within these few years, hoping to be better
governed by the Switzers, then she was by her Duke. And Casall of Montferat
called in the Frenchmen, and gave her self unto the King, desiring rather to
be on his side then on the Emperors: I know not upon what consideration this
said voluntary composition is grounded: likewise when as a town does give it
self unto a Prince to be maintained against her enemies, as Genes did, who
gave her self unto King Charles the seventh, throwing her self into his arms,
to be defended from King Alphonsus of Naples, who made her wars: but because
this piece does nothing serve my purpose, I will leave it aside, and will
speak nothing of it. Concerning forced composition, either it proceeds of ye
long siege that is kept before a place, or through the courses which are
continually made, not besieging it near, by which courses the country is
ouerrunne, pillaged, and destroyed, and the goods of the inhabitants, and of
those that are retired thither, if they be of the country: and furthermore, in
keeping them subject in such sort, that they can not issue out of their gates,
without danger of their persons: nor suffer victuals, or any other provision to
enter without great difficulty: for which cause, the said inhabitants shall
be constrained to yield themselves and their town unto those which do so
hardly deal with them, least they should be afterward evil used. Also towns
sometimes yield themselves not seeing their enemies, finding themselves too
weak for to resist them. The two means then which are used to get Towns are
those that I have spoken of. Wherefore a Lieutenant General may help himself
with either of them which he finds most easy, and may practice it after that
manner that a wise Captain ought to put it in execution. Me think he may use
it after this manner that I am about to declare, except he may be better
counseled, and that is, before all things he diligently enquire of all the
points that concern this business, that is to weet, whether the town that he
pretends to besiege, be strong by nature, or by art: whether it be subject
to battery or no, and to have it in portrature, with the situation of the
country round about it, if it be possible. Furthermore, whether it may be
mined or not: whether they do keep good watch, or do doubt any thing: whether
they do make any preparation at that instant, or have done it before hand:
whether it be well furnished with all store, or if it want, if it may be
victualled from time to time, and relieved in despite of those that besiege it:
or be cut off, that neither victuals nor succor can enter: what garrison it
has: what Chiefs: what will the inhabitants have: and finally, whether the
said inhabitants and soldiers do agree together, or if there be any
controversy and factions betwixt them. Which aduertisements are of such
importance, that they deserve to be bought with their weight in gold: and to
this end a General ought to entertain certain good spies, and should seek
to have intelligence in many and diverse places, to be advertised often and
perticularly of all things truly: before he thrust himself into this dance:
and after that he has known the truth of all things, of his enemies estate,
he must make his principal foundation upon one of the points abouesayd,
which is best for his purpose: as if the town be much easier to mine, then to
batter, he shall ground his principal hope upon the mine: or if it were ill
victualled, he might attend to conquer it through famine, or may use any of the
other means which he thinks may help himself best. Above all things he
must rather use force mingled with fraud: then with manifest violence; if it
were so that he might use either of those two forces which he thought best:
and if so be that he should have to do with a strong and puissant town, I
would never be of opinion he should use any force, if he might have it
lovingly and by honest composition: for besides that, that he shall avoid a
marvelous cost, and the death of many honest men, which may happen on both
sids, he shall keep the same town afterward which he has gotten by the said
composition with less difffcultie (the inhabitants nor others having received
either shame or damage by any of his) then if he conquered the^ by force of
arms: and consequently if they wear hurt in body or goods. To win them then
by this gracious means, a General ought to spare neither money nor words;
money to corrupt the chiefest, and those yt have credit among the communaltie;
and words to persuade the inhabitants, or the Soldiers by lively reasons that
they ought to yield: and for that this office may not well be executed by
himself, not having the commodity to use speech unto his enemies but in his
host, he ought to have about him men for to handle this business who are great
perswaders of themselves and fair speakers. The Trumpetters and the Drums
ought likewise to know this art, for because that they are much more permitted
to go and come every where upon every light occasion, then are any other of
greater mettle. There may also be others sent under color of fugitives, and
by the^ may al means be practiced to taste the minds of his enemies, and to
cause them to yield unto his will, not constrayning them at all. When there is
question to win a town by such like means we must first consider the
occasion it has to defend it self: to wit, if it be the towns own proper
quarrel, or if it touch them little. Afterward if the quarrel be theirs, to
know truly if any extreme necessity has constrained them thereunto or
not: as if it had rebelled against the King, and that it had committed some
heinous fact: I speak not of the towns of this Realm: who are inhabited
with people so well minded that it is not to be thought that ever they will
fall into this crime, and therefore I need not to speak of them: but when I
speak of Towns, I mean those that are out of the realm which ever and anon
do rebel and revolt, and in reuolting do sometimes kill their governors, and
cut in pieces the garrison they have: we must think that those towns where this
like offense should happen, would fight and defend themselves much more
obstinately, then if they had not any ways offended: because of the punishment
yt their offense deserves: which (according to their opinion) will fall upon
their necks, if that they may be overcome. We may likewise make our account
that the towns which by nature do hate us, as the Englishmen and the
Flemmings: or which have our honor in ielosie and desire to rule over their
neghbors, as the Spaniards, and the Almaignes, will yield as late as may be
possible: and with great hardness will they be gotten without using of force.
Notwithstanding a Lieutenant General shall make a proof before all other
things if the two champions, I have spoken of, to weet, gifts, and words, may
do him any service: for many good towns, and places impregnable, have bin
conquested in short time by them two: and many things that were thought
impossible, have yielded easily at the length, through their means. Therefore
they that shall have the charge to confer with these said towns, or to
summon the^ in the behalf of the General, ought to imploie al their wits to
take from the inhabitants, rebels, as others, this said necessity, and
afterward there obstinacy, in promising mountains and merueyles, and that
they shall be pardoned, if they fear to be punished for their rebellion.
Likewise if it be against a people that are in doubt to leese their liberty,
and which have learned to live under their own laws not obeyeing unto any
man, they shall give them to understand that it is better for them to be
governed by one only Chief, the^ by a whole co^munaltie: so yt they may be
maintaned in good peace possessing their goods with quiet, without being
molested or tyrannized by any man: whereof they might be sure being under the
protection of so a good Prince, as is he, for whom those words are spoken: and
furthermore that ye King his pretense does extend but to quench the ambition of
certain particular persons, and not that the people should come into bondage:
showing them moreover the mischief moreover the mischief that may happen unto
their town if it were besieged, and to the country round about it, and besides
the desolations, murders, forces, and violences, which are made in the taking
of a town, and to give them the better encouragement to this matter, to show
the welfare that may happen unto the^ in general, in having of the good favor
of so mighty a king. Concerning the towns that are not constrained to defend
them selves through any extreme necessity, but only make wars to take part
with others, we must say that they make wars of themselves, or that they do
favor an enemy: if so be that they make wars of themselves, there will not
be so great difficulty to win them, as when they do defend themselves of
necessity, for they will soon be weary of the great expenses and danger that
they do put themselves into for other men's quarrels, and in this case, there
must be faier promises made to win them, to cause them to abandon the aliance
of the said enemy: but when as they do but favor an enemy, it is either with
the consent of the inhabitants, or against their wills: if it be against
their wills, the way is open to persuade them all that the aforesaid General
will: and if it be with there wills, there must be pains taken to corrupt the
principal Chiefes, and certain Captains, or other officers amongst the
soldiers, who may make them to believe that their town is not defencible, or
that they should not be succored in time, or if the town did ra^par, they
might hinder fortification by working sloly: and if they were soldiers, yt did
work, they might sow some voice amongst them ^o cause the^ to refuse to do it:
saying that it is a work belonging to pioners, and not to soldiers, and if
they were pioners, they ought to cause them by some means to go their wais, to
ye intent the town might by no means be found strong nor ra^pared when it should
be assaulted, but be constrained to yield to us by and by. These corrupted people
may also cause the provisions to be consumed by the soldiers, fayning to give
no regard thereunto until that all were spent, as Frauncis the Lord Marquis
of Salusse did, at the time that he should have kept Tossan for the king, who
played his part so subtly before that he turned his coat throughlye that the
town at there need, was in all poinctes in as evil an estate, to defend it
self, as the Emperor might have wished it to be: and notwithstanding it held
certain days, making of necessity, a virtue. These things might rather be put
in proof, then the using of force. He must consider if the town which he does
practice to get, be in estate to abide a siege, and to continewe it long or
not, and if it be sufficiently provided, and always kept with good watch, the
mean aforesaid must be put in proof. But when as it shall be unprovided of
things necessary, and has not begune to provide before hand, it is then time
to aboard it, whilst it is unprovided. The Spaniards took this opportunity
when as the Lord Bonneuall did but enter in at Lodes: for before he had divided
the quarters, and appointed what part every band should keep, they were at the
gates, whereupon the said town finding it self unready in all points, was won by
assault. We must therefore take these oportunities, and not let the^ slip,
because it is to be feared, how little leisure so ever they may have, and
whilst we go and come, that they would make the place strong, and furnishe it
with all that it should have need of, which is an opportunity that ought to be
taken from an enemy, and not to be given him. Therefore if the said general will
have this advantage, or other upon his enemies, he must have a care to know
their business trewly, as I have said: and determine thereupon afterward how he
may proceed most surest. In mine opinion, if a town be in division, to wit, if
there be strife between the inhabitants, or amongst the soldiers, or between
the inhabitants and the soldiers, the general ought not to leese such an
opportunity, but to do al his endeavor to come before it, furnished with many
ladders to stall it, and with other light ingins, to beat down gates and
walls, whilst they within do think upon other matters, and these enterprises
must be executed in coming far of: for how further of the general does come
(so that he make great speed) the more he shall amaze his enemies, when they
shall see him at their gates, because they douted nothing: at which place when
he is arrived, he must assault it so quikly, and hotly on al sides that ye
inhabitants should not know unto what Saint to bequethe themselves, except
they yield at the very instant that he did so^mon them, for if he give them but
a quarter of an hour respit to counsel together, and look about, he shall
find that the common danger wherein they are all, that are with in the town,
will cause them to remember themselves, and to defend their persons and town
together: whereas if he do not give them leisure to bethink themselves, being
so suddenly supprized (with the distrust that they have one of another) the
greatest have that the town will make, will be to yield it self. Me think also
that a town where there are diverse partakers (as in Italy) may easily be
gotten, by means of intelligence had with one of the parts, who might give
enteraunce into the town, at some place, were it by night or by day: or if
the walls were well kept, then those with whom the General had this
intelligence, might seize upon the void places and strong buildings within the
town: and at some certain sign given, he might appoint to begin the broile
within, and assault the town without at the gates and walls, which doing, I
dare believe, that the most hardiest, and most assuredst amongst them, would
abandon their defenses incontinent, to save their lives, seeing the^ to be
assaulted in so many places at once. By that means was Genes taken in the
year 1527. in the name of the king, by the Lord Caesar Fregose. I make mine
account, that if the said Lord had ye last time given intelligence unto those
of the league, as he did at the first, that it had been taken again without
any difficulty, and that he had not been repulsed as he was. But he meaning to
surprise it by full assault, doubting that if he advertised his friends, that
those of the contrary part should have known it also: and trusting his
partakers would have bin ready enough, when as they should hear his name
cried, would not that any man should know of his coming: which was cause yt his
partakers had rather at his coming to keep their town with one common accord,
with his enemies then not taking arms, to abide ye adventure, not knowing for
whom or what. It may be also that they doubted that they should have had their
reward with their contrary parties, if ye Frenchmen had gotten the town at
that instant: for that in such like business there is no men spared, which is an
il case, and ought to be looked into: for it is enough to choke all those that
might have will to receive us into their towns, by the mean that is spoken
of, knowing that diverse other have bin evil used. Moreover as it is good to
besiege a town before it be provided of those things yt it has need of: so is
it as convenient to assault it, when as it does stand upon his guard, both for
the little estimation that the Citizens will make of their enemies, thinking
that they would not assault the^, specially if they were far of: and for that
their Chiefes are men of so small experience, and the people and soldiers so
subject to their pleasures, that they would keep but little watch or none at
al. And for the handling of this business, a General ought to choose some one in
his army that were a sufficient man to execute an enterprise of great
importance, and give him some such number of soldiers as were thought
necessary, who should be furnished with victuals for a certain time, causing
the^ to carry it at their backs to take the less baggage with them at their
departure. And although yt said General were far of that hinders not, so that
he make show to some other place, and give out speech so: or that he that is
sent do depart by night secretly. In laying these enterprises to work, he
must foresee whether that after the town shall be taken by his men, it may be
defended against those that would recover it again from them or not, for it is
not al to get into a place, because it is a thing that may be easily done, by
means of the surprises that may be used in such cases, and of the intelligence
that may be had: but in keepeing it afterward is all the difficulty, if yt it
be entered with an opinion, that is to say, with too little company: especialy
if the town were divided, and that the one league did maintain the contrary
part, for it would be to begin again a new every day, except the said league
were driven out at that instant that it were taken, or yt the principals were
laid hands on, and those that might cause any commotion, which is one of the
best remedies that may be used, and to make some part of the town strong, to
have their refuge to it at their need: when as all the town could not be kept,
or yt the surprizer should be repulsed by his enemies, who might be brought
into the same town by his contrary party, if so be yt the town were left in
her entire, which would (...) great oversight. For it is to be presumed, that
if succor should come to them which were strong enough to through out the garrison
that they by and by would join with them: and so those that thought themselves
to be masters, shall be driven out again: and might be taken, in taking: by
suffering their adversaries to haunt amongst them, and wanting place of
safety, not having made some fortress before in some part of the town, to
retire unto at their need, as I have said. If it were so that there were never
a Castle in the said town, or if there were any which were not in their
custody: in which case likewise the surprizers must look well unto their
business, because that if within the town there be any Castle or Fortress
which is in the hands of their adversaries, they may at all hours be assaulted
by it: for that the said adversary may receive aid at all times, specially if
the said Castle have issue into the fields. And it helps not although that
the inhabitants of the town did call them of their own free wills, if that
their enemies be stronger then both they and their assistants: for that the
said enemies may have entrance into the town by the aforesaid Castle at all
hours, except the town were very well fortified, and that the passage out of
the said Castle into the town were rampared in such sort that they might abide
all comers, or else it is to be thought that they should be constrained to
leave their prize, what help or favor the inhabitants might give them. And
besides that they shall be constrained to leave their town so, they shall be in
hazard to be overthrown, and the town pillaged, as Bresse was. The Venetians
which had taken it with the consent of the citizens, being overthrown by the
Lord of Foix, who got this victory by means of the Castle which held on his
side. My Lord Marshall of Foix got Cremone again also, by means of the
Castle: although the town was not pillaged, nor those that had caused it to
rebel, slain: yet was it in great hazard to have been sacked. Casall of
Mountferat has felt the smart of it, and those which took it likewise: for
the town was sacked, and the Frenchmen that entered into it were all slain or
taken. It is therefore necessary to look well into this business, before the
taking in hand of a matter so dangerous, and to go so well accompanied that an
enemy may have no advantage, although that he had intelligence within the
town, or that the Castle (if there were any) did take his part, by whose aid
he might recover that he had lost. But let us pass further, and let us put
case that the towns which do resist are so well provided of all things, and so
well guided, that there is no hope left to conquer them, by surprise, nor by
intelligence, nor otherwise then by mere force. We must say, that if the
aforesaid General do go to besiege one of them, he ought to do it with the
determination not to depart from it until such time as he have taken it: for
that if he besiege a town, and do depart without the taking of it, he does
give the other towns so much the more encouragement to resist him. Wherefore
the said General ought to consider before hand of the force and strength of
the town he pretends to besiege: to know whether it may be taken or not. If
it may be taken by any one of those means that towns are accustomed to be
won, although that it be furnished with things necessary, let him go boldly. But
if so be it were so strong of people, and so well provided, that it would be
invincible, it would be time lost to prove it: besides the shame and the
loss that he should receive. In this case he must try another way, that is to
see if he might in continuance of time get it with long molesting it: which to
do, he must put his people round about it into the other towns and forts that
are at his obedience, and distrubute them by Garrisons, by which Garrisons there
may be courses made howerly against the town which he does trouble,
pretending to conquer it by that means. And if there were no towns near
enough, the said General might keep a flying camp round about it, the which
should neither be far from it, nor near, and in mine opinion, it is better
to follow this counsel: although it were somewhat far of, then to besiege
such a town with all his force at hand: for by means of the courses that may
be made out of the Garrisons, it will be a great marvel, if the town at
length do not famish, or do not agree to some composition, how long soever it
do hold out. Besides that there happen accidents from time to time unlooked for,
which may make a war quickly won or lost: whereas to enterprise a thing
impossible, is as much as to beat a man his fist against a wall, and there can
no good proceed of it: considering the expenses that shall be made to no
purpose; the loss of time, and valiant men that are destroyed at such like
places: so that who so would make account of the pains taken in the besieging
of a strong town, and that which it costeth before it be conquered by force of
arms, with the profit that the conqueror has afterward when it is in his
hands: shall find that the pain and the charges do far surmount the
profit. And I dare say, that the conquest of a great country may be easier
made, then the taking of one of these strong and obstinate towns, for in
conquering a Country, we might help our selves, with our Military
Discipline, and win a battle, through good order, if it come there too: but
to take one town well in order, there is a thousand difficulties. But since I
speak of these strong towns, I will declare what town or place it is that I
esteem to be invincible or at the least very hard to be taken, and against
which, we should get more by making wars warlike out of garrisons then
otherwise, for that there is no other mean to entice the Garrison of the same
town, into the field to fight with it. I say that town is invincible, that
is, as strong of people, and as well furnished with all provisions, as are those
that do besiege it, beesides the fortress of the town which the besieged
have for their advantage, as the Spaniardes had, being besieged within Naples
by the Lord of Lautrec, who were as strong in all points, as we were;
excepting good hearts. Or although the said town be not altogether so strong
of people, at the uttermost if it have men enowe to furnish the walls and
Bulwarks round about it from place to place: and moreover a good number to
defend the breaches which those that are without, might make. And if a Town
be so furnished although that the walls, and the other defenses be not of the
best, yet it may be accounted to be most strong: because that the surest
walls, and defenses that may be made, are men: so that they be good. Every
man knows well that Perone was too weak of it self, to resist the one half
of the army of Flemings and Almaignes that did besiege it: notwithstanding the
virtue of the Lord Marshall of the March, and his men made it invincible. It
is but 18. years since Meziers was found unprovided of all things necessary
to make a Town strong: and notwithstanding the Frenchmen, which were within
it, amongst whose principal Chiefs (as I have understood) was the Lord
Constable, did keep it against the power of an Emperor. The Lacedaemonians
would never suffer that their Cities should be enclosed with walls, saying
that the people would become lasie and of little value: because that they
would put their chiefest trust in their fortress, and not in their arms, and
in truth necessity causes many great matters to be done: specially if the
men employed in this business, are somewhat courageous, as the said
Lacedaemonians were, who were oftentimes assaulted by their neighbors, and
others of great force: and notwithstanding they kept their city always against
all men, without making ditches or walls. It is then the virtue of the men
that make a Town principally strong, and invincible, whilst they have
victuals and where with all to defend themselves. Furthermore I may say that
it is hard to besiege towns and places that are strong by nature: for there is
no man that would counsel to besiedge a Town that were placed so high that
it could not be beaten with Ordnance, nor be approached upon any side to be
assaulted, without being in danger of them within: as are many Castles upon
rocks, which can neither be mined, for the hardness of the rocks whereupon they
are situated, nor beaten because of their height. The towns that are
situated in morie countries, or environed with sea, although they be not
environed upon all sides, but upon some one part (so that ye rest be good) or
with some large and deep river, are likewise most strong: and before them, a
General may loose his time, if it be not a great hap: forasmuch as it is not
possible to approache them but at a marvelous disadvantage. Moreover, it will be
a great hap, if the besiedged be not refreshed often, as well with victuals
as with men, in the dispite of the besiegers and they not knowing it, and such
are most of the Towns in Flaunders: in Italy there are many, as Venice,
Ferrare, Iscle Gayette, Tarente, and others. Concerning the other Towns which
are of the number of the most strongest in what place soever they are
situated, whether they be upon hills, or in plains, we must think that they
have bin fortified within this thirty years: for those which were before, may
not be termed to be strong, since the skill to rampare is come to light but
since a short time. These then that have been rampared since that time, or
in our time (which have bin ra^pared by leisure, and not in have) may be
thought to be the most hardest to be conquered: before which there may be more
lost then won. But where is this General that would stay before Padua,
Teroenne, and Turin, and many other Towns situated in a plain, or before
Veconnie, or Besse, and others which are situated high, except he would
depart thence with great shame. I think in my self that there is no man that
would loose his time so. But, not to spoke of Italy only we have also many
towns upon the Frontires and within the Realm which may well be compared with
the above said. And as there is in Italy and France so there is in other
places: and there will be more ere it be long, since every man is busied with
ramparing and making strong towns, wherefore the conquest of a country from
henceforth will be a most hard matter, I mean who so would plant himself
before every strong town, and where there is no hill or high place near unto
them, from which a man may look into the town, or beat some part of it: for
then it might not be thought to be strong, except there were some remedy to be
found against that anoyance. If the towns then against which a General does
pretend to proceed in arms, are provided with great number of people, or
strong by nature, or artificially as are those I have spoken of, he is not to
meddle to besiedge any one of them, except it be far off: or when as he
shall be advertised that any of them is ill furnished with victuals, or other
provision: or that ye use of the water might be taken from them, in such a
cause he must not stay to plant a siedge: for that one of these necessities may
suffice to constrayne the most strongest town in the world to render it self
in short time, likewise if the Soldiers be il paid, or if they be a small
number because that few consume in time: and that being ill paid they serve
against their wills chiefly if they be strangers, who do nothing but for
profit, and not for the maintenance of their proper quarrel. Moreover al
towns are not so strong, nor so well provided that the manner of besiedging
before spoken of ought always be used nor that regard had, and when as the
said General would besieege any town as strong as those before spoken of or
any other of mean strength, whatsoever should happen unto him, the order that
he ought to keep therein must be as here follows. Let us suppose that he is
in the field with his four Legions and their followers, going toward a place
which he pretends to besiedge: me think that his camp may march in that
form that I have spoken of heertofore: to weet every Legion with their part
of the Ordnance, and other carriages: the first Legion making the auantgarde:
the second and the third the battle: and the fourth the arriergard. The
bagage appertayning unto the fourth Legion may follow the third or at the tail
of the forth, so that there be some horsemen behind them and one band of the
forlorn hope. When the army is upon the way, the Lieutenant General should
send some trumpet before to summon them although it were a day or two before
the army can ariue before the said town, and after that the town is
summoned, when as the host is with in 3 or 4 miles of it, the said Lieutenant
General shall send the Captain General of the horsemen before, and the
marshall of the field with him, or some other express man of judgment, or go
himself in person, if he give not credit enough to the^: to view the town,
and to consider of the situation and strength of it: and to see where it were
best to place the camp. And to the intent that he that should have this charge
might not be hindered by those of the Garrison to take a sufficient view, he
must be accompanied with some such number of horsemen as might be thought to be
strong enough to repulse those of the town, when as they should issue out.

Moreover he must be furnished with so many bands of the forlone hope, as
might be thought sufficient to succor the horsemen, and to maintain the
skirmish until the Legions ariuall: and for a need to enter into the town, if
they saw a fit occasion, I mean if the Garrison were not very strong: and
that these forerunners, were stronger then they. If so be that the town were
situated in such a place, as it might be vewed at ease, without danger of the
ordnaunce, it might be done so much the better: but if it were so situated
that it might be approached by no means undiscovered, when they are come near
the town with in Cannon shot, the general Chief that has the charge must go
on the one side, and must disperse his people some one way, and some an other,
to retire unto them if he were pursued: he might likewise cause some of his
troops (skattering themselves) to aproch near unto the town walls: and he
himself (with one or two at the most) might go about the town as near as
he might with safety, to the intent to view and consider of the weakness,
and strength of the town, as near as he might conjecture: and what part is
easiest to be battered, where he might plant his ordaunce, and where the Camp
should be made. Whilst this is a doing, it will be a great marvel if those
of the town do not issue out upon his me^, who so doing, it shall be
necessary for the assaulters to meet the^, and to charge them with such a
fury, that they may drive the^ again in at their gates, if it were possible:
or at the least beat them them well: and with how much more value they do
execute this charge, so much the less hurt they shall receive of the ordnaunce
in the town, for that the townsmen seeing them to be mingled pell mell with
their men, not knoweing wheere to bestow a shot surely, shall be constrained to
leave their shooting, fearing to hurt their own men as soon as their enemies.
I saw the like by the Emperor his soldiers before Monople, when as the
Marquis of Gwast came to vewe it, who charged them so whoatly, his men being so
mingled amongst the light horse of the town, that the ordnaunce nor
harquebusieres with in the town, could not shoot without spoiling of their
own men, yet the meddle was almost at the edge of the ditch. I say therefore
that this first charge being handled as it ought to be, may work many great
effects: as to dismay the townes-men at their first ariuall, which is no small
matter. For this assault will as much dismay them if so be that they be beaten
at the first recounter, as it would embolden them if so be that they did resist
the assaliants, or have the better hand of them. It is a thing of a maruailous
consequence, to handle the skirmish at ye first ariual with courage: for it
will make those within the town to think that it would be impossible to resist
a people of such valor, and thereuppon will afterward fear them in their
hearts: for to say the truth, it is very strange if the vanquished do not
fear him that has once beaten him. Besides this, it may perhaps be an
occasion of the taking of some of the chiefest of the town prisoners, or if it
were but some of the simpliest sort, the estate of the town may be discovered
by them: and if any of the chiefest were taken, the General should prove to
corrupt them with money, and to win them unto him, and it might happen that the
town would be yielded through his authority, or the affection that those
within do bear unto him. And if it were so, that such an one were taken by
whose means the town might be gotten, the General must help himself with
him, either by love or force: by love; that is in promising him many fair
things in recompense, if so be that he will yield the town over unto him.
And if by that means he can do nothing with him, he may threaten him with
death, and may advertise those within the town what he pretends to do, if so
be that they will not yield to save his life, or that he himself do not his
endeavor to avoid it: and the said General must cause the prisoner to be
brought in the sight of the town, neither to near nor to far from it, and
there make show to put him to death, to move the inhabitants with compassion,
and to make them the more afraid. Likewise his person may be used for an
instrument to approache to the gates to assault them, for hardly will those
within shoot at him. Finally the furious handling of this first skirmish that I
have spoken of, might be an occasion that the assaulters might be so mingled
with the townsmen, that they might win the gates, and enter pell mell with
the^: which is not so greatly to be maruailed at, because of the prease and
troubles that happen in such like actions, which often times do fall out so
great, that those that are repulsed, have not leisure to reenter their place in
good order; but do retire who best can fastest: so that if these towns have
not provided for this inconvenience before hand, except that they do shut
their gates against their own people, and leave them at the mercy of the
assaulters: it is to be thought, that if the said assaulters do pursue them
pel mell at their heels, yt the town will be gotten at the instant, or at ye
least those that are issued out will be taken prisoners. It is therefore a
matter of no small importance, to proceed at the first in the manner before
spoken of, sith it may cause the war so soon to be ended. The assaulters must
have a special regard unto one thing if it should come so to pass, that they
should enter into the town pell mell with the defenders, that is to assure
themselves of the gates, and to break them off from the hinges if it were
possible, or to let them from shutting by laying great stones or timber in the
way, and also to impeach the letting down of the pertcullis: for the townsmen
may use a flight for a policy to entice the besiegers into the town, and
when as they do see that there are as many entered as they can well master,
they may let down the pertcullis and shut them in: therefore this must be taken
heed of, and a good guard set to keep the gates, and others appointed to win
the gate house, which being woone must be kept as long as the townsmen do make
resistance. The rest must follow the victory, who must execute it so
diligently, that ye garrison nor others may have leisure to range themselves
in battle in the market place, or elsewhere: for it is not to be thought that
there are any beforehand to defend those places, for at this day we make no
such reckoning: for every man as soon as they do hear that an enemy is in
sight, do run to the walls to behold them. I do not blame this diligence: but
yet I do not find it good that Soldiers should abandon the place that they
ought to keep, to run unto any other: nor that the market places in a town
that is besieged, or that does look for a siege, should be without me^ of war
at any time, but should be always guarded with a good number: but these things
have carried me a little from my matter. Wherefore to return again unto the
Captain General of the Horssemen, who after that he has viewed all things
well: specially where the approches may be best made, must sound a retreat and
return again unto the General: and the marshall of the Camp must stay upon
the place where the army should lodge that night, which may be within cannon
shot or nearer if it may be free from the danger of ye ordnance. As for the
form of the Camp, I leave it unto the discretion of the Marshall, who must be
ruled by the situation of the place, and the greatness of the town.

Above all things he must have a care that the Legions do not lie so disioint
the one from the other, nor so placed but that they may easily succor one
another. And if there were any river that should cause the army to lie
divided, there must be a bridge made over it, for them to pass and repasse
the one unto the other, which bridge must be fortified at both ends. Moreover
the army being lodged, dispersed, whether it be to keep the town the more
subject, or to batter it in diverse places, every part must be so well
fortified and rampared, that their forts might not be entered, what endeavor or
force the Townsmen or others might use. Likewise it were necessary, that every
fort should have in it twice as much people as the garriso^ of ye town, except
the situation did help them greatly. One Legion may lodge alone, so that it
were lodged in a strong place, although that the garrison of the town were as
strong as it. And when as there are eight or ten thousand men of war in a
town, two Legions might be lodged together: and keep the siege in two places,
making a trench from the one to the other, placing certain small forts betwixt
the two Camps, to hinder those of the Town from ouer-running those that
should pass too and fro betwixt them And as there must a care be had to defend
the army from the town, so must the like care also be had of the hurt that it
may receive of the country. And if so be that the legions do lodge several by
themselves, their fort must have ye form that I have given it in the first
book, in lodging of one legion alone. And when as the Horssemen might not be
lodged with them conuenientlye, or that the place were not large enough to lay
out the quarters at length, the Marshall of the camp may take out the
Horssemen and lay them further off from the Town, provided that he do lodge
them in some strong place: for in truth the nature of Horsemen in the siege of
a town, is to be lodged somewhat far off, for to resist the courses of
their enemies coming from other towns and garrisons near. Concerning the
allarmes which the besieged may give, their footme^ do issue forth and not
their Horsemen, except that they have some gate free, or that the besiegers do
lie far off. If the Horsemen do lodge a part, it shall be necessary that the
Camp should be so much lessened as the room yt the Horsemen did occupy, and
whereas it should be square if they were all lodged together, and had place
enough, it must be lodged as the situation and the siege will permit. And in
this point only the Camp must be subject unto the situation, because that
Towns are diversely placed, according unto whose situation, the besiegers must
be lodged, and not after the manner that they would. That is here spoken of
the disioynt, lodging, or dividing of the army, may be used at the General his
pleasure. But for the first day of the army his arrival before the Town, the
Camp may have the accustomed form: and afterward the night following, or when
the General does think it convenient, he may divide his people at his will:
but as soon as the said General does arrive with his army, he ought to send
one that is a man well spoken to summon it, who in executing this charge, must
seek by all means to have conference with the Chiefes as is before said: and
the Town being summoned, the General the night following must cause the
approaches to be made in as many places as he does pretend to batter it, and
give order what people should lodge on the one side of the Town, and what
upon the other. Likewise what Chiefes should have the charges of the said
sieges, and what quantity of Ordnance should be necessary in every part. I do
not counsel him to plant all his Ordnance toward the Town, but to have a
regard to place some of the smallest to beat the ways, specially if he do
doubt to be assaulted toward the country. Neither would I counsel him to
divide and dispearse his Camp too much, if he did doubt any puissant enemy
that were of sufficient strength to keep him waking from time to time. But it
is before presupposed, that his enemies have no strength in the field, but only
that there are certain obstinate Towns near, whose garrisons might make
sudden courses, which to impeach, there may be diverse bands of horssemen
lodged in strong places near unto them, who might both conuoy the victuallers
in passing and repassing, and keep the way free from thieves, and other
naughty people which do commonly follow a Camp to spoil comers and goers:
but to return unto the siege. Before that the Ordnance should be brought
near unto the Town, the Master of the same should be furnished with good
store of Gabbions, causing them to be rouled by his Pyoners unto the place
where the Ordnance should be placed. And this work should be put in practice
when as the Moon shines not, but when the nights are dark. Also the
Ordnance must be brought unto the battery with as little noise as may be, to
the intent not to be discovered unto those of the Town, who might shoot at
them. And to color their business the better, there may be a great noise made
in the Camp with Drums, Trompets, and other things, whilst that the
Carters do their endeavor. Part of the Forlorn hope must be placed hard unto
the Towne-gates, who must lie flat upon their bellyes, ready to receive
those that might issue out: and part must occupye Spade and Pickaxe with the
Pyoners, to bring the trenches as near unto the ditch side as they may, and
fill those Gabbions with earth that are appointed to cover the Ordnance, and
the places of the trenches that are subject unto the shot of the Town, which
must be done with so great diligence, that the day do not surprise them
before that they have made the said Trenches, and filled the Gabbions, for
being uncovered, they will serve the defenders for a mark to shoot at: for
my meaning is that the Forlorn hope should be appointed to guard the Trenches,
and if they were not thought strong enough for those of the Garrison, the
Souldyers that serve for the flanks may be put unto them. Which doing, the
Forlorn hope, and those of the flanks of two Legions will make 3432. men,
which is a sufficient number to resist a strong Garrison as I do think, and
they may be augmented, or refreshed with the other bands, if it shall please
the General to appoint them to be in the Trenches by turns, and this guard
must be placed by the Ordnance for to defend it at all times. The same night
that the General has divided his army, he might make a proffer to assault it
before that the Ordnance begin to batter, and if he would skale it with
ladders, the ditches being full of water, which could not immediately be drawn
dry, or filled, he must prepare Bridges expressly to pass the water; and lay
Timber from the Bridges to the Gates of the Town. And if he would put this in
execution, it must be done a little before day, or at midnight when as the
defenders are most heauyest asleep: but being done in a dark night, the
assaulters must have some token or cognizance amongst them, as some word, or
garments of like color. We do at this present use shyrts drawn over our
garments.

If this counsel of assaulting do not like the General, the Master of the
Ordnance must salute the Town in the dawning of the day with Cannon shot, and
must hasten the battery as much as possibly he may, for there is no better way
to have his will of those that are within the Town, if the wall be weak, then
to continue the battery the first day with great diligence, until such time
as the breach be of reasonable breadth, and although it be not of great
breadth, so that the defenses be taken away, it may be assaulted, without
giving the defenders leisure to rampare, or to make any Trench against it
whilst the battery does continue, the stones and clods that fly from the
breach hindering them from doing it. Moreover, they will be so dismayed with
the sudden arrival of the army, and speedy handling of the battery
(except that they be hardened, and accustomed to see a battery) that it will be
very hard but they will be vanquished at the first assault.

Further, at that instant that the assault is given, the Town may be skaled
with ladders on every side, which will put the defenders in great fear to be
lost, how little so ever any part is entered by their enemy, or abandoned by the
defenders. Or there needs but one amongst them to cry that their enemies are
entered at some part for to astonish all the rest, and to cause them to quitte
the places that they ought to defend. The assaulters must use all their
endeavor for to enter at the first assault, resolutely assuring themselves to
do it to good purpose: for if so be that they should be resisted or repulsed,
the defenders would be encouraged, and the assaulters discouraged, so that
afterward there would be much ado to vanquishe them, and to bring the besiegers
again unto the assault, but greatly against their wills.

If the General do think it good to defer the assault until that the
breach be wide and large he may do it: but then those of the town having
leisure, will fortifye against him, so that it will be hard to enter, for that
the inventions are so great that are used at this day in the defending of a
town, that the first assaulters (except it be a great marvel) may accoumpt
themselves to be spoiled and murdered, as soon as they do set forward to go
to a breach, for that it is almost impossible that they should escape without
death: yet notwithstanding the custom is to send foremost the most expertest
and valiantest men of all the army, who serve for no other purpose but to
receive upon their persons all the mischiefs that an enemy has studied to
invent, and prepared in long time before. Moreover, when as these first valiant
men are slain, it is not seen that those that did follow them do long abide
the place, or that they do any endeavor to revenge the death of their Chiefes,
or to go forward, but are so skared with the loss of them, that they have
neither heart nor will to do well, so that the best and first being lost, the
rest will do nothing ought worth. I would confirm my sayings to be true by
the assault that was given at the Castle of Hedin, in the King his presence,
my Lord the Doulphine, and in the presence of the greatest part of the Princes
and Lords of France, if I thought that many of those that were there,
appointed for to assault, would not think evil of me, who ought to have been
encouraged by the forwardnes of many Lords, Captains, and other valiant men,
which showed them the way to aboard their enemies: notwithstanding they were so
skared with the slaughter of those that went foremost, that there was none of
them afterward that would once stir afoote: indeed I would allege this for
an authority, but that I should have ill will for it, and therefore I will
hold my peace, for because that the County Danserne, Captain Harencourt his
brother, and certain others, were slain and hurt like men of virtue, the rest
would not fight, but retired quickly enough.

The Turks do make a better accoumpt in preserving of their Ianissaries, and
other valiant men in their armies, for their Asaspes are appointed first of all
to assault, who are a certain kind of soldiers that are made little accoumpt
of, and do serve but only to discover and endeavor all the inventions that
defenders can devise: so that when as the said Asaspes are repulsed, the
Ianissaries need to fear nothing but handstroakes, for that the murders, the
trains, firepots, firepicks, poddings, fagots, and all other fireworks do
make, have playde their parts: besides the Galtrappes, tables with nails, and
a thousand other mischiefs, are covered with slain and maimed men before that
they do come unto the breach, and their trenches are covered over head, so that
they do but only fight against men, and are so good men that there can be no
better, wherefore it is almost impossible that the defenders should resist
them. If the King in these like cases would be served with those that are in
prisons, and have deserved death, causing them to be safely kept in following
the army, and hazard them at the first point of the assaults that might be
given, dividing them so that they might serve for many times, he should not
leese so many good men as he does, and by that means it would be a hard matter
to repulse his men at any time as they are repulsed: for the said prisoners
should be the first that should abide the mischief that the defenders had
prepared: which prisoners should do nothing but carry boords, planks, and make
bridges over the ditches, and return, and then the souldyers being always at
their heels in a readynes, might enter, and by that means they should be free
of the danger which the first assaulters are subject unto, for that the
defenders will have spued out all their venom upon them first, so that there
is nothing to be doubted before the coming to handstroakes, but certain
harquebusse shot. And to the intent that these condemned prisoners should the
more willingly adventure themselves unto this manifest death, all those must be
promised to be pardoned that do their endeavors well, who should by and by be
quitted of all their offense. Besides, if any of them were hurt, the Marshall
of the Camp should cause them to be provided for. Who so should demand to
know what bands the General should use in these assaults, whether it should
be to enter a breach, or to skale a bullwarke, or wall: I would answer, that
although this question touch the ordinary bands of the Legions, yet he ought
first of all to appoint certain troops of Pikemen of the Forlorn hope, and
as many of those of the flanks. As for the Harquebusiers, they must be in the
trenches, all along the edge of the ditch, to shoot at the defenders when as
they do show themselves. Let us suppose that there is but one breach. When
the General has caused all things to be done, and is ready to assault, the
Princes and Triaries of the first and second Legion should be mingled together,
and raunged in one square Battailon of 50. ranks, every rank having 85. men:
and the Princes and Triaries of the third and fourth Legion should be raunged
together in like manner, and in some place very near unto the town, and not
subject unto the Ordnance: and if the place be not covered enough from the said
Ordnance, they must lie down upon the ground on their bellies, attending in
that order until that the General be ready to use them. As for the
Hastaries, they must be divided into four troops, and must take off those
pieces off from their harness, that might hinder them from mounting lightly
and nimbly at a breach: and when as the Trumpets and Drums do sound to
assault, the Hastaries of the four Legions must assault one after another, the
fourth Legion first, and the Forlorn hope of the fourth Legion must skale it
with ladders: and if that they were not a number great enough, the Forlorn
hope of the third Legion should be at hand to help them. The Hastaries might
have their choice to use their Pikes or their Targets. If they did make choice
of the Pike, they might throw down their Targets in the breach to fill it,
to save their feet from Galtrappes and such like. If their Targets did like
them best, they might make a bridge with their Pikes if need were: and must
fight valiantly as long as they may stand: and if they were victorious they
should enter the Town, and if the Hastaries of the fourth Legion were not
enough, the Hastaries of the third Legion should follow them when as the
General did make sign, and after them the Hastaries of the other Legions.
Those which do enter first, and those of the third Legion, must execute the
victory, and the rest must go directly unto the Market places, and unto the
other great places within the Town, and raunge themselves in Battle in them,
to keep them until such time as there were no more resistance made. The
Princes and Triaries must not stir from their places, except that they were
commanded. But if so be that the aforesaid Hastaries who first assaulted
should be repulsed, it touches them of the third Legion to assault after them,
and then those of the second, and those of the first after them. And if so be
that all these Hastaries should be repulsed, the Princes must assault after
them, every Legion in his turn, beginning with the fourth, and ending with the
first. And if the Princes could do nothing, the Triaries must have their turns
one after another: and by this means the defenders should be troubled with one
assault upon another, and not have leisure to take breathe: and in so doing, I
do not blame the defenders if they can not withstand twelve assaults, one
being given presently after another, by good souldyers and fresh men,
specially in the presence of the General of the army, the Captain General of
the footmen, and the Colonels who being near assistants, will judge of every
man's valor. As for the sending of the horssemen when all these have failed, I
know not what to say, but the proof will cost nothing. Which said horssemen
upon the days of batteries and assaults, ought to guard that side of the
Camp next the Country, to withstand the inconvenience that might happen on
that side, specially if there were any enemies near, who might assault any
quarter of the Camp to hinder the assault of the Town, at which time also
the Camp might be troubled to make resistance unto those of the Town, who
might sally out at the same instant.

I have said before, that the General should appoynte the Princes and
Triaries of two Legions to be raunged in one whole Batailion together, and
those of the other two together, as near unto the town as they might, to be
employed when it should be needful, who should serve for no other purpose,
but to make resistance unto those of the town if so be that they did sally
forth whilst the assault did continue: and when as the General should take
the Princes from one of his Batailons to send them unto the assault, it is
meet that the Hastaries should be put in their places, and by this means the
Batailons might be reenforced, and not diminished. I must not here forget a
policy that was used before Golette in Barbery, by the Emperor his Gunners,
at that instant that the Christians were ready to give the assault: that was
for to deceive the Turks and Moors that were within, and to make them to
believe that the assaulters did continue in their trenches (for it is a
general rule that the battery must cease when the assaulters are near the
breach) the said Gunners continued their shooting, until such time as the said
Christians had aborded them in their fort: and because the Ordnance should do
no hurt amongst their men, they did put in wadds of hay instead of shot:
wherein the infidels were deceived, for that they attended upon the Ordnance
which ceased not: wherefore when as they saw the Christians at handstroakes
with them, before that they did look for them, it did dismay and trouble them,
and caused them to break. In that manner before spoken of may the Legions be
divided for to go unto the assault, the first day that the Ordnance does
beat, or at any other time: and if the General do know any great difficulty
to win it by battery only, he may put the mine in practice also, if it may
be mined: which mine may be used to enter into the town withal, and piersed
through: or may be used to overthrow the walls and other defenses through the
violence of the powder that must be put into it, which powder must not be
fiered, before the General see his time convenient to give order to assault
it. The General should also enquire, and cause it to be diligently searched,
if there were no vault, or watercourse that issued into the ditches, for they
might be very necessary helps to get a Town by. Naples was taken by
Bellisarius, in the year 538. by means of a conduct of water. It was likewise
taken in the selfsame place by King Remus in the year 1463. Monople was
taken by the Marquis of Guast, by means of an old cave that lay buried under
ground. Moreover, it would not be amiss to offer many skirmishes, and to seek
by all means possible to draw the defenders out of their fort, to the intent
to diminish and waste their people. And if it were so that the plague were in
the country, there might be commandment given to recover some of the
garments or other things that the infected did use, or the persons infected
might be brought, so that there were heed taken for bringing the infection
amongst his men in stead of sending it amongst others. And having recovered
these things, or the persons infected, they should be laid in such places
whereas they might fall into his enemies hands, that by that means they might
have the infection to come amongst them. This means used the Lord Rance
against us to infect our Camp, when he was in Cremone. Furthermore, if the
General did hope to vanquish them by famine, he ought to have a care that no
victual should enter. If the town he besieged were situated near the Sea,
it were necessary that he should be master of the Sea: or else it will be
victualled and refreshed of all things in despite of him. And if it have any
great river near, he must keep good watch that no victual do enter by it:
and not only for boats, but for all other things that the water may drive
along. For the Romans maintained many days the garrison of Casselin, by
means of barrels full of corn and nuttes which they cast into the river that
passed by their walls, which were afterward taken up by those of the town,
Anniball not knowing of it in long time. There are means also to be used for
the famishing of a town, which do well serve in this place. Fabius Maximus
destroyed all the corn of the Campenois, insomuch that there was nothing
gathered in all the whole summer season: and when the seed time came, he went
far of and forsook them, because that he would not hinder them from sowing
again: hoping that they would unfurnish themselves of a great part of their
grain, which they did: whereupon the said Fabius returned again afterward
and destroyed all that was grown upon the ground: who finding themselves
unfurnished of victuals, were constrained to yield unto his mercy. After that
he conquered many other towns, and desiring that a town called Rhege,
sometimes situated in Calabria, and now destroyed, feigned himself to be a
friend unto the towns men: and under color of friendship he required victuals
for to maintain his army, which being granted unto him for his money, he
lived a certain time with their victuals: and afterward, when he knew that
their victuals went low, he then declared himself to be their enemy, and
overcame them.

By this means Alexander would have taken Leucadie, which abounded with all
things: who before he approached unto it, taking all the towns and strong
places round about it, suffered the garrisons of the said places and all others
to retire unto Leucadie, to the intent that the great multitude of people that
retired thither should famish the town the sooner. Phalaris having had wars
with certain knights of Sicil, fayning afterward to be friends with them,
gave them certain corn of his to keep, which was (as he said) remaining:
which corn he put into certain Garners within their town, causing secret
holes to be made in the roofes of the said Garners, whereby the rain running
into the corn might corrupt it: upon the trust of which corn, the inhabitants
sold their own corn so much the better cheap: but being besieged the year
following, finding the corn that the said Phalaris had given them to keep to
be corrupted, and their own spent, he forced the^ to do what he would.

With these policies the aforesaid General might help him self, if they
might fall out for his purpose: and on the other part if he would make the
besieged believe that he would not stir from before their town until he had
his pretense; he might imitate the examples following: as Clearchus the
Lacedemonian, who being advertised that the Thracians were retired unto the
mountains, having carried with them all things necessary for their
sustentation, and that they hoped to be delivered from him by means of the
famine which would constrain him to go his ways: he commanded that at the
coming of certain Ambassadors unto him in the behalf of the Thracians, that
some one of his Thracian prisoners should be publicly slain, and that
afterward he should be cut in small pieces: which being done, he sent these
pieces into diverse quarters of his Camp in the sight of the said Ambassadors,
making show that it was the victual wherewith he fed his Camp: which
inhumanitie being reported unto the said Thracians, made them so afraid, that
they yielded sooner then they would have done, imagining that the said
Clearchus sought by all means possible to keep himself long time in the
country, seeing that he fed his men with so execrable a meat.

Tyberius Gracchus having wars with the Portugalles, besieging a certain
town of theirs, which vaunted that they were sufficiently victualled for ten
years: he answered them, that he would have them the eleventh year;
wherewith they were so dismayed, that they came to composition with him
immediately. An enemy may also be persuaded that a siege should continue long,
by building of houses, and lodgings, which may hold out winter and summer, and
by making of great provision of victuals, and building of Milles and Ouens, to
grind corn and bake bread. The General must seek by all means possible to
make the besieged afraid, and help himself with all the subtilties that might
serve his turn: specially with the same that Phillip used against a Castle
which he could not take by force, who caused a great quantity of earth to be
brought unto ye edge of their ditch by night, making show that he mined: for
which cause those of the Garrison fearing that their place would be pierced
through in short time by the mine, yielded themselves incontinent. Pelopidas
besieging two towns that stood near together; being before the one, commanded
secretly that four of his knights should come unto him, out of the other siege
with the greatest joy that they might possible, and crowned as it was the
manner of those that did bring any good news: and had given order that a wood
that was betwixt both the towns should be set on fire, to the intent to make
them believe that it was their neighbors town that burnt. And moreover, he
caused certain of his own men to be apparelled and led like prisoners near
unto the town side that he besieged: wherefore the inhabitants thinking that
the other aforesaid town was taken, doubting that the like misery would
happen unto them, if they did not yield, gave themselves over incontinent unto
Pelopidas: who knew that the other would do no less when as it saw it self
to be left alone.

A General may likewise cause a town to be assaulted on that side that it
does least doubt an assault: beginning first to assault it on that part that
they do keep greatest watch. He might alsso practice to entice them into the
field, if that there were no other way to vanquish them: and do as many good
Chiefs have done in times past: amongst who^ Lucius Scipio in Sardaigne, having
besieged a most strong town, appointed at a certain time during the assiege,
that his men should make show to mutin, and to be in arms one against
another, for which mutins sake he feigned suddenly to fly and all his in
disorder: which being perceived by the towns men, they issued out at their
heels with a great power, and went so far after them from their town, that
a certain ambush which the said Scipio had laid near unto the town, had time
enough to assault and take it, for that there was not one soul that did defend
it self.

Anniball being before a great town, placed a good number of his Soldiers in
ambush near unto the said town, and having enticed the citizens out with a
skirmish, making show that he was not in safety for them in his Camp, he
abandoned it, suffering them to take it: the towns men thinking that all was
won, seized upon his Camp, besides those that were left within issued out
both great and small, thinking to have their part of the pillage: but when as
they thought that they had won all, they lost al: because that those that were
in the ambush thrust themselves into their town and took it easily, for that
there was no body in it to defend it.

Himilco likewise placed an ambush by night near unto a town which he
besieged called Agrigentum, commanding them that when as he had enticed the
towns men out, and drawn them far of, that they should set certain wood
and other things on fire, and issue out of their ambush: and when the day came,
he offered them of the town skirmish, who issuing out upon him, chased him
far of, for he would have it to be so. Whereupon the ambush put fire unto
the wood, the smoke whereof was so great, that the Agregentins thinking that
it was their town that was set on fire by some mishappe, returned to save
their town who best might fastest: whereupon the ambush presenting themselves
before them, and Himilco following them near, they got the towns men betwixt
them, and ouerthrewe them.

The Children of Israel used once this policy against the line of Benjamin. To
make short, if all these subtilties can bring forth no fruit, the General
may assay to overcome them by making show to leave them quite, remoouing his
host: for in so doing, perhaps the towns men will think themselves so
sure, that they will keep but little watch or none at all: whereupon the said
General may return with all speed to assault them, travailing as much ground
in one night as he did before in four days. I had forgotten to tell, that in
pretending to besiege one town, a General may make show to besiege another:
to the intent that the town that does doubt nothing, might unfurnish it self
of garrison for to help the other: whereupon that may be left which is
furnished, and the other besieged that is unarmed: as the Lord of Lautrec did
when as he approached near unto Milan, who feigned that he cared not for Pauie,
(although it was the town that he sought) for after that he was advertised
that the County of Belleioyense had sent part of his people unto the succor
of Milan, and thereby to have disarmed Pauie which he ought to have better
furnished and armed: the said Lord of Lautrec placed his siege before Pauie,
and took it easy enough. But for to get out of this matter, leaving all these
subtilties a part, I say that a Lieutenant General ought never to keep the
field, nor an assiege so long as winter lasts: for it will be a great change
if it do not happen ill in the end: for that a winter siege wastes, and
consumes an army; whereas those within a town are well lodged, and do take
no more care then they need. Moreover, the besiegers are at the mercy of the
cold, snowes, raines, and a thousand other persecutions: so that there needs
no other enemy but the wether it self to overthrow them, if the siege do
continue any time: besides, in winter victuals can hardly be brought unto a
Camp for the difficulty of the ways, and waters, if so be it should come by
land: and if it should come by sea, the tempests and outrages which are more
common in the winter then at any other time, would hinder the bringing of it:
so that we must conclude, that all things necessary for the maintenance of a
siege, will then fall out ill for the besiegers. Winter therefore is a most
dangerous season for those that do keep the Camp, and of most advantage for
those that are besieged: so that if they be strong, and can tarry for a time
convenient, they may raise the siege and overthrow all, or at the least give
the besiegers some scourges. Also the Garrisons of the other towns and forts
that are in the country may be in short time assembled, to charge the said
Camp, of whom (in mine opinion) they might have as good a market as they
would wish: forasmuch as the said Garrisons are fresh and rested men, and the
others are pined and half dead with famine. The like may happen unto those
that do keep the field, or do martch from place to place in an enemy his
country in the winter: for that ill wether will consume them in short time, if
so be that they lodge without doors: and for to lodge them covered, they shall
be forced to separate themselves in villages here and there: and being
assaulted when as they are so lodged, they may be overthrown easily. In fine,
the best way for a General is to retire his men into towns, when as winter
does come, and to go into the field about the last of March, and to keep the
field until the last of October: and the countries might be such where the
wars should be made, that the months of July and August would be as much to be
feared, by reason of the extreme heat that it does make in some regions, as
the most coldest winter that might be: for these two extremities are not to be
endured: for either of them may be causes of many great sicknesses and evils,
who so does not provide for it. Wherefore, the General must have a care to
end his wars before winter. And being constrained to keep his army in the
field in a very hot country, he must always plant his Camp in such places,
where it might be covered with trees, and watered with springs, to refresh his
Soldiers. And moreover, lodge them housed, if it were possible, to keep them
from the heat. But this matter has lasted long enough, specially for that
men's wits at these days are so quick, that they do provide of themselves
for all things that are necessary in such like cases. I do but only say, that
if the General do get a town by composition, that he ought to keep all the
articles that have been agreed upon betwixt him and those of the town from
point to point: for in doing otherwise, he should never find town or man that
would give him credit, or trust his promise afterward, but they would do all
that they could imagine before that they would fall into his hands. As I do say
he ought to keep his promise unto those of a town that does yield: so mean I
that he should keep it unto all others after that he has once passed his
word, using toward all those that he does conquer, as great lenity and
meekenes as he may possible, and above all things to eschew cruelty: because
that the true office of a conqueror is to pardon and to have pity upon the
conquered: yet reason would that this pardoning should be done with advise,
least he do give them an occasion to begin the wars again at their own
appetites. For oftentimes the clemency of Captain Generalles of hoasts is so
great, that they do pardon all those whom they do conquer, and all those that
have offended: which facility in pardoning, does cause them ofttimes to commit
new offenses: for that they do look to be received whenever they should
yield.

In such cases me think there ought a mean to be used, and sometimes some one
ought to be chastened, to make others to be afraid: specially those which do
revolt without cause. I do say moreover, that they ought likewise to be
chastened that are so fool hardy, that they dare defend a place which is not
defenceable (and but a dove house) hoping to be received unto mercy at all
times: causing upon this hope a great quantity of provision to be spent, and
an army to spend time for a thing of no value. I say that such ought to be
used somewhat rigorously, and so we do reasonably well at this day: for their
least punishment is to be married unto the Galleys for ever: yet some do use
it more graciously then others, of whom the County of Tend is one, who might
have used prisoners more rigorously then he did: but it is not said that faults
should be always punished according unto their deserts: specially if he that
has failed be otherwise a man of virtue: nor likewise that great hearts should
not show their greatness many ways, specially to pardon a fault that touches
them perticularly: as the said County did the offense of a certain Captain,
which he took in one of his fortresses in Piemont, whom he used always so
courteously, that the remembrance of that clemency ought not to be forgotten:
and for that cause I have inferred it in this place. But ye cruelty that a
Lieutenant General ought to fly, is after the winning of a battle, or after
the taking of a town by force. For what can be more disagreeing from man his
nature, then after the treading of an enemy his Ensigns under feet, sacking
their Camp, dispersing them, in putting them to fight, and cutting their
battles in pieces in the fury, to slay them in a cold mood that were not
slain in the battle: or after that a breach is forced, and those slain that
stood in the defense of their town, then to kill al those that do yield? and
the poor inhabitants both old and young, notwithstanding that they are
disarmed and innocent? And moreover, to suffer wives and maidens to be
ravished, and sometimes slain, their Churches pillaged, and their sacred
things converted into vild uses? In truth it is more then cruelty. The
General therefore ought to have a great care of those disorders, forbidding
his people to exercise the like cruelties, but only while the battle
continues, and there should be those amongst them that should forbid it.
Moreover, if he would that the people of a town should make the less
resistance, after that they are forced to quite a breach, and not constrain
them to fight and to sell their lives dear, as people out of hope for want of
a place to retire unto: he should cause one of the town gates to be set open
to give them passage, and proclamation to be made that his Soldiers should not
charge them that did not resist, nor hurt those that laid down their arms.
For to be brief, if a General will be well spoken of both by his friends and
his enemies, and be beloved of all men; he must after a victory cause the
hurt men of both parts to be provided for as carefully, as if they were his
mere kinsmen. Furthermore it is requisite that he should recompense his men,
that did their endeavors well: or at the least that he should commend them
publicly, and advertise the king of their virtue, attributing unto every man
his deserts: and not unto himself as many do, that speaking nothing of that
their Soldiers have done, but give the praise unto themselves. And finally
he must use himself so toward all men, that it might not be thought that
he made war, to the intent to kill and to murder his enemies: nor to ravish
their goods, and to appropriate unto himself the honor due unto other men:
but only to get a good name, and to do his Prince service. I might speak
many things more of a conqueror, for I have a large argument, but that is
spoken shall suffice: and therefore I will take another matter in hand, which
is no less requisite in an host then any other may be, of which I must make
a great discourse: to wit, of ye justice that ought to reign and to be
exercised in a Camp, I mean the laws that men of war ought to keep, if
they do intend to do their duties, and to deserve the name of good and true
Soldiers.

How Soldiers ought to govern themselves according unto the laws of the
wars: with the chiefest laws, and the manner of proceeding in judgment
against an offender
The 3. Chapter.
SO far has been proceeded in this matter in the chapters before going,
that the four legions which I have taken upon me to conduct, have wholly
vanquished their enemies: and by consequence they do continue masters of town
and country: wherefore they now do want nothing else but to know how to
keep that they have woone, which is no small thing: for being well understood,
there is more difficulty to keep things conquered then to get them. And
therefore I do say that although the General have beaten his enemies in the
field, and have all the towns, and strong places of the country in his
possessions, yet there is nothing done except he do seek to keep surely
those things that he has conquered: specially the towns taken by force of
arms: who in my judgment will always have an eye upon those that have
endomaged them: and a desire to be reuenges of outrages that have been done
unto them, how long so ever that they do tarry. And therefore it is impossible
to keep so good a watch ordinarily, having to do with a people so desirous
to revenge, but that in time the watch may be surprised. To withstand this
danger mine opinion is, that after the taking of a town by an assault, which
cannot be done without great mischiefs, that the inhabitants should avoid the
town wholly, and go seek some other place to inhabit in far off. And who so
would separate them sending part one way, and part another, should do wisely,
and the first inhabitants being voided, the towns should be replenished with
Frenchmen, assigning unto them their houses and possessions. By this means the
king should be assured of the town: besides if he would place part of his
Soldiers in it, he might richely reward them with the goods and lands of his
enemies. One the other part the towns would not be so apt to rebel, and
ready to stand in arms against us as they are, fearing to be dealt withal as
is aforesaid, whereas they do now make no difficulty, seeing that rebels and
recusants (although that they be conquered) are not constrained to change place
nor habitations. When as the Romans in times past did take any town by force,
they used costomarilye to take out all the old inhabitants, and to replenish
it with a certain number of other Citizens: and sometimes with one of their
Legions: which town being so peopled, was called a Roman Colonie: and served
the Cittye of Rome for a most strong Bulwark, and faithful Garrison against
their enemies: in which doing they did assure their estate more and more, and
enlarged their Empire by little and little. So likewise might the King do if
the towns that were taken by force of arms, were made French Colonies: and
that ye first inhabitants dispersed here and there within his realm, I mean
if he would handle them so gently, and had not rather to have them far off
then near. We read concerning this matter that the Children of Israel used
their Conquests much more rigoruslie: for in all the land of Canaan they never
did take one to mercy: but slew them all small and great: I believe that they
did it partly to obey the will of God, who had so commanded them, and partly to
assure their own state the better, and not to stand always in doubt as they
should have don, if they had suffered their enemies to have lived mingled
amongst them. Edward the King of England having taken the town of Callice (not
by assault, but by composition) after that he had besiedged it eleven months,
drove away utterly the people that he found in it, and replenished it wholly
with Englishmen hoping to assure himself of the town, better then if the
first inhabitants had continued in it: because of the affection he knew that
they would always have carried unto the Frenchmen, and that either first or
last they would have proved to have returned unto their first Prince, and
have thrust out their second: as in truth it was to be feared. If we will be
warned by those examples that do happen every day, and that have happened in
such like cases within this Realm and else where they would make us to be wise
and well advised, and keep us in time to come from falling into those
inconveniences, which the Princes do fall into: yt do not regard to people the
towns which they do win by force with their own natural subjects, driving
away the vanquished: which in mine opinion is the chiefest remedy to withstand
the malice of an enemy, and the treasons that the vanquished might practice
against their new Lords. The General may also find other remidies to be
assured of a country or town newly conquered: which is by putting Garrisons
into the foretresses which are in them, or which he may cause to be new built
in places most fit to keep the country in obedience. He may likewise assure
himself of a place, by seazing upon the principal personages of the country,
or those that have the greatest credit within the Towns, and keep them for
Hostages in some sure place. And although that these are good means to keep
people of a Province in subjection: yet the first, to weet the making of French
Colonies is much better: specially if we had conquered them by force as is a
foresaid: or that they were weary to be our subjects, as the Italians are
within ten days after that they are conquered: for then they will practice
nothing so much as to be revenged, or to hunt us out from amongst them: and
there are no hostages that will serve the turn: for after that a people do
suffer their own desires to surmount them, and do discover their courage:
there is nothing in this world that can appease them, but only force:
wherefore we are constrained to keep always strong Garrisons amongst them,
and by that means are put unto a marvelous charge. As for the towns which
do give themselves unto a Prince of their own freewills, or those that do
yield before that any force be done unto them, they will not be so hard to be
kept, as if they had been taken with violence: so that there were no other to
be doubted then they themselves, I would not greatly care for to give them any
garrison. But if there were any fortress or castle in such a town, I do not
say but that we should seize upon it, and furnish it with people and all
things necessary, or else raze it utterly. But if there were none before, I
would cause none to be builded afterward: but would do mine endeavor to win
the hearts of the inhabitants, and to keep them in subjection more by
benevolence then by constraint: having a regard not to hurt them either in
body or goods without great cause. Above all things the General must abstain
from taking of other men's goods: for that men do sooner forget the deaths of
their parents, then the loss of their patrimony: and furthermore he ought to
be abstinent and chaste, having a regard not to defile any man's wife or
daughter, either by love or force: for there is no crime that does so much
offend the hearts of the people, as to see their wives seduced or forced: and
contrarily no greater mean to win their hearts, then to use chastity and
justice toward every man, imitating Scipio the chaste, and Caesar the just,
who obtained with more ease the dominions (the one of Spain, and the other of
France, through two examples which they did show of their virtue) then by any
great force that they did use. For Scipio although that he was young, and a
gallant man, yet he restored a Gentlewoman of most excellent beauty, unto her
father and husband, without ransom: and as he quitted her freely so he
restored her unto her friends as entirely in her honor, as she was at the
time of her taking: which act did profit him more then all his force.

Caesar being in France paid for the wood that he had caused to be cut for to
fortify his host withal: wherein he got such a reputation to be just, that
it made his enterprises to be achieved with the more ease. I say therefore
that a General that is chaste and just, shall win the hearts of a people
more thereby, then by any other means that he may use. Wheerefore if I were in
his place, I would have as great a care as might be possible, neither to do
them wrong in goods or reputation: and as I would refrain my self from doing
wrong, so would I also that my Soldiers should use themselves well, and that
they should so behave themselves, and live amongst others, as they would live
amongst themselves, or amongst their most special friends. And this were easy
enough to be done, if that they had been taught to live well before, and that
Justice had been exercised in the host. But forasmuch as there is nothing so
hard to be done, as that which a man has not been exercised in (as
appears by our Soldiers, who knows not at what end to begin to do well,
until such time as they are constrained to refrain themselves from doing
evil) if our Leiutenant General will have his Soldiers to be such as is
requisite that they should be for to exercise the art of the wars as it
ought to be exercised, and to behave themselves in time of peace like honest
men, he must begin betimes to govern them according unto the military laws
of the wars, to the intent that force may be changed into custom, and the
custom of well doing may be converted into nature: and by that means how
naught and corrupt soever the Soldiers are at the beginning, by use they might
become honest men.

I take all those for Military laws, which do command men to live honestly
upon pain of death: that no man should be endomaged without the General his
leave, that the king might be humblye served: and that the faction of the
wars should be exercised as duty would, in sum, that the Chief under
whose charge they swear to serve, and of whom they are waged should be obeyed
in all things: which points are so general and do comprehend in them so many
others, that it is convenient to specify them perticularly, principally those
that do condemn unto death. As for the other laws that do not extend unto
the taking away of life, I do refer them unto the discretion of the
Provost, and unto others that have power and charge to punish them that do not
observe them. As for the cheifest laws, they are these that follow.

FIrst of all, whosoever shall practice or commit treason against the king, in
what manner so ever it be, or who so shall counsel or favor and aid his
enemies.

Item, whosoever shall have conference with his enemies, without leave of the
Captain General, or of one of the principal Chiefes.

Whosoever shall reueile the secrets of the Counsel, be it unto the king his
enemies, or unto his own proper friends: specially if any hurt might proceed
of the discovery.

Whosoever shall send lettets or message unto his enemies, without leave of the
Lieutenant General.

Whosoever does not immediatlye advertise his superior, of all that he does
know concerning the king his honor and profit, or his damage.

Whosoever does run away, and go toward his enemies, or who so is taken in
his departing.

Whosoever does break the truce or peace, not having express charge to do
it, by those unto whom it does appertain.

Whosoever being taken prisoner by his enemies, does not seek to eskape as
often as he may, except he has given his promise not to depart without leave.

Whosoever shall yield up a place into his enemies hands, except that he should
be too much constrained to do it, and that in truth it were like, that a very
good man would have done as much.

Whosoever does lay hands upon his superior, or his Provost, or upon any
officer to do them hurt.

Whosoever does lay hands upon any of the Chiefes, members, or officers, of
any legion or band whatsoever it be* specially if it be at that time that the
said Chiefes and Officers do exercise their offices, or at any other time
except that the said Chiefes would do them wrong, and beat them without a good
occasion, or put them in danger of their lives.

Whosoever does kill his Soldier for his own pleasure, the said Soldiers
not deserving to be ill used.

Whosoever shall disobey the cries that the Drums and Trumpets shall make:
specially if the said cries be made upon pain of the heart, or upon pain of
death.

Whosoever shall practice to make any mutiny.

Whosoever shall kill any man except it be in the defense of his own person.

Whosoever shall ravish any woman.

Whosoever shall take any thing in the Church, wheather it be sacred or
profane, but with the license of the General.

Whosoever shall cause himself to be inrowled in two bands at once.

Whosoever shall pass twice in one muster.

Whosoever shall go out of any band without leave of his Colonel, who also
shall have no authority to give leave unto any man except it be to be absent
for a certain time, and afterward the party licensed, is bound to return
again within his time: for the Lieutenant General only has this
authority. Soldiers ought likewise to be forbidden from running from one
band unto another, and the Captains from receiving or harbowring of them,
upon great perrill unto them both.

Whosoever shall fail to follow his Ensign, or not be found in any other
place that he is commanded.

Whosoever shall abandon his Ensign without leave, or leave the place that he
ought to keep being ranked in battle.

Whosoever shall fail to be at the watch when he is commanded, and who so
shall forsake his watch.

Whosoever shall reueile the watche-worde unto his enemies, or unto any other
that any damage might ensue unto the Hoaste.

Whosoever shall be found sleeping, either in Skoute or in Sentenell.

Whosoever shall abandon the place that he ought to keep, being placed in it
by the Serieant of the band or other officer, whether it be in watch, skoute,
or other place, except yt he that has placed him there, do take him away, or
some other whom he knows well has charge to do it.

Whosoever shall be absent under coullour of spy, or being in Skoute without
the Camp, or be not found in a readiness when as an enemy does assail the
host.

Whosoever having charge to Skoute without or within the Camp, does so evil
his endeavor, that the enemy does assault the said Camp suddenly, and
surprise it.

Whosoever is appointed to defend a breach, trenche, or passage, and does
abandon it wholly, although that he be forced by his enemy,

Whosoever entering into a town taken by force shall stay to sack and not
follow his Ensign unto what place soever it does go, not forsaking it,
until that proclamation be made by the General his Trumpet, that every man
shall make his prea: and if so be that no proclamation were made, then every
man must refrain from sacking upon the same pain.

Whosoever shall not do his endeavor to recover his Ensign if it happen to
fall into the enemy his hands, and when as it cannot be recovered, then must
be some rygor used against the Soldiers that have suffered it to be lost.

Whosoever flies being ranged in battle, or does march too slowly, in the
giving of an assault, or does play the coward in what manner soever it be.

Whosoever faineth to be sick, when as he should fight with his enemies, or
go unto any service.

Whosoever shall see his superior in the danger of his enemies, and not do
all his endeavor to succor him immediatlye.

Whosoever shall take any thing from a victualer or other that do bring any
provision unto the Camp.

Whosoever shall take any thing from those that are the king his friends, or
who so shall steal any thing from his soldiers, specially their arms and
horses,

Whosoever shall misuze the people of the country where the war is made,
either in body or goods, except that they be declared rebels to the king.

Whosoever shall be found unfurnished of the harnes and arms, for which he is
inrouled: specially if he had lost them in play or in flying, or else where
through his own negligence.

In like manner must those horsemen be handled, which do play away their
horses, or suffer them to be spoiled through their own negligence, for not
keeping them as they should do.

Whosoever shall go out of the quarter of his Legion above an hundred paces
without leave of one of his superiors.

Whosoever should receive a stranger or a suspected person in to his lodging,
or any other except he be of the same legio^ without showing him first unto his
Superior, and asking leave to lodge him.

Whosoever does quarrel with any man in his watch, ambushe, or in any other
place, where silence ought to be kept.

Whosoever shall first begin to do any man injury, either in word or deed,
because that of injuries quarrels do rise, and of quarrels proceed many
disorders in a Camp.

Whosoever shall run unto a fray, with any other weapon then with his Sword,
except he be a Chief, or have some office in the host.

Whosoever shall go about to revenge any injury done unto him, whether it
were done unto him at that instaunt, or long before, by any other means then
by justice: it is not said, that he may not require the Combat, body for body,
if so be that the controversy cannot be mittigated by any other means, which
poincte is reserved unto the Lieuetenaunt General his authority.

Whosoever shall strike stroke at his adversary, either in heat or otherwise,
if a third do cry hold, to the intent to part them: except that they did
fight a Combat in a place incloased: and then no man shall be so hardy to bid
hold, but the General.

Whosoever should carry away money that another has truly won, or does take
his last hand, except it be with the good will of him that has won, but to
do well, and to avoid the manifold inconveniences that do proceed of play, it
ought to be forbidden altogether.

Whosoever should use couzonage or false play, after what manner soever it were,
whereby any man should be deceived.

Whosoever shall run before the battles whether it be to be first lodged,
or for any other intent, or whosoever shall stragle from the hands, whilst
that they do martch.

Whosoever should ransom his host, or other person, not being lawful
prisoner, and being lawful prisoner, do take more the^ the conditions which
are agreed upon betwixt the chiefs of the two hoastes do allow; if so be yt
there be any conditions made betwixt them, and if there be none the ransom
must be as favorable as may be possible, because that the like may happen unto
us.

Whosoever should enter into a Camp, or other place of war at any other place
then at the gates accustomed to go in and out at: for going in and out at any
other place, is a capital crime.

Whosoever should not retire when the Trumpet one his side does sound the
retreat, whether it be in issuing out of a town, in skirmishing, or in other
fight.

Whosoever should speak loud, or make great noise whilst the army i^ in
battle, or in other place where as they ought to keeepe silence, except they
be Chifes and officers.

Whosoever should pass one whole day without exercising of his arms in some
part of the same, except he were otherwise employed in the kings service.

Whosoever shall do any thing that may be prejudicial unto the king his
service, or domageable unto his friends, in what manner soever it should be.

And finally, whosoever should despite God, and blaspheme him after the manner
that they do at this day.

I would also willingly put in those that do swear, and take his name in
vain, and do cut of his arms, and head if I thought it would be received
amongst us. I would likewise make mention of false witnesses, Sodomites, and
those that have an ill opinion of our christian faith: if these crimes were not
so greatly priueleged as they are, and that there is no man but he does know
well, that they ought not to be supported, nor many other offenses which I do
leave for brevity. I would have all these laws to be written in certain
tables, and to be hanged in the enterances of all the Colonels tents: to the
intent that the Soldiers might always see the orders, that they ought to
keep in camp, and in following the wars upon pain of death, which pain
shall be measured according unto the crime. For I do mean that the one shall be
more grievously punished then the other, having regard unto the shame which is
or may proceed of the offense: and who so would, that his soldiers should not
excuse themselves with ignorance in this matter, as to say that they knew not,
that this or that was forbidden, or commanded, must cause these laws to be
published through his host once every month, and also cause them to be read
publicly in the presence of the legions, as often as they do pass muster.
They must also be taught them before that the Legions do assemble, and
likewise when as the army is assembled. For the first thing that a general
ought to do, is to foresee unto the disorders that his own men might commit
amongst themselves, and afterward unto the damage that they may do unto the
Country round about him, if so be that they be his friends: and this done, he
may with a greater liberty make wars with his enemies, then if he had wars
within his army, and without it with his enemies.

We read that Emperor Frediricke Barbarouse, being entered into Italy with a
great army, to the intent to punish the Milannois, who were rebelled, would
not begin his wars until such time as his men had sworn to observe certain
laws which he established, because he would take away the occasion of
controversies which do happen amongst Soldiers, from time to time: and also
punish those that should commit any disorder. The example of this Emperor
ought our General to immitate at the beginning of the assembling of his Host,
causing them to swear, from the highest to the lowest, to observe the
aforesaid laws, and to help with all their power to maintain them: and those
things which I have said, the Soldiers should be forbidden to do one unto
another: shall be likewise forbidden to be done unto those of the towns that
are under our obedience, and also unto those of the conquered Country. For
reason would that we should live with them as if we were one body.

But since I have proceeded so far, I must speak of the manner of judging and
condemning the Soldiers that do not obey the aforesaid laws, or the setting
at liberty of those that are wrongfullye accused, and to condemn those false
accusers. For after the giving of laws, it is necessary, to show how the
same should be executed. For as I have said before, that it serves to no
purpose, to make laws and proclamatio^s every day, if so be that they be not
kept from point to point. Wherefore sithence I have spoken of the principal
points where on life does depend: and those that I do think to be most fit
to bridle Soldiers from doing those evils which they do most commonly
commit, it is necessary that the manner of proceeding in judgment, wherein
death consists should follow: for I will not touch the other at all. For the
handling of this business, me think that every Colonel ought to judge those of
his own legion, taking unto him his Captains, with their members, and officers:
who should proceed in that manner that I will show hereafter. As for that which I
have said in the first book touching the particular orders of these legions,
that in every legion there should be a provost: I do mean that his office
should extend but to the determining of civil causes, and not to causes of
life and death, nor after any appeal. So it is that an appeal should never be
permitted, except the matter did concern some officer, who were condemned to
be punished corporally, or to do some notable penance. But as for ye simple
soldiers, they should not be permitted to appeal from the judgment of a
provost, except that he were condemned to die: and then the appeal shall come
before the Colonel, who with the other judges aforesaid, shall examine if the
party condemned did rightly appeal or not, Moreover, I do not mean any way
to diminish the authritie of the Prouosts, nor of my masters ye Marshals,
although that I have appointed other particular: for I am not ignorant that
they do know all manner of vagabonds, and have power to punish them with death
when they do get them: but for that ye Legionaries are sworn and known men,
it is requisite yt they should have their ordnarie Judge, who should administer
justice unto them as well in civil causes as in criminal as long as the
Legions are under their Ensigns: and to yt intent I have instituted unto
every Legion a man of law, to counsel the Colonells: wherefore I will not
spend the time to show the order yt the prouosts ought to observe in their
judgments: for as much as it is to be thought that they should not have their
offices except they understood how to execute them, and they are clearks of ye
right stamp which I have appointed them to assist them in all their courts that
they do hold, when as they would judge in any matter. I will therefore begin
to speak of the manner that the Colonel and his people ought to use in their
judgments, and first of all I will choose a certain number of Judges by lot,
to avoid confusion, and the jealousy that might be had of them that do
judge: and afterward shall be showed how we must proceed to condemn or
discharge a prisoner. Concerning the first point I do presuppose that the
accuser (I do mean he yt does make the report) wheather it be one of the
preseruers of Military discipline or other, must first come unto the Provost
of the League and inform him very well of the matter, and this done the
Provost shall confer with his counsel, wheather the party do deserve
death or not: if the cafe do not concern death he shall proceed therein
according unto his charge. But if the crime be so heinous yt it does deserve
death, he shall go immediately unto the Colonel and inform him of it: and
thus the matter shall be handled at the first complaynt. Concerning the manner of
bringing of an appeal before the Colonel, it is too manifest. The Collonell
being fully informed of the accusation, shall cause the offender to be taken:
and commit him unto the custody of the Provost. If the Colonel do know that
to summon him to appear personally will serve the turn, the offender shall be
summoned to appear personally: the one of which commissions must be executed
by the Provost and his men, to weete, that of taking him prisoner, except the
accused were a Chief or Member: for in such a case, the master of the Camp,
or the Seriant mayor, accompanied with the Colonel his guard shall go and take
them: as for the adiourning the Drume mayor or the Colonel his trumpet must
do it. If it be late before the accused be taken, the matter shall be deferred
until the next day: but if it were any thing timely, he shall cause
proclamation to be made, that all the Captains, Lieutenauntes, Ensigns,
Corporals, Chiefes of Squadrons, and Deceniers of his Legion, should
immediately come unto his lodging: which proclamation being made, all these
that I have named shall go thither incontinent, carrying no other arms with
them then their swords.

The Seriants of the bands must be there also: and if the Colonel his
lodging or tent be not great enough to receive all this people, the assembly
must be made with out doors: and the Colonel before he does proceed further
shall show unto them for what intent he has called them together: that is to
administer justice unto his soldiers, to preserve the good from oppression,
and to punish the offenses that the wicked do commit. If so be that this
assembly were made for to hear any appeal, the Colonel shall show them the
matter: and for whether soever of these two causes it were, he shall cause
them all to lift up their hands and to swear with one voice, to help to
maintain justice with all their power, against all those of the Legion that
should commit any crime with out exception of person, except the Colonel, who
is to be judged in an other place and not there. The oath being taken in
general, the Deceniers shall assemble by them selves together, the Chiefes of
Squadrons by them selves, and the Corporals likewise by them selves: the
Colonel shall sit in a chair, and shall have two pots set at his feet: in the
one of which pots there shall be as many leadden bullets as there are Deceniers
in one band lacking one, and in steed of ye one leadden bullet which wants,
there shall be a Lattin bullet: so yt amongst a great many of white bullets there
shall be one yealow: the other pot shall have nothing in it and shall be set at
the Colonel his right foot, and that with the bullets at his left. The
Master of the Camp, the Seriant Mayor, and the Provost and his Clearke shall
be by him. These two pottes being so placed, the Colonel shall make sign unto
the Dceniers of the first band, who shall march one after another according
unto the order that they are accustomed to keep in the Battailon. The first
shall show his right hand unto the Seriant Mayor, stripping his sleeue up unto
the elbow to avoid all suspicion of deceit: and afterward shall put his hand
into the pot to take out one of the bullets: and shall show the bullet that he
does take unto the Master of the Camp, to show what bullet that it is: and if
it be a leaden bullet the said Decenier shall put it into the empty pot
immediately: and shall return unto his lodging, but if he do draw the lattin
bullet, the Clearke shall take his name, and he shall stand aside in a place
appointed. After that this first Decenier has drawn, all the rest of the same
band shall draw until such time as some one has drawn the lattin bullet.
And this being done by the Deceniers of the first band, the Colonel shall cause
al ye leaden bullets with the lattin bullet to be set again in their places,
removing the full pot into the empty pot his place: and shall afterward make
sign unto the Deceniers of the second band, to come forward as he did before
unto those of the first: who shall do as they did and so shall all the other
following: so that by this means when as all the Deceniers of the 12 bands
have drawn, he shall have 12 men of those sorts of officers ready to judge.
And to the intent that he might have as many Chiefes of Squadrons, as
Deceniers he shall cause the Chiefes of Squadrons to draw each band after
other, using so many bullets with the lattin bullet as are Chiefes of
Squadrons in a band, and afterward the Corporalls shall do as much, one band
after another. Concerning the Members and Captains they shall not draw
bullets at this time: but their number shall continue whole. Wherefore of all
these six sorts of officers, there shall be 12 me^ of every one which is in
number 72, that is 6 of every band: all which 72 men shall range themselves in
form of a circle, the Colonel being in the midst of them, who shall command
the prisoner to be brought. In ye mean while the Drum Mayor shall make
proclamation that every man shall repair unto his lodging except those that
have bin kept as aforesaid, the master of ye Camp, Seriant Mayor, and the
Seriants of the bands: which Seriants must stand so far from the Counsel
that they may hear nothing. Whilst this is doing, the Provost shall bring the
prisoner, and show him all those that are there to give judgment upon him, and
shall advertise him to consider if there be any amongst them that he does
hold suspected, to the intent that he might be refused incontinent, if so
be that the causes of his refusement are just, and to be allowed, which
causes shall be referred unto the Colonel. And if so be that the said
prisoner had a co^rarie party, his said party might likewise refuse those
who^ he did hold suspect. But so it is that neither of them may refuse above
two men of every one of ye 6 conditions abouesaide. And put case that this
whole number should be refused which do make 24 men (for more shall not be
permitted to be refused) which refused shall incontinent depart thence, the
other shall put themselves into six parts each sort by themselves, and the
Colonel shall sit down in his place, and the two pots shall be placed again
at his feet. The one of them shall be empty, and the other shall have six
bullets of lead, and as many bullets of lattin, as there shall remain
Captains vnrefused. And the like shall be afterward observed amongst
Members, and officers. Which being so ordered the Captains shall go first and
draw out of the pot every man in his degree, and those that shall happen to
draw bullets of lattin shall go their ways unto their lodgings: and those
that do draw leaden bullets must show them unto the master of the Camp, and
their names shall be written by the Clearke, and afterward they shall place
themselves on either side of the Colonel: the one half on the one side and
the other one the other. After this the Seriant Mayor shall again put six
bullets of lead into one pot, and as many bullets of lattin, as there are
Lieutenants more then six, which Lieutenants shall do as the Captains have
don, and the Ensign bearers shall do the like after the^, and consequently ye
Corporals, and after them the Chiefs of Squadrons, and finally the Deceniers.
By this last lot the number of the Judges shallbe reduced unto 36. persons, not
coumpting the Colonel, which 36. Judges shall raunge themselves 18. on the one
side, and 18. on the other, in manner of an angle: and the Colonel shall be the
angle, the Seriants of the bands shall be there as assistants, but they shall be
far of and every man alone by himself. The Colonel his guard shall be round
about the Counsel, and so far of that they may not understand what does
pass. The matter being this ordered, the Colonel shall cause the prisoner to
be brought, who being brought by the Provost, his Cleark shall recite before
them all the contents of the information, and the depositions of the witnesses
(if that there be any) whereunto the prisoner shall answer and shall be heard to
speak. And if so be that he do deny the fact, the witnesses shall be brought
before him: and for want of witnesses, if the presumptions be great, the
Colonel with the advice of the said Counsel, shall condemn him unto the
rack, and shall pass unto judgment, or defer it until the next day, or
longer if it be necessary. As concerning the condemning or releasing of a
prisoner, it shall be handled as here follows: that is, after that the Provost
has made his demand in the behalf of the King, and the party, if there be
any, has made his demand for his damage: and that the said prisoner has
answered from point to point, the Counsel shall be left alone, and the prisoner
and his accuser also shall be put a little a side out of the sight of the
Judges. Upon this the Cleark shall read ye evidences before them all: and the
Judges there present shall hear it, the master of the Camp, the Seriant
mayor, and none other. The evidences being read at large, the Colonel shall
declare unto them that they are assembled for to judge according unto the
truth, and not for any favor that they do bear unto the prisoner, his
parentage, or friends, nor likewise for hatred: and therefore that every man
should speak his mind according unto his conscience, following the laws of
the wars, and not otherwise: for in this business of the wars there must be
no favor nor lenity used, but only the rigor of the laws which have been
made for men of war, the which shall be registered in a table, as I have said
before, and the said table shall be always hanged before the Colonel his tent,
or the gate of his lodging, to the intent that it may be in sight, that every
man may know what he ought to fly for to avoid the danger of Justice. And
the said table shall be brought and read by the Cleark from the one end unto the
other. And this done, the Colonel shall command the Seriant mayor to give
unto every one of the said Judges three bullets: upon one of which bullets
there shall be a great R, which shall signify to release: upon another a
great C, which shall signify to condemn: and upon the third there shall be a
great I, which shall signify to be better informed of the matter: one of
these three bullets shall be used when as they would release, or condemn, or
when as the proofs are not sufficient to release or condemn, but that they
would be better informed.

After that every one of these have received three bullets, as is aforesaid,
and the Colonel three likewise as the others: the Seriant mayor shall place
two empty pottes at the Colonel his feet, the one somewhat distant from the
other, unto which pottes the Judges shall come one after another: to weete, the
Deceniers first, the Chiefes of Squadrons next, and the others following, and
after them the Captains, and the Colonel last of all. Every one of them shall
put the bullet by which he does pretend to signify his opinion into the pot
appointed for the purpose, and the other two bullets into the other pot, and
afterward shall return unto their places. And the Colonel shall cause the
pot of their opinions to be overthrown, to see if the bullets that do release
be more then 18. and if so be that it should happen that the prisoner should be
released simply and purely, he might bring the party afterward to his
answer, that did accuse him and wrongfully swear against him. But if so be
that the bullets which do condemn are more then 18. the Colonel shall
pronounce the judgment of death against the prisoner. And when as neither sort
of bullets do exceed the one half of the number of Judges; because that some
perhaps might require that the matter might be better looked into: in which
case the judgment shall be referred until the next day, or two days after.
In the mean while the Provost and his Counsel shall precisely ouersee the
evidences, to see if there were any point that were not well verified, to the
intent to put the indictment in good order, and take from the Judges all
occasions of prolonging judgment. If the prisoner be released, there is no
more to be done, but that he may return unto his lodging when as he will. But
if so be that the matter be deferred until another day, the Colonel shall
appoint the day and hour, when the Counsel shall meet again, at which day
and hour the prisoner shall be brought again by the Provost. This delay of
saying that the matter is not evidently enough proved, may be used three
times, and not above: and then the Seriant mayor shall give but two sorts of
bullets: to weet, those two that do release or condemn: but if he be
condemned, so that there be 19. bullets or more marked with C, the Colonel
shall immediately pronounce that the prisoner is condemned: and then the Seriant
mayor shall set the two empty pots at the Colonel his feet, as before, and
shall give four bullets unto every one of the Judges: upon the one of which
bullets shall be a great S, which shall signify for to smite off his head:
upon another shall be a great G, which shall signify that he has deserved
the gallows: upon the third there shall be a great P, which shall signify to
pass the Pikes: upon the fourth shall be an H, which shall signify that the
prisoner shall be shot to death with Harquebuziers: whereupon the Judges shall
put the bullets of their opinions (which sort of death they do think the crime
has deserved) into the pot appointed: and if there were more bullets found in
the pot marked with S, then with any one of the other letters, the prisoner
shall have judgment to have his head to be smitten of. Likewise, if there
were more bullets marked with P, then with any other letter, the prisoner shall
be judged to pass the Pikes: and so likewise of the others; which judgment
shall be first registered in wrighting, and afterward pronounced by the
Colonel. And if so be the prisoner should loose his head, or be hanged, he
shall be delivered unto the Provost to be executed. And if so be that he
should be condemned to pass the Pikes, or be Harquebuzzed, he shall be
delivered unto the Seriants of the band, for this execution appertains unto
Soldiers. And if this execution were the first that were made in the Legion,
the Soldiers of the first band should do it: and the other executions must be
done afterward by the other bands every one in his turn.

After this manner must be proceeded as often as any man shall be condemned to
dye, and more precisely if it were possible: and after the sentence pronounced,
it shall be necessary to proceed unto the execution immediately without showing
mercy unto any man whosoever it were. For if one offender shall be pardoned,
the Soldiers would afterward have the less care to refrain from offending.
And likewise, if any man were attainted of crime, and should suffer death for
the same, he would take it the more impatiently, for that mercy should be used
unto some, and not unto others. Concerning the manner of proceeding in
appeals, in these cases which do not concern death, it shall suffice that all
the summons be made publicly, except the last: but for to judge any man unto
death, we must proceed secretly as I have said: which need not to be so
handled when as the fault does not deserve so heinous a punishment: for in such
cases a man may declare his opinion openly, and speak his mind with out using
of bullets. Concerning the punishment of the horsemen, that appertains unto
their Captain, and the punishment of the Captains unto their General, who
likewise is under the justice of the King his Lieutenant, whilst they are in
the wars, or elsewhere under his charge: or else if it be in time of peace,
the ordinary Justice of the country will look into them, reserving the
quality of their estates, in which case my Lords the Marshals of France will
look to have a saying unto them: but being in Camp, or elsewhere under the
charge of the Lieutenant General, the Justice of every Captain of an hundred
men of arms ought to punish his own men: and for default thereof, the General
might be complained unto. A Captain of an hundred men of arms, may choose
certain of his own officers to assist him in his judgments, if he will: and
may use his own authority or lot, which he thinks best, without calling any
other assistance unto him, but his own members, who at the least ought to be
called: yet men of war do with greater patience suffer punishment, when as
they do see that many Judges are assembled to judge them, then when as they are
wholly referred unto three or four.

And if that they do use lots, the manner before showed need not to be greatly
altered, because there are Chiefes amongst the horsemen as well as amongst the
footmen: of which Chiefs there may be a certain number taken to have the
hearing of the matter, and the Marshall that is appointed to lodge the
horsemen, must execute the office of the Provost, as well for to inform, as to
accuse: and moreover, the execution must be done by the Captain General of
the horsemen his Provost, or by themselves, in the selfsame manner that the
footmen do: for, as the one sort have Pikes, so the other have Lances, and
either of them have Harquebuziers: but I will not stand longer upon this
matter, but will show that the manner of proceeding in judgment with bullets,
has two good considerations in it. The first is, that neither the Colonel,
nor Captains, have authority to judge alone. The other is, that those that do
judge, do not speak their opinions publicly: but with silence do signify
their opinions by a bullet: which two manners me think are very good; better
then to give authority wholly unto the Colonells or Captains to judge
according unto their own wills, and without information, as they might
sometimes do through hatred or favor.

Moreover, if a prisoner should be set at liberty, or condemned by a small
number of Judges, those that should skanne upon the matter might sooner have an
evil opinion of a small number then of a great, and the common Soldiers would
exclaim that their right were overthrown, because there should be no body
on their sides to maintain it: for which cause I have appointed a certain
number of Deceniers, who have a more familiarity with the common Soldiers,
and a greater authority to speak unto the chiefest, then the common Soldiers
have with their Captains. I have likewise appointed Chiefes of Squadrons,
Corporalles, and Members, as many of the one sort as of the other, to make them
all (in the seat of Justice) equal in authority one with another. Moreover,
to avoid all occasions of envy amongst them, I have chosen them all by lot, so
that the one cannot say that he has been preferred; nor the other, that he
has been rejected; except that the prisoner did refuse him, and that the cause
of the refusal were just. Concerning that the said Judges do deliver their
opinions secretly, it is to the intent that they should do it more freely, then
they would do if that they should speak their opinions in the hearing of all
men: for sometimes they might be troubled for judging indifferently, because
that the prisoner might be either parent or friend unto some one of them, or
that they might before have received some good turn at his hands: whereupon
they might be thought to be ungrateful, if they did not requite a good turn
at a need: which is a reason to withdraw the hearts of those that have been
beholding unto him, from judging according unto equity, although that the
crime were the most heinous and most detestable that might be possible:
specially if every man's judgment should be know afterward: for in such a
case there would very hardly be any man, that would renounce the friendship of
the prisoner, or would incur the indignation of his parents, if he were a man
of any reputation: but moreover would make a difficulty to do any thing
against him, who before had done them pleasure, or who had means, and friends
to do them the like again. Furthermore, if their opinions should be verbally
pronounced, it would be doubtful that the one of them would depend upon
another opinion: specially if they thought the first speakers to be men of
judgment: and it might be that some amongst them durst not contrary the
first speakers, which might be an occasion sooner to sow discord, then to
root it out. Therefore, who so would have the occasions of hatred amongst
Soldiers to be wholly quenched, and extinguished, and that wicked men which do
not their duty as they ought to do, should be plucked out from amongst good
men; must use no other mean but judge according unto equity. And to judge
justly according unto the law, the surest way is that every man should deliver
his opinion secretly with a bullet: for so doing, it will be impossible for any
man to know who has released or condemned the prisoner: because that every
one of the Judges shall know but only what he himself has done; but not not
what his companions have done. And in this doing every man will imploye
himself to do his duty, and judge according unto the law, not periuring
himself any way to spare or condemn a prisoner wrongfully; who never shall
come by the true knowledge who it was that did him good or hurt. To conclude, I
do esteem this form of judgment to be the best and most surest that may be
used in this case: albeit that judgment may be handled after diverse other
manners: but after this manner should a Colonel handle his judgments, if so
be that he would maintain good justice amongst his hands, and make his
Soldiers to live like honest men. But if the manner before spoken of should
seem to be too long a work: I do know no better way, then to leave the
determination of all matters unto the Prouosts, and that they should judge all
Soldiers, whether they were Chiefes, officers, or simple companions: which
Provost should be enjoined to administer good and short justice unto all men,
and to punish those rigorously that did not use their vocations as they ought
to do. And when as the crimes were such, or the persons of that quality, that
it were not convenient to proceed in judgment immediately, and presently to do
execution, because of the mutiny, and cause of offense that it might give; it
would suffice to do it as soon as it might be conveniently done: and if so be
that the offender might not be taken by day, or that it would be dangerous
to do execution, there must both be stay made of the apprehending, and
punishing, until a fitter time: or the offender might be taken by night, or at
the first holding up of his finger, or at such time as he does think that the
offense is forgotten, and does think least of it: to the intent that justice
might be well maintained, and that the crime which is deferred to be punished
for a time, be not altogether forgotten.

How diverse crimes have been sharply punished in times past: and how it is
necessary for a Lieutenant General to be somewhat cruel, if so be he would
be well served of his Soldiers.
The 4 Chapter.
I Will here infer certain examples of the severity that the ancient
Chiefes in times past have used toward their Soldiers, when as they did
commit any great offense; I do mean capital crimes: which were committed
after one of these two manners, either by one man only, or by many (for
sometimes whole Legions did offend) and were punished either perticularly or in
general. As for particular persons, I do find that the ancient Chiefes did
punish chiefly all those that were not at their watches with their Ensigns, or
with those whom they ought to follow in such like services: they likewise
were punished that went from their watch after they were in it. Also he was
punished that did forsake the place he ought to keep or to fight in, or that
did vaunt that he had done any good service, and was afterward proved a liar.
He also was as sure to loose his life that fought with his enemies without
leave, or express charge, as if he had been slain by them. Moreover, they
that did throw away their arms for fear of their enemies, and those which did
fly from a battle, had their payment likewise with the others. Concerning
general faults; if the Legions did use any rebellion against their Chiefes, or
if that they did mutine, or did fly from their enemies, the custom was to put
a great many of them unto death, or the chiefest rebels: the least punishment
was to cassier them quite and clean from the ordinary bands, and consequently
to pronounce them to be infamous, and deprived of all those privileges, which
the other Soldiers who served their time, and went away with the good wills
of their Chiefes, did enjoy and their children. Of which particular and
general faults, I have here inferred certain examples: by which shall be
showed how the ancient Chiefes, and many other good Souldyers long since, have
grievously punished all those that did not their duties in the wars, and
those likewise that did commit any crime of importance. Chiefly disloyalty
was had in contempt amongst them: and all those that did falsify their faiths,
were grievously punished with the most cruel death that could be devised: as
appears by Mutius Suffetius, who was plucked in pieces betwixt two Wagons,
because of his disloyalty unto Tullius King of Rome in forsaking him, when as
the Romans and the said King fought against their neighbors, and that he
should have succored them with his men being there present with them, and sent
for unto that intent: who in stead of ayding the said Romans, and entering into
battle with them, stood still to see what success they should have in their
fight: by means of which dissimulation, the Romans were in great doubt and
ieopardy being forsaken, having to deal with two great armies, to weet, the
Venetians, and the Fidenats, who were assembled against the City of Rome: but
it came so to pass that the Romans got the victory, and Tullius seized upon
the traitor, causing him to be put to death in the sight of all his partakers
after the manner aforesaid. I do put in amongst these disloyal persons all
those strangers which sometime serve the King, and do forsake him at his need,
or do go away unto his enemies without asking leave: which disloyalty in mine
opinion is so detestable, that it cannot be enough contemned, nor punished so
grievously as it does deserve, because it is a deceiving of God and man: which
crime is more practiced at this day then ever it was, especially amongst a
great number of Italyans, which do nothing but trot too and fro, now to one,
and to morrow unto another, not staying long in a place (but like peason
boiling in a pot) and that for every light occasion, so that there are very
few of them that can vaunt that they have always held upon one side, so
greatly is the said Nation subject to the changing of opinions: and those whom
the King has maintained long time, are the woorst, who do forsake him as if
they never had known him, sooner without taking their leaves, then otherwise:
and this they do as well in time of war as in peace, which is most dishonest
and infamous, for at the least they should take their leaves before that they
did forsake his service. I dare say that amongst the simple soldiers there is
not one that has continued in his service during the wars without going unto
his enemies, except the Chiefs have had so good an eye unto them, as that they
could not eskape when they would: so are there others likewise that do come
from our enemies unto us, and so they do trot too and fro, not resting long in
a place, yea, some of the^ that have not carried one month in a place, do run
away the next day after that they have passed muster. Our own countrymen do
the like oftimes, many of them imitating the Italyans going unto our enemies,
making no more difficulty then if they were stranges: there are also many of
them that go home unto their own houses, and other that do go from one band
unto another as soon as they have received their money, not making any account
of the oath that they have taken, making God as their compagnion, making no
account of the Kings money which they do carry away and steal from him as
approved thieves, traitors, and perjured persons, so that there is not almost
one soldier yt has the fear of God, nor the reverence due unto christian
religion before his eyes, for if they had, the oaths and promises which they
do make should be observed, and the wickedness which they do commit, should not
be committed: but for that they do not fear him they do dispraise him, and
dispraising him, it is not possible that they should keep any thing that they
do swear in his name. Is it possible that they should fear him whose name
they do blaspheme and contemn in all their communications? as we see they do,
therefore there is no other remedy but to compel them by man's laws to observe
that, which they do make no reckning to keep by Gods laws: and mine opinion
is that it should be decreed, that who so ever should be found in this fault,
were he Frenchman or stranger, should immediately be beaten to death with
mallets, or buried alive, or plucked in pieces with four horses, or have a
stake thrust through his body, for ye other punishments are too gentle for such
a crime. And as concerning the disloialty of those which do go unto our enemies
without taking their leaves before that they bear arms against the King,
which liberty of departure with leave is only to be permitted unto those that
are not bound unto him either by faith or homage. I have read one example of
Henry the 7. Emperor of Rome, who caused an execution to be made in his Camp,
when as he besieged the City of Bresse, upon an Italyan named Galleas Brusat,
who forsook him without leave, and served against him with his enemies, who
being taken by ye Emperor his men at a sally that he made out of the said
town, was immediately plucked in pieces with Wagons. This example need not to
be accounted ancient, for it is not above 200. years since it happened, yet I
have alleged it ancient, because that the manner of punishing of this offense
does like me better then yt we do use at this time, which is either to hang, or
to behead, or to pass the pikes, which punishments are to be thought to be
rigorous enough for many other crimes which the soldiers do commit, but for
such an offense as this, I do think them to be too gentle: wherefore I will
continue in mine opinion, that one of the aforesaid punishments ought to be
used in this case, for these comers and goers are causes of too many
inconveniences, and therefore when that any of them are taken, they should be
so handled, that the remembrance of their punishment should remain for an
example for ever: and above all things we must never let such a crime escape
unpunished, if we have opportunity to punish it. The Romans had a great regard
not to pardon their fugitives, nor to restore the^ unto their goods, or first
honors, nor to trust them at any time after with any charge whatsoever it were,
as we do at this present, but they were assured to be put to a most cruel
death whensoever that they were taken, whereof we have many examples in their
histories, specially of those which Fabius Maximus found in certain towns
which he took from Anniball, who being sent unto Rome, were first of all whipped,
and afterward thrown down from an high rock. Certain fugitives that were
delivered unto Scipio by an accord yt was made betwixt the Romans and the
Carthagenians, some were beheaded, and others crucified. The aforesaid Fabius
at another time caused the hands of all the fugitive Romans, and other
strangers fugitives yt had served the^ to be cut off, which he did, to the
intent yt the remembrance of the offense and punishment might be refreshed as
often as they were seen that had lost their hands. Yet me think that these
pernicious people, although that they were maimed of their hands, should not
therefore leave to do many mischiefs, having the other parts of their bodies
whole, wherefore I would at the least dispatch them of all at once.

Paulus Aemelius after that he had vanquished Perseus King of Macedony, made
all the fugitives that were found in his enemies host to be slain by
Elephants: the son of the said Paulus, to weet, that Scipio which razed
Carthage, condemned all the fugitives that he could lay hands upon, to be
quartered and devoured with wild beasts. Auidius Cassus, and many others, have
proceeded in the like business most severely, and yet not so rigorously, but
that they have deserved a great deal more. Moreover, the said Chiefs did most
sharply punish those which did not obey the Proclamations and commandments
that were made by their Chiefes, as appears by the example of Manlius
Torquatus, who caused his own son to be beheaded for fighting with his
enemies contrary to his commandment: and the victory which he got saved not
his life, and yet he was challenged ye Combat body for body, of which challenge
he could not rid his hands with honesty, if there had not bin commandment unto
the contrary: the said Mutius preferred the observation of military discipline
before fatherly love, and caused his son to be put to death. Within a little
after there was enough to do, for that Quintus Fabius, Captain General of the
Roman Horssemen, fought with his enemies contrary unto the commandment of
the Dictator Papyrius Cursor, who although that he had overthrown his said
enemies, yet the Dictator would have put him to death for his disobedience, so
highly was this discipline and obedience esteemed amongst them above all
things, without the which they knew that the occupation of arms whereof they
made their profession, and for which they were honored and feared more then any
other Nation, would be abolished in short time, without the which, the Chiefes
did neither deserved to be called Chiefes, nor the souldyers true souldyers,
but might be accoumpted to be a disordred multitude, if the Chiefes were not
obeyed, nor the souldyers showed themselves to be obedient: and thus much
concerning the principal offenses which souldyers do commit during the wars,
and the disorders which they do, being in Camp, as running over the country,
raunsoming their hoasts, eating them unto the boanes, pilling them, beating
them that they do dye of it, and forcing their Wives and daughters, and to be
short, for all the other outrages which they do. I have many examples worthy to
be remembered in such like cases, and those that have happened specially amongst
Heathen men, that have had no knowledge of God, nor of his truth, who
notwithstanding would not suffer that this wickedness should reign amongst
them, for the aforesaid Auidius Cassius doing all his endeavor to restore the
discipline of the wars unto his intier, after that it was made base and come
to nothing, ordained that the soldiers that did take any thing from the people
of the country where he came, should be crucified upon the place. Peseinius
the black, a great obseruer of ancient discipline, did condemn a whole
Deceine of soldiers unto death, for that they had taken a Cock from a poor
countreyman, and had eaten it, but to have the good wills of his army, who
instantly besought him to show mercy, he pardoned them, with condition that
they should recompense the poor man with ten times as much as the Cock was
worth: and moreover, that no soldier of the Deceine should kindle fire as long
as the wars lasted, nor should eat any thing but dry and raw flesh.
Alexander Seuerus did sharply and grievously punish any of his soldiers that
did go out of their way to run into any house to do any damage, having always
these honest words in his mouth, Do not that unto others, that thou would
not have other do unto thee. It were necessary that Captains at this day
should use the like diligence, for to avoid the disorders that soldiers do
commit in marching upon the way, for there shall hardly be house or village
upon the way, either far or near, but shall feel them, for they would be
very sorry if they had not left tokens behind them, or that the country
should not have occasion to remember their passage long time after. I do not
speak for those places which do ofttimes resist to give lodging unto the King
his good servants, who march at his commandment, to succor him in his
extremity, as many walled towns within this realm are accustomed to do, for
a bravery, or presuming upon their strength, although that the said souldyers
do demand nothing but lodging and victuals. In which case me think there
would be no great hurt done if that they might be showed what difference there
is betwixt these subjects that do abandon their goods, and hazard their lives
to serve their Prince: and those that are good for nothing but to rake up the
fire, and to hurt those that do him service. But I do speak concerning
villages, open places, and houses that stand skattered here and there, who
have neither power nor will to resist, whom they do use like unto places that
had resisted them, and done them much hurt: so that there are but few Towns,
Villadges, or houses that can skape free whereas men of war do pass, but
they shall be let blood in the pursse, either by the Captains, or harbingers,
if so be that they were too far out of the way for the souldyers. And if the
souldyers should come there, it would be worsse, for that there is no man, or
if there be any, it is very few, that do withdraw them from doing evil, for
that there are many Chiefes that do make no other accoumpt, but that every man
might do what he would himself, for that they do reasonably well for their
own parts. Moreover, it would be very hard to make the simple souldyers to
live honestly, and their superiors to make their hands, for the rule must be
general, and the small must imitate the great. This taking that I speak of is
so usual at this day, that robbery does seem to be but a rent, so that there
is no account made to punish those that do ransacke the places yt are in their
passage: I do speak both of the Captains and soldiers that do pillage the
country. Those likewise ought to be punished which do seek to corrupt
Captains, or harbingers, causing them to pass any one place to go unto
another: and those also ought not to go free which do take upon them to lodge
in any place with intent to be revenged of the said place through the charge,
trouble, and damage that soldiers ordinarily do whereas they lodge, and being
lodged to such an intent, it will make their wills sharper to do ill, who of
themselves are so sharp, that they need no whetstone, for in such a case
there would be but too many askers found, whereas if punishment were used,
there should be no man would put forward himself.

The aforesaid manner of rebellion does deserve to have an express order
made, commanding that Souldyers which do march through the country with good
commission, should be readily obeyed, and if so be that the said souldyers did
commit any crime, except satisfaction were made immediately, the towns where
the crime was committed, should be holden, to send accusations and complaints
unto the Leutenant General, or unto the Governor of the country, to attache
the Chief himself. Moreover to speak truly, to suffer a baggage town, or a
good, to shut their gates against men of war, which do go to serve the King,
and do use themselves like honest men, there is neither reason nor order in it,
for first of all it is a resistance against the King who does pay them,
secondly, it is the way to famish the poor men. Moreover it may be that they
may take their ill using in so ill part as to leave their Captain in the
lurtch that has bin at the charge to leuy them, and return home again.
Furthermore, this refusal might encourage the country people to be as
unreasonable as the towns that do shut their gates, and cause them to assemble
themselves a great number together to charge them, imagining that they might
lawfully do it, forasmuch as the towns did resist the said soldiers. And I
leave it unto your consideration to think unto what end all these
inconveniences might come. For the shutting of the souldyers out of their
towns, is in truth the way to ruin them, for that the suburbs of towns are
not commonly so great, that all the souldyers of one, or many bands may lie
covered over head, and in such places the said town may stand, as there is
neither house nor bushe near, who then having no tents with them (as they are
accustomed to carry none) except that the place have many trees in it for them
to cut down, which would be too great a damage, they must lie in ye deaw all
night, and therefore how little time soever that this course does last, they do
fall sick, and dye by the way, whereas else they would come fresh unto the
Camp, and in state to do service: in sum, it is the way to make both the
Captains and Soldiers to despair, and to cause them to do those things,
which when they are done, might displease both parties, and when all is well
wayed it must be so: for we do say commonly, that of two evils, we must avoid
the greatest, for in mine opinion, there would be less hurt to enter forcibly
into one of these rebel towns, and rather into the first that should stand
upon these terms, then any other, to make the rest afraid: provided that
they did kill no body if it were possible, and that there might be no rauishing
of women, Church robberies, or other disorders committed, then to suffer
resistance, or to have a war with the country all along their way, or to
be in danger of famine, or of being overthrown, or of falling sick for want
of lodging, and so to return home again, for these are matters of a greater
damage, then the forceible taking of a place, forasmuch as of the one there
does ensue but the damage of certain resistants, who are the first causers of
the strife; and of the other might proceed the discredit of many poor
Captayns, for that they might be unfurnished of their people to serve their
Prince, which is a hard match for them, and enough to throw them down from
honor all the days of their life, besides the danger that they are in to be
slain by their own soldiers, if so be that they did mutin during those
troubles, as has happened many times in like cases. On the other part the King
might find himself so unprovided of people, and so forced by his enemies, that
a small power might do him great service, and perhaps give him the victory,
for I have used it for a proverb, that a thousand men sometimes are not worth
one, and at others one is worth a thousand. Moreover, if the bands that should
be taken up in France should find these rebellions, there is no man although
he were willing that could do him service, so that the King should be
unprovided of soldiers at all times when as he had need, wherefore all
considered, me think that there might be a time found to chasten these rebels,
seeing that the soldiers do enter and lodge in the best Cities of the Realm,
when as they are commanded to march: or there should be a general law,
that they should altogether lie in the fields, or else that they should be
received into the towns that were appointed for them to lodge in: and not to
suffer certain particular places to resist, whereas all France in general
does obey. But to leave this matter, to the intent that as well the Captains
as the Soldiers should know that the virtue of the Heathen has been such,
that they did forbid their people to do, yt which we Christians do amongst us,
in devouring and oppressing one another, that the wicked might amend their
lives. I am about to declare what the Emperor Aurelian did write unto his
Lieutenant General, concerning the life of his Soldiers: the tenor of his
letter was this.

If so be that thou art determined to be my Lieutenant, or if thou will live
long, it were necessary that thou should command, that no Soldier should
be so bold, as to take a Hen or a sheep from any man, or to carrye away a
plant of a Vine, or to spoil the seed upon the ground: nor likewise that
they should constrain any man to give them oil, wood, or other thing: but
should content themselves with that portion of victuals, that was delivered
them out of the store. Furthermore thou shall forbid them to make any booty
or prea of the poor peoples goods that are our friends, but only prea upon
our enemies.

Moreover thou shall enjoin them, that every man shall have his harnes clean
and bright at all times, his weapons sharp and well kept, the Soldiers them
selves to be well hoased, and when as they are new apparrelled, let them rid
them selves off the old quight and clean: cause them to keep their wages
warely, and suffer them not to spend it in drunkenness or in Tauernes. What so
ever they be that have gotten any prise by force of arms, as Bracelets,
Collers, or Rings, let them be worn ordinarily.

Moreover, for the horsemen, let them curry and rub their Horses of price
them selves, if any of them do make any booty of Cattle, suffer them not to
be soulde, but let them remain in the hoaste for the service of Soldiers, or
for food: and let every one of them in his turn look unto the Mule or Horse
that is appointed to carrye the Baggage of the Deceine or Squadron that he is
of. Moreover, thou shall make thy Soldiers to be serviceable one unto another
as if they were bound unto this duty as slaves: and cause the Surgeons to
heal them without taking any thing of them. Finallye let them give nothing
unto Southsayers, and cause them to live chastely with their hosts: and
whosoever is author of any mutiny, let him be grievously punished.

And this was the contents of the letter that the said Emperor did write unto
his Lieutenant: which was not written unto the Soldiers of that age to better
purpose: then it would be necessary for us at this time, at the least a great
part of it: nor the said Emperor had never more need to use greater severity
toward his Soldiers, then it is necessary for us to use at this day toward
ours. A man cannot sufficiently declare the want of Justice, that we have
amongst us: because that all vices do reign amongst us, and that we do pass
them by dissimulation: or if that any offender be punished, the punishment is
not so grievous as it ought to be: for we punish great faults and small all
alike: for as well shall he be quit with a hanging, that has ravished a
woman, as he that has stolen but one loaf of bread, or any other small
thing: notwithstanding the punishments ought to be different, for that the
crimes of rauishing, is without comparison, more shameful, and detestable then
robbing.

I would that the seueritye of the said Aurelian, were used amongst us: for I
do think that our forcers of women would then be rudelye enough handled, if
we would imitate his example by the punishment that he did unto one of his
Soldiers that had committed adulterye with his Hostess: which word of
adulterye does importe a freewill in it self, and is not to be thought so
heinous as forceing: yet notwithstanding he caused him to be set betwixt two
high trees, and the tops of the trees to be bowed downe-warde, and one of
his legs to be made fast unto the one tree, and the other unto the other tree,
and being so bound, the trees were let go at once, so that the trees
springing up, pluckte him in two pieces. Which manner of Justice was long after
of such force, that there was no Soldiers of his that durst commit any
offense, they were made so sore afraid with the punishment that was used unto
one poor adulterer, which vice was almost as much used at that time, as it is
at this day.

The Emperor Macrinus caused two of his Soldiers to be put to death, after a
strange manner, that had ravished their Hostess maid: which was, he caused
two great Oxen to be paunched, and put the condemned into their bellyes, and
their bellyes to be sowed up afterward: and to the intent that they might
speak each unto other, he appointed that they should have their heads out:
so that these two offenders did rotte, and were eaten with the Vermin that
engendered of the flesh, as it did corrupt: yet not so soon but that they
pyned many days. A worthy example for all other to be warned by.

The like punishments did the ancient Chiefes invent to punish the wicked
that did commit offense, not only against those that did the like unto the
foresaid, but also against those that did seek to betraye any Town, and sell
it unto their enemies, or to put any troop of men into their hands, or other
thing, as it seemed by a certain treason that diverse young men of Rome did
practice to put Torquinus into their City: who being discovered, were
beheaded, with diverse other of their partakers: and amongst others two of the
Sons of Brutus, who being then Consul, commanded the execution to be done
upon them.

There was likewise in our time certain of those traitors punished, which is a
thing worthy to be had in remembrance: It was when the Lord Rans was
Lieutenant for the King in Barlette in the kingdom of Naples, who having given
charge of the town and Soldiers in his absence: whilst he was occupied to
win certain places upon the mountain of Saintange, unto an Italian Captain
named Ieronimie of Cremone: who had sold the said Town unto the Spaniards
that were at Andria under the County of Boeiel: which traitor being taken with
his Seriant, who only were found culpable in this treason: were condemned to
be hanged by the feet until they died. Which sentence being executed
immediately, the Seriant was hanged over the gate toward the sea, and the
Captain at one of the windows in the Castle. I saw them hanging in this
manner, when I came from the Spanish Camp, with whom I was kept prisoner from
our overthrow at Naples, until I came unto Barlette, not finding any means to
depart sooner.

Another like execution was done at Thurine, by the Lord of Boutiers, upon a
traitor which brought the Spaniards into one of the Bulwarks of the town: so
that if the said Lord had not been in place as he was for his great profit,
the town had been lost at that time: but thereby his vigilance was known,
and that he was not a man that loved his ease as many others do, when as they
are appointed to keep places that are worth the keeping.

The traitor as it was told me was drawn in pieces with four horses: and he
did well deserve to be so punished or worse: considering the great damage that
might have insued of the loss of the said town, which is of such importance,
that it were necessary to have good Cheefes in it, which should be vigilant,
as the said Lord of Boutiers was, and as the Lord of Langey is, who does
govern it at this instant: who cannot fail in executing of this charge any
way, for his virtues and perfect knowledge in learning and arms. I dare say
that he has a great care of the charge of the foresaid Thurine: for our
enemies have a good will to get it from us, and do always use all their
endeavor: for in mine opinion it is the town that that they do most desire in
all Italy: wherefore the King ought to make a great reckoning of it.

Forasmuch as I have said before that the faults committed by particular
persons were punished perticularly, and those which the Legions did commit in
General, were punished generally.

Having spoken of particular punishment: it rests to show how the Legions
were punished for the general crime or disorder which they did commit: whereof
we have an ensample in the life of Augustus Caesar, who cassierd the tenth
Legion reprochfullye, because they had disobeyed him: which was a blot of
infamy, that honest men did fear more then death: because they were always
after repulsed and rejected from all honest places, after that they were once
cassierd, and were never after suffered to follow the wars, nor to exercise any
charge, nor to attain to office or estate whatsoever it were. This manner of
cassiering of bands has been used in Province in our time, by the Lord
Constable upon part of those of the Garrison of Arle, and by the Lord Marshall
of Montiean in Thurin: but this manner was not like in all things, because that
the ancient Chiefes declared theirs to be unfit for all honest business: and
those that the said two Lords did cassier were not so handled: but they may
as well attain unto any office, as if they never had bin cassierd. The cause of
this cassiering, was for a mutiny that was committed by the Soldiers of both
the foresaid towns, against the said Lords, who presented the king his person,
and they proceeded so far, that they did enter both their lodgings forceably.
We are so given unto these mutinies, that there is no nation that does care
for our companies one hour, but they had rather be far from us, then near
unto us: because that we run from one unto another, for every small occasion,
and are hastier to begin these quarrels amongst our selves, then to fight with
our enemies when time requires: and these disorders do oftener happen, when
as we have our enemies near us then far of: for which there must be some
good order taken, and most sharp punishment used, as often as these mutinies
do happen, and that Soldiers do rise against their Chiefes. As for the
mutinies of particular bands amongst themselves, I would have him laid hands
upon that were the occasion of the mutiny, or had begun it: and would have him
put to death after the manner that we are accustomed to punish mutiners at this
present. And if so be that any did lay hands upon the Captains or Chiefes, I
would have them to be put to some cruel death: as to be buried alive, to
have their bones broken, or to be drawn at a Horse tail until such time as
their bodies did fall a pieces: or have the^ to be punished in such sort, that
it might be an horror and a fear unto all others. And for to weight a time
convenient to lay hands upon one of these mutiners, I would have the greatest
patience that might be possible: and rather dissemble a year or two, then to
suffer one mutiner to escape the punishment that he had deserved. And if so be
that a whole Legion had committed this offense, that there were no means to
know the principal mutiners, there were no better way then to imitate the
ancient Chiefes herein, who took out the tenth man, or a great part of their
people, when as the fault was general: and this taking was done by lot, which
was an occasion that the punishment did touch but some certain number, and
yet they all in general were made afraid to be of that number that the lot did
condemn.

Wherefore because that every man was in danger of this lot, they endeavored
with all their powers to do their duties iustlye, fearing to bear the burden
of other men's faults. The lot likewise was used, when as the bands or Legions
did forsake a place, or run away before their enemies: for that to put a
whole army unto death had been too great a loss, therefore they took the
tenth man, and sometime more: and he was executed immediatlye. That which
Appius Claudius did amongst his Soldiers, may witness my sayengs: who
fighting against the Voloces, fled from the battle: for which cause he did
put to death all the Captains, Centeniers, Corporals, and Soldiers of his
hoaste that had lost their arms, and the Ensign bearers that had lost their
Ensigns, and not content with all this, he caused the tenth man of the
Soldiers to be put to death by lot.

Augustus Caesar caused likewise the tenth man of certain bands that fled
from their enemies to be flaine. Many other Chiefes have proceeded
extraordinarely in this business, as the one was more seueere then the other.
The Lacedaemonians made a law, that who so fled from a battle, might never
attain unto office in their commonwealths, nor marrye their daughters (if that
they had any) nor take wives if they were to marry. Moreover it was lawful for
any man that did meet them upon the way, to strike or beat them at his
pleasure: so that those poor miserable creatures were subject unto blows, and
unto a thousand infamies, that the woorst Citizens might do unto them. And to
the intent that they might be known from other men, they did wear their
coats of two colors, and their beards shaven on the one side, and long on
the other. If this law had been established in France during the wars which
have been in our time, there would be more Soldiers found wearing party
colored coats, and half shaven, then others: but let that pass: it might
suffice if we had a good will to amend our faults for that that is to come,
and to do our endeavor from henceforth better then we have done hitherto.
To be brief, the severity of the ancient Chiefes did not only extend unto
the punishment of those faults which deserved death. But also they had a
regard unto those faults that were not of that importance, to the intent to
leave no fault unpunished, how little soever it was, contrary unto the
discipline of the wars, as their Histories do make mention. Our General
shall likewise take order that all the faults which his soldiers should
commit, might be grievously punished, how little soever they were, contrary
unto the discipline of the wars, or unto the King his service, although they
were not damageble at that time that they were committed, but might be
afterward. Wherefore the said General must look deeply into this matter,
causing offenders to be punished according unto the quality of the offense
that they did commit, having a regard unto the evil that has insued, or the
inconvenience yt might ensue: for which consideration it is necessary that the
said General should be somewhat cruel, if he would be well served by his
people; cheefely at the beginning, until he has brought the^ in order to live
well, and to that point, yt they do exercise their faculty as it ought to be.

And if so be that he himself were of so gentle, and pitiful nature, that he
would not punish offenders rigorously: yet were it necessary that some other
should cause the punishment to be done for him. For which intent I have
instituted before, the Justice of the Legions, which manner of justice he may
use if he will: both for to ease himself of trouble, as also for not
withdrawing his wits from his other business, but whether he himself does take
knowledge of the offenses that his people do commit, or that he do refer it
unto their Chiefes, those that do commit any heinous crime: and amongst
others, the one of them that I have named before, ought to be extraordinarily
punished. And to the intent that these wicked offenders might be punished
according unto their deserts, and that the example might withdraw others from
doing the like: it were necessary to devise some new torment, to punish them
with the most terriblest death that might be invented. And if so be that any
man will say that a Captain General ought to be merciful, and not such a
one as I would have him, I do answer, that to execute Justice is no cruelty,
but to give every one his hyer, unto the good all good things, and unto the
wicked their reward: for even as we hold it for a most sure opinion, that good
men cannot be so well esteemed or rewarded, but that they do deserve much
more: so likewise we may say by those that are wicked, that it is impossible to
punish them so grievously, but that they do deserve a great deal worse. Me
thinks that whosoever does betraye his Prince, in what manner soever it be,
or does fail to perform the principal points of the art of the wars: or
generally any other that may be an occasion of the slacking of his service:
that is to say, if he do hinder it willingly, and err wilfully, such ought to
be tormented after the most cruellest sort that may be devised: and that
General yt should have such people in his host, ought to put them to death
with one of the torments abouesaid, without mercy or pardon. And although he
should be coumpted to be cruel, for using of such rigor, yet should not this
tittle withdraw him from doing his endeavor, but good me^ will not blame him,
but esteem him the more, and besides their estimation, the blame of the wicked
is a thing not to be accounted of at all. Moreover, he shall be enforced to do
so, if he have a great number in charge, whether that they be all of one
nation, or of diverse: for except that he be feared, and accounted to be such a
one, he shall never keep his host in quiet, nor have have them ready and
willing at al hours to obey him.

Amongst all the great acts, for which Anniball is renowned, I find one to be
the chiefest: that is, that he having under his conduct a very great army
compounded of diverse nations, did govern them so well, that he never had one
only mutunie in his camp, although they were of strange countries, and did
sometimes win, and sometimes loose: which is a thing worthy to be remembered.
The occasion of the maintaining of his army in this peace, in mine opinion,
was the unnatural cruelty which he did use, which together with his virtues,
made him always to be reverenced and feared of his soldiers: but with out his
severity: his good qualities would have done him as little service as Scipio
his did him: who although he was accounted to be one of the most virtuous men
that ever was: yet for that he was no ways cruel, but the readiest man to
pardon that ever was seen, his lenity so bouldened his soldiers to mutunie
in Spain against the chiefes, and to rebel. His great pity another time, was
cause of the destruction of those of Locres, and that many murders were
committed amongst his own people. So that it appears, that lenity, and pity
are not profitable for a Chief that will be obayed of his soldiers, and that
cruelty is more necessary for him. But because that this word, is somewhat
odious, I will term it severity, and will say that a Lieuetenant General that
does pretend to do good service: ought to be as severe as is possible. And if
so be that he do not punish so rigorously, as is aforesaid, yet at the
least he should suffer no fault to escape unpunished: for in so doing every man
will endeavor to do well, and fear to offend seeing no offense shall be borne
withal. And if I were asked whether it were better for a General to be
feared, then loved of his people, or to be beloved then feared: I would
answer, that he ought to do his endeavor to be both, if it were possible.
But for that it is hard that fear and love should be alied together, I say
that it is much more surer to be feared, then to be beloved, if that he might
not be both: forasmuch as we do see that soldiers are generally ungrateful,
variable, deceiptfull, do willingly eschew peril and covet gain, and whilst
that they are provided for and that there is no great need of them, they do
say that they are ready to serve, and to be wholly at the commandment of their
Chiefes: but when it does come unto the pushe that they must be put to their
business, then they do feign them selves sick, or start away, or do find some
forged excuse to be exempted from their service: so that if there be no other
mean to induce them to do their endeavor, the accoumpt may be made that they
will do nothing of them selves. Which other means must rather be for the
love that they do bear unto their General, because that all men have least
regard to offend him who makes him self to be beloved, then him that makes
him self to be feared: for because that love is held by a certain bond of
obligation, which is soon broken by those men who do love their particular
profits, more then their honesties: of which sort the most part of soldiers
are at this day. But fear is held of a doubt to incur the punishment which
is appointed for every fault, which fear does never leave those that do their
endeavor by force.

But a General must make him self to be so feared, that if he could not get
the love of his soldiers, yet at the least he should not make him self to be
hated by them. For these two things may well agree together, to wit, to be
feared, and not to be hated. With which mean the Lord of Lautrec helped him
self as well as any General that was before him or since: for he was so
feared of his men with out hatred, that every man doubted to disobay him: many
examples thereof were seen in many places, but specially upon Easter day a
little from Naples, where his Camp was in such a mutunie one against another,
that there was neither Colonells, nor Captain Generals that could appease
them, or keep them from beginning a war amongst themselves, not unlike to
have made a merueilous medley, if the said Lord had not gone betwixt them to
part them: which he did with so little difficulty, that as soon as he was
arrived there was no stroke stricken, nor man that kept his place: but they
vanished suddenly out of his presence some one way some another, he neither
beating nor striking any man: but only for the fear that every man had to do
ought that might displease him. And in truth he did all with his Soldiers
that he would do, for which cause he stroke them not: knowing that to be
common and familier with every man (although that this familiarity in getting
ye favor and love of men) might be an occasion to emboulden them to offend
sooner then if he showed himself to be strange and severe: considering
moreover, that although he made him self to be feared of his Soldiers, that
he was not therefore to be hated of them: but also furthermore he lost nothing
by showing him self to be such a none as he would have his Soldiers for to
be. Moreover, if there were occasion to put any man to death, the cause being
just, he deferred it not: so that things were handled by him, that he was not
to be reproved.

In like manner must our General live with his people, and to have that
excellency in him, to make him self to be loved and feared.

How Soldiers ought to be recompensed after that they have done good
service: with the Author his excuse.
Chap. 5. To the Lord Constable.
FOr as much as the laws that do concern Military discipline, where unto
soldiers that do exercise the wars are bound and subject, are so rigorous
that it cannot be possible that they should be more: it is reason on the
other part, to institute certain Privileges, Honors, Authorities, Dignities,
Gifts, and profits, to recompense those that have honostly acquitted them selves
of their duties: and which have patiently borne the burden of the wars,
during the time that the king his pleasure was to be served by them. For there
is nothing more just then where offenders are greatly punished, that well
deseruers should be well rewarded: if so be that we would have men to hope, and
fear all at once. For which cause the Romans did ordain a certain recompense
for every virtuous act: to weete, for him that saved any citizens life,
fighting against his enemies: likewise, unto him that got up first upon a wall,
or that entered first at a breach, or into his enemtes Forte: likewise, for him
that in any sally out of a town besieged, did first pass his enemies
trenches: in sum, every virtuous act was remembered, and recompensed by the
Consuls: and moreover, praised publicly of every man. And besides the honor
and good fame that those that did obtain those gifts did get amongst other
soldiers, they might wear them amongst the citizens, and go to and fro with
them, and none other durst wear the like, but only those which had gotten
them by the way abouesaide. I will not stay to tell what gifts they were, nor
whereof the garments were that were given them: for it is enough that the
recompense was good: and although it was not rich, yet it was honorable. The
King had ordained that ye Legionaries which did any act of valor should have
certain gould rings given them: and that order had been very good if it had
been kept. I would likewise, that those of whom I treat here, should have
vppergarments, or rings, or bracelets, or Jewels, I do not care what they
were, so that they might serve for tokens and shows unto the world, that those
that did wear them had behaved them selves like unto men of virtue. Moreover,
they might enjoy the Privileges and other freedoms which the laws of
Emperors do permit, and also the Prerogatives which the ancient Soldiers
did enjoy amongst the ancient Romans. The King might likewise exempt them from
taxes, and though not from all, yet at the least from part. And if so be that
he conquered any country or town by force of arms, he might people them with
those soldiers that had taken pains to do him service, and bannishe the
other inhabitaunts as I have said before: or place them amongst the first
inhabitaunts, if the said town and country were able to receive them all.

The orders of the Legions do import that those that have been maimed of their
limbs in the king his service, should be put into Garrisons and be kept there
as the other dead paies were, and the recompense is honest. But for that it is
not only enough to recompense maimed men, and to forget others that have showed
them selves to be honest men, although that they were not maimed, for I am of
opinion that ye king should make account of all those that had served him
faithfully in his wars, and should be informed of every man his deserts, to
the intent that he him self might cut their bread, and not a quidam, whom the
matter does not touch at all, and who will pass it lightly: except it be the
General that has had them in charge, or some other that does know their
deserts, which to do well must distribute here one thing and there another,
according unto every man his valor and merit, whether they be places of dead
pays, keeping of Castles, Captain ships, Baliages, Prouosties,
Steward-shippes, or other courtlike offices: and if so be that those offices
and estates may not suffice, the king has wherewithal to recompense them
richly by pension or otherwise: at the uttermost there are many governments in
France, which may be charged to maintain a great number. Moreover, the Prelates
and great benefices of France might be charged to maintain another part, with
the third penny of their revenues which they are bound to employ for the
maintenance of the poor, but they do it not: wherefore it would be labor
well spent to make them to be charitable, that will not be so of them selves.
And this I mean for the recompencing of simple soldiers and pore gentlemen:
as for the Chiefs, they may be recompensed with the offices and estats
abouesaide. If that soldiers did hope to be recompensed honestly when as the
wars were ended, and to live without fear of poverty: it is a thing most
certain, that whilst they are in the wars they would incline them selves to no
other thing, but to do the king good service: whereas they are constrained
before all things to think upon their particular profit, and afterward to
exercise their faculty. But God knows how, for we do see, that who so
does not win by his industry, does loose his time in tarrying until that an
other do give him any thing: and that is also the occasion that soldiers at
this day do use the wars for their occupation, and not to the intent to do
the Prince service that does give them their wages. Wherefore, when as the
wars do fail, there are few soldiers that will labor or work again at
the occupation that they did learn in their youth: and then, if they have
nothing to maintain the^ to live idly, they do become robbers and skouters
upon wais, as Montclou his men did, and many other the like have done in
France, since the king his reign.

I speak nothing of the subtleties that they do use, nor of the desire that
they have of the continuance of the war, nor what enemies they are unto the
peace, nor how they do seek many inue^tions to delay the king his service,
which they would not do, if that they had any hope to be recompensed.

To conclude, I do say that who so shall levy soldiers after the manner
before spoken of in this book, and shall use the observations of punishment,
and reward abouesaide toward those that through their good, or ill deeds had
deserved praise or blame, yt he should have as good soldiers as ever were.
Whereof there must be no doubt made: for I dare affirm yt these here spoken of
are in all points so well ordered, as any soldiers were since that the Romans
were in their triumph: and to prove yt it is so, who so does look into it,
shall find that they are first of all levied and chosen according unto true
election, and besides so well armed and weaponed (that in mine opinion) there
is nothing to be found fault with all. Moreover, the destribution of them unto
bands and officers, does agree partly with ye ancient manner, and partly with ye
manner yt is now used: besides, the manner of ranging them is borrowed of both:
so yt what manner soever ye ancient Romans did use yt was better then ours, and
that which we have yt is better then theirs, has bin here in observed: and as
for ye number if it be thought to be too small, I do not say yt it is
forbidden to make it greater, whether it were of footmen or horsemen. But I am
well assured yt the ordnary host of a Roman Consall, was not so great of
Citizens, and alliance as these before spoken of: neither is that much greater
which Vigetius instituteth, if so be yt they be not equal all things compted:
and yet the Romans helped themselves against the greatest part of their
adversaries, with their small number, except when as they had to deal with a
mighty enemy, and then they did put two Consuls hoastes together: and then if
their number amounted unto 50000. Romans, Allies and Voluntaries, that came
without commandment, it was a whole world. Since then they did augment their
number at their need, what shall let us to levy as many as we will, having
men enough as well as they had, if it were 50000. or 100000. if it were requisite?
but this great levy may be reserved until an extremity, and ye abouesaid
four legions might serve for a war of mean importance: to wit, if we were
to encounter but with 30000. or 40000. enemies. For I do make arcount, that the
order that is used in this small number is more worth then an enemy that has
fifteen or twenty thousand more. And if so be that we did levy any small
number more then these, they might serve for sudden courses, and skirmishes,
and to put into garrisons in conquered towns: as for a day of battle, these
four legions with their accomplishmentes, may do as good service as if they
were a greater number, for peradventure a greater number would make a
confusion, as great multitudes are accustomed to do, for that they cannot so
well be ordered as a meaner number. Pirrhus the king of the Epirotes, used to
say that he would have but 15000. only to fight against all men. The small
number of Alexander his soldiers do verify his words, which number being well
ordered, were more worth then Darius great multitude ill governed.

Moreover, I do think that I have so well advertised the General that might
have the conduct of this people of so many points, that if he do leese any
thing, or do not bring his enterprises to a good end, it shall be his own
negligence that will hinder him and not the want of advertisement of any thing
that might serve his turn: for I have showed him how he shall take least hurt,
and have taught him how to give battle, and to get the victory. Moreover, I
have showed him what might happen during ye combat, or after, and the way to
remedy inconveniences.

Consequently, I have led him through his enemies so sure, that he was not to
be surprised, and have made mention of the inconveniences that may happen unto
an host, marching by the way: afterward I have lodged him so strongly
encamped, that he might rest with his people without fear of any man.
Moreover, he has bin taught diverse policies for to overcome his enemies yt
are left after a bataile: and what order ought to be observed in the besiedging
of a town. Moreover I have given him laws to help him self withal, for to
have good service of the people under his charge; and therewith have showed him
how he might proceed in his judgments for to condemn or release a prisoner.
Finally, I have inferred at the tail of these things before spoken of:
certain examples of the severity that the ancient Chiefes did use, when as
they did punish any crimes of importance: of all which there has bin so
largely spoken, that as I have tired my self in writing them, so I doubt that
those that shall thoroughly peruse them, will be weary themselves in reading
them. What rests now then, but to conclude, that who so would put this leauy
in practice should make his Soldiers the most excellentst men of war that have
bin since the Romans: which is so easy a matter to be instituted in France,
and to be maintained, that nothing is more easy. If it had pleased God that
the leuieng of our legions had been like it: for it might be thought that the
king would have liked them so well, that he would not have changed or released
them, for to have bin served with strangers, or adventurers as he has done:
and yet I hope he will remember himself, and make his wars with his own people.
But suppose that he does reject the legions, and that the order spoken of in
this work, be not worthy to be received: yet I do hope shortly to see, that
Militarye Discipline shall be restored unto her ancient force by the said
Lord, and through the diligence that you my Lord Constable will employ before
all other, both for your office sake, and also for that I do think that you
were ordained for to deliver us from the servitude of strangers, wherein we have
been long time, who may vaunt that they have been the disposers of all the
wars that we have made within this 30. years, and have made us to leese as
often as it pleased the^. for in truth all our hope and trust consisted, and it
lay in their hands for to defend or to destroy us, but I am in good hope that
through the good order that you will take, that we shall no more hereafter be
at their mercy: which opinion, both Frenchmen and strangers have of you,
grounding their argument upon that which you have begun, in showing the
Frenchmen yt way how to resist all their enemies. And moreover because that you
have begun to reform the state of the horsemen not long since, it is thought
that you will not leave the footmen in their accustomed error, specially for
that the horssemen had not so great need of reformation as the footmen.
Besides, it is not so requisite to have good horssemen, as good footmen, for
the footmen are they that may win or leese a battle, and not the
horssemen, except that it be by a great chance. I am assured that you putting
your helping hand unto this work, shall be well assisted by many good and
ancient Captains, who do understand this business better then I can express
it. And moreover, there are my Lords the Marshals, and so many other to help,
that it would be impossible if the matter were once set abroach, and put in
question, but that it would have good success: and for to make the matter the
more easy, this realm is so well furnished with experimented, wise, and
wellwilling men, that there wants nothing to set up this art incontinent,
but the setting of them aworke, and showing them the manner how to exercise
those small things that appertain thereunto: wherefore there is no more to do
but to make a leuy of men after the manner that I have showed, or after a
better, and immediately to commit them unto the charge of those that are
fittest, and do best understand this business for to train them: and if the
matter were so handled, you may be sure (as you do well understand) that this
discipline well exercised, would restore us unto the reputation that we have
lost through our negligence, and besides that, you should get an immortal fame
for your travel. Moreover my Lord, if I did not know the great affection that
you have borne of long time unto this reformation, I would enforce my self to
persuade you thereunto at this instant, but knowing that it would be but
folishly done of me to trouble you with a matter that you so greatly desire, I
will but only remember you for ye speedy effecting of your desire, to the intent
that we might yet one day have amongst us the manner, value, and advantage that
a well ordered host has above an host that is ill ordered, to do us service
chiefly against the enemies of our faith, if so be that the King would take
any voyage in hand against the^, as every man hops that he will do, or if so
be that he would attend until that they should assail us at home, as it is to
be feared that they will do, if that our Lord GOD do not put to his helping
hand, which were a thing very needful for us: as for us to think that we
could resist them with our accustomed manner of war, we should deceive our
selves, seeing they do far excel us in power and discipline, and except we
do reform our naughty manner of living, it were nothing, for every man knows
that they are the just scourge of God, by whom he will punish us for the
grievous faults which we do commit. But this amendment will be found to be a
hard matter with those that are accustomed to live at their own pleasures, and
yet it is nothing else but the custom that we have taken in it:
notwithstanding the first is easy, if so be that we would take a little pains
in it, and the last is not impossible, if that we would imitate the Lord
Camille Vrsin, who has so well amended and reformed the Italyans that are
under his charge, for the Venetians in Slauony (whose manner of living before
was too manifest corrupt, as it is well known that of all the nations that do
haunt the wars, there is none so exceeding vicious as the Italyans are
commonly) that of such as I say they were, he has brought them into so good
order, that the worst amongst them may be compared with any of the best
religious that we have in our Monasteries. And to say truth it is ye miracle of
our time, for both the act which he has done, and the victories they have
gotten, may rightly be termed to be wonders. I do say that our men are neither
of steel nor stone more then his were, but that they may be brought unto a
manner of good life as well as they, so that we had another Camille amongst us,
or that the Captains who should have the charge of these men, would do their
endeavor to imitate him as near as they might, and for this cause have I made
mention of him in this place, as also to show that it would not be impossible
to reform a great many of our soldiers, to weet, those that are least
hurtful, so that every one of the Chiefes would first reform himself for his
own part, and moreover did proceed in his business for another and better
intent, then they do that go to the wars at this day. But I now go without my
bounds, and in stead of dispatching, do entangle my self further then ever
before, and do borrowe a new occasion for evil speakers to reprove me,
specially for that I do speak of matters at my own pleasure, willing this and
that to be done, as if it were in me to appoint, or that I were better then
other men, which I am not, and therefore it is the worsse: wherefore not to
detain you longer with words, nor to weery you with rehearsals, which I do
fear more, then the toongs of those that would cut me through, I will take my
hand from this work for it is time, besieching you my Lord Constable to take
my defense in hand against those that will after diverse manners control this
Book, and will make their laughing stock of it in your presence, reproving
here one thing, and there another, as the most part of people do at this day
when as any new thing does light into their hands, chiefly if it do come from
the forge of any one that is of their acquaintance, or of their profession, as
I am sure that more then four that are about you will do, who would be very
sorry, if they should not speak their rablement rather in evil part then in
good, if there should be any of these of whom I speak, I appeal from their
judgment from henceforth, and at this instant unto you, for to maintain my
right, I do cast in their teethes the honest desire yt I long time have had to
do or to wright somewhat yt might please you, which has moved me to take this
matter in hand, as a thing most agreeable unto you: and therefore since it is you
who have caused me to take this work in hand, there is no reason that you
should excuse me of the fault that I have committed in it, or contrarily, that
I should defend mine innocence against all those find faults that would
wrongfully reprove me, whom it shall please you to forbid, not to enter
into the reading of this work for to dispute, nor to correct my sayings,
except they have written better of this matter then I have done, or that you do
esteem them to be of the number of those that have perfect knowledge in
military discipline, for I do consent and permit all those with a good will to
reprove me freely, and to tear out at their pleasure all that they do find to
be ill penned, and contrary unto their opinion: and it shall be so far from
me to be displeased for any thing that they shall blot or tear out of the
book, were it a great part or all, as if I might know their names, I would
give them thanks, and also accoumpt my self to be greatly beholding unto them
for the honor they had done me, in declaring their opinions upon a matter of
so small value. As for the others which do not understand it better then I, or
that would judge of envy, I do hold them for suspected, as well far their
insufficiency, as also for that peradventure I have pricked the^ in some place,
for which cause they might have a desire to revenge if that they might find any
small occasion. It may be also that some may be evil contented, because that I
have spoken against adventures, in blaming their leuy, and also their manner of
life, yet I do think I have done well, and whether I have reproved them justly
or no, I do refer me unto your judgment, who knows of what valewe they are,
and who is not to learn now what fault he does commit that does serve himself
with them, and shall do, until such time as there be a leuy of people made in
France, according unto a true election, with whom a Lieutenant General might
serve himself every way better, then with others. But how should you my Lord
make our adventurers to carry more harness then they are accustomed, and to
carry victuals at their backs, and tools to rampare withal, since they are so
nyce, as to make their Pages (when they are ranged in battle) to carry their
Pikes, or Harquebusse, or their common garment to be lighter, and sometime do
break their Pikes to be excused from carrying the^, and had rather cast their
harnes into a ditch, then to lade their persons. When can you put into their
heads yt they ought ordinarily to do the duties of Pioners, since at a need they
will do no thing, but drive away those yt do rampare of their own free wills. If
in a great number there were one found, they do despise him, and fly from him
as they would do from one that were excommunicated or infected, and despise him
as we do vain and idle men. How will you keep them every day certain hours
in arms for to exercise them in feigned battles, for to be better served of
them at the combat, then if they had not been exercised: since that if there be
question that they should watch but once in fifteen days, or should be sent
but unto one extraordinary service once in a month, they will murmur against
you, saying that they are ouercharged, and that it is for drudges to do the
service they do. I speak nothing of the brauer sort, who disdain to be found
at such like services, because they can renounce God more outragiously then
others, or for that they are more richly clad. How will you bring them to use
any extreme diligence on foot, that only for martching of one mile, they
must mount on horseback at the departing from their lodging: so that a small
band of footmen at this present do carry as great a train of horses, as a
great company of horsemen were wont to do: or if they do any diligence on
foot, they must have more entreaties and persuasions, then I could resite in a
whole day. And sometimes they must be used with threatening and force, so that I
may say, that all the good that they do, if peradventure they do any, is by
force, and that they never make war of their free-willes. When will they
abstain from play, from whores, and from blaspheming, and from committing
those insolences yt they do every day, as well against friend, as against
enemies? Or for to keep them from it, how great a labor should you have, and
how many men should you put to death? how will it be possible to reduce them to
that manner of life, that a plum-tree laden with plummes, being within one of
the Camps that we do make, might be found after that we are dislodged,
undiminished, without any man laying hand upon it (as we do read in times past
has been) when as the very sacred things are not sure in Churches, for that
they pill all, nor the things of those that lodge together is not quiet: for
they rob one from another he that best may best. Shall I make mention of the
country where they pass, since it were as good to be consumed with fire, as
to abide the passage of this people, for that they leave neither riffe nor
raffe, but do force, and murder as well the women as the men they can lay hold
upon. I say in sum, that it is a sort of people that are not to be
corrected, who so shall look well into them, so that there is neither Captain
nor other that can deal with them: for if a Captain would take away their
liberty from doing evil, they will say that he reapeth some profit under
hand: if he reprove them, they do the worse, or they abandon him: if he punish
them, they mutin, and sometimes revenge upon his person. But how will they
amend for him, when as a Captain General himself, can hardly take order for
it? Will they do any thing for that they are of their Captains country? No,
for they are not his subjects, no nor he knows not possible the tenth man but
by sight: wherefore if they fly after that they have done any offense, he
shall not know in what place to find them, for to punish them. And suppose
that they must be found, it is so that the Captains must pursue them at their
own charges, which is not for their profit: for peradventure they shall spend
their money in vain, for to do that which Justice is bound to do. And
furthermore, do these Captains think to make their men refrain by putting
them to any shame, since they are borne and nurssed without ever having learned
any other thing then shame? What shall they promise them being at the wars,
whereby their Soldiers may be enticed or bound with all reverence to love and
fear them: since that when as the wars are ended, they shall have no more to
do with them, and before the end, one will go on the one side, and another on
the other. Wherefore should Soldiers be obedient unto their Captains, if they
know not one another? What others shall they take? shall it be by our Lord,
seeing they do deceive him every way, and blaspheme so cursedly? shall it be by
their parts of Paradise? and they have no portion in it, forasmuch as they are
full of injustice, fornication, malice, wickedness, manslaughter, quarrels,
fraud, evil courage, murmurers, detracters, haters of God, injurious, proud,
vaunters, inuenters of euilles, disobedient unto father and mother, unto the
King, and Superiors: without understanding, except it be to do mischief, and
all the rest that follows: all which are banished from the sight of God, as
the devil is banished out of Paradise. Furthermore, I believe that such people
will never keep that which they have promised in his name, whom they dispraise
at all hours? How were it possible that they that dispraise God, should
reverence men? For it is so that those of whom I speak, do make less account
of him then nothing, and not only they, but also the strange Soldiers that
the King does keep in his service, or the greatest part of them. What good
order then may be taken in this matter? Certainly my Lord (you will answer
me) none: but who would have simple and plain men, so that they were the Kings
subjects, whom it were far better to take into service, supposing that they
were levied, and chosen as appertains, albeit that they never had been at any
service, and that they do come but from houlding of the plough; then those that
had long time exercised the occupation of arms; although they be alswell
experimented as they might be, so that they were otherwise ill conditioned: for
that you shall find that it is easier to make simple and new men good
Soldiers, then it is to bring the wicked to good ways, after that they are
once gone astray. It is not then without cause, that I praise the levy of
those that may be made good Soldiers with little difficulty, and that I cry
against those which are so exceeding wicked, that there is not almost any
remedy to amend them. And therefore it were not convenient that my sayings
should be dispraised nor condemned, if I have spoken against the wicked: for my
meaning was to prick them only, and no others: nor it were no reason that I
should be reproved, although I have blamed the manner that we do use in
leuying Adventurers: for I have not done it before I had justly praised: to
weet, whether the Legionaries or the said voluntaries were better: nor before
regard taken diligently unto ye profit that may come of the one, and unto the
inconveniences and evils of which the others are commonly causers: for if I had
made any comparison on mine own side, I would never be so rash, as to put it
to judgment as I do. But be it that those that do maintain their part,
should find mine opinion evil, and the liberty I have used in speaking: yet
will I not therefore leave to exhort al those that use the wars, and do
delight to have the title of Adventurers, that they should change for some
other manner that should be better, then that which we have handled hitherto:
and that of evil livers as we are, every man should bestow his labor to
become a man of good life: and if we have been inexpert in the feats of arms
heretofore, let us endeavor to reform our selves hereafter in such sort, that
the King seeing us to be well conditioned and perfect good Soldiers, may
think himself happy: specially finding such Soldiers to be in his realm,
that our enemies or neighbors who daily raunsack us, being advertised of our
valor, should make greater difficulty to move war against the said Lord to
morrow or next day, then they are accustomed: or to hold themselves at too
high a price, if he had need of the aid of his said neighbors, knowing how
much we do excel them in virtue and discipline.

Here ends the third, and last Book.
FINIS.
THE PRACTICE of Fortification: Wherein is showed the manner of fortifying in
all sorts of scituations, with the considerations to be used in delining, and
making of royal Frontiers, Skonces, and renforcing of old walled Towns.

Compiled in a most easy, and compendious method, by Paul Iue. Gent.

printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin, for Thomas Man, and Toby Cook. 1589.

To the Right Honorable Sir William Brook, of the most noble order of the
Garter Knight, Lord Cobham, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, and their members,
of her Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel, and Lord Lieutenant of the
County of Kent. And unto the Right Honorable Sir Frauncis Walsingham Knight,
principal Secretary to her Majesty, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster,
and of her Highness most honorable privy Counsel.
THe manifold benefits that I have received at your Honors hands, since my
return into England, have enforced me to seek some means whereby J might
make known my thankfulness for the same. And finding nothing more agreeable unto
your Honorable cares in the service of her Majesty, wherein I might do you
more humble service then in the practice of Fortification, having had sight
therein since the view taken by the Marquis Vitell, for the oppressing of the
Low Countries, with the yoke of Citadels, and exercise sithence Don John's
departing from Bruxels unto Namure: which practice, although it be not so
common amongst us, (or of some thought altogether so necessary for us) as for
the nations whose countries do lie adjoining together, where an enemy may
enter with a great number of horse and men upon the sudden: yet is the
knowledge necessary, that when the practice should be put in execution in the
service of her Majesty, that perfection might be efected that might do her
Highness service. And therefore I have compiled this little treatise of the
practice of Fortification, which J most humbly present unto your Honors,
beseeching you to receive it as a most humble token of the desire J have to do
you service.

Your Honors most humbly ready at commandment. Paul Iue.

The Practice of Fortification.
The necessary placing of a Forte
The 1. Chapter.
THE reason that moved men first to enclose their Cities and other habitations
with walls, was, to be assured from enemies, and that a small number might
defend themselves from the violence and oppressions of a great, wherein their
first practice extended no farther then the preservation of private estates,
until such time as it was considered, yt not only particular places, but also
the general estate of a Kingdom, Province, or Country, might be defended, by
placing of walled Towns, Castles, and Fortresses, upon the edge and borders of
the same; of such sufficient strength and greatness, as that in time of peace,
they might be kept with a few men, and upon a surmize of war, receive a
greater number, by whom the enemy borderer should not only be anoyed in his
Country, and hindered to enter upon the lands of his neighbors so frontierd
with any small power upon the sudden: but bringing any great army, be
constrained not to pass the Fort without subduing it, for avoiding the great
mischief he might receive of so noisome an enemy left behind him, which to
invade, would ask great charge, time, and travel, besides the danger that
might happen. In placing of which Fortresses, two things are chiefly to be
considered of, the necessity, and the situation: for as a Forte not placed
where it were needful, might skantly be accounted for frontier; so having no
benefit of the place it stands in, it might hardly be reckoned for fortress,
so that the one must help the other to the best effect that may be.

A Fort therefore that shall serve for a frontier, must be set near the
walled Towns, Castles, and frontiers of the enemy borderer, or near other
places where an enemy may make any sudden assembly of people in his Country:
having the way from thence commodious to enter upon the lands of his
neighbors, and the retreat good, and upon the Seacoasts at Havens and
Roades, where a Fleet of Ships may be harbored, and have commodious landing:
in which places, because the grounds may be of diverse natures for this purpose,
I will show the manner of fortifieng in all sorts of grounds, and the
commodities and discommodities that a fort may have of the place where it
stands in.

The manner of fortifying in all sorts of grounds, and the commodities and
discommodities a Fort may have of it situation
The 2. Chapter.
WHo so shall fortify in plain ground, may make the Fort he pretends of
what form or figure he will, and therefore he may with less compass of wall
enclose a more superficies of ground, then where that scope may not be had.
Also it may be the perfecter, because the angles that do happen in it, may be
made the flatter or sharper. Moreover the ground in plains is good to make
ramperts of, and easy for carriage, but where water water wants, the building
is costly and chargeable, for that a Fort situated in a dry plain, must have
deep ditches, high walls, great bulwarks, large ramparts, and caualieros:
besides, it must be great to lodge five or six thousand men, and have great
place in it for them to fight, ranked in battle. It must also have
countermines, privy ditches, secret issuings out to defend the ditch, casmats
in the ditch, covered ways round about it, and an argine or bank to empeache
the approach, will require great garrison, much artillery, powder, victuals,
and other things necessary for the keeping and mainteining of it, is subject
to mines and to caualieros, may be surprised, skaled, battered, and assaulted
on every side, and may be kept besieged with forts, men, horse, and artillery.

Where water may be found, the fort may be the less, and needs not the
ditches so deep as in dry ground, for it will be free from surprise, skale,
and myning, and being battered the assault will be troublesome, for that one
man standing upon firm ground, may resist five upon a bridge, boat, floate,
or such like. Moreover, the fort standing near unto any river, may receive
great commodities of it for the bringing of things necessary unto it, both for
making and mainteining of it, and it may have the river turned into the ditch
to skowre the ditch of any thing that may be cast into it, and the same may
also be kept up with stuses within the fort to drown the ground about it, and
in those low places which abound with water, an enemy can hardly cover
himself from the fort.

Betwixt these two scituations, there are diverse opinions held, some
commending dry ditches, alleging that by a dry ditch a fort may receive
relief, the ruin that a battery makes may be taken away, and any thing that
an enemy may cast into ye ditch to fill it, may be burnt, and by the sallies
that may be made out of a dry ditch, an enemy may be charged in his trenches on
every part, (which may serve the turn for a while) but these consider not the
counterscarpe being won, the benefit and use of the ditch will be taken away
by the artillery and harquebusserie of the enemy: nor that of those three
means wherewith a wall may be breached, to wit, the Cannon, mine, and men's
hands, water hinders the putting in practice of two of them. The
discommodities that proceed of water, are these, in hoate Countries standing
water engenders infectiue airs, and in cold Countries it freeseth that men,
horse, and artillery may pass over.

In fortifying amongst hills, make choice of those that are like piramides, or
that have no ground of equal height, with the superficies of their tops, more
then the fort and the ditch will occupy, to the intent that from the Fort an
enemy may be impeached the assent of the hill. For which consideration, the
fortifier shall be oftentimes constrained to make the Fort greater then it were
needful it should be, and ofttimes with great circuit of wall shall enclose
but a small superficies of ground; but being so placed, it needs no great
place in it, nor royal defenses, as great Bullwarks, Flanks, or Ramparts,
because it will not be subject unto battery, but will be assured through the
valley and hanging of the hill, which will give an enemy trouble in lodging,
trenching, taking away the defenses, battery, and assault, and being mined,
the effect might happen to little proffit, for the inequality of the ground.
Besides, if the defenders should charge their besiegers, the one quarter of the
Camp could not succor, or be succored of the other. Or if the defenders
should be enforced to retire, they might do it with advantage enough, having
most commonly a higher ground to repair unto, but when that choice may not be
had, but that the superficies of the hill top be more then the Fort may occupy,
then must he choose the higher part of the hill, placing the Fort, that so
great part of it may enjoy the benefit of the hanging of the hill as possible
may, and toward the other part of the same, build as in a dry plain, for as
part in respect of the valley under it may enjoy the benefit of the hilly
situation, so part in respect af the equality of the ground without it, upon
which an enemy may lodge, trenche, mine, batter, and assault (especially if the
ground may be broken with Spade, Pickaxe, and such like) is subject to all
those discommodities that a Fort situated in a dry plain.

A Fort situated among Mountains, can hardly be kept besieged with fortes,
men, horse, and artillery: but those fortes that are situated upon hills and
mountains are troublesome to make for the difficulty of bringing of stuff to
the place, are subject to surprise, suffer often times great penury of water,
and often times are troubled with great raynes, which seeking issue, do cause
ruin of their walls.

A Fort situated in a lake, needs no great defenses: as great bulwarks,
ramparts, caualieros, nor large flanks, because it is free from battery and
assault, but through the evil air of the lake, it will often times be besieged
of it self. Besides, an enemy may easily besiege it, in placing Forts where it
has recourse to the land, and proceed on his voyage, assuring himself that
the Fort must come into his hands, for as it is hard to be aborded; so it is to
receive succor, and able to do an enemy but little hurt.

Of Forts placed upon small rivers, is sufficiently spoken before, and those
that stand upon great rivers, may partly be compared with those in lakes, but
where they may be approached, their defenses must be great, are free of the
infectiue air which the lake often times yields, may better receive succor,
and give an enemy great travel in the assiege.

A Fort situated in the Sea, is not only free from battery and assault,
because the battery that may be made at Sea is feeble, weak, and uncertain,
by reason of the Seas continual motion; but also is free from besieging, not
only for that those enemies are few that can put any great army to Sea: but
also because the Wind and Seas alteration is such, that an Assige at Sea
cannot be continued. Moreover, it may be maintained with Merchant trade, and
with it Shipping occupye things apperteyning to other men. But a Fort that
stands in the Sea cannot serve the land it stands near unto for frontier,
but at Sea only, because it may not put men and horse a shore, and serve them
for retreat.

A Fort that must serve for frontier upon the Sea coast at havens, roades, and
such like landing places, must be set part within the Sea, or at least so near
unto the Sea, that an enemy may make no Fort, Trench, or other couerture, how
little so ever it be, to save himself from the violence of the Fort betwixt
the Sea and it, nor may use any artillery within one or two hundred paces on
neither side of the port, or haven, to impeache ye free entering and going out
of Ships, and being so placed for the benefit it has of the Sea, it may be the
greater, and both in time of war and peace be kept and defended with less
number of men and provision: because it may be succored at all times, and may
serve it self with the commodities both of Sea and Land, and may serve for
frontier unto both, for that it may keep shipping, men, and horse. And to
besiege a Fort so placed, an enemy that dwells upon the same main the Fort
stands, shall be enforced to have two armies, the one by Sea, and the other
by Land, and coming from any other part, shall be constrained to bring in so
great an army by Sea, as that may carry men, horse, artillery, and other
things, for the mainteyning of the army, to put ashore, and yet must keep the
Seas also, but how hard a matter it is to land an army, and troublesome to
continue an assiege at Sea, and of what valewe those Towns are that have this
situation, Flushing, Rochell, and Ostende, do, and will bear witness, but
the discommoditie that those Forts have that stand by the Sea side where great
ebbes do run, is, they are subject unto surprise at low water.

The manner of the lyning out of a Fort, and the considerations to be used
therein
The 3. Chapter.
IN the delineation of a Fort that shall serve for a royal frontier, the
figure triangular is not to be used at all, nor the quadrant, but only in those
watrie grounds where it can not be approached, neither is the cynqueangle to be
chosen for any perfection that is in ye figure, for this purpose (although that
many good Forts are made in that form of the Castle of Antwerpe, the citadell
of Turyne and others) but rather for sparing of charges in building and
mainteing the Fort, for the exterior angles of the bulwarks placed upon the
angles of those figures, do fall out sharp, and therefore are weak to resist
a battery, and hard to be defended, but in other figures they become flatter,
and the more bulwarks a Fort has, from the more places it may travel and
offend an enemy; but then it will require the greater garrison, provision, and
artillery, the more cost in making, and care in keeping. All which being
considered, line out the Fort you pretend, if nothing do hinder the
deliniation, nor that any part may be less approchable then other with equal
sides and angles; but if any part may be better assured of the situation then
the rest, on that side lay out the longer sides and sharper angles, or both, to
the intent the other part more easy to be approached, may be the more
defenceable: yet herein there must be a foresight, that the Fort may fall out
as circular as possible it may, and being constrained to fortify near any
bank, or high ground, place a curten against it, and not a bulwark, because a
curten lying betwixt two flanks may be better defended then the front of a
bulwark from one, and that high ground more offended from the bulwarks on
either side of it: but if the bank be so large that it would reach from the
front of one bulwark unto another, then in no case build near none so noisome
a neighbor, for upon such a high ground with little labor may be
cauelieros raised in short time, which with artillery may command over the
Fort, and impeache the defense of a breach, notwithstanding any trauers that
may be made, and finding any old Fortress subject to this mischief from
which you would assure it, make on that part the walls, ditches, ramparts,
bulwarks, cauelieros, and parapetes, deeper, higher, and larger, then of
custom, laying the superficies of the rampart hanging somewhat inward. The
City of Gaunt being subject to such a high ground that lay hard unto the ditch
side thereof, by the advice of the foresight, the Prince of Orange fell to
work, with spade, pickaxe, horse, cart, and willing people, and in short time
rebated the pride of it, carrying away part into a valley, and bringing part
into the City, making of it bulwarks, ramparts, cauelieros, parapets, and the
rest, so yt that ground which first commanded the City, was afterward made
subject, the City commanding it: but these like labors may be practiced where
necessity enforces, but not where free choice may be used for avoiding of
superfluous charges, time, travel, and anoyance.

But to return to the practice of the deliniation, being upon the ground to
be fortified, take good view where it were necessary the bulwarks which are
the chiefest and royalest defenses should be placed, (which must be where they
may domayne and command over the ancomings to the Fort, be as hard to be
approached, and as little subject to battery or other offense, as the place
will permit.) And where you determine to place a Bulwark, there set down a
stake, and stretch a line betwixt stake and stake, and with a Spade make a
little cut along the line, as is seen in the figure where these letters
fortification diagram A. B. C. D. E. F. do represent the stakes, and the lines
the breaking of ye ground. Well understood, that these stakes termed yt angles
of the meeting of two curtins, or ye interior angles of the Bulwarks may not
stand farther distant then 200. paces, or 1000. foot, at five foot every
pace, and the reason hereof is, that the exterior angle of the Bulwarks placed
upon these angles, would stand too far from the flanckes, from which they
should be defended, neither is there any great reason to set them so far
asunder, for the greatest force of the Cannon, is within an hundred paces, but
in consideration that the rampart which an enemy approaching the front of a
Bulwark, may make to defend himself from the Artillarie fortification
diagram in the flancke, may be but loose earth, and therefore the less able
to resist a shot, it may be placed the further of.

The circuit of the fort being laid out to fashion out the Bulwarks
proportional and defensive to the same, take the one angle of the figure
before going, which shall be the angle F. A. B. imagining it to be placed in
a dry plain, and frame upon it one Bulwark, in which all the defenses
necessary unto a Forte may be showed, which you shall do in this manner.
First upon the line A. B. take 165. foot, or 33. paces (at 5. foot every pace)
for the length of the Bulwark, which is the line A. C. which length must be
taken with this consideration, that unto every place in the flancke where you
pretend to use Artillery, you must give 50. foot at the least for the recoyle
of a Cannon, and defend the same Cannon from the enemies Artillery with a
parapet of 25. or 30. foot thick, and therefore at the prick C. erect a
perpendicular line of infinite length, which shall be the line C.D. (so shall
the Curtin which is the distance betwixt two Bulwarks be 134. paces long,
which Curtin lying upon the side of a town difficill to be approached and well
watered, may be 12. paces longer; but in a dry situation the said Curtin
should never be so long by 12. or 16. paces) and of the line C.D. take a
portion for the thicknes of the shoulder of the Bulwark, and breadth of the
flancke, which shall be the line C. E. which breadth and thicknes of both
together may be 27. paces or 135. foot, giving unto a flancke, where two
Cannons may be used, not less then 25. foot, nor more then the one third part
of the thicknes of the shoulder and flancke together: for the thicker the
shoulder is, the longer it shall be able to resist a battery, and the better
be defended: wherefore take 25. foot signified by the line C.G. which 25. foot
(the flank being raised, with the scarpe that the Curtin will make may be
some 28. foot, or more or less, as hereafter shall be showed.) And to have the
front of the Bulwark, first divide the angle F.A.B. into two equal parts with
the line H.I. and from the flancke or other place, from whence you would defend
the front of the Bulwark, draw a right line of infinite length, which must
cut the line C.D. in the prick E. and the line H.I. where it happens, as in
the prick K. which shall be the line Q.R. and after this manner shall you
frame the Bulwark, as is seen in the figure.

But here note that the exterior angle of the Bulwark will not always fall
out upon the line H.I. for when the fronts of the Bulwarks are not defended
from like distances and the flancks and shoulders of equal thicknes, then
cannot the fronts be of equal length.

Moreover, note fortification diagram that the custom is to line out the front
of a Bulwark precisely from the angle of the flanck which does defend it, but
for that precisenes there is no great reason: for the front of such a Bulwark
being battered, an enemy may assure himself in ye breach from the Artillery
in the flancke, and therefore to enforce him to make ye deeper breach, and the
better to defend the front of the Bulwark, it were better to line it from the
prick L. somewhat distant from the flancke: but not so far dista^t but that
the artillery which should scour the front of ye one Bulwark might lie
covered in the other Bulwark: for if the Artillery should lie open that it
might be beaten in face and side, the use of it would soon be taken away, and
the better to cover the flancke where the Artillery should lie, to the intent
to give an enemy the more trouble to dismount it, was an Orechion or Cullion
invented (as the Italians and Frenchmen do term it) which we may term to be
ears, wings, or finnes, such as is seen in the former figure marked M. Which
cullion or orechion may be made longer and shorter according to the will of the
workman, but the longer it is, the more covered will the flanck be: but longer
then 80. foot, or shorter then 60. foot in so royal a Fortress, as in this
work is pretended, it were not necessary. The outside of which orechion must
be framed upon the line that forms the front of the Bulwark, and the inside
upon a line stretched from the exterior angle of the flancke unto the
exterior angle of the Bulwark, which is the line G.M. or from the angle G.
unto the midst of the ditch, as is seen by the lines G.K. for these customs
are commonly observed. In waterie ditches, the inside of the cullion stands
that the piece next it may scour the exterior angle of the Bulwark: and in a
dry ditch, that the same piece may scour a secret ditch, which must be made
in the midst of the great ditch: but narrower it may not be, for then the
piece should be impeached to do it office: and wider it were not necessary,
for then the flancke would be too open: and the ditch in waterie ground would
be laid out 100. or 120. foot broad, or upward at the shoulder of the
Bulwark, and in dry ground not above 60. or 70. foot, and in such sort, that
the counterscarpe or side of the ditch may be uncovered and lie wholly open
unto the Bulwark, as in the figure is seen. And when you have thus lined out
the fort and his ditch, and marked upon the ground where the lines run, and
set up special marks or stakes, for the angles of the Bulwarks begin a new
reuiew, to see if any thing, either in the placing or delining might be
amended. For if any fault should be escaped, it were now time to amend it
before any ground be broken: which the Duke of Alua and the Marquis Vitell
considering, caused the Castle of Antwerpe after the first marking to be
delined a new in many parts, correcting their first escaped negligences and
errors. (Here note, that in this business the opinion of the Soldier who has
had experience of the defense, and offense, is to be preferred before the
opinion of the Geometrician, or Mason, who are inexpert, of the practices that
an enemy may put in execution) To proceed, lay out the breadth that the
thicknes of the wall and the Esperons or Counterforts will occupy in the front
of the Bulwark, and likewise that in the Curtin: which breadth in the one may
be 22. foot, and in the other 18. foot: the reason thereof is hereafter
sufficiently showed, and likewise draw a line two foot equedistant unto the
front of the Bulwark and Curtin both outwardly and inwardly for the foundation
signified by the pricks, which foundation must be so much broader then the
wall, and the Counterforts that shall be raised upon it, as in the figure
following is seen.

fortification diagram

The foundation, ditch, secret ditch, and countermine.
Having laid out the superfices that the Fort will occupy, begin to break
ground, bringing the earth inward into the Fort, to rampire withal, foreseeing
as much as may be to avoid the superfluous charges of often remoouing it, and
when you have dug seven or eight foot deeper then you pretend to make the
ditch (or more or less according to the goodness of the ground, lay the
superficies of that bottom somewhat hanging inward toward the center of the
Fort, and work your foundation, as hereafter shall be showed) the depth of which
ditch in dry ground may be 30. or 40. foot, and more, according to the cost
that will be bestowed, besides the depth of the secret ditch which may be
made in the great ditch to ease the charge of the building, which also may be
20. foot broad, and 10. or 12. foot deep: for the chiefest strength in a
Fort that stands dry is the depth of the ditch: for the deeper the ditch is,
the more trouble it gives an enemy in cutting the Counterscarpe, and in
myning the better it will receive the ruin of a breach, and makes the assault
more difficill: but where water abounds, that depth cannot be had, neither
were it altogether necessary, but there 10. or 12. foot under the superficies
of the water, or more or less as the water will permit, is to be thought a
great depth, but then it must be the broader, as 100. or 120. foot, as is
before showed, where the other need not be above 60. or 70. foot: and the
reason of this breadth in the one is, that an enemy may be the more troubled
to abourd the Fort: and of that narrownes in the other, that he may be the
more offended in the approaching and cutting the Counterscarpe, and that the
defenders may be the more covered in the ditch. But when by this ditch and
secret ditch a Fort cannot be assured from the mine, which an enemy may put
in practice, then must a countermine be made; which countermine of some has
been made to little effect upon the foundation within the Fort. But of others
without in the ditch hard against the foundation to better purpose, but that it
weakeneth the foot of the wall: wherefore to avoid that danger, make the
countermine 25. or 30. foot distant from the wall, and so deep in the ground,
as an enemy may go with a mine. Which countermine must be 4. foot broad, and
6. or 7. foot high, and must have vents made in the top of it, whereby it may
receive light: and the best way into it, were some 40. foot distant from the
Bulwark Orechion or Cullion, as shall be showed hereafter, that it may be
used not troubling or impeaching the Bulwark, nor impeached by it: but in the
work it must be the last thing performed, when the ditch is emptied. But for
the foundation of a Fort, if the same be to be made in a fenne, marish, or
other such like grounds, which of themselves are not able to bear the weight
of the wall and rampire that shall be raised upon them; lay a trauers of trees
in the bottom of the foundation of Oaks, or other wood, which will longest
continue good in the earth, laying them thwart wise in the work the one fast
and close shut to the other, and hanging somewhat inward toward the center of
the Fort. And where this foundation is not thought to be sufficient, there
drive in piles, the one half a foot distant from the other, or more or less
as shall be needful, first driving in one pile as far as it may go, and by
the deapth of that one pile in the ground fit the length of all the other,
which piles being driven even with the ground, pare away the earth betwixt the
pile heads some half a foot deep or more, and in stead of that earth so
pared away ram in stones with a rammer, and upon those pile heads lay a
trauers of trees, as before, and upon that trauers, begin your foundation of
stone, which must rise both outwardly and inwardly two foot broader then the
wall, with the Esperons or Counterforts that shall be raised upon it, and half
a foot higher then the bottom of the ditch, to the intent it might the better
support the weight of the wall and rampire that shall be laid upon it. But
where you find quick sands, quages, and such like, there must you not work
much of the foundation at once, least the quages master you: and the fittest
stuff for such a foundation is great chalk stones of two foot and a half,
or three foot long, roughly squared and laid bond wise with the dust of the
lyme-kill or untempered lyme powered in betwixt their joints by baskets full,
and in this manner was the foundation of Graueling wrought upon a quick sand,
so likewise with chalk or stone which you find readyest, you may make a
foundation in any other place (where water does trouble you, in depening of the
ditch, or laying the foundation, if it can not otherwise be voided: use chain
pomps, kettle milles, or such other like inventions, whereof Georgius Agricola
does make demonstration in his sixth book De re metalica:) and where you find
part rocks, and part earth, make a firm foundation in the earth until it rise
even with the rock, leaving the superficies both of the one and of the other
somewhat hanging inward toward the center of the Fort. And building upon the
entire rock plain, the superficies of it somewhat hanging toward the center
of the Fort, but building upon the edge of a rock, cut the same edge in
manner of steps of four or five foot broad, leaving the superficies of
these steps somewhat hanging inward as before, and so proceed (but in these
foundations, use the advice and counsel of the practiced Mason for his
experience sake) the said foundation being brought to an euennes and ready for
the wall that shall be raised upon it, will be like the Figure following.

fortification diagram

The wall, counterforts, rampire, privy doors, parapet or vammure, ways by
which the artillery must be brought into the first place, or casmate in the
flank, casmate in the ditch, covered ways, and argine.
THE foundation laid out, lay out upon it the thicknes of the wall, and length
of the counterforts that shall be raised upon it, for which thicknes observe
this order, that the deeper the ditch, and higher the wall is raised, the
broader it must be at the ground, that it may the better bear the weight of
the rampire that shall be laid against it: wherefore at fifty foot deep make
the wall 5. or 6. foot broad at the ground, at forty 4. at thirty 3. foot,
and at twenty, two and a half, or less, and the reason of this thinness
upwards, is both to avoid superfluous charges, and to the intent the wall may
both the longer resist a battery, and that being battered, the ruin may
occupy the less place in the ditch. And as for the counterforts, they need
not to be set nearer together then twelve foot, where the wall is not above
25. or 30. foot deep, nor would be set further asunder then 10. foot, where
the wall will be 40. or upward, and they may be made of diverse forms: as of
equedistant sides, thin in the midst, and thick at both ends, thin at
the wall, and thick in the rampire, triangular, or broad at the wall, and
thin behind, as in the Figure is seen, which with those of equedistant
sides are the best. The breadth of which counterforts at the wall may be four
foot or less, with consideration of the deapth of the wall, and at the
thinner end two foot more or less as the stuff will give it, those in the
bulwark would be eightene foot long, and those in the curtine fouretene
foot. The benefit that a Fort has of them, is, they keep the rampire firm
against a battery from falling, give an enemy travel to break them, and
help the wall to bear the weight of the earth wherewith it is charged, and
the reason why those in the bulwark should be longer then those in the curtin,
is, because the bulwark is more subject to a battery then a curtine, and not
so well defended, for a curtine is defended from two flanks, and the front of a
bulwark but from one, of all which, is demonstration made in the Figure
following.

fortification diagram

The wall and it esperons or counterforts being laid out, begin to raise up the
same, giving unto it in every eight, nine, or ten foot in height, one foot
of scarpe, hattering, or coming in, the inside equedistant unto the outside,
and the inner ends and sides of the conterforts plumbe working them up together
with the wall, and filling them with good earth well beaten and rammed together
as the work rises, and likewise the side of the cullion next the flank must
be plumbe, and when the exterior angle of the bulwark falls out sharp, then
make the upper part of it, that is subject to battery flat, or round, leaving
the under part sharp, to the intent an enemy may not stand, covered behind,
that flatnesse, or roundnesse from the artillery in the flank. But here
marvel not that I speak of so little scarpe, as of one in eight, nine, or
ten foot, other before having put in practice, one in four, and one in five
foot, holding opinion that by that scarpe a wall should the longer stand
against a battery, but their reasons to prove it are not great, and the effect
is less, but the discommoditie a wall receives of that so great scarpe, is,
that often times through the great weight of the top, it loses it foot and
shoots (besides the weather has the more power of it, which also in few
years causes it ruin) and hereof in the Low Country are sufficient
proofs in the frontiers, made by the late Emperor Charles the fifth, diverse
of their walls having given way two or three hundred foot at once, but one
foot in eight, nine, or ten, the inside of the wall raised equidistant unto
the outside, is given to the intent that the wall leaning inwards, should the
better resist the weight of the rampire laid against it. In raising of this
wall and it conterforts, must the privy door, and the way unto it, by which
the ditch and argin should be defended, be thought upon, which must be made
descendent from the first place in the flank into the ditche, as in the Figure
following is seen. The fittest stuff to make the face of a Fort, is brick,
and such other like soft stones, but the next to hand and best cheap must
always be taken.

fortification diagram

Having raised the wall until the first place in the flank, cordone, or full
height (and filled it with good earth well beaten and rammed) which height may
be five or six foot above the argine, and ten or eleven foot above the
conterscarpe or level it stands upon, make the Fort defenceable, raising a
parapet or vammure upon the front of the bulwark and curtine, of good earth
of ten foot thick, the inside four foot and a half, or five foot high,
and the outside three foot and a half, or more, because it will settle, which
outside and inside must be of turfe, and the superficies must be beaten and
laid hanging toward the ditch in such sort, that the couerd way and
counterscarp may be open unto the defenders from the inner edge of the parapet:
but the parapet in the flank would be 25. or 30. foot thick, and that upon
the cullion 20. foot at the least: the reason thereof is hereafter
sufficiently showed. Afterward draw a line 50. foot equidistant unto the
parapet in the flank for the requoyle of the artillery, and another line 15.
foot equidistant unto the parapet upon the curtine, for the defendors to pass
between the parapet and the rampire that is intended to be raised upon the
curtine at this said line, and from a prick 20. foot distant from the parapet
upon the shoulder of the bulwark, extend a line toward the exterior angle of
the same, but not equidistant unto the parapet, but in such sort, that the
rampire which shall be raised at that line, may be defended from the artillery
in the second place of the flank, as the front of the bulwark was from the
first. And upon this flower also, or two or three foot under it, (to the
intent they may lie the lower) would the flowers and ways for the passage of
the artillery into the casemate and front of the bulwark, and likewise that
out of the one flank into the other, be laid, which must be so broad, that
any piece may pass with ease: but that for the passage from flank to flank
may be broader then the other, and laid out in form like the front of a
bulwark: as in the Figure following is seen: the reason thereof is hereafter
sufficiently showed.

fortification diagram

The parapet being raised upon the Bulwark and Curtin-to proceed to the full
finishing of the Fort in this work pretended, at the lines signified by the
pricks in the figure before going, raise the rampart unto the full height,
which were necessary to be 12. foot at the least higher then the wall, or
first place for the Artillery, and raise the wall in the inside of the
Cullion, with the Esperons or Counterforts in it, (to bear the earth in the
angle next the flancke) so high as it is intended the rampire shall be, but
plumbe as the vnderworke is, but outward toward the Cullion let the same wall
scarpe endwaies as the rampire does: and raise also the walls of the ways for
the passage of the Artillery into the flanks, and front of the Bulwarks,
which must be vaulted over, but must be laid as low as they may that they be
not seen unto the enemy. And as for the passage from one flank unto another,
that may be left vnuaulted, and the walls of it raised as high as the
superficies of the rampire, and covered over with timber. At which may a
retrenchment be made when need requires, and the same well flanked, as by the
manner of the lining of it in the figure before going is to be seen. The
rampire must be raised scarping, battering, or coming in, for every one foot
of height one foot of scarpe: but that part toward the Cullion must be raised
flatter then the rest, and that within the flank or casemate need not to be
raised altogether so flat, and it must be of earth only without any faggot,
that it may the better close and settle together. And the reason why this
rampire is so high and far distant from the edge of the wall, is, that the
whole fortress might from every part of it the better offend an enemy, and as
a caualier command, and domayne over any thing an enemy might put in practice
before it. And that also the wall being battered, this yet might stand
defenceable for a retreat. (but note, that to ease the charge that the
carrying of this great mass of earth would cost, the rampire upon the Curtins
need not to be raised so high as that upon the Bulwarks: neither if the Fort
do stand well watered need the face of the Curtin to be raised with brick or
stone higher then three or four foot above the water: but from thence upward
ye rampire must be raised to his full height. These things may be done for
sparing of charges, but perfection were better) Upon which rampire must a
parapet be raised of 20. foot thick upon the Bulwark, and ten foot upon
the Curtin: for this order would be observed in the parapet. Where Artillery
is to be used of necessity in a permanent place, as in a flank, upon a
caualier, platform, or Bulwark; there almost no thicknes of parapet is to be
thought sufficient, so that ye place will permit it. But upon a Curtin which is
extended wide and broad, and may offend an enemy sometime from one place, and
sometime from an other, there needs no such thicknes. And being enforced at
any part to reenforce the parapet, it may there with less labor and anoyance
be done, then upon a Bulwark. The superficies of the rampire must be so
broad, that any piece may be used upon it, and have scope enough to recoyle.
And the ascent unto it must lie so flat that the defenders may run up upon it
with ease, or pluck up a piece of Artillery by hand at any place of it, and
therefore it must be free of incombraunces. Also the streets of the Fort must
run all direct from the Bulwarks unto the market place, and likewise from
the midst of the Curtins. Which market place must be large 300. foot
square, or little less. The gate of the Fort must be placed in the midst of
the Curtin, that from the Bulwarks on both sides of it, it may be equally
defended, and must be set so low, that the defenders may go out and in to the
covered ways, to defend the argin, or sallie out, as little seen as may be.
But the chiefest defense of the argin must be through the privy doors in the
Cullion, passing the secret ditch with a portable bridge, which may be
lightly laid and taken away, ascending the Counterscarpe: which Counterscarpe
may be left somewhat flat, and pared steeper as need requires. The casemate in
the ditch (for not only the first place in the flank is called casemate, but
also any other edifice that may be made in the ditch to defend the ditch by)
must be placed opposite to the exterior angle of the Bulwark, betwixt it and
the secret ditch, and must be made full of holes of use Harquebuze and Musket
out at. And the walls of it must be so thin, that being ruined, the ruin
may make no great body in the ditch: and the way to man it, must be under
ground, through the countermine, or by some other vault made for the purpose.
The covered way round about the Fort must be ten foot broad, and the argin or
bank so high that a man be not seen behind it: which may be six or seven
foot, and against it there must be steps made for the defenders to stand
upon to use their arms over it; and to mount upon it, when it shall be
needful. The superficies of the argin must be laid scarping, but in such sort
that it may be scoured from the Fort, as in the figure following is seen. Here
note, that as in a dry ground where an enemy may trench and cover himself
from the fort, an argin and covered way, were thought necessary, to give him
the more impeachment to approach the Counterscarpe: so in a low waterie ground
where an enemy cannot cover himself, it were not good to make any argin at
all: least you give him the mean to do the mischief which, you would hinder
him from doing.

The manner of fortifying with earth
The 4. Chapter.
THere is another manner of fortifying which is with earth: in which, in stead
of a face of brick or stone, is a face of turffe used, and for the
Counterforts, faggots: which manner of building is of little charge in respect
of the other, and yet is much more durable against a forceable battery. The
experience thereof has been sufficiently seen in this late wars of ye Low
Countries; but it is not so durable against the wether: but being of good earth
and the faggots green, it will the longer continue: and although the face wast
and moulder away with the wether, yet will the Fort continue defenceable. And
the best is, the face may be repaired again with little charge. With this
manner of building were the towns in the Low countries reenforced, and also
many small Forts made both by the Duke of Parma, wherewith he kept the towns
besieged: and also by the Patriotes, wherewith they frontiered the Duke,
impeaching the courses of his men: he pretending the assurance of his, through
the Camp he had in the field to succor them: and they for the most part,
placing theirs so well watered and hard to be kept from relief, having for
the most part so commodious situations for the purpose: as some of them have
given their enemies travel to get them, and others have caused them to retire
without the^, as Lyllo and others. Of which forts, some contained 160. paces
square, some 100. some 80. others 60. 40. or less, and of these, diverse forms
here following are showed. But so small Forts may well serve to hinder the
courses of a small number, but not to frontier a forcible enemy, except they
stand well watered, and where they cannot be cut off from succor. And yet it
were necessary that they should be of that greatness, that they might receive
and lodge four or five hundred men at the least, leaving the rampires,
streets and place of assembly, or market place free.

fortification diagram

fortification diagram

fortification diagram

Besides these, there are diverse other irregular forms used, most of them
carrying a more show of strangenes then of defense: but since the defenses in so
small Forts as these proceed chiefly, either of bulwarks, half bulwarks, and
tenailes, these may suffice: admonishing the Fortifier, if the place will
permit, to use as well in the delyning of these small Forts, as in those
greater, the considerations before in them alleged.

The manner of the work is this: the turffe must be cut like a wedge, of 12.
or 14. inches long, and 5. or 6. inches broad equidistant, the one end 4. or
5. inches thick, and the other sharp, and these turffes would be taken in the
best ground that lies near about the Fort, and must be cut with a long sharp
Spade, of five or six inches broad, and 14. inches long, which must be well
steeled, and kept very sharp: and the turffe must be carried and handled
without breaking, and laid in the work, the great end outward, and the
grassy side downward, and scarping, one in 5. or 6. foot, the rampire behind
the turffe rising with the earth that is thrown out of the ditch, as fast as
the face of the work rises. (And when the face is raised the height of five
turffes, and the earth behind it laid even, and spread almost as broad as the
rampire is pretended (which may be 20. 30. or 40. foot, and more or less, as
the earth that may be thrown out of the ditch will make it) or at the least so
broad as it is thought that the wood will lie: for to say truth, to throw
down the earth, or to spread it too broad before the wall be raised, were a
point of no great wisdom) stretch a line and pare the turffe even with a
sharp Spade, but scarping, according to the first scarpe you laid them at,
and then lay a row of faggots, which faggots must be 8. or 9. foot long, and
more or less as the wood will give them, but not thicker then that you may
almost gripe them betwixt your two hands, the great end of the wood lying all
one way in the faggot, which end must be stamped against the ground that it may
lie even in the wall, and must be bound with three bonds and laid in the work
the great ends outward, one inch over the turffe, and must be thrust up fast
and close the one to the other, but not laid thicker then one faggot at once.
And upon the small ends of those first laid faggots, must other faggots be
laid, whose small ends must ouerlappe the small ends of the said first
faggots, some three foot and a half or thereabouts. And upon the great ends
of these second faggots, must a third faggot be laid, whose small ends must
likewise ouerlappe the great ends of the said second faggots, as the small end
of the second did the small ends of the first, (and where wood is plenty,
having haste to raise the work, lay a fourth faggot in like manner,) which
being done, raise again the face of the work five turffes higher, paring them
by a line as is aforesaid, and raising the earth behind them as before, and
then lay another row of faggots, and thus continue the work, until it rises
some twelve foot, above the foot it stands upon; which foot must be left
six foot broad, until the Fort be full ended to receive the earth which
shall be thrown out of the bottom of the ditch, which from thence must be
thrown into the Fort, and this foot must be afterward cut narrower flat off,
but not so narrow that it might put the rampire that stands upon it in
danger of falling. Which done, raise a parapet of some five or six foot
broad, more or less, according to the greatness of the Fort, and largeness
of the rampire, and make the ditch if it be where water abounds the broader,
but standing dry, the narrower and deeper. A great care must be had in making
of the ditch, of the goodness of the ground, for fear of laying the work
under feet, to avoid which inconvenience, the best way is to leave the wall a
very good foot, and not to sink the ditch too deep on that side next it,
but rather to make a secret ditch in the midst, or to make that side next the
counterscarpe very deep, leaving the other side the showler. Where wood is
scarce, there use none but in the bulwark only, and there as little as you
may, but only to stay the face of the bulwark; and raise the face of the
curtine with turffes only, giving them somewhat the more scarpe, or for a need
use no wood at all, and where turffe would fall out scant, so that the ditch
would be well watered, use none but in the bulwarks, and raise the courtine
with earth only, making every way a virtue of necessity.

The manner of fortifying of old walled Towns
The 5. Chapter.
FOr that the Towns enclosed with weak walls of stone, and defended with
small, square, or round towers, are insufficient to abide the malice and
offense that an enemy at this day may put in practice, the Cannon being an
engine of much more force then any before it invented. To resist whose
violence, other mean cannot be given, then to rampire those walls within, and
make greater and royaller defenses without; which defenses, where the ditches
are narrow and showle, the wall running any thing straight, or not making so
great an arc, but that from any reasonable large flank the same may be
scoured, would be set joint to the wall as bulwarks, and those Towers ruyned
that might impeach the artillery in their flanks to scour the wall: but where
the ditches are deep and broad, or the wall too much circulare, there the
defenses would be placed without the counterscarpe, both for the better
flanking of the wall, and to avoid the great charge, labor, and time, that
the filling of the ditch, and far fetting of the earth to raise the work
would require, and being so placed, they are termed to be rauelins of the
Italyans and Frenchmen, and of us they have been termed spurs. Of Bulwarks
there is sufficiently before spoken, but yet here note, that it shall not be
necessary to make these Bulwarks in Towns, so great as those in royal
frontires, committing the charge of them unto Townsmen, except the same be
well peopled Cities; neither were it good to bestow too great cost upon the
fortifying of any evil situated place, for such things are easy for an
enemy to get, and hard afterward to be gotten out of his hands, but for the
delyning of a raueling, if the same be to be placed against the side of a
town, take this course being upon the ground where the raueline should stand,
go perpendicularly from the wall and counterscarpe some 140. or 160. foot, or
more or less as you will make it great, having respect unto the necessity,
and unto the valor, and number of the defenders that be upon the place, or may
be had upon a sudden, and set down a stake for the exterior angle or point
of the raueline: then turning toward the wall, behold from what place the same
raueline may best be defended, which must be by caueliers or platformes raised
within the wall, except the wall and rampire be of sufficient breadth to place
artillery upon, which must not stand farther distant from the exterior angle
or point of the rauelin then 180. paces at the uttermost, and from those
platformes or caualiers unto the same exterior angle, draw two right lines
for the fronts of the raueline, which fronts may not be continued upon those
lines unto the counterscarpe (because the extremes of the^ next the
counterscarpe would fall out too weak and indefencible) but must be cut off
perpendicular from the counterscarpe or wall at some reasonable breadth,
leaving both ends of the rauelin as the flanks or cullions of a bulwark, and
it must lie wholly open toward the town, that the town may command, and
domaine over it, and that an enemy entered, may have no succor in it, to assure
himself from the artillery and harquebuserie of the town. And it must be
manned by a bridge which must be laid as low, and covered as possibly it may.
But if the ditch be dry, then make the way into it through a vault under the
ground, or through the bottom of the ditch, and shut in both the sides or
flanks of the raueline unto the wall with a strong palizado to assure it from
surprice. And when a raueline is to be placed upon an angle, then proceed as
in the delyning of a bulwark, but never place a rauelin upon a sharp or
right angle, because it would fall out too sharp, but within the right or
sharp angle place a platform which may defend the rauelins upon the lines
on either side of it: and note also that you may not upon any other angle take
the flank of a rauelin so royal and large, as you would the flank and
shoulder of a bulwark, because of it disioint standing from the wall which
causes sharpnes.

The caualiers or platformes, must be placed where they may best defend the
thing for whose cause they are made, on most parts offend an enemy, with choice
as near as may be of the highest ground to ease the labor and charge, and
they may be of earth only, with dung, rubbish, and such like, as the place
yields, but must be begun so broad, as that being raised to their full
height, you may have scope enough to use five or six pieces of artillery
upon them, or more or less as shall be thought needful, and also have
sufficient breadth to defend the same, with a large parapet, gabions, or such
like, and place them a good distance from the wall that they charge not the
wall, and that being beaten, they may the easier be reedified.

If the wall be so high, that to rampire it to the height it is at, it would
ask too great a labor and charge, then rebate it or take it down lower,
(especially if there be no high ground without the town opposite unto it,) but
if it be not able to bear the weight of the earth that should be laid against
it, then to stay the wall from sliding, lay earth without at the foot of it,
making the ditch deeper and larger if need require, as in the Figure following
is seen.

To help the insufficiency of the gates, place a raueline before them,
foreseeing with one defense to serve two turns, but if any gate stand
indefencible as in an angle, damme it up, and make a new in the curtine.

Where the water may be drawn away, there make a strong and sufficient damme
of stone, placing a palizado before it, (providing always to have some royal
defense near unto it, that an enemy may be impeached, by all means possible
to approach it:) which palizado must be of young trees that will yield five or
six inches of square timber, set fast in the ground, and bound together, the
one standing three inches distant from the other, that nothing may be hid
behind it from the harquebusserie of the Fort, and also it were necessary that
the outside of it should be flanked from the said Fort. Likewise, any courtine
or bulwark standing near unto any damme, seabanke, or other such like,
whereby it might be easily approached, aborded, and surprised, must have a
palizado (placed at the outer edge of the parapet raised upon the said
courtine or bulwark) of sparres or such like, which palizados may be 14. or
15. foot high, or more or less.

Where a river of slow course has passage through a town, whose water side
or Keys are unwalled, there place in the river (betwixt two forceable flanks) a
stackado of great piles to keep an enemy out, leaving certain places open for
passage, which upon the sudden at every need may be shut: but where the
water runs strong, and the fall of the river great, or the deapth such, that
a stackado would little avail the defense, and hinder the town of his
commodity, there only upon necessity, when an enemy is looked for (especially
if he may either bring with him, or find where he comes to serve his turn,)
make a bridge of hoyes, lighters, or such like, forceably moaring them,
stretching cables from the one to the other, placing the bridge where it may be
royally flanked, well arming it with men and artillery, of all which, in the
Figure following is sufficient demonstration.

Concerning the suburbs of cities and towns, if that they do lie so stretched
out at length, that there could neither be means found to defend them, nor
reason to make them strong, they must be thrown down when as an enemy is
looked for: (but rather too soon then too late) not only because that the said
suburbs might lodge and harbor the said enemy, or that the timber, board, or
other thing that might be had in them, might greatly pleasure him to offend
the town: but also because that houses or other thing standing near unto a
town, or fort, are means to surprise and approach unto it, and the approacher
not be discovered, or impeached by the defenders. But whereas the suburbs do
stand round together, are well peopled and great, like unto a piece of a city
or town, to avoid the great damage that would ensue of the ruining of such a
multitude of houses: inuiron the said suburbs (having leisure to do it) with a
good A. Rauelins.

B. Caualiers, or Plat. forms.

C. Bulwarks, with Palizados upon their Parapets.

D. Stacados.

E. Dammes, with Palizados before them.

F. A bridge of boats.

ditch, and large rampire, well defended with Bulwarks: leaving the said
suburbs open toward the town, to be subject unto it.

When as any open town or other inhabited place is to be fortified, whether
the same be to be made a royal frontier, or to be meanly defended against
sudden courses and surprises. The fortifier or ingener must do his endeavor to
reduce the same unto the perfectest form that the place will permit,
remembering the considerations alleged before in the delineation of a fort.
But where it is intended that the said place should be but of mean strength,
only to withstand the courses of a small number, and not to resist a puissant
army: nor that it should have any garrison in it, but be kept by the
inhabitants: the Curtins must not be made nothing so long, nor the Bulwarks so
great as in frontiers, and the said Fort must be contrived to be defended from
as few places as it might be: and to bring it unto this perfection, he must
neither spare house, garden, orchard, backside, key, or other thing that should
stand in the way (where the rampire should be raised, or the ditch made) but
respect the commodity and perfection of the Fort before any private
commodity: and yet rather spare the poor for pity sake, then the rich for
reward. Having above all things a regard unto his charge, that this parcialitie
do not cause the work to be imperfect. For that these three: to weet,
ignorance, negligence, and partiality in this business, are things to be
punished with death.

FINIS.
Errata in the Book of Fortification.
For G.M. read G.N. fol. 12. For, at the lines signified by the pricks, read
at the lines within the parapet. fol. 25.


