The beginning and ending of all popery, or popish kyngedome.
scene with pope And then shall that wicked be uttered, whom the lord shall
consume with the sprete of his mouth, and shall destroy with the apperaunce of
his coming, even him whose coming is after the workinge of Satan.


The epistle. To the most excellent and worthy prince, Edward the.vi. by
the grace of god, King of England, France, and Irlande, defender of the
faith, and in earth supreme head of this church, of England and Ireland,
immediately next under god, and to his most dear uncle, Edward duke of
Somerset, lord protector of all the kings majesty's realms and dominions,
and gouernoure of his most royal person: His faithful and obediente subject
Gwalter Lynne, wissheth the continual assistence of gods grace.
WHEN SATAN perceived the ground work and foundation of the papacy to be so
weak and slender, that it should not be able to sustain and bear, the weight
of the great heap that he intended to erect and build thereon: then did he
(most dear sovereign) being the angel of darcknes, put on him the form
of an aungel of light. And under that cloak, he endeavored all that he might,
to fortifye and strengthen it: by the most sacred and holy scripture, to
thintente that the impiety and wickedness thereof, might the better be cloked
and hid. And therefore did he subtylly invent, and diligently instruct all his
faithful children the bishops of Rome craftily to wreste and falsely to
interpretate, this place of scripture in Math. Thou art Peter, and upon this
stone or rock I will buyld my church. Upon this foundation, builded he so
strongelye, and erected so beautyfull and gloriouse a piece: that all the whole
world wondered thereat. The wise and learned men employed all their study to
enlarge, and deck this princely palayce, and see of Rome. Yea princes and
rulers, thought it their duty, to become laborers, and drudges in the erecting
and upholding of this so gorgiouse a buldynge. Finally the matter was so
handled, that thoroughe all christendom ye see was taken for the fountain and
well of all mercy. Remission and forgiveness of sin, were not to be had in
any other place then there. But now, that it has pleased the lord (according
to the words of his prophet Joel) in these our days (the latter days of the
world) to power out of his spirit upon all flesh, yt this secret and hid
mystery of abominable iniquity, is come to light, and so opened that the
suckelynges and young babes of this time, know more then did the ancient and
gray heared fathers in the time of blyndnesse and ignorance.

That most victoriouse and triumpha^t prince, your dearly beloved and natural
father, perceiving that more then hell darkness, wherein we (his pore
subjects) were led: opened unto us the most holy and sacred bible, wherein are
declared the mysteries of this so gorgiouse a buyldyng. Cease not therefore
(most graciouse prince) to set forward this godly work that your father
began. And to thentent that your graces louinge subjects may know by what
craft and policy this buylding first began, and afterward proceeded, I have
thought good to translate out of the German tongue into English, this
little book. wherein is declared what manner of things the bishops of Rome were
at the first, what was their estate and condition, and what was their office or
deutye. Then how they abusing their office aspired, and came to so inordinate
honor and dignity. How they leuinge Christ and his most holy word,
enployed all their study to please men. The secular power was it that they
looked for. And no dout it was that, and not Christ, that gave to the bishops of
rome, ye preeminence to be called fathers of fathers, and to be preferred
before other bishops. But because so secret a mystery, can not well be opened
without plain demonstracions: the Author of this book has most plainly set
forth by figures, the estate, that this Antichrist is in, has been in, or shall
be in, even to the day of his utter destruction. These figures are not of the
authors own inuencion, ne of late days invented: but they were found in
ancient libraries above.ccc. years sense. The common experience, that is
daily seen of the great blyndenesse and ignorance of that time, would move
your highness to doubt of the truth, and verity of this report: but to
certify your majesty therein, there is at this day remaining in the abbaye of
saint Laurence in Luyke, a table of great antiquity, containynge portrature of
like matter. Whereby it is manifest that the fathers of ancient time, saw in
the papacy, the thing that they durst not utter, either by words or
writing, but trusting that the time would come when men might be bold to
speak it: they did in the mean time keep it in painting and portrature, that
such as could conjecture, might gather knowledge thereby, and that the thing
might remain till such time as god had appointed it to be declared both in
writing and words. The Author therefore of this little book: has not only
added unto these figures an exposicion to declare ye meaning of every of them:
but manifest scriptures also, to prove the things that they represente, to be
true, so that these figures may appear rather to be the figures of some
Apocalipsis or reuelacion, then the inuencion of any man. The spirit of the
living god, the geuer of all goodness, instruct you in all godly knowledge,
that for the time of your reign in this world, your highness may use the
sword to you committed, to the honor of god, and wealth of his members, living
here under your dominion. And then no doubt ye shall enjoy the kingdom, that
shall continue for ever. AMEN.

Your faithful and obedient subject Gwalter Lynne.

IN MONSTRVM QVOD libellus, iste graphice depingit, ad Lectorem Candidum.
CApripedes Satyri: tetrae Stymphalides Hydra
Dira: Canis Stygius: Gorgones anguicomae
Igne Chimaera furens rapido: Scyllaeque triformes:
Monstraque si qua usquam fabula prisca refert:
Portento huic nostro uictricia sagmina cedunt,
Nec monstro immani cedere turpe putant.
Incesta siquidem and uecordae libidine feruet.
Depascitque inopes, expoliatque bonis.
Mill, quibus miseros circumuenit, obtinet arts:
Tutatur leges mordicus usque suas
Vertice uittato stulte nimiumque superbit!
Inque pios flammis saeuit and igne nocens.
Orbis opes conquirit, opum sinuosa uorago
Aestuat, and nummis cuncta profana facit.
Portenti nomen Pestis tibi Maxima binis
Exprimit haud dubie, Lector amice, notis. P. M.

Romuleae quanque Pater augustissimus urbis
Cenceri falso iure proternus amat.
Scilicet est turpis Dominae meretricis alumnus,
Quam sacri arcanum uatis adumbrat opus.
Cui, genius pronus studia in contraria Christo. Antichristus.

E^ Graio nomen non male font dedit.
Nam uere (mihi creed) pios qui torret: egenos
Deglubit: sceleri Praemia magna locat.
Qui pede ceruices Regum premit imperioso:
Atque tumet fastu turgidus Arsacio:
Venalesque malis sacros proscribit honores:
Obruit and uerbi semina sancta dei:
Connubijque suis socialia foedera nescit,
Pacem almam frangit, dissidiumque serit
Colliditque armis totum feralibus orbem:
Foenerat: annonas aere flagellat iners:
Diuinosque suis titulis postponit honores:
Et redimi sacris coelica regna docet:
Monstru^ haec cuncta Deo patrans pugnantia, christi
Dici hostem merito, quis dubitare queat?
Sollicito hunc studio lector peruolue libellum,
Sat scio, uel lectus ter, mage gratus erit.
Non fuco, at uero depicta color placebit
Portenti facies prodigiosa trucis.
Dispeream, nisi uera magis, quam oracula Phoebi
Delphica, uel sorts Diua Sibylla tuae.
I.A.

Paul in his second epistle, and second chapter to the Tessolonians.
Brethren we beseke you by ye coming of our LORD Jesus Christ, and in that we
shall assemble unto him, that ye be not suddenly moved from your mind, and be
not troubled, another by sprete, another by words, 2. pet. 3. a
nor yet by letter which should seem to be sent from us, as though the day of
Christ were at hand. Let no man deceive you by any means. Danie. 9. c 1. Tim.
4. a. Luce. xi. c
For the Lord comes not except the departing come first, and that that man
of sin be opened, eue^ the son of perdicio^, which is an adversary, and is
exalted above all that is called god or gods service, so that he sytteth as God
in the temple of god, and boasts himself to be God. 1. Co. ^. ^ and. 6. c.
Dan. xi. c
Remember ye not, that wha^ I was yet with you, I told you these things? And
now ye know what witholdeth it, even that it might be uttered at his time. 1.
Ioh. ^.^
(For the mystery of the iniquite works alredye, till he which now only
lets be taken out of the way.) And then shall that wicked be uttered, whom
the LORD shall consume with the sprete of his mouth, Job. 15. d. Esaias. 11. a.
Danie. 8. d. Ioh. 8. d. Deu 13. Math. 24 v
and shall destroy with the appearaunce of his coming: even him, whose
coming is after the working of Satan with all lyenge power, and signs and
wonders, and with all deceueablenesse of unrighteousness among the^ that
peryshe, because they received not the love of the treuth, that they might have
been saved. zacha. 5. a. Rom a. 1. d.
Therefore shall God send the^ strong delusion, that they should believe lies,
that they almyght be damned, Osee 7. a
which believed not the truth but had pleasure in unrighteousness. But we are
bound to give thanks always unto God for you, brethren beloved of the Lord,
because that God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation, in the
sanctifyenge of the sprete and in beleuyng of the treuth, whereunto he has
called you by our Gospel, to obtain the glory of our LORD Jesus Christ.

Therefore brethren stand fast, and keep the ordinances which ye have learned,
whether it were by our preaching, or by epistle. But our Lord Ihesus Christ
himself and God our father, which has loved us and given us everlasting
consolacyon, and a good hope through grace, comfort your hearts, and stablyshe
you in all doctrine and good doing.

scene with pope And than shall that wicked be uttered whom the lord shall
consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy him with apperaunce of
his coming even him whose coming is after the workinge of Satan.


The beginnynge and ending of all popery (being taken out of certain old
prophecies more then.ccc. years agone, here faithfully set forth to the
amendment of this present world, out of hye Almayne by Gwalter Lynne.
The interpretacion of the words of christ. Math.xvi. Thou art Peter. etc.
which the pope ascribes unto him self.
THe pope (because his estate might seem the hollyer) took the holy scriptures
and christ him self to defend and maintain it withal As Lucius Silla by the
romans, having under the pretens of goodness delivered them from the Marianes,
afterward betrayed the rich and honest men of them, imprisoned, spoiled and
killed them. Might not such another part be played with us? yes and it is (the
more pite) come to pass already. And still he has kept us under, with the
words which Christ spoke unto Peter, Thou art Peter. etc. which words in no
wise do serve for his purpose. But commonly is it seen, that all thing so
begone, come to an evil end, as is to be seen by ye hole popery. They might
better have been suffered, if they had ruled more with goodness in peace and
tranquillite then with rigor and mere tirannie, if they had likewise rather
for given, then still persecuted to death. But truly, the wolf (the whiles
he is in prison) deuoureth no sheep, although there were never so many with
him in captivity, but being at liberty, let every man beware of him.

Christ said to Peter. Matthew.xvi. Thou art Petrus. etc. Petrusin the greake
tongue, is as much to say as in the latyne tongue saxum. In ye english tongue a
rock, and therefore of christ he was named a rock, because he had been
constant in the knowledging all the holy catholic faith, and not wavering
hither and thither, as the commune people did. And upon the same rock, that is
upon the same steadfast knowledge of faith, will I buyld my church. And who
soever steadfastly stands to the same, the very hell shall not prevail
against him, much less shall men.

Like as saint Augustine in his sermon upon this place does attribute these
words, upon this rock, to our Lord Jesus Christ, and not to Peter saying, this
is the meaning of it. Thou art Petrus, and upon the same rock which thou
have confessed and knowledged, saienge, Thou art christ the son of the living
god, will I buyld my church, upon me I will build the, and not me upon the.
But such as would men to be builded upon men, said thus, I hold of Paul, I
hold of Apollo, I hold of Cephas, which is Peter. The other sort which would
not be builded upon men, but only upon the rock Jesus christ, said. I hold
of Christ. etc. Augustinus. Erasmus Roterodamus.

I Marvel therefore (not a littell) that certain people there be that wrest
and wring this place and forcely apply and asscribe him, to the pope as if it
only apperteined unto him. But the whiles his church (which he names the
catholyke church) is not builded upon christ, but upon him self, so must
likewise the foundation even be so strong, mighty and durable. Yet does he
set forth him self, with the holy scripture which in no manner of wise does
serve for him. Neither is Cyprian with him, where as he speakethe of saint
Peter, upon whom the church was builded. For S. Peter in his confession and
knowledge, and the pope agree, even as fire and water. what comparison is there
between Christ and Beliall? if the popes both in faith and lyuinge were to be
compared with Peter, so were there some hope to be had. Math. v Mat. ix.
Luc^. xiiii.
But whiles he is but a corrupt and unprofitable lalte, having lost his
savor, whereto does he serve? scasse to the dong hill? And therefore is he
dekeied. Yet the pope that the scriptures would not maintain him, he has
sought another mean or way. As is to be seen and read in the popes Cronicles.

How long that the bishops have been in the church, and when, with the
beginning likewise of the pope.
THe christians had but bishops until the time of Constantine. Anno.ccc.
xi. And these bishops did nothing but study the holy scripture, and taught the
holy gospel to the people, and exercised ye same, and lived soberly. The
bishop of rome had no dominion over rome as he has now, he was a curate unto
the^, and that was al. And bishops generallye (according to their vocation)
taught ye people ye kingdom of god, and comforted and fed the poor. The
communes gave the^ money with other necessary things which they dealed among
the poor people, as ye apostles did like wise. There was much spite
wroughte against them by diverse great and mighty men. They were there to
suffer. Few of the magistrates were of their side, if by chance one were with
them ten were against them: as both themperoures and popes Cronicles
testify, The persecution of the christian people and how they came together.
yet did they suffer al things for gods sake. Item the commune people labored
truly and help one another, and where as they might be sewrest, there did
they gather together. So has likewise the holy Anthony done in egypt, and
brought many to christ, and they increased. Insomuche that there dwelt certain
thowsandes of christians in the wilderness of Egypt, and lived by the gospel,
geuinge them selves to mortify the flesh, and daily labors, This witnesses s.
Ierom. Ierom. x^


But when ye foresaid Consta^tinus Magnus had overcome and subdued cruel
Maxe^tius which persecuted al christians, he gave license to ye christians
being scattered abroad, to build chirches and openly to preach the gospel,
geuinge them also certain great gifts toward the same, but not the city of
rome, neither yet lands nor people, as the pope alleges in his laws.
Constantinus gave not rome to the pope.
Distinct.xcvi. Constantinus, but kept them to him self, his heirs and
executors, and Constantius his son had the possession of rome even as
Constantinus his father had before him. After Consta^tius, Iulianus likewise,
Iouinianus Valentinianus, Gratianus, and so forth.

WE read no where that the bishop then invaded the Romans, neither that he
kept any manner of wars, Such emperor such bishops.
but lived poorelye. And the bishop with the christians were many times invaded
by ye emperor.

But when Iustinianus (after the birth of christ. vc.xix.) became emperor, he
redeemed the bishops out of their miserye, and did much good unto them.
After him reigned Iustinianus his susters son, which was so righteous, that
he compiled and set in order all the institucions of themperours of rome,
which now we name themperiall laws, he builded diverse goodly churches at
constantinople, and gave them great riches, yearelye fode and sustinaunce. The
beginning of the popes riches.
And by this mean the bishops and preistes became somewhat more welthye then
they were before.

ANno. vc.lxxx. was Gregorius Magnus (the first of that name) made bishop of
rome, and one named Mauricius de Cappadocia (ye first that came out of grecia)
emperor when (as before) the bishop of rome was become somewhat mighty and
rich, they could not agree between them: Insomoche that Mauricius became
ennemy unto Gregorye: At the same time, were the bishops something yet
persecuted, as yet being faithful. And the emperor continuyng in persecution of
the^, god permitted a plage to come over him, that he was takyn prisoner by
Phoca, that was chosen emperor in his rome, and caused him to be headyd.

When now Phocas. Anno. vic. and iii. kept his seat at Constantinopell, And
ye occidental empire (that is, Rome, Italy, France, and Germany) were without
a head, Practice to get lands and people
the vice emperor being slain of the Gottishe king Theodorico. The bishop
of Rome thought in his mind, what and if thou hadste the dominion of the vice
Emperowre, that rowme neded not to stond open for a preye to every man? For
that cause went Bonifacius the third unto the emperor Phoca, to obtain of
him, that as in worldly dominion every man took themperoure for the chief head
of all the world, likewise ye bishop of Rome might be the chief bishop within
Christendom. Then must needs follow that he must have lands and men.

Whiles themperowre of Rome, kept his seat at Constantinople, the bishop of
Constantinople wrote him self the chief bishop, because of the empire. This
shrodely troubled ye bishop of Rome called Bonifacius, when and i^ what
bishops time this name papa began.
who went for the same cause to themperoure Phoca, praienge him instantlye to
grant to the seat of Rome his Imperialle privilege, from henceforth to be a
bishop above al bishops, that is Papa patrum. And the byshoprike of Rome to be
named the chief of all bishoprikes.

Although this privilege would not so lightly be granted, yet he obtained it
by continual seute and begging. This will they not be a known of now, but
say that the pope is the supreme head and his romish byshoprike to be above
all byshoprikes by gods ordenaunce.xxi. Quamuis. and Distinct.xxii. omnes.
And the emperor Constantinus (say they) should likewise have given this
privilege to be pope, and his bisshoprike to be above al other which likewise
appears by their own Decret. Distinc.xcvi. Constantinus. They make of the
privilege, whatsoever they will the whiles it is to their profit. And thus have
they written it in their own Decrees. Thence commith the name of the most
holiest father the pope. The same have they afterward colored with Christ, his
holy word, and Peter. It should have had no likeness to truth else.

But how agree these things, Constantinus did grant the privilege, Gregorius
the third brought it to pass by Phoca. And afterward must Christ confirm
the same. Have the faithful old bisshops before Constantynes time been so
ignorante that they understood not the holy scriptures? then is it no maruail
that they were persecuted. If they had set forth them selves by times, with
christ's words, they might have been in better case.

IF they had such power of christ, what neded they to entreat and flatter
the ungodly emperors for it? when christus chose Paul to be an apostle
among the heithe^s, he must needs be it, went also, and did as he was
commanded, neding nether emperors nor kings confirmacion to ye same, And
continued until such time as the emperor did head him. After that sort was Paul
made pope, and Petrus was crucified. Therefore has it another menyng then the
pope allegeth. And of ye same words Tu es Petrus They have made them a law
contrary to the doctrine of christ and the Apostles, and the lives of
faithful bishops.

THe same Bonifacius the third, when he had begged the chief byshoprike of
Phoca, immediately after he wrote him self pope Bonifacius the third of that
name. He gathered al his bishops and preistes together, and kept a concile at
Rome. And declared there openly that from that time forward a pope being
chosen by the priesthode and the common people, should be taken of as much
authorite, as if he were created by the emperor and admitted. Lo there may we se
ye first thanks or reward yt the pope gave to the emperor for the privilege
granted unto him taking away from him his old rightes which were and had been
themperours, since ye first christen emperor was. That the emperor should make
no more bishops, but ye pope, and so should ye bishops likewise be more
obedient to the pope the^ to the emperor, and despetch al their matter at
Constantinople without the emperor. And thus began he privily to rule and co^ma^d
his master the emperor, of whom he had begged the privilege. The same was not
done immediately by rigeur, but the pope suffered the emperor to have still for a
time his deputy at Rome, which admitted the pope.

Now was it come to such a point, that the popes power would break out, and
take upon him to be above themperoure. And therefore, when after the birth of
Christ.viic. and.xviii. years Leo the third of that name, being emperor,
did put down Germanum a Patriarche at Constantinople, and in his place set
Anastasium. The pope of Rome sent Gregory the third unto themperoure, and wrote
unto him, that he should put Germanum into his place again, which
themperoure would not do. There began all the mischeife at ones. The pope
found the means that all Italy fell from the emperor and forsook him (which
none other pope has done, but they patiently suffered persecution) he cursed
also the emperor. Thinking when thempire were divided within it self, he would
be emperor, for he had already gotten him a great name, among the princes and
governors. Reason would also require that he were not only the cheifhead by
name, but also in might and power, and so would he keep Rome and grant
thempire to whom he would and listed.

WHen now Constantinus the fifte, the son of Leo the third was emperor,
and somewhat offended with the pope zacharia, by reason of his father, whom
Gregorius suffered to dye under his curse in Messambria, and caused all Italye
to fall away from him. He purposed to have brought the^ again under his
subjection. zacharius the pope fearing least Constantinus might shorten his
wings again, sought another manner of mean, then super hanc petram, upon
this rock, that is to say, How the pope came by rome.
him self. He sent for help unto Pipinus thadministratour of france,
promisinge to make him king of France, with the favor and good will of the
Magistrates and rulers. Was not this likewise done in despite of themperoure?
And thus was the romish empire divided, one took here, and another there. The
pope kept Rome as his own.

HEre have you the first king made by ye popes power, and the favor of the
rulers and governors, according to the tenoure of his spiritual laws.xi. q.
i. Te quidem. Pipinus the first king made by pope zacharia^
But this pope dyed the next year after, and Stephanus the second came in
his stead, The which had much sorrow and trouble by king Astulphum, and
likewise called unto Pipinus to assiste the church of Rome, Insomuche that the
king Pipinus took his part, and did drive king Astulphum away from rome,
and gave the pope Stephane Raue^nam, with diverse other cities.

ANd so is the pope successively become a ruler above emperors and kings, and
al christendom universally. And has forsaken ye holy scriptures, the
gospel, the footesteppes of the ancients poverty, sorrow, care, and all
other kinds of persecutions and troubles etc. How can he then be the most
holy vycare of christ, and successor of saint Peter? we find written, Dear
brethern be my followers, as I am the follower of christ.i. cor. xi. if the pope
with his company do follow Christ, then is it reason that we likewise follow
him. But for their deuylish and abominable rule and doctrine, is there not one
jot in scripture. There is neither Peter, nor Paul that will know them, much
less will Christ him self know them. Thus shall they be answered nescio uos. I
know you not. Quia operati estis iniquitate^. you have set forth your own
noughtynes in summa ebrietate sicut fortes Ephraim. in all filthynes and diverse
other kinds of ungodliness (which be not to be written) with the might of this
world.

LO, hitherto have you had in writing the beginning of the pope,
thaugme^tacion of his state, and thirdly his full power and might. Now shall
you likewise behold and se the same in the old painted figures following.

HOw be it many old and faithful fathers perceived, and saw it well, yet
durst they not clearelye set it forth, except only by fygures. Trustyng
alwais, that through the mercy of god a time should come when they might be
brought to light. And so clearly set forth, that it were impossible more
sightlye to paint them. This will we now do for the plaisure, and to the profit
of such as can not read. To prove whether they be able to know a lion by his
claws.

The pope in his pontifical robes on every side a bear, casting them money
in their mouths, and the holy ghost a side of him. scene with pope and bears
IN this estate began the bishop of Rome to set him self. Anno.ccc.xi. at
the time of Constantinus Magnus, the which when he had overcome, Maxentiu^
granted the Christianes to buyld churches, and gave exceeding great gifts
toward it but neither lands nor people, nor yet the cure of Rome, as they
say he did. When they smelled riches, and daily coueted more and more, then
was gods word laid aside. And afterward overcame they all things (as they
do yet) with monney Lords, dukes, emperors, kings, lands and people have
made subject unto them. They had well studied the words of Philip the king
of Macedonia, where as he says, that there is no castle, no town, ye no
land, so strong, which cannot be won, if a moyle laden with money may enter
into it. And thus money overcomes all things. And so have they set a side
the very true rock, which is Christ, the fotesteppes of Peter, and finally al
manner of tribulations and persecutions. Their church have they builded upon
them selves, and therefore they may not endure or continue. They have sought
also their help by the worldly powers, which the bears signify and
represent in this figure. If they had continued in their vocation, christ would
never have forsaken them. But when they fell from it, and yet would
(notwithstanding) maintain all their doings with these words, upon this
rock. etc. Christ went from them. And immediately after they sought help,
wherewith they yet continuallye (ye and against Christ him self) will
defend themselves.

And this fall of the bishops first broke out clearly, by pope zachariam,
and Stephan the second against Constantine the fifth, when they persuaded Pipin
the lieutenaunte of France to help ye pope against themperoure, and so
doing, the pope would make him king of France, Italy, and Germanye, with the
favor and good will of the magistrates and rulers.

Wherewith defends the pope his church now with Christ or with bears? that
is with worldly power and strength. It has tyghte well been perceived
hitherto, and is as clear as ye son. That the bears sygnifie worldly might
and cruel people: We find it in the second book of Samuel, the seuententh
chapter, ii. Sam. 17.
where as Eusai reproved the counsel of Ahitophell, Saying unto Absolon, thou
know thy father and his men, how they be strong, and they be chased in
their minds, and are even as a bear robbed of her whelps in the field. etc.

IT suffiseth not to say, I am the chief bishop I have the room of an
apostle, I sytte in the Apostel stole, Petrus must preach, Paulus must also
preach. Whiles the pope now follows not Peter and Paul (the which he
takes for his authors) in preachinge, teachinge, and feadinge of Christ's
flock, as the commandment specifieth, so sytteth he besides the apostell
stole, and the spirit of god shrinkethe from him, the which more strengthened
him then all the bears of the world. But the child of perdicion with also his
great tirannye (even as Judas) must needs be set forth and be known.

The pope in his robes thrusts down the Aigle with the flower deliis at the
end of his slaffe.
THe crowned aigle doutles signifies the emperor of Rome, whom the pope under
the pretens of holiness has always stopped with ye flower deliis, which is
the frensh king. And has robbed themperoure, of all manner of things,
lands, and people, substance and riches, as above sufficiently is declared.
The pope fearing lest in process of time, the same things might be taken from
him again, and that the righteouse heir and lord might fortune to recover
them again (as often times has been seen by certain emperors). He wined
him dailye more and more to other worldly princes and rulers, and resisted
the emperor, contrary to all right and reason. Neither was he so contented,
but prouokinge likewise other to invade themperoure. And by this mean he
remained a ruler above them all. The same appeared by Constantine the syxthe.
For when zacharias the pope could not obtain his purpose of him, he matched
him self with Pipin, a lieutenaunte of france, and made him king thereof. The
same was a way and mean to bring thempire unto France. Is this any other
thing, then with the assistence of the flower deliis, to resist themperoure?
Ye, and unto this present day have ye popes always more favored france,
then thempire. For what soever these two have, has been in time past, under
the occidentalle empire. And to thentente it be not taken from them again,
they styke hard together Et uiuit ex rapto, non hospes ad hospite tutus. That
is. And the pope lives by things robbed of thempire. But he that says so
now, is named an heretic, and no where free.

Here kneleth the pope, and the hand of god threateneth and rebukethe him, but
a fox does counsel the contrary?
IN the second book of Moses the third chapter, god showed unto Moses out
of a fyrye busshe, what he should do. Eue^ so is here the hand of god painted
in a busshe oueragainst the pope, sitting upon his knees, threatening and
rebuking the pope, because he does utterly apply him self to the riches and
dominion of this world, which is contrary to the vocation and nature of the
apostolical function. Such threateninges, admonitions, and warninges, have
many years agone been given to the pope, of many and diverse faithful men.
Ye, and though certain popes feign would have amended it. It could not be.
For it were agreat abuse to the church of rome: Nether would the foxesse suffer
it to be done, that is to say, the Cardinals, Notaries, and other of that see
the which even at this present, pull backewardes, fearinge, that if the pope
should follow Peter and Paul, their doctrine and life, then must they
likewise become poor. And that the foxes signify such as attaininge to the
unfaithful princes and governors, the same shalt thou find. Luc. xiii.
where as Christ calls Herod themperours deputy at Jerusalem a fox. Luc.
xiii.
Whiles now the pope hearethe not the voice of god, he imagines and
practisethe al ways and means, to have ye Aigle by the throat, that is to
subdue, and bring the emperor under his power and dominion,

The pope has the Aigle by the throat, and foyneth at the other birds
likewise with his threforked scepter, and the same affirms a monk to be
agreeable to scripture.
WHen a man is taken by the throat, then must he needs do what soever his
adversary requirethe: How long, and what manner of practice and sutteltie the
pope has used until such time as he had gotten thempire under his
subieccion, is not necessary here to be written, seeing it is mentioned before.
But this is very necessary to be known, after what sort he handled
themperoure, when he took thaigle by the throat? In the time of Johan the.xii.
and Otto the first there was stablyshed a greuouse intolerable, hurtefull and
exitiable oath to all thempire, to be sworn of all emperors, The oath of
themperor to the pope
in this manner. I Otto the good, promise and swear unto the pope John, my
sovereign lord, by the father, son, and holy ghost. etc. That (if I come to
the city of rome) I shall exalt and promote the holy church of rome, and the,
as ruler of the same, to my power and ability. And farthermore that thou shall
lose no part of thy living nor dignity, which thou haste with my will,
counsel or assente. And within the city of rome nothing to command or
institute (concerning things belonging unto you, or the Romans) with out thy
counsel. And all the lands longinge to s. Peter (so that they come under our
jurisdiction) to restore unto you. And whom soever I permytte to the
governance of Italye, him will I likewise bind by his oath to be assistente
unto you, and a defender of the Lands and possessions of saint Peter to his
power.

THe pope had the power to stablyshe and set forth this oath, by the
auctorite (and according to the tenoure) of his spiritual law.xii. q.i.
clericus. is this any better, then taking the Aigle by the throat? Thus became
Otto the first emperor of Germany with all his successors very bo^dmen. And the
most richest and also myghtyest empire and kyngedome of all the world, was in
bondage, and remained under the popes power, and dominion.

THus is the temporal governance even here overthrown. The popes before were
servants, and themperoure a prince and governor over all thempire. Now is
the pope become the gouernoure over all, and themperoure a servant, In somuche
that he must kiss the fete of his subject. A faithful and true German
emperor ought rather to grant to be torn in pieces. But doutles, if he did
well begin it, well should come of it. Fie of soche shame before god and the
world, for this knavery can with no manner of scripture be proved, except only
by their own deuilysshe and ungodly laws, which the mounke standinge here by
the pope confirms. Ye and to be even as true as the holy scriptures.

WHen a right natural Germain heart reme^breth well this stinking pride and
presumption of the pope, it is for anger like to burst a sunder, that the
valeante and myghtie German emperors have suffered them selves to be made
such fools and jesting stocks, as to kiss the feet of so ungodly a
creature. I believe that if it were not to vile a thing, they must have kyssed
the popes hindermost part. And yet every man may not come so nyghe to the holy
father.

AT the first was it not so, Constantinus ye first and all his successors (as
many as were Christianes) made and chose bishops at rome and every where. Now
make the popes, emperors, kings and bishops, and therefore foineth he
likewise with his scepter at the other birds,

Whiles now the pope takethe upon him the governance and rule of this world,
so must he likewise promise and swear to the highest prince of this world,
which is the devil. And the same declares the figure next following.

Here comes the Devil with the pope and gives him his commau^dements,
according to which he must behave him self in this his kingdom in earth.
Whiles (as above is mentioned) by the forsakinge of gods word, the
persuasion and illusion of the devil, which only is a prince of this
world) the popes be become successors, and deputies unto him, as their chief
gouernoure here in earth. So have they nothing more to do with god, Christ
nor his doctrine. For Christ says. Ioh. xiiii. The prince of this world
comes and has nothing in me, and so shall now (whiles I am here) the
prince of the world be thruste out. Johan. xii. Thus can the pope have no
part with Christ, concerning the kyngedome of this world, whiles his chief
minister the devil has nothing in him. Math. 8*
How can they now defend the patrimony and possession (as they name it) of
Christ and Pieter? Math. 8. c. Luc. 9. f.
Christus had not where to lay his head in. And Peter forsook his poor
fisher bote, with his patched fishernet also.

Christ sought not in this world (as many covetous parsons do, the which
gather and heap great substance together, neither dare they spend it them
selves, to the end that they might leave much behind them for their
executours) but was sent from his father to teach and suffer persecution,
which he fulfilled. Even the very same left he to the^ that be his servants,
Mat. 10. b. Luc. 10. ^
for a testament, saying, I send you forth, as my father has sent me, as
sheep among ye wolves, if they persecuted me, Ioh. 13.15
they shall likewise do the same unto you, for ye servant is no greater then
his lord. Here find we very little of the kingdom of this world.

ANd thus is all the popes boaste and presumption nothing worth. For he is
none of the children of Abraham, (How be it, he writes and says him self to
be the follower of Christ) but a child of the devil, which fathers words and
works he follows diligently always. And the same verifieth his own doctrine
and life, forbidding meats, times, and wedlock, to maintain horedome, with
more other abuses which be not to be spoken.

Io. 8. d. 10 a 13. e. 1. Ioa. 4.
HE that hearethe gods words, and does thereafter, is of god. But whosoever
hearethe them not, is not of god. Then must he needs be of ye devil, which is
also a father, but of lies, Genesis ^. a. Ioh. 8. d. 1. Ioh. 3. b.
And who so ever follows him, goethe about with lies.

THe devil is the prince of this world. And the pope writes him self also a
gouernoure of ye world, as having received the same of him that had power to
deliver it. The devil from the beginning has been a murderer and liar, and
the authore and father of all lies. The same charge he like wise his officers
and servants withal, for he would give them nothing, doing not his will.
Even so is all that longs to the pope, nothing but murder, lies, and
deceit, Ita patrem sequitur sua proles. No crow becomes white with
wasshinge. There is now both Crisame and baptyme lost. And therefore will the
lord subuerte and overthrow them, as it is (lauds and praise unto god) begone
already, yet they think still, even as they got it, even so to keep it. As
is to be seen in the figures folowinge.

The pope thrustethe the lamb through with his sword. And therefore gives
him the devil the keys that is, power and might.
How be it the pope boasts and daily cries, his keys to be of Christ,
though it be nothing so. The old fathers perceived the same right well, and
therefore have they painted here the devil with the keys by the pope. Because
that all the authority which he has here in earth, comes not from god,
but from the devil. For how could the power of god be with the sword that
kylleth the lamb.

THe devil is the father, and the pope the son The devil is a prince of
this world, and the same has he given unto the pope, as his heir, with all
manner of worldly might and power, the same signify the keys, the rod, and
the sword. And who soever obeys him not in this his power and dignite, the
same does he scourge first with ye rod admonishes him, and curses. etc. And
if that will not help, then must he dye with his sword as an heretic. The
sword of the spirit which Paul speakethe of, ought rather to proceed out
of the popes mouth, Ephesians. 6. Hebre. 4.
if he would be named the successoure of Peter.

But even such a man's servant as he is, such kind of livery wears he.
And the same shewethe the figure folowinge.

The pope with his keys, them keeps a serpente, in his pontifical robes and
treasor full of ducates, and the power la^be is the hard cote of.
THe devil is the wylye serpente, the which yet still by wilynes auau^ceth the
popes power, rules ye same and keeps in strength. Insomuch that by that
mean, he has almost subdued, and brought under his dominion all
Christendom, some he seduceth, with money, and so be his ornaments full of
ducates, some again with his false and fained ypocrisye, having a cross in
his hands. Some by might and power, So that partly by the sense of the cross
and keys, and partly by the devil and France he subdueth altogether. And it
goes with the pope, even as Apoca.xiii. is written: That as many as will not
worship him, shall be killed. And all his men be marked, so that no man dare by
or sell, save he that has the mark in his righthande or in his foreheade. The
poeps mark.
There falls the lamb even to the ground. The pope headeth him, and he
must dye. In all these doings he has kept him self with the kocke, that
is France, signified by the kocke, which helps him to suppress gods
word. And all this under a pretense of fained holiness. So has he obtained
the rule both in spiritualle and temporalle matters over all Christendom. And
with the assistence of his wolves he treads vnde his fete all rulers and
governors that they can go no farther then he permits them. As the figure
folowinge declares.

The pope stands upon the imperial crown having a rasoure in his hand,
and the wolf the sword.
TO be a fotestole, is over all ye world a vile and abiecte thing. Neither
might themperoure come to a lower degree, then that he and all other worldly
rulers, Psalm. 109. Math. 22. d Marc. 12. d. Actu 2. d. 1. Cor. 15. c. Heb. 1.
b. 10.
must lie under the popes fete. David could write no greater honor unto
Christ in the Psalter, the^ that his enemies should become a fotestole unto him.
And so was it the most pain and spite to the enemies to ly under the fete of
him that overcame them. Those that be overcome must do unto the conqueror,
what soever he will. And so rules now the pope themperialle crown euin as he
will, and has laid it under his fete that is, under his power. And has so
utterly subdued the same, that it is more to be lamented, then largely
described.

IT was not enough that the pope had spoiled thempire both of lands and
goods. But he must also have the sword withal. Sap. 6. a To. ^0.4. c romans
13. a ^itu^. 3. 1 Pet. 2. b.
To thend that even as the sword appertains to the high powers having
lands and people, for the wealth of the good, and punishment of the evil. He
might likewise defend and keep all whatsoever he had taken from thempire.
Neither is it against raison. For a wolf is a tiranne beast, 3. reg. 13 u Iud.
8. c Deuteronomy. 13 a Mat. ^. b 1. Ioh. 4. ^
specially among sheep, And therefore must he also have weapons to play the
butcher and murderer withal but only among the christianes, farther dare he
not swel. Concerning these raueninge wolves has Christ and his apostles left
many warninges behind them to teach us to beware of them. But the popes
rasoure is so sharp, that before a man can look behind him, (ye and scarsse
feleth it) he is wounded with ye popes mischief, wickedness, and vngracyousnes.
And the same signifies the rasour. Psalm 52. a
Psalm. lii.

Therefore now, Dan. 11. e. Isai. 11. 2. Tessa. 2. 1. Ioh. 2.
saying the pope has set his seat above both spiritual and temporal
powers, ye and enters into the judgments of god, rulynge the consciences of
men. And soche as hear him not, he punysheth with the blody sword. Christ
through his promise and the glory of his name, will suffer it no longer, but
has already thruste him away from him, as the figure folowinge shows.

The angel takes the keys from the pope, but yet he remains proud in his
power
A. reg. 13. c. A. reg. 15 ^. reg. 16. c ^. reg. 28.
HEre it goes to work with the pope as it did with Saul, which was put
down by god, and another anointed king before he was all together put out
of his dominion. Saul thought forasmoch as the prophet had anointed him king
by ye commandment of god, that he might do what soever he would, ye and by
the law. Soche pride and disobedience suffered god for a time. ^. reg. 31. a.
^. par. 11. a
But it was not rewardide with a mean death, for he killed him self in
despeare. And so the pope now, Iudi. 9. v.
being neither ordened of God, Christ nor his Apostles, and thinkinge
quietlye to live the whiles he has, has brought all things under him, so
sendethe god an Angel which pullethe away the lions skin from the ass,
and makethe him a mockinge stock to all the world with his holy word. In
somoch that he knowith not now which way to go out or in. And although he be
suppressid of God, yet, will he not shrink or abash, but kepith ye rod still
in his hand, therewith to subdue ye consciences of men, and remains pufte up
as a todde or a bold pecocke in his pride by certain people. Which to
mainteyne against the will of god, ^. reg 28. ^ Liui. 20. b. Deuteronomy. 8. b. Detu.
16 ^
he seeks counsil (as Saul did by the Phytonissa) not by God but by the
devil, and by all the deuylyshe people and tyrannes of this world. Therefore
is he set forth in the figure following without any cross, and his book
shytte up, and set about with bears.

The pope set about with bears.
THe popes holiness will now almost come to light. And it is so far gone with
him, that he says, if nothing help me so help me the devil and all his
household. It was not unknown unto him, that he might not defend him self
with the holy scripture, which is directly against him, and therefore has he
shytte his book and taken it to him self. Commaundynge upon great pains and
the curse, no man to read in it, lest men should perceive that his dignity
could not be proved by the same. And has set him self among the bears
before and behind, above and beneth, that is, with mighty princes and men of
wars, which help him to maintain his dignity, to the end that this book,
with also his power be not taken away from him.

Has not all this tyranely anoughe continued almost these thirtye years? Let
them suffer more that list. Neither is it come to an end yet, god help us.
And yet will (notwithstanding) these bears, bloudsuppers, and murderers, be the
most Christianes. These bears need no farther exposition, for we see daily
before our eyes what and which they be. Neither is it greatly necessary to
recite the great pity, in wyddowes, fatherles and motherles children, the
destruction and murder of the people. For it is al clear, as the son. The
son has not yet clearly lycte up the blood of the innocent Abel neither
has the earth drunk it in: O god, in thy kyngedome has the blood of an
Innocente man called vengeance upon Cayne the first murderer. How can the
innocents blood hold his peace, so long? when the tyrants have bathed them
selfs almost to the very kne in blood, neither think they as yet to hold up.
Here neded well an Helias, which through the word of the lord spoke to king
Ahab in Israel. 3. reg. 11. 2. reg. 12.
Thou have killed and taken possession of Naboths vineyarde. Therefore in the
place where the dogs lycked the blood of Naboth, there shall the dogs lycke
even thy blood also, etc. But it seems (parauenture) unto the righteouse and
merciful god, as yet to be no time. willing his people to learn to be the
more paciente, Psalm. 9
until the pytte be dygged up for the ungodly. Psalm. xciiii. when ye power of
the Tiphones ones shall be gathered together even as Pharao, As these gyauntes
called Tiphones (through the co^fide^ce they had in their great stature)
endeavored to co^quire the heavens, so did Pharo the children of Israel,
through the trust he had in his great multitude.
then shall it be suddenly done with them.

An unicorn thrusts the popes crown from his head.
How be it the pope with his own falseheade and subteltie has gotten the
reign of this world by the devil (for no christian ever helped another to
such a kingdom) he, keeps him self therein, And though god have put him
down, he will not yet avoid, yet shall the righteousenes of god come and judge,
and even utterly destroy the pope, and expel and drive him out of his reign,
which is the deuylles, by whom he got it, with worldly power. And the same
signifies the unicorn,

LEt no Christian be grieved though the pope and other tyrannes do yet stick
to their dominion before the face of the world. Be it sufficient unto him to
know the judgment of god, and that the pope must so long remain and walk
in the same state and life, until he happen ones suddenly to come under the
gallows, And than must he hang without redemption.

ALthough the keys, that is the power of absolucion, is taken away from the
pope, yet is he set here in spyte of all faithful persons, to forgive
sin, until such time as the zodomiticall sin be accomplisshed. And then
will god (even as he did send to the Jews a Titum) send a Iehu to Baales
preistes, and suffer them, 3. re. 18. ^ 4. re. 9. 10. ^
one to destroy another.

But that the pope should and must be put down from a great dignity and
power. And (the whiles he has the devil the prince of this world to assist
him on his side) can not so soon be done as we mean, so must his enemies be
as strong as unicorns.

DAVYD calls unto the God. Psalm.xxii. Deliver me from the unicorns. Psalm.
xxii. ^
By them he means doutles his mighty and strong enemies of the which he
fearethe that he shall in no wise be delivered, except god helped him, as
namely, was Saul with his company. Likewise the persecutours of Christ be
named in this Psalm unicorns, by reason of their tirannye, wherein they were
like to the kind and nature of the unicorn. Thereof writes Job likewise. cap.
xxxix. Thinkeste thou that the unicorn will be so tame as to do the service?
Job. 39.
or to abide still by thy cryble? Canste thou bind the yoke about an unicorn
in thy forow, to make him plowe after the in the valeis? may thou trust him
(because he is strong) or commyt thy labor unto him, that he will bring
home thy corn, or to carry any thing to thy barn? In no wise. For it is to
exceeding strong, fearful and unruly a beast.

THe very true horn of salvation that shall overthrow all ungodliness (if thou
will spirituallye understand it) zacharias recites. Luce. 1.
Luc. i. And what soever god has spiritually, that is, ordained by him self,
that must always proceed in ye world There can he well find an assure when his
plaisure is, and afterward break the rod also, and cast it into the fire.

Seeing the pope will have it so, that no man shall be able to resist his power,
So must there needs come a more puissant and mightier than he that shall lift
him out of his neste, that must he needs a bide, and must perish in the mean
time, let him defend him well. Mat. 3.17. luce. 3. Apo. 18.
For then is all lost. The axe is put unto the root of the tree and the
workman stryketh already therein, to pull out his root from the ground, in
so much that men shall ask, Apo. 18.
where did Babylon the great city stand?

By the pope lies a strong ox prayenge, and the worldly governors behold
it still.
IN the.xxii. Psa. 22.
Psalm complainethe David unto god saying, many Oxen are come about me, and
fat bulls close me in on every side. There signifye the bulls and oxen,
doubteles, the strong enemies of David the king Saul with his adherentes.
But spiritually it appartaineth unto the death and passion of Christ, these
twain have through the help of god overcome all their enemies, as having
right, the pope as having no right. The which has almost brought under him
all princes, lands, cities, and people, for all these must lie down at the
popes fete and kiss them devoutly wisshing nevertheless to be disamist of it,
if possible were.

SEcondarely is likewise this Ox compared to the common poor artificer and
husband man. Saying the Ox is a common rude beast, and apt to all rude and
hard labors, in the feldes and villages, but seldom in the great cities,
fed with no delicate meats, but only with heye and chapped straw. etc. And
is by the popes ungodly and tirannishe institutes so far consumed, that he
can no more pull or draw, and so sore sucked out (ye the very marye out of his
bones) that he is no more able to stand, but lies there, wishinge
delyueraunce of the popes tyranny, but all in vain, for such as should help
therein, stand still and look upon it. And every one puts from him, as if it
appertained not unto him.

By raison ought emperors, kings, and princes here to put to their hands,
and to help the poor ox out of his miserye, and so might their own business
likewise prosper the better afterward And the subjects should become the more
obedyent. For the holy gospel has taught them how they shall behave them
selves toward the potestates and rulers, ye and they would dowtles do it. But
in the reuelacion may we sone see, what they be that worship the beast. Apo.
13. ^
And then shall we have the reason and cause why it happens not. And therefore
becomes of the paciente ox a grimminge bear, as shewethe the figure
folowinge.

Falls on the pope a griminge bear with her whelps.
Whiles now the pope and his adherentes even at this present day will not
return unto the right way, it is no marvel though every man be unwilling,
and both the Oxen and also calves become bears. And is to be feared that if
they will so proceed without better head, that at the last littell goodness
will come of it. Anno.xxv. was there an insurrectio^ between the commo^le of
germany and the spirytualtie.
Few remember now that which most pitiousely chanced. Anno.xxv. God save us
from soche another fall. I fear me that if it should ones again come to such
a point, the bear with her whelps would otherwise use them selves, and to
earnestly set them to work. But here from will god preserve his people, and
for all that drown Pharao in the read seas nevertheless. what is it, of a long
time, with great pomp and pride (other abominacions I speak not of) to keep
councels, or parlyamentes, for the word of god? God the creator of us all
has not so gloriouselye set forth his acts, with shepeherdes and fishers
kept he his councels, and briefly fynyhed his matters. But truly even as we
mind it, even so does Christ auaunce it.

A fox runs away with the popes banner.
YE and rather than the pope should pass undestroyed, his own famylye or
householde should rather do it. The same signifies the fox. Before he swaded
him from god, and now seeing the pope can reign no longer, he departs from
him even as a master of a hundredth crafts, as he boasts him self to be in
Esopo. against ye catte which had but one thing to help her wythall, but when
the hounter came with his dogs behynd them both, the simple cat ran upon a
tree, and the suttel fox paid for all with his skin. Even so fears here
the popes famili likewise, in many matters have they ben hitherto good
enoughe, but now in time of need, to keep them in their nestes, they can do
nothing. Therefore they run away with shame from the poope, with goods and
substance, which they have gotten from him with their suttelties and falshed,
and thus must he stand alone. Neither is it sufficient unto them, to run
away from him them selves, but moreover take also with them, all that longethe
unto him, his possessions, honor, and might, that is, they can no more help
him with his decrees, for the godly scripture is against them and to strong for
them. And so do both the foxes, and might and power run together away. Here
may the pope rightwell think on the poet, where he sings. Donec eris foelix
multos numerabis amicos. Tempora si fuerunt nubila, solus eris. When it was
well with me, then had I many friends, but in mine adversity they be all
fled away. But truly the reward is but reasonable. Soche as have clothed
saint Peter, be most worthy to spoil him again. With craft and sutteltie
did the poperye first come up, and with the same must it come down again, to
the end that the salt might return again, whereas it was before, to the
water. Therefore he sits now naked and bare upon his pardon cheste, as a
jesting stock to all men.

The pope sits here naked upon his pardon chyste, the husbandman mocketh him
saying, his folly to be right well known to every man.
As Much as we have written hitherto have we seen in our time, but now rests
this only, that he sytteth not naked. But if we speak according to the holy
scriptures, we shall likewise find ye same prophecy to be on a good way
toward. In diverse places in the holy scripture is mencyoned, how god has
dyscouered Sodoma and Gomorra, Iherusalem, and more other lands, and made them
mocking stocks to al me^, and at last made them naked altogether. Ezechielis
xvi. speaks god in this manner, I will gather together all thine enemies
against the, and will dyscouer thy shame before them, that they may see thy
fylthynes. I will give the over into their power that they strype the out of
thy clothes. All thy fair and beautiful Jewels shall they take from the. And
so let the sytte naked and bear. etc.

THese words with more other, witness nothing else, but that god will
trouble their worldly rule and power, and utterly destroy it. So must this
figure likewise be set forth here. That the pope at the last leseth all his
power, honor, riches, pleasure, his coffers with monye, and finallye is
without all comfort or assistence of all the world, and syttethe bare and
naked, And is so much despised, that the very husbandman mocketh him saying.
Lo what a goodly pope be you now? Lo what a ruler art thou now above kings
and emperors? lo, where is thy godlynes? Lo where is thy pardon? Lo where is
thy cursynge and banninge? etc. I think you be but poor now, I think you
abide honger and cold, we will handell you better yet, thou shalt be burnt in
the fire, even as thou have measured unto other. etc.

To this end must it come, and let no man be abashed, 4. re. 24. and. 25 2.
Para. 36
though it semyth otherways yet to be. The children of Jerusalem must needs
to Babel and there suffer out their time, But what follows upon the same?
^esd. ^.2.5. Hiere. 3^.52
when your time then shall be accomplisshed, I will remember you, visit you
again, and minister my good word unto you, and bring you home again. And
the lands of that king shall be obediente to many kings and people. And
finally be brought under the Medianes. Have we ben feign to suffer a while? and
as yet be? the ungod lie be not shylde quyte of it, as if they were in the
right way. But they shall pay twice for it, which they have at once
devoured, as we find it to be happened unto all the ungodly Emperors,
kings, and princes, and high preistes, in the holy scripture

THe same witnesses not only the holy scripture wherein they believe but a
little, The prophecy of Hyllegarde.
but the prophecye likewise of a certain Nonne named Hillegard, being one of
their own mark, saying. Al worldly princes and the common people also shall
fiercely fall upon you preistes, which hitherto have abused me. They will turn
you away from them, and put you to flyghte. They shall take away your
substance and riches, because that in your time you have not well kept the
order of your preisthode. These words will they speak by you. Let us cast
out these othebreakers, robbers, and people replenyshed of all iniquity out of
the holy catholicalle church, for the holy church is contaminated and
polluted by them. And therefore will god suffer also such things to come over
you. And the kings of the world shall assiste them that shall avoid you with
their earthly power, and might. Your priestly dignity and annointinge will they
exteme as no thing worth, And so that propose will they gather together in
counsel, that they may drive you out of their jurisdictions, because you have
driven a way the innocente lamb from me with your most ungodly and
habominable works.

THerefore will the heavens rain diverse plages, which shall be against men, as a
reuengeaunce of god. The mist shall cover the whole earth, so that all your
grass shall dry up, and your ornaments become paile. The profunditie shall
sustre earthequakynge, and then shall appear the very anger of god, and smart
both heaven and earth.

GOd will send a righteouse and streighte judgment against the
transgressors of righteousness. And then shall we say altogether. How long
shall we forbear and suffer these raueninge wolves? They ought to be feaders
of the souls, and they be destroyers of them. They bynd and unbind (which
nothing longethe to them) at their own pleasure, and as most fearful
beasts they utterly cast us away. And thus remain we still in our, and they
in their sins, Insomuche that all Christendom perishes through them. And
what soever is right that write they not, but only it which is contrary to
the law. They devour us, as the wolf deuoureth the sheep, they live still in
lust and gloutenye, they be very robbers of the church. And what soever they
cancome by, they take and devour it. They make us also with their occupacion
poor and beggarly. They dampne them selves and us also.

THerefore will we judge them righteouselye, and separate them from us, for
they be rather saducers then teachers. etc. yet care they not for it, and
remain so still, making all kingdoms subject unto them. For all this they
must away, and leave behind them all that they have, neither shall they
afterward rule any more over the people again, with lands, possessions,
vyneyardes, and other temporal goods, which the worldly princes be set for.
A pope should be a pope, a knight, a knight. A gentilman, a gentilman. And
therefore shall be taken away from such things as they possede vnrighteousely,
and not righteousely. etc.

But against the same will rebelle the heads of this world, the spiritual
people, as the pope cardinals, bishops, abbates and other prelates. First
with their curse, and with shyttinge up of the heavens, but the same will men
fear but a little, An end of the prophecye of the nonne Hillegarde.
after that will they get them to their harnashe and weapons, therewithe to
defend them selves. But against the judgment of God they can do nothing,
for their time is come. etc. This prophesied the nonne Hillegarde.

So must now the bloudye hoore drink of her chalys, Dan. 7. b Mat 25. d.
Apo. 19. d and.20. c
and the beast with also the false prophets be cast down in the
botthomlesse pytte where as is no rest, night nor day, eternallye there to
suffer pains. And then will Christ raise up faithful sheep herdes to feed his
flock.

WHat these shall be, we find likewise in the scriptures openly enoughe
declared, they that come from him. And how may it fail in such as god
sends? God is righteouse, and sendethe also when he sees his time,
righteouse shepeherdes. And they do righteousely, for even as they teach, even
so they live.

ANd these be the true servants which Christus speaks of, Math. 24. d.
and.25. b. Lu. 12. e. 19. b
the which in due time set forth the gifts and glory of the father of ye
house hold, and not their own tradicions, which as yet (god amend it) the
whole world is full of. But god will now shortly scume away all filthynes,
and thereunto help Jesus Christ. Amen.

Conclusion.
THere be diverse such other prophecies not necessary to be written here. I
hope there will amendment follow after this, except they have nether eyes nor
ears: But whom would not this old and true and faithful declaration of the
romish and Babylonyshe bryde, bring to conversion and knowledge? She is so
clearly set forth and painted with all her falsehead and colors, that it
could no live liar be done. Has not she with her chalice made drunk, and
with her sutteltie and deceit overcome Emperors, kings, princes and lords?
and with her snares overthrown all Christendom? Let every man mark it
well. When did they any other thing, but powi and shave, lie and deceive,
burn, banne, keep wars and murder? until soche time continually, as they
were become the heads of al kingedomes. etc. The same has (as above is
mentioned) lasted many years, but now will it take an end. For the time of
the hoore is come about. Apo. 1. a. 21. a and.21. c Esai. 41. a. and 44. b.
and. 48. c
And he comes that speaks in Apocalipsi. I am A. and O. the beginning and
the endinge, the first and the last, blessed be they that follow his
commandments, to the end that he may come to ye tree of life, Apo 22. c. 2
a Gene. 2. b
and enter into the gates of ye celestial Jerusalem. But out of ye same shall be
exclosed al dogs enchaunters, hoores murdrers, Idolotrers, and al such as
love and follow lies.

SO has now Jesus Christ sent his angel again to show the people that
he is the very root of David, and the clear morning star. Ap. 22. d. 2, d,
Mat. 2. Luc. 12. ^. cor 4 b 2. Pet. 1. d.
And in none other is there any salvation, but in him only, for it is written.
Act 4 ^ Math 1 c Philip. 2. ^
There is none other name under the heavens, wherein we may be saved, but this
only. etc. Now he that is faithful, be he still faith full. He that is holy,
let him become more holyer, and continue to the end, and let him not long
for ye time approaches. And thus let every man be warned, for he knocks, and
if ye do open, well and good. if not, you know the danger, both baptism and
crifame is lost on such people, and thus Christ send us all his holy
spirit. Amen,

But whether these or such like prophecies be of god, and by the holy gooste,
or no, moves not me. For as much as I se, when god will show his displeasure
and indignation, and will bring to pass some great act, that all creatures
do prophecy before, and give warninge, although it help but litel. Even so
when he would subuerte Jerusalem, his prophets did prophecye it before, but it
auailed not, Christ had threatened it unto them. The apostles had warned
them thereof it prevailed not, They heard voices in the Temple, They saw
signs in the element, they heard battles in the clouds, mad men and
such as were out of their wits, did prophecy it unto them, but al these
things prevailed not, they saw it in act, it prevailed not. And they might
have remedied it, if they would have suffered the emperor to rule over them.
The emperor Titu^ Vespasianum.
And al prevailed nothing. They were destroyed, for they had despised gods
word. Even so shall it happen unto our papists also. It is prophesied unto
them by Daniel in the seventh and eight chapter, it is prophesied unto them by
Sacharia, in the eleventh chapter, it prophecieth unto them John in his
reuelacions, it prophecieth unto them Christ him self. Mat xxiiii it is
prophesied unto them by Paul.ii. Tessalo.ii. also.i. Timo. iiii. It is
prophesied unto them by Peter.ii. Pe. ii. It prevails not. There prophecyeth
unto them their own bishops, abbots, monks and nonnes, it prevails not, it
is prophesied unto them by the astronomers, it is prophesied unto the^ by the
commun rumor with certain proverbs, it is prophetied unto them by visions
and signs in ye element, but all preuayleth not. They hear it and see it in
act, it prevails not. They might turn it, if they would not be above gods
word and men's consciences. But would suffer god and his word, to rule over
them, and all men's consciences, but all preuayleth nothing. Therefore must
they also be destroyed, there is no remedy, that must they see. Therefore let
no good christian frette him self with them. But rather suffer and take patience
and pray unto God, that it will please him to revenge ye shed blood of his
saints, and shortly to deliver us of these cruel tirantes. Thereby shall a
man get more upon them, then by sword and harnysshe. God knows well a
Titus, that shall destroy these Jews also. Amen.

Thus ends the beginning and ending of all poperye or popysshe kingdom,
taken out of old prophecies, more then three houndreth years past to the
amendment of this present world. set forth out of hye Almayne into english
by Gwalter Lynne.

Printed at London in Aldergate street, by John Herforde, at the costs and
charges of Gwalter Lynne.

Cum priuiligio ad imprimendum solum.


