THE GENERAL PRACTICE OF MEDECIN.

Comprehending the most remarkable maxims appertaining to the Diagnosis, where,
by every disease is known, the Prognosis, whereby the issue is foreshowne,
and Therapia, which poynteth out the methodick, proceeding in the cure.

Collected out of the most famous, both Ancient and Modern writers, for the
use of such as be ignorant of the Greek and Latin tongues.

By (...).

EDINBVRGH, Printed by John Wreittoun. 1634.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir THOMAS HOPE of Craighall Knight Baronet, Advocat
general to his Majesty of great Britain, in his Kingdom of Scotland,
Wishes all health and happiness, etc.
IT is reported of Caesar (Right Honorable) that often times he praised his
Soldiers goodwill, although they wanted skill: And Cicero as well commended
stammering Lentulus for his painful industry, as learned Laelius for his
passing eloquence: Which considered (although wisdom did will me not to
strain further than my sleive would stretch) I thought good to present this
small Treatise to your H. protection, hoping your H. will out of your
accustomed clemency, accept it, and take my well meaning for an excuse of my
boldness, in that my poor will is not in the wane, whatsoever this imperfect
work does want. The Emperor Trajan was never without suitors, because so
courteously he would hear every complaint. The Lapidaries continually
frequented the Court of Adobrandinus, because it was his chief study to search
out the nature of stones. All that courted Atlanta were hunters, and none sued
to Sapho but Poets: Wheresoever Mecaenas lodges, thither no doubt will
Scholars flock. And your H. being a worthy favourer and fosterer of
learning, has forced many through your exquisit virtue, to offer the first
fruits of their study at the shrine of your Courtesy. But though they have
waded far and found mines, and I gadded abroad to get nothing but mytes: yet
this I assure my self, that they never presented you their treasure with a
more willing mind, ^hen I do this simple trash, which I hope your H. will so
accept. Resting therefore upon your wonted clemen^ie, I commit you to the
Almigh^ie.

I. M.

To the Gentlemen Readers, Health.
PAN blowing upon an oaten Pipe a little homely music, and hearing no man
dispraise his simple cunning, began both to play so loud and so long, that they
were more weary in hearing his Music, then he in showing his skill, till at
last to claw him and excuse themselves, they said, his Pype was out of tune. So
Gentlemen, because I have before time rashly reached above my pitch, and yet
your courtesy was such as none accused me, I have once again adventured upon
your patience, but (I doubt) so far as to be read of my folly, you will at
the last say, as Augustus said to the Grecian that gave him often times many
rude verses: Thou have need (quoth he) reward me well, for I take more pains
to read thy works, then thou to write them. But yet willing to abide this
quip, because I may countervaile it with your former courtesy, I put my self
to your patience, and commits you to the Almighty. Farewell.

I. M.

THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC.
CANON I.
THE methodick practicing in Physic has first a knowledge of the disease,
next fortelleth the event of it, and last goes about to cure the same. For
that part of Physic which is called Therapeutick, follows still the
diagnostick and prognostic: for whosoever will use profitable remedies, should
first remark the things present, next forwarn the future, because it is
necessare to understand the present estate of the disease, to that end that the
remedies proper may be used, then to foresee that which is to come, for the
more boldly attempting of the cure, if there be hope of health: or else to
foretell the danger, if one do fear death, otherwise to abstain wholly from
the interprise: if one does fear inevitable death: for we should never
interprise the cure of desperate diseases: much less promise health, or at the
least take the business in hand after a due premonition of the danger of it.

Canon II.
Now to come to the perfect knowledge of the disease, ye must first search the
place, next the kind, and then the cause, if the place be manifest of the
self, it rests to find out the espece of disease, and then the cause.

Canon III.
The place is known by the action hurt or hindered, by the sort and seat of
the pain, by the excrements, and accidents, or proper symptoms: although that
all these signs do not at all times appear all together, yet still some of
them does kyth.

Canon. IV.
The action offended shows the part from whence it proccedes to be indisposed
for a functioun animal, vital, or natural being troubled declares some of
those parts to be affected, so the hurt of the reason, imagination, and memory
shows the brain to be sick, the loss of sense and motion manifests the
nerves or else there origin to be grieved: difficulty of breathing, wills the
lights or some of the instruments of respiration to be interessed, the pulse
commoved shows the heart to be troubled.

The stop of the descent of the meat, shows the vizorne to be hurt, the
digestion hindered, the stomach, when the body is not nourished, the lever is
mistempered.

The espece or sort of sickness points forth also the place, so a pain with
a pulsation is from the nerve hurt or offended, with punction from the membrane
distended, with convulsion, from the drawing of the nerves or tendons with
violence, dolor with tension shows the veins repletion out of measure: when
it is profound it declares the membran covering the bone called Periostium to
be diseased, when soft and gentle without great pain it is in the flesh: when
heavy and blunt, it points forth some of the intrels to be grieved.

The situation of the pain makes known the seat of the disease also, so if it
be in the right hypochondre or under the short ribs on the right side, it
declares the lever to be hurt, if under the left side, the melt: for
wheresoever is the pain there is the sickness: wherefore we must not omit to
inquyre of the sick person on which side he lies with greatest ease: for if it
be without he lies best on the whole side, but if within, best on the sore.

That which issues forth of the body indicats also the part affected, so if
by cough there is thrown forth any part of a girstle, there is no doubt the
light pypes are torn: if in the water there is found any piece of flesh, it
betokens the neers to be hurt: if in the draught, there is found any piece of
skin, it signifies the puddings to be vlcerat. The stomach is known to be hurt
when the meat or chile does issue forth at the wound, and if the fecall matter
come forth it shows the puddings to be wounded, so the water issuing wills the
bladder to be wounded, and when the Pleura that covers the ribs within is
pierced, then the wind does blow forth at the hole.

Moreover the form of issuing forth is remarked, for the better understanding
of the part that is troubled: so the blood that proceeds of the arteries,
because of the abundance of the spirits does issue with force in a leaping
manner: but if flowing and deadly from the vein: also if any piece of the part
troubled do come forth alone, it signifies the place or seat to be near by,
but if it be mixed with the excrements, it declares to be higher and further
removed.

The accidents points also at the place, so the pearl declares the eye to be
molested, the swelling of the right lisk, the lever, and that of the left, the
melt.

The symptoms manifests the place, for ravery designs the brain to be
distempered, the cheeks very red, the lights to be inflammed, the loss of
appetit, the indisposition of the stomach, the excrements like to the washing
of raw flesh, the debility of the lever.

Canon. V.
Thus having found out the part that is troubled, next ye must search whether
it is by Idiopathie or by Sympathy: because it is requisite first to help the
part that is troubled by the own proper desert, (so Idiopathie is a proper
indisposition of the part as is the pearl of the eye.) Sympathy is an
indisposition which befalls any part by the fault of another. And that either
because of the defluxion of an humor falling from one part to another, or by
reason of the defect of the natural faculty required for the action of the
part: sometimes it falls out that a part of a long trouble by a sympathy, in
end turns to be troubled by an Idiopathie. Idiopathie is either privatiue or
consecutiue, so it is expedient to remark whether the disease be privatiue,
that is, be first, or consecutive, that is, does flow from another.

An Idiopathie is by this discerned from a Sympathy, when the sore is alone,
continual, and without intermission, and receaves neither increase nor
diminution, by the augmentation or declination of any disease that is in any
other part, but remains still in one state and condition, the remeds applied,
serving for the good of the same, it is a sign that the indisposition is
Idiopathetick: But when it follows another disease, and grows according to
the growth of the same, and also is mitigat by the same remeades, and when the
remeades applied to it self does not help, it is then by Sympathy, so the
pain of the head arising from the stomach* is distinguished from the dolor
that comes of the proper fault of the brain, in that it succeeds to a desire
to vomit, a heavy rifting, evil smell or taste in the mouth, with a falling
away or lypothomie, and when it grows with the indisposition of the stomach,
not receiving help from the topics applied to the head.

Canon VI.
Having found out the part of the body offended, next ye must make inquisition
of the indisposition.

The indisposition that hinders action is called morbus or sickness, that
which follows it is termed Symptom, and that which ingenders is named cause:
so that all indisposition against nature is either morbus, symptoma, or causa.

The Symptom is known of the self without other signs, because it is
objected still to some of our senses: but the disease and the cause for the
most part are removed from our senses, but they are known by the Symptoms
which are the signs, to wit, by the actions hurt, by the excrements, and by
the accidents of the body.

Canon VII.
Malady or sickness is an indisposition against nature, that hurts immediately
the action of the part affected, whenever then thou perceives the action to
be hindered or hurt, then is it a disease.

Sickness or malady is triple, similare, isntrumental, and common: the first
hurts the action of the part similare, the second troubles the use of the
organick, the third hinders both: wherefore if the action of the part, in so
far as it is similare be hurt, the disease shall be similare, if in so far
as an instrument, it shall be isntrumental, and if they both befall together
it shall be common. The action of the part similary is hindered by a simple
intemperature, as heat, cold, moistness, and drouth, or by one composed, as
hot and dry, hot and humid, cold and dry, cold and humid, and that either with
or without matter. The use of the organe is preverted by the fault of the
greatness, nombre, situation, oftest by conformation, and obstruction: both
the one and the other, is troubled by the breach or solution of continuitie in
the parts, as by phlegmon, scirrh, or any other tumor contrare nature, as also
by vlcere, wound, fracture, or luxation, so in temperature is a sickness,
similare: obstruction, a disease organick, and solution of the continuitie
sickness, common.

The diversity of especes are known by the variety of the actions hindered,
so the continual desire of sleep signifies an indisposition, cold and moist
of the brain, a continual waking shows a hot and dry pulse frequent, quick,
and unequal, a fever: suchlike the kind of the pain points forth the
disease, as a dolor inflammative a hot distemper, a stupefactive, a cold.

The excrements serves also to find out the espece of the sickness, as sand
in the water shows a gravel, the meat sent forth below without change,
declares a lienterie: suchlike the accidents of the body, so the color green
shows an oppilation in the liver, brown color an obstruction in the melt, a
blak tougne, a burning or fever, the nails crooked a consumption ptisie: the
cheeks red, a peripneumonie. Among those accidents they that are proper and
inseparable, are holden for most certain, because they have a great
demonstrative faculty.

Canon VIII.
The nature and situation of the place serves much to the knowledge of the kind
of the sickness for every part has the own prope sickness, so the eyes
only are subject to a pearl, the neires and bladder to the stone, the
puddings to worms and not the stomach, the heart can never suffer a ulcer
profound nor the lights any dolor.

Canon IX.
The better taking of the disease, you must diligently consider the things
antecedent such are the nature, the habitude, the age, the country, the
season, the disposition of the air, the form of life of him who is diseased
and the sickness wherewith he uses to be molested: for one is soonest
overtaken with the disease with the which there nature has greatest
familiarity. So hot diseases are most frequentlie incident to hot bilious
persons as cold sickness to cold lumpish nature and that alswell to those who
are such by nature, habitude and age as to those who are so by reason of the
region, the season and the constitution of the air. And albeit that all sort
of sickness may befall to all sort of persons, all ages in all place and
time, yet they fall on most freque^tly the temperament age, place and time with
the which they have some affinity. An Epidemik sickness is known incontinent
by the running of it among the people, seazing on many at one time: al
hereditar disease as the epilepsie, the gravel, the gowt is suspect to be
incident to those who are procreat of parents, sick of such infirmities.
Moreover often men finds the kind of the disease by the usage of the things
which hurts or helps, for the hot intemperature does increase by the use of
hot things but is mitigate by the use of cooling things, the cold
intemperature of the contraire.

Canon X.
After the acquyred knowledge of the disease make search thereafter for the
cause of it, the which is either extern or intern, the intern is two fold,
antecedent or conjoined. First then seek out the cause conjoined, because it
produces immediately the disease. It is therefore needful to search whither
it be wind or any other superabundant humor as blood, bile, melancholy or
phlegm, or any other thing contrare nature, as stone, lump of blood, worms or
any other sort of excrement. The color and nature of the place, the kind of the
dolor and the sort of the excrement with the praedominant humor in the body
will serve for marks.

Canon XI.
For when the part in fla^med is red, it is full of blood: when yellow, full of
byle: but that which is cold and whyt is replenished with phlegm, when
blackish, with melancholy, for the color of the skin does commonly point forth
the humor is within. Diverse parts are appointed for the ingendring of diverse
humors excrementitious, as the lever for breeding of yellow byle: the melt, of
black byle, the stomach, the tryps, and the brain of phlegm, the neers and
the bladder, of the gravel and stone, the tryps of worms.

The pain pricks sore when it is caused of choler, it is moderat when it
proceeds of blood, blunt when of melancholy, phlegm, or wind, except it be
when they make great distention through their abundance.

If that which issues forth by the excrements of the part affected, be a
portion of that which is continued, within it, it shows either by the color or
substance what it is: we shall speak hereafter of the predominant humor.

Canon XII.
After the knowledge of the cause conjoynt it follows, know whether it be alone
or if it be fostered or furnished by any other cause antecedent. That which
gathered, is by way of congestion through the fault of the part offended, is
reput to be alone: but when all the body, or any part of it, does exoner the
self on the member affected of any superabundant humor, the which
overburthened, there is then a cause antecedent, which does accompany the
conjoynt, so there be two sort of causes interne, to the which remead must be
used.

Canon XIII.
The cause antecedent of the sickness, is double, the one is named Plethor or
plenitud, the other is called Cacochymi, Plethor is a repletion of all the
humors aequallie augmented, or of blood only.

Cacochymie is a repletion of Choler, melancholy or phlegm: the signs both of
the one and the other, are taken both from the causes antecedent, which does
gather the humor as from the temperature of the whole body, and of the
principal parts, from the age, season, constitution of the air, region, manner
of living, and of the evacuation ordinar suppressed, as also from the accidents
that befall all the qualities of the body: such as be the color, the habitud,
the fashions, the functions animal, vital, and natural, as from the sleep,
dreams, pulse, concoction, excrements, of the diseases ensuing, and of the
things that hurts and profits.

Canon XIV.
There be two sorts of plenitud, the one called plenitudo ad vires, in the
which the blood, although it be not excessive, neither in quantity nor
quality, overcharges never the less the weak forces of nature: the other is,
plenitudo ad vasa, the which in quantity surpasses the natural limits or
bounds: and this either light or gentle, when it fills only the cavity of the
veins not far exceeding mediocritie: or it is excessive when it extends, so
that it almost rives the veins through the fullness of it by too great
abundance: and although it be very excessive, it may be so that nature be
not chooked by it, for commonly the force grows with the blood, but if it
fall out that the forces be abaited, then it is plenitudo supra vires.

When then in a plethor, the body is on no ways by a too great weight, lasie
or heavy, and the force remains still in a state, it is only a plentitud ad
vasa. But when the body becomes heavy, lasie, doyled* the fleepe troubled and
profond, seeming to carry as it were some thing, while he sleeps, it is then
plenitudo, supra vires.

Canan XV.
The causes that ingenders blood in abundance, are signs antecedents, of a
plenitud as the complexion temperat of all the whole body, but chiefly of the
lever, and the heart, or else moderatly hot and humid.

The age growing for the bairnes and young men has much blood, because they
are not far from there principes of natural generation.

The spring also for in it the blood abounds for then the cold cease and
there falls out waters.

Also good fare: a pleasant past life, without care, moderat excersise, and
sleep.

The natural evacuation, of blood suppressed: or the artificial of long
intermitted.

The accidents which shows the domination of blood in the body, are the
signs consequent of blood, such be,

The color of the face and all the body red, by the ordinare custom or mixed
of red and whyt.

The swelling of the veins aequalie appearing through all.

A manifest bending of the vessels, being full of blood by measure.

A lazines or wearying coming of it self without any labor, under the which
the joynters by reason of their weight with great difficulty do move the
self, for it is when the great veins over full of blood do exoner themselves
in the little, and they again in the muscels, so that they are filled and
bended.

The habitude of the body fleshie, because it does proceed of an abundance
of blood, yea the mediocer fleshy acompanied of a heat benign, and vaporous,
for that is a sign of nature temperat which ingenders abundance of blood.

The fashions and cariag merry, joviall, peaceable, gentle, because they are
marks of a body well disposed.

The heaviness of the head proceeding from the abundance of vapors ascending
upwards.

The sleep profound and pleasant, with dreams of things pleasant.

The pulse strong, great, and full, for in it the veins are so full, that they
do infuse a part in the neighbors arters by an anastomosie, the which being
filled, causes such a pulse and that not only in the shakle bones, but also
in the temples, the fingers, and over all the body.

The respiration more difficill and frequent, chiefly after exercise, because
the muscells of the breast are made lazy through the abundance of blood, hence
it is that the respiration is made more frequent by reason of the use, but
shortened because the capacity interior of the breast is made more strait.

The promptitud of rendering blood by the seages, aemerodes, monthly courses,
water, nose, and spitle.

Moreover a continual sweating during the time of the disease, is a token of
plenitud.

Canon XVI.
Cacothymie is three fold, choleric, melancholic, and phlegmatic: the causes
that gathers abundance of choler, are signs preceding the same, such are,

The complexion hot and dry, for commonly there ingenders much choler in men of
a hot and dry complexion, by reason of the conformity of this humor with that
temperament.

The manly age which is betwixt 25 and 35. for in that, choler does abound,
because the natural heat is much more dry and active then, than before a great
part of the inbred moist or sap being consumed by it.

The Summer, for the byle is more abundant than by reason of the circumsisting
air, which makes the blood more hot and dry.

The climat hot and dry, the precedent diet of these same qualities.

Such like great exercise, travel, anger, care, watching, fasting; and
abstinence does all gather byle.

Moreover the ordinar evacuation of bile by vomit, by the stool, the water,
the sweat, suppressed.

The consequent marks of abounding Choler, are,

The whole color of the body, pale, yellow or blackish, drawing near to that
of Iandise or brown: for when the temperament is excessive in heat, the color
is black

The state of the body, dry, lean, small, for such proportions are commonly
bylous, as also hairie with the hair red, for it is the excrement of byle.

But more the black, for black hair is when the exhalation burnt by the force
of the heat is changed in black, but the red is when it is not so burnt.

The greatness of the veins extended by the heat, for they who has great
veins are of complexion hot, but who has strait and narrow veins, are of
cold, for it is heat that does enlarge.

The heat, sharp, and biting to the toucth.

Promptitud of courage, and a disposition to anger and revenge.

The sense lively, light and sudden.

The spirit subtle, and of good invention, for the subtilitie and industry of
the judgment comes of the humor bylous.

The sleep little and light, accompanied with inquyetud, great watching,
testifying the great drynes of the brain from the which they flow, or else
from abundance of a humor, bilious with them.

The dreams of fire, war, and things furious.

The pulse vehement, hasty and hardy.

Bitterness of the mouth, loss of appetit, great thirst, venting of choler
upward and downward, with the belly often constipat.

The water yellow, biting, inflammed, with little grounds.

The diseases bilious frequent, as fevers fierce and ardent, raverie, jandies,
herpes, or ring-worme, erysiple, pustuls, cholericks dispersed through the
whole body.

Canon XVII.
The melancholic distemper is known first by the causes productives of
melancholy, as are: The temperature cold and dry, with a debility of the melt,
or hot from the beginning, but become cold by change, for if any hot and dry
before, by an adustion of the blood ingenders much black bile, he becomes cold
and dry, and in end melancholic.

The declining age which is betwixt 35: and 45. for melancholy does abound in
that age, for succeeding to the youth, which is the most bilious of all, it
receives the bile burnt.

The harvest, in it also melancholy abounds, for succeeding to the Summer, it
receaves the brunt bile from it.

Gross food and viscuous, as brown bread, porcks flesh, beif, hairs flesh,
Hearts flesh, chiefly salted, thick black wine, beir, and old chief.

The life sad occupied in great affairs in contemplation, studying without
recreation or exercise of the body, for by it the natural heat diminishes, and
the humors becomes gross and thick.

The suppression of melancholy that used to be by the aemrodes, monthly
courses, seages, with scabs or by medecin.

As also by the signs of melancholy, predominant in the body, as are: the
color brown or blackish, of the face and all the body, the skin full of
scabs, hardness, swelling and pain of the melt: The habitud of the body dry
and lean, the visage sad and heavy: fear, silence, solitariness, urine,
imagination, conceits: for the constancy of the spirit comes of an humor
melancholic.

The mind slow to wrath, but being incensed, hard to be appeased.

The sleep troubled with horrible dreams as with sightes of evil spirits,
tortoures of death, sepulchers, and other things fearful.

The pulse little, slow, hard.

The appetit depravat sometime disordinat by reason of a sour matter adhearing
to the orifice of the stomach.

The water clear and whyt, where there is no melancholy mixed, but thick and
black where there is some mixed.

The diseases melancholicks frequently arriving.

Canon XVIII.
The knowledge of a pituitous distemper is taken from the causes antecede^t,
procreating it, and the signs assequent following it, the antecedent are, the
complexion of the body, cold and humid: the old age which is from 49. to the
term of life: for in that age, by reason of the weakness of the natural heat,
much phlegm is engendered.

The Winter, because that season as reports Hip: replenishes the body with
phlegm, both because of the length of the nights, and also by reason of the
abundance of rain. The rainie reason, for the watrie air which does inviron
the body: gathers quantity of pituitous humors, and of watrie superfluities.
The great uses of humid and moist meat, the frequent drinking of water and any
kind of excess, either in meat or drink: idleness and want of exercise, with
a sedentarie or sitting life: long sleep, but especially after meat. The
following marks of phlegm are, the color of the face and all the body
somewhat whitish, grayish, or livid, being withal swelled: the whole body
grown, and fat, for fat folk are commonly cold and phlegmatic, grease being
engendered by the coldness of the habitude of the body: the veins and arteries
little and strait, as coming of little blood and few spirits, the skin whit
and soft without hair, because the complexion cold and humid is no ways
hairie. The hair is whit, because procreat of phlegm: all the senses of the
body heavy and lazy: the spirit stupid, the sleep profound, the pulse little,
small, and soft.

Slow digestion, often belshing with a sour taste, a desire to vomit, the water
whitish, crud, and troubled sometimes with a thick ground.

Pituitous and phlegmatic diseases frequently occurring, or cold catarrhes, and
the like.

Canon XIX.
The antecedent causes pointing a windy Cacochymie, are, the stomach cold and
humid, with the debility of natural heat, proceeding of a simple intemperature
or with humors indigested.

The melt swelled and bouden up with melancholy, hindering by a sympathy, the
digestion of the stomach.

Meats windy, as raw fruits, beans, pease, chestnuts, and the like.

Overmuch drink, too much use of boiled meat, drunkenness, and gluttony.

Lack of exercise, great sleep, the age, the country, the season of the
year cold, does cause abundance of ventosites.

And when wind is gathered in the body by reason of the former causes, there
is found a distention of the ventricle, of the colic gowt, chiefly on the left
side, with a noise.

The wandering distenting pains running here and there through the whole body.

There is heard wind issuing at all occasions both up and down, from whence
comes some ease: there is remarked often a singing in the ears.

The colik with other diseases arysing of wind, troubles often.

Canon XX.
The external causes of sickness, called of the Greeks procatartik commonly
named primitives, should be diligently searched, for they lead us as well to
the knowledge of the cause intern, as of the disease, for, air, meat, and drink
to warm, watching, great and violent motion, anger, and the suppression of the
excrements, ingenders hot humors, and hot diseases. In the contrare, cold
food with a cooling air, sleep, Idleset, fear, and all evacuation immoderat
causes cold humors, and cold diseases. Dry diseases ordinarily accompanies the
hot causes, and the humide, the cold. For hot does ordinarily bring with it
drouth, and cold, humiditie, because it is the mother of crudities. For to find
out then exactlie the cause and effect of the malady which is hid, it is
needful by a diligent inquisition, and interrogation of all things, which
commonly are called, not natural causes, to learn of the sick if he has
exposed himself to an intemperat or impure air, if he has committed any
excess in meat and drink, or in watching and laboring, or if he has been
too fierce in Venus service, or if the spirit has not been troubled by
passions, or if any ordinare evacuation be not suppressed, as the monthly
courses to women, and the flux of the aemrodes to men, and so much the rather
we ought to inquyre carefully of the things past, because the ignorance of the
causes is not without great danger: for if a fever should fall into long
watching, fasting, or over great dallying with Venus, then without
consideration of the cause of the disease, presently they would draw blood and
purge, should they not think you hazard his life, seeing the disease to have
come from evacuation: For in the contrare we ought rather to repare the forces
by analeptiks or restoring things, and not augment it by Phlebotomie and
cathartiks.

For to foresee the issue of the Disease.
Canon I.
THe fundamental laws of the Prognostics, are taken from things natural, not
natural, and conter nature, as of the springs: for we foresee and foretell the
sickness to be salutare or mortal, short or long, by the force, the
constitution of the body and age of the Patient, the season, and the form of
life, by the cause, the espece and seige of the evil, with the symptoms,
which we remarke in the change or diminution of the actions, the excrements
and the qualities of the body.

Canon II.
If the forces be strong to obtain the victory over the disease, without
doubt the sick shall escape, if not shall die. For none dies so long as their
force remains: but so soon as the forces begins to yield to the burden of
the sickness, then follows death. Now to foretell the day of death ye must
remarke how far the sickness surpasses the forces, and remarke the most
violent access, for if one does perceive the sickness so to outrepasse the
forces, that they cannot be able any longer to resist, death shall follow
presently: but if it appear otherwise it shall be longer: so that the origin
of Prognostics consists in the conferring of the forces with the sickness.
For if nature be strong enough to overcome the sickness, then the person
shall escape: but if it be so weak that it cannot obtain the victory, death
of necessity will follow, and ye must wait on the one or the other sooner or
later, according as the forces are stronger or weaker: hence it appears that
all the other signs salubres or mortals are no otherwise, foresignes of death
or life, but because they point forth the forces or weakness of nature in the
combat with the sickness.

Canon. III.
It is a great help to health to be of a mediocre constitution of body, that
is, neither too fat nor too lean; for such a body has great forces to resist
unto any disease that does present the self: but where this mediocrisie is
not, a gross body is in a worse case then a small: for who are of that
taillie, dies sooner then they that are of the other: because the veins and
arteres of grown fat people are narrow and strait and therefore has both
little blood and spirits, so that the age concurring, upon a light occasion, the
natural heat is choked or extinguished: But they that are of a lean and thin
constitution, because they have the veins and arters larger, and also more
blood and spirits, which in them does not so shortly incur the danger of
death: yet so it is that they are sooner troubled by external causes, and that
for lack of flesh and greise, so the gross are more obnoxious to interne
injuries, the lean to extern.

Canon IV.
Youth has great force to withstand the disease, because it has store of
natural heat requisite to the concoction and excretion of the evil humors.
Contrare, old age is not able to resist, because of the defect of force, not
having much natural heat. Hence it is that sickness are longer in old people
then young, because they abound in cold humors, the digestion whereof cannot be
but in a long space, by reason of the weakness of their natural heat: yea the
greatest part of sickness that arrives to old people does convoy them to their
grave.

Canon V.
The Spring is very wholesome and no ways mortal, when it keeps the
temperature: but in Harvest the diseases are very strong and deadly for the
most part. First because being cold and dry is diametrically opposed to our
life, which consists in heat and moisture, and so hinders the generation of
blood whereof our body is made and nourished. Secondly, because it receives
from the Summer preceding the body languishing and weary. Thirdly, because it
beat back within the body the superfluous humors melted by the heat of Summer,
and come forth to the skin, to the end they may go forth. The fourth because
about the twelfth hour it opens the pores of the body by the heat, and
incontinent thereafter becomes cold: it ryses within the body as an enemy to
extinguish by its quality malign the natural heat already feeble and
languishing. Moreover it gathers store of crudities within the body, the which
does choke the natural heat, and that by the use of fruits which it
furninisheth.

The Summer hastenes sickness, but the Winter does retarde them, because in the
Summer the pores being open, the evil humors of the body being melted, by the
heat of the air are suddenly dissipat, but in Winter they being closed by the
cold they are retained within.

Canon VI.
Among the constititions of the seasons the dry is more wholesome and not so
deadly as the rain, for it gathers no excrements and resists better to the
putrefaction, the humid in the contrar causes many superfluities from whence
are the generation of diseases, when the seasons are constant keeping there
temperature ordinar, so that all things does naturally fall out in them, the
diseases are lykewayes constant and facily to be understood, but when the
season is inconstant, so are the sickness variable and hard to be understood,
for there crise is accompanied with dangerous symptoms where they suddenly
cause death or else leaves a matter to a new sickness.

When the sick proves a good second to the physician fighting againes the
sickness, it is easy to obtain the victory.

Now when he beleues the physician and puts in practice his ordinances he
serves him for a second and declares himself enemy of the disease: in the
contrar if quyting the physician he takes part with the disease accomplishing
that which he desires, he hazards his life two ways the one in leaving the
physician above in combat, the other in serving as a second to the sickness
which was before alone, for it is certain two is stronger nor one.

Canon VIII.
The greatness of the sickness follows the greatness of the cause, for as a
light cause produces a light evil, even so a great causes a great. Hence a
vehement cause contrar nature is a most certain indice of a great and
dangerous sickness.

Canon IX.
Byle causes still, quick diseases, which are termined or ended within few
days because it is easily resolved by its subtilitie, but melancholy is the
most viscuous of all the humors, and makes longest accesses, because it is dry
cold and thick, being the life of the blood. Next to melancholy is phlegm in
difficulty of digestion and expulsion by reason of its viscositie

Canon X.
The diseases that has some resemblance with the nature, bodily constitution,
and age of the diseased, are less dangerous then these that has no
conformity, for all sickness, hot, cold, dry, moist, being conform to the
complexion, age, and bodily constitution of the sick, and also to the season
has so much less danger, as it is less removed from the natural
constitution, and so may more easily return, as proceeding from a lighter, yea
a slighter cause. As in the contrare, the disease that has no affinity,
neither with the temper, taillie, nor age of the Patient, or with the season,
is much more dangerous then the former, being further removed from the natural
complexion, and therefore worse to cure: as proceeding of a greater and
stronger cause. So that of two burnt fevers equal in grandeur that which falls
out in the Summer to a young man lean of body, of temper hot, shall not be so
dangerous as that which falls out in the Winter to an old man of a fat body and
cold complexion.

Canon XI.
Meek and gentle relenting diseases are commonly long, but the sharp, fyrie,
and fierce are ended within fourteen days, and the extreme hot in seven
days.

There can no certain prediction be made of hot, sharp diseases, either for
health nor death, for by that they are quickly ended, they become on a
suddaintie great: so that both for the greatness of the disease, with the
sudden change which befalls in the crise, as also because the humor is often
transported from one place to another, the issue is uncertain, wherefore while
the humor is in its motion, we must suspend our judgment, for it is not
certain whether it will rush on a noble or ignoble part, within or without by
passages conveniable or not conveniable: and though the humor were stayed in one
place, yet the Physician ought not resolutly affirm that the sick shall
escape, but with this provision, that no new change befall, and that he follow
the advice and keep the regiment prescribed.

When a woman with child is overtaken by any fiery hot disease, she is in
danger of her life, for a hot fyrie fever requyres a strait diet, which she
cannot admit, least the child being frustrat of his food she be brought to bed
before the time: and if often to save the child, ye give the mother often to
eat, the fever thereby growing ye shall precipitat the mother in a manifest
hazard of her life, and if it be any other strong sickness without fever, as a
epilepsie, apoplexy, convulsion, she shall never be able to support the
vehemency of it.

Canon XII.
To foretell the event of the disease, ye must consider diligently the part
that is offended, whether it be noble or ignoble, public or private, for the
condition, dignity, and necessity of the part that suffers, are of great
importance, for the pronouncing of a sentence to the profit or prejudice of the
sick.

Canon XIII.
In all diseases the constancy of the reason not troubled: with the bounty of
the appetit still ready for taking of whatsomeever shall be offered to it, is
a good sign, and the contrare is an evil: the satlednesse of the reason, and
sharpness of the appetit are numbered among the good marks, because the former
bears witness of the temperat disposition of the brain, the menings or tayes
of the harnes, and of the marrow of the back, the medrife and all the nervous
parts, and the latter shows the integrity of the stomach and lever: In the
contrare, the alienation and troubling of the reason, and the loss of appetit,
are evil signs, because the one betokens the animal parts to be affected, the
other the natural.

All they that are troubled with pain or dolor in any part of the body
whatsomeever, and are not sensible of it, has the reason troubled, because the
apprehension does not perceive in any measure the evil.

Canon XIV.
It is good to sleep in the night to make reparation of the spirits animals and
digestion of the humors, by the means of the heat that enters within the
center of the body, and to watch in the day, for the clearing of the same
spirits, to give motion to the humors, and to make expulsion of the excreme^ts:
but it is a very pernicious sign not to sleep night nor day, for continual
watching comes either of the dolor, pain, and torment that they suffer, or
of the dryness of the brain, which in end will cause an alienation of the
mind.

Sleep likewise surpassing the borders of mediocrite, is in like manner evil,
because it is a mark of extreme coldness of the brain, which causes a
lethargy if it be mixed with humidity or catalepsie, if with dryness.

When in a sickness sleep is noisome and hurts, there is danger of death:
for if the sleep hurts, that time, that has been accustomed to help much, as
in the decline of any sickness, it is not without cause that it foretells
death: and that because the heat reteared within the body the time of the
sleep, and by this means increase. Notable nevertheless either by reason of
its weakness or the maliciousness of humors overcome the cause of the
disease, shows that nature no ways strengthened or comforted by this means but
rather hurt, is ready to succumbe under the burden of the disease being
stronger.

Canon XV.
The pulse is the faithful messenger of the heart, bringing certain news of
death and life: The pulse great and strong is a token of force, on the which is
builded the hope of recoverie of the health, but the pulse little, weak and
languishing, shows the weakness of the vital faculty, from whence is the fear
of death: the inequality of the pulse is always evil when it perseveres, the
intermission of it in young men is most dangerous, for it threatens with
present death, if it be not from an obstruction and oppression of the arters,
it is less dangerous in bairnes, and least of all in old men.

Canon XVI.
Ye must know that the respiration and breathing, free without stop is very
wholesome, in all sharp or quick diseases: Because it denotes the temperature
of the breast, and of the parts therein contained. As also the respiration
remainting whole, declares the natural heat yet to be strong for to fight
valiantly with the disease in the contrar, the difficulty of breathing shows
the indisposition of the vital parts, and the suffocation of the forces.

For the respiration frequent and great, is a sign of some inflammation of the
parts within the breast: but the great and rare, foreshow a future alienation
of the Spirit, as the respiration, little and rare, betokens as death, because
it bears witness of the exstinction of the natural heat, which one perceives
clearly by the coldness of the breath ishuing at the nostrells and the mouth.

Canon XVII.
It is a good sign to have still a whole heart, for they that falls often in
lypothimy or swowning without a manifest cause, dies in end suddenly, because
of the debilitie of the vital faculty.

Canon XVIII.
The coction of the humor appearing in the excrements of the sick, signifies
the crise to be shortly with an assurance of health. But the crudity denotes
either that there shall be no crise, or that the patient is mightily troubled
or that the disease shall be longer, or afterward it shall return, or that
death shall follow on it. For as when the coction is made, when nature is
victorious, of the causes of the disease, so the contrar befalls when she is
overcome by them. So the foecall matter being soft, aequall, and yellow, and
not having an evil smell is judged to be good, because it is well digested.
Suchlyke the water of a mediocer consistence of color some what yellow, having
grounds whyt, united and aequall is reput singular good, because it bears
witness of the digestion, of the humor vicious and consequently of the victory
of nature over it, in the contrar the dejection liquid and waterie whyt and
pale, is reput evil, because it is crude or raw, as also the urine waterie,
and small whyt and shyning out of measure is not good, because it is raw, and
without digestion.

Canon XIX.
When the excrements of the sick are not very different from the excrements
of the whole, it shows the disease to be light, but if there be a very great
difference ye must apprehend the disease to be deadly. For the excrements much
different, shows nature to be overcome by the greatness of the disease.
Therefore the foecall matter black, livid, green and stinking are mortal,
because they are whole alienat from there natural constitution and the water
that is black and thick and troubled as that of oxen are most evil, because
extremely removed from the natural.

The same mixed in color foreshowes a long disease, for they denote diverse
indispositions caused of diverse humors, and therefore it is necessar that
nature employ a long time to the coction having so many enemies to combat with.

The urine in the which ye see grease swiming like Spider webs, are thought
evil, because they declare a melting of the body by an extraordinar heat:

Canon XX.
Sweats are good in all sharp or fiery diseases when they fall out on the
critic days, and causes the fever wholly to cease: they are good also when
they make the disease more easy to the Patient providing they be universal.
But this which brings no ease and serves to no use, also these that are cold
and appears only about the head, the face, and neck are most evil: for in a
hot fyrie and quick fever they prognostic death, and in a gentle the longnes
of the disease: a cold sweat running without ceasing in great abundance, is a
mark of long disease, because it comes of a great quantity of a gross and
cold matter, which cannot easily be dissipat, neither dantoned by the natural
heat: as a hot sweat wills a short disease, being caused of a subtle matter,
which matter in short space will be dissolved.

Canon XXI.
If the visage of the sick be like to the countenance of whole persons, it is
a very excellent sign, chiefly if it look like it self being whole. In the
contrare, it is a very evil sign when it is different from the natural, and
when it is hideous to behold, as it is then when the nose is sharp, the eyes
hollow, the temples abaited, the ears cold and drawn in, the lap of the ear
turned, the skin of the face hard extended and dry, the color of the face pale
or black, livid or lead colored. For if this deformity do not proceed of a
manifest cause, as of lack of sleep or meat, or of a flux of the belly,
without doubt it presages death to be near, seeing this great extenuation is
made by the malignity of the disease.

Canon XXII.
Where there is perceived a change through the whole body, so that it is now
cold, then hot, sometime of one color then of another, it foretells a long
disease. For the indisposition diversely mixed, are still longer then these that
are of a fast form or fashion, for nature cannot danton more at once. Now the
changing of qualities and humors, demonstrats the disease to be caused of
diverse humors, in the coction whereof, nature has need to employ much time:
for according to the variety of humors within, there appears variety of
colors without.

Canon XXIII.
It is a good sign to have the hypochondres (that is, the space under the
short ribs) on either side soft, equal, and without dolor: but very evil to
have them hard, bended, inequall and painful, for as the former shows the
good temperature of the epigastrick muscells, of the mesentary, the liver, the
melt, and the stomach: so the latter declares an intemperature, to wit, an
inflammation, a skirrh or wind to be in these parts.

In all diseases it is good that the parts about the navell, and the inferior
part of the belly be gross, fat, and in good case, but evil when they are
extenuat and lean, for the hypocondres gross and fleshie are marks of force:
but the small and extenuat are evil, both as signs and as causes: forasmuch
as they are signs of the debilitie of the parts extenuat, and causes that the
digestion is not well elaborat in the stomach, nor the sanguification in the
lever, for the grossness or fatness of the epigastre or low parts of the
belly augments the natural heat, by the which the parts within being warmed
they digest better the meat, and so makes better blood.

Canon XXIV.
As to the consideration of these things that falls out in the body, if ye
remarke any good sign, ye must not think for that, that assuredly the sick
shall escape, neither although there do appear any evil signs that he shall
die, for a good sign may be over weighted by an evil, being great: And on
the contrare, an evil may be overcome, a good being stronger.

Canon XXV.
The disease quyts the sick either wholly at once by way of crise, or by little
and little by way of resolution. Crise is a sudden change of the disease into
health, or else into death, which is then when nature separats the vicious
humors from the good, and that for to expel them, Of it there be two sorts,
the one is by excretion, and the other by absesse, that comes by a flux of
blood or sweat, or a flux of the belly, or vomit, or flux of the urine.

Canon XXVI.
The good crise arives on the 7.14. or 20 day, wherefore these days are called
Critics. The future crise was foreseen by the signs of digestion, appearing
the 4.11. and 17. day: hence these days are called of of the Greeks (...),
that is in dicatives, contemplatives: for according to the doctrine of Hip. the
4. day is the indicative of the 7. the 8. is the beginning of the next month,
the 11. is also remarkable, because the fourth of the second weik, the 17. is
also to be observed, because the 4. after the 14. and the 7. from the 11.

Canon XXVII.
When the crise is to be on the 7. day, there is perceived on the fourth day
preceding a red cloud in the water, and other signs correspondent: for because
the 4. day is the pointer out of the 7. if there appear any sign of
concoction that day, it forwarnes the crise to be on the 7. day. Where then
there appears a clowd in the water not only red but whyt, and yet rather a
whyt hypostasies or ground, united and equal, if so be the motion of the
sickness be sudden, it is a presage of the future crise.

When the crise draws near, the night preceding is very troublesome, but
that which follows is ordinarily more easy to endure. For while nature is
making a separation betwixt the good and evil humors that falls out, that in
this exercise of nature the disease is much troubled. But so it is that this
great work appears, the night before the crise, because the sleep is
interrupted: but the night that follows the crise perfyte, they are much more
at their own ease, because nature is disburdened of superfluous humors,

Canon XXVIII.
The universal signs by the which one discernes the espece of the crise to
come, are taken from the kind of the disease, from the part that is diseased,
and from the nature of the Patient: For hot and quick diseases, are ordinarily
judged by excretion, but the cold and long by abscesse.

If there be an inflammation in the gibbous part of the lever, ye must expect
a crise by a flux of blood at the right nostrile, or by a flux of the urine, if
the inflammation be in the hollow part of it, then ye must expect it by a
flux of the belly, or vomishment, or sweat. The inflammations of the brain and
of all the head, are commonly judged by an haemorragie at the nose, but that of
the stomach and mesenterie by vomishment, or a flux downward.

Moreover a flux of blood falls oftenest to young men cholericks, overtaken with
a hot fever, and a flux of the belly to old men phlegmaticks. There the
common, and now here the proper prognostics of every crise.

Rednes of the face, extreme dolor of the head and the neck, a beating of
the arters in the temples, the distention of hypochondres with dificultie of
breathing a dimnes tnd watering of the eyes, singing of the ears, and itching
of the nostrell^ prognostics the crise to be a flux of blood by the nose.

A heat and heavines of the loins with a pain and extention of the
hypograster, foreshowes a crise to be by a flux menstruall.

A suppression of the water, with a pricking and shivering through the whole
body, with the pulse soft and waterie and the exterior parts of the body
hot and vaporous, betokens that it will be by sweat.

Rifts, ventosites, or winds, a bending of the belly, and pain of the neires
by a flux of the belly: loss of appetit or lothing of meat with a thrawing of
the heart and sorenes of the head, with a dissinesse, great spitting,
bitterness in the mouth, and a trembling of the under lip prognostics a
future crise by vomit.

When the signs of concoction has gone before, and when the motions of a
crise, has been perceived: then it may be exspected by a flux of the urine,
if there does not appear any mark of a crise by a flux of blood, not by
sweat, flux of the belly, vomit, and specialy when the patient feels an
heavines in the hypograster, and an heat about the end of the privy member,
having also made much water thick and gross during his disease, or if he be
aged, and sick in the Winter, it foretells it the rather.

A heavines and pain of the head, with a profoundity of sleep and deafness,
succeeding immediately to a difficulty of breathing suddenly ariving without
any manifest cause, to one sick with a long disease, points forth an absesse
to be behind the ear.

But if there be no sign of a paritude, and that the sick has had his urine
of a long time clear and undigested, and when he finds a heaviness, a pain,
a bending or tension, a heat in the hypochondres, ye must exspect an absesse in
the lower pairts. If any part of the body has been hurt before, there shall
the aposteme or absesse be. An absesse falls out most frequently in winter and
after on imperfyt crise.

Canon XXIX.
Moreover, a good crise ought to be signified before in the day of indication
and should fall out in a critike day, with a manifest excretion, or notable
absesse: without dangerous accidents. It ought also to be perfyt. I call a
perfyt crise, that which evacuats all the vicious matter. And on imperfyt, that
which evacuats but one part for the former is sure, but you must not believe
the latter, for the evil humors remaining after a crise, are wont to make one
recidiwe.

Moreover a crise is judged to be good by reason of the convenable quality and
reasonable quantity, with the form agreeable, and the time opportune.

A crise is known to be perfyt and assured by the restablishing of the
functions naturalls, vitals and animalls, by the coction of the excrements, or
by quality or form of the body reduced and made conform to the natural.

Canon XXX.
Ye must not trust to any ease, or aleagment which falls without cause, nor
fear evil symptoms ariving against reason, for the most part of those are
inconstant and does not last a long time: for when any vehement diseases
cease of the self without any evacuation, either by sweat, vomit, flux
downward, or hemorrage upward, or without any sign of concoction one must not
take that ease to be assured, neither must one believe to it seeing it does
threaten with something of greater evil which follow thereon. As also one must
not be affraighted of the evils that befalls without, or rather contrare
reason, as difficulty of breathing, raverie, shiviring reduplication of the
fever, seeing they are not constant nor of long last, and so far from
signifying any thing evil, that on the contrar they presage often a good crise
which shall arive to the great ease of the patient.

The right method of curing the disease.
Canon I.
WHosever will exactly keep the method of right proceeding in the cure, ought
to begin at the first indications, then come to those that follows them.
Afterward to the next and never leave off, till they have come to the end
pretended. We take here indication for that which serves to teach us the way
in the cure of the disease, to attain to health.

Canon II.
The forces before all things ought to be kept in those who are diseased:
after the indication of the forces, follows the consideration of the
indisposition which is proposed to be cured. The forces wills allways their
conservation, and the indisposition its ablation. Now as the forces are kept
or conserved by their like so the indisposition is taken away by the contrary.

Canon III.
In all diseases where the efficient cause is yet present, you must begin your
cure at the same for it is impossible to cure perfytly any disease, whileas the
cause that does engender it, is present: so the maladies cease never till the
evil humors ingendring them be banished, which does lurk within the body.

Canon IV.
After the taking away of the cause, you must next turn you to the disease
engendered of the cause, keeping for a general rule, first the ablation of the
cause efficient, and next of the malady.

Canon V.
The cure of the symptom is never first intended, but always that of the
malady which causes the symptom. Yet when the symptom minaceth with death,
or greater and suddainer danger then the disease it self, the cure of it may
be first attempted.

Canon VI.
While as the disease is growing, we must hinder the growth of it, and take
away that part that is already inge^dred. The generation of that which is to
come, is hindered by taking away the cause antecedent, and the malady already
engendered is banished by taking away the cause conjoynt.

Canon VII.
In all diseases caused of fluxion, ye must first stop that which flows
yet: next draw forth that which already is flowed. Therefore the cure of a
phlegmon, catarrhe, and of all other diseases that are caused by a fluxion,
looks all to two buts, the first is, that the humor which runs yet be
stayed, the other, that that part of it which is already in the part be
evacuat.

Canon VIII.
In all diseases complicate, the one whereof cannot be cured without the other,
there must respect be holden to order: now method or order requyres still the
cure of that first, which hinders the cure of the other: as if a phlegmon were
accompanied with a ulcer, ye must first take away that, then cicatrize this.

Canon IX.
When two indications are directly opposite one to another, ye must not regard
so the one, that ye misregard the other, but rather having as good mind of
this as of that, make a mixture as equal as ye can. As for example, if one be
troubled by two so contrary diseases, that the one desires a hot, the other a
cold remead, ye must then make use of one temperat, to that end it do harm
neither to the one nor to the other, but rather help both. So when the stomach
is cold, and the lever over hot, things temperat are convenable, and all that
is mixtioned of hot and cold things: or the alternative use of the one and the
other. Hence is it that when a phlegmon is in its grouth, there is mixed
repercussives with digestives.

Canon X.
When there is remarked a repugnance among the indications, after you have well
considred that which is taken from the forces, and also the indication of the
cause, the disease, thou shall follow the most important of all, not neglecting
howsoever the other.

Canon XI.
It is a maxim most necessary, that commands to cure first the most
importunat danger, (For the indisposition, that is the first and principal
cause of precipitating the diseased in any danger, ought first to be helped.)
Wherefore excessive watching, cruel pain, all evacuation out of measure,
chiefly of blood, the suppression of superfluities, and other like symptoms,
which weakens the forces, and augments the disease, in such sort, that there
may arrive quickly some danger, constraines often the Physician to quyt the
cure of the sickness to occur to these symptoms.

Canon XII.
The general method of curing diseases is accomplished by the convenable
quantity and quality of the remedies, with the manner and time of using of them.

Canon XIII.
It is required that all the remedies be contrare in quality to the disease,
for contraria, contrariis curantur. For if all that which is immoderat be
contrare to nature, and that which is moderat agreeable to nature: of
necessity it will follow that that which is out of measure must be brought to
measure by its contrare in like degree out of measure. Hence is it that all
diseases engendered of repletion, are cured by evacuation: and these that
proceed of evacuation by repletion, and such like of the rest.

Canon XIV.
The temper of the body diseased with the disease it self, shows the measure
of the contrariety: forasmuch as it is not enough to apply cold remedies to a
hot disease: if that be not done with a measure reasonable, otherwise not
equal in measure, it is to be feared that there remain some portion of the
disease, or being excessive that one disease contrar to the other be moved:
For to occur to this we must know the nature of the body, that is to be
handled to that end that understanding how far the disease exceeds
mediocritie, one may exactly measure the proportion of the refrigeratiue
remedy. Therefore the quantity of every remead ought to be measured according
to the complexion of the sick, and the greatness of the sickness.

Canon XV.
The contrare remedies must be put in use little by little, and now and then make
intermission, for it is dangerous to evacuat all at once, or yet to fill, to
heat, or cool, or to chang the body suddenly in any other manner, for all that
which is excessive is enemy to nature, but that which is done by little and
little, is without danger, for it is therefore surer to serve your self
moderatly of contrary remedies, then to use excessively and suddenly, for as
much as nature does not suffer sudden changes without hazard.

Canon XVI:
When diseases are in the beginning, then move that which seems good to be
moved, but when they are in their vigor, it is better to let them alone in
rest, for it is more expedient to use remedies in the beginning, then in hight
of the disease, for two reasons, the one because the accidents are weaker at
the entres and at the end, then in the hight: the other, because nature wholly
employed at that time about the coction and excretion of the humor noisome,
ought not to be diverted or hindered by any remeed, for seeing the digestion is
then, it is better in the beginning to evacuat a part of the humor vicious,
that nature may the more easily overcome the rest: but when the malady is in
its vigor, nature occupied already about the concoction, it is no more time
to use evacuation.

Canon XVII.
If the espece of the sickness be so obscure that thou can not take it up at the
first, make no have in using remedies, rather suffer nature to work it out her
self, for being helped by a good dyat, in end she shall banish the sickness
forth. Where she shall make it manifest. For a remead uncertain and doubtful
cannot be ordained, without prejudice. If perhaps thou be constrained to use
one at the least, let it be light, to that end, that if it be not profitable,
at the least it be not hurtful.

Canon XVIII.
A simple cure is sufficient for a simple disease, but when it is composed with
an other, then it requyres a composed remeed.

Canon XIX.
For the accomplishing of the cure it is not enough that the physician do his
duty but that the sick also and they that are about him, that there be
nothing wanting of that which is required, for it is requisite that the diseased
strive to fight with the disease, with the medicine, and so obey him, and not
give way to his pleasures, having about him people sitting for his service,
being well lodged, and furnished with commodities needful.

Canon XX.
The medicine that does all things according to reason, although that things
succeed not according to expectation, ought not to change his bute, or end
proposed in his method purposed from the beginning. For that is but small
wisdom to quyt lightly that which seemde expedient although the success has
not been according to exspectation, for as the mark of a drop of water falling
on a stone, does not appear sensibly, but after a long space it falls, even
so in raw or undigested diseases which receives no coction, but with
difficulty, unto the which when reason has found that which is conveniable,
according to all indications considered one after other: one must not leave off
the course intended, although there has no manifest utility been found from
it, if that some other accident do not fall out, which does constrain to
quyt the first purpose, for we have reason to use the remedies which those
indications did furnish.

Canon XXI.
There be three sorts of remedies, by the which all indispositions are cured
that be curable, to wit by dyat, by chirurgie or manual operation, and
pharmacie or remeeds outward and inward, it is needful that the diat be
repugnant to the sickness and familiar to nature, for wholesome food is that
which is contrare to that, which is contrare to nature, and like to that which
is according to nature, so hot meats are conveneable to cold diseases, and
cold meats in hot diseases, moist or humid meats, for the dry, and drying, for
the weak and moist, wherefore it is expedient to prescribe a strait dyat to
fat fleshie peoeple for such a dyat dries.

Canon XXII.
Meat and drink more pleasant to the taste, but less profitable is to be
preferred to that which is more profitable and pleasant, for one must sometime
permit meats which are not best, not only to gratify the sick but also for
his further good, because the stomach embraces more straightly and keeps better
the meat that we take willingly, and with great contentment, yea disgests it
better. In the contrare, it rejects with disdain these things that are
disagreeable to the taste because they move a prease of vomiting, or cause some
fluctuating, or inflation in the stomach, therefore we must pleasure the sick
in things that are not very hurtful.

Canon XXIII.
In the ordaining of the dyat, there must respect be had of the custom, for
things of a long time accustomed, although worse, commonly hurts less then
these which are not in custom.

Canon XXIV.
When the disease is in its vigor, it is necessar then to use a very slender
or weak dyat, as well for the greatness of the symptoms, as for the coction
of the humor, for we must not hinder natures coction of the humors by the
coction of the meat.

Canon XXV.
When the disease is violent and quick, it causes incontinent extreme pain
and dolor, wherefore we must use a most sharp and weak dyat, because such a
disease is in the vigor the first days, as the grievous symptoms which do
incontinently accompany it from the beginning bears witness. For a most
sharp sickness is that which attaines to its hight, that is, in the first four
days or little after.

Canon XXVI.
So soon as the sickness by its violence does show that it is drawing near
the hight then a strait dyat must be enjoined: but when the hight is long in
coming as it falls out in long diseases, then a more large dyat would be used,
till the approaching of the hight, or a little before, and then ye must
restrain it. Strait and small dyats are still dangerous in long diseases,
because they abait the forces which ought to be conserved in their integrity,
to that end it may resist to the length of the disease.

Canon XXVII.
When the body is not clean, the more you nourish it, the more ye hurt it:
for seeing the body full of vicious humors, has more need of evacuation then
nutrition: it appears that they should not be too much nourished, because
these evil humors gathered a long time in the body, spoils the food newly
received: so that thereby the cacochymie is augmented to the double, which falls
out chiefly then when the stomach is foul: for even as mixing of clear water
with muddy, it becomes al muddy and troubled: even so the meat, although pure
and clean of it self, yet taken in to great quantity in a foul body, becomes
wholly corrupt.

Canon XXVIII.
A larger dyat must be granted to bairnes then old folk, and a mediocre, to
these of a middle age: because that old men indures easily hunger, next to them
that are at the entry of the declining age, worse then these young men, worst
of all boys: for they that are growing has much of the natural heat, and
therefore has much need of nourishment, otherwise their body should consume,
but there is but little heat in old bodies: wherefore they need not much
nourishment, because that too much should choke it.

Canon XXIX.
The great cavities in the body, in Winter and in the Spring, are naturally
hoter then at any other time, and the sleep longer: wherefore in these the dyat
may be larger, (here by the cavities we must understand the stomach, the
whole belly containing the puddings, and the rest of the natural parts that
are appointed for digestion.) But if ye desire to know why the natural heat is
augmented in Winter, Arist. attributs the cause to the circumsisting air, that
is colder chasing by this means the natural heat inward, while as in the
Summer it extends the self ordinarily through the whole body toward the heat
that is without as familiar to it. Hence is it that in the Summer its substance
is dissipat and exhals, but in Winter it is holden in and kept there, and
therefore all the coctions are the better made.

Canon XXX.
As to the form and manner of dyat, one should eat less in the Summer and the
Harvest and ofter, but in the Winter and Spring more seldom, but more
abundantly: because in the Summer and the Harvest hardly does one digest meat,
in Winter very easily, but in the Spring some way well.

Canon XXXI.
Ye must nourish gently, and repare by little and little the bodies that has
been extenuat of long time, and restore quickly these that has quickly been
taken down.

Canon XXXII.
You must give meat to the sick when as the sickness gives intermission or
release, and during the access abstain from giving* for meat then is
hurtful, because that it withdraws nature from the digestion of the humor to
the concoction of the nouritour, as also because by it the cause of the disease
is augmented.

Canon XXXIII.
Among the operations of chirurgerie, phlebotomie, or drawing of blood, keeps
the first rank: because it is the common remead of diseases which proceeds of
plenitud or fullness, for by it an evacuation is made of the humors equally,
being for this the most exquisit of all other means.

Canon XXXIV.
Phlebotomie is not only a remead evacuative, but also revulsive and
derivative: for it is profitable when we turn the course of the flux to the
opposite part, or desires to turn it asid to the neighbor part.

Canon XXXV.
We must draw blood in hot fevers 'till the spirits fail and heart saint, if
so be the forces be strong, also in great inflammations and extreme pains:
for if one draw blood in hot fevers till the heart faint, all the body is
incontinent cooled, and the vehement heat extinguished, to diverse after it,
there follows a flux of the belly and a sweat. By this means some are
wholly freed of the fever, others receives great ease, the vehemency of their
sickness having passed. This sort of bleeding is likewise good in great
inflammations, both for the former reasons, and for that it stops the flux
causing the inflammation, and so hinders the growth of the phlegmon: by this
same it appeaseth the great dolours caused of the heat of the fever, and of the
inflamtions: wherefore there is not found a remead more sovereign for
insupportable dolours, than it.

Canon XLV.
You must draw much blood, if the sickness does urge and the forces do
permit, if not by little and little, and at diverse times, for all extreme
evacuations are dangerous and chiefly bleeding being al at once.

Canon XXXVII.
They to whom purging and blood drawing is profitable, ought to be purged and
bled in the spring. For that season is very proper to make evacuation by
phlebotomie or pharmacie, because that at that time there is no extraordinar
heat for to weaken the body, by exhalation, nor great cold to make it stiff,
by congealing the humors in it, nor yet inaequall to disturb the forces but
rather a mediocre temper.

Canon XXXVIII.
You must not without great cause or deliberation open a vein to a woman with
child, because that a woman with child bled, is brought to bed before the time,
if the child be great, because having drawn blood of a woman with child: the
child thereby frustrat of his food, famishing in the matrix of the mother,
breaks his bonds, and seeks forth for nourishment, and that before the
time, except the mother abound in blood: for then ye may be so far from
fearing it, that in the contrar if it be not administrat, both the mother and
the child are in danger as has been remarked in the persons of the most
illustrious dames in the court of France: least the child should be choked by
the too great abundance of blood.

Canon XXXIX.
Purgative medicines should be ordained to cacochymike diseases, these that
purges the bile to bilious, they that phlegm, to phlegmaticks, and so of the
rest, for the cure of one cacochymie is made by a purgation which is
particularly appropriat to the humor tha^ exceedes, and among the alterative
potions the cold are appointed for the hot, the hot for the cold, the dry for
the humids, and the humid to the dry, for the hot mistemper would be made cold,
and the cold made hot, and such like of the rest.

Canon XL.
Strong potions would be given to strong diseases, and gentle medicines to more
meik and gentle, for extreme remedies are fitest for strong diseases: hence
the Roman orator desirous to show how a curagious man should interprise
hazards, says, in the presenting of himself to dangers, he must imitat the
custom of the medicines, that handles gently those that are but lightly
troubled, but in greater diseases are constrained to make use of remedies more
dangerous and doubtsome.

Canon XLI.
We must expel those things that requyres to be expelled, by the ways most
proper whither nature chiefly tends: and divert them if they make not there
course by the way they ought: the physician then ought curiously to mark the
motion of nature, and the inclination of the humor, redounding: to that end,
that if it tend to any place fitting, to help it, and in the contrar, if it
seek for one unfitting, to hinder it and to draw it off that course. So if
phlegmatic or melancholic humors take the course downward and nature have
essayed already to banish by the retract the fever, the physician ought to
prescribe a clister or some other proper remead for to stir up nature, and if a
bilious humor bend upward, and nature strive to expel it at the mouth, a vomit
is expedient to be taken, for that is to draw thither the humor whither nature
aims chiefly, and if ye do otherwise, you shall change the order and course
of nature, constrain the forces, and put the sick in hazard.

Canon XLII.
In very sharp sickness ye must purge the same day, if the humor be moved.
For it is not good to dryve over time, then, as says Hip. for fear least the
evil grow, the forces become weaker, and the wandering humors cease on some
noble part. When then in most sharp or violent diseases, we perceive nature
to be touched with a great and ardent desire to discharge the self of the
superfluous humors, we must purge incontinent. And because that that desire
does not often overtake nature to disburden the self of vicious humors, in the
beginning of such diseases we must advise well to use purgations at such a
time of such a sickness.

Canon XLIII.
When you are to purge the body, you must prepare the body before and make the
humors fluxile: other ways the purgation will not be without great pain and
difficulty, grinding of the belly, inquyetud, fainting, debilitie of the
pulse, and dissolution of the forces: Now for to make the body fluxile, you
must open all the passages of it, and make the gross humors liquid that are
within.

Canon XLIV.
You must purge the humors digested and prepared, not the raw and unprepared,
neither in the beginning of any disease, except they be moved and have no fixed
place. For as nature is by no means moved to the evacuating of any humor:
except it have first prepared the matter, so the physician ought to purge the
matter that is digested, not that which is undigested, because undigested humors
are slow to be moved, by reason of their viscositie and grossness, so that
they stop the passages that goes from the extremities of the body to the belly,
from the which the medicine does draw them, and by this means moves
troublesome symptoms by their not going forth.

Canon XLV.
You must purge women with child, if the matter be moved betwixt the fourth, and
seventh month, but sooner or later, is to be feared, for the infant is fastened
to the matrix of the mother, after the same manner that the fruits are to the
trees, fruits newly budded has there stalk so tender, that being beaten by
any violent wind, they fall easily to the ground: but with time being more
firmly fixed, they fall not so easily, until the time they become unto there
maturitie, and then they fall off themselves without violence. Even so fares it
with women incontinent after their conception, if they leap or fall in any
sliprie part, or yet move by any means either the spirit or the body, their
new conception easily falls forth, So fares it, with them, when the children
are great. But in the mid term of their time they are with child, they
adheare faster to the matrix, and are not so subject to be expelled: wherefore
women with child, may suffer stronger motions at that time without hurting
their fruit, and so may be better purged.

Canon XLVI.
When the crise is, or when it has already been and the humors are finally
expelled, we must move nothing, nor chang nothing, neither by physic nor any
other thing that may irritat nature, but rather suffer nature to work it out
her self: for seeing the crise is a work of nature, and not of the physician,
when she is about it, or has already obsolved it, the physician ought to move
nothing, but rather suffer her for fear of troubling her action, which she is
wholly employed about the bussines. But if the crise has been vnperfyt, it is
the duty of the medicine to purge that which rests of the vicious humors
fearing least by process of time, putrefying within the body, they renew the
sickness.

Canon XLVII.
During the caniculare days, laxative medicines are not good, for all strong
purgations are hardly supported that time, for three reasons. The first because
all purgatives being naturally hot, inflammes the body already warm by the
heat of the air. The second is because they dissipat the forces already
weakened by the vehemence of the heat. The third because the action of a purging
medicine, and that of the invironing air are contrare, for as much as that does
draw from without, inward, and this from within, outward.

Canon XLVIII.
The lower part of the belly or epigastre, being far extenuat, cannot suffer
without danger, purgations by the stool.

Canon XLIX.
When a defluxion on any part that is troubled, you must repel it: wherefore
repercussives that have virtue to bind are proper in the beginning of any
defluxion, for two respects: the one because they fortify so the part, that it
receives not so quickly the super fluities that does abord: the other because
they press forth the most subtle portion of that which is already placed
there.

FINIS.

