MJCROLOGJA. CHARACTERS, OR ESSAYS, Of Persons, Trades, and Places, offered to
the City and Country.

By R. M.

HEB DDIEV HEB DDIM printer's device of Thomas Cotes

Printed at London by T. C. for Michael Spark, dwelling at the blue Bible in
Green (...). 1629.

The Authors caueatory Epistle to the understanding Reader.
INtelligent and indifferent Readers: The frequent use of new Books should not
only be a means to conserve in memory all material occurrences; but likewise
to preserve for posterity such Patterns of remarkable prescription, as might
easily induce (with an vntyred delight) the mind of the Peruser. My self
therefore (having in the small iournall of my life been acquainted with sundry
passages in the world) shall fairly hope these collections to my Country men,
will not prove altogether fruitless. The work in it self is of no great
substance, not much Satyricall nor Critical; it only glances, like the dogs
of Nilus, taking a lap here and there, and not dwelling long upon any subject.
And because many men, are less offensiuely reprehended by a conceited jesting
reproof, then a serious; I have adapted it in the way of Characters, with a
Language of suitable familiarity. They may happily appear at first view a mere
congested Chaos of confused Chimer as, the Ideas or fantasmas of an Epidemicke
Brain; yet on receipt of the least warmth from the Sunbeams of your
favorable opinions, they shall easily dissipate all foggy mists of erroneous
misprision, and be really clarified in your considerate censure; for though you
may deem them somewhat promiscuously handled; I can well assure you my meaning
herein was more methodicall. That I present you with no curious Pourtrait of
Cosmographicall or Chronologicall relation, my slender reading in History* an^
less judgment in the Mathematics may easily approve. Only I offer at the
shrine of your serious considerations, this small piece of Charactery,
comprising the Natures, Arts, Humors, and dispositions of men. For which
purpose and your greater contentments I have madly rambled through Court, City
Country, University, etc If in the due form of a Character, I have either over
roued, flowne wide, or fallen short, it is not unlike you may impute it to my
folly of precipitance. In this (I excusiuely make answer.) I shall not unfitly
resemble the Painter, who being to figure forth the fury of a mad dog, the
better to express it, stood long curiously pidling about the froth or foam
issuing from his mouth; but finding nothing frame fitly to his intention;
rashly takes up his pencill, dashes it against the Picture, minding to spoil
it: howbeit this sudden Accident prevailed to make his work more excellent. So
happily may I in these sudden Touches pencill out these mean Characters with a
more lively tincture, than if I had been tediously curious in contriuing, or
vainly vainglorious to embelish them with the quaint eare-hony of finest
elocution. The world you know is at this time oppressed with nothing more then
the Press* every one striving to distill the dewie Quintessence of his brain,
through the Limbecke of invention. Amongst the rest, you see, I have not
altogether sequestered my self; but set apart some time from matters more
serious, to collect such simples as may extract from my iuyce-barren Quill some
few drops of your desired approbation. If I may be fateblest so fairly, I
shall futurely be encourae ged to exemplify these in a choycer strainor
amplify to a competent number others, with a more pleasing variety. In the
mean time for my present perclose and to stop the mouth of malicious
malignitie, who may without cause be exceptious: I only allege this, I have
not searched deeply into any man's matters, a little I confess I have touched
their manners, and perhaps started their humors; which if it prove current to
the courteous, I mind not the captious. But if it be generally mislikt, as not
answering your expectations; I conclude thus, if you be sorry it is no better,
you may be glad it is no longer.

Obsequious to your contentm^nts, R. M.

The Table.
1 A fantastic Tailor. 2 A Player. 3 A Shoemaker. 4 A Rope-maker. 5 A
Smith. 6 A Tobacconist. 7 A Cunning woman. 8 A Cobbler. 9 A Tooth-Drawer. 10 A
Tinker. 11 A Fiddler. 12 A Cunning Horse courser. 13 Bethlem. 14 Ludgate. 15
Bridewell. 16 Newgate.
Characters, OR Witty descriptions of sundry persons, and places, their
qualities, and conditions, etc.
1. A fantastic Tailor.
IS a tenth part of the Bombast that goes to the s^tting forth of a Man; and of
himself could not subsist, but by being adiunct to the rest of his Regiment.
He is commonly the Forepart or Facing of many Men in the World; when a fair
Suit, of his own making, and the newest edition, presupposes a Shirt
semblable; yet ofttim^s sits nearer the Skin; so sit, so punctual, as
scarsely admits any shifting Insertion. His Art in Numbers is not much fluent;
yet in way of Substraction you may happily find him dexterious. His dealing
consists not much in Weight; but in the Weight of his pressing-Iron, under
whose Tyranny, you shall perceive no small shrinking. Only for Measure he
improues himself no niggard, but rather cuts out with overplus, and has a
gift to preserve large Parings to his own purposes. He condemns the Relics
of Pride, and other men's superfluities to his Abisse, vnderbord; whence is no
Redemption, save only he reserues some Trophies of his Trade, to match pieces
of like valuation; indeed as Monuments for his Posterity to make use of. He is
a kind of skiping squey-legd Creature, keeps Company with Gentle men, and if
you saw him at my Ladies, you would hold him some Usher of a Dancing-schoole;
as being aptest in sight for a Crosse-Caper. By his clothes you might de^me him
a Knight; but that, if you v^case him, you will find his S^tt^n Doublet naught
but Fore-sleeues and Breast, the Backepart Buckeram; his Cloak and Cape of two
sorts, his Roses and Garters of my Ladies old Cypres. His fashion is to bring
all out of fashion; yet I wears the French were the only People in the World,
and commonly desires to speak that Language above all. He vpholds in no
Theeuerie to take what is brought, and stretch it forth to his best commodity.
His slender skill in Arithmeticke, (over and above his rules of Addition in a
long Bill) has brought him to maintain this Maxim, that Division is most
necessary, and Participation a maine Particle of Thrift. In dead Vacations, he
is not idle but often practiced upon Repair, where if a Sixe-foot creature
chance to Perambulate to his Needles Point; at push of Pike he either foiles,
or in his Linsey-Wolsey Prison enfolds them. His discourse is rich and
plentiful; the Argument he treats on, new Proiects; and tells stories of the
newest, and Devises your Court-Ladies have got up. He promises the Chambermaid
a new shagg-wastcoate to induce her Lady to that modern fashion, not in
respect of his own gain; but to show how well it might become her. Whether he
be in the Books of a foolish Citizens Wife, or a fantastique Lady is to him
alike material. If for the one he make up Gown, Peticote, or other garment;
he vows the Citizens carry away now the only fashion from Court-Ladies set
off in light colors, goldlace, etc. If for the other, contrarily he swears
your City Druggs now are not worth a rush; rich Embroyderies, Silks,
Taffaties, etc. are most Lady-like, and in special request. He is an
Ambo-dexter, or Jack of all sides, and will needs mend that which God made. He
is in this vain Age much set by, for his quality consists of Invention, and
Translation: and can readily shape an Ape into all fashions.

2. A Player,
IS a Volume of various conceits or Epitome of Time, who by his representation
and appearance makes things long past seem present. He is much like the
Compters in Arithmeticke, and may stand one while for a King, another while a
Beggar, many times as a Mute or Cipher. Sometimes he represents that which in
his Life he scarce practices, to be an honest Man. To the point, he often
personates a Rorer, and therein comes nearest to himself. If his Action
prefigure passion, he raues, rages, and protests much by his painted Heavens;
and seems in the height of this fit ready to pull Jove out of the Garret,
where perchance he lies leaning on his elbowes, or is employed to make Squips
and Crackers to grace the Play. His Audience are oftentimes Iuducious; but his
chief Admirers are commonly young wanton Chamber-maids, who are so taken with
his posture and gay clothes they never come to be their own women after. He
exasperates men's enormities, in public view; and tells them their faults on the
Stage, not as being sorry for them, but rather wishes still he might find
more occasions to work on. He is the general Corrupter of Spirits yet
untainted, inducing them by gradation to much lascivious deprauity. He is a
Perspicuity of vanity in variety; and suggests youth to perpetrate such vices,
as otherwise they had happily nere heard of. He is (for the most part) a notable
Hypocrite, seeming what he is not, and is indeed what he seems not. And if
he lose one of his fellow Stroules, in the Summer he turns King of the
Gypsies; if not, some great man's protection is a sufficient Warrant for his
peregrination, and a means to procure him the Towne-Hall; where he may long
exercise his quality, with clown-claps of great admiration in a Tone suitable
to the large Ears of his Illiterate Auditorie. He is one seldom takes care
for old Age; because ill Diet and Disorder, together with a Consumption or some
worse disease, taken up in his full Careere; have only chalked out his
Catastrophe but to a Colon: and he scarsely suruiues to his natural period of
days.

3. A Country Shoo-maker,
IS one, that seems to have some insight in Men's dispositions, especially of
his ordinary Customers; for he will soon have the length of your foot to an
hair. He is not much unlike some careless Prelates; for he sets a smooth
face on the upper Leather, but regards not the Soles slitting. His knowledge is
merely superficial, and dives much into the Art of excoriation. The Butcher
is the Prologue, or first branch of his profit: The Currier the intermedium or
Chorus: Himself with the help of his cutting-knife, makes up the Catastrophe,
in Boots, Shoes, Pantofles, etc. He is an inueterate enemy to the lives of
diverse dumb beasts, not caring how many are put to slaughter, so their Hides
come cheaply to him. His Foxfurre pretending ease by drawing on; is the truest
Emblem of his fraud and ^ubtilty, intending rather to draw in for ^is own
profit; and if you watch nar^owly his insteps in a dark shop; you may
characterize him uttering (if not charging) Calfe for Neat. He is a great
^ormentor of improfitable Corns in a Common wealth; yet if you entreat him
^^ire, he is merciful enough, and will at Last give you ease. He is the
crooked Toes Iavlor, and often keeps Chamber-^^^ds so fine in their feet, they
halt downright. In the Country he always caries the Relics of S. Hugh's
Bones, ^ill the hot Sunshine, conuerts him to Hay-making, or Haruest-worke. In
win^^r season you shall by 8 of the clock, ^^ther find his nose steeled with
a black ^ot, then his Aule with a Bristle. He is a ^ruce fellow at a Fair, and
uses Truncke ^ose at a Wake. He pinches more at ^^e groats then any other Trade
at two-^^nce. His skill is very raw in the Ma^^ematicks; yet has taught many,
being a while in his Leather prison, to prove weather-wise; and by pricking and
shooting of their Corns perfectly sensi^le of storms ensuing. His greatest
enemy is a Rich man with the gout, who never wears ought but slippers in all
companies. He tells you the only Court fashion is to walk in Boots, and
swears they are the compleatest ornament of leg or foot. His maine fear is
a Parliament, lest there might proceed some new addition to the last Act, to
thwart his designs, That as Butchers were forbad to sell meat on Sundays, so
he should shoes* which if it happen, he vows neither King nor Beggar, shall
pass his pinching jurisdiction so long as he vpholds the Trade. Briefly, he i^
one uses least conscience on Sundays when if your necessities bring you to hi^
shop door, he will be sure to rac^^ two pence or a groat more on the prie^
for coming so unseasonably. He sing all the Rounds and Catches that Robi^ hood
had; and the Pinder of Wakefield is commonly the fore-horse of his Tenor. He
deemes good-Ale the only vpholder of a clear voice, and wishes, that he which
loves it not may never sing more.

4. A Rope-Maker,
IS the Lobsters Executor, and gets his living contrary to all men; he holds by
that as a maine end of his living, which catching hold on another proves fatal
to his destruction; howbeit he seems Cowardly, and retires fearfully, as if
he were working out his own Destiny. He is like some hypocritical Miser,
that looks toward charity, and retires still to covetousness. Or by his
posture of going back-ward when he looks forward; may claim affinity with the
waterman, who rows one way, yet looks another. He is the Spider that spins
from about his own bowels his threefold web, which may afterward entrap some
silly Flies of misfortune. His Boy that sits still turning the wheel; (but for
default of gravity) may expressly resemble the old Usurer turning and winding
his money; himself the Money-master or Broker that goes up and down, twisting
up the whole estate to his own Commodity. His wares are of several sizes,
some great, some smaller; and the Beadle finds his as suitable to an Whores
back, as the Hangman his to a Theefes neck. His Ancestors surely were
Gardiners or Field-keepers, and he deriues his Pedigree from the Hempstalke.
He scarsly knows his own Coat-Armes; but may be informed as follows: On
the borders or out-skirts of a fair field Argent, in midst of a three-turning
Highway passant, three may wooden pillars, with cross banes, in shape of a
Triangle, three fair Hempstalks vprearing from the foot of those Pillars, and
entwining the body in manner of a Vine: then three Collers perpendicularly
descending; with nooses of equal distance. A cross cheuron of Cable, in the
middle and uttermost part, and in the midst of the maine Scutcheon two Beaters
with heau'd Beetles. The Crest a large bottom of round platted pack-thred, in
shape of a Turks Turbant, and two Porters for the Supporters girt with a
Trinodie of Ropes, and alike crossed over the shoulders in form of a Belt. To
be serious, he is a man industrious in his calling, and his back retyring,
brings him on more forward in the world. He is the Saylors hope-hold; for he
cannot ride safely, without his industry. In fine he is constant to his
business, and lets not slip his good occasions, till at length the cord of his
life vntwines and he returns to his grave, where we leave him.

5: A Smith,
IS a man principally composed of two Elements, Fire and strong Liquor; his
dreams are often Iron bars, Steel-gads Wedges and Thunderbolts, and he
maintains his Antiquity from Vulcan. He vpholds Wars the only trade at Sea,
and w^lfare of the Land, and brags no man can live without him, deeming it most
requisite himself should be matter of the Parish, and King of all Professions;
according to the old verse,

By Hammer and hand, all Arts do stand.

He is the morning Cock, and the evening Hog; for he always begins well,
and continues in the fire Salamander-like, till in the afternoon, when he
comes to his Liquor, and has taken his load, can scarce see to drive one nail
right. He is the Horse-Physitian, the Plow-mans right hand, the Sea-mans stay,
and the Generals Commander. His Hammer frames speeches to the clouds, so
loudly, that he rends the Air, tears the Earth, and brings down the tallest
Cedars. He grieves more at the death of a good Gelding, then many men do at
their wives Funeral. He has ever an intent to travel to Peru, to see horses
shod with gold; but could never get silver to begin his journey. He never
caries envy in his breast to his Master, but pays an ill turn upon his Beast.
He never rides with Boots but when Skimmington keeps Holiday, and then a
rusty Sword keeps warm his sides. He is a man most apt at barganing, for he
commonly strikes while the Iron's hot. He is no less ingenuous then
industrious; for he is still hammering on some subject or other. The greatest
harm he has done in the Common wealth, is his puffing of Sea-coale to so
high a Price; for by his ordinary use, he has raised them to extraordinary
rate. His head is often too heavy for his heels, for he dreams of Ringals,
Spauins, and Founders, and seems to have more skill in this kind then the
best Doctor. He is a well experienced Horse-Phlebotomist; and to minister a
Drench, has his Oxehorne always in readiness. He is never unfurnished of his
Bath or Lotium-water, which has been ever a most approved r^ceipt for the Itch
or Scabd hands. He has heard Markhams Method twice read over; and had Markham
but known his secrets he had rode in his foot-cloth long since. He has found
out a new devise, to make Bi^s for Warre-horse, to ore-runne the Enemy; and had
he but coale^ and Iron gratis, he would make an Iron instrument should charge
and discharge 500 Muskets with one man. His great Grandfather was an
Irishman, and sucked the blood of beasts; himself more English bred and leaves
it to the hogs and dogs. His buckler is a brown Apron, and his weapon a
Hammer. He Anuils out his oaths and curses in fury like sparks from a
plow-share.

6. A Tobacconist,
IS a man furious, making all smoke again where he comes, and doubtless may
prove a stout soldier in a Town where long siege has made scarsitie of
victuals; for he most commonly preferres smoke-drinke before smok-meat. At
first he is happily brought to use it, but for fashion-sake, until custom make
it habitual: His Brain-pan is lined like an old Usurers Nightcap; and for his
Belly, though it make a fair show outwardly; yet there are many sluttish
corners within. The Plurifie, Gout, and other diseases are to him as
inseparable, as oppression to an Usurer, or griping to a Broker. The Recorder,
Flute, Hob^ise or any other Pipe the best Musician can invent, does yield him
such content as does the Tobaccopipe; or can afford him like Music to please
his Nostrils; were it the Oaten Reed of that Rural Shepherd which so sweetly
warbl^d on the Plains of of Arcadie. Of all other Countries England is least
beholding to him; for he prefers Verina, Trinidado, and other barbarous Parts
before it, as being the best Seed-plots of those Drugges he most affects. In
all companies where he comes, he is never vnfurnish'd of his case of
Instruments, which he will be ready to draw on any occasion for himself or
his friend; and has his stops ready at his singers ends to make his Limbecke
burn more fervently, till all be consumed to ashes. To conclude, he is a man
dissolues himself in vapors while he lives, and being dead is fit for none but
Chirurgions to make use of. On whom I will bestow this Epitaph.

Here lies one took all in snuff
Whose life was but a Bubble:
Now being dead, he is calm enough,
And's friends are rid of trouble.
7. A Cunning woman,
IS the female spawne engendered between a Chyrurgion and a Physician, and would
seem to have skill equal, especially when she meets with them who either
believe or admire her. Her proceeding she never took in the Schools; for her
learning is more natural, and came indeed of her Motherwit; sodered up here
and there with some fragments of observation gathered from gossippings and
discourse with others of her society. Her Ingredients (though for several
diseases) do never much differ; a few pounded Caterpillars, a roasted Bitches
marrow, Stauesaker, a little Bores-grease and Quicksilver, these are all to a
Dram; of which (with a few simples) she can temper you a salve for every
sore, and perform as great Cures as ever did Galen or Hypocrates. If it happen
she be called into question by Authority, she (like the Snaile) creeps into
her shell, and either hides herself out of the way, or else brings in some of
her sufficientst Neighbors to testify for her what great good she has done
in the Common wealth. After a while that she is grown thus perfectly cunning
to deceive the world by her Physic; she happily proceeds further, presuming to
profess the Black-Art, and will make you believe she has the stars at
command, and can readily help you to any thing you have lost; provided you
minister something unto her to find her self. If you would know what shall
betide you in your affairs, let her but look in your Hand, or perfectly on
your face, her skill is so exquisite in physiognomie or palmistry, she will
easily satisfy your demands without scruple. She is first cozen to your
Gypsies for Fortune-telling, and can with as much dexterity coozen you of your
money, while she only pretends observing lines in your Palm. In brief, she
is one so seeming skillful in many things, that indeed she has judgment in
nothing; but one that by her iugglyng Impostures seeks not only to delude the
world, but deprave men of that worthy calling and profession, to whom much
honor is due. And so I leave her, as I find her, a Subject unworthy my
further discourse.

8 A Cobbler,
IS a man never like to be preferred by his worke-manship, for that right term
makes him an excellent workman. He resembles most fitly an earthworme living
under a stall; for he commonly keeps a little shop under a great one. He is a
fellow so necessary in a Commonwealth, that few can be without him; for if any
happen to step awry, he is straight ready to set them upright. He is one,
though apt enough to take his liquor, far better then the common drunkard;
for he mends every day, and hour; yet contrary to all, is never on the mending
hand on Sunday* He is most commonly a good Singer, good fellow, and a Jolly
talker. He sleeps more s^cure then any man, and never fears fire, and like a
crooked Crauish, pray s the clean contrary way: Others pray for fair, he for
foul weather. He brags that himself nor none of his were never known
Bankrupts. He sets up his Trade for sixpence, scarce ever trusts twelue-pence,
and can command the best m^n in the Town to stay his leisure. H^ holds a
Smi^h, a man most unnecessary in a Commonwealth; it goes to his heart to see
an iron-heele patch, or a hobnayle shoe. He is much vexed at the vent of
Sparrow-bils, and can as ill away with f^shion of wooden Clamps, as being
maine obstacles to his profession. He should by some appearances seem an
excellent linguist, for he his much inured with Translation. His Thumb and his
Tongue are the best Instruments he makes use of, and the more he employes
them, the better his wife is pleased, and the Consort more tunable. In fine he
is a stubbed fellow well bristled, and being armed with a welsh-hook'd knife,
or sharp semite^, rips up before you many old matters, and brings Aule at Last
to his own ends.

9. A Tooth-drawer,
IS a man highly feigned for his Art; for he got it beyond the Seas, as by
Labels at his door may appear. As thus: Know all gentlemen, that I Signior or
Mounsieur such a one, after long travail, and greet experience in foreign
parts, beyond the Seas, have industriously attained many rare secrets, viz. To
draw Teeth, set in New, mundifie or make black Teeth white, rid the gummes, or
take away the pain without drawing; nor does he rest here, but if need
require professes the Cure of many other diseases, as Cramp, Convulsions,
Gouts, Palsies, Catars, etc. And can tell them at first sight, if they be
curable or not. Howbeit, this superficial view must bring him some feeling,
else he is not well pleased. His business is never performed in so much State,
as when he is mounted upon his Palfrey or Irish Hobby, riding through the high
streets of the City, like Caesar in his Triumph, his Clyents following him
laying their hands on their mouths, as though they would keep silence, till
pain makes them roar out, which his horse or he perceiving, reflects back on
them an eye of ruthful pity, straight plays the Constables part to bid them
come after him; and having felt their pulses, looks next into their mouths,
to know their age, thrusts in his hand or fingers, and seems in this posture a
Richard Corde-Lyon, diuing to the heart or stump of hollow Teeth. Yet have I
heard he has a trick to convey an iron punch in a hand-kerchiefe, which often
prove the ieopardy of a iaw to some of his Patients. He is a fellow very
captious; for he is apt to twit you in the Teeth on the least occasion;
exceeding desperate, for if you take distaste or find your self agreeu'd,
though it be but a Tooth-aking, he is straight ready to draw. He is the
mouths Gardener, that prunes the hedge-rowes of the Teeth, and like a Serg^ant
military set them in their due Ranks and Files. Those rott^n, ^a^ged and
corrupt Teeth he has drawn from others have been the only means to draw in
him customers; and he preserues them as Trophes of Triumph to dignifie his
B^nner. At spre^ding forth his Flags of affiance, streamer, Pendants, etc.
multitudes of people commonly assemble; when the Cutpurse spying his best
advantage, becomes a great sharer in the work, and can as nimbly employ his
limetwig-fingers to draw a Purse, as himself a Tooth. Of all Trades in the
City, he is most beholding to the Comfit m^ker; for he and his Confections
have been a great bane to the Teeth, helped him to much work, and brought
sour sauce to their sweet meats. To conclude he is a man only used at a
pinch; and the use of his pincers h 's drawn his Patients out of patience.
Those that have once t^ide him, hope they shall never have occasion to use him
more. So I leave him, till pain pricks me to employ him, but desire no further
acquaintance of him.

10. A Tinker,
IS a rude rustic ruff hayr'd Compapanion, one that seldom walks without a
Pike-staffe, a Doxy and a Dog. He is second cosen to Vulcan, approues his
genealogy from Tubal-Cain, rather of Cain then Tubal. His shop is always at
his back, and he gets his living by making of holes; for he seldom stops one
unless six more bear him Company. He desires most to be a free holder upon
the Common: his house never knew the black Bible, but the black Pot is his
nearest and dearest friend. His wife he seldom regards, but makes it the
chiefest holiday when he least sees her. In the summer season he is most
frequent to be seen at the Royal Exchange of a Bush or hedge, where he
commonly dynes upon an earthen Table, in the winter stowes himself in some
musty Barn. His complexion is sanguine, and he deemes the Barber-no fit member
in a Common wealth. His prayers are, The devil take me, or, God refuse me. In
his talk, his full points are curses, and his first line o^thes, where after
he has rapped out some twenty or forty, he begins to swear, and he tells
you he is seldom let blood in the face, or his Nose naild on with his wives
fingers. He is one that haunts Wakes and Faires like a spirit, and his Music
is always a pair of wooden Organs under a Peinthouse, or a Cross which he
loves not to see; beside his daily practice of the voice set and sung to the
Tabering on a Kettle. He exclaimes much against Gluttony, and wishes every
Butchers shop were turned to an Alehouse. He loves not to go upon Plantages,
unless it be where every house has a Brew House belonging to it. He paies
his Landlords rent with blows and curses, because his house is not
tenantable; for he will bring the Door rather then want fine. He holds Banbury
to be a place not to be pitti'd though in never so much misery. His heart is
as hard as his hammer, his fingers smell like Bird-lime. He thinks a Knave, a
Drunkard, and a Tinker to be the best Commonwealths men and to make most
stirring, of which he desires he may have an Inheritance.

11. A Fiddler,
IS a Bastard of the Muses; one that by early rising and la^e watching scrapes
out a poor living; for he is wakefull as the Belman, and many times after two
or three hours earnest looking up for reward is c^owned with a Pispot. If you
would know of any merry meeting or Feasting, follow but him, and you cannot
miss the way; he has still the best in elligence of them all You may
perceive by the Rosemary and Ribbon in his hat where he was the last Sunday,
nor can the Clarks book better certify you who was the Bride and
Bridesgroome; himself being there a man of greatest Request. At any Fair,
Wake, May pole rearing, or Whitsunale, you shall rarely want his company, but
find him always in readiness to bid you welcome; And if happily some generous
Gentleman lie in his way, he will not miss to give him his mornings
salutation, be he stranger, or otherwise: he has his name or style as ready in
his mouth, as if he had been his old acquaintance or nearest kin. His skill
by the ear is much in the sounds and different tones of music, yet stands
best affected to the chinking of money. He may for his impudence resemble most
fitly the Tongue of a Iewes-trumpe; which though often repulst by the finger,
returns with more eagerness to his full Twang. His fingers are so pliant to
his Instrument, that though he chance to screw his head backwards into a
pottle pot, yet forgets not his lesson, but by rote plods forward in his play.
His Boy is the sweet singing Bird hung forth at a Tavern door next the
street, that proffers his notes to all p^ss^ngers. He trauerses all Companies,
feeds on all sorts of diet, receives all men's gratuities. If his largess come
off lamely, he goes forth of your company with a grand grumble more base then
his Viol; If largely, his Kitt and he iogge away merrily together. When he
gets but some Songs or Sonnets patcht up with Kibaldrie, or enterlarded with
any thing against the state, they are maine helps to him, and he will adventure
to sing them though they cost him a whipping for his labor. His head is
troubled with many Crotchets, and he often strives to strain his strings a note
beyond Ela; till many times both crack together. If he chance to get a Livery
on his back of some noble personage, he is well worthy your entertainment,
and you must pay to his Coat. You cannot anger him worse, then by telling him
of the Doctors grace, and should you repeat but a line, his melody would
convert to a malady. Yet he may happily bear out that or any thing, for his
quality with community of knocks and rough language, has armed him for Battry
and an Assass ination. To conclude, he is a man never much respected, though
sometimes acc^pted in men's companies: and then better heard then seen.

12. A cunning Horse-Courser,
IS a person so altogether compact of a Country habit, that he loves not a
black hat: A skillful Farrier is his friends enemy. He reads Markhams Method,
and Banks is his old acquainttance. He keeps his best horses in the worst
clothes, and his worst Iades be richest on weeke-dayes. He has the Racers,
Breeds, and Clymats of the best in England; for variety of Barbary, Spanish,
English, Flaunders and Irish breed, his race, his hunting, drawing, or all in
one if you please. Of his bastard sort the Sire and Damme he keeps an exact
Catalogue, and freely offers to let you have the trial of him any morning to
Hye-gate; and ten to one he will spend so much time to ride with you himself,
where happily his Copers be before to carry him back upon some new bargain;
but ere you get to London you are caught in his fet-locks, and he fastens on
you a Jade that dare not clim^ Hye-gate hill. He is a man not much affected
with Pride, but makes commonly his prauncing serve as a Prologue to his profit
He trots, ambles, gallops, rebounds and treads the Measures in all variety of
Paces: he circumuents Smithfield with curuets, and leaps madly through thick
and thin, seeming in his full careere, ready to outstrip Pegasus. He keeps at
all Faires in Country habits, and the change of his clothes is as frequent as
the Moons. He prefers a stout horse before a stubborn wife, and with more
delight manages the one then the other. If a lusty Courser come to his hand,
his beast and he must trace the prime streets of the City; for his visit is
Cheap Side, Cornwall, Watling, street, etc. Being thus mounted, he begins to
eleuate his voice in a lofty Tone set by himself, and can speak no other
language on his back but 100. Angels, which often he should have been blessed
with from such and such a Knight, and this the only beast that makes him rich,
for he won at least 7 Races in six weeks. What he swears and lies he has
vouchers for, and the best remedy you can have, if he prove a Jade, is, that
you never take him for an honest man. But leave him as he is, till he mend his
manners.

13. Bethlem.
IS a place of rest for restless persons, where though many meet and all of
one Nation, yet show several conditions. You may happily hear a confused hubbub
of contrariety in their speeches, yet many times harp upon something that men
more sensible then themselves may make ^se of. It is a place where many a stout
heart has been tamed and brought under. Where this house is, scarce any need
ask, yet may it in some sort seem questionable, and this Theme challenge a
larger comment then ordinary; for but well consider, and we shall find many
bedlems elsewhere, as in Court, City, Country, University, etc. Are there not
Court Bedlems, that conform themselves merely to all forms of new fashions,
that expend time to raise up a puffe-paste honor, which as childr^ns bubbl^s
v^nish immediate, irr^couerable, or bring in the catastrophe a disgraceful
p^aecipitation. City B^dlems that seeming cautelous, prove often too credulous,
and by giving much credit to others themselves have none left; or contrary rake
and scrape together they know not what for they know not whom. Country Bedlems
that have sold their Farms to buy them a Pedigree, and at last left themselves
no Patrimony. University Bedlems, that have studied their Majors, Minors,
Antecedent and Consequent to be at length concluded Coxecombs. This place
therefore is not only confined between More fields and Bishopsgatestreete,
but may prove more ample in extent then the King has any Land.

14. Ludgate.
IS the maine Prop, or surest vpholder of Ancient Citizens, who are declined
from the Nominative of credit to the Vocative of Caret; having multiplied in
O^latiue, Subtracted in the Ablative. The City is the circumference, this the
Center, or as the Fox said by the Furriers shop the surest place to meet
in. It is a Receptacle of Complainers against dead vacations, who have perhaps
made up their catastrophe in the quick'st Term. It is the resting place or
cares and troubles, a full poyse of misery or safe harbor of ill husbandry. It
is a kind of Inns of Court, where men gather more by experience then study,
and have the Law at their fingers ends. The Keepers in it resemble Ashen trees,
bearing fruit, which they turn to no men's profit but their own; and seem to
have power to open and shut to all under their charge, as those that receive
Keys from S. Peter: for you shall perceive them no less skillful in the
sounds and stops of each then the most curious and best Musician. They are men
of much circumspection, and look more warily to their several wards then the
cunning'st Fencer, pressed to play his Masters-prize. Shortly, it is a house
ch^ap^ier purchased then kept, and a man's great'st Fine is paid at parting. It
is the Bankrouts bait, which at first he greedily swallows, after is swallowed
up of. The Speed-well never winters here, but the Hope-well has cast Anchor.

16. Bridewell.
BRides-well, or Bridgets well, is the City Schoole-mistris, that by due
correction tames and brings under her unruly obstinate children of both sexes;
those that have drank, or inde^d but thoroughly tasted of this well, will
commonly ever after be most cautelous of any relapse to return thither for a
second cure. It is a fair, free, hospitable open house for all comers. The
complaint of Guests hither invited or rather incited, seems quite contrary to
that of common Innes, where fault is most found for want of observance, the
distaste here growing of more followers then needs: Howbeit their Attendants,
(as persons well deserving) are men in Liueries, Beadles in Bluecoates, who
hold as much land by giving out statute lace, as your Bosomes-Inne Cariers by
delivering cheeses at Christmas: They are ready waiters on your backs on any
occasion, and their maine service a full satiety of whipping-cheare. They are
men not fluent in discourse, yet captious in your company, much inclined to
criticisme, and so Satyricall, that on the le^st fault committed they are ready
to give you a Ierke. They much resemble the Momusses of our times, aff^cted
with the spirit of Detraction; only in this different, their hands rather then
tongues are the greatest Back-biters. Their best exercise is running and
driving at a Carts Tail; where they take as much pride in the posture and
practice of their weapon, as a dexterious Fencer before a Company at Simon and
Jude, and are no less bountiful and free in the open Markets, then at their
own Hall Table. They are men of large Commission, extentiue in jurisdiction to
the utmost part of their Regiment, even from the Whore rampant, to the poor
Rogue couchant, and are as cunning in conueyances and slights as a Iugler; for
he is no more but Whip, Pass, and Be gone; yet these are never out of action.
It is an Amsterdammicall Conuenticle, translated only in the Clime; or an
hotch-potch of people different in Age, Sex, Nation, Disposition, not seldom
in Religion; yet every one uses that little conscience he has, so far as the
whip will give him leave. Not unlike the Family of Love, for they have here all
things in common, which I think commonly is little or nothing, unless the
Whip, Stocks, or Pillory. You have here the grand gross Baud, Prouocatious
Pander, ungracious Letcher, audacious Whore, ungracious Kaue; rude Ruffians,
Runnagates, Cheates, Pimps, Nips, Foysts, Decoyes, and multa alia quae nunc,
etc. And though it be every week swept over by the Beesome of authority, yet
is this muck-hill replenished daily with stuff of the like kind. It is a
Bee-hiue of Drones, where the good sting them home to the old abode, a Pill to
purge vagabonds out of the Commonwealth, and a Curry-combe for Hackney whores
to reduce them to their pristine reputation; for if after punishment you so
chance to call them, they get you on the hip, and have the Law on their own
sid^s. It is a well compacted Commonwealth of workers against their wills,
where the awe of the whipstocke confines them to the laborious stroke of the
hempe-blocke, and the turning of the wheel a daily Memento of turning over a
new leaf. It is a bit or bridle for Roaring Boys that fly out beyond their
bounds, or a civil government of persons in behavior most uncivil, where,
though many meet roughly all strangers, yet here grow calm enough and work
together like neighbors. It is a Receptacle of Rogues, Ruffians and
Runnagates, who never serve God but on Saturday mornings, and then call on him
but with small devotion: when the storm is over, all is salu'd up with a sob
and a sour face. It is a stepdame to stubborn natures who would never be
ruled by their more natural mother: An Empericke in a diseased climate, that
by a skillful Phlebotomy, with well managing of a small knotted whipcord, has
preserved many from the fare of a hard hempen halter, and cleansed both City and
Suburbs of much corruption. It may not unfitly be termed the Trades Increase,
or Cities Hope-well, where her stubborn youth are made wieldy, brought up in
handicraft professions. It is the Real Exchange of good houswiues, whither
they commonly resort for their Hemp, Flax, or Towe, and here find it ready
beaten to their hands by those, who happily thought little to have come under
Jurisdiction of Block and Beetle.

The tenor of the new Law.
All graceless wights that lead Luxurious lives,
Bold roaring Boys, base Queanes, and unchaste wives,
Cutpurses, Canters, Cheaters, Hie-way-standers,
Bawdes, Bouncing-Megs, Decoyes, Puncks, Pimps and Panders
All vagrant Vagabonds o'th Co^mo wealth,
Sharks, Prigs, Nips, Foysts, that pill and live by stealth;
Whole swarms of lazy Drones in corners lurking,
That rather choose to hang then fall to working:
These with their carst confederates, all must stand
Toth' new laws Judgment, that does strait command
An equal penance for their crime most meet,
That (yoakt in Carts) they now must purge the street
Of noisome Garbage, carry Dirt and Dung;
The Beadles following with a mighty throng;
Whilst as they pass the people scoffing say,
Holla, ye pampred Iades of Asia.
The knotty Whip could never half so sling ye
As this new law; the very shame will bring ye,
(If ever) now to mend, else still ye must
Drive, till ye sweat again in Dirt and Dust,
Bare faced in public view throughout the City;
While all men laugh, and few or none will pity:
Just is that law, whose sentence thus inforces
All those who lived as Beasts, to draw like Horses.
To conclude, it is the latter course of a full Banquet served in Sallets and
sharp Tarts, or the sour sauce to the sweet meats of Venery. It is a
Diet-drinke most wholesome for a Whoremonger, or a principal receipt for the
Itch of concupiscence. In fine a free Hospital for the Remedy of sundry
diseases, whither many are brought, upon cure purged and past away: the lazy
Drones from Idleness, lewd Letchers from Luxury, vain unthrifts from
Prodigality, old persons from vildnesse, youth from wildness, all if possible
to goodness* Whence if any depart and mend not, an hund^ed to one they drop
into the Hangmans Budget.

16. Newgate.
IS the old way to an ill Destiny, or the Hye-way to look through a hempen
window. It is the Blacke-dogs walk of an ill conscience, and the period of a
Purloyner. It is the subburbs of hell, and not seldom under the Jurisdiction
of Furies. It is a dangerous Hellespont, wherein many setting forth are ship
wrackt in their journey. It is a dark Cell of care, and dungeon of despair, a
place that sends all worse forth, and scarce any mend. It is a promiscuous
rabble of Rogues, Villains, and Whores, where if once they pass the fiery
trial they soon grow master; they love not to ride, and ever fear the
changing of the Moon. All good deeds of charity, they turn to sin and
wickedness: The Tapsters purse, and the Tobacco-shop is their Treasury, and
he that swears and drinks most is of best respect: The stoutest Rogue has
there most credit, and the cunningst foyst wins best esteem. All ill is the
highest aim, and he that has been longest ^heeuart is the worst member,
keeps the remembrance. book and is grown a Schoolmasters fit for the
Devil; so absolute a Rogue that he grows in office to see sin correct
vice. He summons Iuries, Judges, and can tell fortunes to all comers. He has
a Title suitable to his disposition, and goes under the name of Corporal Craft.
Briefly, it is a Cage of unclean Birds, a Coope of Cony-catchers, and an
Abisse of all Abominations.

FINIS.

