Gallathea.

As it was playde before the Queens Majesty at Greene-wiche, on Newyeeres day
at Night.

By the Children of Paul's.

AT LONDON, Printed by John Charlwoode for the Widow Broom. 1592.

The Prologue.
IOS and Smyrna were two sweet Cytties, the first named of the Violet, the
latter of the Myrrh: Homer was borne in the one, and buried in the other; Your
Majesty's judgment and favor, are our Sun and shadow, the one coming of
your deep wisdom, the other of your wonted grace. We in all humility
desire, that by the former, receiving our first breath, we may in the latter,
take our last rest.

Augustus Caesar had such pearcing eyes, that who so looked on him, was
constrained to wincke. Your highness has so perfect a judgment, that what
soever we offer, we are enforced to blush; yet as the Athenians were most
curious, that the Lawne wherewith Minerua was covered, should be without spotte
or wrinkle, So have we endeavored with all care, that what we present your
Highness, should neither offend in Scaene nor syllable, knowing that as in
the ground where Gold grows, nothing will prosper but Gold, so in your
Maiestes mind, where nothing does harbor but virtue, nothing can enter but
virtue.

GALLATHEA.
Actus primus.
Scaena prima.
Tyterus. Gallathea. Tyterus. THE Sun does beat upon the plain fields,
wherefore let us sit down Gallathea, under this fair Oak, by whose broad
leaves, being defended from the warm beams, we may enjoy the fresh air,
which softly breathes from Humber floodes.


Galla. Father, you have devised well, and whilst our flock does roame up and
down this pleasant green, you shall recount to me, if it please you, for
what cause this Tree was dedicated unto Neptune, and why you have thus
disguised me.


Tyterus I do agree thereto, and when thy state and my care be considered,
thou shall know this question was not asked in vain.


Gallathea I willingly attend.


Tyterus In times past, where thou see a heap of small pyble, stood a
stately Temple of white Marble, which was dedicated to the God of the Sea, (and
in right being so near the Sea) hither came all such as either ventured by
long travel to see Countries, or by great traffic to use merchandise,
offering Sacrifice by fire, to get safety by water; yielding thanks for
perrils past, and making prayers for good success to come; but Fortune,
constant in nothing but inconstancy, did change her copy, as the people their
custom, for the Land being oppressed by Danes, who in steed of sacrifice,
committed sacrilidge, in steed of religion, rebellion, and made a pray of that
in which they should have made their prayers, tearing down the Temple even
with the earth, being almost equal with the skies, enraged so the God who
binds the winds in the hollowes of the earth, that he caused the Seas to
break their bounds, since men had broke their vows, and to swell as far
above their reach, as men had swarued beyond their reason: then might you see
ships sail where sheep fed, ankers cast where ploughes go, fishermen
throw their nets, where husbandmen sow their Corn, and fishes throw their
scales where fowls do breed their quils: then might you gather froth where
now is dew, rotten weeds for sweet roses, and take view of monstrous
Maremaides, instead of passing fair Maids.


Galla. To hear these sweet maruailes, I would mine eyes were turned also
into ears.


Tyte. But at the last, our Countrymen repenting, and not too late, because at
last, Neptune either weary of his wroth, or wary to do them wrong, upon
condition consented to ease their miseries.


Galla. What condition will not miserable men accept?


Tyte. The condition was this, that at every five years day, the fairest and
chastest virgin in all the Country, should be brought unto this Tree, and
here being bound, (whom neither parentage shall excuse for honor, nor virtue
for entegrity) is left for a peace offering unto Neptune.


Galla. Dear is the peace that is bought with guiltless blood.


Tyte. I am not able to say that, but he sends a Monster called the Agar,
against whose coming the waters rore, the fowls fly away, and the Cattle in
the field for terror, shun the banks.


Galla. And she bound to endure that horror?


Tyte. And she bound to endure that horror.


Galla. Does this Monster devour her?


Tyte. Whether she be devoured of him, or conveyed to Neptune, or drowned
between both, it is not permitted to know, and encurreth danger to conjecture;
Now Gallathea here ends my tale, and begins thy tragedy.


Galla. Alas father, and why so?


Tyte. I would thou had been less fair, or more fortunate, then should
thou not repine that I have disguised thee in this attire, for thy beauty will
make thee to be thought worthy of this God; to avoid therefore desteny (for
wisdom rules the stars) I think it better to use an unlawful means (your
honor preserved) then intolerable grief, both life and honor hazarded, and
to prevent (if it be possible) thy constellation by my craft. Now have thou
heard the custom of this Country, the cause why this Tree was dedicated unto
Neptune, and the vexing care of thy fearful Father.


Galla. Father, I have been attentive to hear, and by your patience am ready
to answer. Destenie may be deferred, not prevented; and therefore it were
better to offer my self in triumph, then to be drawn to it with dishonor.
Has nature (as you say) made me so fair above all, and shall not virtue make
me as famous as others? Do you not know, (or does ouercarefulnes make you
forget) that an honorable death is to be preferred before an infamous life. I
am but a child, and have not lived long, and yet not so childish, as I desire
to live ever: virtues I mean to carry to my grave, not gray hairs. I would I
were as sure that destiny would light on me, as I am resolved it could not
fear me. Nature has given me beauty, Virtue courage, Nature must yield me
death, Virtue honor. Suffer me therefore to die, for which I was borne, or let
me curse that I was borne, since I may not die for it.


Tyte. Alas Gallathea, to consider the causes of change, thou art too young,
and that I should find them out for thee, too too fortunate.


Galla. The destenie to me cannot be so hard as the disguising hateful.


Tyte. To gain love, the Gods have taken shapes of beasts, and to save life
art thou coy to take the attire of men?


Galla. They were beastly gods, that lust could make them seem as beasts.


Tyte. In health it is easy to counsel the sick, but it is hard for the sick
to follow wholesome counsel. Well let us depart, the day is far spent.


Exeunt. Actus primus. Scaena secunda.
Cupid, Nymph of Diana. Cupid. Fair Nimphe, are you strayed from your company
by chance, or love you to wander solitarily on purpose?


Nymph. Fair boy, or god, or what ever you be, I would you knew these woods
are to me so well known, that I cannot stray though I would, and my mind so
free, that to be melancholy I have no cause. There is none of Dianaes train
that any can train, either out of their way, or out of their wits.


Cupid. What is that Diana a goddess? what her Nymphs virgins? what her
pastimes hunting?


Nymph A goddess? who knows it not? Virgins? who thinks it not? Hunting? who
loves it not?


Cupid I pray thee sweet wench, amongst all your sweet troop, is there not
one that follows the sweetest thing. Sweet love?


Nymph Love good sir, what mean you by it? or what do you call it?


Cupid A heat full of coldness, a sweet full of bitterness, a pain full of
pleasantness, which makes thoughts have eyes, and hearts ears, bred by
desire, nursed by delight, weaned by jealousy, killed by dissembling, buried by
ingratitude, and this is love, fair Lady will you any?


Nymph If it be nothing else, it is but a foolish thing.


Cupid Try, and you shall find it a pretty thing.


Nymph I have neither will nor leisure, but I will follow Diana in the Chase,
whose virgins are all chaste, delighting in the bow that wounds the swift Heart
in the Forest, not fearing the bow that strikes the soft heart in the
Chamber. This difference is between my Mistress Diana, and your Mother (as I
guess) Venus, that all her Nymphs are amiable and wise in their kind, the
other amorous and too kind for their sex; and so farewell little god.


Exit. Cupid Diana, and thou, and all thine, shall know that Cupid is a great
god, I will practice a while in these woods, and play such pranckes with these
Nymphs, that while they aim to hit others with their Arrows, they shall be
wounded themselves with their own eyes.


Exit. Actus primus. Scaena tertia.
Melebeus. Phillida. Meleb. Come Phillida, fair Phillida, and I fear me too
fair being my Phillida, thou know the custom of this Country, and I the
greatness of thy beauty, we both the fierceness of the monster Agar. Every
one thinks his own child fair, but I know that which I most desire, and
would least have, that thou art fairest. Thou shall therefore disguise thy
self in attire, least I should disguise my self in affection, in suffering
thee to perrish by a fond desire, whom I may preserve by a sure deceit.


Phil. Dear father, Nature could not make me so fair as she has made you
kind, nor you more kind then me dutiful. What soever you command I will
not refuse, because you command nothing but my safety, and your happiness.
But how shall I be disguised?


Mele. In man's apparel.


Phil. It will neither become my body, nor my mind.


Mele. Why Phillida?


Philli. For then I must keep company with boys, and commit follies
unseemly for my sex, or keep company with girls, and be thought more
wanton then becomes me. Besides, I shall be ashamed of my long hose and short
coat, and so vnwarelie blabbe out something by blushing at every thing.


Mele. Fear not Phillida, use will make it easy, fear must make it
necessary.


Philli. I agree, since my father will have it so, and fortune must.


Mele. Come let us in, and when thou art disguised, roame about these woods
till the time be past, and Neptune pleased.


Exeunt. Actus primus. Scaena quarta.
Mariner, Raffe, Robin, and Dicke. Rob. Now Mariner, what call thou this
sport on the Sea?


Mar. It is called a wrack.


Raffe. I take no pleasure in it. Of all deaths I would not be drowned, ones
clothes will be so wet when he is taken up.


Dicke What calst thou the thing we were bound to?


Mar. A raughter.


Raffe. I will rather hang my self on a raughter in the house, then be so
haled in the Sea, there one may have a leap for his life; but I marvel how
our Master speedes.


Dicke I Will warrant by this time he is wetshod. Did you ever see water buble as
the Sea did? But what shall we do?


Mar. You are now in Lyncolnshire, where you can want no foul, if you can
devise means to catch them, there be woods hard by, and at every miles end
houses: so that if you seek on the Land, you shall speed better then on the
Sea.


Rob. Sea, nay I will never sail more, I brook not their diet: their bread is
so hard, that one must carry a whetstone in his mouth to grind his teeth: the
meat so salt, that one would think after dinner his tongue had been powdered
ten days.


Raffe O thou have a sweet life Mariner to be pinde in a few boordes, and to be
within an inche of a thing bottomless. I pray thee how often have thou been
drowned?


Mar. Fool thou see I am yet alive.


Rob. Why be they dead that be drowned, I had thought they had been with the
fish, and so by chance been caught up with them in a Net again. It were a
shame a little cold water should kill a man of reason, when you shall see a
poor Mynow lie in it, that has no understanding.


Mar. Thou art wise from the crown of thy head upwards; seek you new
fortunes now, I will follow mine old. I can shift the Moon and the Sun,
and know by one Card, what all you cannot do by a whole pair. The Lode-stone
that always holds his nose to the North, the two and thirty points for the
wind, the wonders I see would make all you blind: you be but boys, I fear
the Sea no more then a dish of water. Why fools it is but a liquid element,
farewell.


Rob. It were good we learned his cunning at the Cards, for we must live by
cosenage, we have neither Lands nor wit, nor Masters, nor honesty.


Rafe Nay I would feign have his thirty two, that is, his three dozen lacking
four points, for you see betwixt us three there is not two good points.


Dicke Let us call him a little back that we may learn those points. Sir a
word, I pray thee show us thy points.


Mar. Will you learn?


Dicke. I.


Mar. Then as you like this I will instruct you in all our secrets: for there
is not a clowte nor card, nor board, nor post, that has not a special name,
or singular nature.


Dicke Well begin with your points, for I lack only points in this world.


Mar. North. North and by East. North North East. North-east and by North,
North-east. North-east and by East. East North-east, East and by North. East.


Dicke I Will say it, North, north-east, North-east, Nore nore and by Nore-east. I
shall never do it.


Mar. This is but one quarter.


Rob. I shall never learn a quarter of it. I will try. North, North-east, is
by the West side, North and by North.


Dicke Passing ill.


Mar. Have thou no memory. Try thou.


Rafe North North and by North. I can go no further.


Mar. O dullerde, is thy head lighter then the wind, and thy tongue so heavy
it will not wagge. I will once again say it.


Rafe I will never learn this language, it will get but small living, when it
will scarce be learned till one be old.


Mar. Nay then farewell, and if your fortunes exceed not your wits, you shall
starve before ye sleep.


Rafe Was there ever such cosening? Come let us to the woods, and see what
fortune we may have before they be made ships: as for our Master he is
drowned.


Dicke I will this way.


Robin I this.


Rafe I this, and this day twelue-month let us all meet here again: it may
be we shall either beg together, or hang together.


Dicke It skils not so we be together. But let us sing now, though we cry
hereafter. Exeunt.


Actus secundus*
Scaena prima.
Gallathea alone. Galla. BLush Gallathea that must frame thy affection fit
for thy habit, and therefore be thought immodest, because thou art
unfortunate. Thy tender years cannot dissemble this deceit: nor thy sex
bear it. O would the gods had made me as I seem to be, or that I might
safely be what I seem not. Thy Father doteth Gallathea, whose blind love
corrupts his fond judgment, and jealous of thy death, seems to dote on
thy beauty, whose fond care carries his parciall eye as far from truth, as
his heart is from falsehood. But why do thou blame him or blab what thou art,
when thou should only counterfeit what thou art not. But whist, here
comes a ladde: I will learn of him how to behave my self.


Enter Phillida in man's attire. Philli. I neither like my gate, nor my
garments, the one untoward, the other unfit, both unseemly. O Phillida, but
yonder staieth one, and therefore say nothing. But o Phillida.


Galla. I perceive that boys are in as great disliking of themselves as
maids, therefore though I wear the apparel, I am glad I am not the person.


Philli. It is a pretty boy and a fair, he might well have been a woman, but
because he is not, I am glad I am, for now under the color of my coat, I
shall decipher the follies of their kind.


Galla. I would salute him, but I fear I should make a curtsie in steed of a
leg.


Philli. If I durst trust my face as well as I do my habit, I would spend
some time to make pastime, for say what they will of a man's wit, it is no
second thing to be a woman.


Galla. All the blood in my body would be in my face, if he should ask me (as
the question among men is common) are you a maid?


Phil. Why stand I still, boys should be bold, but here comes a brave
train that will spill all our talk.


Enter Diana, Telusa, and Eurata. Diana God speed fair boy.


Galla. You are deceived Lady.


Diana Why, are you no boy?


Galla. No fair boy.


Diana But I see an unhappy boy.


Telusa. Saw you not the Dear come this way, he flewe down the wind, and I
believe you have blancht him.


Galla. Whose Dear was it Lady?


Telusa. Dianaes Dear.


Galla. I saw none but mine own Dear.


Telusa This wagge is wanton or a fool, ask the other, Diana.


Galla. I know not how it comes to pass, but yonder boy is in mine eye too
beautiful, I pray gods the Ladies think him not their Dear.


Diana Pretty lad, do your sheep feed in the Forest, or are you straied
from you flock, or on purpose come ye to mar Dianaes pastime?


Phillida I understand not one word you speak.


Diana What art thou neither Ladde nor sheepehearde?


Phill. My mother said I could be no ladde til I was twenty year old, nor
keep sheep till I could tell them; and therefore Lady neither lad nor
sheephearde is here.


Telusa These boys are both agreed, either they are very pleasant or too
perverse: you were best Lady make them tuske these VVoodes, whilst we stand
with our bows, and so use them as Beagles since they have so good mouths.


Diana I will. Follow me without delaie, or excuse, and if you can do nothing,
yet shall you hallow the Dear.


Phill. I am willing to go, not for these Ladies c^panie, because my self am
a virgin, but for that fair boys favor, who I think be a God.


Diana. You sir boy shall also go.


Galla. I must if you command, and would if you had not. Exeunt.


Actus secundus. Scaena secunda.
Cupid alone in Nymphs apparel, and Neptune lystening. Cupid Now Cupid,
under the shape of a silly girl show the power of a mighty God. Let Diana
and all her coy Nymphs know, that there is no heart so chaste but thy bow can
wound, nor eyes so modest, but thy brandes can kindle, nor thoughts so stayed,
but thy shafts can make wavering, weak and wanton: Cupid though he be a child,
is no babie. I will make their pains my pastimes, and so confound their loves
in their own sex, that they shall dote in their desires, delight in their
affections, and practice only impossibilities. Whilst I trewant from my
mother, I will use some tyranny in these woods, and so shall their exercise in
foolish love, be my excuse for running away. I will see whither fair faces be
always chaste, or Dianaes virgins only modest, else will I spend both my
shafts and shyfts, and then Ladies if you see these dainty Dames intrapt in
love, say softly to your selves, we may all love.


Exit. Neptune. Do silly Sheepeheards go about to deceive great Neptune, in
putting on man's attire upon women: and Cupid to make sport deceive them all,
by using a vvomans apparel upon a God, then Neptune that have taken sundry
shapes to obtain love, stick not to practice some deceit to show thy deity,
and having often thrust thy self into the shape of beasts to deceive men be
not coy to use the shape of a Sheepehearde, to show thy self a God. Neptune
cannot be ouer-reached by Swains, himself is subtle, and if Diana be
overtaken by craft, Cupid is wise. I will into these woods and mark all, and
in the end will mar all. Exit.


Actus secundus. Scaena tertia.
Enter Raffe alone. Rafe Call you this seeking of fortunes when one can find
nothing but byrds nestes? would I were out of these VVoodes, for I shall have
but wodden luck, heers nothing but the skreeking of Owls, croking of Frogs,
hissing of Adders, barking of Foxes, walking of Hagges. But what be these?

Enter Fayries dancing and playing and so, Exeunt. I will follow them, to hell
I shall not go, for so fair faces never can have such hard fortunes. What
black boy is this.


Enter the Alcumists boy Peter. Peter What a life do I lead with my Master
nothing but blowing of bellows, beating of spirits, and scraping of Croslets?
it is a very secret Science, for none almost can understand the language of
it. Sublimation, Almigation, Calcination, Rubification, Encorporation,
Circination, Sementation, Albification, and Frementation. With as many terms
impossible to be uttered, as the Art to be compassed.


Raffe Let me cross my self, I never heard so many great devils in a little
Monkies mouth.


Peter Then our instruments, Croslets, Subliuatories, Cucurbits, Limbecks,
Decensores, Violes, manual and murall, for enbibing and conbibing, Bellows,
molificatiue and enduratiue.


Rafe What language is this? do they speak so?


Peter Then our Mettles, Saltpeeter, Vitrioll, Sal tartar, Sal perperat, Argon,
Resagar, Sal Armonick, Egrimony, Lumany, Brimstone, Valerian, Tartar Alam,
Breeme-worte, Glass, Vnsleked lyme, Chalk, Ashes, hair; and what not, to
make I know not what.


Rafe My hair begins to stand upright, would the boy would make an end.


Peter And yet such a beggarly Science it is, and so strong on multiplication,
that the end is to have neither gold, wit, nor honesty.


Rafe Then am I just of thy occupation. What fellow, well met.


Peter Fellow, upon what acquaintance?


Rafe Why thou say, the end of thy occupation is to have neither wit, money,
nor honesty: and me thinks at a blush, thou should be one of my occupation.


Peter Thou art deceived, my Master is an Alcumist.


Rafe What Is that, a man?


Peter A little more then a man, and a hayres breadth less then a God. He can
make of thy cap gold, and by multiplication of one grote, three old Angels. I
have known him of the tagge of a point, to make a silver boole of a pint.


Rafe That makes thee have never a point, they be al turned to pots: but if he
can do this, he shall be a god altogether.


Peter If thou have any gold to work on, thou art then made for ever: for with
one pound of gold, he will go near to paue ten Akers of ground.


Rafe How might a man serve him and learn his cunning?


Peter Easily. First seem to understand the terms, and specially mark
these points. In our Art there are four Spirits.


Rafe Nay I have done if you work with devils.


Peter Thou art gross; we call those Spirits that are the grounds of our Art,
and as it were the mettles more incorporatiue for domination. The first Spirit
is Quicksilver.


Rafe That is my Spirit, for my silver is so quick; that I have much a do to
catch it, and when I have it, it is so nimble that I cannot hold it; I thought
there was a devil in it.


Peter The second, Orpyment.


Rafe That's no Spirit, but a word to conjure a Spirit.


Peter The third, Sal Armoniack.


Rafe A propper word.


Peter The fourth, Brimstone.


Rafe That's a stinking Spirit, I thought there was some spirit in it because
it burnt so blew. For my Mother would often tell me that when the candle burnt
blew, there was some ill Spirit in the house, and now I perceive it was the
spirit Brimstone.


Peter Thou cast remember these four spirits.


Rafe Let me alone to conjure them.


Peter Now are there also seven bodies, but here comes my Master.


Enter Alcumist. Rafe This is a beggar.


Peter No, such cunning men must disguise themselves, as though there were
nothing in them for otherwise they shall be compelled to work for Princes, and
so be constrained to bewray their secrets.


Rafe I like not his attire, but am enamored of his Art.


Alcumist An ounce of Silver limde, as much of crude Mercury, of Spirits four,
being tempered with the bodies seven, by multiplying of it ten times, comes
for one pound, eight thousand pounds, so that I may have only Beechen coals.


Rafe Is it possible?


Peter It is more certain then certainty.


Rafe I Will tell thee one secret, I stole a silver thimble; do thou think
that he will make it a pottle pot?


Peter A pottle pot, nay I dare warrant it a whole Cupbord of plate: why of the
quintessence of a leaden plummet, he has framed xx, dozen of silver Spoones.
Look how he studies, I durst venture my life he is now casting about, how
of his breath he may make golden braselets, for oftentimes of smoke he has
made silver drops.


Rafe What do I hear?


Peter Dydst thou never hear how Jupiter came in a golden shower to Danae?


Rafe I remember that tale.


Pet. That shower did my Master make of a spoonefull of Tartar-alom, but with
the fire of blood, and the corasiue of the air, he is able to make nothing
infinite, but whist he espieth us.


Alcum. What Peter do you loyter, knowing that every minute increases our
Mine?


Peter I was glad to take air, for the mettle came so fast, that I feared my
face would have been turned to silver.


Alcum. But what stripling is this?


Peter One that is desirous to learn your craft.


Alcum. Craft sir boy, you must call it mystery.


Rafe All is one, a crafty mystery, and a mystical craft.


Alcum. Can thou take pains?


Rafe Infinite.


Alcum. But thou must be sworn to be secret, and then I will entertain thee.


Rafe I can swear though I be a poor fellow as well as the best man in the
Shyre. But Sir I much marvel that you being so cunning, should be so ragged.


Alcu. O my child, Gryphes make their nestes of gold though their coats are
feathers, and we fether our nestes with Diamonds, though our garments be but
frize. If thou knew the secret of this Science, the cunning would make thee
so proud that thou would disdain the outward pomp.


Peter My Master is so ravished with his Art, that we many times go
supperlesse to bed, for he will make gold of his bread, and such is the drouth
of his desire, that we all wish our very guts were gold.


Rafe I have good fortune to light upon such a Master.


Alcum. When in the depth of my skill I determine to try the uttermost of mine
Art, I am dissuaded by the gods, otherwise, I durst undertake to make the fire
as it flames, gold, the wind as it blows, silver, the water as it runs,
lead, the earth as it stands, iron, the sky, brass, and men's thoughts, firm
mettles.


Rafe I must bless my self, and marvel at you.


Alcum. Come in, and thou shall see all. Exit.


Rafe I follow, I run, I fly; they say my Father has a golden thumb, you
shall see me have a golden body. Exit.


Peter I am glad of this, for now I shall have leisure to run away; such a
bald Art as never was, let him keep his new man, for he shall never see his
old again; God shield me from blowing gold to nothing, with a strong
imagination to make nothing any thing.


Exit. Actus secundus. Scaena quarta.
Gallathea alone. Galla. How now Gallathea? miserable Gallathea, that having
put on the apparel of a boy, thou can also put on the mind. O fair
Melebeus, I too fair, and therefore I fear, too proud. Had it not been
better for thee to have been a sacrifice to Neptune, then a slave to Cupid? to
die for thy Country, then to live I thy fancy? to be a sacrifice, then a
Lover? O would when I hunted his eye with my heart, he might have seen my
heart with his eyes. Why did Nature to him a boy give a face so fair, or to me
a virgin a fortune so ^^^d? I will now use for the distaffe the bow, and play
at quaites abroad, that was wont to sow i^ my Sampler at home. It may be
Gallathea, foolish Gallathea, what may be? nothing. Let me follow him into
the Woods, and thou sweet Venus be my guide.


Exit. Actus secundus. Scaena quinta.
Enter Phillida alone. Philli. Poor Phillida, curse the time of thy birth and
rarenes of thy beauty, the unaptness of thy apparel, and the vntamednes of thy
affections. Art thou no sooner in the habit of a boy, but thou must be
enamored of a boy, what shall thou do when what best lyketh thee, most
discontenteth thee? Go into the Woods, watch the good times, his best moodes,
and transgress in love a little of thy modesty, I will, I dare not, thou
must, I cannot. Then pine in thine own peeuishnes. I will not, I will. Ah
Phillida do something, nay any thing rather then live thus. Well, what I will
do, my self knows not, but what I ought I know too well, and so I go
resolute, either to bewray my love, or suffer shame.


Exit. Actus tertius.
Scaena prima.
Telusa alone. Telusa How now? what new conceits, what strange contraries
breed in thy mind? is thy Diana become a Venus, thy chaste thoughts turned to
wanton looks, thy conquering modesty to a captive imagination? Beginnest thou
with Piralis to die in the air and live in the fire, to leave the sweet
delight of hunting, and to follow the hot desire of love? O Telusa, these
words are unfit for thy sex being a virgin, but apt for thy affections being
a Lover. And can there in years so young, in education so precise, in vows so
holy, and in a heart so chaste, enter either a strong desire, or a wish, or a
wavering thought of love? Can Cupids brands quench Vestas flames, and his
feeble shafts headed with feathers, pearce deeper the Dianaes arrows headed
with steel? Break thy bow Telusa that seek to break thy vow, and let
those hands that aimed to hit the wild Heart, scratche out those eyes that have
wounded thy tame heart. O vain and only naked name of Chastity, that is made
eternal, and perish by time: holy, and is infected by fancy: divine, and is
made mortal by folly. Virgins hearts I perceive are not unlike Cotton trees,
whose fruit is so hard in the budde, that it sounds like steel, and being
ripe, pours forth nothing but wool, and their thoughts like the leaves of
Lunary, which the further they grow from the Sun, the sooner they are
scorched with his beams. O Melebeus, because thou art fair, must I be fickle,
and false my vow because I see thy virtue? Fond gyrle that I am to think of
love, nay vain profession that I follow to disdain love, but here comes
Eurota, I must now put on a red mask and blushe, least she perceive my pale
face and laugh.


Enter Eurota Eurota Telusa, Diana bid me hunt you out, and says that you care
not to hunt with her, but if you follow any other Game then she has rowsd,
your punishment shall be to bend all our bows, and weaue al our strings. Why
look ye so pale, so sad, so wildly.


Telusa Eurota the Game I follow is the thing I fly: my strange disease my
chief desire.


Eurota I am no Oedipus to expound riddles, and I muse how thou can be Sphinx
to utter them. But I pray thee Telusa tell me what thou aylest, if thou be
sick, this ground has leaves to heal: if melancholy, here are pastimes to
use: if peevish, wit must weane it, or time, or counsel. If thou be in love
(for I have heard of such a beast called love) it shall be cured, why blushest
thou Telusa?


Telusa To hear thee in reckoning my pains to recite thine own. I saw Eurota
how amorouslie you glaunced your eye on the fair boy in the white coat, and
how cunningly (now that you would have some talk of love) you hit me in the
teeth with love.


Eurota I confess that I am in love, and yet swear that I know not what it
is. I feel my thoughts unknit, mine eyes unstaid, my heart I know not how
affected, or infected, my sleeps broken and full of dreams, my wakenesse sad
and full of sighs, my self in all things unlike my self. If this be love, I
would it had never been devised.


Telusa Thou have told what I am in uttering what thy self is: these are my
passions Eurota my unbridled passions, my intolerable passions, which I were
as good acknowledge and crave counsel, as to deny and endure peril.


Eurota How did it take you first Telusa?


Telusa By the eyes, my wanton eyes which conceived the picture of his face,
and hanged it on the very strings of my heart. O fair Melebeus, o fond Telusa,
but how did it take you Eurota?


Eurota By the ears, whose sweet words suncke so deep into my head, that the
remembrance of his wit, has bereaved me of my wisdom, o eloquent Tyterus, o
credulous Eurota. But soft here comes Ramia, but let her not hear us talk,
we will withdraw our selves, and hear her talk.


Enter Ramia. Ramia I am sent to seek others that have lost my self.


Eurota You shall see Ramia has also bitten on a love leaf.


Ramia Can there be no heart so chaste, but love can wound? nor vows so holy
but affection can violate. Vain art thou virtue, and thou chastity but a by
word, when you both are subject to love, of all things the most abject. If
Love be a God, why should not lovers be virtuous? Love is a God, and Lovers are
virtuous.


Eurota Indeed Ramia, if Lovers were not virtuous, then were thou vicious.


Ramia What are you come so near me?


Telusa I think we came near you when we said you loved.


Eurota Tush Ramia, it is too late to recall it, to repent it a shame: therefore I
pray thee tell what is love?


Ramia If my self felt only this infection, I would then take upon me the
definition, but being incident to so many, I dare not my self describe it,
but we will all talk of that in the Woods. Diana stormeth that sending one to
seek another, she loses all. Seruia of all the Nymphs the coyest, loves
deadly, and exclaimeth claims against Diana, honors Venus, detesteth
Vesta, and makes a common scorn of virtue. Clymene, whose stately looks
seemed to amaze the greatest Lords, stoopeth, yields, and fauneth on the
strange boy in the Woods. My self (with blushing I speak it) am thrall to that
boy, that fair boy, that beautiful boy.


Telusa What have we here, all in love? no other food then fancy; no no,
she shall not have the fair boy.


Eurota Nor you Telusa.


Ramia Nor you Eurota.


Telusa I love Melebeus, and my deserts shall be aunswerable to my desires. I
will forsake Diana for him. I will die for him.


Ramia So says Clymene, and she will have Him. I care not, my sweet Tyterus
though he seem proud, I impute it to childishnes: who being yet scarce out
of his swath-clowtes, cannot understand these deep conceits; I love him.


Eurota So do I, and I will have him.


Telusa Immodest all that we are, unfortunate all that we are like to be;
shall virgins begin to wrangle for love, and become wanton in their thoughts,
in their words, in their actions. O divine Love, which art therefore called
divine, because thou ouer-reachest the wisest, conquerest the chastest, and
do all things both unlikely and impossible, because thou art Love. Thou
make the bashful impudent, the wise fond, the chaste wanton, and workest
contraries to our reach, because thy self is beyond reason.


Eurota Talk no more Telusa, your words wound. Ah would I were no woman.


Ramia Would Tyterus were no boy.


Telusa Would Telusa were no body. Exeunt


Actus tertius. Scaena secunda.
Phillida and Gallathea. Phil. It is pity that Nature framed you not a woman
having a face so fair, so lovely a countenance, so modest a behavior.


Galla. There is a Tree in Tylos, whose nuttes have shells like fire, and being
cracked, the karnell is but water.


Phil. What a toy is it to tell me of that tree, being nothing to the
purpose: I say it is pity you are not a woman.


Galla. I would not wish to be a woman, unless it were because thou art a man.


Phil. Nay I do not wish to be woman, for then I should not love thee, for I
have sworn never to love a woman.


Galla. A strange humor in so pretty a youth, and according to mine, for my
self will never love a woman.


Philli. It were a shame if a maiden should be a suter, (a thing hated in that
sex) that thou should deny to be her servant.


Galla. If it be a shame in me, it can be no commendation in you, for your
self is of that mind.


Philli. Suppose I were a virgin (I blush in supposing my self one) and that
under the habit of a boy were the person of a maid, if I should utter my
affection with sighs, manifest my sweet love by my salt tears, and prove my
loyalty unspotted, and my griefs intolerable, would not then that fair
face, pity this true heart?


Galla. Admit that I were, as you would have me suppose that you are, and
that I should with entreaties, prayers, oaths, bribes, and what ever can be
invented in love, desire your favor, would you not yield?


Philli. Trush you come in with admit.


Galla. And you with suppose.


Philli. What doubtful speeches be these? I fear me he is as I am, a maiden.


Galla. What dread rises in my mind, I fear the boy to be as I am a maiden.


Philli. Tush it cannot be, his voice shows the contrary.


Galla. Yet I do not think it, for he would then have blushed.


Phill. Have you ever a Sister?


Galla. If I had but one my brother must needs have two, but I pray have you
ever a one?


Philli. My Father had but one daughter, and therefore I could have no sister.


Galla. Aye me, he is as I am, for his speeches be as mine are.


Philli. What shall I do, either he is subtle or my sex simple.


Galla. I have known diverse of Dianaes Nymphs enamored of him, yet has he
rejected all, either as too proud to disdain, or too childish not to
understand, or for that he knows himself to he a Virgin.


Phill. I am in a quandarie, Dianaes Nymphs have followed him, and he despised
them, either knowing too well the beauty of his own face, or that himself is
of the same moulde. I will once again try him. You promised me in the woods,
that you would love me before all Dianaes Nymphs.


Galla. I, so you would love me before all Dianaes Nymphs.


Philli. Can you prefer a fond boy as I am, before so fair Ladies as they
are.


Galla. Why should not I as well as you?


Phillida Come let us into the Grove, and make much one of another, that cannot
tell what to think one of another.


Exeunt. Actus tertius. Scaena tertia.
Alcumist. Rafe. Alcum. Rafe, my boy is run away, I trust thou will not run
after.


Rafe I would I had a pair of wings that I might fly after.


Alcum. My boy was the veriest these, the arantest liar, and the vildest
swearer in the world, otherwise the best boy in the world, he has stolen my
apparel, all my money, and forgot nothing but to bid me farewell.


Rafe That will not I forget, farewell Master.


Alcum. Why thou have not yet seen the end of my Art.


Rafe I would I had not known the beginning. Did not you promise me, of my
silver thimble to make a whole cupboord of plate, and that of a Spanish needle
you would build a silver steeple?


Alcum. I Rafe, the fortune of this Art consists in the measure of the fire,
for if there be a cole too much, or a spark too little, if it be a little too
hot, or a thought too soft, all our labor is in vain; besides, they that
blow, must beat time with their breathes, as Musicions do with their
breasts, so as there must be of the metals, the fire and workers a very
harmony.


Rafe Nay if you must weigh your fire by ounces, and take measure of a man's
blast, you may then make of a dram of wind a wedge of gold, and of the
shadow of one shilling make another, so as you have an Organist to tune your
temperatures.


Alcum. So is it, and often does it happen, that the just proportion of the
fire and all things concur.


Rafe Concur, condogge. I will away.


Alcum. Then away.


Exit Alcumist. Enter Astronomer. Rafe An art quoth you, that one multiplieth
so much all day, that he wants money to buy meat at night? But what have we
yonder? what devout man? he will never speak till he be urged. I will salute
him. Sir, there lies a purse under your feet, if I thought it were not yours,
I would take it up.


Astron. Do thou not know that I was calculating the nativity of Alexanders
great horse?


Rafe Why what are you?


Astron. An Astronomer.


Rafe What one of those that makes Almanacks.


Astro. Ipsissimus. I can tell the minute of thy birth, the moment of thy
death, and the manner. I can tell thee what wether shall be between this and
Octogessimus octauus mirabilis annus. When I list I can set a trap for the
Sun, catch the Moon with lyme-twigges, and go a batfowling for stars. I
can tell thee things past, and things to come, and with my cunning, measure how
many yards of Clouds are beneath the Sky. Nothing can happen which I foresee
not, nothing shall.


Rafe I hope sir you are no more then a God.


Astron. I can bring the twelve signs out of their Zodiacks, and hang them up
at Tauerns.


Rafe I pray you sir tell me what you cannot do, for I perceive there is
nothing so easy for you to compass as impossibilities. But what be those
signs?


Astro. As a man should say, signs which govern the body. The Ram governs
the head.


Rafe That is the worst sign for the head.


Astro. Why?


Rafe Because it is a sign of an ill Ewe.


Astron. Tush, that sign must be there. Then the Bull for the throat,
Capricornus for the knees.


Rafe I will hear no more signs, if they be all such desperate signs: but
seeing you are, (I know not who to term you) shall I serve you? I would feign
serve.


Astron. I accept thee.


Rafe. Happy am I, for now shall I reach thoughts, and tell how many drops of
water goes to the greatest shower of rain. You shall see me catch the Moon in
the clips like a Conny in a pursnet.


Astro. I will teach thee the Golden number, the Epact, and the Prime.


Rafe I will meddle no more with numbering of gold, for multiplication is a
miserable action; I pray sir what wether shall we have this hour threescore
year?


Astro. That I must cast by our Judicials Astronomicall, therefore come in with
me, and thou shall see every wrinkle of my Astrologicall wisdom, and I will
make the Heavens as plain to thee as the high way, thy cunning shall sit
cheek by iole with the Suns Chariot; then shall thou see what a base thing
it is, to have others thoughts creep on the ground, when as thine shall be
stitched to the stars.


Rafe Then I shall be translated from this mortality.


Astro. Thy thoughts shall be metamorphosed, and made hail fellows with the
Gods.


Rafe O fortune. I feel my very brains moralized, and as it were a certain
contempt of earthly actions is crept into my mind, by an etheriall
contemplation. Come let us in.

Exeunt.
Actus tertius. Scaena quarta.
Diana, Telusa, Eurota, Ramia, Larissa. Diana What news have we here Ladies,
are all in love? are Dianaes Nymphs become Venus wantons? is it a shame to be
chaste, because you be amiable? or must you needs be amorous, because you are
fair? O Venus, if this be thy spite, I will require it with more then hate,
well shall thou know what it is to drib thine arrows up and down Dianaes
leies. There is an unknown Nymph that straggleth up and down these woods,
which I suspect has been the weauer of these woes, I saw her slumbring by the
brook side, go search her and bring her, if you find upon her shoulder a
burn, it is Cupid: if any print on her back like a leaf, it is Medea: if any
picture on her left breast like a bird, it is Calipso; who ever it be, bring
her hither, and speedily bring her hither.


Telusa I will go with speed.


Diana Go you Larissa and help her.


Lurissa I obey.


Diana Now Ladies, does not that make your cheeks blushe, that makes mine
ears glowe? or can you remember that without sobs, which Diana can not think
on without sighs? What greater dishonor could happen to Diana, or to her
Nymphs shame, then that there can be any time so idle, that should make their
heads so addle? Your chaste hearts my Nymphs, should resemble the Onix, which is
hotest when it is whitest, and your thoughts, the more they are assaulted with
desires, the less they should be affected. You should think love like Homers
Moly, a white leaf and a black root, a fair show, and a bitter taste. Of
all Trees the Cedar is greatest, and has the smallest seeds: of all
affections, love has the greatest name, and the least virtue. Shall it be
said, and shall Venus say it? nay shall it be seen, and shall wantons see it?
that Diana the goddess of chastity, whose thoughts are always answerable to
her vows, whose eyes never glanced on desire, and whose heart abateth the point
of Cupids arrows, shall have her virgins to become unchaste in desires,
immoderate in affection, intemperate in love, in foolish love, in base love.
Eagles cast their evil feathers in the Sun, but you cast your best desires
upon a shadow. The birds Ibes lose their sweetness when they lose their
sights, and virgins all their virtues with their unchaste thoughts, unchaste,
Diana calls that, that has either any show or suspicion of lightness. O my
dear Nymphs, if you knew how loving thoughts stain lovely faces, you
would be as careful to have the one as unspotted as the other beautiful.

Cast before your eyes the loves of Venus truls, their fortunes, their fancies,
their ends. What are they else but Silenus pictures, without, Lambs and Doves,
with in, Apes, and Owls, who like Ixion embrace clouds for Juno, the shadows
of virtue in steed of the substance. The Eagles feathers consume the feathers of
all others, and loves desire corrupts all other virtues. I blush Ladies that
you having been heretofore patient of labors, should now become prentises to
idleness, and use the pen for Sonets, not the needle for Samplers. And how
is your love placed, upon pelting boys, perhaps base of birth, without doubt
weak of discretion. I but they are fair. O Ladies do your eyes begin to love
colors, whose hearts was wont to loath them? is Dianaes Chase become Venus
Court? and are your holy vows turned to hollow thoughts?


Ramia Madame, if love were not a thing beyond reason, we might then give a
reason of our doings, but so divine is his force, that it works effects as
contrary to that we wish, as unreasonable against that we ought.


Larissa Lady, so unacquainted are the passions of love, that we can neither
describe them nor bear them.


Diana Foolish gyrles, how willing you are to follow that which you should
fly, but here comes Telusa.


Enter Telusa and other with Cupid. Telusa We have brought the disguised
Nimphe, etc have found on his shoulder Psiches burn, and he confesses
himself to be Cupid.


Diana How now sir, are you caught, are you Cupid?


Cupid Thou shall see Diana that I dare confess my self to be Cupid.


Diana And thou shall see Cupid that I will show my self to be Diana, that
is, Conqueror of thy loose and untamed appetites. Did thy mother Venus under
the color of a Nimphe, send thee hither to wound my Nymphs? Does she add
craft to her malice, and mistrusting her deity, practice deceit: is there no
place but my Groves, no persons but my Nymphs? Cruel and unkind Venus, that
spighteth only chastity, thou shall see that Dianaes power shall revenge thy
policy, and tame this pride. As for thee Cupid, I will break thy bow, and
burn thine arrows, bind thy hands, clyp thy wings, and fetter thy feet.
Thou that fattest others with hopes, shall be fed thy self with wishes, and
thou that bindest others with golden thoughts, shall be bound thy self with
golden fetters. Venus rods are made of Roses, Dianaes of Briars. Let Venus that
great Goddess, ransom Cupid that little God. These Ladies here whom thou
have infected with foolish love, shall both tread on thee and triumph over
thee. Thine own arrow shall be shot into thine own bosom, and thou shall be
inamored, not on Psiches, but on Circes. I will teach thee what it is to
displease Diana, distress her Nymphs, or disturb her Game.


Cupid Diana, what I have done, cannot be undone, but what you mean to do,
shall. Venus has some Gods to her friends, Cupid shall have all.


Diana Are you prating? I will bridle thy tongue and thy power, and in spite
of mine own thoughts, I will set thee a task every day, which if thou
finish not, thou shall feel the smart. Thou shall be used as Dianaes slave,
not Venus son. All the world shall see that I will use thee like a captive,
and show my self a Conqueror. Come have him in, that we may devise apt
punishments for his proud presumptions.


Eurota We will plague ye for a little God.


Telusa We will never pity thee though thou be a God.


Ramia Nor I.


Larissa Nor I. Exeunt.


Actus quartus*
Scaena prima.
Augur, Mellebeus, Tyterus, Populus. Augur THis is the day wherein you must
satis-fie Neptune and save your selves, call together your fair Daughters, and
for a Sacrifice take the fairest, for better it is to offer a Virgin then
suffer ruin. If you think it against nature to sacrifice your children, think
it also against sense to destroy your Country. If you imagine Neptune
pitiless to desire such a pray, confess your selves perverse to deserve such
a punishment. You see this tree, this fatal Tree, whose leaves though they
glister like gold, yet it threatens to fair virgins grief. To this Tree
must the beautifullest be bound do until the Monster Agar carry her away, and
if the Monster come not, then assure your selves that the fairest is concealed,
and then your country shall be destroyed, therefore consult with your selves,
not as fathers of children, but as favorers of your Country. Let Neptune have
his right if you will have your quiet; thus have I warned you to be careful,
and would wish you to be wise, knowing that who so has the fairest daughter,
has the greatest fortune, in loosing one to save all, and so I depart to
provide ceremonies for the Sacrifice, and command you to bring the Sacrifice.
Exit Augur.


Mel. They say Tyterus that you have a fair daughter, if it be so, dissemble
not, for you shall be a fortunate father. It is a thing holy to preserve ones
Country, and honorable to be the cause.


Tyterus In deed Melebeus I have heard you boast that you had a fair
daughter, then the which none was more beautiful. I hope you are not so careful
of a child, that you will be careless of your Country, or add so much to
nature, that you will detract from wisdom.


Melle. I must confess that I had a daughter, and I know you have, but alas
my Childs cradle was her grave, and her swath-clowte her winding sheet. I
would she had lived til now, she should willingly have died now; for what could
have happened to pore Melebeus more comfortable, then to be the father of a
fair child and sweet Country.


Tyterus O Mellebeus, dissemble you may with me^, deceive the Gods you cannot,
did not I see, (and very lately see) your daughter in your arms, when as you
gave her infinite kisses, with affection I fear me more then fatherly. You
have conveyed her away, that you might cast us all away, bereauing her the
honor of her beauty, and us the benefit, preferring a common inconvenience,
before a private mischief.


Melle. It is a bad cloth Tyterus that will take no color, and a simple Father
that can use no cunning, you make the people believe that you wish well, when
you practice nothing but ill, wishing to be thought religious toward the Gods,
when I know you deceitful toward men. You cannot ouer-reach me Tyterus,
ouershoote your self you may. It is a wily Mouse that will breed in the Cats
ear, and he must halt cunningly, that will deceive a Cripple. Did you ever
see me kiss my Daughter? you are deceived, it was my wife. And if you thought
so young a piece unfit for so old a person, and therefore imagined it to be my
child, not my spouse, you must know that silver hairs delight in golden
locks, and the old fancies crave young Nurses, and frostie years must be
thawed by youthful fyers. But this matter set aside, you have a fair daughter
Tyterus, and it is pity you are so fond a Father.


Popu. You are both either too fond or too froward: for whilst you dispute to
save your Daughters, we neglect to prevent our destruction.


Alter Come let us away and seek out a sacrifice. We must sift out their
cunning, and let them shift for themselves.


Exeunt. Actus quartus. Scaena secunda.
Cupid. Telusa, Eurota, Larissa, enter singing. Telusa Come Cupid to your
task. First you must undo all these Lovers knots, because you tied them.


Cupid If they be true love knots, it is impossible to unknit them, if false, I
never tied them.


Eurota Make no excuse but to it.


Cupid Love knots are tide with eyes, and cannot be undone with hands, made
fast with thoughts, and cannot be unloosed with fingers, had Diana no task to
set Cupid to but things impossible, I will to it.


Ramia Why how now? you tie the knots faster.


Cupid I cannot choose, it goes against my mind to make them loose.


Eurota Let me see, now it is impossible to be undone.


Cupid It is the true love knotte of a woman's heart, therefore cannot be undone.


Ramia That falls in sunder of it self.


Cupid It was made of a man's thought which will never hang together.


Larissa You have undone that well.


Cupid I, because it was never tide well.


Telusa To the rest, for she will give you no rest. These two knots are finely
untied.


Cupid It was because I never tide them, the one was knit by Pluto, not Cupid,
by money, not love, the other by force, not faith, by appointment, not
affection.


Ramia Why do you lay that knot aside.


Cupid For death.


Telusa Why?


Cupid Because the knot was knit by faith, and must only be unknit of death.


Eurota Why laugh you?


Cupid Because it is the fairest and the falsest, done with greatest art and
least truth, with best colors, and worst conceits.


Telusa Who tide it?


Cupid A man's tongue.


Larissa Why do you put that in my bosom?


Cupid Because it is only for a Woman's bosom.


Larissa Why what is it?


Cupid A woman's heart.


Telusa Come let us go in, and tell that Cupid has done his task, stay you
behind Larissa, and see he sleep not, for Love will be idle, and take heed
you surfette not, for love will be wanton. Exit Telusa.


Laris. Let me alone I will find him somewhat to do.


Cupid Lady, can you for pity see Cupid thus punished.


Larissa Why did Cupid punish us without pity?


Cupid Is love a punishment?


Larissa It is no pastime.


Cupid O Venus, if thou saw Cupid as a captive, bound to obey that was wont
to command, fearing Ladies threats, that once pierced their hearts, I cannot
tell whether thou would revenge it for despite, or laugh at it for disport.
The time may come Diana, and the time shall come, that thou that set Cupid
to undo knots, shall entreat Cupid to tie knots, and you Ladies that with
solace have beheld my pains, shall with sighs entreat my pity.

He offers to sleep.


Larissa How now Cupid begin you to nod?


Ramia Come Cupid, Diana has devised new labors for you that are God of
loves, you shall weaue Samplers all night, and lackie after Diana all day. You
shall shortly shoot at beasts for men, because you have made beasts of men,
and weight on Ladies trains, because thou intrappest Ladies by trains. All
the stories that are in Dianaes Arras, which are of love, you must pick out
with your needle, and in that place sow Vesta with her Nuns, and Diana with
her Nymphs. How like you this Cupid.


Cupid I say I will prick as well with my needle, as ever I did with mine
arrows.


Telusa Diana cannot yield, she conquers affection.


Cup. Diana shall yield, she cannot conquer desteny.


Larissa Come Cupid, you must to your business.


Cupid You shall find me so busy in your heads, that you shall wish I had
been idle with your hearts.


Exeunt. Actus quartus. Scaena tertia.
Neptune alone. Neptune This day is the solemn Sacrifice at this Tree, wherein
the fairest virgin (were not the inhabitants faithless) should be offered
unto me, but so over careful are Fathers to their children, that they forgette
the safety of their Country, and fearing to become unnatural, become
unreasonable; their slights may bleere men, deceive me they cannot, I will be
here at the hour, and show as great cruelty as they have done craft, and
well shall they know that Neptune should have been entreated, not cosened.
Exit.


Actus quartus* Scaena quarta. Enter Gallathea and Phillida. Phill. I marvel
what virgin the people will prepresent, it is happy you are none, for the^ it
would have fallen to your lot because you are so fair.


Galla. If you had been a Maiden too I need not to have feared, because you
are fairer.


Phill. I pray thee sweet boy flatter not me, speak truth of thy self, for
in mine eye of all the world thou art fairest.


Galla. These be fair words, but far from thy true thoughts, I know mine
own face in a true Glass, and desire not to see it in a flattering mouth.


Phill. O would I did flatter thee, and that fortune would not flatter me. I
love thee as a brother, but love not me so.


Galla. Noe I will not, but love thee better, because I cannot love as a
brother.


Phill. Seeing we are both boys, and both lovers, that our affection may have
some show, and seem as it were love, let me call thee Mistress.


Galla. I accept that name, for diverse before have called me Mistress.


Phill. For what cause?


Galla. Nay there lie the Mistrisse.


Philli. Will not you be at the sacrifice?


Galla. Noe.


Philli. Why?


Galla. Because I dreamt that if I were there, I should be turned to a virgin,
and then being so fair (as thou say I am) I should be offered as thou
know one must. But will not you be there.


Phill. Not unless I were sure that a boy might be sacrificed, and not a
maiden.


Galla. Why then you are in danger.


Phill. But I would escape it by deceit, but seeing we are resolved to be both
absent, let us wander into these Groves, till the hour be past.


Galla. I am agreed, for then my fear will be past.


Phill. Why, what do thou fear?


Galla. Nothing but that you love me not. Exit.


Philli. I will. Poor Phillida, what should thou think of thy self, that
love one that I fear me, is as thy self is; and may it not be, that her
Father practiced the same deceit with her, that my Father has with me, and
knowing her to be fair, feared she should be unfortunate, if it be so, Phillida
how desperate is thy case? if it be not, how doubtful? For if she be a Maiden
there is no hope of my love, if a boy, a hazard: I will after him or her, and
lead a melancholy life, that look for a miserable death.


Exit. Actus quintus.
Scaena prima.
Enter Rafe alone. Rafe. NO more Masters now, but a Mistrisse if I can light
on her. An Astronomer? of all occupations that's the worst, yet well fare the
Alcumist, for he keeps good fires though he gets no gold, the other stands
warming himself by staring on the stars, which I think he can as soon
number as know their virtues. He told me a long tale of Octogessimus octauus,
and the meeting of the Conjunctions and Planets, and in the meane-time he fell
backwarde himself into a ponde. I asked him why he fore-sawe not that by the
stars, he said he knew it, but contemnd it. But soft, is not this my
brother Robin?


Enter Robin. Robin Yes as sure as thou art Rafe.


Rafe What Robin? what news? what fortune?


Robin Faith I have had but badde fortune, but I prie-thee tell me thine.


Rafe I have had two Masters, not by art but by nature, one said, that by
multiplying he would make of a penny ten pound.


Robin I but could he do it?


Rafe Could he do it quoth you? why man, I saw a pretty wench come to his
shop, where with puffing, blowing, and sweating, he so plied her, that he
multiplied her.


Robin How?


Rafe Why he made her of one, two.


Robin What by fire?


Rafe No, by the Philosophers stone.


Robin Why, have Philosophers such stones?


Rafe I, but they lie in a privy cupboord.


Robin Why then thou art rich if thou have learned this cunning.


Rafe Tush this was nothing, he would of a little fasting spittle, make a hose
and dublet of cloth of silver.


Robin Would I had been with him, for I have had almost no meat, but spittle
since I came to the woods.


Rafe How then did thou live?


Robin Why man I served a fortune tellers, who said I should live to see my
Father hanged, and both my brothers beg. So I conclude the Mill shall be mine,
and I live by imagination still.


Rafe Thy Master was an Ass, and looked on the lines of thy hands, but my
other Master was an Astronomer, which could pick my nativity out of the
stars. I should have half a dozen stars in my pocket if I have not lost
them, but here they be. Sol, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus.


Robin Why these be but names.


Rafe I, but by these he gathers, that I was a Ioualist, borne of a Thursday,
and that I should be a brave Venerian, and get all my good luck on a Friday.


Robin It Is strange that a fish day should be a flesh-day.


Rafe O Robin, Venus orta mari, Venus was borne of the Sea, the Sea will have
fish, fish must have wine, wine will have flesh, for Caro carnis genus est
muliebre: but soft, here comes that notable villain, that once preferred me
to the Alcumist.


Enter Peter. Peter So I had a Master, I would not care what became of me.


Rafe Robin thou shall see me fit him. So I had a servant, I care neither
for his conditions, his qualilities, nor his person.


Peter What Rafe? well met. No doubt you had a warm service of my Master
the Alcumist.


Rafe It Was warm indeed, for the fire had almost burnt out mine eyes, and yet
my teeth still watered with hungar: so that my service was both too whote and
too cold. I melted all my meat, and made only my slumber thoughts, and so had
a full head and an empty belly. But where have thou been since?


Peter With a brother of thine I think, for he has such a coat, and two
brothers (as he says) seeking of fortunes.


Robin Tys my brother Dicke, I prie-thee lets go to him.


Rafe Syrra, what was he doing that he came not with thee?


Peter He has gotten a Master now, that will teach him to make you both his
younger brothers.


Rafe I, thou passest for devising impossibilities, that's as true as thy
Master could make silver pottes of tagges of points.


Peter Nay he will teach him to cozen you both, and so get the Mill to
himself.


Rafe Nay if he be both our cozens, I will be his great Grandfather, and
Robin shall be his Uncle, but I pray thee bring us to him quickly, for I am
great bellied with conceit till I see him.


Peter Come then and go with me, and I will bring ye to him straight.

Exeunt.
Actus quintus. Scaena secunda.
Augur. Ericthinis. Augur Bring forth the virgin, the fatal virgin, the
fairest virgin, if you mean to appease Neptune, and preserve your Country.


Erict. Here she comes, accompanied only with men, because it is a sight
unseemly (as all virgins say) to see the misfortune of a maiden, and terrible
to behold the fiercenes of Agar that Monster.


Enter Haebe, with other to the sacrifice. Haebe Miserable and accursed Haebe,
that being neither fair nor fortunate, thou should be thought most happy
and beautiful. Curse thy birth, thy life, thy death, being borne to live in
danger, and having liude, to die by deceit. Art thou the sacrifice to appease
Neptune, and satis-fie the custom, the bloody custom, ordained for the
safety of thy Country. I Haebe, poor Haebe, men will have it so, whose forces
command our weak natures, nay the Gods will have it so, whose powers dally
with our purposes. The Egiptians never cut their Dates from the tree, because
they are so fresh and green. It is thought wickedness to pull Roses from the
stalks in the Garden of Palestine, for that they have so lively a red: and
who so cutteth the incense Tree in Arabia before it fall, commits sacrilege.

Shall it only be lawful amongst us in the prime of youth, and pride of
beauty, to destroy both youth and beauty: and what was honored in fruits
and flowers as a virtue, to violate in a virgin as a vice? But alas destenie
allows no dispute, die Haebe, Haebe die, woeful Haebe, and only accursed
Haebe. Farewell the sweet delights of life, and welcome now the bitter pangs
of death. Farewell you chaste virgins, whose thoughts are divine, whose faces
fair, whose fortunes are agreeable to your affections, enjoy and long enjoy
the pleasure of your curled locks, the amiablenesse of your wished looks, the
sweetness of your tuned voices, the content of your inward thoughts, the pomp
of your outward shows, only Haebe bids farewell to all the joys that she
conceived, and you hope for, that she possessed, and you shall; farewell the
pomp of Princes Courts, whose roofes are imbosst with gold, and whose
pauements are decked with fair Ladies, where the days are spent in sweet
delights, the nights in pleasant dreams, where chastity honoreth affections,
and commands, yields to desire and conquereth.

Farewell the Sovereign of all virtue, and Goddess of all virgins, Diana,
whose perfections are impossible to be numbered, and therefore infinite, never
to be matched, and therefore immortal. Farewell sweet Parents, yet to be
mine, unfortunate Parents. How blessed had you been in barrennes? how happy
had I been if I had not been. Farewell life, vain life, wretched life, whose
sorrows are long, whose end doubtful, whose miseries certain, whose hopes
innumerable, whose fears intolerable. Come death, and welcome death whom
nature cannot resist, because necessity rules, nor defer because destenie
hastes. Come Agar thou insatiable Monster of Maidens blood, and douourer of
beauties bowels, glut thy self till thou surfeit, and let my life end thine.
Tear these tender joints with thy greedy jaws, these yellow locks with thy
black feet, this fair face with thy foul teeth. Why abatest thou thy wonted
swiftness? I am fair, I am a virgin, I am ready. Come Agar thou horrible
monster, and farewell world thou viler Monster.


Augur The Monster is not come, and therefore I see Neptune is abused, whose
rage will I fear me, be both infinite and intolerable: take in this Virgin,
whose want of beauty has saved her own life, and all yours.


Erict. We could not find any fairer.


Augur Neptune will. Go deliver her to her father.


Haebe Fortunate Haebe, how shall thou express thy joys? Nay unhappy girl
that art not the fairest. Had it not been better for thee to have died with
fame, then to live with dishonor, to have preferred the safety of thy
Country and rareness of thy beauty, before sweetness of life, and vanity of
the world? But alas, desteny would not have it so, desteny could not, for it
asks the beautifullest, I would Haebe thou had been beautifullest.


Erict. Come Haebe, here is no time for us to reason, it had been best for us
thou had been most beautiful.

Exeunt.
Actus quintus. Scaena tertia.
Phillida. Gallathea. Phillida We met the virgin that should have been
offered to Neptune, belike either the custom is pardoned, or she not thought
fairest.


Galla. I cannot conjecture the cause, but I fear the event.


Phil. Why should you fear, the God requires no boy.


Galla. I would he did, then should I have no fear.


Phil. I am glad he does not tho, because if he did, I should have also cause
to fear. But soft, what man or God is this? Let us closely withdraw our
selves into the Thickets,


Exeunt ambo. Enter Neptune alone. Neptune And do men begin to be equal
with Gods, seeking by craft to ouer-reach the^ that by power ouer-see them? Do
they dote so much on their daughters, that they stick not to dally with our
deities, well shall the inhabitants see, that destiny cannot be prevented by
craft, nor my anger be appeased by submission. I will make havoc of Dianaes
Nymphs, my Temple shall be died with Maidens blood, and there shall be nothing
more vile then to be a Virgin. To be young and fair, shall be accounted shame
and punishment, in so much as it shall be thought as dishonorable to be honest,
as fortunate to be deformed.


Enter Diana with her Nymphs. Diana O Neptune, have thou forgotten thy self,
or will thou clean for-sake me? Has Diana therefore brought danger to her
Nymphs, because they be chaste? shall virtue suffer both pain and shame which
always deserves praise and honor?


Enter Venus. Venus Praise and honor (Neptune) nothing less, except it be
commendable to be coy, and honorable to be peevish. Sweet Neptune, if Venus can
do any thing, let her try it in this one thing, that Diana may find as small
comfort at thy hands, as Love has found courtesy at hers.

This is she that hates sweet delights, enuieth loving desires, masketh
wanton eyes, stops amorous ears, bridleth youthful mouths, and under a
name, or a word constancy, entertaineth all kind of cruelty: she has
taken my son Cupid, Cupid my lovely son, using him like a prentise,
whypping him like a slave, scorning him like a beast, therefore Neptune I
entreat thee by no other God, then the God of love, that thou evil entreat
this Goddess of hate.


Neptune I muse not a little to see you two in this place, at this time, and
about this matter, but what say you Diana, have you Cupid captive?


Diana I say there is nothing more vain, then to dispute with Venus, whose
untamed affections have bred more brawles in heaven, then is fit to repeat
in earth, or possible to recount in number, I have Cupid, and will keep him,
not to dandle in my lap, whom I abhor in my heart, but to laugh him to scorn,
that has made in my virgins hearts such deep scarres.


Venus Scarres Diana call you them that I know to be bleeding wounds? alas
weak deity, it stretches not so far, both to abate the sharpness of his
Arrows and to heal the hurts. No, Loves wounds when they seem green,
rankle, and having a smooth skin without, fester to the death within.
Therefore Neptune, if ever Venus stood thee in steed, furthered thy fancies,
or shall at all times be at thy command, let either Diana bring her Virgins to
a continual massacre, or release Cupid of his martyrdom.


Diana It is known Venus, that your tongue is as unruly as your thoughts, and
your thoughts as unstaid as your eyes, Diana cannot chatter, Venus cannot
choose.


Venus It is an honor for Diana to have Venus mean ill, when she so speaks
well, but you shall see I come not to trifle, therefore once again Neptune, if
that be not buried, which can never die, fancy, or that quenched which must
ever burn, affection, show thy self the same Neptune that I knew thee to be
when thou wast a Sheepe-hearde, and let not Venus words be vain in thine
ears, since thine were imprinted in my heart.


Neptune It were unfit that Goddesses should strive, and it were
unreasonable that I should not yield, and therefore to please both, both attend;
Diana I must honor, her virtue deserves no less, but Venus I must love, I
must confess so much.

Diana, restore Cupid to Venus, and I will for ever release the sacrifice of
Virgins, if therefore you love your Nymphs as she does her Son, or prefer
not a private grudge before a common grief, answer what you will do.


Diana I account not the choice hard, for had I twenty Cupids, I would
deliver them all to save one Virgin, knowing love to be a thing of all the
vainest, virginity to be a virtue of all the noblest. I yield, Larissa, bring
out Cupid: and now shall it be said, that Cupid saved those he thought to
spoil.


Venus I agree to this willingly: for I will be wary how my Son wander
again. But Diana cannot forbid him to wound.


Diana Yes, chastity is not within the level of his bow.


Venus But beauty is a fair mark to hit.


Neptune Well I am glad you are agreed: and say that Neptune has dealt well
with Beauty and Chastity.


Enter Cupid. Diana Here take your son.


Venus Sir boy where have you been? always taken, first by Sapho, now by
Diana, how happens it you unhappy Elphe?


Cupid Coming through Dianaes woods, and seeing so many fair faces with
fond hearts, I thought for my sport to make them smart, and so was taken by
Diana.


Venus I am glad I have you.


Diana And I am glad I am rid of him.


Venus Alas poor boy, thy Wings clypt? thy brandes quenched? thy Bow burnt?
and thy Arrows broke?


Cupid I but it skilleth not, I bear now mine Arrows in mine eyes, my Wings
on my thoughts, my brandes in mine ears, my bow in my mouth, so as I can
wound with looking, fly with thinking, burn with hearing, shoot with
speaking.


Venus Well you shall up to heaven with me, for on earth thou will lose me.


Enter Tyterus, Melebeus, Gallathea and Phyllida. Neptune But soft, what be
these?


Tyterus Those that have offended thee to save their daughters.


Neptune Why, had you a fair daughter?


Tyterus I, and Melebeus a fair daughter.


Neptune Where be they?


Meleb. In yonder Woods, and me thinks I see them coming.


Neptune Well, your deserts have not gotten pardon, but these Goddesses iarres.


Meleb. This is my Daughter, my sweet Phillida.


Tyterus And this is my fair Gallathea.


Galla. Unfortunate Gallathea if this be Phillida.


Phill. Accursed Phillida if that be Gallathea.


Galla. And wast thou all this while enamoured of Phillida, that sweet
Phillida?


Phill. And could thou doat upon the face of a Maiden, thy self being
one, on the face of fair Gallathea?


Neptune Do you both being Maidens love one another?


Galla. I had thought the habit agreeable with the Sex, and so burned in the
fire of mine own fancies.


Phillida I had thought that in the attire of a boy, there could not have
lodged the body of a Virgin, and so was inflamed with a sweet desire, which
now I find a sower deceit.


Diana Now things falling out as they do, you must leave these fond fond
affections, nature will have it so, necessity must.


Gallathea I will never love any but Phillida, her love is engraven in my heart,
with her eyes.


Phillida Nor I any but Gallathea, whose faith is imprinted in my thoughts by
her words.


Neptune An idle choice, strange, and foolish, for one Virgin to doat on
another, and to imagine a constant faith, where there can be no cause of
affection. How like you this Venus?


Venus I like well and allow it, they shall both be possessed of their wishes,
for never shall it be said that Nature or Fortune shall ouer-throwe Love, and
Faith. Is your loves unspotted, begun with truth, continued with constancy,
and not to be altered till death?


Gallathea Die Gallathea if thy love be not so.


Phillida Accursed be thou Phillida if thy love be not so.


Diana Suppose all this Venus, what then?


Venus Then shall it be seen, that I can turn one of them to be a man, and
that I will.


Diana Is it possible?


Venus What is to Love or the Mistrisse of love impossible? Was it not Venus
that did the like to Iphis and Iauthes; how say ye are ye agreed, one to be
a boy presently?


Phillida I am content, so I may embrace Gallathea.


Gallathea I wish it, so I may enjoy Phillida.


Melleb. Soft Daughter, you must know whether I will have you a Son.


Tyterus Take me with you Gallathea, I will keep you as I begatte you, a
Daughter.


Melleb. Tyterus, let yours be a boy and if you will, mine shall not.


Tyterus Nay mine shall not, for by that means my young son shall lose his
inheritance.


Melleb. Why then get him to be made a Maiden and then there is nothing lost.


Tyte. If there be such changing, I would Venus could make my wife a Man.


Melleb. Why?


Tyterus Because she loves always to play with men.


Venus Well you are both fond, therefore agree to this changing, or suffer
your Daughters to endure hard chance.


Melleb. How say you Tyterus, shall we refer it to Venus.


Tyte. I am content, because she is a Goddess.


Venus Neptune you will not dislike it.


Neptune Not I.


Venus Nor you Diana.


Diana Not I.


Venus Cupid shall not.


Cupid I will not.


Venus Then let us depart, neither of them shall know whose lot it shall be til
they come to the Churchdore. One shall be, does it suffice?


Phillida And satis-fie us both, does it not Gallathea?


Galla. Yes Phillida.


Enter Rafe, Robin, and Dicke. Rafe Come Robin, I am glad I have met with
thee, for now we will make our Father laugh at these tales.


Diana What are these that so malepartlie thrust themselves into our companies?


Robin Forsooth Madame we are fortune tellers.


Venus Fortune tellers; tell me my fortune.


Rafe We do not mean fortune tellers, we mean fortune tellers: we can tell
what fortune we have had these twelve months in the Woods.


Diana Let them alone, they be but peevish.


Venus Yet they will be as good as Minstrils at the marriage, to make us all
merry.


Dicke I Ladies we bear a very good Consort,


Venus Can you sing?


Rafe Baselie.


Venus And you?


Dicke Meanly.


Venus And what can you do?


Robin If they duble it, I will treble it.


Venus Then shall ye go with us, and sing Hymen before the marriage. Are you
content?


Rafe Content? never better content, for there we shall be sure to fill our
bellies with Capons rumpes, or some such dainty dishes.


Venus Then follow us.


Exeunt. The Epilogue.
Galla. GO all, it is I only that conclude al. You Ladies may see, that Venus
can make constancy ficklenes, courage cowardice, modesty lightness, working
things impossible in your Sex, and tempering hardest hearts like softest wool.
Yield Ladies, yield to love Ladies, which lurketh under your eyelids whilst
you sleep, and plaieth with your heart strings whilst you wake: whose sweetness
never breeds satietie, labor weariness, nor grief bitterness. Cupid was
begotten in a miste, nursed in Clouds, and sucking only upon conceits.
Confess him a Conqueror, whom ye ought to regard, since it is impossible to
resist, for this is infallible, that Love conquereth all things but it self,
and Ladies all hearts but their own.


FINIS.

