A Health to the Gentlemanly profession of Seruingmen: or, The Seruingmans
Comfort: With other things not impertinent to the Premises, as well pleasant
as profitable to the courteous Reader.

Felix qui socij nauim perijsse procellis cum vidit, in tutum flectit sua
carbasa portum. Imprinted at London by W. W. 1598.

The Epistle to the gentle Reader, of what estate or calling soever.
GEntle Reader, whether adorned with the royal Roabes of true Nobility, or
apparrelled with the gorgious Garments of Gentilitie, pardon I pray, these my
unpolished lines: unrip not, I beseech you, the mistaken stitches of this
botcherit, neither sensure severely the unsavory taste of this Loaf, being
Primogeniti, the first batch of my baking: But if you find any thing herein
contained displeasing your humors, say with the Doctor in Cambridge, What, was
it I he meant? No, he named not me, he spoke it not by me, he knows me
not; How should he then be private to any of my doings? No no I am none of
these miserable Masters that so inhumanely burieth in oblivion unrewarded the
long, good, and duetifull service of my old Servant: But if you be such as
either thus, or otherwise abuses those good creatures that God has lent you,
I mean these earthly commanders, Gold and Silver: Let these my cauiats work
some remorse of conscience, and play not the gauled Horse that kicketh and
winseth, his sore being once touched, to burst out into vngentlemanlike terms
against the Author, being with his work displeased. For assure your selves,
and before God I protest, I speak not against one in particular, neither
against all in general, upon a malepart or presumptuous mind, as not caring
who are offended with my doings; but careful least I should offend any, or
incur their displeasures, by my presumptuous enterprise, I humbly (as before)
pray pardon. Think not Gentlemen, that whereas I speak any thing of Masters
hard usage of their Servants, or of any ancient familiarity betwixt them,
that thereby I would give any encouragement to the Servant to be negligent in
his duty, or by malepart sauciness to abuse that reverence that he owes
unto his Master: for God is my record, be it far from me, that I should
once dream of so inhumane and sedicious a practice: For I protest for my own
part, if I should serve the meanest Carman that whistleth after his Horse, and
be bound by his wages to call him Master, I would not skorne to do him any
reverence and duty that by my place and calling were to be required at my
hands. Therefore gentle Gentlemen, since courtesy is always the companion of
true Gentilitie, courteously I pray you consider of me and my doings. And now
Reader, if you by degree deserve the name of a Yeoman, submissiuely without
hautines of heart I pray your patience in perusing this my first practice, for I
hold your calling no less commendable, and your profession no less pertinent
to the supportyng of this humane society, then them of higher dignity and
degree: For, What is the Prince without the Plough? or the Potentate without
the Pasture? Does not the one affoorde them Corn, the other Kine, with all
other provision for their bodyly sustenaunce? Since therefore gentle Reader, if
Yeoman you be one, that I shall happily have somewhat to say to in this
following Treatise, I pray (as before) your patience, that if you find any
thing therein amiss, either in unmannerly terms, or otherwise, that you would
pass it over with silence, and impute it to ignorance, and not to be done of
any malicious or set purpose; or else to say with your selves, In aliena
republica ne sis curiosus, It is not good to scalde ones lyppes in other men's
Pottage. Since he speaks neither by me, of me, nor against me, nor any thing
that consernes me, why should I spurn against his speches, or hate him for his
harsh harmony? Let them that are galled kick, and them that are wounded seek
remedy: But if you be such as your guyltie conscience persuades you, that what
as is spoken, is meant by you, for it is an old saying Concius ipse sibi, de
se putat omnia dici, the guyltie conscience thinks what as is said, is always
spoken himself to vpbrayde: Then worthily weigh and consider whether you be
justly accused, and complained of or no; and if you find your self to have
offended in such and such things, and that what has been said of you, you
have worthily deserved; then be content to bite the lyp, wincke at small
faults, and mende that is amiss: for if you manifest your malice in any
opprobrious speeches against the Author of this work, then you shall
pronounce a definitive sentence of condemnation against your self, as worthy
to have deserved all, and more, then herein is contained. For be it known unto
you, and all other of higher or inferior degree, that I have not touched any
of the better sort, neither any that are men well meriting for their minds and
manners; but such as are mates of no merit, and as have condingly deserved
more then I can say against them: but if any of what estate or degree so ever,
shall murmr against me, I will say unto him as Christ said to the men that
brought the woman taken in adultery before him to be stoned to death, He that
has not offended, let him throw the first stone: So, he that will acknowledge
himself touched herewith, let him cast the first stone, let him the first
seek remedy and revenge: but before he seek revenge, it were good he knew
who had wronged him. And if he think I have wronged him by speaking any thing
against him, then let him come to me and know whether I meant it by him or no,
and I will not only resolve him of that doubt, but also pacify his impatient
humor. Therefore gentle Reader, I expect a pardon of course, if I have
offended by ignorance; which I undoubtedly persuade my self to receive at
your hands, and so I leave you to your labors: which I pray God may yield
you a plentiful increase. Now curtuous surueyour of these barren Lands, nay
barren and mosse-begrowen lines, if thou be my fellow in fraternity a
Seruingman, to thee I address my petition, if you be a Gentleman borne, and a
Seruingman by profession, if in reading this my Book, you shall happily
stumble on any unsavory sentence that may mislike your taste, pocket I pray
you this injury, as I may term it, since (God is my witness) I mean you no
harm, but rather pray for your preferment, and wysh your welfare, then by any
means to seek your indignity, or disgrace. And if gentle Reader, thou be a
Yeomans son, that has with the complet Armor of four Marks and a Lyuerie,
entered the lystes to play the pryses of a Seruingman, shall in this my Book
find a lump too much leauened, that a weak and queasie stomach can hardly
digest, I pray thee persuade thy self, that it is better to have a frown of
a friend, then a smyle of a flattering and deceitful enemy: and whatsoever I
have spoken of thee, or concerning thee, is rather of goodwill, to forewarne
thee of an imminent danger, then to beat thee with the dry blows of
intolerable ignominy. Wherefore gentle Reader, whatsoever thou be, I
earnestly entreat thee, to reuerse that hard sentence of Hatred in lue of my
labor, and rather smother thy discontent with the ashes of silence (if any
such thou find in reading this Treatise) then to wreake thy malice with the
hot coals of inquenchable fury; which will sooner consume they self, then
prevail against thy mistaken enemy. Thus having (as I hope) satisfied my
curious enemies, I am to crave the goodwill of my courteous friends; desiring
you (gentle Reader) to accept in good part these my labors: which if they
shall like you, I shall account my gain great; if not, yet must I needs count
my loss but light, in that the doing of it kept me from idleness, a thing so
dangerous to a young man, as it is convenient he should seek with as much
industry to avoid the same, as the skillful Mariners with vigilant eyes do
labor to pass without peril the dangerous Rocks of Scilla and Caribdis: And
so wishing to thee as to my self, I commit thee to God.

I. M.
A HEALTH TO THE GENTLEMANLY PROFESSION OF SERVINGMEN.
IN this Bursse, or Exchange of humane affairs, which consists (as it were)
altogether in Merchandise, bargayning, buying and selling, it is very meet
and necessary that there should be men of all manners, conditions, and
callinges: as the Princes or Potentats, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Knights,
Esquires, Gentlemen, Yeomen, Husbandmen, Tailor, Tanner, and Tinker, Cowper,
Carter and Cobbler, with men of all other estates, degrees, and professions,
summoned upon for fayture of.10. l. in Issues to appear, with money or ware
always ready, to mayntaine this Mundane market. If then without every of these
professions, there can be no well governed Common wealth: (For if all men
should be Kings, then cunning Cobblers should loose their craft: if, all
Cobblers, Princes soueraintie would quickly surceasse:) How then comes it to
pass that so many Heresies are crept into one Religion, so many diseases into
one body, and so many aspyring minds into this Commonwealth of England? For
the Cobbler would be a Shoemaker, the Shoemaker a Tanner, the Tanner a Grasier:
so that no man rests contented with his vocation. But me thinks I hear one
cry unto me, Hoe sir John lacklattin, you are out of the text, your tongue
trottes so upon Tanners, Tailors, and Tinkers, that I fear me you will either
loose your way amongst these cobling Carters, or else run yourselfe out of
breath: which if you do, your promise to your profession will be slenderly
performed, and our expectacions frustrate, so that we shall be forced to say with
the Fable in Esope, Perturiunt Montes paritur ridiculus Mus, His promise is
golden Hills, but his performance durtie Dales: Suitor ne vltra Crepitam: the
pott is sull, therefore youth, drink a health to the Gentlemanly profession of
Seruingmen, and return to your purpose. Seruingmen (says my gaffer Thomsons
eldest son) as they are namelesse in this former Catalogue; so I hold them
needeles in any well governed Common wealth. Russet coat I tell thee, if thou
can hold the Plough no better then thou can hold this argument, I hold
thy through thrift scarce able to provide lyquor for thy throat: But as thou by
profession, art not the meanest member in this united body, if thou consider
thy calling accordingly, without aspiring higher, or manifesting thy malice by
scalding thy lyppes in other men's Pottage: So I leave thee to thy labor;
wishing thee in thy profession no less prosperity, then health and happiness
to my self. But since this whole text is too tedious for my travel, unwilling
to undertake the cutting out of a Garment, before I can heel a Hose; I will
first implo^^ my endeavor to threede the needle, to entreat of one of ^^ese
members, and leave the body for a ^^tter workman: in which member more matter
consists, then qui mihi Du^^nis is able to comprehend: But Cum de^^unt vires
^^min est laudanda voluntas, As the poor must mix Beans and Pease with their
Breadcor^^e this dear year, for Wheat and Rye is too highly rated, unless
it be knauerie, which seldom or never misseth a plentiful year in what
ground soever it be sown: So must I yield you a Loaf of course Cockle,
having no acquaintance with Coin to buy Corn, which though it may be hard of
digestion, yet I hope it will not be much unwholesome.

This Loaf is the profession of Seruingmen, not course for the calling, but in
respect of the workman, whose short time in his trade, has gained him so
small experience, as he can hardly as yet fashyon a loaf of fine Cocket: but
fine or course, such as it is, you must either eat or starve, for any bread of
my baking. This Loaf (as I said before) this state and profession of
Seruingmen, is the only mark whereat I aim: whose original, and to what end
it was ordained, I mean first to declare. Secondly, how flourishing was the
prime of this profession. And thirdly, the ruin and decay of this ancient
buylding. In the first creation of Adam and Eve, there needed no Superiority,
nor members for this body, being altogether planted and seated in all happiness
and perfectnes of Nature: but the offense committed, and the forfayture
enrolde, that Man for his transgression Should eat the Labors of his hands
by the Sweat of his brows, and that the command, Increase and Multiply,
was strictly by the law of Nature observed: Tract of time yielded so plentiful
an increase, as it grew very needful that this body should be drawn into
several members, to avoid a ca^^es of confusion, and frame an artificial
buylding. For even as a Logge of wood unwrought, yeeldes neither profit nor
pleasure, but being sawne, hewne, and squared, serves for many several uses;
for that which will not be a Bed, will be a Board, a Table, or Trusse, so that
every piece having his proportion, will execute his office: Even so this
consort of Companions, not knowing severally the parts of their profession,
restes very troublesome one to another: for all desiring to be Heads, then the
body must needs fall for want of Eyes to direct him; and if all Eyes, then it
must needs perish for want of a mouth to feed him: But being divided into
members, every one using his office, and resting contented with his estate, the
body remaynes in perfect health and happiness. Now in the knitting of these
joints together, every officer according to his aptnes was appointed. First
the King as head, for his magnanimity: then others adorned with the tytles of
Nobility and gentry, their minds no less meriting: And lastly, the
Comminaltie at the command of these merciful Maiestrates. These Princes and
Potentates thus seated in the solace of their soueraintie, thought it very
meet and necessary, to chose and ordain one sort of Servants for their
profit and pleasure (over and besides their servile sottes, as Dicke to
droyle, Ralph to run, Kit the Cater, with other Gouldsmythes of their
occupation:) which sort of Servants were known from the rest by the names of
Seruingmen. Now being come to their names, it is necessary to know of what
metal these ministers were molded, and what sort of people were thought
fittest for this frame, considering the end for which they were ordained.
First they were chosen men of wit, discretion, government, and good bringing
up, considering their Sovereigns, Lords, and Masters serious business,
weighty affairs, and worldly wealth, was for the most part committed to their
custody and care: Whose vigilant eye, willing mind, and faithful forecast
diligently to discharge that duty, was thought so necessary, as choice they
were of them they admitted to this calling.

Secondly, men of v^^loure and courage, not fearing to fight in the mayntenance
of their Masters credit, in his just quarrel, against his foreign foe, if
occasion were offered: and also, if any Countries causes called him abroad, to
guard and defend him against Newmarket Heathes commissioners, or any consories
of their craft.

Thirdly, men of strength, and actiuitie, to be excellent in shooting, running,
leaping, dancing, pitching the Barte, throwing the Hammer, or other feats of
like faculty, wherewith Potentates in times past were highly pleased.

Fourthly, men fine, neat, and nimble, in regard of their nearenes about
their Master, his apparel and cates: for the Clown, the Slouen, and Tom
althummes, are as far unfit for this profession, as Tarletons toys for
Paul, Pulpit: betwixt which, though I make a comparison, yet to the place I
reserve a reverend regard.

Fifthly and lastly, men of quality to be seen in haulking, hunting, fyshing
and fowling, with all such like Gentlemanly pastimes: All which being required
in a Seruingman, and naturally belonging to a Gentleman: Amongst what sort of
people should then this Seruingman be sought for? Even the Dukes son
preferred Page to the Prince, the Earls second son attendant upon the Duke,
the Knights second son the Earls Servant, the Esquires son to wear the
Knights lyuerie, and the Gentleman's son the Esquiers Seruingman: Yea, I know
at this day, Gentlemen younger brothers, that wears their elder brothers Blew
coat and Badge, attending him with as reverend regard and duetifull obedience,
as if he were their Prince or Sovereign. Where was then, in the prime of this
profession, goodman Tomsons Jack, or Robin Roushe my gaffer russetcoats
second son? the one holding the Plough, the other whipping the Carthorse,
laboring like honest men in their vocation: Trick Tom the Tailor was then a
Tiler for this trade, as strange to find a Blew-coate on his back with a
badge on his sleeue, as to take Kentstreete without a Scoulde, or
Newmarket-heath without a Commissioner. But now being lapt in his Liuerie, he
thinks him self as good a man, with the Sheares at his back, as the Poet
Lawret with a pen in his ear: Notwithstanding for his profession I hold it
profitable, and him self a good member, if his Sheares do not canker, nor his
Needle rust. And if there must be one amongst artificers, Cobblers, and Carters,
chosen fellow of this faculty, I hold the Tailor not unfittest: First, in
regard his trade tyeth him to no vncleanlines: and secondly, that his Masters
apparel be kept in reparations: for nothing more unseemly in a civil
Gentleman, then his apparel out of repair, torn, or broken. Again, if he be
a fellow of an humble spirit, he may pleasure his friends, and profit him
self: his friends, I mean his fellow servants, without blot or stayne to his
birth, or trade.

Two things, it should seem, were holden in high regard amongst the founders
of this fraternity of Seruingmen: the preservation of ancient Houses, and, the
mayntenance of the Commons in their calling. First, for the upholding of
Hospitality or ancient Houses, a Gentleman by antiquity, or an Esquire by
his calling, waighing and worthyly considering his wealth and worship, in this
wavering world of wretchedness, having by Gods providence sent him.vi. or.viii.
Sons, proper and personable men, well meriting for their minds and manners,
calling I say to mind the credit he carried in his Country, the men he
maintained, the poor provided for by pence from his purse, the black Jack
ietting from haul to butterie, from butterie to barrel, from barrel back for
the hauls health, where good fellows dyuing into the deapth of this ditch,
leaves in the bottom this inscription: God save the founders.

Of all these, with many more, the good Gentleman meditating in his mind, says
with him self: If I shall leave my Land and living, my Kine and Coin, equally
divided amongst my children, imparcially proporcioning to every one his part,
the youngest to the heir and eldest no way inferior for worldly fortune: then
shall the dignity of my degree, the hope of my house, and the mayntenance of
these before mentioned members, be quite (as Issue extinct) buried in the
bottomless pit of oblivion. What, shall the light of my Lamp for want of Oil
be blemished, and my House for want of Living sustain the reproachful name of
a Mock-begger? Virtus post funera viuit. And shall I not leave my name noted in
the book of ensuing ages? Yes, yes verily, Thou my eldest Son, that shall
survive thy dying father, hold here, wholly my Land I leave thee, that my
name may remain registered in thy posterity, thy byrthright by holy writ does
challenge it. Let therefore the example of Esaw be ever coated in the margent:
Let covetousness never corrupt thee, nor pleasures so much prevail, as for
Pottage to hazard thy Parentage: but let thy mind and manners be ever equally
matched according to thy birth and calling, that thy fathers foregoing may
teach thee to follow. Maynteine thy right, and loose no part of that which the
law of liberty has allotted thee. According to thy ability mainteyne
Hospitality: for that is the harbourer of two hopes, praise, and prayers: yet
let Liberality be the Link to light thee, least Covetousness might corrupt, or
Prodigality procure penury, in medio concistet virtus, every mean betwixt
two extremes, is a virtue: so is liberality, betwixt avarice and
prodigality, being placed: this mean in all music yields a most heavenly
harmony. Thus not doubting but in thee to live after my Funerals be
solemnized, committing the honor of my House to the care of thy credit, and
thee with it to the tuition of thalmightie.

And you my younger sons, to whom I allow no less love then the law of
nature does allot, I give every one of you yearly, to mainteyne you from
misery, an annual rent during your natural lives: with payment of which rent
your eldest brothers land shall remain charged; so that the Legasie I leave
you, you may assuredly receive: exceed not your exhibition, but live within
compass, till your care and diligence, being sown in service, it may yield
you a more plentiful Harvest. For I tell you, my younger Children, Service I
mean shall be your inheritance: wherefore I will you, and every of you, with
modest minds, and humble spirits, by diligence to augment your portions. And
thus much for the preservation of aucient Houses. Now it follows, with what
care the maintenance of the commons in their calling, was in this election
considered. For this Mundaine market was wholly maintained by three
Merchauntes, the supporters of this whole society: first the Prince or
Sovereign: secondly, the Nobility with gentry: and the Commons the third
calling. Now the Prince, being but one alone person, could lend no part to
this profession: and for the Commons, there were many causes to keep them in
their accustomed consort. For if they should take Peter patch-pannell from the
Cart to the Court, from the Plough to the Parlour, from the Sack to the
Saddle, and from course Karsie to handsome habit, this Ship having one of
her Cables thus cracked, might in a storm hazard the whole, for want of such
like necessaries to prevent the extremity of wind and weather. Considering
therefore that the Plough was the Potentates power, and Corn the kings
Commander, it was thought good not to lame it of any limb, especially not of
any such necessary limb as the houlder or the dryuer: for take but away a
Yokesticke, the Yoke falls, the Plough stands, and the Harvest is hindered:
Much more the mayming of either the before mentioned members. All artificers,
Colliers, Cobblers, and Carters, are consortes of this Craft, and maynteyners of
this Mystery: And if any of them, nay any member of any of them be a missing,
it does blemysh the body cross the company, and hinder the hope of this happy
Harvest.

Since therefore, as I said before, the Plough is the Princes repast, the
Masters meat, the Servants sustenance, and the poores prouender; the
Potentates as good Physicians, had always an eye that no hurt should happen to
hinder the health of this blessed body, the blemish whereof might bring bane
and bail into their own bosom. You see the two causes so highly had in
esteem in the choice of Seruingmen: the mayntenance of ancient Houses, and
the Commons in their calling. And thus much for the original and end of
Seruingmens first ordeyning. Now follows how flourishing was the prime of this
profession.

Even as Adam our first Parent, in the perfection of all pleasure placed in
Paradise, God in his wisdom thought this seat too solitary for him alone,
so framed him a fellow for his further content, help, and comfort: but what was
the metal that his mate was made of, considering that two of a contrary
nature being matched together could never agree: and that these two must
continually accompany together the one with the other, as in a consort without
discord; thought it meet and necessary to match them as near as might be,
so casting Adam into a dead sleep, took a Ribbe from his left side, whereof
he framed the Woman: which being made of the same moulde, even part of his own
body, he combined together in vndesoluable bonds of assured friendshyp: Even
so, Gentlemen and States considering their calling, thought it very meet and
necessary to have a help, to further them in every of their actions: which
help, though not to them so serviceable as Eve to Adam yet so needeful unto
them, and so necessary about them, as it was thought meet, this help or
Servant should be made of their own metal, even a Loaf of their own
dough: which being done, as before I have declared, the Gentleman received even
a Gentleman into his service, and therefore did limit him no other labor then
belonged him self, as to help him ready in the morning, to brush his
apparel, Cloak, Hatte, Girdle, or other garment, trusse his points, fetch
him water to wash, with other such like necessaries. His Master thus made
ready, if it pleased him to walk abroad, then to take his Liuerie and Weapon
to attend him, being himself ready, handsome, and well appointed: at his
return, if it pleased him to eat, then with all diligence, decently and
comely to bring his meat to the Table, and thereon in seemly sort being
placed, with a reverend regard to attend him, placing and displacing dyshes
at the first or second course, according as occasion shall serve, till time
command to take away: which done, grace said, and the Table taken up, the
Plate presently conveyed into the Pantrie, the Haul summons this consort of
companions, (upon pain to dyne with Duke Humfrie, or kiss the Hares foot) to
appear at the first call: where a song is to be song, the vndersong or holding
whereof is, It is merry in Haul, when Beardes wagges all: But beardlesse
Brian, and long toothed Tom, whose teeth be longer then his beard, says the
inditer of this dittie, was as far ouerseene in misplacing a word, as the
founders of Broughton Church in Crauen in Yorkshyre was, in placing it without
an Alehouse: or, he that gives his friend a pot of Ale in a frostie morning
without a Toast, for that is the appurtenance thereunto belonging: (Beardes for
Choppes) say they is the right of it, for it is merry in Haull when Choppes
wagges all: But Beardes or Choppes whether so ever, they both agree to bid a
base to the chine of Beef, which being sore battered with many fresh
assaults, retyres back again to his houlde the Kitchen, if he be able to
abide a second charge: if not, then he dies manfully in the feelde, upon the
point of his enemies weapon, who pursues him with such hatred, as they even
eat him for very anger, or hunger, choose you whether: and not so contented,
they commit his very boones to the Dogs to gnaw, for his further persecution.

And if any other enemies of less esteem encounter them in this hot conflict,
all goes to the pot, unless some spark of mercy move their minds to
repriue these prisoners till the next assizes to be holden in the Haull
aforesaid: which service performed, and they satisfied, the Master calls to
go on huntyng, haulkyng, fishyng, or fowlyng, in which he takes most pleasure,
or thinks fit for the time. Then the Seruingman, or men, with all diligence
prepare them selves to the feelde, every one willing to show his skill, to
delight his Master in which of these recreations he takes most pleasure. Thus
passing the day with these, or such like sportes, the night calls them home,
where the whole service of the Seruingman is still imployde about his Master.
No servile service was then sought for at the Seruingmans hand, though no
Gentelman but stands need of some moylyng mate to droyle about his
drudgerie. How florishyng then the state of Seruingmen was in these days, he
that has ears to hear, let him hear. What sport or pastime in feelde or at
home, pleasing the eye, or delyghting the care, could the Master any way have,
but the Servant was thereof equal partaker? What was the difference then, will
some say, betwixt the Master and the Man, if their pleasures were equal? for
then it had been as good to have been a Servant, as a Sovereign, a Man, as a
Master: even this was one, and all that parted the Potentates power, and the
Seruingmans profession, the one did command, the other was to obey: the due
obedience to which command was had in so reverent regard, and the Servant so
fearful to offend his Master, no servile, but as it were a filial fear,
as the Master was almost as careful in his command, as the Servant diligent
in his duty. For in these days what greater love could almost be found, then
betwixt the Master and the Servant? it was in manner equal with the Husbands
to the Wife, and the Childs to the Parent: for testimony whereof, there are
infinite examples to be alleged, as in the prescription of the triumuerie of
Marcus Lepidus, Marcus Anthonius, and Octauius Caesar, in the Roman civil
wars, where Naso, condemned by their prescription, was by one of his Servants
kept safe in an hill: the said Servant going to the Sea side, to hyre his
Master a Boat for his more safe passage and speedy escape, and at his
return, perceauing his Master by the strikers to be killed, he cried aloude
unto him, (having yet a little life) Stay a while, O Master (quoth he) and
sodaynely stroke the Captain and killed him, then coming again to his
Master, killed him self, saying: O Master, you have received comfort.

An other in the same time of persecution and trial of frindes, having a fair
shadowed Uineyarde, and in it a goodly Cave, deep and large (for the which
peradventure he was condemned) by chance refreshing him self in the said
Cave, one of his Servants perceauing the quellers yet a far off, which came
to finysh his Masters tragidie, for the pure love, and sinceere affection that
he bore to his Master, hid him safely, as he thought, in the secret place of
the Den, and furnished him self with his Masters apparel, feigning to be
he, even offering him self to the death for his Masters safety. O rare
examples, worthy of everlasting memory: What greater goodwil? What purer love,
or more sinceere affection can be found amongst any consort of creatures then
this? O happy Servants that had your being in those goulden days, when
Masters would merit such maruels at your hands: and thrice happy Masters,
that past your pilgrimage in those blessed hours, when by your love and
liberality, you tied your Servants with this vndessolueable bond of assured
friendshyp, even to deserve and merit the full measure of your good will
toward them. Infinite are the examples (as I said before) that may be
alleged in this matter, only these two I hold sufficient to confirm this
argument, since none but will confess this love and affection to be ancient,
and of long continuance.

Yea, but will some say, these examples are old, and long is it since this
love and affection was thus in the highest degree made manifest, and the trial
of friendshyp thus exercised: show me some examples of late years, for the
more credit of your cause, or else some reasons why these examples should not
be as plentiful in these latter days, as in former time.

To this Objection, I answer thus: There be two especial causes that has
vntwyned this knott, and even cancelled this firm Obligaton, exchanging it for
a single Bi^^l. The first is, the compounding of this pure and refined metal
(whereof Seruingmen were first framed) with untried dregs and dross of less
esteem. The second, is the death and decay of Liberality or Reward for well
doing. But I will omit to vnrippe the bowelles of these reasons, till time and
place of fitter opportunity be offered, since I have not as yet finished the
second part of this tractate, which is only to declare the florishyng days
of the prime of this profession.

I have before declared how this service was in no sort servile, nor the pains
belonging it any penance, but they ioyed as much in their liberty, and
flourished as fresh in their profession as any other, of what sort, degree, or
calling soever: their fare was always of the best, their apparel fine,
neat, handsome, and comely, their credit and esteem always equal with their
birth and calling, in good regard: their exercises, or daily labors, nothing
but pleasure, their head so smally troubled with carpe and care of worldly
Coin, and them selves so far from misery, pennurie, scarcity, or beggerie,
harbored in the haven of happiness, swimming in the calm, neither too deep
nor too shallow, supported by these good patrons their Masters, neither
soaryng to high, nor dyuing too deep, neither Prince nor beggar, floryshing in
this their estate, being (as it were) even the mean or midwarde of all degrees
and callinges, as I verily think they were the happiest consort of Companions,
and the least troubled tradesmen, in the prime of their profession, that
belonged this Mundaine market.

O what pleasure belonged Seruingmen in those days? when the great Chamber was
served? the Hauls crier with a Hoe yes, summoned all good fellows to appear
upon an allarum? at which battle, the boordes end was ever battered with the
gunshot of Good-stomackes, where the chine of Beef, the hagstocke to these
Carpenters, was hewn and squared into diverse parcels, for several purposes:
And the black Jack, merrily trowlyng from one to another, well lyned with the
lyquor of life, moystened and molified the malecontent humors of these merry
mates, to their Masters credice, and their own comfort.

But me thinks I hear the maligners of this mystery or profession, like
Momus mates murmr, saying to them selves, He tells us of their delicate
diet, handsome habit, and pleasant passing the Summer of their years: But
when this lusty (...) begun (with the Moon) to wane, and that crooked old
age had eclipsed the bright Sunshyne of their golden days, with duskie black
Clouds of dark morpheus; I mean, when that stealing Time, had consumed the
oil of their Lamps, and every joint begun to grow stark, not able to
supply his former place; what course then they took, to maynteine them selves
from misery, in this their greatest necessity, he does omit, as a thing
altogether impertinent to this discourse: but in my judgment, a thing most
necessary amongst them to be considered, and the very mark whereat they ought
chieflyest to aim: for else, who is so simple but will confess, that the
Seruingmans profession (in regard of their pleasure and ease) is to be
preferred before diverse sorts of people, of more wealth, and greater ability,
if their end were not misery, pennurie, scarcity, and almost beggerie: For,
I hold it an infallible rule, An old Seruingman, a young Beggar. What
Gentleman now a days, that gives wages and liveries, does not look his
Servant should deserve them? and when the Servant is old and crooked, and
altogether unable to help him self, how much more is he then unable to
deserve mayntenance at his Masters hands? To this Objection, thus much: What
sotte is so simple to ask a question, not knowing the cause? or to make
answer, being altogether ignorant of the question? My Discourse tends only
to set forth the florishyng and golden days of Seruingmens first ordeyning:
and the Objection comes forth, With what Gentleman now a days. etc.

But least he, or they should think me stricken mute with the first blow, not
able to abide a second charge, I will answer so much of the question as shall
seem any way appertayning to this place, and leave the rest to a fitter
opportunity.

Seeing therefore I have handled the Ver, aestas, and Autumnus, of this
Seruingmans estate, I will not leave him till his fourth part be fully finished,
since the Objection has allowed, that these three parts of his life was spent
in pleasure and delyght, according to my former saying: But you must note by
the way, that I hold straight on the path wherein first I set foot, not
medlyng with these latter or leaden days, till time minister occasion. Now for
the fourth, which is the Hiems, and last part of man's years, commonly called
Crooked old age; as David says, are to every man nothing but mere misery,
in regard of weakening his strength, and decaying of nature: which hoarie
hears, if they bring to every man misery in general, it must then needs
touch this degree in particular. But this misery common to all, and by the law
of nature so forcible, as the wealthy Cressus, the witty Solomon nor the
subtyle Simon, can any way eschew, if Atropos do not befriende them in cutting
the thread of their life before these days of decay approach, cannot I say be
only attributed to Seruingmen, and them by that means accounted most
miserable. But to leave this natural misery, and come to the misery that by
pennurie, scarcity, and want of worldly wealth, is incident. Thus much I say
for this profession: When that Boreas boisterous blastes had blown the buddes
and blossoms from their trees, and that Hiems hoarie frostes had even nipped
and wythered the fruits of their florishyng Summer, this kind care had every
Lord of his attendant, and every Master of his Servant that by these, and such
like means, they provided for their Attendantes and Servants, to maynteyne
them from want of worldly necessaries, even until the fall of their leaf was
fully finished, and their vital days ended. Some would give their Servants
an Annuitie or yearly portion of Money, duering their natural lives, over and
above their Wages, to the end, that when their service could not merit
mayntenance, in respect of their years and vnwealdines, considering they had
reaped the first fruits of their Benefice, even the Summer of their years,
this their beueuolence should maynteyne these their Servants from worldly
pennurie, to their last hour. Other some Masters, in the same regard, would
procure for their Servants such Martages, as they should think them selves
sufficiently rewarded and satisfied for their whole service. Again, some other
would reward their Servants with the Lease of a Farm, not as they are let now
adays, like a bridle for a brainesicke Jade, Durante been placito, and rearing
the rent, but Durante vita, and rent free: so that this angelical Oil, should
so molifie his decaying members, and revive his dying spirit, as the thought of
crooked old Age should neither hinder his duty in his service, nor with
grief shorten his days. By these, and such like means, were always
Seruingmen so provided for in those days, that none, no not one (that reserved
that reverent regard and duty toward his Master that he ought) but passed
his youth and age, in as much pleasure, plenty, and worldly felicity, to his
hearts content, as any other, of what estate, degree, or calling soever. And
thus much for the florishyng prime of this profession. Now follows the third,
and last part of this tractate, wherein shall be declared (God willing) the ruin,
downe-fall, and decay, of this m^^sterie or profession. First you have heard
the original, and of what moulde or metal this Seruingman was made.
Secondly, in what pleasure, plenty, and delyght, in the first age of their
ordeyning, they past their time, even A crepundus ad t^^minum vitae.

Now gentle Reader, if thou will with patience peruse these unpolished lines,
and willingly lend me thy senses, to suruay a capite ad c^^lcem, this last
part of this my first practice: thou shall therein plainly behold the manifold
occasions that has moved me to undertake this heavy task, which may be
thought in me a malepart presumption, in regard of my insufficiency. For even
as the erector or buylder of an House, if he lay his platform or foundation
more large then the pence in his purse, or the coin in his coffers is able to
counteruayle or discharge, so that his ability is not sufficient to end his
beginning, what he is censured, the simple may easily surmise, Even so I,
having undertaken this task, and laid this platform, fitter to carry Stones
and Mortar to this buylding, then to be thought the workman, having I say
laid this foundation, and far unfit to finysh it, what the gentle Reader may
think of me, I leave it to his good consideration: For Cum desunt vires,
tamen est laudanda voluntas, but the mutteryng or murmuryng of Momus mates I
weigh not, for I hold them like barking Dogs, that ceasseth not to trouble,
as well the honest traveler, as the lurking loyterer. But least I should fall
into a laborinth, not able to free my self from captivity, I mean, to go so
far beside my text, as to forget where I left, I will return again to my
purpose. Since therefore I have divided this Tractate into three parts, namely
the original and end of this ordinance, the flooryshyng prime of this
profession, and lastly the ruin and decay thereof: two of the which, I have
already handled. Now the third and last, which is the downfall and decay of
this buylding, I will also divide and reduce into three several points,
though infinite are the causes that may be alleged in this matter.

First, the death of Liberality. Secondly, the ambition and disdain of the
plain Countreyman, and the gentlemanly Seruingman. Thirdly and lastly, the
decay of Hospitality, or good Housekeeping.

Now for the first, which is the death of Liberality, at whose Funeralles or
Obsequies the Seruingman may be holden chief mourner: Of the year, and day,
of his original and beginning, I am altogether uncertain, unless he took
his beginning primo die et anno salutis, in the first day and year of our
savior Christ Jesus: whose love and liberality to mankind, so far surpassed
all others, as I am sure he had either thence his beginnig, or was then grown
to his full perfection: but then, or whenever he had his beginning (it is not
greatly material) since he is now almost buried in the bottomless pit of
oblivion, he is sure now either altogether dead, or else so aged, as he lies
bedrid in some obscure place: Where he is surely I know not; but if I were of
that power to pay his ransom, and free him from captivity, or of that
knowledge in the Physical science, as by ministryng unto him Potions I might
mittigate his passions, I would endeavor with my whole power and skyll to
procure his freedom and health, that I might crave of him some acquaintance,
for I much desire his friendshyp and familiarity. But sure in my days he has
been such a stranger as I could never have his acquaintance, no not know him
from his overthwart neighbor Prodigality. I would feign learn what is his
countenance and habit, that if I meet him, I may know him, and crave his
acquaintance. Surely, I fear he walks early in the morning, and then it is no
marvel though I know him not, for my hour is eight a clock, though it is an
infallible Rule, Sanat, sanctificat, et ditat, surgere mane: But if I thought
early rising would prevail in this quest, I would change my hour, and begone
at four: but I am almost past hope of his recovery, since his two utter
enemies, Prodigality and Covetousness, does daily pursue him with such deadly
hatred. These are two extremes, and Liberality ameane betwixt them both,
which is always a virtue: but Hercules ne contra duos, though his part was the
mean to make the music the sweeter, yet it is accounted harsh harmony where
Liberality bears a part: And why? because his two opposite enemies has
banished him these (I may say) inhumane coasts. Where he lives I know not;
but sure I am, his exile, banyshment, death, or decay, has brought this utter
ruin and overthrow to this profession, as further by the sequel hereof shall
plainly appear.

I have told you before, that Seruingmens only mayntenance consists upon
Liberality, for their wages was never (in any age able to defray their
necessary charges and expenses. But I would not have you to m^^sconster my
meaning in this Liberality, that it was bestowed upon them in mere
commisseration, pity, and charity, as them of ability do upon impotent
Beggars: but the Servant by his duty and diligence, did merit and deserve it
before he had it, though it was over and above his covenant and bargayne.

And again, besides this good mind of the Master to his own Servant, there
was an other Liberality, as thus: If the Servant were sent to his Masters
friend, or familiar, with a present or friendly remembrance, though he were
not at that time provided to requite his equal with the like gift or present,
yet he would show his thankfulness toward his Servant, in liberally
rewarding him for his pains: And this kind of Liberality is now very much
decayed.

There was also a Liberality allotted and belonging to the Seruingman, in this
sort: If one Gentleman invited an other to his house, or that of courtesy and
kindness he came to see him, the Seruingmans duty and diligence, to do this
his Masters neighbor and friend service and honor, though that was their
Masters pleasure and command, yet in regard of their extraordinary pains,
some pence redounded to their profit: For a Gentleman in those days, thought
it (as it is in deed) the greatest disgrace that could happen unto him, to
omit thankfulness for kindness received: But Covetousness does now so much
corrupt, as they either think it is idely spent, or evil bestowed that is
given in that manner, without care of their credit, or consideration why they
should give it, or else their memory does fail them more then in former time
it was wont: for sure I am, that they do either many times forget, or else are
stacke in performance of this Gentlemanly gratitude and liberality. Est virtus
vera nobintas, et liberalitas est virtus, ergo liberalitas est vera nobilitas:
true it is, there are either few or none that are endued with wealth and
worldly blessings, but they covet to be comely covered with the handsome habit
of their highest tytles, Nobility, or Worship, or else whatsoever: but whether
on them these titles be rightly bestowed, or no, that I leave to the censure
and judgment of their own consciences. And if that Liberality be always the
companion of true Nobility, as it is in deed (for they are as near joined
together as Faith and Good works) Then, as S. James says, The good Tree will
bring forth good fruit: so the true Noble mind cannot be without his
fruits, even Liberality it self will bud and planely appear in the branches
of this body.

Is Liberality then a Virtue, and so near a kinsman to the true Noble mind,
as it is the very scuttion, creast, and badge thereof, so that if this Coat
and Cognizance walk the streets, the Master thereby may easily be known?
surely it is: but if a Nobleman or Gentleman now adays, could no otherwise be
known but by his Liberality, I fear me, if I should tread the Strand, I
should often (for want of knowledge) vnduetifully iustle some of them, and
scarce lend my Cappe, to whom a low leg should belong. For trust me, I met
(not long since) a Gentleman in Fleetestreete, whose living is better worth
then.2000. Marks yearly, attended with only one Man, whose apparel was
much better then his Masters, though he was a Justice of Peace is his
Country. But I speak not this, either to discommend the Gentleman's homely
habit, or commend to Seruingman in his excess: but the misery of that
mind, that regarded more Coin then his credit.

But me thinks I hear one interrupt me, saying, If your sense of seeing be
not besotted, you may easily discern a difference betwixt the Potentate and
the Peasant, the Gentleman and the meaner person: And if your heart be not too
hautie, you may render a reverent regard, and due courtesy to whom in duty
it does belong. For if there were no other note nor difference to know the one
from the other, a Gentleman from his inferior, the Potentats costly apparel,
handsome habit, and gorgious garments, does always easily bewray him; also
his men and attendantes (when he walks abroad) does show what he is: for men
of meaner estates do not use to go so guarded, or walk so worthily attended.
Wherefore, as I said before, easy it is, if you be thereunto willing to lend
Cappe or knee, or other duty, to whom it shall rightly belong or appertain.

To this Objection I answer thus: First, for apparel, surely I think him
some far borne Countreyman, that thus obiecteth, where in his Country a
Satin Doblet, nay if it be but a Ueluet Gyrdle or Waste, is of as much power
and force, as Boreas boisterous blastes in a wyndie day, or a long Staff with
a good arm, the one blowyng a man's Cappe from his head perforce, and the other
teaching a man to make courtesy, being well laid on. For I say, in some places
of England, let but a pair of Ueluet breeches make their appearance, what
personage so ever they retain to, they shall have more Caps, and low Legs,
then the Lord Mayor of Applebie within his whole limit, precinct, or
corporation. But if he be such a cunning Lapidarie as can discern colors,
and tell the nature and virtue of every Stone by his outward appearance, then
I would gladly (if I might make so bold with him) crave his company to walk
Paul's in a Term time: and if his shoes be not too near worn, foot it
down to Westminster haull by land: in which perambulation, if he can rightly
discipher the nature of every gold Lace, and the virtue of every silk
Stocking at the first blush, nay, after long perusing the same, if he can show
me by their royal Roabes, and gorgious Garments, the Noble man, and
Gentleman, from the Uerser, Setter, Cross biter, and Cunnie-catcher, then I will
yield to his saying, and learn some of his cunning, that I may ever hereafter
know my duty the better, and spare my Cappe and Leg from such mates of no
merit, as many times I lend them unto unknown. But surely I hold him in a
great error, that thinks him self thus cunnyng, and no less able to
perform this by his skill (I mean) to know every estate by his habit, then
the Alcumistes unable by their Philosophers Stone, to make a metamorphosis of
every metal, and turn all into Gold that they therewith touch.

And whereas he alleges, that the Seruingmen and attendantes do always
bewray the Nobleman and Gentleman what he is, that I deny: for, fallet hec
regula quociescunque, I meet a Gentleman that may dispende yearly by his
revenues.2000. pounds of good and lawful Englysh money, with only one Boy at
his heels, walking up Ludgate hill, and by that time I come to Paul's middle
walk, I shall see Sir Dauie Debet, with.vi. or.viii. tall fellows attending
him, whetting their knives ready to dine with Duke Humfrie: but though they be
sharp set, they may take leisure enough, for there all lirching is barde by
and maine. But if their hard Commons were the worst, that might be mended with
after noones batling, for there is good Ale and Bread in Paul's petty Cannons:
but there is a sore Giant, a Sargent I mean, with whom they must wrestle, if
Pater noster Row be no better to them then Creed Lane: if then sir John
Makeshift (whose last acre lies morgaged to the mercy of sise sincke) has
many times.vi. or.viii. tall fellows attending him, and an ancient Gentleman,
that has fair lands, and great revenues, whose only study is Arithmatique,
and therein most practiced in multiplication and the goulden number, manneth
him self with only one Boy, How should it be possible to discern this
difference, and know the one from the other, the Gentleman from the
Swashbuckler, by his apparel, attendants, and company?

But what is the reason, may some say, that a Gentleman of great worth and
ability, does walk nowadayes so slenderly attended? and a new vpstart
Caueliro, whose Fathers chief Badge or Cognizance was the Weauers Shuttle, or
the Tailors Sheares, will tread the streets so stately attended, and so
gallantly guarded with a sort of seemly (if so I may term them) and
floryshing fair Cloakes, as though he were the Prince of Peacockes, or Marquis
of some stately Moulhill? Mary even this, The loss of Liberality in the one,
and the power of Prodigality in the other: for if the Gentleman of high
regard and esteem, were not too studious in these two branches of the art of
Arithmetique, Multiplication and the Goulden number: if I say, Liberality, the
badge and cognisaunce of true Nobility and worship, were not by his power and
authority committed to common Jail, then would he, preferring worth before
wayght, walk more worthily attended, guarded gallantly with a sort of seemly
Servants, always well appointed, as well to show his power, as to grace his
person. And sir Henry Hadland, if he would well waygh and consider how many
days, nay weeks, months, and years, his father spent in sore toil and
travail, every hour and moment, day and night, carping and caring, how of
patches to make a weareable garment, and scrape some Crowns into his Coffers,
whereby he, with his posterity, might be more able to maynteine themselves in
their trade and calling neighborlike, would never so prodigally and carelessly
spend, consume, and make havoc in one Winter of that, which so many, yea and
fruitful Summers before had yielded. This prodigality procures a double
misery, a miserable want in the end to them that so carelessly consumes their
patrimony, and mere misery to the covetous Cormorant: for, says he, Felix
quem socij nanim periisse procellis cum vidit, in tutum flectit sua carbasa
portim, it is good to be rich, a man may be yoore when he will: So by the
example of this prodigal person, he that has wherewith to maynteyne himself
in very Gentlemanlike sort, with men about him for his credit, being descended
of an ancient house and worthy parentage, burieth in oblivion his state and
dignity, and becoming a very servile slave, and thraull, to this donghyll
dross, his gold and money, leads his life in most miserable manner. Where is
then this Liberality become, that has been in former time so highly esteemed?
Look in the.vii. Chapter of Ecclesiasticus, and there you shall find a
friendly persuasion, Be liberal unto all men: much more then unto your
Servants and Attendantes, meriting and deserving this your liberality. And in
an other place of the same Chapter he says, You Masters, restrain not your
Servants of their liberty, and be sure you leave not your faithful Servant a
poor man.

O how many Gentlemen in these days does respect this worthy saying? or have
that care of their faithful Servants, that this place of Scripture does
command? sure they are few or none. The liberal Master is a rare Phoenix: so
that the saying of Elias may well in these our days be verified, There is
none, not one left in all Israel, that fears the Lord, and works
righteousness. Even so it may be said, There is none, no not one, in this age,
that bears that love in Liberality toward his Servants, that he in
goodwill ought, or they by duty do daily merit. But it may be said to me,
as the Lord said to Elias, I have not only seven, but seventy times seven
Servants in Israel, that has not bowed their knees to Ball, though unto Elias
they were thought so small a number: Even so, not only seven, but seventy
times seven Gentlemen, in whom the ancient virtue, the badge and crest of true
Nobility, even Liberality it self, does budde, blossom, and bear her
accustomed fruit in due season, as in former ages.

This number is since, by tract of time, much lessened and impaired: but
howsoever, sure I am that Liberality, as I said before, is either quite dead,
banyshed, or else plays least in sight, as Banckroutes, that walks narrow
lanes, or keeps them out of the Liberty, least they should sing the Counter
tenor, or at Ludgate, For the Lords sake. But pity it is, that Liberality
that honest fellow should, dying, be buried without his rites and ceremonies,
his funeralles and obsequies, to be duly solemnized. I fear me that none was
so charitable as to ring his soul knell, or bestow on him a winding sheet. O
that I had lived when he dyed, or had been at the making of his Will, though I
had been none of his Executors, nor had had any Legasie bestowed upon me, yet
would I, at my own charges, have seen him honestly brought forth to his long
home (as the saying is:) but sure he died Intestate, and for heirs Apparent I
think he had none, for since his death I never heard o^^ any his successors:
Notwithstanding though he were before my time, yet have I heard so much good of
him, as loath I am that his fame should be buried in oblivion: wherefore I will
(though I be no professed Poet) frame some Epitaph of his life and death, though
the place and time of his death be unto me altogether unknown, and leave it
to ensuing ages.

It is not for the Sheepheards O ten pipe, to presume to keep his part in
consort in Princes Palaces, where heavenly harmony is daily harbored; neither
I to take upon me Poetry, whose judgment therein can scarcely discern what
feet a Uerse does stand upon: notwithstanding, since I have promised an
Epitaph, I will perform it, though it lie buried with the shauinges of the
Press in the bottom of a Dryfat: wherefore, hoping the Fiddle may be
accepted, for want of musical Instruments, give ear, and you shall hear his
best tune.

Cease Sun to lend thy glorious shine,
Moon darkened be, as cloudy night,
Stars stay your streaming lights divine,
That wonted were to shine so bright:
Weep woofull wightes, and wayle with me,
For dead is Liberality.
You Fire, Water, Earth, and Air,
And what remaynes at your command:
Fowls, Fysh, or else, be fyld with care,
And mark the sum of my demand:
Weep, weep I say, and wayle with me,
For dead is Liberality.
You silver Streams, that wont to flow,
Upon the banks of Helicon:
You sacred Nymphs, whose stately show
Bedimd the bright of Phaeton,
Weep, weep I say, and wayle with me,
For dead is Liberality.
If Due-desart to Court resort,
Expecting largely for his pain,
The Prince he finds then alamore,
No lue, his labor is spent in vain:
May he not then come wayle with me?
Yes, dead is Liberality.
The paringes from the Princes Fruit,
That silie Grooms were wont to feed,
Now Potentates for them make suite:
True Gascoine says, the Lord has need:
Weep therefore weep, and wayle with me,
For dead is Liberality.
The Courtly crew, of Noble minds,
Would give reward for every Leg:
To crouch and kneel now duty binds,
Though Suitor naught but right does beg:
Weep therefore weep, and wayle with me,
For dead is Liberality.
When Countries causes did require,
Each Nobleman to keep his house,
Then Blewcoates had what they desire,
Good cheer, with many a full carouie:
But now not as it wont to be,
For dead is Liberality.
The Haull boordes-ende is taken up,
No Dogs do differ for the bones,
Blacke-Iacke is left, now Glass or Cup,
It makes me sigh with many groones,
To think what was, now thus to be,
By death of Liberality.
Where are the Farms that wont to fly
Rent free by service well deserved?
Where is that kind Annuitte,
That men in age from want preserved?
What, do you look for wont to be?
No, dead is Liberality.
What Squire now but rackes his Rentes,
And what he ^^ath, who will g^^ue more?
T^^e giffe gaffe promise he repentes,
The Lord has need, surceasse therefore:
Weep, weep, for now you well may see,
That dead is Liberality.
The golden world is past and gone,
The Iron age has run his race,
The lump of Lead is left alone,
To press the poor in every place:
Naught else is left but misery,
Since death of Liberality.
Weep, weep, for so the case requires,
The world has lost her second Sun:
This is the sum of my desires,
To end where erst I have begun:
Even still I say come wayle with me,
The death of Liberality.
Thus you have heard, the death of Liberality to be one of the especial
occasions that has wrought the utter overthrow, ruin, and subuertion of
Seruingmens estate. Now for the ambition and disdain of the Countreyman, and
the Gentlemanly Seruingman.

First for the Yeoman, or Husbandmans son, aspyring from the Plough to the
Parlor, I hold these the contempt of his vocation, Fear, to hazard his life
in his Princes Marciall affairs, and, the ambitious desire of dignity, to be
the especial occasions that has moved him to change his habit and color,
from Ierkin to Coat, and from Russet to Blew. In the first he imitates Icarus,
who presuming upon his Waxen wings, soared so high, as the heat of fiery
Phaeton melted the wings of this vnfethered Foul, and so cast him fully as
low as he had his beginning: even so, this Yeomans Son prying into this
easy and pleasant life of Seruingmen, and considering the droyling he has
about his drudgerie, without consideration that he is called to this Countries
labor, or how far he is unfit to execute the others office, not acquainted
therewithal, takes upon him this new trade of living, in my judgment as far
unable to execute the others office, as Icarus to soar in the highest heavens:
but pity it is that they are not as well punished for their aspyring minds,
as Icarus for his proud and presumptuous enterprise, Tempora mutantur et nos
mutamur in illis, when crooked old age comes, and they shaken off, as by
their vnwildinesse not able to merit four Marks and a Lyuerie, then they are
faigne with heavy cheer retro spectare; and wishes that eye had been blind
wherewith they first pried into the floryshing profession of Seruingmen:
floryshing I say, in their first age, but now by these and such like occasions
ruinated, and almost clean withered.

The second occasion that made Blew so dear, was this, These latter days are
more dangerous and troublesome then former ages, so that many Kings and
Princes are even occasioned to maynteine their right by force of Arms and
Hostility. And now falling out so that an Army must be leauied, to be
employed at home or abroad, for the defense of the Country, or offense to the
enemy, Robin Russetcoate must of necessity be one of the number, as good
reason that all sorts should be assistant to such service. Now his Father,
loath to part from his beloved Son, will give Marks and Pounds to redeem
him, and keep him at home from doing his Prince and Country service. And if
he can by any favor, coin, or kindness, blow over these boisterous blastes,
and keep his Son from being made deaf by the gunshot of great Ordinance:
then he will seek by all means possible to prevent a second fear, and makes
haste to a Gentleman, or Justice of peace, to whom when he comes, he lendes
more Cappes and Legs, then a good Arithmetitian can almost in a long time
number: then comes, I beseech your Worship, and at every word a low leg:
the tenor of whose petition may easily be surmysed. The Gentleman being of
Servants sufficiently furnished, and having all his Offices full, loath to
displace any, well considering how far unfit such a fellow is to be lapt in a
Lyuerie, or harbored in the Haull, who wonted daily to attend in the
Oxe-parlor, shapeth him an answer: Friend, I can not pleasure you, I have no
place void that your Son can supply. The seely old man returns home
sad and sorrowful, not knowing how to prevent the next Alarm: but remembering
the old saying of the popysh Priests, that wont to make money of their
Mattens, No penny, no Pater noster, puts in practice, by the oil of
Angels, to mollify the hard heart of this Maiestrate: then comes he again, I
have brought your worship a coople of fat Capons, Pigge, Goose, or Lamb; now
good your Worship stand my good Master, and take my Son into your service,
I will apparel him at my own charge, he shall ask nothing but meat,
drink, and a Lyuerie, with other necessaries I will maynteine him like a man.
Now the Gentleman, calling to mind that hereby he might save four Marks and
a Lyuerie, beside a preferment that his Man would expect for his long and
duetifull service, bethinketh himself one way or other, Nodum in serpo
querere, and thereby to make benefit of this last motion: then he watches
opportunity, and even for breaking a Bulrush, Facile cum inuenire baculum, ad
cedendum Canem, Knave pack out of my doors, I will keep no such as thou art:
with a thousand such like opprobrious liueries, neither befittyng a Gentleman
to give, nor a right Seruingman to receive. But thus ridding his hands of one
of his Servants that then most expected preferment, he gives entertainment
to sir Rowsand Russet-coates son, who restes no less glad of his place, then
the Foul of a fair day: But dulce bellum in expertis, If he considered what
the want of fire is in a Winter evening, he would rather with the Emmet labor
in Summer, then with the Fly starve in Winter, though the Winter of
Seruingmens years was ever sufficiently provided, as before I have declared:
but every thing is worse for the wearing. Then th^^s goodly Yeoman, thrusten
into a Blew coat, holds himself a better Seruingman, then he that has
spent his whole time in that trade, though (simple swayne) he know not how to
hold a Trencher.

The third, and last occasion of this new enormitie, is the ambicious desire
of dignity: for in former ages (as before I have said) when Seruingmen were
had in good regard, by diverse occasions they were many times highly preferred,
as by their wit and will many of them often merited great matters: Some of them
would carry them selves so soberly, discreetely, and wisely, as they came to
great wealth, worth, and preferment by Marriage: some again, amongst the
Potentates were so much esteemed, as they were thought worthy, and in deed
preferde to Offices and places of great credit: and many other means they had
whereby they came to great promotion. Which wealth, worth, credit, and
preferment, these uncivil sottes gape after, and surmise them selves worthyly
to merit, though (God wot) many of them are as much unworthy to keep the
Dogs out of the dyning Chamber, as I unable to express their insufficiency.

Now for the disdain of the Gentlemanly Seruingman: You have heard before what
metal the right Seruingman was made off, of him self pure and right stuff,
not mixed with any dregs and dross of less esteem: But when this mixture
of mingle-mangle begun, and that he saw him self consorted with a crew of
such clusterfystes, he began to wax weerie of his profession, even loathing
to live in fellowshyp with such unserviceable people, and disdayning the degree
of a seru^^le drudge, resolves either to clear the suite of that Card, or
else to turn over a new leaf: but Herculei labores, it is as hard for him to
thrust Pierce the Ploughman out of his Blew coat, as to tame the shrewysh
tongue of a Kentysh-streete Scoulde; not in regard that the Gentlemen of this
age are so delyghted with their clownish barbarism, but that their mayntenance
does not so stretch the Purse-stringes of their Mai^^ters, as the mayntenance
of the right Seruingman: betwixt whose merits, there is much more difference,
then in these our days betwixt their rewards: for, four Marks and a
Lyuerie, is to them both as current, as.vii. s. vi. d. for a flemysh Angel;
nay, forty shillinges a year keeps a great stir in many Houses, though
it was ordinary.400. years since: but for wages I will omit, till opportunity
be offered. Notwithstanding, to return to my purpose, I would feign know
whether the Iorneyman or Apprentice, the Workman or the Labourer, be more
worthy or better deserving? If the Laborers wages be but.vi. d. a day, and the
Master workman can and will earne a shilling? So much, and more (in my
judgment) ought to be the difference betwixt a right Seruingman, and a new
vpstart Tom all-thummes: For the one, A crepundiis, has been trained up to his
science: the other at.xx. years sets up for him self. But it is maruayle
they are not brought into the Exchequer, using other men's occupations, never
serving Apprentishyp: Exchequer, nay, into the Towne-stockes, a fitter place:
for the occupation is now a days so beggarly, as few, or none of them, is able
to pay the fees to that Court belonging, neither can Thenformer wring any
powlyng pence out of any of their Purses. The old saying is verified, There
are so many of thoccupation, as one can not thrive for throng of his
neighbors. Surely this does prove, that in diebus illis, it was a good trade,
otherwise so many would not have left the Plough, to wayle in the Parlor. But
even as Ringtayles and Bussardes hoooueryng over the Partridge, spoils the
flight of the Falcon, whose magnanimious mind daigneth not to stoop in the
presence of these carrion Scarcrowes, but choseth rather to leave the pray, and
soar abroad, then to wagge her wings, or seem any way conversant amongst
such coapesmates: even so the Gentlemanly Seruingman, whose life and manners
does equal his birth and brynging up, scorneth the society of these sottes,
or to place a Dysh, where they give a Trencher.

But amongst these unfitting fellows for this fraternity, I mean not to place
all Yeomens sons, or others, that are not Gentlemen by birth, God forbid that
I should do them all in general so great wrong: for many there are that come
to deserve the names of Gentlemen, and higher tytles, by Learning, and other
their extraordinary good gifts, whose Father could well content him self with
the name of Goodman. etc. Wherefore, such as have either been brought up in
Learning, and so made fit for this Form, or them that a purili etate have been
practisers of this science, I will make bold to place amongst these
Gentlemanly Seruingmen: for Cicero says, It is more honor and credit to be
the first Gentleman of the name, then so to end, as his posterity cannot
challenge for their inheritance that worthy title: And for my own part, I
think the Scholar (howsoever borne) deserves always the name of a Gentleman.
Therefore filing these, as I said before, upon the roll of right Seruingmen, I
will return again where I left. What inconvenience does grow by this
controversy may easily be seen, known, and understood.

First, for the aspyring mind of the Countreyman, that will needs be lapt in
a Lyuerie, this mischief follows his madness, dearth, scarcity, famine, and
hunger: For I will prove by good reason, that the Yeomans Son leaving his
daily labor (to which from his infancy he has been trained) and taking upon
him the degree of a Seruingman, breeds as many inconveniences in the
Commonwealth, as want of exercises begets diseases in a corpulent body: For
the Yeomans son, as I said before, leaving gee, haygh, for Butlor some more
fair Trenchers to the Table, brings these ensuing vleers amongst the members
of this Common body. First, whereas he him self by the sweat of his brows
and daily hand labor, was able to dig yearly from the womb of the earth,
so much belly timber, as was able to sustain and satisfy the hungry mouths
of.vi.viii. or.x. of his Fathers family, or neighbors near dwelling, and so
much back provision, as would hill, hap, or cover them in seemly sort,
according to their Countries calling: This hand, that was so well employed, Non
sibi solum sed suis, now by change of his vocation, becoming idle, not any way
gettyng meat for his own mouth, the ^^eelie souls that were by his industry
before fully fed, must of necessity now perysh with famine, and starve for
want of clothing, for that the means of their mayntenance is now thus
metamorphosed: for the hand of any man scorning his office to feed his mouth,
the whole body of necessity must perysh: even so this body, this hand thus
disdayning his duty.

Again, this is an other enormitie that hereof proceeds, This hand that
maynteyned vi.viii. or.x. as I said before, ceasseth not only to do this good
to his Country, but also in process of time by changing his vocation,
breeds and begets a further mischief and inconvenience, to the hurt and
hinderance of the Common wealth, as after by circumstances I shall declare. For
having thus altered his vocation, he must alter his habit, countenance,
conditions, qualities, cogitations: and what not? he must as well as he can
make satisfaction for the Queens current English before by him clipped, he
must now make it full wayght, good and current lawful English: His habit must
now be fashionate in proportion and color: Northeren Carsies not now
weareable in Breetches, for it will shrink, and the fashion is now to have
Uenetians of the largest sise: if they will not hold a bushel a breetch, they
are not saleable in Birtchen lane. For Kentish russet, it is no color, it
will make no show in a Country Church: But the best Broad-cloth, and newest
color, must cover this late Country Courtier. His pase it must not be the other
Leg totherway, and the other Leg totherway, as he was wont to throw them, when
he turned his Cattle from Plough to Pasture, making Indentures all along the
ditches: But his gate and iesture of his body must be direct and upright,
treading as true as though he would tell what paces are in a Furlong. His
courtesy with Cappe and Leg must be as his Apparel of the newest fashion,
with all other the rites and ceremonies belonging to this new taken up trade:
no small time he spendes before he be in this an artist, and mean while, his
senses are so besotted, as he quite forgets how to hold the Plough, or whip
the Carthorse: and for the cunning in this craft, not one amongst an hundred of
them, ever in all his life time, attayneth to the knowledge of his duty, for
Ethiopcum lauare, is an endless labor: even so, to make a Fox tail a
blowing Horn, or of a Country Clown, a sufficient Seruingman: For, Quo semel
est imbuta rec^^ns seruabit odorem testa diu.

He that till twenty is brought up to Plow,
What service in P^^rlor can he do think you?
Is it possible to bend or how a strong Oak as a young Sapline? or to teach
the old fyngers that are grown styffe and stark, to their full age, to play
upon any musical Instrument, with such facility and leauinesse of joints, as
the young Fingers that are nimble, and to any thing tractable, in regard they
are but grystles and sinews vngrowen? Even such is the impossibility, to make
the Countreyman that has been brought up in Husbandry, and other bodyly
labor, whose hands, tongue, and all the rest of his members, have been daily
and hourly employed to one and the same kind of exercise, now to altar and
change every office of his said members, and them to employ in several and
unknown exercises. But some may object and say, You make such a mystery of
your profession, and such cunning to belong it, as without a man have all his
members apt, neat, and nimble; as his Hands plyant to several purposes, his
Tongue eloquent to object, answer, or discourse pleasantly, his Person and
iesture handsome and comely, his Wit, Discretion, and Courage, answerable to
all the rest of his parts, as if he want these, nay any one of these, he is
Seruus nomine n^^n^^re, He is a Seruingman in name, but not in deed. I hold
you are much mistaken, for if a man can place a Dysh, fill a Boule, and carry
his Masters Rapier, what more is or can be required at his hands? And if this
be all in all to discharge that duty, what blunt fellow, how brutishly soever
he has been brought up, but can and may learn quickly, to discharge so much
as is here required:

O foolysh objection, and thrice sottysh surmise, no less simple, then mere
simplicity it self, not much unlike the Popysh Priests of the old Learning
(as the say) which thought them selves worthy, nay, sufficient to discharge a
place in the Ministry, and take orders, if they could say or sing by roate,
or otherwyise, the old Confitemini, or, Nunc dimittis seruum tuum domine,
though they could better sing the whole Mass, then decline Dimittis: But as
the old verse is worthy notyng, and true in deed, that Qui been can, been
con, been le, presviter debet esse, and none else, no none ought to take upon
them that function, unless they could read well, sing well, and expound
well: So none ought (in my judgment) to take upon him the degree of a
Seruingman, unless he be furnished with those qualities and parts that before
I have set down belonging a Seruingman, and befitting his profession.

And if it be then requisite in a Seruingman, that he should be of wit,
discretion, government, and good bringing up, fine, neat, nimble, and well
qualited, to discharge those duties, which before I have set down belonged
him, and were required at his hands in the prime of his ordeyning, and for
those qualities was so called to that place, as without them, nay, every of
them, he could not sufficiently discharge his duty therein: how much would
then the founders of this fraternity have frowned, to have admitted one into
this fellowshyp, that had wanted not only one, but all these parts before
mentioned, so requisite, and the full measure of them so much at his hands
expected and required? would they, think you, have been contented, to have
entertained a man that could only have carried a Dysh, given a Trencher, or
carried a Rapier after them? No, they did not only require this to be done in
decent and comely manner, which none, no not one of them which is objected,
fit enough for this profession, can do as is required, but much more he must
over and besides the qualities before in him required, be able to give
entertaynement to a stranger in decent and comely manner, deliver a Message
discreetely and wisely to a Potentate, Maiestrate, or meaner person, to talk
and discourse with his Master upon foreign or domestical affairs, nay much
more then I can express, for want of judgment and experience herein: and if I
were of knowledge sufficient, yet would my pen be weerie, before I should at
large express the whole duty to this profession belonging. But I will not
take upon me to teach others that, wherein I am my self but a learner, least
it might be said unto me (and not undeservedly) Turpe doctori cum culpa
redarguit ipsum, You take upon you to teach others their duty, and cannot
your self perform it. Therefore I will surceasse to wade any further into
this Foorde, least I should be drowned in the deapth, or loose my self in this
Laborinth. If then all these duties, and many more be required in a Seruingman:
How much then insufficient think you is the Yeomans son, that begins
at.xx. to take upon him this trade? Thus you have heard what inconvenience does
grow by the aspyring mind of the Countreyman: Now what hurt does happen to the
Commonwealth, by the disdain of the Gentlemanly Seruingman, a word or two,
and so an end of this part.

You have heard before from whence this Seruingman was descended, of ancient
and worthy Parentage, yet his mayntenance not altogether correspondent: and
the causes why he was no better by his Parents provided for, are before at
large expressed: his mayntenance I say was but some annual portion, and that
after the deceasse of his Parents, which without some other help, was no way
able to maynteine him Gentlemanlike, and therefore called to this profession,
for the better supportyng of him according to his estate, without charging of
his friends further then his Fathers Legasie, his estate, birth, calling, and
credit, no way thereby blotted, blemished, stained, impaired, or impeached,
but much bettered for wealth and worth: in worth, in regard he was fellow to
no inferior: and in wealth, because he kept his own, and often increased his
tallent by his diligence and desert. But now being forced to consort him self
with men of less merit, and that they shall equal him in esteem, and better
him in reward, I mean, they coming in the after noone at four a clock into
the Uineyarde, shall have their hire for the whole day, in as full or larger
measure, then he that has endeavored himself Manibus pedibusque, with tooth
and nail, that is, even to the uttermost of his power from.vi. in the morning,
to the last hour, truly to earne his whole days wages, begins much to
disdain this drudgerie, and so leaves the Uineyarde wholly to these
unskillful workmen, and loytering laborers: And now being not as before set
aworke, but missyng that part of his mayntenance before mentioned, which he got
in service, How do you think he can carry himself in statu quo prius? no, it
cannot be without some extraordinary means: Either he must be more chargeable
to his friends then his Father willed him, or else procure his mayntenance by
some worse means then will stand with his birth or credit. What need I
gloss upon the text, or seem to dance masked in a Net? truth it is, he
must live, and he will live. How? like a Man? yea, and like a Gentleman. What,
and want living? that is no matter, he will live by his Wits. What, by the art
of Alcumistrie, to metamorphis other Metal into Money? or by conueying the
Indies into England, or England into the Indies? No, no, Pewter, Brass, nor
Tin, we can not spare, to turn into Gold or Silver: and for the Indies to
come into England, we have no room, unless he can command the Sea to give
it place, which does on every side so round immure us, and I am sure it loves
us too well, to leave us vndefenced: What restes then? He can not, as Christ
did, work miracles, to turn Water into Wine; but he can do this miracle, by a
writ of Remove he can displace Money, or Gold, finding it unseemly seated,
and place it higher or lower, as he finds it worthy: and if the sight of it be
too garysh, and offend his eyes, he can do this miracle, he can turn it into
Wine, which shall be more pleasant to his taste, then was the sight to his eye:
and after all, turn the Wine into Water, to show his power and pre-eminence
over it, and how smally he esteems this worldly dross and pelf. But what
Court this Writ of Remove comes from, or whether it be ex officio or no, there
is the question, but that doubt I leave for men of more judgment to discide:
yet notwithstanding, thus much I will say, that if the breaking, transgressing,
and violating, of good Laws and Statutes in a Common wealth, for the public
weal established, be offensive, dangerous, and hurtful to the state of the
said weal public, then surely this disdain that I have hitherto spoken off,
must of necessity engender many diseases in this common body, to his great
hurt and hinderance.

Much more surely I could have said in discribing particulerly the
inconveniences hereof proceeding, but loath I am to protract time with frivolous
phrases, and seem too tedious in a matter so apparent. Wherefore gentle Reader,
you see how dangerous is this disdain, and how hurtful to the Common wealth,
and bear with me I beseech you, in that I pass it over so slightly, for, Quod
sub inteligiter non deest, that that is behind I leave to your good
consideration.

But me thinks I hear you say, You have made a long discourse of this
ambition and disdain, what mischief and inconvenience does thereof proceed
to the Common wealth, and to all in general: but, what hurt or hinderance does
thereof grow in particular, to the state and profession of Seruingmen in this
age, that you leave altogether untouched, which (as I take it) should be the
sum of your Treatise. I answer no, I have in some sort handled it already:
but if I have not therein satisfied your expectations to the full, I will
briefly give you a note or two more, and so an end of this part.

For the Countreyman that will needs eleuate his voice a note above Ela, that
will with Icarus have waxen Wings to fly aloft, because Feathers be to light
in a boisterous wind: this fellow I say, that imagines he can sing Pricksong at
the first sight, before he can say his Gammoth, when he steps in to play his
pryses, imployeth all his parts, to see if he have any thing in him so to
commend him, as thereby to gain the good lyking of his new Master. But
finding in himself nothing worthy esteem, and that his parts and gifts
cannot deserve nor gain him that he expectes at his Masters hands, he
turns over a new leaf, and seeks by sinister means to effect that, which
otherwise he could not by any good means bring to pass. Then he begins,
like a Politician, to enter into consideration of his Masters humor; and if he
be prodigal, he preaches of Gentlemanlyke liberality: if covetous and
worldly, then he turns his copy, and prattles of sparing, he tells him he
keeps too many idle fellows, his Butterie is too open, and his fare too
costly, less would serve and as well satisfy: with a thousand such like
tales he tyreth his Masters ears: which needs not, for they are subject
enough to hear now adays such pratlyng Parasites, especially talking of
profit or sparing. And if his Master lend him hearing, and seem to allow of
his talk, then he ceasseth not to invent and inuaigh against his fellows,
hoping thereby to creep into sole credit with his Master, and to lift them
out that are men of much more merit, and better desert: but all this his
practice and prattling, is not with sinceere affection to prefer his Masters
profit, but thereby to grope for some gain to himself. For Petty in his
civil conversation, says: That mark when you will, if any seek to come up
or benefit them selves, they seek by briberie, flattery, and such other
sinister means, if they want the gifts of Nature and nurture to the same to
commend them. Now if this new vpstart tradesman prevail in his practice, it
makes the Master slenderly regard his old Servants, it makes him again
smally, or not at all, reward them for their long service, and good desartes;
it cutteth them short of their wonted allowance, as well for fare and diet, as
for their liberty: which mayning of their mayntenance, and laming their
liberty, makes their lives so miserable, their profession so contemptible, and
their manners so mutable, as not being able (as before) to play the good
fellows, they fall into some desperate humor, or some malecontent
melancholyke, cursing the hour of their creation, the day of their nativity,
the place of their education, and the time wherein they took upon them this
their profession, wyshing they had been brought up otherwise, though it had
been to the greatest and most servile bodyly labor: For, Who is so wobegon,
as first a man, and then none? And thus much for the ambitious mind of the
Countreyman.

Now for the disdain of the right Seruingman, finding himself thus agreeued,
and his disease incurable, without change of air, leaves his place and
profession, and retyreth him self into some solitary desert, where I will
leave him to the mercy of his malecontent humors. Now he being thus banished
as an exile, steps into his place some mate of less merit, which having no
parts to commend him, nor gifts to deserve gaynes, becomes very officious
and diligent, willing to droyle and drudge in any servile sort, so as he may
get meat to his belly, and clothes to his back, without respect of the
credit of his place, his present gain, or his future preferment: and when an
other of better parts comes to supply that place, having a care of his
credit, and respect to his preferment, his Master will regard him no more
then the other, neither in wages nor reward: so that this kind of service by
this means, becomes a very servile servitude. What might further hereof be
discoursed I will omit, since I must touch it more at large in the sequel of
this treatise, and therefore thus much shall suffice concerning this ambition
and disdain.

Now follows the last part of this Tractate, wherein I will show (God willing)
into what utter ruin, downfall, decay, and mere misery, this state of
Seruingmen is fallen, by the decay of Hospitality and Good-housekeeping. It
were a travel too tedious to show a capite, ad calc^^m, all the causes that
brought this bane and bail to the Butterie and Bordes end, which both being
fallen into a consumption, a curelesse disease, there restes no Physic helps
to recover their decaying members. Wherefore I will omit the original, from
whence their malady proceeds, and only speak of the hurt and hinderaunce
that thereof ensues to the trafiquers in this trade, and ministers of this
mystery.

Now truth it is, in diebus illis, in former ages, that Potentates and
Gentlemen of worth, spent their whole Rentes and Revenues in Hospitality and
good Housekeeping (Skot and Lot only excepted) making even at the years end,
never trubling them selves with the art of Arithmetique, to add or substract:
they wayed no wealth, but held Coin in utter contempt, not vouchsafing to
touch, handle, or dispose of it, that care they committed to the consideration
of their Servants, strictly observing the command of wise Cato, Dilige
denarium sed perce dilige formam. It was rare to see any of them sell, or
purchase, or find more Coin in their Coffers then would defray necessary
charges. O how meryly they lived, and what pleasure they took to see the
gunshot of good stomachs come batter the great Chines of their staulled Beef.
To compare the pleasures of their golden days, when Gold was so smally
regarded, with the misery of this latter, nay last age, were able in my
judgment, to wring tears out of the eyes of Adamant. There was no violating
of Faith, nor breach of promise, no hatred nor malice, no cunning nor
Cunnie-catching, no swearing nor forswearing, no fear of fraud, nor mistrust
of friendshyp, no symonie, no briberie, no flattery, no villainy, no deceyte in
bargaynyng, no false witness bearyng, no cruel murderyng, no crafty
conspyring, nor any fraudulent dealing. And why? Because Gold, the author of
all this ungodliness, was not regarded. Why is promise not performed? Malice so
manifest? Cunning and Cunny-catching so common? Swearing and forswearing so
usual? Symonie, Briberie, Flattery, and all villainy, so daily practiced?
What is the end of deceyte in bargayning? Why does the wicked bear false
witness? the murderer kill cruelly? the crafty conspiratour imagine his
mischief? and the fraudulent dealer deceive his neighbor? even Silver and
Gold, Money is the mark whereat they all shoot, the Master whom they all
obey, the Mine wherein they all dig, and the Man to whom they all do
reverence. It is Money they mind, Gold they grope after, and Gain they
groan for: Money I say, Money is the cause of all this mischief and misery.

But it may be objected, How can Money be the cause of all this mischief and
misery? It neither commands nor forbids, procures nor disswadeth,
flattereth nor frowneth, compels nor denies, furdereth nor hinders, any
man to commit any offense, villainy, or knauerie; it is a dead metal, and no
living creature, that with fair words, amiable countenance, or faithful
promyses, it might entice, allure, or persuade any man to do any thing contrary
to his own intended meaning or purpose. Truth it is, the Metal of it self
cannot be deemed either good or hurtful: for let it lie, it will neither stop
your passage, nor hinder your journey, it will not brave upon you, nor urge you
to any inconvenience, take it and use it with discretion, it will not be your
foe, but your friend: But come to abuse it, it will bear no coals, it will
not take any wrong at your hands, it is pure and fined Metal, and cannot
endure to be mixted with dregs and dross of less esteem: I say, it cannot
endure to be used otherwise then as it is, and to that end it was ordained. It
is not the Metal of it self, as I said before, that is either good or
hurtful, but the use or abuse of it works in it either of the foresaid
effects. For mark from the beginning, whom you have seen to abuse it, I
mean, to desire or procure it, contrary to law, equity, and conscience (for
that is the abuse of it) and it has not quit him or his their meede, as the
saying is, even rewarded him according to his desartes.

Did not Judas that false traitor, even for the covetous desire of Coin,
betray his own master our savior Christ into the hands of the Jews? but
what was his guerden and reward? How long did he possess this booty, by this
his inhumane practice obtained? Did he not immediately go forth, and cursing
the hour of his creation, the time of his birth, the womb that bore him, and
the pappes that gave him suck, and so in this desperate humor hanged himself?
Infinite are the number of them against whom this definite sentence of death,
or other danger has been adjudged, only for abusing these pure and refined
earthly commanders, Gold and Silver.

You have now proved, may some say, that the wrong use of worldly treasure
breeds many diseases in this humane society: But what particular hurt hereof
ensues to Hospitality, which is the matter you have now in hand, you omit.
Not so my very good friends, but have patience a while, and I will pay you the
uttermost farthing.

I have told you before, in what small esteem men of worth in former ages
held this worldlinges God, nay, they were so afraid to discontent or abuse
it, that they would neither make nor meddle with it, but by substitutes and
deputies, which the help of it procured to them selves all worldly necessaries,
which was the total of their desire. But the Devil (in my judgment) the
author, root, and original of all mischief and misery, has infused into
this metal some piece of Adamant, and into man's desire and affection some
lump of Iron: which Adamant, according to his nature, drawing the Iron unto
it, linketh them selves together in vndesolueable bonds of earthly
perpetuity during this worldly pilgrimage: not much unlike the Castle of
Adamant, feigned in the history of Hughon of Bordeaux, which Castle having
drawn the said Hughon unto it, all hope of departure thence was quite
extinguished, only except he could escape and be thence delivered by an
extraordinary and imminent danger: which was, to be carried over the Sea in the
claws of a Griffine, whose desire was to devour him, and that was one danger:
and in great hazard in regard of his wayght to fall from the said Griffine
into the Ocean and so be drowned, and that was an other danger: which dangers,
as they were great and perilous, so I hold their perils no less dangerous,
and as hard for them to be separated and delivered from this pernicious Adamant
Castle, that has linked and chamed themselves unto it by their extraordinary
couetouse desire of this worldly Mammon. Now this affectionate desire of this
hase Bulloigne, having linked and chayned the hearts of great ones unto it,
such as in former ages were wont to maynteine Hospitality, and
Good-house-keeping in the highest degree, in such a self blinded bond of
assurance, as they fall into consideration and wary waighing of all the
surplussage to that charge belonging: so lessening, pinching, deminishyng,
dividing, and substracting of it, as they may almost be ashamed of the remain,
it is drawn into so narrow a room: nay, if they hold on (as God wot they
have done too long) their substractes I fear me will be, Take nothing out of
nothing, and there remaynes nothing. I advise you go not fasting to such a
house, for there you may as soon break your neck as your fast. O miserable
and strange language, and not so strange as true: Where are the great Chines of
staulled Beef? the great black Iackes of doble Beer? the long Haull tables
fully furnished with good victuals? and the multitude of good fellows
assembling to the houses of Potentates and men of worth? In a word, they are
all banyshed with the spirit of the Butterie, they are as rare in this age, as
common in former times, These Potentates and Gentlemen, as I said before, have
begun in this manner to lessen their charge: first, for their three years
staulled Beef, it was too fat, and triple charge, one year, nay less will
serve to fat a Bullock, the meat much sweeter, and the charge much less,
and so for other victualles of that kind. Now for Beef, Mutton, Ueale, Pigge,
Goose, and Capon, which was the substance of their provision in those days,
wherewith their Tables were daily furnished, so that there was good cheer with
plenty for them that sat, good reuertions for them that waited, and great
relief for the poor amongst those full platters. Now these bountiful and
substantial dyshes are changed into cates of less cost, though dyshes of
rarer device. Now there must be Goose-giblets, Pigs-petitoes, and so many other
boiled meats, forced meats, and made dyshes, as will supply the room of the
substantial accustomed full platters, to furnysh the Table, though they be but
as siphers in Augrime, to supply the number. Allow notwithstanding, that this
kind of service does satisfy and content them that are served, yet what shall
answer the hungry appetites of the attendantes that has long fasted in hope
of this reuertion? Even the remain of these cold boiled meats, and made
dyshes, must satisfy their hungry appetites, which may well be called cold
Commons: but after this latter dinner is ended, small are the broken meats
that remain to relieve the poor. Nay further concerning their fare, they
(like good Physicians) consider that change of choice dyshes and several
meats at one time may breed a surfeit, and all superstuitie brings excess,
and therefore they will draw their multitude of dyshes into a less number, and
content them selves only with two or three dyshes at the most, with Fruit and
Cheese after, to supply, if need require. Now, if they have but two or three
dyshes, What should they need so many Attendantes? So wanting service wherein
to employ them, there they cut off an other charge: this affoordes them a doble
benefit, it cuts off the charge of Men, and many Dyshes. But yet there
remaynes one service, wherein they must employ more Men then the tables
attendance requires, that is, if their Mistres ride abroad, she must have.vi.
or.viii. Seruingmen to attend her, she must have one to carry her Cloak and
Hood, least it rain, an other her Fan, if she use it not her self, an other
her Box with Ruffes and other necessaries, an other behind whom her Maid or
Gentlewoman must ride, and some must be loose to open Gates, and supply other
services that may be occasioned. Now to deminish and cut of this charge, as well
of Horse as Men, there is now a new invention, and that is, she must have a
Coach, wherein she, with her Gentlewomen, Maid, and Children, and what
necessaries as they or any of them are to use, may be carried and conveyed with
smaller charge, less cost, and more credit, as it is accounted: for one or
two Men at the most, besides the Coachman, are sufficient for a Gentlewoman or
Lady of worthy parentage. Now at Board and abroad, if so few Servants may
satisfy, and supply all the service that herein can be required, all the rest
sure are su^^er^^acuum, and omne nimium vertitur in vitium, therefore, least by
the mayntenance of this superfluous charge, the superabundant number of
Seruingmen might grow vicious, and so blame worthy, these remedies before
rehearsed were put in ure and use, so that hereby the number of this Company
is much lessened and impaired.

Now it should seem (in my judgment) that the lessenyng and diminishyng of
this consort of companions, should better their estate and calling: for the
fewer that a Gentleman has attending him, the better he may prefer them, being
as able in worldly possessions as his ancestors, which maynteyned many more:
But it falls out contrary, for their service was never so smally regarded and
rewarded as now; and yet the number of them never so small.

The Gentleman (I know) will thus answer for him self, that he is neither
able to do so much for his men, nor to maynteine his port and hospitality in
so bountiful manner as h^^s ancestors in former ages: for his Father, or
Graundfather, paid but.xx. s. an Ox.iii. s. a Mutton, ii. s. a Calfe.vi. d. a
Goose.iiii. d. a Capon.ii. d. a Hen, and.ii. d. a Pigge, and for all other
householde provision the like rate. Now there is not any thing that belonges to
housekeeping, but it is a triple charge over it was: and whereas one hundred
pounds a year was a competent living to maynteine good hospitality, now
three hundred pound a year will not defray the charge of such a house,
rateably proportionyng all necessaries thereunto belonging, without exceeding
his accustomed plenty. Now his living is not greater then was his ancestors,
nor any Acre by tract of time enlarged: if the charge therefore grow thus doble
burdenous, by reason of the deerenes of all kind of provision to that house
keeping belonging, and his mayntenance not any way augmented, How is it
possible for him to maynteine himself in statu quo prius? Now Farmours speak
for your selves, for I hold you sufficient (though not learned) to answer
this question, and discide this doubt.

Me thinks I see them strive, who should speak first: free liberty is
granted, therefore speak in order, and you shall all be heard.

Mary then says one, Let me have the ten Acres at the old rent, and I will
find you Beefes for your house at.xx. s. a piece. Says another, Let me have
such a Farm as it went an hundred years since, and I will serve you Muttons
at.ii. s. vi. d. the case. Well says the third, Let me have your Demaynes in
such a place, for the rent your Graundfather let them, and I will find you all
other household provision, for ordinary victualles, at the rate he paid:
therefore, if your Housekeeping be more chargeable then it was, by the deerenes
of your diet, then your Lands yeeldes you more profit then it did, by rearing
the rent.

Thus is the Landlordes excuse answered with quid pro quo. But what may the
poor Servant here object, and say for him self.

In times past, I could have bought Cloth for.ii. s. the broad yard, an Hatt
for.xii. d. a Shirt for.x. d. a pair of Boots for.ii. s. and whatsoever other
necessaries belonged me, at like rate: now I must pay three times dearer for
any part of the said Apparel, and yet my Wages not more then my great
Graundfathers, supplying the same place and office I do. But it may be
objected on the behalf of Masters, that my auncestor or predecessor could be
content with corse Karsie, or Countries Russet, for his Holyday garment, and
you, with your fraternity, in these latter days, cannot be content to shape
your Coat according to your Cloth, and your expenses according to your
mayntenance: but you, or the most of your consort, must in manner exceed your
Masters in bravery, and costly fashionate Apparel. Turpe doctori cum
culparedarguit ipsum, It is a shame for the Lawgiuer to break and violate his
own institutions.

Trust me, I hold this excessive costly Apparel, a great cause why Gentlemen
cannot maynteyne their wonted and accustomed bounty and liberality in
Hospitality and Housekeeping: for when as the Mercers book shall come, Item
for so many yardes of Cloth of Gold, of Silver, Ueluet, Satin, Taffata, or
such like ware: the Goldsmithes Debet, for Chains, Ringes, Jewels, Pearls,
and precious Stones: the Tailors Bill, so much for such a Suit of laced Satin,
and such like superfluous charges, amounting in one year to more then the
revenues of his Lands, the charge of Housekeeping, and other necessaries
vndefrayde, How can he then chose but either make others Gentlemen by
possessing his Inheritance, or else betake him to London, or some other
Sanctuary, where he may live private so many years, as he is run
ouershooes, that debtes thereby may be paid, and defectes supplied. Which time
thus spent in this private life, is so evil bestowed, as he can not make any
account thereof to God, his Prince, or his Country, to whom he with his lands,
living, possession, and worldly patrimony, is bound in several duties: for
there is none but knows, that at their hands that has much, much shall be
required.

If a Gentleman have a competent living, that will maynteine good Hospitality
(which is, as I said before, the harbourer of two hopes, Praise and Prayers)
and him self like a Gentleman, if he will not exceed his degree, al other
superfluous charge laid a part, will bestow upon his own or his wives back in
bravery of apparel half a year of his house-keepinges charge, the other
half year must of necessity be maimed, pinched, and impaired, to the great
hurt and hinderaunce of that duty which he is bound to perform by
neighborhood to his Country, and by charity to his poor brother.

Concerning this costly and fashionate Apparel, I remember a notable example
of a King of England (as it is said) that calling, upon occasion, certain of
his Noblemen, and Peers of his Realm to the Court, whyther when they came,
one amongst the rest came very homely apparreled, in a Ierken of Frieze, and a
pair of bretches of Countries Russet, and al his other apparel correspondent;
his train and attendantes were a hundred or six score proper and personable
men, all well Horsed, and gallantly furnished at all points: this Nobleman
thus attended, came to the Court, and doing his duty to his Prince and
Sovereign, the King said unto him: My Lord, I cannot but commend your troop
and train so well furnished, and your self so worthyly attended: but your
own person to be apparrelled in so base and unseemly a suite, I cannot but
highly discommende, for that it befitteth not a man of your estate, degree, and
calling, but always to be apparrelled in costly, comely, decent, and handsome
habit. Well my Liege and Sovereign, answered the Nobleman, What as is
amiss, shall be amended (God willing.) So going from the Court to his lodging,
he seen presently his man to buy him a rich Gown of black Ueluet, the sleeves
thereof all beset with Aglets of Gold, a Ueluet Cappe, with a Fether and a
gold Band, very richly bordered about with Pearls and precious Stones of
great value, a suite of Cloth-of-golde of the newest and richest fashion, his
Gyrdle and Hangers richly imbrodred and beset with costly Pearl, with all
other his apparel no less stately and costly. Thus richly furnished,
attended with only one Man and a Page, he makes his repair the next morning
to the Court again, where when he had done his duty to the King: Yea mary my
Lord, said the King, you are now like your self, and as you should be: but
where is your goodly train of Men and Horse, wherewith you were yesterday so
gallantly guarded? If it may like your Grace, answered the good Earl, throwing
down his Cappe, Here is twenty Men and twenty Horse: and throwing off his
Gown, says, Here lies forty Men and forty Horse more, with other the
rest of his sumptuous Raiment at the like rate, saying, that all his Men and
Horses, were turned into gorgious Garments. Now says he, if it like your
Majesty that I should maynteine my self in these Royal Roabes to do your
Grace service, only guarded with my Man and my Page, or that I should maynteine
my troop of Horse and Men, to do your Maistie service at home, or abroad
against your Graces foreign foes, or domestical Rebels (if any such shall be)
in my homely habit: Whether of these, as it shall please your Grace to
command me, I am ready to obey: but my living is not able to perform them
both. Now what answer he received from the King I know not, but if both could
not be performed, then I persuade my self that none is so simple, but will
prefer the Men and Horse, before the gorgious Garments, both for the honor
of the King, the credit of the Master, the sauegarde of the Country, the
common good for the weal public, and in all other respects whatsoever: But
Totnam is turned French, these Men and Horse are metamorphosed into Golden
Garments, which makes Seruingmen, yea and Men, so little set by, and so smally
regarded: wherefore they may well both say and sing, In vain my eyes, in vain
you wast your trickling tears,
In vain my sighs, my sighs, and sobbes of my despayres:
In vain you search these troops of gallent men and horse,
In vain you search, for painted plumes has banishd al remorse.
The stately Towers decay, the Courts thereof grow green,
No passage into Palace fair, where great resort has been:
The Hauls are now too large, the Tables are too long,
The clouted shoes comes in so fast, they keep too great a throng.
The Chargers now be changed, wherein men wont to eat,
An old Fruit dish, is big enough to hold a joint of meat:
A Sallad, or a Sauce, to taste your eats withal,
Some strange device to feed men's eyes, men's stomachs now be small.
And where the Porters lodge, did yield beef, bread and beer,
The Kitchen, Haul, and Parlor to, now wantes it twice a year:
Now Seruingmen may sing, adue you golden days,
Mere misery has taken place, where plenty purchased praise.


Thus you have heard, that the number of this profession, by this decay of
Hospitality, is greatly lessened and diminished, and so consequently the state
of the remain impaired: for what trade or occupation is best, there are
commonly of the same most professors. But I will speak a word or two of the
particular inconveniences that has happened to this, at the first happy, but
by tract of time, thrice unfortunate fraternity: hereby I mean by the decay
of good Housekeeping.

First, whereas their pleasures were equal with their Masters, and their
Masters took pleasure commonly in honest sportes: now these their Masters
sportes and pastimes, are either turned into covetousness, groping after
worldly graith, or else into riotous spending their Patrimony in gay Clothes,
lascivious lewdnes, extraordinary gaming, or such like; the godly mean, which
is the heavenly harmony, is now banished these (I may say) inhumane coasts,
and cannot be harbored in any of our Havens. Now the Seruingmans pleasure, is
turned into servile toil, and droyling drudgerie, for since he has no
fellows but that are daily and hourly employed: and how? not in pleasure, as
before, in haulking, hunting, fyshing, and fowling, but in other business, he
himself always riding and running about worldly business, or otherwise, as it
shall please his Master to appoint: but I cannot, nor will not maynteine
argument against this, for, Otium est radix omnium malorum, Idleness is the
root of all mischief. And if Seruingmen should do no other service but as
they were wont, and tie them selves to their ancient custom, then they should
be altogether idle, because former employment is taken away. But it may be
objected, You told us what maruels Seruingmen merited at their Masters hands
in former ages: and why are not their desartes so well gratified in these
latter days, as before? Marie for many respects, yet principally for two.
First, they are for the most part, though not all, of a baser metal then they
were wont to be, and therefore the kind usage, and friendly familiarity that
in former ages did link the Master and the Servant together, is now on the
Masters behalf had in utter contempt and disdain, in regard of their homely,
rusticke, and vngentlemanlike bringing up: which they regard as it is, and
reward only with bare wages. Couenauntes they keep and perform, as
Artificers do with their Apprentises, and Workmen with their Laborers; but
preferment over and above they get none: And why? Because their singularity in
any of their services, is no such as can merit or deserve any thing above
promise. Neither does Masters now adays take any such pleasure in the
qualities of their Men, as he can affoorde them a Farm for their feats, or a
yearly Annuitie for their skill in any of the seven liberal Sciences. Believe
me, I speak as I think, If the wisdom of Solomon, the strength of Sampson,
the beawtie of Absolon, the prowes of Hercules, the eloquence of Cicero, the
profound learning of wise Plato, and all the excellentest parts that can be
named, were all comprehended in one man, and the same man would shroude him
self in the habit of a Seruingman, and profess the same by taking four
Marks a year wages and a Liuerie, I verily believe his preferment should be
rather a Remuneration, then a Guerdon, if he get any in this Leaden and last
age. But what is the difference betwixt the Remuneration and the Guerdon, may
some say, we would feign know? otherwise we can not tell how you mean this
well qualited Seruingmans desartes should be rewarded. Your question is
reasonable, and therefore I will distinguish them as their difference was told
me, not long since by a friend of mine.

There was, says he, a man (but of what estate, degree, or calling, I will not
name, least thereby I might incur displeasure of any) that coming to his
friends house, who was a Gentleman of good reckoning, and being there kindly
entertained, and well used, as well of his friend the Gentleman, as of his
Servants: one of the said Servants doing him some extraordinary pleasure
during his abode there; at his departure he comes unto the said Servant, and
says unto him, Hold thee, here is a remuneration for thy pains, which the
Servant receiving, gave him utterly for it (besides his pains) thanks, for it
was but a Three-farthinges peer: and I hold thanks for the same a small
price, howsoever the market goes. Now an other coming to the said Gentleman's
house, it was the foresaid Servants good hap to be near him at his going away,
who calling the Servant unto him, said, Hold thee, here is a Guerdon for thy
defartes: Now the Servant paid no d^^ere^^ for the Guerdon then he did for the
Remuneration, though the Guerdon was xi. d. farthing better, for it was a
Shilling, and the other but a Three-farthinges. Therefore, I say as I said
before, the man of best quality in these days, if he be a Seruingman by
profession, shall be as slenderly rewarded for his service, as the mome of no
merit, that has no parts at all in him worthy commendation.

Now for the other reason, why Seruingmens desartes are not rewarded in these
days, as they were wont in former ages: It is, because Gentlemen nowadayes
have more use of their Land and Living, their Kine and Coin, their Rentes and
Revenues, their Silver and Gold, and all other their worldly Treasure, then
they were wont to have: for in times before they had so much (many of them) as
they bestowed Lands, Liuinges, Rentes, and Revenues, vaynely and ceremoniously
upon Friars, Monks, Abbots, Cannons, and pelting popysh Priests: And to what
end? Even that they, and their ^^rue, might pray that their souls might pass
Purgatory with less penance then they would willingly endure. But now they
find other use for it, then either to bestow it upon such momysh Massmongers,
or any of it upon them that better deserve it, their own Men.

What say they, if a Seruingman for long and duetifull service, request the
Lease of a Farm at the old rent, or some other preferment? Was my Living left
me to bestow upon my Men? or, to divide amongst my Children? Why do I give you
wages, but in regard of your service? If you like not me nor my wages, you may
provide for your self when you will, I will not be your hinderaunce; not
waighing and considering, that that his wages is not able to find his Man
necessaries from the middle down: but I dare not speak what I think, neither
what might be spoken, concerning wages in these days. But why is the Gentleman
so peremptory and resolute at his Man's reasonable request? Mary, because he
knows where to have a Man fitter for his purpose, that will stand him in
less charge; and therefore Seruingmen are not rewarded as they were wont,
because Gentlemen nowadayes cannot spare any preferment to bestow upon them.
But what is this fellow that is fitter for his purpose? and will stand him in
less charge, expecting no preferment at all at his hands, no not so much
commonly as Wages? It is (as I said before) his neighbors Son, who will not
only maynteine him self with all necessaries, but also his father will
gratify his Masters kindness at Christmas with a New-yeeres gift, and at other
Festival times with Pigge, Goose, Capon, or other such like householde
provision. And why will the good old Yeoman be at all this charge, since his
son would otherwise earne him much more profit, and do him much more
pleasure? Why? Marie, because his Son shall be sure to keep the Catte from the
Tongues at home, when other his neighbors children shall trudge into France,
Flaunders, and other Nations, to do their Prince and Country service. But if
it would please God of his goodness, to send us peace and quietness, that
our gracious Sovereign (whom God preserve long amongst us, to his blessed will
and pleasure) should have no use of warlike provision at home nor abroad, and
consequently the Yeoman no use of this the Gentleman's goodwill and pleasure,
you should see these new vpstart Seruingmen flock to their old haunt, as the
Emmets in the beginning of Summer do congregate them selves together, to
labor while Summer lastes, for fear of Winters penury.

Now if this Man, I say (as I said before) my neighbors son, can at one and
twenty, or two and twenty years supply the place of a Seruingman, and
discharge that duty as well as he that has been trained up in service from
his childhood, and will take upon him that trade, without expecting either
present gain, or future preferment for his service at his Masters hands:
what need then the Gentleman give wages and preferment to a Seruingman, if he
may have these of so free cost? But I say it is pity that God has lent that
man his five Senses, and all other his bodyly members that belonges to the
sufficient furnishyng of a whole man, that bestows his talent so evil, and so
slouthfully labors in his vocation, as he cannot with all his endeavors get
meat to his belly, nor clothes to his back, as these do that bestows even
the best time of all their years in the service of Gentlemen. But this decay
of Hospitality, has bred a far greater mischief amongst Seruingmen then
this: For now every Gentleman almost, has gotten such a rabble of Retayners,
as makes poor House-holde servants so smally set by as they are. For what
cares a Gentleman now adays, to knave and rascal his Man at every word? And
if his Man (as flesh and blood many times cannot endure to be (...) inhumanely
entreated) shall scorn these vngentlemanlike terms, and think much for so
small a cause, as many times they are, to be so hardly used: then off goes the
Lyuerie-Coate, or Cloak, and pack out of my doors you arrant knave, I will
have your betters to bear more then this at my hands. Thus is the poor
Seruingman turned out of his Lyuerie, and out of doors, having but a bare
quarters warning, but not that quarter that is allowed them by the Statute made
for Servants, in Quinto of her Maisties reign, which is a quarter of a year,
but scarce a quarter of an hour, to pack up such apparel as he has.

But what is the cause that the Gentleman cares so little for his Man, though he
be never so paynefull, honest, diligent, and duetifull a Servant? What? marie
this, because he can have, if he send for such a Retayner, to ride with him,
or run for him, or do any service he has to command him, till such time as
he shall be provided of another. But poor Seruingman, what shall he do? if he
be far from his friends, and have small acquaintance there where he dwelt?
Poor soul, I hold him to be in much worse case then the impotent Beggar,
that procures the Towne-seale, with certain of his neighbors hands, where
he has been three years last resident, to beg within the limits of such
hundredes, by virtue of the Statute made in Vicessimo secundo of our late dread
Sovereign, that worthy Prince of famous memory, King Henry the eight, for
the relief of the poor: for the one has free liberty to pass from Town to
Town, without let, molestation, or hinderance, using himself honestly: and
the other shall be accounted as a Roge, and sent to Jail, being Maisterlesse,
for wandering abroad without a License.

Now the miserable needinesse of Housekeeping was the first founder, begetter,
and rayser of this Retayner. For if a Gentleman nowadayes, could be content to
give Meat, Drink, Wages, and Lyuerie, as his forefather did, to so many men
as he had any employment for, What need he then have any Retayners? And if the
Gentleman will plead inhabilitie, that he is not able by his Living to
maynteine so many in householde as his father did, though his degree and
calling require no less countenance: then let him be content to carry so much a
lower sail, and grind as his wind will give him leave, carry that port,
credit, and countenance in his Country, as his living will afforde him
maynteinance. I will not say what I could say concerning these Retayners, since
the worthy Laws and Statutes of this Realm has prepared, constituted, and
ordained, pecuniarie punishments for the offenders herein, if they might be
duly put in execution: But, Quod supra nos, nihil ad nos, What has Joan to do
with my Lady, or I with execution of Laws or Statutes, that is neither
Constable nor Borshoulder of Town nor Hundred? But I wysh well to all, and
would not willingly incur displeasure of any, and crave pardon if in any
thing I have past my bounds, or been too bold. But to return again to my
poor maisterlesse, and Lyuerylesse, nay Lyuerlesse and Hartlesse brother in
Christ, What shall he do being thus Maisterlesse, moneylesse, and friendlesse,
having lost his Master and maynteynance both at one instance? What, shall he
beg? no, he wantes his Testimonial. Liberality is dead, as I told you
before, and no body will give him any thing, because he is able to work. What
then, shall he work? Alas, he can not earne salt to his pottage, for he has
not been trained to any bodyly labor: and if he would or could, yet no body
will set him a work, because they know him not: and if they knew him, yet they
will not, for they have Townsmen laborers enough, to do what work they have.
What shall he then do? Shall he make his appearance at Gaddes hill, Shooters
hiil, Salisburie plain, or Newmarket heath, to sit in Commission, and examine
passengers? Not so, for then, if he mistake but a word, Stand, for Goodmorow,
he shall straight, whereas he did attend, be attended with more men then his
Master kept, and preferred to a better house then ever his father builded for
him, though not so wholesome. What restes then, shall he starve? No, no, Ferrum
frangit necessitas, Hunger breaks stone walls, necessity has no Law: and
yet necessity urges him to do some of these, to work or steal: to work if
he could have it, I hold well withal: but to steal, or starve, are two hard
choyses. And woe, woe, and thrice woe be to him that is driven to either of
them, as God wot many of these poor Seruingmen be in this Leaden and last age.

O who would be a Seruingman, to hazard to fall into this detestable danger,
and be driven into these extremities? even into all the penury, beggarie,
scarcity, and mere misery, that may befall any humane creature: nay when
they are in their greatest prosperity, and had in highest esteem, yet they
are even then the most contemned and despised company that lives in this
humane society. For what does a Gentleman now adays care more for his Man,
then to serve his present turn? No, no more for him then he does for his Dog
or his Horse, who while they can do him service, he is content to allow them
meat, and other necessaries: But when the Horse falls blind or lame, knock
him in the head: when the Dog grows so old as he can do nothing but lie by
the fire, cut his throat, what is he good for, but to spend victualles: and
the Seruingman, when the Summer of his years are spent, and that crooked old
age has summoned him to make her many low courtesies, with bended knees, so as
he is not able now by his service to earne Otemeale for his Pottage, then off
goes his shoes, and he is turned to the Common, inpasture is too good for him,
for who would keep one to do nothing, and bread so dear? Thus much does his
Master regard him when he is able to do him no more service.

Again, if this honest minded Seruingman does enter into consideration of his
estate, and would willingly by some honest means provide that he might live
in time to come like a man, and so ^^endes a loving look to some Yeoman or
Countreymans daughter, whose Father he thinks will bestow upon her some
reasonable portion, that with good husbandry may maynteine them both
neighbour-like: then upon some good lyking of both the parties, he comes to the
Father and Mother of the Maid, to crave their good wills in the matter. What
then? says the Father, shall I bestow my Daughter upon a Gentleman, forsooth,
that wantes living, and cannot work? On a Seruingman, on a beggar? Noe, I am
not yet so weerie of my Daughter, as I would see her stand need of an alms:
no no, I pray you provide for your self otherwise, for my Daughter is not, nor
shall not be a pray for your paws. Then it comes to the ears of my neighbors
kinsmen and friends, that my neighbor Ienkingsons daughter shall have M. what
call you-hims man: then they begin to gabble amongst them selves. What, shall
Joan have a Seruingman? is her father so madd as he will marry her to a
Seruingman? What to a Seruingman says one? To a Seruingman says another? he
neither has any thing, nor can earne any thing. How will they live, says one?
How will they live says another? Marie merrily, till his wives portion be
spent, and then will he be gone, and play least in sight. Me thinks he might
remember the old saying: A Bakers wife may byte of a Bunne, a Brewers wife may
drink of a Tun, and a Fyshmongers wife may feed of a Cunger, but a
Seruingmans wife may starve for hunger.

Thus uncharitably do they all judge of the poor Seruingman. What estate,
degree, or calling, can then be more miserable, then the profession of a
Seruingman? Here to day, and gone to morrow. In good credit with his Master
at noone, and Jack out of office before night. It was not for nothing that a
good fellow, and friend of mine, a Seruingman, told me he never made his
Bed before he went to it; for, says he, I know not in the morning, whether I
shall lie in it at night or no, and therefore I will be sure my Master shall
not owe me a bed making.

And thus you see, gentle Reader, the estate, degree, calling, and profession,
of every poor Seruingman, in these latter days, to be more waueryng and
unconstant, then Winters weather, Women's thoughts, or Fortunes wheel, that
never restes rowlyng and turnyng about, in all things mutable, but mutabilitie.

Thus courtuous Reader, I have set down, according to my small judgment
herein, to what end this fraternity of Seruingmen was at the first ordained,
and of what metal they were made. I have also declared how floryshyng was the
prime of their profession, and what estate, credit, and countenance, they
lived in, in former ages, even till Vltima linea vitae. And thirdly and lastly,
into what penury, scarcity, beggary, mere myserie, and utter ruin,
subuertion, and contempt, this ancient buyldyng is fallen into, in this
leaden, latter, and last age. Whose fall, I earnestly lament and bewail,
wyllyng (if any way I could) to procure a salve for this incurable disease:
But, since I cannot, I will pray even Ab intimo cord, from the bottom of my
heart, that this company of Seruingmen, may either be better rewarded for their
service, and better esteemed of amongst their superiors, equals, and
inferiors; or else, that none of my friends, or welwillers, do take upon them
this trade and profession: (though for my own part I cannot speak any thing
of this, by my own experience, as having tasted my self the gaul of this
bitter-sweete: for ever since I was a Seruingman, I have received the full
measure of my desartes at my Masters hands) least they should fall into the
before rehearsed inconveniences, which are very incident generally to the
professors of this calling.

FINIS.

