Euphues and his England, CONTAINING. his voyage and adventures, myxed with
sundry pretty discourses of honest Love, the description of the country, the
Court, and the manners of that Isle.

DELIGHTFUL TO be read, and nothing hurtful to be regarded: wherein there is
small offense by lightness gluen to the wise, and less occasion of loosenes
proffered to the wanton.

By John Lyly, Master of Art.

Commend it, or amend it. Imprinted at London for Gabriell Cawood, dwelling in
Paul's Churchyard. 1580.

VERO NIHIL VERIVS
blazon or coat of arms

To the Right Honorable my very good Lord and Master, Edward de Vere,
Earl of Oxenforde, Vicount Bulbecke, Lord of Escales and Badlesmere, and
Lord great Chamberlain of England, John Lyly wishes long life, with
increase of honor.
THe first picture that Phidias the first Painter shadowed, was the protraiture
of his own person, saying thus: if it be well, I will paynt many besides
Phydias, if ill, it shall offend none but Phydias.

In the like manner fares it with me (Right Honorable) who never before
handling the pensill, did for my first counterfaite, color mine own Euphues,
being of this mind, that if it were liked, I would draw more besides
Euphues, if loathed, grieve none but Euphues.

Since that, some there have been that either dissembling the faults they saw,
for fear to discourage me, or not examining them, for the love they bore me,
that praised mine old work, and urged me to make a new, whose words I thus
answered. If I should coin a worse, it would be thought that the former was
framed by chance, as Protogenes did the foam of his dog, if a better, for
flattery, as Narsissus did, who only was in love, with his own face, if none
at al, as froward as the Musition, who being entreated, will scarce sing sol
fa, but not desired, strain above Ela.

But their importunity admitted no excuse, in so much that I was enforced to
prefer their friendship before mine own fame, being more careful to
satisfy their requests, then fearful of others reports: so that at the last
I was content to set another face to Euphues, but yet just behind the other,
like the Image of lanus, not running together, like the Hopplitides of
Parrhasius least they should seem so unlike Brothers, that they might be both
thought bastardes, the picture whereof I yield as common for all to view, but
the patronage only to your Lordshippe, as able to defend, knowing that the
face of Alexander stamped in Copper does make it current, that the name of
Caesar, wrought in Canuas, is esteemed as Cambricke, that the very feather of
an Eagle, is of force to consume the Beetle.

I have brought into the world two children, of the first I was delivered,
before my friends thought me conceived, of the second I went a whole year
big, and yet when every one thought me ready to lie down, I did then quicken:
But good huswiues shall make my excuse, who know that Hens do not lay eggs
when they clucke, but when they cackle, nor men set forth books when they
promise, but when they perform. And in this I resemble the Lappwing, who
fearing her young ones to be destroyed by passengers, flies with a false cry
far from their nestes, making those that look for them seek where they are
not: So I suspecting that Euphues would be carped of some curious Reader,
thought by some false show to bring them in hope of that which then I meant
not, leading them with a longing of a second part, that they might speak well
of the first, being never farther from my study, then when they thought me
houering over it.

My first burden coming before his time, must needs be a blind whelp, the
second brought forth after his time must needs be a monster* the one I sent
to a noble man to nurse, who with great love brought him up, for a year: so
that where-soeuer hoe wander, he has his Nurses name in his forhead, where
sucking his first milk, he cannot forget his first Master.

The other (right Honorable) being but yet in his swathe cloutes, I commit
most humbly to your Lordships protection, that in his infancy he may be kept
by your good care from falls, and in his youth by your great countenance
shielded from blows, and in his age by your gracious continuance, defended
from contempt. He is my youngest and my last, and the pain that I sustained
for him in travel, has made me past teeming, yet do I think my self very
fertile, in that I was not altogether barren. Glad I was to send them both
abroad, least making a wanton of my first, with a blind conceit, I should
resemble the Ape, and kill it by cullyng it, and not able to rule the second, I
should with the Viper, loose my blood, with mine own brood. Twins they are
not, but yet brothers, the one nothing resembling the other, and yet (as all
children are*now a days) both like the father. Wherein I am not unlike unto the
unskillful Painter, who having drawn the Twins of Hippocrates, (who were as
like as one pease is to an other) and being told of his friends that they were
no more like than Saturn and Appollo, he had no other shift to manifest what
his work was, then over their heads to write: The Twins of Hippocrates. So
may it be, that had I not named Euphues, few would have thought it had been
Euphues, not that in goodness the one so far excels the other, but that
both being so bad, it is hard to judge which is the worst.

This unskillfulness is no ways to be covered, but as Accius did his
shortness, who being a little Poet, framed for himself a great picture, and I
being a naughty Painter have gotten a most noble Patron: being of Ulysses
mind, who thought himself safe under the Shield of Ajax.

I have now finished both my labors, the one being hatched in the hard winter
with the Al^yon, the other not daring to bud til the cold were past, like the
Mulbery, in either of the which or in both, if I seem to gleane after an
others Cart, for a few ears of corn, or of the Tailors shreds to make me a
lyuery, I will not deny, but that I am one of those Poets, which the painters
feign to come unto Homers basin, there to lap up, that he does cast up.

In that I have written, I desire no praise of others but patience, altogether
unwilling, because every way unworthy to be accounted a workman.

It suffices me to be a water bough no bud, so I may be of the same root: to
be the iron, not steel, so I be in the same blade: to be vinegar not wine, so
I be in the same caske: to grind colors for Appelles, though I cannot
garnish, so I be of the same shop. What I have done, was only to keep my
self from sleep, as the Crane does the stone in her foot, and I would also
with the same crane I had been silent holding a stone in my mouth.

But it falls out with me, as with the young wrastler, that came to the games
of Olympia, who having taken a foil, thought scorn to leave, till he had
received a fall, or him that being pricked in the finger with a Bra^ble,
thrusts his whole arm among the thorns for anger. For I seeing my self not
able to stand on the ice, did nevertheless adventure to run, and being
with my first book stricken into disgrace, could not cease until I was brought
into contempt by the second: where-in I resemble those, that having once wet
their feet, care not how deep they wade.

In the which my wading (right Honorable) if the envious shall clap lead to my
heels to make me sink, yet if your Lordship with your little finger do but
hold me up by the chinne, I shall swim, and be so far from being drowned,
that I shall scarce be duckt.

When Bucephalus was painted, Appelles craved the judgment of none but Zeuxis:
when Iuppiter was carved, Prisius asked the censure of none but Lysippus: now
Euphues is shadowed, only I appeal to your honor, not meaning thereby to be
careless what others think, but knowing that if your Lordship allow it, there
is none but will like it, and if there be any so nice, whom nothing can please,
if he will not commend it, let him amend it.

And here right Honorable, although the History seem imperfect, I hope your
Lordship will pardon it.

Appelles dyed not before he could finish Venus, but before he durst.
Nichomachus left Tindarides rawly, for fear of anger, not for want of Art.
Timomachus broke off Medea scarce half colored, not that he was not willing
to end it, but that he was threatened: I have not made Euphues to stand without
legs, for that I want matter to make the^, but might to maintein them: so
that I am enforced with the old painters to color my picture but to the
middle, or as he that drew Ciclops, who in a little table made him to lie
behind an Oak, where one might perceive but a piece, yet conceive that all the
rest lay behind the tree, or as he that painted an horse in the river with
half legs, leaving the pasternes for the viewer to imagine as in the water.

For he that vieweth Euphues, will say that he is drawn but to the wast, that
he peepeth as it were behind some screene, that his feet are yet in the water:
which makes me present your Lordship, with the mangled body of Hector, as it
appeared to Andromache, and with half a face, as the painter did him that had
but one eye, for I am compelled to draw a hose on, before I can finish the
leg, and in steed of a foot, to set down a shoe, So that whereas I had thought
to show the cunning of a Chirurgian, by mine Anatomy with a knife, I must play
the Tailor on the shop board, with a pair of sheeres, But whether Euphues
lympe with Vulcan, as born lame, or go on stilts with Amphionax, for lack of
legs, I trust I may say, that his feet should have been old Helena: for the poor
Fisherman that was warned he should not fish, did yet at his door make nets,
and the old Vintener of Venice, that was forbidden to sell wine, did
notwithstanding hang out an Iuie bush. This Pamphlet right honorable co^teining
the estate of England, I know none more fit to defend it, the^ one of the
Nobility of England, nor any of the Nobility, more ancient or more honorable
the^ your Lordship, besides that, describing the co^ditio^ of the English
court, and the majesty of our dread Souereign, I could not find one more
noble in court, the^ your Honor, who is or should be under her Majesty
chiefest in court, by birth borne to the greatest Office, and therefore me
thought by right to be placed in great authority: for who so co^pareth the
honor of your L. noble house, and the fidelity of your au^cestors, may well
say, which no other can truly gainsay, Vero nihil v^rius. So that I commit the
end of al my pains unto your most honorable protection, assuring my self that
the little Cock-boat is safe, when it is hoised into a tall ship, that the Cat
dare not fetch the mouse of the Lions den, that Euphues shall be without
danger by your L. patronage, otherwise, I cannot see, where I might find
succor in any noble personage. Thus praying continually for the increase of
your Lordships honor, with all other things that either you would wish, or God
will grant, I end.

Your Lordships most dutifully to command. LOHN LYLY.

TO THE LADIES and Gentlewomen of England, John Lyly wishes what they would.
ARachne having wouen in cloth of Arras, a Rainbow of sundry stikes, it was
objected unto her by a Lady more captious then cunning, that in her work there
wanted some colors, for that in a Rainbow there should be all: Unto whom
she replied, if the colors lack thou look for, thou must imagine that
they are on the other side of the cloth: For in the Sky we can discern but
one side of the Raine-bowe, and what couloures are in the other, see we
cannot, guess we may.

In the like manner (Ladies and Gentle women) am I to shape an answer in the
behalf of Euphues, who framing diverse questions and quirkes of love, if by
some more curious then needs, it shall be told him, that some sleightes are
wanting, I must say they are noted on the backside of the book. When Venus is
painted, we can-not see her back, but her face, so that all other things that
are to be recounted in love, Euphues thinks them to hang at Venus back in a
budget, which because he can-not see, he will not set down.

These discourses I have not clapped in a cluster, thinking with my self, that
Ladies had rather be sprinkled with sweet water, then washed, so that I have
solved them here and there, like Strawberies, not in heaps, like Hoppes:
knowing that you take more delight, to gather flowers one by one in a garden,
then to snatche them by handfulles from a Garland.

It rests Ladies, that you take the pains to read it, but at such times, as
you spend in playing with your little Dogs, and yet will I not pinch you of
that pastime, for I am content that your Dogs lie in your laps, so Euphues
may be in your hands, that when you shall be weary in reading of the one, you
may be ready to sport with the other: or handle him as you do your Iunckets,
that when you can eat no more, you tie some in your napkin for children, for
if you be filled with the first part, put the second in your pocket for your
waiting maids: Euphues had rather lie shut in a Ladies casket, then open in a
Scholars study.

Yet after dinner, you may ouerlooke him to keep you from sleep, or if you be
hauie, to bring you a sleep, for to work upon a full stomach is against
Phisike, and therefore better it were to hold Euphues in your hands, though
you let him fall, when you be willing to wink, then to sow in a clout, and
prick your fingers, when you begin to nod.

What-soeuer he has written, it is not to flatter, for he never reaped any
reward by your sex, but repentance, neither can it be to mock you, for he
never knew any thing by your sex but righteousness.

But I fear no anger for saying well, when there is none, but thinks she
deserves better.

She that has no glass to dress her head, will use a hole of water, she
that wants a sleeke-stone to smooth her linen, will take a pebble: the
country dame girdeth her self as straight in the wast with a course caddis, as
the Madame of the court with a silk riband, so that seeing every one so
willing to be pranked, I could not think any one unwilling to be praised.

One hand washes another, but they both wash the face, one foot goes by an
other, but they both carrye the body, Euphues and Philautus praise one an
other, but they both extol women: Therefore in my mind you are more beholding
to Gentlemen that make the colors, then to the Painters, that draw your
counterfaites: for that Appelles cunning is nothing if he paint with water,
and the beauty of women not much if they go vnpraised.

If you think this love dreamed, not done, yet me thinks you may as well
like that love which is penned and not practiced, as that flower that is
wrought with the needle, and grows not by nature, the one you wear in your
heads, for the fair sight, though it have no savor, the other you may read
for to pass the time, though it bring small pastime.

You choose cloth that will wear whitest, not that will last longest, colors
that look freshest, not that endure soundest, and I would you would read
books that have more show of pleasure, then ground of profit, then should
Euphues be as often in your hands, being but a toy, as Lawne on your heads,
being but trash, the one will be scarce liked after once reading, and the other
is worn out after the first washing.

There is nothing lighter then a feather, yet is it set a loft in a woemans
hatte, nothing slighter then hair, yet is it most frilled in a Ladies head,
so that I am in good hope, though their be nothing of less accounte then
Euphues, yet he shall be marked with Ladies eyes, and lyked sometimes in their
ears: For this I have diligently observed, that there shall be nothing found,
that may offend the rhast mind with unseemly terms, or uncleanly talk.

Then Ladies I commit my self to your courtesies, trauing this only, that
having read, you conceal your censure, writing your judgments as you do the
posies in your rings, which are always next to the finger, not to be seen of
him that holds you by the hands, and yet known to you that wear them on
your hands: If you be wrunge (which can-not be done without wrong) it were
better to cut the shoe, then burn the last.

If a Tailour make your gown too little, you cover his fault with a broad
stomacher, if too great, with a number of plights, if too short, with a fair
guard, if to long, with a false gathering, my trust is you will deal in the
like manner with Euphues, that if he have not fead your humor, yet you will
excuse him more then the Tailour: for could Euphues take the measure of a
woman's mind, as the Tailour does of her body, he would go as near to fit
them for a fancy, as the other does for a fashion.

He that weighes wind, must have a steadie hand to hold the ballaunce, and he
that sercheth a woemans thoughts must have his own stayed. But least I make my
Epistle as you do your newfound bracelets, endless, I will frame it like a
bullet, which is no sooner in the mould but it is made. Committing your
Ladyships to the Almighty, who grant you al you would have, and should
have: so your wishes stand with his will. And so humbly I bid you farewell.

Your Ladyships to command JOHN LYLY.

To the Gentlemen Readers.
GEntlemen, Euphues is come at the length though to late, for whose absence, I
hope three badde excuses, shall stand in steed of one good reason.

First in his travail, you must think he loytered, tarying many a month in
Italy viewing the Ladies in a Painters shop, when he should have been on the
Seas in a Merchaunts ship, not unlike unto an idle huswife, who is catching of
flies, when she should sweep down copwebs.

Secondly being a great start from Athens to England, he thought to stay for
the advantage of a Leap year, and had not this year leapt with him, I think
he had not yet leapt hither.

Thirdly being arrived, he was as long in viewing of London, as he was in
coming to it, not far differing from Gentlewome^, who are longer a dressing
their heads than their whole bodies.

But now he is come Gentlemen, my request is only to bid him welcome, for
diverse there are, not that they mislike the matter, but that they hate the man,
that will not stick to tear Euphues, because they do enure Lyly: Where-in they
resemble angry Dogs, which byte the stone, not him that throws it, or the
cholaricke Horse-rider, who being cast from a young Colt, and not daring to
kill the Horse, went into the stable to cut the saddle.

These be they, that thought Euphues to be drowned and yet were never troubled
with drying of his clothes, but they gessed as they wished, and I would it had
happened as they desired.

They that loath the Fountains head, will never drink of the little Brooks:
they that seek to poison the Fish, will never eat the spawme: they that like
not me, will not allow any thing that is mine.

But as the Serpent Porphirius, though he be full of poison, yet having no
teeth hurts none but himself, so the envious, though they swell with malice
till they burst, yet having no teeth to bite, I have no cause to fear.

Only my suit is to you Gentlemen, that if any thing be amiss, you pardon
it: if well, you defend it: and how-soeuer it be, you accept it.

Faults escaped in the Printing, correct with your pens: omitted by my
negligence, ouerslippe with patience: committed by ignorance, remit with
favor.

If in every part it seem not alyke, you know that it is not for him that
fashioneth the shoe, to make the grain of the leather.

The old Hermit will have his talk savor of his Cell, the old Courtier, his
love taste of Saturn, yet the last Lover may happily come somewhat near
Iuppiter.

Lovers when they come into a Gardeine, some gather Nettles, some Roses, one
Time, an other Sage, and every one, that, for his Ladies favor, that she
favors: insomuch as there is no Weed almost, but it is worn. If you
Gentlemen, do the like in reading, I shall be sure all my discourses shall be
regarded, some for the smell, some for the smart, all for a kind of a loving
smacke: Let every one follow his fancy, and say that is best, which he
lyketh best. And so commit every man's delight to his own choice, and my self
to all your courtesies.

Yours to use, John Lyly.

Euphues and his England.
EVphues having gotten all things necessary for his voyage into England,
accompanied only with Philautus, took shipping the first of December 1579.
by our English Computation: Who as one resolved to see that with his eyes,
which he had oftentimes heard with his ears, began to use this persuasion
with his friend Philautus, as well to counsel him how he should behave
himself in England, as to comfort him being n^we on the Seas.

As I have sound thee willing to be a fellow in my travail, so would I have
thee ready to be a follower of my counsel: in the one shall thou show thy
good will, in the other manifest thy wisdom. We are now sailing into an
Island, of small compass, as I guess by their Maps, but of great civility, as
I hear by their matters, which if it be so, it behooves us to be more
inq^isttiue of their conditions, then of their country, ^ more darefull to
mark the natures of their men, then curiou^ to note the situation of the
place. And surely me thinks we cannot better bestow our time on the Sea,
then in advice how to behave our selves when we come to the shore: for greater
danger is there to ariue in a strange country where the inhabitauntes be
politic, then to be tossed with the troublesome waves, where the Mariners be
unskillful. Fortune guides men in the rough Sea, but wisdom rules them in a
strange land.

If trauailers in this our age were as wary of their conditions, as they be
venterous of their bodies, or an willinge to reap pros^te by their pai^e^, as
they are to endure peril for their pleasure, they would either prefer their own
soil before a strange land, or good counsel before their own conceit. But
as the young scholar in Athens went to hear Demosthenes eloquence at Corinth,
and was entangled with Lais beauty, so most of our trauailers which pretend
to get a smacke of strange language to sharpen their wits, are infected
with vanity by following their wills. Danger and delight grow both upon one
stalk, the Rose and the Canker in one bud, white and black are commonly in
one border. Seeing then my good Philautus, that we are not to conquer wild
beasts by fight, but to confer with wise me^ by policy: we ought to take
greater heed that we be not entrapped in folly, then fear to be subdued by
force. And here by the way it shall not be amiss, as well to drive away the
tediousnes of time, as to delight our selves with talk, to rehearse an old
treatise of an ancient Hermit, who meeting with a Pilgrim at his Cell,
uttered a strange and delightful tale, which if thou Philautus art disposed
to hear, and these present attentive to have, I will spend some time about it,
knowing it both fit for us that be trauailers to learn wit, and not unfit
for these that be Merchaunts to get wealth.

Philautus although the stumpes of love so sticked in his mind, that he rather
wished to hear an Eelegie in Ovid, then a tale of an Hermit: yet was he
willing to lend his care to his friend, who had left his heart with his Lady,
for you shall understand that Philautus having read the cooling Card which
Euphues sent him, sought rather to answer it, then allow it. And I doubt not
but if Philautus fall into his old vain in England, you shall hear of his
new device in Italy. And although some shall think it impertinent to the
history, they shall not find it repugnant, no more then in one nosegay to
set two flowers, or in one counterfeit two colors, which brings more
delight then disliking.

Philautus answered Euphues in this manner.

MY good Euphues, I am as willing to hear thy tale, as I am to be pertaker of
thy travail, yet I know not how it comes to pass, that my eyes are either
heavy against foul weather, or my head so drowsy against some ill news,
that this tale shall come in good time to bring me a sleep, and then shall I
get no harm by the Hermit, though I get no good, the other that were then in
the ship, flocked about Euphues, who began in this manner.

THere dwell sometimes in the Island Scyrum, an ancient Gentleman called
Cassander, who as well by his being a long gatherer, as his trade being a lewd
usurer, wared so welthy, that he was thought to have almost all the money in
that country in his own coffers, being both aged and sickly, found such
weakness in himself, that he thought nature would yield to death, and
physic to his diseases* This Gentleman had one only son, who nothing
resembled the father either in fancy or favor, which the old man perceiving,
disse^ilised with him both in nature and honesty, whom he caused to be called
unto his bedsid, and the chamber being boyded, he brake with him in these
terms.

Callimachus (for so was he called) thou art too young to dye, and I too old
to live: yet as nature must of necessity pay her debt to death* so must she
also show her devotion to thee, whom I a-liue had to be ye comfort of mine
age, and whom alone I must leave behind me, for to be the only maintayner
of all mine honor. If thou could as well conceive the care of a father, as I
can level at the nature of a child, or were I as able to utter my affection
toward a son as thou ought to show thy duty to thy ^ire, the^ would
thou desire my life to enjoy my counsel, and I should correct thy life to
amend thy conditions: yet so tempered, as neither rigor might detract any
thing from affection in me, or fear any whit from thee, in duty. But seeing my
self so feeble that I cannot live to be thy guide, I am resolved to give thee
such counsel as may do thee good, wherein I shall show my care, and discharge
my duty.

My good Son, thou art to receive by my death, wealth, and by my counsel
wisdom, and I would thou were as willing to imprint the one in thy heart, as
thou will be ready to bear the other in thy purse: To be rich is the gift of
Fortune, to be wise the grace of God. Have more mind on thy books then thy
bags, more desire of godliness then gold, greater affection to dye well, then
to live wantonly.

But as the Cypress tree, the more it is watered, the more it withers, and
the oftener it is lopped, the sooner it dies: so unbridled youth, the more it
is also by grave advice counseled, or due correction controlled, the sooner it
falls to confusion, hating all reasons that would bring it from folly, as
that tree does all remedies, that should make it fertile.

Alas Callimachus, when wealth comes into the hands of youth before they can
use it, then fall they to all disorder that may be, tedding that with a fork in
one year, which was not gathered together with a rake in twenty.

But why discourse I with thee of worldly affairs, being my self going to
heaven, here Callimachus take the key of yonder great barred chest, where thou
shall find such store of wealth, that if thou use it with discretion, thou
shall become the only rich man of the world. Thus turning him on the left side,
with a deep sigh and pitiful groan gave up the ghoast.

Callimachus having more mind to look to the lock, then for a shrowdinge
sheet, the breath being scarce out of his fathers mouth, and his body yet
panting with heat, opened the Chest, where he found nothing but a letter
written very fair, sealed up with his Signet of arms, with this
superscription.

In finding nothing, thou shall gain all things.

Callimachus, although he were abashed at the fight of the empty Chest, yet
hoping this letter would direct him to the golden Mine, he boldlye opened it,
the contents whereoff followed in these terms.

Wisdom is great wealth. Sparing is good getting. Thrift confisteth not in
gold, but grace. It is better to dye without money, then to live without
modesty. Put no more clothes on thy back, then will expe^ cold: neither any
more meat in thy belly, then may quench hunger. Use not channge in attire, nor
variety in thy diet: the one brings pride, the other surfets. Each vain,
void of piety: both costly, wide of profit.

Go to bed with the Lamb, and rise with the Lark: Late watching in the night,
breeds unquiet: and long sleeping in the day ungodliness: Fly both: this,
as unwholesome: that as dishonest.

Enter not into bands, no not for thy best friends: he that pays an other
man's debt, seeks his own decay, it is as rare to see a rich Surety, as a
black Swan, and he that lends to all that will borow, shows great good will,
but little wit. Lend not a penny without a pawn, for that will be a good gage
to borow. Be not hasty to marry, it is better to have one plough going, then
two cradells: and more profit to have a barn filled, then a bed. But if
thou can not live chastely, choose such an one, as may be more commended for
humility, then beauty. A good huswife is a great patrimony: and she is most
honorable, that is most honest. If thou desire to be old, beware of too much
wine: If to be healthy take heed^ of many women: If to be rich, shun playing at
all games. Long quaffing, makes a short life: Fond lust, causes dry bones:
and lewd pastimes, naked pursses. Let the Cook be thy Physician, and the
shambles thy Apothecaries shop: He that for every qualme will take a Receipt,
and cannot make two meals, unless Galen be his Gods good: shall be sure to
make the Physician rich, and himself a beggar, his body will never be without
diseases, and his pursse ever without money.

Be not too lavish in giving alms, the charity of this Country, is, God
help thee: and the courtesy, I have the best wine in town for you.

Live in the country, not in the Court, where neither grass will grow, nor
Moss cleave to thy heels.

Thus have thou if thou can use it, the whole wealth of the world, and he
that cannot follow good counsel, never can get commodity. I leave thee more,
then my father left me, for he dying gave me great wealth, without care how I
might keep it, and I give thee good counsel, with all means how to get
riches. And no doubt, what so is gotten with wit, will be kept with wariness,
and increased with wisdom.

God bless thee, and I bless thee: and as I tender thy safety, so God deal
with my soul.

Callimachus was stricken into such a maze at this his fathers last Will, that he
had almost lost his former wit: And being in an extreme rage, renting his
clothes and tearing his hair, began to utter these words.

IS this the Nature of a father to deceive his son, or ye part of crabbed age
to delude credulous youth? Is the death bed, which ought to be ye end of
devotion, become the beginning of deceit? Ah Cassander, friend I cannot term
thee, seeing thee so unkind, and Father I will not call thee, whom I find so
unnatural.

Who so shall hear of this ungratefulness will rather lament thy dealyng then
thy death, and marvel that a man affected outwardly with such great gravity,
should inwardly be infected with so great guile. Shall I then show the duty of a
child, when thou have forgotten the Nature of a Father? No, no, for as the
Torch turned downward is extinguished with the self same wax, which was the
cause of his light: so Nature turned to unkindness, is quenched by those
means it should be kindeled, leaving no branch of love, where it found no
root of humanity.

Thou have carried to thy grave more gray hairs, tha^ years: and yet more
years, then virtues. Could thou under the Image of so precise holiness,
harbor the express pattern of barbarous cruelty? I see now that as the
Canker soonest enters into the white Rose, so corruption does eassiest creep
into the white head.

Would Callimachus could as well digest thy malice with patience, as thou
did disguise it with craft: or would and might either bury my care with thy
carcass, or that thou had ended thy defame with thy death. But as the herb
Moly has a flower as white as snow, and a root as black as inck, so age has
a white head showing piety, but a black heart swellyng with mischief.
Whereby I see that old men are not unlike unto old Trees, whose barks
seems to be sound, when their bodies are rotten.

I will mourn, not that thou art now dead, but because thou have lived so long,
neither do I weep to see thee without breath, but to find thee without money.
In steed of coin thou have left me counsel: O polytique old man. Did
thou learn by experience, that an edge can be any thing worth, if it have
nothing to cut, or that Miners could work without mettalls, or wisdom thrius
without wherewith.

What avails it to be a cunning Lapidarie, and have no stones? or a skillful
Pilot, and have no ship? or a thriftie man, and have no money. Wisdom has no
Mint, Counsel is no coyner. He that in these days seeks to get wealth by
wit, without friends, is like unto him, that thinks to buy meat in the
Market, for honesty without money, which thriueth on either side so well,
that the one has a witty head, and an empty pursse, the other a godly mind,
and an empty belly.

Yea, such a world it is, that Gods can do nothing without gold, and who of
more might? nor Princes any thing without gifts, and who of more Majesty? nor
Philosophers any thing without gylt, and who of more wisdom? For as among
the Egyptians, there was no man esteemed happy, that had not a beast full of
spots, so amongst us, there is none accounted wise, that has not his pursse
full of gold. And had thou not loved money so well, thou would never have
lived so warily, and dyed so wickedly, who either burying thy treasure, do
hope to meet it in Hell, or borowing it of the Devil, have rendered him the
whole, the interest whereoff, I fear me comes to no less, then the price of
thy soul.

But whether art thou carried Callimachus, rage can neither reduce thy fathers
life, nor recover his treasure. Let it suffice thee, that he was unkind, and
thou unfortunate, that he is dead and hears thee not, that thou art alive and
profitest nothing.

But what did my father think, that too much wealth would make me proud, and
feared not too great miserye would make me desperate? Whilst he was beginning a
fresh to renew his complaints, and revile his parents, his kinsfolk assembled,
who caused him to bridle his lavish tongue, although they meruailed at his
piteous tale: For it was well known to them al, that Cassander, had more money
then half the country, and loved Callimachus better then his own self.

Callimachus by the importunity of his allies, repressed his rage, sctting
order for all things requisite for his fathers funerals, who being brought
with due reverence unto the grave, he returned home, making a short Inventory
to his fathers long Will. And having made ready money of such mouables as were
in his house, put both them and his house into his purse, resolving now with
himself in this extremity, either with the hazard of his labor to gain
wealth, or by misfortune to seek death, accompting it great shame to live
without travail, as grief to be left without treasure, and although he were
earnestly entreatred, as well by good profers of gentle persuasions to weane
himself from so desolate, or rather desperate life, he would not harken
either to his own commodities or their counselles: For seeing (said he) I am
left heir to all the world* I mean to execute my authority, and claim my
lands in all places of the world. Who now so rich as Callimachus* Who had as
many revenues every where as in his own country? Thus being in a readiness
to depart, apparelled in all colors, as one fit for all companies, and
willing to see all countries, iournyed three or four days very devoutly like
a Pilgrim who straying out of his pathway, and somewhat weary, not used to
such day labors, rested himself upon the side of a silver stream even
almost in the ^grisping of the evening, where thinking to stcale a nappe,
began to close his eyes. As he was thus between slumbring and waking, he
heard one cough pitiously, which caused him to start, and seeing no creature,
he searched diligently in every bushe, and under every shrubbe, at the last
he lyghted on a little cave, where thrusting in his head, more bold then
wise, he espied an old man cladde all in gray, with a head as white as
Alablaster* his h^arie beard hanging down well near to his knees; with him no
earthly creature, saving only a Mouse sleeping in a Cats ear.

Over the fire this good old man sat, leaning his head to look into a little
earthen vessel which stood by him.

Callimachus delighted more then abashed at this strange sight, thought to see
the manner of his host, before he would be his guest.

This old man immediatelye took out of his pot certain roots, on the
which he fed hungerly, having no other drink then fair water. But that
which was most of all to be considered and noted, the Mouse and the Catte fell
to their vi^tualles, being such relics as the old man had left, yea and that
so louinglye, as one would have thought them both married, judging the Mouse
to be very wild, or the Cat very tame.

Callimachus could not refrain laughter to behold the solemn feast, at the
voice where-of the old man arose, and dema^nded who was there: unto whom
Callimachus answered: Father, one that wishes thee both greater cheer and
better servants: unto whom he replied shoaring up his eyes, by Iis son, I
account the cheer good, which maintains health, and the servants honest,
whom I find faithful. And if thou neither think scorn of my company nor my
Cell, enter and welcome, the which offer Callimachus accepted with great
thanks, who thought his lodging would be better then his supper.

The next morning the old man being very inquisitiue of Callimachus what he
was, where he dwelt, and whether he would, Callimachus discoursed with him in
perticulers, as before, touching his fathers death and despite, against whom he
uttered so many bitter and burning words, as the old Hermittes ears gloed
to hear them, and my tongue would blyster if I should utter them.

Moreover he added that he was determined to seek adventures in strange
lands, and either to fetch the golden fleece by travail, or sustain the
force of Fortune by his own wilful folly.

Now Philautus, thou shall understand that this old Hermit, which was named
also Cassander, was brother to Callimachus Father, and Uncle to Callimachus,
unto whom Cassander had before his death conveyed the sum of ten thousand
pounds* to the use of his son in his most extremity, and necessity, knowing
or at the least foreseeing that his young colt will never bear a white mouth
without a hard bridle. Also he assured him self* that his brother so little
tendered money being a professed Hermit, and so much tendered and esteemed
Callimachus, being his near kinsman, as he put no doubt to stand to his
devotion.

Cassander this old Hermit hearing it to be Callimachus his nephew, and
understanding of the death of his brother, dissembled his grief, although he
were glad to see things happen out so well, and determined with himself to make
a Cousin of his young Nephew, until he had bought wit with the price of woe,
wherefore he assayed first to stay him from travail, and to take some other
course, more fit for a Gentleman. And to the intent said he, that I may
persuade thee, give ear to my tale. And this is the tale Philautus that I
promised thee, which the Hermitte sitting now in the Sun, began to utter
to Callimachus.

WHen I was young as thou now art, I never thought to be old, as now I am,
which caused lusty blood to attempt those things in youth, which aching
boanes have repented in age. I had one only Brother, which also bore my
name, being both born at one time as twins, but so far disagre^ing in
nature, as had not as well the respect of the (...) time, as also the
certeintie and assurance of our Mothers fidelity, persuaded the world we
had one Father: It would very hardlye have been thought, that such
contrary dispositions could well have been bredde in one womb, or issued
from ones loins. Yet as out of one and the self same root, comes as well
the wild Olyue, as the sweet, and as the Palm Persian Fig tree, bears as
well Apples, as Figs: so our mother thrust into the world at one time, the
blossom ofgrauitie and lightness.

We were nursed both with one teate, where my brother sucked a desire of
thirst, and I of theft, which evidently shows, that as the breath of the Lion
engenders as well the Serpent as the Ant, and as the self same deaw forces
the earth to yield both the Darnell and Wheat: or as the Easterly wind makes
the blossoms to blast, and the buddes to blow, so one womb nourishes
contrary wits, and one milk diverse manners, which argues something in Nature I
know not what, to be marvelous, I dare not say monstrous.

As we grew old in years, so began we to be more opposite in opinions: he
grave, I gamesome: he studious, I careless: he without mirth, and I without
modesty.

And verily, had we resembled each other, as little in favor, as we did in
fancy, or disagreed as much in shape as we did in sense, I know not what
Dedalus would have made, a Laborinth for such Monsters, or what Appelles could
have colored such mishapes.

But as the Painter Tamantes could no way expres the grief of Agamemnon, who
saw his only daughter sacrificed, and there-fore drew him with a vale over
his face, where-by one might better conceive his anguishe, then he color it:
so some Tamantes seeing us, would be constrained with a Curtain to shadow
that deformity, which no counterf^it could protraye liuelye. But nature
recompensed the similitude of minds, with a Sympathy of bodies, for we were in
all parts one so like the other, that it was hard to distinguish either in
speech, countenance, or height one from the other, saving that either carried
the motion of his mind in his manners, and that the affects of the heart were
bewrayed by the eyes, which made us known manifestly. For as two Kubies be
they never so like, yet if they be brought together one staineth the other, so
we being close one to the other, it was easily to imagine by ye face, whose
virtue deserved most favor, for I could never see my brother, but his gravity
would make me blush, which caused me to resemble the Thrush, who never sings
in the company of the Nightingale, For whilst my brother was in presence, I
durst not presume to talk, least his wisdom might have checked my
wildenesse: Much like to Roscius, who was always dumb when he dined with
Cato. Our Father being on his death bed, knew not whom to ordeine his heir,
being both of one age: to make both, would breed as he thought, unquiet: to
appoint but one, were as he knew injury: to divide equally, were to have no
heir: to impart more to one then to the other, were parctalitie: to disherite
me of his wealth, whom Nature had disherited of wisdom, were against reason:
to bar my brother from gold whom God seemed to endue with grace, were flat
impiety: yet calling us before him, he uttered with watery eyes these words.

WEre it not my sons, that Nature works more in me, then Justice, I should
disherite the one of you, who promises by his folly to spend all, and leave
the other nothing, whose wisdom seems to purchase all things. But I
welknow, that a bitter root is amended with a sweet graft, and crooked trees,
prove good Cantmockes, and wild Grapes make pleasant Wine. Which persuades
me, that thou (poynting to me) wilt in age repent thy youthly affections, and
learn to dye as well, as thou have lived wantonly. As for thee (laying his
hand on my brothers head) although I see more then commonly in any of thy
years, yet knowing that those that give themselves to be bookish are
oftentimes so blockish that they forget thrist: Where-by the old Saw is
verified, that the greatest Clearkes are not the wisest men, who dig still at
the root, while others gather the fruit, I am determined to help thee
forward, least having nothing, thou desire nothing, and so he accounted as no
body. He having thus said called for two bags, the one full of gold, the
other stuffed with writings, and casting them both unto us said this: There my
sons, divide all, as between you it shall be best agreed, and so rendered up
his ghoast, with a pitiful groan.

My brother as one that knew his own good and my humor, gave me leave to
choose which bag I lyked, at the choice, I made no great curiosity, but
snatching ye gold let go the wrstings, which were as I knew Guidences for
land, Oblygations for debt, too heavy for me to carry, who determined (as now
thou do Callimachus) to seek adventures. My pursse now swelling with a
timpany. I thought to search all countries for a remedy, and sent many golden
Angels into every quarter of the world, which never brought news again to
their master, being either soared into Heaven where I cannot fetch them, or
sunk into Hell for pride, where I mean not to follow them. This lyse I
continued the space of. xiiii. years, until I had visited and viewed every
country, and was a stranger in mine own: but finding no treasure to be
wrapped in travel, I returned with more vices, then I went forth with pence,
yet with so good a grace, as I was able to sin both by experience and
authority, use framing me to the one, and the countries to the other. There was
no crime so barbarous, no murder so bloody, no oath so blasphemous, no vice
so execrable, but that I could redely recite, where I learned it, and by roate
repeat the peculiar crime, of every particular Country, City, Town, Village,
house, or Chamber. If I met with one of Creete, I was ready to lie with him for
the whetstone. It with a Grecian, I could dissemble with Synon, I could court
it with the Italian, carous it with the Dutchman. I learned all kind of
poisons, yea, and such as were for ye Popes holiness. In Egypt I worshipped
their spotted God at Memphis. In Turkey, their Mahomet. In Rome, their Mass:
which gave me not only a remission for my sins past, without penance, but
also a commission to sin ever after without prejudice. There was no fashion
but fitted my back: no fancy but served my turn. But now my barrel of
gold, which Pride set a broach, love began to set a tilte, which in short time
ran so on the lees, that the Devil daunced in the bottom, where he found
never a cross. It were to tedious to utter my whole life in this my Pilgrimage,
the remembrance whereoff, does nothing but double my repentance.

Then to grow to an end, I seeing my money wasted, my apparel worn, my mind
infected with as many vices, as my body with diseases, and my body with more
maladyes, then the Leopard has marks, having nothing for amends but a few
broken languages, which served me in* no more steed, then to see one meat
served in diverse dishes: I thought it best to return into my native soil,
where finding my brother as far now to erceed others in wealth as he did me
in wit, and that he had gained more by thrift, then I could spend by pride, I
neither envied his estate, nor pitied mine own: but opened the whole course of
my youth, not thinking thereby to recover that of him by request, which I had
lost my self by riot, for casting in my mind, the miseries of the world, with
the mischiefs of my life, I determined from that unto my lives end, to lead a
solitary life in this cave, which I have done the term of full forty Winters,
from whence, neither the earnest entreatie of my Brother, nor the bayne
pleasures of the world could draw me, neither shall any thing but death.

Then my good Callimachus, record with thy self the inconveniences that come
by trauailyng, when on the Seas every storm shall threaten death, and every
calm a danger, when either thou shall be compelled to board others as a
Pyrate, or fear to be boorded of others as a Merchaunt: when at all times,
thou must have the back of an Ass to bear all, and the snout of a Swine, to
say nothing, thy hand on thy cap to show reverence to every rascal, thy pursse
open to be prodigal to every Boore, thy sword in thy sheath, not once daring
either to strike or ward, which makes me think, that trauaylers, are not
only framed not to commit injuries, but also to take them. Learn Callimachus
of the bird Acanthis, who being bredde in the thistells, will live in the
thistels, and of the grasshopper, who being sprung of the grass, will rather dye
the^ depart from the grass. I am of this mind with Homer, that as the Snaile
that crept out of her shel, was turned eftsoons into a Toad, and thereby was
forced to make a stool to sit on, disdaining her own house: so the Trauailer
that stragleth from his own country, is in short time transformed into so
monstrous a shape, that he is feign to alter his mansion with his manners, and
to live where he can, not where he would. What did Ulysses wish in the midst of
his travailing, but only to see the smoke of his own Chimney? Did not all
the Romans, say, that he yt wandered did nothing else but heap^ sorrows to his
friends, and shame to himself, and resembled those that seeking to light a
link, quenched a lamp, imitating the barbarous Goths, who thought the roots
in Alexandria, sweeter than the Kaisons in Barbary: In my opinion it is a
homely kind of dealyng to prefer the courtesy of those he never knew,
before the honesty of those among whom he was borne: he that cannot live with
a groate in his own Country, shall never enjoy a penny in an other nation.
Little do thou know Callimachus, with what wood trauailers are warmed, who
must sleep with their eyes open, least they be slain in their beds, and
wake with their eyes shut, least they be suspected by their looks, and eat
with their mouths close, least, they be poisoned with their meats. Where if
they war wealthy, thou shall be envied, not loved: If poor, punished, not
pitied: If wise, accounted espyalls: If foolish, made drudges. Every
Gentleman will be thy peer though they be noble, and every pesant their Lord,
if they be gentle. He therefore that leaves his own house to seek
adventures, is like the Quail that forsakes the Malowes to eat Hemlocke, or
the Fly that shunneth the Rose, to light in a cowshard.

No Callimachus, there will no moss stick to the stone of Sisiphus, no grass
hang on the heels of Mercury, no butter cleave on ye bread of a trauailer.
For as the Egle at every flight loses a fether, which makes her bald in her
age: so the trauailer in every country loses some fleece, which makes him a
beggar in his youth, buying that with a pound, which he cannot sell again for a
pen, ney, repentance. But why go I about to disswad thee from that, which I my
self followed, or to persuade thee to that which thou thy self flyest? My
gray hairs are like unto a white frost, thy read blood not unlike unto a hot
fire: so that it can-not be that either thou should follow my counsel, or I
allow thy conditions: such a quarrel has there always been between the
grave and the cradle, that he that is young thinks the old man fond, and the
old knows the young man to be a fool. But Callimachus, for ye towardnes I
see in thee, I must needs love thee, and for thy frowardness of force
counsel thee: and do in the same sort, as Phoebus did the daring boy Phaeton.
Thou go about a great matter, neither fit for thy years being very young nor
thy profit being left so poor, thou desire yt which thou know not,
neither can any perform that which thou seem to promise. If thou covet to
travail strange countries, search the Maps, there shall thou see much, with
great pleasure and small pains, if to be conversant in all courts, read
histories, where thou shall understand both what the men have been, and what
their manners are, and me thinks there must be much delight, when there is no
danger* And if thou have any care either of the green bud which springs out
of the tender stalk, or the timelye fruit which is to grow of so good a
root, seek not to kill the one, or hasten the other: but let time so work,
that grafts may be gathered of the tree, rather then sticks to burn. And so I
leave thee, not to thy self, but to him that made thee, who guide thee with
his grace whether thou go as thou would, or tarry at home as thou should.

Callimachus obstinate in his fond conceit, was so far from being persuaded by
this old Hermit, that he rather made it a greater occasion of his pilgrimage,
and with an answer between scorning and resoning, he replied thus.

Father or friend (I know not very well how to term you) I have been as
attentive to hear your good discourse, as you were willing to utter it: yet me
thinks you deal meruailously with youth, in seeking by sage counsel to put
gray hayres on their chins, before nature has given them almost any hayres on
their heads: where-in you have gone so far, that in my opinion your labor
had been better spent in travailing where you have not lived, then in talking
where you cannot be believed. You have been a Trauailer, and tasted nothing but
sour, therefore whosoever trauaileth, shall eat of the same sauce: an
Argument it is, that your fortune was ill, not that others should be as had,
and a warning to make you wise, not a warning to prove others unfortunate.
Shall a soldier that has received a skarre in the battle, give out that all
warriors shall be may^ied? Or the Merchant that has lost by the Seas, be a
cause that no other should venture, or a trauailer that has sustained harm by
sinister fortune, or ben infected by his own folly, dissuade all Gentlemen to
rest at their own home, till they come to their long home? Why then let all
men abstain from wine, because it made Alexander tipsie, let no man love a
woeman for that Tarquine was banished, let not a wise man play at all, for that
a fool has lost al, which in my mind would make such medly, that we should
be enforced to leave things that were best, for fear they may be bad, and
that were as fond as not to cut ones meat with that knife that an other has
cut his finger. Things are not to be judged by the event, but by the end, nor
travailing to be condemned by yours or manies unlucky success, but by the
common and most approved wisdom of those that can better show what it is then
I, and will better speak of it then you do.

Where you allege Ulysses that he desired nothing so much, as to see the
smoke of Ithaca, it was not because he loved not to travail, but that he
lo^ged to see his wife after his travail: and greater commendation brought his
travail to him, then his wit: the one taught but to speak, the other what he
should speak. And in this you turn the point of your own bodkin into your
own bosom. Ulysses was no less esteemed for knowledge he had of other
countries, then for the revenues he had in his own, and where in the end you
seem to refer me to the viewing of Maps, I was never of that mind to make my
ship in a painters shop, which is like those, who have great skill in a
wooden Globe, but never behold the sky. And he that seeks to be a cunning
Trauailer by seeing the Maps and an expert Astronomer, by turning the Globe,
may be an Apprentice for Appelles, but no Page for Ulysses.

An other reason you bring, that travailing is costlye, I speak for my self:
He that has little to spend, has not much to lose, and he that has nothing
in his own country, cannot have less in any.

Would you have me spend the flower of my youth, as you do the withered raze
of your age* can ye fair blood of youth creep into the ground as it were frost
bitten* No father Hermit, I am of Alexanders mind, if there were as many
worlds, as there be cities in the world, I would never leave until I had seen
all ye worlds, and each city in every world. Therefore to be short, nothing
shall alter my mind neither penny nor Pater noster.

This old man seeing him so resolute, resolved to let him depart, and gave him
his farewell.

MY good son, though thou will not suffer me to persuade thee, yet shall thou
not let me to pity thee: yea, and to pray for thee: but the time will come
when coming home by weeping cross, thou shall confess, that it is better to
be at home in the cave of an Hermit then abroad in the court of an Emperor,
and that a crust with quietness shall be better then Quails with unrest. And
to the end thou may prove my sayings as true, as I know thy self to be
wilful, take the pains to return by this poor Cell, where thy fare shall be
amended, if thou amend thy fault, and so farewell.

Callimachus courteously took his leave, and went his way: but we will not
leave him til we have him again, at the Cell where we found him.

NOw Philautus and Gentlemen all, suppose that Callimachus had as ill fortune,
as ever had any, his mind infected with his body, his time consumed with his
treasure: nothing won, but what he cannot loose though be would, misery. You
must imagine (because it were too long to tell all his journey) that he was Sea
sick, (as thou beginnest to be Philautus) that he hardly escaped death, that
he endured hunger and cold, heat without drink, yt he was entangled with women,
entrapped, deceived, that every stool he sat on, was penniles bench, that his
roves were rags, that he had as much need of a Chyrurgian as a Physician, and
that thus he came home to the Cell, and with shame and sorrow began to say as
follows.

I Find too late, yet at length, that in age there is a certain foresight,
which youth can-not search, and of a kind of experience, unto which, vnripened
years can not come: so that I must of necessity confess, that youth never
raineth well, but when age holds the bridle (you see my good father) what I
would say by outward show, and I need not tell what I have tried, because
before you told me, I should find it: this I say, that whatsoever misery
happened either to you or any, the same has chanced to me alone, I can say
no more, I have tried no less.

The old Hermit glad to see this ragged Colt returned, yet grieved to see him
so tormented, thought not to add sower words to augment his sharp woes, but
taking him by the hand, and sitting down, began after a solemn manner, from
the beginning to the end, to discourse with him of his fathers affairs, even
after the sort that before I rehearsed, and delivered unto him his money,
thinking now that misery, would make him thriftie, desiring also, that as well
for the honor of his Fathers house, as his own credit, he would return
again to the Island, and there be a comfort to his friends, and a relief to
his poor neighbors, which would be more worth then his wealth, and the
fulfilling of his Fathers last Will.

Callimachus not a little pleased with this tale, and I think not much
displeased with ye gold, gave such thanks as to such a friend apperteined,
and following the counsel of his uncle, which ever after he obeyed as a
commandment, he came to his own house, lived long with great wealth, and as
much worship as any one in Scyrum, and whether he be now living I know not, but
whether he be or no, it skilleth not.

Now Philautus, I have told this tale to this end, not that I think
trauailyng to be ill if it be used well, but that such advice be taken that the
horse carry not his own bridle, nor youth rule himself in his own co^ceits.
Besides that, such places are to be chosen, wherein to inhabit as are as
commendable for virtue, as buildings: where the manners, are more to be marked,
then ye men seen. And this was my whole drift, either never to travail, or so
to travail, as although the pursse be weakened, the mind may be strengthened.
For not he that has seen most countries is most to be esteemed, but he that
learned best conditions: for not so much are the situation of the places to be
noted, as the virtues of the persons. Which is contrary to the common practice
of our trauaylers, who go either for gain, and return without knowledge, or
for fashion sake, and come home with out piety: Whose estates are as much to
be lamented, as their follyes are to be laughed at, this causes youth to
spend their golden time, without either praise or profit, pretending a desire
of learning, when they only follow loytering. But I hope our travail shall be
better employed, seeing virtue is the white we shoot at, not vanity, neither
the English tongue (which as I have heard is almost barbarous) but the English
manners, which as I think are most precise: And to thee Philautus I begin to
address my speech, having made an end of my hermits tale, and if these few
precepts I give thee be observed, then doubt not, but we both shall learn that,
we best like. And these they are.

AT thy coming into England, be not too inquisitiue of news neither curious
in matters of State, in assemblyes ask no questions, either concerning ma^ners
or me^. Be not lavish of thy tongue, either in causes of weight, least thou
show thy self an espyall, or in wanton talk, least thou prove thy self a
fool.

It is the Nature of that country to sift strangers, every one that shakes
thee by the hand is not joined to thee in heart. They think Italians wanton,
and Grecians subtle, they will trust neither, they are so incredulous, but
undermine both* they are so wise. Be not quartellous for every light occasion,
they are impatient in their anger of any equal, ready to revenge an injury, but
never wont to proffer any: they never fight without provoking, and once
provoked, they never cease. Beware thou fall not into the snares of love, the
women there are wise, the men crafty: they will gather love by thy looks, and
pick thy mind out of thy hands. It shall be there better to hear what they say,
then to speak what thou think: They have long ears and short tongues,
quick to hear, and slow to btter: broad eyes and light fingers, ready to espy
and apt to strike. Every stranger is a mark for them to shoot at: yet this
must I say, which in no country I can tell the like, yt it is as seldom to
see a stranger abused there, as it is rare to see any well used else where: yet
presume not too much of ye courtesies of those, for they* differ in natures,
some are hot, some cold, one simple, an other wily, yet if thou use few words,
and fair speches, thou shall command any thing thou stand in need off.

Touching the situation of the soil, I have read in my study, which I partly
believe (having no worse Author then Caesar) yet at my coming, when I shall
confer the things I see, with those I have read, I will judge accordingly.
And this have I heard: that the inner part of Britain is inhabited by such as
were borne and bred in the Isle, and the Seacoast by such as have passed
thither out of Belgicke to search booties, and to make war. The country is
meruaylously replenished with people, and there be many buildings, almost like
in fashion to ye buildings of Gallia, there is great store of Cattle, the
coin they use, is either of Brass, or else rings of Iron, used at a certain
weight in steed of money. In the inner parts of the Realm grows Tin, and
in the Sea Coaste grows iron. The Brass that they occupye, is brought in
from beyond sea. The air is more temperate in those places, than in France,
and the cold lesser. The Island is in fashion three cornered, where-off one
side is toward France, the one corner of this side which is Kent, where for the
most part Ships ariue out of France, is in the Gast, and the other nethermore,
is toward the South. This side contains about five hundred miles, an other
side lies toward Spain and the Sun going down, on the which side is
Ireland, less then Britain, as is supposed by the one half: but the cut
between them, is like the distaunce that is between France and Britain* In
the midst of this course is an Island called Man, the length of this side is
(according to ye opinion of the Inhabiters) seuc^ hundred miles. The third side
is Northward, and against it lies no land, but the point of that side,
butteth most upon Germany. This they esteem to be eight hundred miles long,
and so ye ciruit of ye whole Island is two thousand miles. Of all the
Inhabitaunts of this Isse, the Kentishmen are most ciuilest, the which country
marches altogether upon the Sea, and differs not greatly from the manner of
France. They that dwell more in the heart of the Realm saw corn, but live by
milk and flesh, and cloth themselves in leather. All the Britains do dye
themselves with woad, which sets a blewishe color upon them, and it
makes them more terrible to behold in battle. They wear their hair long,
and shave all parts of their bodies, saving the head and the upper lyppe.
Diverse other uses and customs among them, as I have read Philautus: But
whether these be true or no, I will not say, for me thinks an Island so well
governed in peace then, and so famous in victoryes, so fertile in all respects,
so wholesome and populous, must needs in the term of a thousand years be
much better, and I believe we shall find it such, as we never read the like of
any, until we ariue there, we will suspend our judgments: yet do I mean at
my return from thence, to draw the whole description of the Land, the
customs, the nature of the people, the state, the government, and whatsoever
deserves either marvel or commendation.

Philautus not accustomed to those narrow Seas, was more ready to tell what
wood the ship was made of then to aunsivere to Euphues discourse: yet between
waking and winking, as one half sick, and somewhat sleepy, it came in his
brains, answered thus.

In faith Euphues thou have told a long tale, the beginning I have forgotten,
the middle I understand not, and the end hangs not together: therefore I
can-not repeat it as I would, nor delight in it as I ought: yet if at our
ariuall thou will renew thy tale, I will rub my memory: in the mean season
would I were either again in Italy, or now in England. I cannot brook these
Seas, which provoke my stomach sore. I have an appetite, it were best for me
to take a nap, for every word is brought forth with a nod.

Euphues replied. I cannot tell Philautus whether the SEa make thee sick, or
she that was borne of the Sea: if the first, thou have a quesic stomach: if
the leatter, a wanton desire. I well believe thou remembrest nothing that may
do thee good, nor forgettest any thing, which can do thee harm, making more
of a sore then a plaster, and wishing rather to be curssed then cured,
where-in thou agreest with those, which having taken a surfeit, seek the means
rather to sleep then purge, or those that having the green sickness, and are
brought to deaths door, follow their own humor, and refuse the Physicians
remedy. And such Philautus is thy disease, who pining in thine one follies,
chusest rather to perish in lone, then to live in wisdom, but whatsoever be
the cause, I wish the effect may answer my friendly care: then doubtless you
shall neither dye being sea-sicke, or dote being loue-sicke. I would the Sea,
could as well purge thy mind of fond conceits, as thy body of gross humors.
Thus ending, Philautus again began to urge.

Without doubt Euphues thou do me great wrong, in seeking a skar in a smoth
skin, thinking to stop a vain where none is opened, and to cast love in my
teeth, which I have already spitte out of my mouth, which I must needs think
proceeds rather for lack of matter, then any good meaning, else would thou
never harp on that string which is burst in my heart, and yet ever sounding in
thy cares. Thou art like those that procure one to take phisik before he be
sick, and to apply a searcloth to his body, when he feels no ache, or a
vomit for a surfeit, when his stomach is empty. If ever I fall to mine old
Byas, I must put thee in the fault that talks of it, seeing thou did put me
in the mind to think of it, whereby thou seem to blow the cole which thou
would quench, setting a teene edge, where thou desire to have a sharp
point, ymping a fether to make me fly, when thou ought rather to cut my
wing for fear of soaring.

Lucilla is dead, and she upon whom I guess thou harpest is forgotten: the
one not to be redeemed, the other not to be thought on: Then good Euphues wring
not a horse on the withers, with a false saddle neither imagine what I am by
thy thoughts, but by mine own doings: so shall thou have me both willing to
follow good counsel, and able hereafter to give thee comfort. And so I rest
half sleepy with the Seas.

With this answer Euphues held himself content, but as much wearied with
talk as the other was with travail, made a pillow of his hand, and there let
them both sleep their fill and dream with their fancies, until either a
storm cause them so wake, or their hard bedds, or their iournies end.

Thus for the space of an eight weeks Euphues and Philautus sailed on ye seas,
from their first shipping, between whom diverse speeches were uttered, which to
resite were nothing necessaric in this place, and waying the circumstances,
scarce expedient: what tempests they endured, what strange sights in the
element, what monstrous fishes were seen, how often they were in danger of
drowning: in fear of boording, how weary, how sick, how angry, it were
tedious to write, for that whosoever has either read of trauayling, or
himself used it, can sufficiently guess what is to be said. And this I leave
to the judgment of those that in the like journey have spent their time from
Naples to England, for if I should feign more then others have tried, I might
be thought to Poetical: if less, parciall. Therefore I omit the wonders, the
Rocks, the marks, the goulffes, and whatsoever they passed or saw, least I
should trouble diverse with things they know, or may shame my self with things I
know not. Let this suffice, that they are safely come within a kenne of Dover,
which the Master espying with a cheerful voice waking them, began to utter
these words unto them.

GEntlemen and friends, the longest Summers day has his evening, Ulysses
arriueth at last, and rough winds in time bring the Ship to safe Road. We
are nows within four hours sailing of our Haven, and as you will think, of
an earthlye Heaven. Yonder white Cliffes which easily you may perceive, are
Dover hills, whereunto is adjoining a strong and famous Castle, into the which
Julius Caesar did enter, where you shall view many goodly monuments, both strange
and ancient. Therefore pull up yours hearts, this merry wind will immediately
bring us to an easy bayte.

Philautus was glad he slept so long, and was awaked in so good time, being as
weary of the Seas, as ^^e that never used them. Euphues not sorrowful of this
good news, began to shake his ears, and was soon apparail^d. To make short,
the winds were so favorable, the Manners so skillful, the way so short, that
I fear me they will land before I can discribe the manner how, and
therefore suppose them now in Dover Town, in ye noble Isle of England, somewhat
benighted, and more apt to sleep then suppe: yet for manners sake they
enterteyned their Master and the rest of the Marchaunts and Mariners, where
having in due time both recorded their travails past, and ended their repast,
every one went to his lodging, where I will leave them soundly sleeping, until
the next day.

The next day they spent in viewing the Castle of Dover, the Pyre, the
Cliffes, the Road, and Town, receiving as much pleasure by the sight of
ancient monuments, as by their courteous entertainment, no less praising the
persons for their good minds, then the place for the goodly buildings: and in
this sort they refreshed themselves three or four days, until they had
digested the seas, and recovered again their healths, yet so warely they
behaved themselves, as they were never heard, either to enquire of any news,
or point at any fortres, beholding ye bulwarks with a slight and careless
regard, but the other places of peace, with admiration. Folly it were to show what
they saw, seeing hereafter in the description of England, it shall most
manifestly appear. But I will set them forward in their journey, where now
with-in this two hours, we shall find them in Caunterbury.

Travailing thus like two Pilgrims, they thought it most necessary to direct
their steps toward London, which they heard was the most royal seat of the
Queen of England. But first they came to Caunterbury, an old City, somewhat
decayed, yet beautiful to behold, most famous for a Cathedral Church, the
very Maicstie whereof stroke them into a maze, where they saw many monuments,
and hard tell of greater, then either they ever saw or easily would believe.
After they had gone long, seeing themselves almost benighted, determined to
make the next house their Inn, and espying in their way even at hand a very
pleasant garden, drew near, where they saw a comely old man, as busy as a
Be, among his Bees, whose countenance be wrayed his conditions; this ancient
Father, Euphues greeted in this manner.

FAther, if the courtesy of England be aunswerable so the custom of
Pilgrims, then will the nature of the country, excuse the boldness of
strangers: our request is to have such enterteinment, being almost tired with
travail, not as diverse have for acquaintance, but as all men have for their
money, which courtesy if you grant, we will ever remain in your debt,
although every way discharge our due: and rather we are importunate, for that
we are no less delyghted with ye pleasures of your gardeine, then the sight of
your gravity. Unto whom the old man said.

GEntlemen you are no less, I perceive by your manners, and you can be no more
being but men, I am neither so discourteous to mislyke your request, nor so
suspicious to mistrust your truths, although it be no less perilous to be
secure, then peevish to be curious. I keep no virtuallyng, yet is my house an
Inn, and I an Host for every honest man, so far as they with courtesy
will, and I may with abilytie. Your enterteinment shall be as small for
cheer, as your acquaintance is for time, yet in my house, you may happily
find some one thing cleanly, nothing courtly: for that wisdom provides
things necessary, not superfluous, and age seeks rather a Modicum for
suffenaunce, then feasts for surfets. But until some thing may be made ready,
might I be so bold as enquire your names, countries, and the cause of your
Pilgrimage, where-in if I shall be more inquisitiue then I ought, let my rude
birth satisfy my bold request, which I will not urge as one importunate (I
might say) impudent.

Euphues seeing this fatherly and friendly Sire (whom we will name Fidus) to
have no less inward courtesis then outward comeliness, coniectured (as well
he might) that the proffer of his bounty, noted the nobleness of his birth,
being well assured, that as no Thersites could be transformed into Ulysses,
so no Alexander could be couched in Damocles. Thinking therefore now with more
care and aduisednesse to temper his talk, least either he might seem foolish
or curious, he answered him in these terms.

GOod sir, you have bound us unto you, with a doubls chain, the one in
pardoning our presumption, the other in granting our peticion. Which great and
undeserved kindness, though we cannot requit with ye like, yet if occasion
shall serve, you shall find us hereafter as willing to make amends, as we
are now ready to give thanks. Touching your demaundes, we are not so unwise to
mislike them, or so ungrateful to deny them, least in co^cealing our names it
might be thought for some trespass, and covering our pretense, we might be
suspected of treason. Know you then sir, yt this Gentleman my fellow is called
Philautus, I Euphues: he, an Italian, I a Grecian: both sworn friends by just
trial, both Pilgrims, by free will. Concerning the cause of our coming into
this Island, it was only to glue our eyes to our ears, that we might justify
those things by sight, which we have oftentimes with incredible admiration
understood by hearing: to wit, the rare qualities, as well of the body as the
mind, of your most dread Souercigne, and Queen, the brute of ye which has
filled every corner of ye world, insomuch, as there is nothing that moves
either more matter or more marvel, then her excellent Majesty, which Fame
when we saw without comparison, and almost above credit, we determined to
spend some part of our time and treasure in the English Court, where if I
could find ye report but to be true in half, we should not only think our
money and travail well employed, but returned with interest more then
infinite. This is the only end of our coming, which we are nothing fearful
to utter, trusting as well to the courtesy of your country, as the equity of
our cause.

Touching the Court, if you can give us any instructions, ws shall think the
evening well spent, which procuring our delight, can no way work your
dislyking.

GEntlemen (answered this old man) if because I enterteine you, you seek to
undermine me, you offer me great discourtesie: you must needs think me very
simple, or your selves very subtle, if upon so small acquaintance I should
answer to such demaundes, as are neither for me to utter being a subject, nor
for you to know being strangers. I keep hiues for Bees, not houses for busy
bodies, (pardon me Gentlemen, you have moved my patience,) and more welcome
shall a Waspe be to my honny, then a privy enemy to my house. If the rare
report of my most gracious Lady, have brought you hither, me thinks you have
done very ill, to choose such a house to confirm your minds as seems more
like a prison then a pallaice, whereby in my opinion, you mean to derogate from
the worthiness of the person, by the vileness of the place, which argues
your pretenses to savor of mallyce, more then honest meaning.

They use to consulte of Jove, in the Capitol: of Caesar, in the Senate: of
our noble Queen, in her own Court. Besides that, Alexander must be painted
of none but Appelles, nor engraven of any but Lysippus, nor our Elizabeth set
forth of every one that would in duty, which are all, but of those that can
in skill, which are few, so far has Nature overcome Art, and grace eloquence,
that the Paynter draws a veil over that he can-not shadow, and the Orator
holds a paper in his hand, for that he cannot utter. But whether am I
wandering, rapt farther by devotion, then I can wade through with discretion.
Cease then Gentlemen, and know this, that a Englishman learneth to speak of
me^, and to hold his peace of the Gods. Enquire no farther then beseems you,
least you hear that which can not like you. But if you think the time long
before your repast, I will find some talk which shall breed your delyght,
touching my Bees.

And here Euphues brake him off, and replied: though not as bitterly as he
would, yet as roundly as he durst, in this manner.

We are not a little sorry sir, not that we have opened our minds, but that we
are taken amiss, and when we meant so well, to be entreated so ill, having
talked of no one thing unless it be of good will toward you, who^ we
reverence for age, and of duty toward your Souerigne, whom we meruailed at for
virtue: which good meaning of ours, misconstrued by you, has bred such a
distemperature in our heads, that we are fearful to praise her, whom all the
world extolleth, and suspicious to trust you, whom above any in the world we
loved. And where-as your greatest argument is, the baseness of gour house, me
thinks that makes most against you. Caesar never rejoiced more, then when he
heard, that they talked of his valiant erploits in simple cotages, alleging
this, that a bright Sun shines in every corner, which makes not the beams
worse, but the place better, when (as I remember) Agesilaus son was set at
the lower end of the table and one cast it in his teeth as a shame, he
answered: this is the upper end where I sit, for it is not the place that
makes the person, but the person that makes the place honorable. When it was
told Alexander that he was much prayse^ of a Myller, I am glad quoth he, that
there is not so*much as a Myller but loves Alexander. Among other fables, I
call to my remembrance one, not long, but apt, and as simple as it is, so fit
it is, that I cannot omit it for the opportunity of the time, though I might
ouer-leape it for the baseness of the matter. When all the birds were
appointed to meet to talk of the Eagle, there was great contention, at whose
nest they should assemble, every one willing to have it at his own home, one
preferring the nobility of his birth, an other the statelynesse of his
building: some would have it for one quality, some for an other: at the last
the Swallow said they should come to his nest (being commonly of filth) which
all the Birds disdaining, said: why thy house is nothing else but dirt, and
therefore answered the Swallow, would I have talk there of the Eagle: for
being the basest, the name of an Eagle will make it the b^auest. And so good
father may I say of thy cottage, which thou seem to account of so homely,
that moving but speech of thy sovereign, it will be more like a court then a
cabin, and of a prison the name of Elizabeth will make it a palace.

The Image of a Prince stamped in copper, goes as current: and a Crow may try
Aue Caesar without any rebuke.

The name of a Prince is like the sweet deaw, which falls as well upon low
shrubbes, as high trees, and resembles a true Glass, wherein the poor may
see their faces with the rich, or a clear stream where-in all may drineke
that are dry: not they only that are wealthy.

Where you add that we should fear to move any occasion touching talk of so
noble a Prince, truly our reverence takes away the fear of suspicion.

The Lamb fears not the Lion, but the Wolf: the Partridge dreadeth not the
Eagle, but the Hawk: a true and faithful heart stand (...) ^^ in awe of his
superior whom he loves for fear, then of his Prince whom he fears for
love. A ^leere conscience needs no excuse, nor fears any accusation.
Lastly, you conclude, that neither art nor heart can so set forth your noble
Queen, as she deserves. I grant it, and rejoice at it, and that is the
cause of our coming to see her, whom none can sufficiently commend: and yet
does it not follow, that because we can-not give her as much as she is
worthy of, therefore we should not owe her any. But in this we will imitate
the old paynters in Greece, who drawing in their Tables the Portrature of
Iuppiter, were every hour mending it, but durst never finish it: And being
demanded why they began that, which they could not end, they answered, in
that we show him to be Iuppiter, whom every one may begin to paint, but
none can perfect. In the like manner, mean we to draw in part the praises of
her, whom we cannot thoroughly protraye, and in that we signify her to be
Elyzabeth: Who enforces every man to do as much as he can, when in respect of
her perfection, it is nothing. For as he that beholds the Sun steadfastly,
thinking there-by to describe it more perfectly, has his eyes so daseled, that
he can discern nothing, so fares it with those that seek marueilously to
praise those that are without the compass of their judgments, and all
comparison, that the more they desire, the less they discern, and the nearer
they think themselves in good will, the farther they find themselves off in
wisdom, thinking to measure that by the ynch, which they cannot reach with
the ell. And yet father, it can be neither hurtful to you, nor hateful to
your prince, to hear the commendation of a stranger, or to answer his honest
request, who will wish in heart no less glory to her, then you do: although
they can wish no more. And therefore me thinks you have offered a little
^i^courtesse, not to answer us, and to suspecte us, great injury: having
neither might to attempt any thing which may do you harm, nor malice to
revenge, where we find help. For mine own part this I say, and for my friend
present the like I dare swear, how boldly I cannot tell, how truly I know:
that there is not any one, whether he be bound by benefit or duty, or both:
whether linked by zeal or time, or blood, or all: that more humbly
reuerenceth her majesty, or meruaileth at her wisdom, or prays for her long
prosperous and glorious reign, then we: then whom we acknowledge none more
simple, and yet dare a^owe^, none more faithful. Which we speak not to get
service by flatterye, but to acquit our selves of suspicion, by faith: which
is all that either a Prince can require of his subject, or a vassal yield to
his Sovereign, and that which we ^we to your Queen, and all others should
offer, that either for fear of punishment dare not offend, or for love of
virtue, will not.

Here old Fidus interrupted young Euphues being almost induced by his talk,
to answer his request, yet as one neither too credulous, nor altogether
mistrustfull, he replied as a friend, and so wisely as he glaunced from the
mark Euphues shot at, and hitte at last the white which Philautus set up, as
shall appear hereafter. And thus he began.

MY sons (mine age gives me the privilege of that term, and your honesties
can-not refuse it) you are too young to understand matters of state, and were
you elder to know them, it were not for your estates. And therefore me
thinks the time were but lost, in pulling Hercules shoe upon an Infantes
foot, or in setting Atlas burden on a childs shoulder, or to bruise your
backs with the burden of a whole kingdom, which I speak not, that either I
mistruth you (for your reply has fully resolved that fear) or that I malice
you (for my good will may clear me of that fault) or that I dread your might
(for your small power cannot bring me into such a folly.) but that I have
learned by experience, that to reason of kings or Princes, has ever been much
misliked of the wise, though much desired of fools, especially where old men,
which should be at their beads be too busy with the court, and young men which
should follow their books, be too inquisitiue in ye affairs of princes. We
should not look at yt we cannot reach, nor long for that we should not have,
things above us, are not for us, and therefore are Princes placed under the
gods, that they should not see what they do, and we under princes that we
might not enquire what they do. But as the foolish Eagle, that seeing the
Sun, coueteth to build her nest in the Sun, so fond youth, which viewing
the glory and gorgiousnesse of the court, longs to know the secrets in the
court. But as the Eagle, burns out her eyes with that proud lust: so does
youth break his heart with ye peevish conceit. And as Satirus not knowing what
fire was, would needs embrace it, and was burned, so these fond Satiri, not
understanding what a prince is, run boldly to meddle in those matters which
they know not, and so feel worthily the heat they would not. And therefore good
Euphues and Philautus content your selves with this, that to be curious in
things you should not enquire off, if you know them, they appertain not
unto you, if you knew them not, they cannot hinder you. And let Appelles
answer to Alexander, be an excuse for me. When Alexander would needs come
to Appelles shop and paynt, Appelles placed him at back, who going to his own
work, did not so much as cast an eye back, to see Alexanders devices, which
being well marked, Alexander said thus unto him: Art. not thou a cum^inge
Painter, and will thou not ouerlooke my picture, and tell me wherein I have done
well, and wher-in ill, whom he answered wisely, yet merely: In faith O king,
it is not for Appelles to enquire what Alexander has done, neither if he show
it me, to judge how it is done, and therefore did I set your Majesty at my
back, that I might not glaunce toward a kings work, and that you looking over
my head, might see mine, for Appelles shadows are to be seen of Alexander,
but not Alexanders of Appelles. So ought we Euphues to frame our selves, in all
our actions and devices, as though the King stood over us to behold us, and
not to look what the King does behind us. For whatsoever he painteth, it is
for his pleasure, and we must think for our profit, for Appelles had his
reward though he saw not the work.

I have heard of a Magnifico in Millaine, (and I think Philautus you being an
Italian do remember it,) who hearing his son inquisitiue of the Emperors
life, and demeanor, reprehended him sharply, saying: that it beseemed not one
of his house, to enquire how an Emperor lived, unless he himself were an
Emperor: for that the behavior and usage of so honorable personages are not
to be called in question of every one yt doubts, but of such as are their
equals.

Alexander being commanded of Philip his Father to wrestle in the games of
Olympia, answered he would if there were a King to strive with him, whereby I
have noted (yt others seem to enforce) that as Kings pastimes, are no plays
for every one: so their secrets, their counsayles, their dealyngs, are not to
be either scanned or enquired off any way, unless of those that are in the
like place, or serve the like person.

I can-not tell whether it be a Canterbury tale, or a Fable in Aesope, (but
pretty it is, and true in my mind) That the Fore and the Woolfe, gooing both a
filching for food thought it best to see whether the Lion were a sleep or
awake, least being too bold they should speed too bad. The Fox entering into
the Kings den (a King I call the Lion,) brought word to the Wolf, that he
was a sleep, and went himself to his own kenel, the Wolf desirous to search
in the Lions den, that he might espy some fault, or steal some pray,
entered boldly, whom the Lion caught in his paws, and asked what he would? ye
silly Wolf, (an unapt term for a Wolf, yet fit being in a Lions hands)
answered, that understanding by the Fox, he was a sleep, he thought he
might be at liberty, to survey his lodging: unto whom the princely Lion with
great disdain though little despite (for yt there can be no envy in a king)
said thus: Do thou think that a Lion thy Prince and governor, can sleep
though he wink, or dare thou enquire whether he wink or wake? The Fox had
more craft then thou, and thou more courage (courage I will not say, but
boldness: and boldness is to good, I may say desperateness) but you shall
both well know, and to our griefs feel, that neither the wiliness of the
Fox, nor the wildness of the Wolf, ought either to see or to ask, whether
the Lion either sleep or wake, be at home or a-broade, dead or alive. For this
is sufficient for you to know, that there is a Lion, not where he is, or what he
does. In like manner Euphues, is the government of a Monarchy (though homely
be the comparison, yet apt it is) that it is neither the wise Fox nor the
malicious Wolf, should venture so far, as to learn whether the Lion sleep
or wake in his den. whether the Prince fast or feast in his court: but this
should be their order, to understand there is a King, but what he does, is for
the Gods to examine, whose ordinance he is, not for men, whose ouerseer he is.
Then how vain is it Euphues (too mild a word for so mad a mind) that the
foot should neglect his office to correct the face, or that subjects should
seek more to know what their Princes do, then what they are: where-in they
show themselves as badde as beasts, and much worse then my Bees, who in my
conceit though I may seems partial, observe more order then they, (and if I
might say so of my good Bees) more honesty: honesty my old Graundfather
called yt, when men lived by Law, not list: observing in all things the mean,
which we name virtue, and Virtue we account nothing else, but to deal justly
and temperately.

And if I might crave pardon, I would a little acquaint you with the common
wealth of my Bees, which is neither impertinent to the matter we have now in
hand, nor tedious to make you weary.

Euphues delighted with the discourses of old Fidus, was content to hear any
thing, so he might hear him speak some thing, and consenting willinglye, he
desired Fidus to go forward: who now removing himself nearer to the Hyues,
began as follows.

GEntlemen, I have for the space of this twenty years dwelt in this place,
taking no delyght in any thing but only in keeping my Bees, and marking them,
and this I find, which had I not seen, I should hardly have believed, that
they use as great wit by indution, and Art by workmanship, as ever man has or
can, using between them selves no less Justice, then wisdom, and yet not so
much wisdom as Majesty: insomuch as thou would think that they were a
kind of people, a common wealth for Plato, where they all labor, all gather
Honny, fly altogether in a swarm, eat in a swarm, and sleep in a swarm:
so neat and finely, that they abhor nothing so much as uncleanness,
drinking pure and clear water, delyghting in sweet and sound Music, which
if they hear but once out of tune, they fly out of sight: and therefore are
they called the Muses birds, because they follow not the sound so much as the
consent. They live under a Law, using great reverence to their Elder, as to the
wiser.

They choose a King, whose Pallaice they frame, both brauer in show, and
stronger in substance: whom if they find to fall, they establish again in
his throne: with no less duty then devotion, garding him continually, as it
were for fear he should miscarry, and for love he should not: whom they tender
with such faith and favor, that whether soever he slyeth, they follow him, and
if he cannot fly, they carry him: whose life they so love, that they will not
for his safety stick to dye, such care have they for his health, on whom they
build all their hope. If their Prince dye, they know not how to live, they
languish, weep, sigh, neither intending their work, nor keeping their old
society. And that which is most meruaylous, and almost incredible: if there be
any that has disobeyed his commandments, either of purpose or unwittingly,
he kills himself with his own sting as executioner of his own
stubbornness.

The King himself has his sting, which he uses rather for houour then
punishment: And yet Euphues, albeit they live under a Prince, they have their
Privilege, and as great lyberties, as straight laws.

They call a Parliament, wherein they consult for laws, statutes, penalties,
choosing Officers, and creating their King, not by affection, but reason, not by
the greater part, but the better. And if such a one by chance be chosen (for
among men sometimes the worst speed best) as is bad, then is there such civil
war and dissension, that until he be plucked down, there can be no
friendship: and overthrown, there is no enmity, not fighting for quarrels,
but quietness.

Every one has his Office, some trimming the Honny, some working the wax, one
framing biues, an other the combs, and that so artificially, that Dedalus
could not with greater Art or excellency, better dispose the orders, measures,
proportions, distinctions, joints and circles, Diverse hew, others polysh, all
are careful to do their work so strongly, as they may resist the (...) of
such drones, as seek to live by then labors, which makes the^ to keep watch
and ward, as living in a camp to others, and as in a court to themselves. Such
a care of chastity, yt they never engender, such a desire of cleanness, that
there is not so much as meat in all their hiues. When they go forth to work,
they mark the wind, the clouds, and whatsoever does threaten either their
ruin, or reign, and having gathered out, of every flower honny, they return
laden in their mouths, thighs, wings, and all the body, who^ they that
tarried at home receive redily, as casting their backs of so great burdens.

The king himself not idle, goes up and down entreating threatening,
commanding, using the counsel of a sequel, but not loosing the dignity of a
Prince, preferring those that labor to greater authority, and punishing those
that loyter with due severity. All which things being much admirable, yet
this is most, that they are so profitable, bringing unto man both honny and
wax, each so wholesome, that we all desire it, both so necessaray, yt we cannot
miss them. Here Euphues is a common wealth, which oftentimes calling to my
mind, I cannot choose but commend above any yt either I have heard or read off
Wherthe king is not for every one to talk off, where there is such homage,
such love, such labor, that I have wished oftentimes rather be a Be, then not
be as I should be.

In this little garden with these hiues, in this house have I spent the better
part of my life, yea and the best: I was never busy in matters of state, but
referring all my cares unto the wisdom of grave Counselors, and my
confidence in the noble mind of my dread Sovereign and Queen, never asking
what she did, but always praying she may do well, not enquiring whether she
might do what she would, but thinking she would do nothing but what she might.

Thus contented with a mean estate, and never curious of the high estate, I
found such quiet, that me thinks, he which knows least, lives longest:
insomuch that I choose rather to be an Hermit in a cave, then a Counselour in
the Court.

Euphues perceiving old Fidus, to speak what he thought, answered him in these
short words. He is very obstinate, whom neither reason nor experience can
persuade: and truly seeing you have alleged both, I must needs allow both.
And if my former request have bred any offense, let my latter repentance make
amends. And yet this I know, that I enquired nothing that might bring you into
danger, or me into trouble: for as young as I am, this I have learned, that
one may point at a star but not pull at it, and see a Prince but not search him:
and for mine own part, I never mean to put my hand between the bark and the
tree, or in matters which are not for me, to be over curious.

The common wealth of your Bees, did so delight me, that I was not a little
sorry that either their estate have not been longer, or your leisure more, for
in my simple judgment, there was such an orderly government, that men may not
be ashamed to imitate them, nor you weary to keep them.

They having spent much time in these discourses, were called into supper,
Philautus more willing to eat, then hear their tales, was not the last that
went in: where being all set down, they were served al in earthen dishes, all
things so neat and cleanely, that they perceived a kind of courtly Majesty
in the mind of their Host, though he wanted matter to show it in his house.

Philautus I know not whether of Nature melancholy, or feeling love in his
Bosom, spoke scarce ten words since his coming into the house of Fidus.

Which the old man well noting, began merrely thus to parle with him.

I Marvel Gentleman that all this time you have been tongue-tied either
thinking not your self welcome, or disdaining so homely enterteinment: in the
one you do me wrong, for I think I have not showed my self strange, for the
other you must pardon me, for that I have not to do as I would, but as I may:
And though England be no graunge, but yields every thing, yet is it here as
in every place, all for money.

And if you will but accept a willing mind in steed of a costly repast, I shall
think my self beholding unto you, and if time serve, or my Bees prosper, I
will make you part of amends, with a better breakfast.

Philautus thus replied: I know good Father, my welcome greater then any ways
I can requite, and my cheer more bountiful then ever I shall deserve, and
though I seem silent for matters that trouble me, yet I would not have you
think me so foolish, that I should either disdain your company, or mislike
your cheer, of both the which I think so well, that if time might answer my
true meaning, I would exceed in cost, though in courtesy I know not how to
compare with you, for (with out flattery be it spoken) if the common courtesy
of England be no worse the^ this toward strangers, I must needs think them
happy that travail into these Coasts, and the Inhabitants the most courteous of
all Countries.

Here began Euphues to take the tale out of Philautus mouth, and to play
with him in his melancholicke mood, beginning thus.

NO Father I durst swear for my Friend, that both he thinks himself
welcome, and his fare good, but you must pardon a young Courtier, who in the
absence of his Lady thinks himself forlorn: And this vile Dog Love will so
rancle where he biteth, that I fear my Friends sure, will breed to a Fistula:
for you may perceive that he is not where he lives, but where he loves, and more
thoughts has he in his head, the^ you Bees in your hiues: and better it were
for him to be naked among your Waspes, though his body were all blistered,
then to have his heart stong so with affection, whereby he is so blinded. But
believe me* Fidus, he takes as great delight to course a cogitation of love,
as you do to use your time with Honny. In this plight has he been ever since his
coming out of Naples, and so has it wrought with him (which I had thought
impossible) that pure love did make him seasick, insomuch as in all my travail
with him, I seemed to every one to bear with me the picture of a proper man,
but no living person, the more pity, and yet no force.

Philautus taking Euphues tale by the end, and the old man by the arm between
grief and game, jest and earnest, answered him thus.

EVPHVES would dye if he should not talk of love once in a day, and therefore
you must give him leave after every meal to cloase his stomach with love, as
with Marmalade, and I have heard, not those that say nothing, but they that
kick oftnest against love, are ever in love: yet does he use me as the mean
to move the matter, and as the man to make his Myrrour, he himself knowing
best the price of Corn; not by the market folks, but his own footesteps. But
if he use this speech either to make you merry, or to put me out of conceit,
he does well, you must thank him for the one, and I will think on him for the
other. I have oftentimes sworn that I am as far from love as he, yet will be
not believe me, as incredulous as those, who think none balde till they see
his brains. As Euphues was making answer, Fidus prevented him in this manner.

THere is no harm done Philautus, for whether you love, or Euphues lest, this
shall breed no jar. It may be when I was as young as you, I was as idle as
you, (though in my opinion, there is none less idle then a lover.) For to tell
the truth I my self was once a courtier, in the days of that most noble king
of famous memory Henry the eight, Father to our most gracious Lady Elizabeth.

Where, and with that, he paused as though the remembrance of his old life,
had stopped his new speech: but Philautus itching to hear what he would say,
desired him to go forward, unto whom Fidus fetching a great sigh, said, I
will. And there again made a full point. Philautus burning as it were, in
desire of this discourse, urged him again with great entreatie: then the old
man commanded the board to be uncovered, grace being said, called for stools,
and sitting by the fire, uttered the whole discourse of his love, which brought
Philautus a bed, and Euphues a sleep.

And now Gentlemen, if you will give ear to the tale of Fidus it may be, some
will be as watchful as Philautus, though many as drousic as Euphues. And thus
he began with a heavy countenance (as though his pains were present, not
past) to frame his tale.

I Was borne in the wild of Kent, of honest parents and worshipful, whose
tender cares, (if the fondness of Parents may be so termed) provided all
things even from my very cradle, until their graves, that might either bring
me up in good letters, or make me heir to great lyuings. I, (without
arrogancy be it spoken,) was not inferior in wit to many, which finding in my
self, I flattered my self, but in the end deceived my self: For being of the
age of xx. years, there was no trade or kind of life that either fitted my
humor, or served my turn, but the Court: thinking that place the only means
to climb high and fit sure. Where-in I followed the vain of young Soldiers,
who judge nothing sweeter then war till they feel the weight, I was there
enterteined as well by the great friends my father made, as by mine own
forwardnes, where it being now but Honny moon I endeavored to Court it with a
grace, (almost past grace) laying more on my back, then my friends could well
bear, having many times a brave cloak and a thread bare purse. Who so
conversant with the Ladies as I* who so pleasant? who more prodigal? Insomuch
as I thought the time lost which was not spent either in their company with
delyght, or for their company in letters. Among all the troup of gallant
Gentlemen, I singled out one (in whom I mislyked nothing but his gravity)
that above all I meant to trust: who as well for the good qualities he saw in me,
as the little government he feared in me, began one night to utter these few
words.

Friend Fidus (if Fortune allow a term so familiar) I would I might live to
see thee as wise, as I perceive thee witty, then should thy life be so
seasoned as neither too much wit might make thee proud, nor too great riot
poor. My acquaintance is not great with thy person, but such insight have I
into thy conditions, that I fear nothing so much, as that, there thou catch
thy fall, where thou think to take thy rising. There belongs more to a
Courtier then bravery, which the wise laugh at, or personage, which the chaste
mark not, or wit, which the most part see not.

It is sober and discreet behavior, civil and gentle demenour, that in court
wins both credit and commodity, which counsel thy vnripened years, think
to proceed rather of the malice of Age, then the good meaning.

To ride well is laudable, and I like it, to run at the tilt not amiss, and I
desire it, to revel much to be praised, and I have used it, which things as I
know them all to be courtly, so for my part I account them necessary, for
where greatest assemblies are of noble gentlemen, there should be the greatest
exercise of true Nobility. And I am not precise, but that I esteem it is as
expedient in feats of arms and actiuitie, to employ the body, as in study to
wast the mind: yet so should the one be tempered with the other, as it might
seem as great a shame to be valiant and courtly without learning, as to be
studious and bookish without valor.

But there is an other thing Fidus, which I am to warn thee off, and if I might
to wreast thee from: not that I envy thy estate, but that I would not have
thee forget it. Thou bsest too much (a little I think to be too much) to dally
with women, which is the next way to doat on the^. For as they that angle for
the Tortois, having once caught him, are driven into such a lythernesse, that
they loose all their spirits, being benumbed, so they that seek to obtain
the good will of Ladies, having once a little hold of their love, they are
driven into such a trance, that they let go the hold of their liberty
bewitched like those that view the head of Medusa, or the Uiper tied to the
bough of the Beech tree, which keeps him in a dead sleep, though it begin
with a sweet slumber.

I my self have tasted new wine, and find it to be more pleasant then
wholesome, and Grapes gathered before they be ripe, may set the eyes on lust,
but they make the teeth an edge, and love desired in the budde, not knowing
what the blossom were, may delyght the conceiptes of the head, but it will
destroy the contemplature of the heart.

What I speak now is of mere good will, and yet upon small presumption, but
in things which come on the sodeine, one cannot be to wary to prevent, or to
curious to mistrust: for thou art in a place, either to make thee hated for
vice, or loved for virtue, and as thou reuerencest the one before the other, so
in uprightness of life show it. Thou have good friends, which by thy lewd
delights, thou may make great enemies and heavy foes, which by thy well doing
thou may cause to be earnest arbettors of thee, in matters that now they
canuasse against thee. And so I leave thee, meaning hereafter to bear the
rayn of thy bridle in mine hands, if I see thee head strong: And so he
departed. I gave him great thanks, and glad I was we were parted: for his
putting love into my mind, was like the throwing of Buglosse into Wine, which
increases in him that drinks it a desire of lust, though it mittigate the
force of drunkenness.

I now fetching a windlesse, that I might better have a shoot, was prevented
with ready game, which saved me some labor, but gained me no quiet. And I
would gentlemen that you could feel the like impressions in your minds at the
rehearsal of my mishappe, as I did passions at the entering into it. If ever
you loved, you have found the like, if ever you shall love, you shall taste no
less. But he so eager of an end, as one leaping over a style before he come
to it, desired few Parentheses or digressions, or gloses, but the text, where he
himself, was coating in the margent. Then said Fidus thus it fell out.

It was my chance (I know not whether chance or destenie) that being invited
to a banquet where many Ladies were, and too many by one, as the end tried,
though then too many by all, saving yt one, as I thought, I cast mine eyes so
earnestly upon her, that my heart vowed her the mistres of my love, and so
fully was I resolved to prosecute my determination, as I was earnest to begin
it.

Now Gentlemen, I commit my case to your considerations, being wiser then I was
then, and somewhat as I guess elder: I was but in court a nouice, having no
friend but him before rehearsed, whom in such a matter, I was lykelyer to
find a bridel, than a spur. I never before that time could imagine what
Love should mean, but used the term as a flout to others, which I found now
as a fever in my self, neither knowing from whence the occasion should arise,
nor where I might seek the remedy. This distress I thought youth would have
worn out, or reason or time, or absence, or if not every one of them, yet all.
But as fire getting hold in the bottom of a tree, never leaves till it come
to the top, or as strong poison Antidotum being but chafed in the hand,
pearceth at the last the heart, so love which I kept but low, thinking at my
will to leave, entered at the last so far that it held me conquered. And
then disputing with my self, I played this on the bit.

Fidus, it stands thee upon either to win thy love, or to weane thy
affections, which choice is so hard, that thou can not tell whether the
victory will be the greater in subduing thy self, or conquering her.

To love and to live well is wished of many, but incident to few. To live and
to love well is incident to few, but indifferent to all. To love without
reason is an argument of lust, to live without love, a token of folly. The
measure of love is to have no mean, the end to be everlasting.

Thesius had no need of Ariadnes thread to find the way into the Laborinth,
but to come out, nor thou of any help how to fall into these brakes, but to
fall from them. If thou be witched with eyes, wear the eye of a Wesil in a
ring, which is an enchauntment against such charms, and reason with thy self
whether there be more pleasure to be accounted amorous, or wise. Thou art in
the view of the whole court, where the ielous will suspecteth upon every
light occasion, where of the wise thou shall be accounted fond, and the foolish
amorous: the Ladies themselves, how-soeuer they look will thus imagine, that
if thou take thought for love, thou art but a fool, if take it lightly, no
true servant. Besides this thou art to be bound as it were an apprentice,
serving seven years for that, which if thou win, is lost in seven hours, if
thou love thine equal, it is no conquest* if thy superior, thou shall be
enuyed, if thine inferior, laughed at. If one that is beautiful, her color
will change before thou get thy desire: if one that is wise, she will
ouer-reache thee so far, that thou shall never touch her: if virtuous, she
will eschew such fond affection, if one deformed, she is not worthy of any
affection, if she be rich, she needs thee not: if poor, thou need not
her: if old, why should thou love her, if young, why should she love thee.

Thus Gentlemen I fed my self with mine own devices, thinking by piece mea^e
to cut off yt which I could not diminish, for the more I striued with reason to
conquer mine appetite, the more against reason, I was subdued of mine
affections.

At the last calling to my remembrance, an old rule of love, which a courtier
then told me, of whom when I demanded what was the first thing to win my
Lady, he answered, Opportunity, asking what was the second, he said
Opportunity: desirous to know what might be the third, he replied
Opportunity. Which answers I marking as one that thought to take mine aim of
so cunning an Archer, coniectured that to the beginning, continuing an ending
of love, nothing could be more convenient then Opportunity, to the getting of
the which I applied my whole study, and wore my wits to the stumps, assuring my
self, that as there is a time, when the Hare will lycke the Hounds ear, and
the fierce Tigresse, play with the gentle Lamb: so there was a certain season
when women were to be won, in the which moment they have neither will to deny,
nor wit to mistrust.

Such a time I have read a young Gentleman found to obtain the love, of the
Duchess of Millayne: such a time I have heard that a poor yeoman chose to get
the fairest Lady in Mantua.

Unto the which time, I trusted so much, that I sold the skin before the
Beast was taken, reckoning without mine host, and setting down that in my
books as ready money, which after wards I found to be a desperate debt.

IT chanced that this my Lady (whom although I might name for the love I bore
her, yet I will not for the reverence I owe her but in this story call her
Iffida) for to recreate her mind, as also to solace her body, went into the
country, where she determined to make her abode for the space of three months,
having gotten leave of those that might best give it. And in this journey I
found good fortune so favorable, that her abiding was within two miles of my
fathers mansio^ house, my parents being of great familiarity with the
Gentleman, where my Iffida lay. Who now so fortunate as Fidus? who so fralicke?
She being in the country, it was no being for me in the court? Where every
pastime was a plague, to the mind that lived in melancholy. For as the Turtle
having lost her mate wandreth alone, ioying in nothing but in solitariness, so
poor Fidus in the absence of Iffida, walked in his chamber as one not desolate
for lack of company, but desparate.

To make short of the circumstaunces, which hold you too long from that you
would hear, and I feign utter: I came home to my father, where at mine
entrance, supper being set on the table, I espied Iffida, Iffida Gentlemen,
whom I found before I sought, and lost before I won. Yet least the
alteration of my face, might argue some suspicion of my follyes, I, as courtly
as I could, though God knows but coursely at that time behaved my self, as
though nothing payned me, when in truth nothing pleased me. In the middle of
supper Iffida as well for ye acquaintance, we had in crout as also the courtesy
the used in general to all, taking a Glass in her hand filled with wine,
drank to me in this wise. Gentleman I am not learned, yet have I heard, that
the Uine bears three grapes, the first alters, the second troubles, the
third dulleth. Of what grape this Wine is made, I cannot tell, and therefore I
must crave pardon, if either this draught change you unless it be to ye
better, or grieve you, except it be for greater gain, or dull you, unless it
be your desire, which long preamble I use to no other purpose, then to warn
you from wine hereafter, being so well counseled before. And with that she
drinking, delivered me ye glass. I now taking heart at grass, to see her so
gamesome, as merely as I could, pledged her in this manner.

* It Is pity Lady you want a pulpit, having preached so well over the pot,
wherein you both show the learning which you profess you have not, and a kind
of Jove which would you had: ye one apeareth by your long sermon, the other by
yt desire you have to keep me sober, but I will refer mine answer till after
supper, and in the mean season, be so te^perate, as you shall not think my wit
to smell of the wine, although in my opinion, such grapes set rather an edge
upon wit, then abate the point. If I may speak in your cast, quoth Iffida,
(the glass being at my nose) I think, wine is such a whetstone for wit, that
if it be often set in that manner, it will quickly grind all the steel out,
and scarce leave a back where it found an edge. With many like speeches we
continued our supper, which I will not repeat, least you should think us
Epicures to sit so long at our meat: but al being ended, we arose, where as
the manner is, thanks and cursie made to each other, we went to the fire, where
I boldned now without blushing, took her by the hand, and thus began to kindle
ye flame which I should rather have quenched, seeking to blow a cole, when I
should have blown out the candle.

GEntlewoman either thou thoughts my wits very short, that a sip of wine
could alter me, or else yours very sharp, to cut me off so roundly, when as I
(without offense be it spoken) have heard, that as deep drincketh the Goose as
the Gander.

Gentleman (quoth she) in arguing of wits, you mistake mine, and tall your
own into quession. For what I said proceeded rather of a desire to have you
in health, then of malice, to wish you harm. For you well know that wine to a
young blood, is in the Spring time, Flare to fire, and at all times, either un
wholesome, or superfluous, and so dangerous, that more perish by a surfeit then
the sword.

I have heard wise Clearkes say, that Galen being asked what diet he used
that he lived so long, answered: I have drunk no wine, I have touched no
woman, I have kept my self warm.

Row sir if you will license me to proceed, this I thought, that if one of
your years should take a dram of Magis, whereby consequently you should fall into
an ounce of love, and then upon so great heat take a little cold, it were
enough to cast you away, or turn you out of the way. And although I be no
Physician, yet have, I been^ used to attend sick persons, where I found
nothing to hurt them so much as wine, which always b^^ we with it, as the
Adamant does the iron, desire of women: how hurtful both have been, though you
be too young to have fried it, yet you are old enough to believe it.

Wine should be taken as the Dogs of Egypt drink water, by snatches, and so
quench their thirst, and not hinder their running, or as the Daughters of
Lysander used it, who with a drop of wine took a spoonefull of water, or as
the Uirgines in Rome, who drink but their eye full, contenting themselves as
much with the sight, as with the taste.

Thus to excuse my self of unkindness, you have made me almost impodent, and
I you, (I fear me) impatient, in seeming to prescribe a diet where is no
danger, in giving a preparatiue, when the body is purged. But seeing all this
talk came of drinking, let it end with drinking.

I seeing myself thus ridden, thought either she should sit fast, or else I
would cast her. And thus I replied.

Lady, you think to wade deep where the Foorde is but shallow, and to enter
into the secrets of my mind, when it lies open already, wherein you use no
less Art to bring me in doubt of your good will, the^ craft to put me out of
doubt, having baited your hook both with poison and pleasure, in that, using
the means of Physic (wheroff you so talk) mingling sweet sirops with bitter
dregs. You stand in fear that wine should inflame my liver, and convert me to
a lover: truly I am framed of that metal, that I can mortify any
affections, whether it be in drink or desire, so that I have no need of your
Plasters, though I must needs give thanks for your pains.

And now Philautus, for I see Euphues begin to nod, thou shall under stand,
that in the midst of my replye, my father with the rest of the company
interrupted me, saying, they would fall all to some pastime, which because it
grows late Philautus, we will defer till the morning, for age must keep a
straight dyotte, or else a sicklye life.

Philautus tickeled in every vein with delyght, was loath to leave so,
although not willing the good old man should break his accustomed hour, unto
whom sleep was the chiefest sustenaunce. And so waking Euphues, who had taken
a nappe, they all went to their lodging, where I think Philautus was musing
upon the event of Fidus his love: But there I will leave them in their beds,
till the next morning.

GEntlemen and Gentlewomen, in the discourse of this love, it may seem I have
taken a new course: but such was the time then, that it was as strange to
love, as it is now common, and then less used in the Court, then it is now in
the Country: But having respect to the time past, I trust you will not
condeu^pne my present time, who am enforced to sing after their Playnesong that
was then used, and will follow heere-after, the Crochettes that are in these
days cunningly handeled.

For the minds of Lovers, alter with the mad moodes of the Musitions: and so
much are they with-in sewe years changed, that we account their old wooing
and singing to have so little cunning, that we esteem it barbarous, and were
they living to hear our new quoyings, they would judge it, to have so much
curiositic, that they would term it foolish.

In the time of Romulus, all heads were rounded of his fashion, in the time of
Caesar, curled of his manner. When Cyrus lived, every one praised the hooked
nose, and when he dyed, they allowed the straight nose. And so it fares with
love, in times past, they used to woo in plain terms, now in picked
sentences, and he speedeth best that speaks wisest: every one following the
newest way, which is not ever the nearest wape: some going over the style, when
the gate is open, an other keeping the right beaten path, when he may cross
over better by the fields.

Every one follows his own: fancy, which makes diverse leap short, for
want of good rising, and many shoot over, for lack of true aim.

And to that pass it is come that they make an Art of that, which was wont to
be thought natural: And thus it stands that it is not yet determined,
whether in love Ulysses more prevailed with his wit, or Paris with his
personage, or Achilles with his prowess.

For every of them have Venus by the hand, and they are all assured and
certain to win her heart.

But I had almost forgotten the old man, who uses not to sleep compass,
whom I see with Euphues and Philautus now already in the gardein ready to
proceed with his tale: which if it seem tedious, we will break off again
when they go to dinner.

FIdus calling these Gentlemen up, brought them into his garden, where under a
sweet Arbor of Eglantine, the birds recording their sweet notes, he also
strayned his old pipe, and thus began.

GEntlemen yester night, I left off abruptly, and therefore I must begin in the
like manner.

My Father placed us all in good order, requesting either by questions to whet
our wits, or by stories to try our memoryes, and Iffida yt might best there be
bold, being the best in the company, and at al assayes too good for me, began
again to preach in this manner. Thou art a Courtier Fidus, and therefore best
able to resolve any question: for I know thy wit good to understand, and
ready to answer: to thee therefore I address my talk.

THere was some time in Sienna, a Magnifico, whom God blessed with three
daughters, but by three wives, and of three sundry qualyties: the eldest was
very fair, but a very fool: the second meruaylous witty, but yet marvelous
wanton: the third as vertuons as any living, but more deformed then any that
ever lived.

The noble Gentleman their father, disputed for the bestowing of them with
himself, thus.

I thank the Gods, that have given me three daughters, who in their bosoms
carry their dowries, insomuch as I shall not need to disburse one Myte for all
them marriages. Maidens be they never so foolysh, yet being fair they are
commonly fortunate: for that men in these days have more respect to the
outward show, then the in ward substance, wherein they imitate good
Lapidaries, who choose the stones that delyght the eye, measuring the value, not
by the hidden virtue, but by the outward glistering: or wise Painters, who
lay their best colors, upon their worst counterfeit.

And in this me thinks Nature has dealte indifferently, that a fool whom
every one abhors, should have beauty, which every one desires: that the
ercellency of the one, might excuse the vanity of the other: for as we in
nothing more differ from the Gods, then when we are fools: so in nothing do we
come near them so much, as when we are amiable. This caused Helen to be
snatched up for a Star, and Ariadne to be placed in the Heavens not that they
were wise, but fair, fitter to add a Majesty to the Sky, then bear a
Majesty in Earth. Juno for all her jealousy, beholding Io, wished to be no
Goddess, so she might be so gallaunt. Love comes in at the eye, not at the
care, by seeing Natures works, not by hearing women's words. And such effects
and pleasure does sight bring unto us, that diverse have lived by looking on
fair and beautiful pictures, desiring no meat, nor harkening to any Music.
What made the Gods so often to trewant from Heaven and much here on earth, but
beauty? What made men to imagine, yt the Firmament was god, but ye beauty?
which is said to be witch the wise, and enchant them that made it. Pigmalion
for beauty, loved an Image of Iuory, Appelles the counterfeite of Campaspe,
and none we have heard off so senseless, that the name of beauty, cannot
either break or bend.

It is this only that Princes desire in their houses, Gardens, Orchards, and
Beds, following Alexander, who more esteemed the face of Venus not yet
finished, then the Table of the nine Muses perfected. And I am of that mind
that there can be nothing given unto mortal men by the immortal Gods, either
more noble or more necessary then beauty. For as when the counterfeit of
Ganimedes, was showen at a market, every one would feign buy it, because
Zeuxis had therein showed his greatest cunning: so when a beautiful woman
appears in a multitude, every man is drawn to sue to her, for that the Gods
(the only Painters of beauty) have in her expressed, the art of their Deity.
But I will here rest my self, knowing that if I should run so far as
beauty would carry me I should sooner want breath to tell her praises, then
matter to prove them, thus I am persuaded, that my fair daughter shall be well
married, for there is none, that will or can demand a greater ioynter then
beauty.

My second child is witty, but yet wanton, which in my mind, rather adds
a delight to the man, then a disgrace to the maid, and so lynked are those two
qualyties together, that to be wanton without wit, is Apishnes: and to be
thought witty without wantonness, preciseness. When Lais being very pleasant,
had told a merry jest: it is pity said Aristippus, that Lais having so good
a wit, should be a wanton. Yea quoth Lais, but it were more pity, that Lais
should be a wanton and have no good wit. Osyris King of the Egyptians,
being much delighted with pleasant conceiptes, would often affirm, that he
had rather have a virgin, that could give a quick answer that might cut
him, then a mild speech that might clawe him.

When it was objected to a gentlewoman, that she was neither fair nor
fortunate, and yet quoth she wise and well favored, thinking it the chiefest
gift that Nature could bestow to have a Nutbrowne hue, and an excellent
head. It is wit that allureth, when every word shall have his weight, when
nothing shall proceed, but it shall either favor of a sharp conceipte, or a
secreat conclusion. And this is the greatest thing to conceive readely, and
answer aptlye, to understand whatsoever is spoken, and to replye as though
they understood nothing. A Gentleman that once loved a Lady most entirely,
walking with her in a Park, with a deep sigh began to say, O that women
could be constant, she replied, O that they could not, Pulling her hat over
her head, why quoth the Gentleman does the Sun offend your eyes, yea,
answered she the son of your mother, which quick and ready replies, being
well marked of him, he was enforced to sue for that which he was determined to
shake off. A noble man in Sienna, disposed to jest with a Gentlewoma^ of mean
birth, yet excellent qualities, between game and earnest began thus to salute
her. I know not how I should commend your beauty, because it is somewhat too
brown, nor your stature being somewhat too low, and of your wit I can not
judge, no quoth she I believe you, for none can judge of wit, but they that
have it, why then quoth he, do thou think me a fool, thought is free my
Lord quoth she, I will not take you at your wor^. He perceiving all outward
faults to be recompensed with inward favor, chose this virgin for his wife.
And in my simple opinion, he did a thing both worthy his stock and her
virtue. It is wit that florisheth, when beauty fades: that waxes young
when age approaches, and resembles the Iuie leaf, who although it be dead,
continues green. And because of all creatures, the woman's wit is most
excellent, therefore have the Poets feigned the Muses to be women, the Nymphs
the Goddesses, ensamples of whose rare wisdoms, and sharp capacities, would
nothing but make me commit Idolatry with my daughter. I never hard but of three
things which argued a fine wit, inue^tion, co^ceiuing, aunswering. Which have
all been found so common in women, that were it not I should flatter them, I
should think them singular.

Then this suffices me, that my second daughter shall not lead Apes in Hell,
though she have not a penny for the Priest, because she is witty, which
binds weak things, and loses strong things, and works all things, in
those that have either wit themselves, or love wit in others.

My youngest though no pearl to hang at ones ear, yet so precious she is to a
well disposed mind, that grace seems almost to disdain Nature. She is
deformed in body, flow of speech, crabbed in countenance, and almost in all
parts crooked: but in behavior so honest, in prayer so devout, so precise in
all her dealings, that I never heard her speak any thing that either concerned
not good instruction, or Godly mirth.

Who never delyghteth in costlye apparel, but ever desires homely attire,
accompting no brauerye greater then virtue: who beholding her ugly shape in a
Glass, smyling said: This face were fair, if it were turned: noting that
the inward motions would make the outward favor but counterfeit. For as the
precious stone Sandastra, has nothing in outward appearaunce but that which
seems black, but being broken pours forth beams like the Sun: so virtue
shows but bare to the outward eye, but being pierced with inward desire,
shines like Crystal. And this dare I avouch, that as the Trogloditae which
dug in the filthy ground for roots, and found the inestimable stone Topason,
which enritched them ever after: so he that seeks after my youngest daughter,
which is deformed, shall find the great treasure of piety, to comfort him
during his life. Beautiful women are but like the Ermine, whose skin is
desired, whose carcass is despised, ye virtuous contrariwise, are then most
lyked, when their skin is least loved.

Then ought I to take least care for her, whom every one that is honest will
care for: so that I will quiet my self with this persuasion that every one
shall have a wooer shortly. Beauty cannot live without a husband, wit will not,
virtue shall not.

NOw Gentleman, I have propounded my reasons, for every one I must now ask you
the question. If it were your chance to travail to Sienna, and to see as much
there as I have told you here, whether would you choose for your wife the
fair fool, the witty wanton, or the crooked Saint.

When she had finished, I stood in a maze, seeing three hooks laid in one
bayte, uncertain to answer what might please her, yet compelled to say
somewhat, least I should discredit my self: But seeing all were whist, to
hear my judgment, I replied thus.

LAdy Iffida, and Gentlewomen all, I mean not to travel to Sienna to woo
Beauty, least in coming home the air change it, and then my labor be lost:
neither to seek so far for wit, least she account me a fool, when I might
speed as well nearer hand, nor to sue to Virtue, least in Italy I be infected
with vice: and so looking to get Iuppiter by the hand, I catch Pluto by the
heel.

But if you will imagine that great Magnifico to have sent his three Daughters
into England, I would thus debate with them, before I would bargain with
them. I love beauty well, but I could not find in my heart to marry a fool:
for if she be impudent, I shall not rule her: and if she be obstinate, she will
rule me, and my self none of the wisest, me thinks it were no good match, for
two fools in one bed are too many.

Wit of all things sets my fancies on edge, but I should hardly choose a
wanton: for be she never so wise, if always she want one when she has me, I
had as liefe she should want me too, for of all my apparel I would have my
cappe sit close.

Virtue I cannot mislyke, which he thertoo I have honored, but such a crooked
Apostle I never brooked: for virtue may well fat my mind, but it will never
feed mine eye, and in marriage, as market folks tell me, the husband should
have two eyes, and the wife but one, but in such a match it is as good to have
no eye, as no appetite.

But to answer of three inconveniences, which I would choose, (although each
threaten a mischief) I must needs take the wise wanton, who if by her
wantonness, she will never want where she lykes, yet by her wit she will ever
conceal whom she loves, and to wear a horn and not know it, will do me no
more harm, then to eat a Fly, and not see it.

Iffida I know not whether stong with mine answer, or not content with my
opinion, replied in this manner.

Then Fidus, when you match, God send you such a one as you like best: but be
sure always, yt your head be not higher then your hat. And thus faining an
excuse departed to her lodging, which caused all the company to break off
their determined pastimes, leaving me perplexed with a hundred contrary
imaginations.

For this Philautus thought I, that either I did not hit the question which she
would, or that I hit it too full against her will: for to say the truth, witty
she was, and somewhat merry, but God knows so far from wantonness, as my
self was from wisdom, and I as far from thinking ill of her, as I found her
from taking me well.

Thus all night tossing in my bed, I determined the next day, if any
opportunity were offered, to offer also my importunate service. And found the
time fit, though her mind so froward, that to think of it my heart throbbeth,
and to utter it, will bleed freshly.

The next day I coming to the gallery, where she was solytarily walking with
her frowning cloth, as sick lately of the sullens, understanding my father to
be gone on hunting, and all other the Gentlewomen either walked throade to take
the air, or not yet ready to come out of their chambers, I adventured in one
ship to put all my wealth, and at this time to open my long concealed love,
determining either to be a Knight as we say, or a knitter of cappes. And in
this manner, I uttered my first speech.

LAdy, to make a long preamble to a short suit would seem superfluous, and to
begin abruptly in a matter of great weight, might be thought absurve: so as I
am brought into a doubt whether I should offend you with too many words, or
hinder my self with too few. She not staying for a longer treatise, brake me
off thus roundly.

Gentleman a short suit is soon made, but great matters not easily granted,
if your request be reasonable, a word will serve, if not, a thousand will not
suffice. Therefore, if there be any thing that I may do you pleasure in, see
it be honest, and use not tedious discourses or colors of rhetorike, which
though they be thought courtly, yet are they not esteemed necessary: for the
purest Emerauld shines brightest, when it has no Dyle, and truth delyghteth
when it is apparayled worst.

Then I thus replied.

Fair Lady as I know you wise, so have I found you courteous, which two
qualyties meeting in one of so rare beauty, must foreshew some great marvel,
and works such effects in those that either have heard of your praise or seen
your person, that they are enforced to offer themselves unto your sernice,
among the number of which your vassalls, I, though least worthy, yet most
willing, am now come to proffer both my life to do you good, and my ly^ings
to be at your command, which frank offer proceeding of a faithful mind, can
neither be refused of your nor mislyked. And because I would cut off speeches
which might seem to favor, either of flattery, or deceipte, I conclude thus,
that as you are the first, unto whom I have vowed my love, so you shall be the
last, requiring nothing but a friendly acceptaunce of my service, and good will
for the reward of it.

Iffida whose right ear began to gloe, and both whose cheeks wared read,
either with cholar or bashfulnesse, took me up thus for stumblyng.

GEntleman, you make me blush, as much for anger as shame, that seeking to
praise me and profer your self, you both bring my good name into question, and
your ill meaning into disdain: so that thinking to present me with your
heart, you have thrust into my hands the serpent Amphisbena, which having at
each end, a stinge, hurts both ways. You term me fair, and there-in you
flatter, wise, and therein you mean witty: courteous, which in other plain
words, if you durst have uttered it, you would have named wanton.

Have you thought me Fidus, so light, that none but I could fit your
looseness? or am I the witty wanton, which you harped upon yesternight, that
would always give you the sting in the head? you are much deceived in me
Fidus, and I as much in you? for you shall never find me for your appetite,
and I had thought never to have tasted you so unpleasant to mine. If I be
amiable, I will do those things that are fit for so good a face: if deformed,
those things which shall make me fair. And howsoever I live, I pardon your
presumption* knowing it to be no less common in Court, then foolish, to tell a
fair tale to a foul Lady, where-in they sharpen, I confess their wits, but
show as I think small wisdom, and you among the rest, because you would be
accounted courtly, have assayed to feel the vein, you cannot see, wherein you
follow not the best Physicians yet the most, who feelyng the pulses, do
always say it betokens an Ague, and you seeing my pulses beat, pleasauntly
judge me apt to fall into a fools Fever, which least it happen to shake me
hereafter I am minded to shake you off now, using but one request, where I
should seek often to reueng, that is, that you never attempt by word or writing
to solicit your suit, which is no more pleasant to me, then the wringing of a
straight shoe.

When she had uttered these bitter words, she was going into her chamber: but I
that now had no stay of my self, began to stay her, and thus again to
replye.

IPerceiue Iffida that where the stream runs smoothest the water is
deepest, and where the least smoke is there to be the greatest fire: and where
the mildest countenance is, there to be the melancholiest conceits. I swear
to thee by the Gods, and there she interrupted me again, in this manner.

FIdus the more you swear the less I believe you, for yt it is a practice in
Love, to have as little care of their own oaths, as they have of others
honors, imitating Iuppiter, who never kept oath he swore to Juno, thinking it
lawful in love to have as small regard of Religion, as he had of chastity.
And because I will not feed you with delays, nor that you should comfort
your self with trial, take this for a flat answer, that as yet I mean
not to love any, and if I do, it is not you, and so I leave you. But once
again I stayed her stepps being now thoroughly heated as well with love as
with cholar, and thus I thundered.

IF I had used the policy that hunters do, in catching of Hiena, it might be
also, I had now won you: but coming of the right side, I am entangled my
self and had it ben on the left side, I should have inueigled thee. Is this
the guerdon for good will, is this the courtesy of Ladies, the life of
Courtiers, the food of lovers? Ah Iffida, little do thou know the force of
affection, and therefore thou rewardest it lightly, neither showing courtesy
like a Lover, nor giving thanks like a Lady. If I should compare my blood
with thy birth, I am as noble: if my wealth with thine, as rich: if confer
qualities, not much inferior: but in good will as far above thee, as thou
art beyond me in pride.

Do thou disdain me because thou art beautiful? why colors fade, when
courtesy flourishes. Do thou reject me for that thou art wise? why wit
having told all his cards, lacks many an ace of wisdom. But this is
incident to women to love those that least rare for them, and to hate those
that most desire them, making a stacke of that, which they should use for a
stomacher.

And seeing it is so, better lost they are with a little grudge, then found
with much grief, better sold for sorrow, then bought for repentance, and
better to make no account of love, then an occupation: Where all ones service
be it never so great is never thought enough, when were it never so little, it
is too much, When I had thus raged, she thus replied.

FIdus you go the wrong way to the Wood, in making a gappe, when the gate is
open, or in seeking to enter by force, when your next way lies by favor.
Wherein you follow the humor of Ajax, who loosing Achilles shield by reason,
thought to win it again by rage: but it fell out with him as it does
commonly with all those that are cholarike, that he hurt no man but himself,
neither have you moved any to offense but your self. And in my mind, though
simple be the comparison, yet seemly it is, that your anger is like the
wrangling of children, who when they cannot get what they would have by
play, they fall to crying, and not unlike the use of foul gamsters who having
lost the maine by true judgment, think to face it out with a false oath, and
you missing of my love, which you required in sport, determine to hit it by
spite. If you have a commission to take up Ladies, let me see it: If a
privilege, let me know it: if a custom, I mean to break it

You talk of your birth, when I know there is no difference of bloods in a
basen, and as little do I esteem those that boast of their ancestors, and
have themselves no virtue, as I do of those that crake of their love and have
no modesty. I know Nature has provided, and I think our laws allow it,
that one may love when they see their time, not that they must love when others
appoint it.

Where as you bring in a rabble of reasons, as it were to bind me against my
will, I answer that in all respects I think you so far to exdell me, that
I cannot find in my heart to match with you. For one of so great good will as
you are, to encounter with one of such ^eide as I am, were neither commendable
nor convenient, no more then a patch of Fustion in a Damasi^e ^oase.

As for my beauty and wit, I had rather make them better then they are, being
now but mean by virtue, then worse then they are, which would then he nothing
by love.

Now where as you bring in (I. know not by what peoofe, for I think you were
never so much of women's counsels (that there women best like, where they be
least beloved, then ought they more to pittye us, not to oppress us, seeing we
have neither free will to choose, nor fortune to enjoy. Then Fidus since your
eyes are so sharp, that you cannot only look through a Millstone, but clean
through the mind, and so cunning that you can leuel at the dispositions of
women whom you never knew, me thinks you should use the mean, if you desire
to have the end, which is to hate those whom you would feign have to love
you, for this have you set for a rule (yet out of square) that women then love
most, when they be loathed most. And to the end I might stoop to your lure,
I pray begin to hate me that I may love you.

Touching your loosing and finding, your buying and selling, it much skilleth
not, for I had rather you should loose me so you might never find me again,
then find me that I should think my self lost: And rather had I be sold
of you for a penny, then bought for you with a pound. If you mean either to
make an Art or an Occupation of Love, I doubt not but you shall find work in
the Court sufficient: but you shall not know the length of my foot, until by
your cunning you get commendation. A Phrase now there is which belongs to
your Shop boorde, that is to make love, and when I shall hear of what
fashion it is made, if I like the pattorne, you shall cut me a partlet: so as
you cut it not with a pair of left handed sheeres. And I doubt not though you
have marred your first love in the making, yet by the time you have made three
or four loves, you will prove an expert workman: for as yet you are like the
Taylours boy, who thinks to take measure before he can handle the sheeres.

And thus I protest unto you, because you are but a young beginner, that I will
help you to as much custom as I can, so as you will promise me to sow no false
stitches, and when mine old love is worn threadbare, you shall take measure
of a new.

In the meaneseason do not discourage your self, Appelles was no good Painter
the first day: For in every occupation one must first endeavor to begin: He
that will sell lawne must learn to fold it, and he that will make love, must
learn first to court it.

As she was in this vain very pleasant, so I think she would have been very
long, had not the Gentlewoemen called her to walk being so saire a day: then
taking her leave very courteously she left me alone, yet turning again she
said: will you not man us Fidus, being so proper a man? Yes quoth I, and
without asking too, had you ben a proper woman. Then smiling the said: you
should find me a proper woman, had you ben a proper workman. And so she
departed.

Now Philautus and Euphues, what a trance was I left in, who bewailing my
love, was answered with hate: or if not with hate, with such a kind of heat,
as almost burnt the very bowels with-in me. What greater discourtesie could
there possiblye rest in the mind of a Gentlewoman, then with so many nippes,
such bitter girdes, such disdainefull gliek^s, to answer him that honored
her? What cruelty more unfit for so comelye a lady, then to spur him that
gallopped or to let him blood in the heart, whose vein she should have
staunched in the liver? But it fared with me, as with the herb Basil, the
which the more it is crushed, the sooner it springs, or the Rue, which the
oftener it is cut, the better it grows or the Poppy, which the more it is
trodden with the feet, the more it flourishes. For in these extremities,
beaten as it were to the ground with disdain, my love reaches to the top of
the house with hope, not unlike unto a Tree, which though it be often felled to
the hard root, yet it buddeth again, and gets a top.

But to make an end, both of my tale and my sorrows, I will proceed, only
craving a little patience, if I fall into mine old passions: With that,
Philautus came in with his spoake saying: in faith Fidus, me thinks I could
never be weary in hearing this discourse, and I fear me the end will be too
soon, although I feel in my self the impression of thy sorrows.

Yea quoth Euphues, you shall find my friend Philautus so kind hearted that
before you have done, he will be farther in love with her, than you were: for
as your Lady said, Philautus will be bound to make love as warden of that
occupation. Then Fidus: Well, God grant Philautus better success then I had,
which was too badde. For my Father being returned from hunting and the
Gentlewomen from walking, the table was covered and we al set down to dinner,
none more pleasant then Iffida, which would not conclude her mirth, and I not
melancholy, because I would cover my sadness, least either she might think
me to doat, or my Father suspect me to desire her. And thus we both in table
talk began to rest. She requesting me to be her Caruer, and I not attending
well to that she craved, gave her salt, which when she received, she began thus
to replye.

IN sooth Gntle-man I seldom eat salt, for fear of anger, and if you give
it me in token that I want wit, then will you make me cholaricke, before I
eat it: for women be they never so foolish, would ever be thought wise.

I stayed not long for mine answer, but as well quickened by her former talk,
and desirous to cry quittance for her present tongue, said thus.

If to eat store of salt, cause one to fret, and to have no salt fignifi^
lack of wit, then do you cause me to marvel, that eating no salt you are
so captious, and loving no salt, you are so wise, when in deed so much wit is
sufficient for a woman, as when she is in ye rain, can warn her to come out
of it.

You mistake your aim quoth Iffida, for such a shower may fall, as did once
into Danaes lap, and then that woman were a fool that would come out of it:
but it may be your mouth is out of taste, therefore you were best season it with
salt. In deed quoth I, your aunsweres are so fresh, that without salt I can
hardly swallow them. Many nips were returned that time between us, and some so
bitter that I thought them to proceed rather of malice to work despite, than
of mirth to show disport. My Father very destrous to hear questions asked,
willed me after dinner to use some demand, which after grace I did in this
sort.

Lady Iffida, it is not unlikely but yt you can answer a question as wisely as
the last night you asked one wilyly, and I trust you will be as ready to resolve
any doubt, by entreatie, as I was by commandment. There was a Lady in Spain,
who after the decease of her Father, had three suitors (and yet never a good
Archer) the one excelled in all gifts of the body, insomuch that there could
be nothing added to his perfection, and so armed in all points, as his very
looks were able to pearce the heart of any Lady, especially of such a one, as
seemed her self to have no less beauty then she had personage. For that as
between the similitude of manners, there is a friendship in every respect
absolute: so in the composition of the body, there is a certain love engendered
by one look, where both the bodies resemble each other, as wouen both in one
loome.

The other had nothing to commend him, but a quick wit, which he had
always so at his will, that nothing could be spoken, but he would wrest it to
his own purpose, which wrought such delight to this Lady, who was no less
witty than he, yt you would have thought a marriage to be solemnized before
the match could be talked off. For there is nothing in love more requisite or
more delectable then pleasant and wise conference, neither can there arise any
storm, in love, which by wit is not turned to a calm.

The third was a Gentleman of great possessions, large revenues, full of money,
but neither the wisest that ever enjoyed so much, nor the properest that ever
desired so much, he had no plea in his suit, but gylt, which rubbed well in a
hot hand, is such a grease, as will supple a very hard heart. And who is so
ignorant, that knows not gold to be a keye for every lock, chiefly with his
Lady, who her self was well stored, and as yet infected with a desire of more,
that she could not but lend him a good countenance in this match.

Now Lady Iffida, you are to determine this Spanish bargain or if you please,
we will make it an English controversy: supposing you to be the Lady and three
such Gentlemen to come unto you a wooing, In faith who should be the speeder.

GEntleman (quoth Iffida) you may answer your own question by your own
argument if you would, for if you conclude the Lady to be beautiful, witty,
and wealthy, then no doubt she will take such a one, as should have comeliness
of body, sharpness of wit, and store of riches: Otherwise, I would condemn
that wit in her, which you seem so much to commend, her self excelling in
three qualyties, she should take one, which was endued but with one: in perfect
love the eye must be pleased, the ear delyghted, the heart comforted: beauty
causes the one, with the other, wealth the third.

To love only for comeliness, were lust: to like for wit only, madness: to
desire chiefly for goods, covetousness: and yet can there be no love without
beauty, but we loath it: nor without wit, but we scorn it: nor with out
riches, but we repent it. Every flower has his blossom, his savor, his
sap, and every desire, should have to feed the eye, to please the wit, to
maintain the root.

Ganimedes may cast an amiable countenance, but that feeds not: Ulysses
tell a witty tale, but that fatteth not: Croesus bring bags of gold, and
that does both: yet without the aid of beauty he cannot bestow it, and
without wit, he knows not how to use it So that I am of this mind, there is
no Lady but in her choice will be so resolute, that either she will live a
Uirgin, till she have such a one, as shall have all these three properties, or
else die for anger, if she match with one that wants any one of them.

I perceiving her to stand so stifely, thought if I might to remove her
footing, and replied again.

LAdy you now think by policy to start, where you bound me to answer by
necessity, not suffering me to join three flowers in one Nosegay, but to
choose one, or else to leave all. The like must I crave at your hands, that if of
force you must consent to any one, whether would you have the proper man* the
wise, or the rich.

She as not without an answer, quickly requited me.

ALthough there be no force which may compel me to take any, neither a profer,
whereby I might choose al: Yet to answer you flatly, I would have the
wealthiest, for beauty without riches, goes a begging, and wit without
wealth cheapneth all things in the Fair, but buyeth nothing.

Truly Lady quoth I* either you speak not as you think, or you be far
ouershot, for me thinks, that he that has beauty, shall have money, of
ladies for alms, and he that is witty will get it by craft: but the rich
having enough, and neither loved for shape nor sense, must either keep his
gold for those he knows not, and spend it on them that cares not. Well
answered Iffida, so many men, so many minds, now you have my opinion, you
must not think to wring me from it, for I had rather be as all women are,
obstinate in mine own conceit, then apt to be wrought to others constructions.

My father liked her choice, whether it were to flatter her, or for fear to
offend her, or that he loved money himself better then either wit or beauty.
And our conclusions thus ended, she accompanied with her Gentlewomen and other
her servants, went to her Uncles, having tarried a day longer with my father
then she appointed, though not so many with me, as she was welcome.

Ah Philautus, what torments did thou think poor Fidus endured, who now
felt ye flame even to take full hold of his heart, and thinking by
solytarinesse to drive away melancholy, and by imagination to forget love, I
labored no otherwise then he that to have his Horse stand still, pricketh him
with the spur, or he that having sore eyes rubbeth them with salt water. At
the last with continual abstinence from meat, from company, from sleep my
body began to consume, and my head to ware idle, in so much that the
sustenance which perforce was thrust into my mouth, was never disgested, nor
the talk which came from my addle brains liked: For ever in my slumber me
thought Iffida presented her self, now with a countenance pleasant and merry,
straight ways with a color full of wrath and mischief.

My father no less sorrowful for my disease; then ignorant of the cause, sent
for diverse Physicians, among the which there came an Italian, who feeling my
pulses, casting my water, and marking my looks, commanded the chamber to be
voyded, and shutting the door applied this medicine to my maladye. Gentleman
there is none that can better heal your wound then he that made it, so that
you should have sent for Cupid, not Aesculapius, for although they be both
Gods, yet will they not meddle in each others office. Appelles will not go
about to amend Lisippus caruing, yet they both wrought Alexander: nor
Hippocrates busy himself with Ouids art, and yet they both described Venus.
Your humeur is to be purged not by Apothecaries confections, but by the
following of good counsel.

You are in love Fidus? which if you cover in a close chest, will burn every
place before it burst the lock. For as we know by Physic that poison will
disperse it self into every vein, before it part the heart: so I have hard by
those that in love could say somewhat, that it maymeth every part, before it
kill the Liver. If therefore you will make me privy to all your devises, I will
procure such means, as you shall recover in short space, otherwise if you
seek to conceal the party, and increase your passions, you shall but shorten
your life, and so loose your love, for whose sake you live.

When I heard my Physician so pat to hit my disease, I could not dissemble with
him, least he should bewray it, neither would I, in hope of remedy.

Unto him I discoursed the faithful love, which I bore to Iffida, and described
in every particular, as to you I have done. Which he hearing, procured within
one day, Lady Iffida to see me, telling my father that my disease was but a
consuming Fever, which he hoped in short time to cure.

When my Lady came, and saw me so altered in a month, wasted to the hard
bones, more like a ghoast then a living creature, after many words of comfort
(as women want none about sick persons) when she saw opportunity, she asked
me whether the Italian were my messenger, or if he were, whether his embassage
were true, which question I thus answered.

LAdy to dissemble with the world, when I am departing from it, would profit
me nothing with man, and hinder me much with God, to make my deathbed the
place of deceit, might hasten my death, and increase my danger.

I have loved you long, and now at the length must leave you, whose hard
heart I will not impute to discurtesie, but destiny, it contenteth me that I
dyed in faith, though I could not live in favor, neither was I ever more
desi^ous to begin my love* then I am now to end my life. Things which
cannot be altered are to be borne, not blamed: follyes past are sooner
remembered then redressed, and time lost may well be repented but never
recalled. I will not recounte the passions I have suffered, I think the effect
show them, and now it is more behooffull for me to fall to praying for a new
life, then to remember the old: yet this I add (which though it merit no
mercy to save, it diserueth thanks of a friend) that only I loved thee, and
lived for thee, and now dye for thee. And so turning on my left side, I fetched
a deep sigh.

Iffyda the water standing in her eyes, clasping my hand in hirs, with a sad
countenance answered me thus.

MY good Fidus, if the increasing of my sorrows, might mittigate the
extremity of thy sickness, I could be content to resolve my self into tears
to rid thee of trouble: but the making of a fresh wou^d in my body, is
nothing to the healing of a festred sore in thy bowels: for that such diseases
are to be cured in the end, by the means of their Original. For as by Basil
the Scorpion is engendered, and by the means of the same herb destroyed: so
love which by time and fancy is bred in an idle head, is by time and fancy
banished from the heart: or as ye Salamander which being a long space nourished
in the fire, at the last quenches it, so affection having taken hold of the
fancy, and living as it were in the mind of the lover, in tract of time
alters and changes the heat, and turns it to chillness.

It is no small grief to me Fidus, that I should be thought to be the cause
of thy languishing, and can-not be remedy of thy disease. For unto thee I will
reveal more then either wisdom would allow, or my modesty permit.

And yet so much, as may acquit me of ingratitude toward thee, and rid
thee of the suspicion conceived of me.

SO it is Fidus and my good friend, that about a two years past, there was in
court a Gentleman, not unknown unto thee, nor I think vnbeloued of thee,
whose name I will not conceal, least thou should either think me to
forge, or him not worthy to be named.

This Gentleman was called Thirsus, in all respects so well qualyfied, as had
he not been in love with me, I should have been enamoured of him. But his
hastiness prevented my heat, who began to sue for yt, which I was ready to
proffer, whose sweet tale although I wished it to be true, yet at the first I
could not believe it: For that men in matters of love, have as many ways to
deceive, as they have words to utter.

I seemed straight laced, as one neither accustomed to such suites, nor willing
to entertain such a servant, yet to warily, as putting him from me with my
little finger, I drew him to me with my whole hand. For I stood in a great
mammering, how I might behave my self, least being too coye, he might think
me proud, or using too much courtesy he might judge me wanton. Thus long time
I held him in a doubt, thinking thereby to have just trial of his faith, or
plain knowledge of his falshoode. In this manner, I lead my life, almost one
year, until with often meeting, and diverse conferences, I felt my self* so
wounded, that though I thought no heaven to my hap, yet I lived as it were in
hell, til I had enjoyed my hope. For as the tree Ebenus though it no way be set
in a flame, yet it burns with sweet savors: so my mind though it could not
be fired, for that I thought my self wise, yet was it almost consumed to ashes
with pleasant delights and sweet cogitations: insomuch as it fared with me as
it does with ye trees, stricken with thu^der, which having the barks sound are
bruised in the body, for finding my outward parts, without blemish, looking
into my mind could not see it without blows.

I now perceiving it high time to use the Physician, who was always at hand,
determined at the next meeting, to conclude such a faithful and inviolable
league of love, as neither the length of time, nor the distaunce of place, nor
the threatening of friends, nor the spite of Fortune, nor the fear of death,
shouldh either alter, or diminish: which accordingly was then finished, and
has hitherto been truly fulfilled.

Thirsus as thou know, has ever since been beyond the Seas, the
remembrance of whose constancy, is the only comfort of my life: neither do
I rejoice in any thing more, then in the faith of my good Thirsus.

Then Fidus, I appeal in this case to thy honesty, which shall determine of
mine honor. Would thou have me inconstant to mine old friend, and
faithful to a new? Know thou not that as the Almond tree bears most
fruit when he is old, so love has greatest faith when it grows in age. It
falls out in love, as if does in vines, for the young Uines bring the most
wine, but the old the best: So tender love makes greatest show of blossoms,
but tried love brings forth sweetest juice.

And yet I will say thus much, not to add courage to thy attempts, that I have
taken as great delyght in thy company, as ever I did in anyes, (my Thirsus
only excepted) which was the cause that oftentimes I would either by questions
move thee to talk, or by quarrels incense thee to cholar, perceiving in thee
a wit aunswerable to my desire, which I thought thoroughly to whette by some
discourse. But were thou in comeliness Alexander, and my Thirsus, Thirsites,
were thou Ulysses, he Mydas, thou Croesus he Codrus, I would not forsake him
to have thee, no not if I might there-by prolong thy life, or save mine own:
so fast a root has true love taken in my heart, that the more it is dug
at, the deeper it grows the oftener it is cut, the less it bleedeth, and the
more it is laden the better it bears.

What is there in this vile earth that more commends a woman than constancy?
It is neither his wit, though it be excellent, that I esteem, neither his
birthe though it be noble, nor his bringing up, which has always been
courtlye, but only his constancy and my faith, which no torments, no tyrant,
not death, shall dissolve. For never shall it be said, that Iffida was false to
Thirsus, though Thirsus be faithless (which the Gods forfend) unto Iffida.

For as Amulius the cunning Painter so portrayed Minerua, that which way soever
one cast his eye, she always beheld him: so has Cupide, so exquisitly drawn
the Image of Thirsus in my heart, that what way soever I glaunce, me thinks
he looks stedfastlye upon me: insomuch that when I have seen any to gaze on
my beauty (simple God wot though it be) I have wished to have the eyes of
Augustus Caesar to dim their sights with the sharp and scortching beams.

Such force has time and trial wrought, that if Thirsus should dye, I would
be buried with him, imitating the Eagle which Sesta a Uirgin brought up, who
seeing the bones of the virgin cast into the fire, threw him self in with
them, and burnt himself with them. Or Hippocrates Twins, who were borne
together, laughed together, wept together, and dyed together.

For as Alexander would be engraven of no one man in a precious stone, but
only of Pergotales: so would I have my picture imprinted in no heart, but in
his, by Thirsus.

Consider with thy self Fidus, that a fair woman with out constancy, is not
unlike unto a green tree without fruit, resemblyng the Counterfeit that
Praxitiles, made for Flora, before the which, if one stood directly, if seemed
to weep, if on the left side to laugh, if on the other side to sleep: whereby
he noted the light behavior of her, which could not in one constant shadow be
set down.

And yet for the great good will thou bear me, I cannot reject thy service,
but I will not admit thy love. But if either my friends, or my self, my goods,
or my good will, may stand thee in stead, use me, trust me, command me, as
far forth, as thou can with modesty, and I may grant with mine honor.

If to talk with me, or continualye to be in thy company, may in any
respect satistic thy desire, assure thy self, I will attend on thee, as
dilygently as thy Nourse and be more careful for thee, than thy Physician.
More I can-not promise without breach of my faith, more thou can not ask,
without the suspicion of folly.

Here Fidus take this Diamond which I have heard old women say to have been
of great force against idle thoughts, vain dreams, and phrenticke
imaginations, which if it do thee no good, assure thy self it can do thee no
harm, and better I think it against such inchaunted fantasies, then either
Homers Moly, or Plynies Centaurio.

When my Lady had ended this strange discourse, I was stricken into such a
maze, that for the space almost of half an hour, I lay as it had been in a
Trance, mine eyes almost standing in my head without motion, my face without
color, my mouth without breathe, insomuch that Iffida began to scritch out,
and call company, which called me also to my self, and then with a faint and
trembling tongue, I uttered these words.

LAdy, I cannot use as many words as I would, because you see I am weak, nor
give so many thanks as I should, for that you deserve infinite. If Thirsus have
planted the Uine, I will not gather the Grapes, neither is it reason, that he
having sowed with pain, yt I should reap the pleasure. This suffices me, and
delights me not a little, that you are so faithful and he so fortunate. Yet
good Lady let me obtain one small suit, which derogating nothing from your
true love, must needs be lawful, that is, that I may in this my sickness
enioyo your company, and if I recover, be admitted as your servant: ye one will
hasten my health, the other prolong my life. She courteously granted both, and
so carefully tended me in my sickness, that what with her merry sporting, and
good nourishing, I began to gather up my orumbos, and in short time to walk
into a Gallery near adjoining unto my Chamber, where she disdained not to
lead me, and so at all times to use me, as though I had ven Thirsus. Every
evening she would put forth some pretty question, or utter some merry conceit,
to drive me from melancholy. There was no broth that would dosun but of her
making, no meat but of her dressing, no sleep enter into mine eyes, but by
her singing, insomuch as she was both my Nurse, my Cook, and my Physician.
Being thus by her for the space of one month cherished, I wared strong as
though I had never ben sike.

NOw Philautus judge not parcially, whether was she a Lady of greater
constancy toward Thirfus, or courtesy toward me?

Philautus thus answered. Now surely Fidus, in my opinion, she was no less to
be commended for keeping her faith inviolable, then to be praised for giving
such alms unto thee, which good behavior differs far from the nature of
our Italian Dames, who if they be constant they despise all other that seem to
love them.

But I long yet to hear the end for me thinks a matter begun with such a
heat, should not end with a bitter cold.

O Philautus, the end in short and lamentable, but as it is have it.

SHe after long recreating of her self in the Country, repaired again to the
court, and so did I also, where I lived (as the Elephant does by Air) with the
sight of my Lady, who ever using me in all her secrets, as one yt she most
trusted. But my joys were too great to last, for even in the middle of my
bliss, there came tidings to Iffida, that Thirsus was slain by the Turks,
being then in pay with the King of Spain, which battle was so bloody, that
many Gentlemen lost their lives.

Iffida so distraught of her wits, with these news, fell into a phre^sie,
having nothing in her mouth but always this Thirsus slain, Thirsus slain,
ever doubling this speech, with such pitiful cries and scritches, as it would
have moved the soldiers of Ulysses to sorrow. At the last by good keeping, and
such means as by Physic were provided she came again to her self, unto
whom I wryt many letters to take pa^iently ye death of him, whose life could
not be recalled, diverse she answered, which I will show you at my better
leisure.

But this was most strange, that no suit could allure her again to love, but
ever she lived all in blacks, not once coming where she was most sought for.
But within the term of five years, she began a little to lysten to mine old
suit, of whose faithful meaning she had such trial, as she could not think
that either my love was builded upon lust, or deceit.

But destiny cut of my love, by the cutting of her life, for falling into a
hot pestilent fever, she dyed, and how I took it I mean not to tell it: but
forsaking the Court presently, I have here lived ever since, and so mean
until death shall call me.

NOw Gentlemen I have held you to long, I fear me, but I have ended at the
last. You see what Love is, begun with grief, continued with sorrow, ended
with Death. A pain full of pleasure, a joy replenyshed with misery, a Heaven,
a Hell* a God, a Devil, and what not, that either has in it solace, or
sorrow? Where she days are spent in thoughts, the nights in dreams, both in
danger, either beguyling us of that we had, or promising us that we had not.
Full of jealousy without cause, and void of fear when there is cause: and so
many inconveniences hanging upon it, as to reckon them all were infinite, and
to taste but one of them, intolerable.

Yet in these days, it is thought the signs of a good wit, and the only
virtue peculyar to a courtier, for love they say is in young Gentlemen, in
clownes it is lust, in old men dotage, when it is in all men, madness.

But you Philautus whose blood is in his chiefest heat, are to take great
care, least being over warmed, with love, it so inflame the liver, as it drive
you into a consumption. And thus the old man brought them into dinner, where
they having taken their repast, Philautus as well in ye name of Euphues as his
own, gave this a unswere to the old man's tale, and these or the like thanks
for his cost and courtesy.

Father I thank you no less for your talk which I found pleasant, then for
your counsel, which I account profitable, and so much for your great cheer and
courteous entertainme^t, as it deserves of those that cannot deserve any* I
perceive in England the women and men are in love constant, to strangers
courteous, and bountiful in hospitality, ye two latter we have tried to your
cost, ye other we have heard to your pains, and may justify them all
whersoeuer we become to your praises, and our pleasure. This only we crave,
that necessity may excuse our boldness, and for amends we will use such
means, as although we cannot make you gain much, yet you shall loose little.

Then Fidus taking Philautus by the hand, spoke thus to them both.

GEntlemen and friends, I am ashamed to receive so many thanks for so small
courtesy, and so far off it is for me to look for ame^ds for my cost, as I
desire nothing more then to make you amends for your company, and your good
wills in accompting well of ill fare* only this I crave, that at your return,
after you shall be feasted of great personages, you vouchsafe to visit the
Cottage of poor Fidus, where you shall be no less welcome then Iuppiter was
to Bacchus: Then Euphues.

We have troubled you too long, and high time it is for poor Pilgrims to take
the day before them, least being be-nighted, they strain courtesy in an other
place, and as we say in Athens, ^^she and guess in three days are stale:
Not-withstanding we will be bold to see you, and in the mean season we thank
you, and ever as we ought, we will pray for you.

Thus after many farewells, with as many welcomes of the one side, as thanks
of the other, they departed and framed their steps toward London* And to drive
away the time, Euphues began thus to instruct Philautus.

THou see Philautus ye courtesy of England to surpass, and the constancy
(if the old Gentleman told the truth) to excel, which warns us both to be
thankful for the benefits we receive, and circumspect in behavior we use,
least being unmindful of good turns, we be accounted ingrate, and being
dissolute in our lives, we be thought impudent.

When we come into London, we shall walk in the Garden of the world, where
among many flowers we shall see some weeds, sweet Roses and sharp Nettles,
pleasant Lillies and pricking Thorns, high Uines and low Hedges. All things
(as the fame goes) that may either please the sight, or dislike the smell,
either seed the eye with delight, or fill the nose with infection.

Then good Philautus let the care I have of thee be in steed of grave
counsel, and my good will toward thee in place of wisdom.

I had rather thou should walk among the beds of wholesome Potte-hearbes,
then the knottes of pleasant Flowers, and better shall thou ^nde it to gather
Garlike for thy stomach, then a sweet Uiolet for thy senses. I fear me
Philautus, that seeing the amiable faces of the English Ladies, thou will cast
off all care both of my counsel and thine own credit. For well I know that
a fresh color does easily dim a quick fight, that a sweet Rose does soonest
pearce a fine sent, that pleasant sirops does chiefliest infect a delycate
taste, that beautiful women do first of all all^re them, that have the
wantonnest eyes and the whitest mouths.

A strange tree there is, called Alpina, which brings forth the fairest
blossoms of all trees, which the Be either suspecting to be venomous, or
misliking because it is so glorious, neither tastes it, nor comes near it.
In the like case Philautus would I have thee, to imitate the Be, that when
thou shall behold the amiable blossoms of the Alpine tree in any woman, thou
shun the^, as a place infected either with poison to kill thee, or honny to
deceive thee: for it were more convenient thou should pull out thine eyes and
live without love, then to have them clear and be infected with lust.

Thou must choose a woman as the Lapidarie does a true Sapphire, who when he
sees it to glister, covers it with Dyle, and then if it shine, he allows
it, if not, he breaks it: So if thou fall in love with one that is beautiful,
cast some kind of color in her face, either as it were misliking her
behavior, or hearing of her lyghtnesse, and if then she look as fair as
before, woo her, win her, and wear her.

Then my good Friend, consider with thy self what thou art, an Italian, where
thou art, in England, whom thou shall love if thou fall into that vain, an
Angel: let not the eye go beyond thy ear, nor thy tongue so far as the
feet. And thus I consure thee, that of all things, that thou refrain from the
hot fire of affection.

For as the precious stone Autharsitis being thrown into the fire looks
black and half dead, but being cast into the water glistreth like the Sun
beams: so the precious mind of man once put into the flame of love, is as it
were vglye, and loses his virtue, but sprinkled with the water of wisdom
and detestation of such fond delights, it shines like the golden rays of
Phoebus.

And it shall not be amiss, though my Physic be simple, to prescribe a
straight diot before thou fall into thine ^lde disease.

First let thy apparel be but mean, neither too brave to show thy pride, nor
to base to bewray thy poverty, be as careful to keep thy mouth from wine, as
thy fingers from fire.

Wine is the glass of the mind, and the only sauce that Bacchus gave Ceres
when he fell in love: be not dainty mouthed, a fine taste notes the fond
appetites, that Venus said her Adonis to have, who seeing him to take chiefest
delight in costly cates, smyling said this.

I am glad that my Adonis has a sweet tooth in his head, and who knows not
what follows. But I will not wade to far, seeing heretofore as well in my
cooling card, as at diverse other times, I have given thee a caveat, in this
vanity of love, to have a care: and yet me thinks the more I warn thee, the
less I dare trust thee, for I know not how it comes to pass, that every
minute I am troubled in mind about thee.

When Euphues had ended, Philautus thus began.

EVphues, I think thou wast borne with this word love, in thy mouth, or that
thou art bewitched with it in mind, for there is scarce three words uttered to
me, but the third is love: which how often I have answered thou know, and
yet that I speak as I think, thou never beleeuest: either thinking thy self,
a God, to know thoughts, or me worse then a Devil, not to acknoweldge them.
When I shall give any occasion, warn me, and that I should give none, thou have
already armed me, so that this persuade thy self, I will stick as close to
thee as the soale does to the shoe.

But truly I must needs commend the courtesy of England, and old Fidus for
his constancy to his Lady Iffida, and her faith to her friend Thirsus, the
remembrance of which discourse did often bring into my mind the hate I bare to
Lucilla, who loved all and was not found faithful to any. But I let that
pass, least thou come in again with thy fa-burthen, and hit me in the teeth
with love, for thou have so charmed me, that I dare not speak any word that may
be wrested to charity, least thou say, I mean love, and in truth, I think
there is no more difference between them, then between a Broom and a Besome.

I will follow thy dyot and thy counsel, I thank thee for thy good will, so
that I will now walk under the shadow and be at thy commandment: Not so
answered Euphues, but if thou follow me, I dare be thy warrant we will not
offend much. Much talk there was in the way, which much shortened their way:
and at last they came to London, where they met diverse strangers of their
friends, who in small space brought them familiarly acquainted with certain
English gentlemen, who much delighted in the company of Euphues, whom they
found both ^ober and wise, yet sometimes merry and pleasant. They were brought
into all places of the City, and lodged at the last in a Merchaunts house,
where they continued till a certain breach.

They used continually the court, in the which Euphues took such delight that
he accounted all the praises he hard of it before, rather to be envious, then
otherwise, and to be parcial, not giving so much as it deserved, and yet to be
pardoned because they could not. It happened yt these English Gentlemen
conducted these two strangers to a place, w^er diverse Gentlewomen were: some
courtiers, others of the country: where being welcome, they frequented almost
every day for the space of one month, entertaining of time in courtly
pastimes, though not in the court, insomuch that if they came not, they were
sent for, and so used as they had been countrymen not strangers. Philautus
with this continual access and often conference with gentlewomen, began to
weane himself from the counsel of Euphues, and to wed his eyes to the
comeliness of Ladies yet so warily, as neither his friend could by narrow
watching discover it, neither did he by any wanton countenance bewray it, but
carrying the Image of Love, engraven in the bottom of his heart, and the picture
of courtesy, imprinted in his face, he was thought to Euphues courtly, and
known to himself comfortless. Among a number of Ladies he fixed his eyes
upon one, whose countenance seemed to promise mercy and threaten mischief,
intermedling a desire of lyking, with a disdain of love: showing her self in
courtesy to be familiar with all, and with a certain comely pride to accept
none, whose wit would commonly taunt without despite, but not without disport,
as one that seemed to abhor love worse then lust, and lust worse then
murder: of greater beauty then birth, and yet of less beauty then honesty,
which gate her more honor by virtue, then nature could by Art, or Fortune might
by promotion, she was ready of answer, yet wary: shril of speech, yet sweet:
in all her passions so te^perate, as in her greatest mirth none would think her
wanton, neither in hi^ deepest grief sullom, but always to look with so
sober cheerfulness, as it was hardly thought where she were more commended
for her gravity of the aged, or for her courtlinesse of the youth: oftentimes
delyghted to bear discourses of Love, but ever desirous to be instructed in
Learning: somewhat curyous to heep^ her Beauty, which made her comelye, but
more careful to increase her credit, which made her commendable: not adding
the length of a hair to courtlynesse, that might detract the breadth of a hair
from chastity: In all her talk so pleasant, in all her looks so amiable, so
grave modesty joined with so witty mirth, that they that were entangled with
her beauty, were enforced to prefer her wit before their wills, and they that
loved her virtue, were compelled to prefer their affections before her
wisdom: whose rare qualyties, caused so strange events, that ye wise were
allured to vanities, and the wantons to virtue, much like the river in Arabia,
which turns gold to dross, and dirt to silver. In conclusion, there wanted
nothing in this English Angel that nature might ad for perfection, or Fortune
could give for wealth, or God does commonly bestow on mortal creatures: And
more easy it is in the description of so rare a personage, to imagine what
she had not, then to repeat all she had. But such a one she was, as almost
they al are that serve so noble a Prince, such Uirgins carry lights before such
a Vesta, such Nymphs, arrows with such a Diana. But why go I about to set
her in black and white, whom Philautus is now with all colors importraing in
the Table of his heart. And surely I think by this he is half mad, whom
long since, I left in a great maze.

Philautus viewing all these things, and more then I have uttered (for that the
lovers eye perceth deeper) with drew himself secretly into his lodging and
locking his door, began to debate with himself in this manner.

AH thrice unfortunate is he that is once faithful, and better it is to be a
merciless soldier, then a true lover: the one lives by another death, the
other dies by his own life. What strange fits be these Philautus that burn
thee with such a heat, that thou shakest for cold, and all thy body in a
shiuering sweat, in a flaming Y^e, melts like wax, and hardens like the
Adamant? Is it love? then would it were death: for likelyer it is that I should
loose my life, then win my love. Ah Camilla, but why do I name thee, when thou
do not hear me, Camilla, name thee I will, though thou hate me. But alas ye
sound of thy name does make me sound for grief. What is in me that thou
should not despise, and what is there not in thee that I should not wonder
at. Thou a woman the last thing God made, and therefore the best. I a man that
could not live without thee, and therefore the worst. Al things were made for
man, as a sovereign, and man made for woman as a slave. O Camilla, would
either thou had been bred in Italy, or I in England, or would thy virtues
were less then thy beauty, or my virtues greater then my affections.

I see that India brings gold, but England breeds goodness: And had not
England been thrust into a corner of the world, it would have filled the
whole world with woe. Where such women are as we have talked of in Italy,
heard of in Rome, read of in Greece, but never found but in this Islande: And
for my part (I speak softly, because I will not hear my self) would there
were none such here, or such every where. Ah fond Euphues my dear friend,
but a simple fool if thou believe now thy cooling Card, and an obstinate
fool if thou do not recant it. But it may be thou layest that Card for the
elevation of Naples, like an Astronomer. If it were so I forgive thee, for I
must believe thee, if for the whole world. Behold England, where Camilla was
borne, the flower of courtesy, the picture of comlynesse: one that shameth
Venus, being somewhat fayrer, but much more virtuous, and stayneth Diana
being as chaste, but much more amiable. I but Philautus, the more beauty she
has the more pride, and the more virtue the more precisenes. The Pecock is a
bird for none but Juno, the Dove, for none but Vesta: None must wear Venus in
a Tablet, but Alexander, none Pallas in a ring but Ulysses. For as there is but
one Phoenix in the world, so is there but one tree in Arabia, wherein she
builds, and as there is but one Camilla to be hard off, so is there but one
Caesar that she will like off. Why then Philautus, what rests for thee but to
dye with patience, seeing thou may not live with pleasure. When thy disease
is so dangerous, that the third letting of blood is not able to recover thee,
when neither Ariadnes third, nor Sibillas vough, nor Medeas seed, may remedy
thy grief. Dye, dye, Philautus rather with a secret scarre, then an open
scorn. Patroclus cannot mask in Achilles armor without a maime, nor
Philautus in the English Court without a mock. I but there is no Pearl so
hard but Uineger breaks it, no Diamond so stony, but blood mollyfieth, no
heart so stiff but love weakeneth it. And what then? Because she may love one,
is it necessary she should love thee? Be there not infinite in England, who
as far exceed thee in wealth, as she does all the Italians in wisdom, and
are as far above thee in all qualyties of the body, as she is above them in
all gifts of the mind? Do thou not see every minuite the noble youth of
England frequent the Court, with no less courage then thou cowardice. If
Courtlye brauerye may allure her, who more gallaunt then they? If personage,
who more valiant? If wit, who more sharp, if birth, who more noble, if
Virtue, who more devout?

When there are all things in them that should delyght a Lady, and no one
thing in thee that is in them, with what face Philautus can thou desire,
which they cannot deserve, or with what service deserve that, which so many
desire before thee?

The more beauty Camalla has, the less hope should thou have: and think
not but the bayte that caught thee, has beguiled other Englishe-men or now.
Infants they can love, neither so hard hearted to despise it, nor so simple not
to discern it.

It is likely then Philautus that the Fox will let the Grapes hang for the
Goose, or the Englishman bequeath beauty to the Italian? No no Philautus,
assure thy self, there is no Venus but she has her Temple, where on the one
side Vulcan may knock but Mars shall eater: no Saint but has her shrine, and
he that cannot win with a Pater Noster, must offer a penny.

And as rare it is to see the Sun without a light, as a fair woman without a
lover, and as near is Fancy to beauty, as the prick to the Rose, as the
stalk to the rind, as the earth to the root.

Do thou not think that hourly she is served and sued unto, of thy
betters in birth, thy equales in wealth, thy inferiors in no respect.

If then she have given her faith, dare thou call her honor into suspicion
of falshod?

If she refuse such vain delights, will thou bring her wisdom into the
compass of folly?

If she love so beautiful a piece, then will she not be unconstant: If she
vow virginity, so chaste a Lady cannot be perjured: and of two things the one of
these must be true, that either her mind is already so weaned from love, that
she is not to be moved, or so settled in love, that she is not to be removed.

I but it may be, that so young and tender a heart has not yet felt the
impression of love: I but it cannot be, that so rare perfection should want
that which they all wish, affection.

A Rose is sweeter in the budde then full blown. Young twigges are sooner bent
then old trees. White Snow sooner melted then hard Ice: which proves that
the younger she is, the sooner she is to be wooed, and the fayrer she is, the
likelier to be won.

Who will not run with Atlanta, though he be lame? Who would not wrestle with
Cleopatra, though he were sick? Who fears to love Camilla, though he were
blind?

Ah beauty, such is thy force, that Vulcan courteth Venus, she for comeliness
a Goddess, he for vglynesse a devil, more fit to strike with a hammer in his
forge, then to hold a Lute in thy chamber.

Whether do thou wade Philautus, in launcing the wound thou should taint,
and prtcking the heart, which asks a Plaster: for in decyphering what she is,
thou have forgotten what thou thy self art, and being dazeled with her
beauty, thou see not thine own baseness.

Thou art an Italian poor Philautus, as much mislyked for the vice of thy
Country, as she meruailed at, for the virtue of hirs, and with no less shame
do thou hear, than know with grief, how if any Englishman be infected with
any misdemeanour, they say with one mouth, he is Italionated: so odious is that
Nation to this, that the very man is no less hated for the name, then ye
country for the manners.

O Italy I must love thee, because I was borne in thee, but if the infection of
the air be such, as whosouer breed in thee, is poisoned by thee, then had I
rather be a Bastard to the Turk Ottomo, then heir to the Emperor Nero.

Thou which heretofore wast most famous for victoryes, art become most
infamous by thy vices, as much disoained now for thy beastlynesse in peace, as
once feared for thy battles in war, thy Caesar being turned to a Uicar,
thy Consulls, to Cardinals, thy sacred Senate of three hundred grave
Counsaylours, to a shameless Sinode of three thousand greedy Caterpillars.
Where there is no vice punished, no virtue praised, where none is long loved if he
do not ill, where none shall be loved, if he do well. But I leave to name thy
sins, which no Ciphers can number, and I would I were as free from the
infection of some of them, as I am far from ye reckoning of all of them, or
would I were as much envied for good as thou art pitied for ill.

Philautus would thou had never lived in Naples or never left it. What new
skirmishes do thou now feel between reason and appetite, love and
wisdom, danger and desire.

Shall I go and attire my self in costlye apparayle, tush a fair pearl in a
Murrians ear cannot make him white? Shall I ruffle in new devices, with
chains, with Bracelettes, with Rings and Robes, tush the precious Stones of
Mansolus Sepulcher can-not make the dead carcass sweet.

Shall I curle my hair, color my face, counterfaite courtlynesse? tush there
is no painting can make a picture sensible. No no Philautus, either swallow the
juice of Mandrake, which may cast thee into a dead sleep, or chewe the herb
Cheruell, which may cause thee to mistake every thing, so shall thou either dye
in thy slomber, or think Camilla deformed by thy potion. No, I cannot do so
though I would. But suppose thou think thy self in personage comely, in birth
noble, in wit excellent, in talk cloquent, of great revenues: yet will this
only be cast in thy teeth as an obloquye, thou art an Italian.

I, but all that be black dig not for coals, all things that breed in the
mudde, are not Euets, all that are born in Italy, be not ill. She will not
enquire what most are, but enquire what I am. Every one yt sucketh a wolf is
not ravening, there is no country but has some as bad as Italy, many that
have worse, none but has some.

And can thou think that an English Gentleman will suffer an Italian to be
his Rival? No, no, thou must either put up a quarrel with shame, or try the
Combatte with peril.

An Englishman has three qualyties, he can suffer no partner in his love, no
stranger to be his equal, nor to be dared by any. Then Philautus be as wary
of thy life, as careful for thy love: thou must at Rome reverence, Romulus, in
Boetia, Hercules, in England those that dwell there, cls shall thou not live
there.

Ah Love, what wrong do thou me, which once beguildest me with that I had, and
now beheadest me for that that I have not. The love I bore to Lucilla was cold
water, the love I owe Camilla, hot fire, the first was ended with defame, the
last must begin with death.

I see now, that as the resiluation of an Ague is desperate, and the second
opening of a vein deadly, so the renewing of love, is, I know not what to term
it, worse then death, and as bad as what is worst. I perceive at the last, the
punishment of love, is to live. Thou art here a stranger without
acquaintance, no friend to speak for thee, no one to care for thee, Euphues
will laugh at thee, if he know it, and thou will weep if he know it not. O
unfortunate Philautus, borne in the wane of the Moon, and as like to obtain
thy wish, as the Wolf to eat the Moon. But why go I about to quench fire
with a sword, or with affection to mortify my love?

O my Euphues, would I had thy wit, or thou my will. Shall I utter this to thee,
but thou art more likely to correct my follies with counsel, then to comfort me
with any pretty co^ceipt. Thou will say, yt she is a lady of great credit, and
I here of no countenance. I but Euphues, low trees have their tops, small
sparks their heat, the fly his spleen, the Ant her Gall, Philautus his
affection, which is neither ruled by reason, nor lead by appointment. Thou
broughtest me into England Euphues, to see, and am blind, to seek adventures
and I have lost my self, to remedy love, and I am now past cure, much like
Seriphuis, that old Drudge in Naples, who coveting to heal his bleard eye,
put it out. My thoughts are high, my fortune low, and I resemble that foolish
Pilot, who hoyseth up all his sails and has no wind, and lau^ceth out his
ship and has no water. Ah love thou take away my taste, and prouokest mine
appetite, yet if Euphues would be as willing to further me now, as he was once
wilye to hinder me, I should think my self fortunate, and all that are not
amorous to be fools. There is a Stone in the flood of Thracia, that whosoever
finds it, is never after grieved, I would I had that stone in my mouth, or
that my body were in that river, that either I might be without grief, or
without life.

And with these words, Euphues knocked at the door, which Philautus opened,
pretending drowsiness, and excusing his absence by Idleness, unto whom
Euphues said.

WHat Philautus do thou shun the Court to sleep in a corner, as one either
cloyed with delight, or having surfetted with desire, believe me Philautus, if
the wind be in that door: or thou so devout to fall from beauty to thy
beads, and to forsake the Court to live in a cloy^ber. I cannot tell whether I
should more wonder at thy fortune or praise thy wisdom, but I fear me if I
live to see thee so holy, I shall be an old man before I dye, or if thou dye
not before thou be so pure, thou shall be more meruayled at for thy years,
then esteemed for thy virtues. In sooth my good friend, if I should tarry a
year in England, I could not abide an hour in my chamber, for I know not how
it comes to pass, that in earth I think no other Paradise, such variety of
delyghts to allure a Courtlye eye, such rare purity to draw a well disposed
mind, yt I know not whether they be in England more amorous or virtuous,
whether I should think my time best bestowed in viewing goodly Ladies, or
hearing godly Lessons.

I had thought no woman to excel Liuia in the world, but now I see that in
England they be all as good, none worse, many better, insomuch that I am
enforced to think, that it is as rare to see a beautiful woman in England
without virtue, as to see a fair woman in Italy without pride. Courteous they
are without coins, but not without a care, amiable without pride, but not
without courtlines: merry without curiosity, but not without measure, so that
conferring the Ladies of Greece, with the ladies of Italy, I find the best but
indifferent, and comparing both countries with the Ladies of England, I account
them all stark naught.

And truly Philautus thou shall not shrine me like a Ghostly father, for to
thee I will confess in two things my extreme folly, the one in loving Lucilla,
who in comparison of these had no spark of beauty, the other for making a
cooling card against women, when I see these to have so much virtue, so that
in the first I must acknowledge my judgment raw, to discern shadows, and
rash in the latter to give so peremtorye sentence, in both I think my self,
to have erred so much, that I recant both, being ready to take any penance
thou shall enjoin me, whether it be a Faggot for Heresy, or a fine for
Hypocrisy. An heretic I was by mine inuectiue against women, and no less
then an Hipocrite for dissembling with thee, for now Philautus I am of that
mind that women, but Philautus ^aking hold of this discourse, interrupted him
with a sudden reply, as follows.

STAY Euphues, I can level at the thoughts of thy heart by the words of thy
mouth, for that commonly the tongue utters the mind, and the outward speech
bewrays ye inward spirit. For as a good root is known by a fair blossom,
so is the substance of the heart noted by the show of the countenance. I can
see day at a little hole, thou must halt cunningly if thou beguile a Cripple,
but I cannot choose but laugh to see thee play with the bait, yt I fear thou
have swallowed, thinking with a Mist, to make my sight blind, because I
should not perceive thy eyes bleared, but in faith Euphues, I am now as well
acquainted with thy conditions as with thy person, and use has made me so
expert in thy dealings, that well thou may iuggle with the world, but thou
shall never deceive me.

A burnt child dreadeth the fire, he that stumbleth twice at one stone is
worthy to break his shins, thou may happily sorsweare thy self, but thou
shall never delude me, I know thee now as readelye by thy visard, as thy
visage: It is a blind Goose that knows not a Fox from a Fearne-bushe, and a
foolish fellow that cannot discern craft from conscience, being once
cousened. But why should I lament thy follyes with grief, when thou seem
to color them with deceit. Ah Euphues I love thee well but thou hate thy
self, and seek to heap more harms on thy head by a little wit, then thou
shall ever claw off by thy great wisdom, all fire is not quenched by water,
thou have not love in a string, affection is not thy slave, thou can not
leave when thou listest. With what face Euphues can thou return to thy
vomit, seeming with the greedy hounde to lap up that which thou did cast
up, I am ashamed to rehearse the terms that once thou did utter of malice
against women, and art thou not ashamed now again to recant them? they must
needs think thee either envious upon small occasion, or amarous upon a light
cause, and then will they all be as ready to hate thee for thy spite, as to
laugh at thee for thy looseness.

No Euphues so deep a wound cannot be healed with so light a plaster, thou
may by art recover the skin, but thou can never cover the skarre, thou
may flatter with fools because thou art wise, but the wise will ever mark
thee for a fool. Then sure I cannot see what thou gaynest if the simple
condemn thee of flatterye, and the grave of folly. Is thy cooling Card of
this property, to quench fire in others, and to kindle flames in thee? or is
it a whetstone to make thee sharp and us blunt, or a sword to cut wounds in me
and cure them in Euphues? Why did thou write that against them thou never
thoughtest, or if thou did it, why do thou not follow it? But it is
lawful for ye Physician to surfeit, for the sheepeheard to wander, for Euphues
to prescribe what he will, and do what he list.

The sick patient must keep a straight dyot, the silly sheep a narrow
fold, pore Philautus must believe Euphues and all lovers (he only excepted)
are cooled with a card of ten, or rather fooled with a vain toye. Is this
thy professed purity to cry peccauie? thinking it as great sin to be
honest, as shame not to be amorous, thou that did blaspheme the noble sex
of women without cause, do thou now commit Idolatry with them without
care? observing as little gravity then in thine unbridled fury, as thou do
now reason by thy disordinate fancy. I see now that there is nothing more
smooth then glass, yet nothing more brittle, nothing more fair then snow,
yet nothing less firm, nothing more fine then wit, yet nothing more fickle.
For as Polypus upon what rock soever he lyteth, turns himself into the same
likeness, or as the bird Piralis sitting upon white cloth is white, upon
green, green, and changes her color with every cloth, or as our
changeable silk turned to the Sun has many colors, and turned back, the
contrary, so wit shippeth it self to every conceit^, being constant in
nothing but inconstancy.

Where is now the conference with Atheos, thy devotion, thy Divinity? Thou
say that I am fallen from beauty to my beads, and I see thou art come from
thy book to beastlines, from coting of the scriptures, to courting with Ladies
from Paul to Ovid, from the Prophets to Poets, resembling the wanton
Diophantus, who refused his mothers blessing to hear a song, and thou
forsakest Gods blessing to sit in a warm Sun.

But thou Euphues think to have thy prerogative (which others will not
grant thee for a privilege) that under the color of wit, thou may be
accounted wise, and being obstinate, thou art to be thought singular.

There is no coin good silver, but thy halfepeny, if thy Glass glister it
must needs be Gold, if thou speak a sentence it must be a law, if give a
censar, an oracle, if dream, a Prophecy, if conjecture, a truth: insomuch,
that I am brought into a doubt, whether I should more lament in thee the want
of government, or laugh at thy fained gravity.

But as that rude Poette Cherilus had nothing to be noted in his verses, but
only the name of Alexander, nor that rural Poet Daretus any thing to cover
his deformed ape, but a white curtain, so Euphues has no one thing to shadow
his shameless wickedness, but only a show of wit. I speak all this
Euphues, not that I envy thy estate, but that I pity it, and in this I have
discharged the duty of a friend, in that I have not wincked at thy folly.
Thou art in love Euphues, contrary to thine oath, thine honor, thine honesty,
neither would any professing that thou do live as thou do, which is no
less grief to me then shame to thee: excuse thou may make to me, because I
am credulous, but amends to the world thou can not frame, because thou art
come out of Greece, to blase thy vice in England, a place too honest for thee,
and thou too dishonest for any place. And this my flat and friendly dealing if
thou will not take as I mean, take as thou will: I fear not thy force, I
force not thy friendship: And so I end.

Euphues not a little amazed with the discurteous speech of Philautus, whom he
saw in such a burning Fever, did not apply warm clothes to continue his sweat,
but gave him cold drink to make him shake, either thinking so strange a
maladye was to be cured with a desperate medicine, or determining to use as
little art in Physic, as the other did honesty in friendship, and there fore
in steed of a Pill to purge his hot blood, he gave him a choake-peare to
stop his breath, replying as follows.

I Had thought Philautus, that a wound healyng so fair could never breed to a
Fistula, or a body kept so well from drink, to a Dropsy: but I well perceive,
that thy flesh is as rank as the Wolves, who as soon as he is stricken
recouereth a skin, but rankeleth inwardly until it come to the liver, and
thy stomach as queasie, as old Nestors, unto whom pappe was no better than
poison: and thy body no less distempered than Hermogineus, whom abstinence
from wine, made oftentimes dro^ken. I see thy humor is love, thy quarrel
jealousy: the one I gather by thine addle head, the other by thy suspicious
nature: but I leave them both to thy will, and thee to thine own wickedness:
Pretely to cloak thine own folly, thou call me these first, not unlike
unto a cursed wife, who deserving a check, begins first to scolde.

There is nothing that can cure the Kings evils, but a Prince, nothing ease a
pluriste but letting blood, nothing purge thy humor but that which I can-not
give thee, nor thou get of any other, liberty.

Thou seem to color craft by a friendly kindness, taking great care for my
bondage, that I might not distrust thy follyes, which is, as though the Thrush
in the cage, should be sorry for the Nightingale, which sings on the tree, or
the Bear at the stake, lament the mishap of the Lion in the forest.

But in truth Philautus, though thy skin show thee a Fore, thy little skill
tries thee a Sheep. It is not the color that commends a good Painter, but
the good countenance, nor the cutting that valueth ye Diamond, but the virtue,
nor the gloss of the tongue that tries a friend, but the says. For as all
coins are not good that have the Image of Caesar, nor all gold that are
coined with the Kings stamp, so al is not truth that bears the show of
godliness, nor all friends that bear a fair face: if thou pretend such love
to Euphues, carry thy heart on the back of thy hand, and thy tongue in the
palm, that I may see what is in thy mind, and thou with thy fingers claspe
thy mouth Of a stranger, I can bear much because I know not his manners, of
an enemy more, for that all proceeds of mallyce, al things of a friend, if it
be to try me, nothing if it be to betray me: I am of Scipios mind, who had
rather that Hanniball should eat his heart with salt, than Laelius grieve it
with unkindness: and of the like with Laelius, who chose rather to be slain
with the Spaniards, then suspected of Scipio.

I can better take a blister of a Nettle, than a prick of a Rose: more willing
that a Raven should pecke out mine eyes, than a Turtle pecke at them. To dye
of the meat one lyketh not, is better then to ^urfette of that he loves: and
I had rather an enemy should bury me quick, than a friend belie me, when I am
dead.

But thy friendship Philautus, is like a new fashion, which being used in the
morning is accounted old before noone, which variety of changing, being
oftentimes noted of a grave Gentleman of Naples, who having bought a Hat of the
newest fashion, and best block in all Italy, and wearing it but one day, it
was told him that it was stale, he hung it up in his study, and biewing al
sorts, al shapes, perceived at the last his old Hat again to come into the new
fashion, wherewith smilyng to himself he said, I have now lived compass, for
Adams old Apron, must make Eve a new Kirtle: noting this, that when no new
thing could be devised, nothing could be more new than the old.

I speak this to this end Philautus, that I see thee as often change thy
head, as others do their hats, now being friend to Ajax, because he should
cover thee with his buckler, now to Ulysses, yt he may plead for thee with his
eloquence, now to one, and now to an other, and thou dealest with thy friends,
as that Gentleman did with his felt, for seeing not my vain aunswerable to thy
vanities, thou go about (but yet the nearest way) to hang me up for holy
days, as one either fitting thy head, nor pleasing thy humor, but when
Philautus thou shall see, that change of friendships shall make thee a fat
Calfe, and a lean Cofer, yt there is no more hold in a new friend, then a new
fashion, that hats alter as fast as the Turner can turn his block, and hearts
as soon as one can turn his back, when seeing every one return to his
old wearing, and find it the best, then compelled rather for want of others
than good will of me, thou will retire to Euphues whom thou laydst by the
walls, and seek him as a new friend, saying to thy self, I have lived
compass, Euphues old faith, must make Philautus a new friend. Wherein thou
resemblest those that at ye first coming of new Wine, leave the old, yet
finding that Grape more pleasant then wholesome, they begin to say as
Call^stines did to Alexander, yt he had rather carrous old grains with
Diogi^es in his dish, then new Grapes with Alexander in his standing cup, for
of all Gods said he, I love not Aesculapius.

But thou art willing to change, else would thou be unwilling to quarrel,
thou keep only company out of my sight, with Reynaldo thy countreyman,
which I suspecting cencealed, and now proving it do not care, if he have
better deserved ye name of a friend, than I, god knows, but as Achilles
shteld, being lost on ye Seas by Ulysses, was tossed by the Sea to the Tomb of
Ajax, as a manifest token of his right: so thou being forsaken of Reynaldo,
wilt be found in Athens by Euphues door, as the true owner. Which I speak not
as one loath to loose thee, but careful thou loose not thy self. Thou
think an Apple may please a child, and every odd answer appease a
friend: No Philautus, a Plaster is small amends for a broken head, and a bad
ercuse, will not purge an ill accuser.

A Friend is long a getting, and soon lost, like a Merchaunts riches, who by
tempest loses as much in two hours, as he has gathered together in twenty
years. Nothing so fast knit as glass, yet once broken, it can never be
joined, nothing fuller of metal than steel, yet over heated it will never be
hardened, friendship is the best pearl, but by disdain thrown into vinegar,
it bursteth rather in pieces, then it will boowe to any softness. It is a salt
Fish that water cannot make fresh, sweet honny that is not made bitter with
gal, hard gold that is not to be mollyffed with fire, and a miraculous friend
that is not made an enemy with contempt. But give me leave to examine the cause
of thy discourse to the quick and omitting the circumstaunce, I will to the
substance.

The only thing thou layest to my charge is love, and that is a good ornament,
the reasons to prove it, is my praising of women, but that is no good argument.
Am I in love Philautus? with whom it should be, thou can not conjecture,
and that it should not be with thee, thou give occasion.

Priamus began to be jealous, of Hecuba, when he knew none did love her, but
when he loved many, and thou of me, when thou art assured I love none but thou
thy self every one, but whether I love or no, I cannot live in quiet, unless I
be fit for thy diet, wherein thou do imitate Scyron and Procustes, who
framing a bed of brass to their own bigness, caused it to be placed, as a
lodging for all passengers, insomuch that none could travel ye way, but he was
enforced to take measure of their sheets: if he were too long for the bed,
they cut off his legs, for catching cold, it was no place for a longis: if to
short they racked him at length, it was no pallet for a dwarf: and certes
Philautus, they are no less to be discomme^ded for their cruelty, then thou
for thy folly. For in like manner have thou built a bed in thine own brains,
wherein cuery one must be of thy length, if he love, thou cuttest him shorter,
either with some odd devise, or grave counsel, swearing (rather then thou
would not be believed) that Protagines protraid Venus with a sponge
sprinkled with sweet water, but if once she wrong it, it would drop blood:
that her Iuorie Comb would at the first tickle ye hairs, but at the last
turn all the hairs into Aoders: so that nothing is more hateful then love. If
he love not, then stretchest out like a Wyre-drawer, making a wire as long as
thy finger, longer then thine arm, pulling on with ye pincers with the
Shoemaker a little shoe on a great foot, till thou crack thy credit, as he
does his stitches, alleging that love follows a good wit, as ^he shadow
does the body, and as requisite for a Gentleman, as steel in a weapon. A wit
say thou without love, is like an Egg without salt, and a Courtier void
of affection, like salt without savor. Then as one pleasing thy self in thine
own humor, or playing with others for thine own pleasure, thou rollest all
thy wits to sifte Love from lust, as the Baker does the branne from the flower,
bringing in Venus with a Torteyse under her foot, as slow to harms: her
Chariot orawen with white Swannes, as the cognizance of Vesta, her Birds to be
Pigeons noting piety: with as many inventions to make Venus current, as the
Ladies use slights in Italy to make themselves counterfaite.

Thus with ye Egyptian thou playest fast or loose, so that there is nothing
more certain, then that thou will love, and nothing more uncertain then when,
tourning at one time thy tail to the wind, with the Hedg-hogge, and thy nose
in the wind, with the Weather-cocke, in one gale both hoysing sail and
weighing Anchor, with one breath, making an Alarm and a Parley, discharging in
the same instant, both a Bullet and a falfe fire. Thou have rackt me, and
curtald me, sometimes I was too long, sometimes too short, now too big, then too
little, so that I must needs think thy bed monstrous, or my body, either thy
brains out of temper, or my wits out of tune: insomuch as I can liken thy head
to Mercuris pipe: who with one stop caused Argus to stare and wink. If this
fault be in thy nature, counsel can do little good, if in thy disease,
physic can do less: for nature will have her course, so that persuasions
are needelesse, and such a malady in the Marrowe, will never out of the bones,
so that medicines are bootelesse.

Thou say that all this is for love, and that I being thy friend, thou art
loath to wink at my folly: truly I say with Tully, with fair words thou shall
yet persuade me: for e^perience teaches me, that straight trees have crooked
roots, smooth baytes sharp hooks, that the fayrer the stone is in the Toads
head, ye more pestilent the poison is in her bowels: that talk the more it is
seasoned with five phrases, the less it sauoureth of true meaning. It is a mad
Hare that will be caught with a Taber, and a foolish bird that stays the
laying salt on her tail, and a blind Goose that comes to the Foxes sermon,
Euphues is not entangled with Philautus charms. If all were in jest, it was to
broad weighing ye place, if in earnest to bad, consid^ring the person, if to
try thy wit, it was solly to be so hot, if thy friendship, malice to be so
hasty: Have thou not read since thy coming into England a pretty discourse of
one Phialo, concerning the rebuking of a friend? Whose reasons although they
were but few, yet were they sufficient, and if thou desire more, I could
rehearse infinite. But thou art like the Epicure whose belly is sooner filled
then his eye: For he coueteth to have twenty dishes at his table, when he
cannot digest one in his stomach, and thou desire many reasons to be
brought, when one might serve thy turn: thinking it no Rayne-bowe that has
all colors, nor ancient armoury, that are not quartered with sundry coats,
nor perfect rules that have not a thousand reasons, and of all the reasons would
thou would follow but one, not to check thy friend in a bravery, knowing
that rebukes ought not to weigh a grain more of salt then sugar: but to be so
tempered as like pepper they might be hot in ye mouth, but like triacle
wholesome at the heart: so shall they at the first make one blush if he were
pale, and well considered better, if he were not past grace.

If a friend offend he is to be whipped with a good Nurses rod, who when
her child will not be still, gives it together both the twig and the teate,
and brings it a sleep when it is wayward, as well with rocking it as rating
it.

The admonition of a true friend should be like the practice of a wise
Physician, who wrappeth his sharp pills in fine Sugar, or the cunning
Chyrurgian, who lau^^ing ye wound with an iron, immediately applies to it soft
lint, or as mothers deal with their children for worms, who put their bitter
seeds into sweet reasons, if this order had been observed in thy discourse,
that enterlasing sour tauntes with sugared counsel, bearyng as well a gentle
rain, as using a hard snaffle, thou might have done more with the whiske
of a wande, then now thou can with the prick of a spur, and avoided that
which now thou may not, extreme unkindness. But thou art like that kind
Judge, which Propertius notes, who condemning his friend, caused him for the
more ease to be hanged with a silken twist. And thou like a friend cuttest my
throat with a Rasor, not with a hatchet, for my more honor. But why should I set
down the office of a friend, when thou like our Athenians, know what thou
should do, but like them, never do it.

Thou say I eat mine own words in praising women, no Philautus, I was never
either so wicked, or so witless to recant truethes, or mistake colors. But
this I say, that the Ladies in England as far excel al other countries in
virtue, as Venus does all other women in beauty. I flatter not those of whom
I hope to reap benefit, neither yet so praise them, but that I think them
women: there is no sword made of steel but has iron, no sire made of of wood
but has smoke, no wine made of grapes but has leese, no woman created of
flesh but has faults: And if I love them Philautus, they deserve it.

But it greeueth not thee Philautus that they be fair, but that they are
chaste, neither do thou like me ye worse for commending their beauty, but
think they will not love thee well, because so virtuous, where-in thou
followest those, who better esteem the sight of the Rose, then the savor,
preferring fair weeds before good herbs, choosing rather to wear a painted
flower in their Bosoms, then to have a wholesome root in their broathes, which
resembles ye fashion of your maidens in Italy, who buy that for the best
cloth that will wear whitest, not that will last longest. There is no more
praise to be given to a fair face their to a false glass, for as the one
flattereth us with a vain shadow, to make us pronde in our own coceiptes,
the other feeds us with an idle hope to make us peevish in our own
contemplations. Chyrurgians affirm, that a white vain beeinge stricken, if at
the first there spring out blood, it argues a good constitution of Body: and
I think if a fair Woeman having heard the suite of a Lover, if she blush at
the first brunt, and show her blood in her face, shows a well disposed mind:
so as virtuous women I confess are for to be chosen by the face, not when they
blush for the shame of some finne committed, but for fear she should commit
any, all women shall be as Caesar would have his wife, not only free from
sin, but from suspicion: If such be in the English court, if I should not
praise the^, the^ would thou say I care not for their virtue, and now I give
them their commendation, thou swearest I love them for their beauty: So that
it is no less labor to please thy mind, than a sick man's mouth, who can
realish nothing by the taste, not that the fault is in the meat, but in his
ma^a^y, nor thou liks of any thing in thy head, not that there is any disorder
in my sayings, but in thy senses, Thou do last of al obi^ct that which
silence might well resolve, that I am fallen from Prophets to Poets, and
returned again with the Dog to my vomit, which god knows is as fair from
truth as I know thou art from wisdom*

What have I done Philautus, since my going from Naples to Athens, speak no
more then the truth, utter no less, flatter me not to make me better than I
am, belie me not to make me worse, forge nothing of malice, conceal nothing
for love: did I ever use any unseemly talk to corrupt youth? tell me where:
did I ever deceive those that put me in trust? tell me whom: have I committed
any fact worthy either of death or defame? thou can not reckon what: have I
abused my self toward my superiors, equals, or inferiorse I think thou
can not deiuse when: But as there is no Wool so white but the Diar can make
black, no Apple so sweet but a cunning grafter can change into a Crab: so is
there no man so boyd of crime that a spightful tongue cannot make him to be
thought a caitife, yet commonly it falls out so well that the cloth wears
the better being dyed, and she Apple eats pleas^^ter being grafted, and the
innocent is mo^e esteemed, and thriueth sooner being envied for virtue, and
belyed for malice. For as he that stroke Jason, on the stomach, thinking to
kill him, brake his impostume with the blow, whereby he cured him: so oftentimes
it fares with whose that deal maliciously, who in steed of a sword apply a
salve, and thinking to be ones Priest, they become his Physician. But as the
traitor that clippeth the coin of his Prince, makes of lighten to be wayed,
not worse to be touched: so he that by sinister reports seems to pare the
credit of his friend; may make him lyghter among the common sort, who by
weight oftentimes are deceived with counter faits, but nothing empayreth his
good name with the wife, who try all gold by the touch stone.

A stranger coming into the Capitol of Rome, seeing all the Gods to be
engra^en, some in one stone, some in an other, at the last he perceived Vulcan
to be wrought in Iuory, Venus to be ^arued in Ieate, which long time beholding
with great delyght, at the last he burst out in these words, neither can this
white Iuory Vulcan, make thee a white Smith, neither this fair woman Ieat,
make thee a fair stone. Whereby he noted that no running could alter the nature
of the one, nor no Nature transform the color of the other. In like manner say
I Philautus, although thou have shadowed my guiltless life with a defamed
counterfeit, yet shall not thy black Vulcan make either thy accusations of
force, or my innorencie faulty, neither shall the white Venus which thou have
portrayed upon the black Ieat of thy malice, make thy conditions amiable, for
Vulcan cannot make Iuory black, nor Venus change the color of Ieat, the one
having received such course by Nature, the other such force by virtue.

What cause have I given thee to suspect me, and what occasion have thou not
offered me to detest thee? I was never wise enough to give thee counsel, yet
ever willing to wish thee well, my wealth small to do thee good, yet ready to do
my best: Insomuch as thou could never accuse me of any discourtesie, unless
it wet in being more careful of thee, then of my self.

But as all flowers that are in one Nosegaye, are not of one nature, nor all
Kings that are worn upon one hand, are not of one fashion: so all friends
that associate at bed and at board, are not of one disposition. Scipio must
have a noble mind, Loelius an humble spirit: Titus must lust after Sempronia,
Gisippus must leave her: Damon must go take order for his lands, Pithias
must tarry behind, as a pledge for his life: Philautus must do what he will,
Euphues not what he should.

But it may be that as the sight of diverse colors, make diverse beasts mad,
so my presence does drive thee into this melancholy. And seeing it is so, I
will absent my self, hier an other lodging in London, and for a time give my
self to my book, for I have learned this by experience, though I be young,
that Bauilrs are known by their bands, Lions by their claws* Cocks by their
combs, envious minds by their manners.

Hate thee I will not, and trust thee I may not: Thou know what a friend
should be, but thou will never live to try what a friend is. Farewell
Philautus* I will not stay to hear thee replye, but leave thee to thy lust.
Euphues carries this Posie written in his hand, and engraven in his heart. A
faithful friend is a wilful fool. And so I taking leave till I hear thee
better minded, England shall be my abode for a season, depart when thou will,
and again farewell*

Euphues in a great rage departed, not suffering Philautus to answer one
word, who stood in a maze, after the speech of Euphues, but taking courage by
Love, went immediatelye to the place where Camilla was dauncinge, and there
will I leave him, in a thousand thoughts, hammering in his head, and Euphues
seeking a new chamber, which by good friends he quickly got, and there fell to
his Pater noster, where a while I will not trouble him in his prayers.

NOW you shall understand that Philautus furthered as well by the opportunity
of the time, as the requests of certain Gentlemen his friends, was entreated
to make one in a Masque, which Philautus perceiving to be at the Gentleman's
house where Camilla lay, assented as willingly to go, as he desired to speed,
and all things being in a readiness, they went with speed: where being
welcomed they daunced, Philautus taking Camilla by the hand, and as time
served, began to board her on this manner.

IT has been a custom fair Lady, how commendable I will not dispute how
common you know, that Masquers do therefore cover their faces that they may
open their affections, and under the color of a daunte, discover their whole
desires: the benefit of which privilege, I will not use except you grant it,
neither can you refuse, except you break it* I mean only with questions to
try your Wit, which shall neither touch your honor to answer, nor my
honesty to ask.

Camilla took him up short, as one not to seek how to reply, in this manner.

GEntleman, if you be less you are to bold, if so, to broad, in clayming a
custom, where there is no prescription. I know not your name because you fear
to utter it, neither do I desire it, and you seem to be ashamed of your face,
else would you not hide it, neither do I long to see it: but as for any
custom, I was never so superstitious, that either I thought it treason to
break them, or reason to keep them.

As for the proving of my wit, I had rather you should account me a fool by
silence, then wise by aunswering? For such questions in these assemblyes, move
suspicion where there is no cause, and therefore are not to be resolved least
there be cause.

Philautus who ever as yet but played with the bait was now stroke with the
hook, and no less delyghted to hear her speak, then desirous to obtain his
suite, trained her by the blood in his sort.

IF the patience of men were not greater then the perverseness of women, I
should then fall from a question to a quarrel, for that I perceive you draw
the counterfaite of that I would say, by the conceit of that you think others
have said: but whatsoever the color be, the picture is as it pleases the
Paynter: and whatsoever were pretended, the mind is as the heart does intend.
A cunning Archer is not known by his arrowe but by his aim: neither a
friendly affection by the tongue, but by the faith. Which if it be so, me
thinks common courtesy should allow that, which you seek to cut off by
courtlye coyness, as one either too young to understand, or obstinate to
overthwart, your years shall excuse the one, and my humor pardon the other.

And yet Lady I am not of that faint mind that though I wink with a flashe
of lightning, I dare not open mine eyes again, or having once suffered a
repulse, I should not dare to make fresh assault, he that strikes sail in a
storm, hoyseth them higher in a calm, which makes me the bolder to utter
that which you disdain to hear, but as the Dove seems angry, as though she
had a gall, yet yields at the last to delight: so Ladies pretend a great
skyrmish at the first, yet are boorded willingly at the last.

I mean therefore to tell you this which is all, that I love you: And so
wringing her by the hand, he ended: she beginning as follows.

GEntleman (I follow my first term) which shows rather my modesty then
your desert, seeing you resemble those which having once wet their feet, care
not how deep they wade, or those that breaking the y^e, weigh not how far
they slip, thinking it lawful, if one suffer you to tread a wry, no shame
to go slipshood: if I should say nothing then would you vaunt that I am
won: for that they that are silent seem to consent, if any thing, then
would you boast that I would be wooed, for that castles that come to parlue,
and women that delight in courting, are willing to yield: So that I must
either hear those things which I would not, and seem to be taught by none, or
to hold you talk which I should not, and run into the suspicion of others. But
certainly if you knew how much your talk displeases me, and how little it
should profit you, you would think the time as vainly lost in beginning your
talk, as I account over long, until you end it.

If you build upon custom that Maskers have liberty to speak what they
should not, you shall know that women have reason to make them hear what
they would not, and though you can utter by your visarde whatsoever it be
without blushing, yet cannot I hear it without shame. But I never looked for
a better tale of so ill a face, you say a badde color may make a good
countenance, but he that conferreth your disordered discourse, not your
deformed attire, may rightlye say that he never saw so crabbed a visage, nor
heard so crooked a vain. An archer say you is to be known by his aim, not
by his arrowe: but your aim is so ill, that if you knew how far wide from
the white your shaft sticks, you would heareafter rather break your bow,
then bend it. If I be too young to understand your destinies, it is a sign I
cannot like* if too obstinate, it is a token I will not: therefore for you to
be displeased, it either needs not, or booteth not. Yet go you farther,
thinking to make a great virtue of your little valor, seeing that lightning
may cause you wincke, but it shall not strick you blind, that a storm may
make you strike sail, but never cut the mast, that a hot skyrmish may cause
you to retire, but never to run away: what your cunning is I know not, and
lykely it is your courage is great, yet have I heard, that he that has
escaped burning with lightning, has been spoiled with thunder, and one that
often has wished drowning, has been hanged once for all, and he that
shrinketh from a bullette in the maine battle, has been stricken with a byll
in the rerewarde. You fall from one thing to an other, using no decorum, except
this, that you study, have your discourse as far void of sense as your face
is of favor, to the end that your disfugured countenance might supply the
disorder of your ill couched sentences, among the which you bring in a Dove
without a gall, as far from the matter you speak off, as you are from the
mastrye you would have, who although she cannot be angrye with you in that
she has no gall, yet can she laugh at you for that she has a spleen.

I will end where you began, hoping you will begin where I end, you let
fall your question which I looked for, and picked a quarrel which I thought
not of, and that is love: but let her that is disposed to answer your
quarrel be curious to demand your question.

And thus Gentle-manne I desire you all questions and other quarrelles set
aparte, you think me as a friend, so far forth as I can grant with
modesty, or you require with good manners, and as a friend I wish you, that
you blow no more this fire of love, which will waste you before it warm me,
and make a coal in you before it can kindle in me: If you think otherwise, I
can as well use a shift to drive you off, as you did a show to draw me on. I
have answered your custom, least you should argue me of coyness, no
otherwise then I might mine honor saved, and your name unknown.

By this time entered another Masque, but almost after the same manner, and
only for Camillas love which Philautus quickly espied, and seeing his Camilla
to be courted with so gallaunt a youth, departed, yet with-in a corner, to the
end he might decypher the Gentleman whom he found to be one of the brauest
youths in all England, called Surius, then wounded with grief, he sounded
with weakness, and going to his chamber began a fresh to recount his
miseries in this sort.

Ah miserable and accursed Philautus, the very monster of Nature and spectacle
of shame, if thou live thou shall be despised, if thou dye, not missed, if
woo, poynted at, if win, lothed, if loose, laughed at, bred either to live in
love and be forsaken, or dye with love and be forgotten.

Ah Camilla, would either I had been borne without eyes not to see thy
beauty, or without ears not to hear thy wit, the one has inflamed me
with the desire of Venus, the other with the gifts of Pallas, both with the
fire of love: Love, yea love Philautus, then the which nothing can happen
unto man more miserable. I perceive now that the Chariot of the Sun is for
Phoebus, not for Phaeton, that Bucephalus will stoop to none but Alexander,
that none can sound Mercurius pipe but Orpheus, that none shall win Camillas
liking but Surius, a Gentleman, I confess of greater birth then I, and yet I
dare say not of better faith. It is he Philautus yt will fleet all the fat from
thy bearde, insomuch as she will disdain to look upon thee, if she but once
think upon him. It is he Philautus, that has wit to try her, wealth to
allure her, personage to entice her, and all things, that either Nature or
Fortune, can give to win her.

For as the Phrigian harmony being moved to the Calenes, makes a great noise,
but being moved to Apollo, it is still and quiet: so the love of Camilla
desired of me, moves I know not how many discords, but proved of Surius, it
is calm and consents.

It is not the sweet flower that Ladies desire, but the fair, which makes
them wear that in their heads, wrought forth with the Needle, not brought
forth by Nature: And in the like manner, they account of that love, which Art
can color, not that the heart does confess, wherein they imitate ye Maidens
(as Euphues often has told me) of Athens, who took more delyght to see a
fresh and fine color, then to taste a sweet and wholesome siroppe.

I but how know thou that Surius faith is not as great as thine, when thou
art assured thy virtue is no less then his? He is wise, and that thou see,
valiant, and that thou fear: rich, and that thou lackest: fit to please her
and displace thee: and without spite be it said, worthy to do the one, and
willing to attempt the other.

Ah Camilla, Camilla, I know not whether I should more commend thy beauty or
thy wit, neither can I tell whether thy looks have wounded me more or thy
words. for they both have wrought such an alteration in my spirits, that seeing
thee silent, thy comeliness makes me in a maze, and hearing thee speaking,
thy wisdom makes me stark mad.

I, but things above thy height, are to be looked at, not reached at. I but if
I should now end, I had been better never to have bego^. I, but time must wear
away love, I but time may win it. Hard stones are pierced with soft drops,
great Oaks he wen down with many blows, the stoniest heart mollified by
continual pers wasions, or true perseueraunce.

If deserts can nothing prevail, I will practice deceipts, and what faith
cannot do, coniuring shall. What say thou Philautus, can thou imagine so
great mischief, against her thou love? Know thou not, that fish caught
with medicines, and women gotten with witchcraft are never wholesome? No, no,
the Foxes wyles, shall never enter into the Lions head, nor Medeas charms into
Philautus heart. I, but I have heard that extremities are to be used, where the
mean will not serve, and that as in love there is no measure of grief, so
there should be no end of guyle, of two mischiefs the least is to be chosen,
and therefore I think it better to poison her with the sweet bait of love,
than to spoil my self with the bitter sting of death.

If she be obstinate, why should not I be desperate? if she be void of pity,
why should I not be void of piety? In the ruling of Empires there is required
as great polycie as prowess: in governing an Estate, close cruelty does more
good, than open clemency, for the obteining of a kingdom, as well mischief as
mercy is to be practiced. And then in the winning of my Love, the very Image
of beauty* courtesy and wit, shall I leave any thing unsought, unattempted,
undone? He that desires riches, must stretche the string that will not reach,
and practice all kinds of getting. He that coueteth honor, and can-not clymbe
by the Ladder, must use all colors of lustiness. He that thirsts for Wine,
must not care how he get it, but where he may get it, nor he that is in love,
be curious, what means he ought to use, hut ready to attempt any: For slender
affection do I think that, which either ye fear of law, or care of religion,
may diminish. Fie Philautus, thine own words condemn thee of wickedness: tush
ye passions I sustain, are neither to be quyeted with counsel, nor eased by
reason: therefore I am fully resolved, either by Art to win her love, or by
despair to loose mine own life.

I have heard here in London of an Italian cunning in Mathematicke, named
Psellus, of whom in Italy, I have heard in such cases can do much by Magic,
and will do all things for money, him will I assaye as well with gold as other
good tournes, and I think there is nothing that can be wrought, but shall be
wrought for gylt or good will, or both.

And in this rage, as one forgetting where he was, and whom he loved, he went
immediatelye to seek Physic for that, which only was to be found by Fortune.

SEere Gentlemen you may see, into what open sins the heat of Love drives
man, especially, where one loving is in despair, either of his own
imperfection, or of his Ladies virtues, to be beloved again, which causes man
to attempt those things, that are contrary to his own mind, to Religion, to
honesty.

What greater villainy can there be devised, than to enquire of Sorcerers,
Southsayers, Coniurers or learned Clearkes, for the enjoying of love. But I
will not refell that here, which shall be confuted hereafter.

Philautus, has soon found this Gentleman, who conducting him into his
studdie, and demanding of him the cause of his coming, Philautus begins in
this manner as one past shame to unfold his suit.

MAster Psellus (and Countryman) I neither doubt of your cunning to satisfy
my request, nor of your wisdom to conceal it, for were either of them
wanting in you, it might turn me to trouble, and your self to shame.

I have heard of your learning to be great in Magic, and somewhat in
Physic, your experience in both, to be exquisit, which caused me to seek to
you for a remedy of a certain grief, which by your means may be eased or cls
no ways cured.

And to the end such cures may be wrought, God has stirred up in all times,
Clearks of great virtue, and in these our days men of no small credit, among
the which, I have heard no one, more commended than you, which although
happily your modesty will deny (for that the greatest Clearkes, do commonly
dissemble their kowledge) or your precisenes not grant it, for that cunning
men are often more dangerous, yet the world does well know it, diverse have
tried it, and I must needs believe it.

Psellus not suffering him to raunge, yet desirous to know his arrant,
answered him thus.

GEntleman and countryman as you say, and I believe, but of ye hereafter: if
you have so great confidence in my cunning as you protest, it may be, your
strong imagination shall work yt in you, which my Art cannot, for it is a
principle among us, that a vehement thought is more auayleable, than the virtue
of our figures, forms, or charecters. As for keeping your counsel, in things
honest, it is no matter, and in cases unlawful I will not meddle. And yet if
it threaten no man harm and may do you good, you shall find my secrecic to be
great, though my science be small, and therefore say on.

THere is not far hence a Gentlewoman whom I have long time loved, of honest
parents, great virtue, and singular beauty, such a one, as neither by Art I
can describe, nor by service deserve: And yet because I have heard many say,
that where cunning must work, the whole body must be colored, this is her
shape.

She is a Uirgin of the age of eighteen years, of stature neither too high
nor too low, and such was Juno: her hair black, yet comelye, and such had
Laeda: her eyes has^ll, yet bright, and such were the lights of Venus.

And although my skill in Phisognomie be small, yet in my judgment she was
borne under Venus, her foreheade, nose, lyppes, and chinne foreshewing (as by
such rules we guess) both a desire to live, and a good success in love. In
complexion of pure sanguine, in condition a right Saint, seldom given to
play, often to prayer, the first letter of whose name (for that also is
necessary) is Camilla.

THis Lady I have served long, and often sued unto, insomuch that I have melted
like war against the fire, and yet lived in the flame with the fly Pyrausta. O
Psellus, the torments sustained by her presence, the griefs endured by her
absence, the pyning thoughts in the day, the pinching dreams in the night,
the dying life, the living death, the jealousy at all times, and the despair
at this instant, can neither be uttered of me without floods of tears, nor
heard of thee without grief.

No Psellus, not the tortures of hell are either to be compared, or spoken
off, in the respect of thy torments: for what they all had severally, all
that and more do I feel jointly: Insomuch that with Sysiphus I roll the
stone even to the top of the Hill, when it tumbleth both it self and me into
the bottom of hell, yet never ceasing, I attempt to renew my labor, which was
begun in death, and cannot end in life.

What dryer thirst could Tantalus endure then I, who have almost every hour
the drink I dare not taste, and the meat I cannot? Insomuch that I am torn
upon the wheel with Ix^on, my liver gnawne of the Vultures and Harpies: yea my
soul troubled even with the unspeakable pains of Megaera, Tisiphone, Alecto,
which secreate sorrows although it were more meet to enclose them in a
Laborinth, then to set them on a Hill: Yet where the mind is past hope, the
face is past shame.

It fares with me Psellus as with the Ostrich, who pricketh none but her
self, which causes her to run when she would rest: or as it does with the
Pelicane, who strikes blood out of her own body to do others good: or with
the Wood Culuer, who plucketh off her feathers in winter to keep others from
cold: or as with the Storke, who when she is least able, tarrieth the greatest
burden. So I practice all things that may hurt me to do her good that never
regards my pains, so far is she from rewarding them.

For as it is impossible for the best Adamant to draw iron unto it if the
Diamond be near it, so is it not to be looked for, that I with all my service,
suite, deserts, and what else soever that may draw a woman, should win
Camilla, as long as Surius, a precious stone in her eyes, and an eye sore in
mine, be present, who loves her I know too well, and she him I fear me,
better, which love will breed between us such a deadly hatred, that being
dead our blood cannot be mingled together like Florus and Aegithus, and being
burnt, the flames shall part like Polinices and Eteocles, such a mortal
enmity is kindled, that nothing can quench it but death: and yet death shall
not end it.

What counsel can you give me in this case? what comfort? what hope?

When Acontius could not persuade Cydippe to love, he practiced fraud. When
Tarquinius could not win Lucretia by prayer, he used force.

When the Gods could not obtain their desires by suite, they turned
themselves into new shapes, leaving nothing undone, for fear they should
be undone.

The disease of love Psellus, is impatient, the (...) extreme, whose assaults
neither the wise can (...) by policy, nor the valiant by strength.

Julius Caesar a noble Conqueror in war, a grave Counsaylour in peace, after
he had subdued France, Germany, Britain, Spain, Italy, Thessalia, Egypt,
yea, entered with no less puissaunce then good fortune into Armenia, into
Pontus, into Africa yielded in his chiefest victories to love Psellus, as a
thing fit for Caesar, who conquered all things saving himself, and a deeper
wound did the small Arrow of Cupid make, then all the spears of his enemies.

Hanniball not less valiant in arms, nor more fortunate in love, having
spoiled Ticinum, Trebia, Trasmena and Cannas, submitted himself in Apulia to
the love of a woman, whose hate was a terror to al men, and became so
bewitched, that neither the fear of death, nor the desire of glory, could
remove him from the lap of his lover.

I omit Hercules, who was constrained to use a distaffe for the desire of his
love. Leander, who ventured to cross the Seas for Hero. Iphis that hanged
himself, Pyramus that killed himself, and infinite more, which could not
resist the hot skirmishes of affection.

And so far has this humor crept into the mind, that Biblis loved her
brother, Myrra her Father, Canace, her nephew: Insomuch as there is no reason
to be given for so strange a grief, nor no remedy so unlawful, but is to be
sought for so monstrous a disease.

My disease is strange, I my self a stranger, and my suite no less strange
then my name, yet least I be tedious in a thing that requires haste, give ear
to my tale.

I Have heard oftentimes that in Love there are three things for to be used,
if time serve, violence, if wealth be great, gold, if necessity compel,
^orcerie.

But of these three but one can stand me in steed, the last, but not the
least, which is able to work the minds of all women like war, when the other
can scarce wind them like with. Medicines there are that can bring it to
pass, and men there are that have some by potions, some by verses, some by
dreams, all by deceit, the cnsamples were tedious to recite, and you know
the^, the means I come to learn, and you can give them, which is the only
cause of my coming, and may be the occasion of my pleasure, and certainly the
way both for your praise and profit.

Whether it be an enchaunted lease, a verse of Pythia, a figure of Amphion, a
Charecter of Oschanes, an Image of Venus, or a branch of Sybilla, it skilleth
not.

Let it be either the seeds of Medea, or the blood of Phillis, let it come by
Oracle of Appollo, or by Prophecy, of Tyresias, either by the intrailes of a
Goat, or what else soever I care not, or by all these in one, to make sure
incantation and spare not.

If I win my love, you shall not loose your labor, and whether it redound or
no to my greater peril, I will not yet forget your pains.

Let this potion be of such force, that she may dote in her desire, and I
delight in her distress.

And if in this case you either reveal my suite or deny it, you shall soon
perceive that Philautus will dye as desperately in one minuite, as he has
lived this three months carefully, and this your study shall be my grave, if
by your study you ease not my grief.

When he had thus ended, he looked so sternly upon Psellus, that he wished him
farther off, yet taking him by the hand, and walking into his chamber, this
good man began thus to answer him.

GEntleman, if the inward spirit be aunswerable to the outward speech, or
the thoughts of your heart agreeable to the words of your mouth, you shall
breed to your self great discredit, and to me no small disquiet. Do you
think Gentleman, that the mind being created of God, can be ruled by man, or
that any one can move the heart but he that made the heart? But such has been
the superstition of old women, and such the folly of young men, that there
could be nothing so vain, but the one would invent, nor any thing so
senseless but the other would believe: which then brought youth into a fools
paradise, and has now cast age into an open mockage.

What the force of love is, I have known, what the effects have been, I have
heard, yet could I never learn that ever love could be won, by the virtues
of herbs, stones or words. And though many there have been so wicked to seek
such means, yet was there never any so unhappy to find them.

Parrhasius paynting Hopplitides, could neither make him that ran to sweat, nor
the other yt put off his armor to breath, adding this as it were for a note,
No farther than colors: meaning that to give life, was not in his Pencill, but
in the Gods.

And the like may be said of us, that give our minds to know the course of the
Stars, the Plannets, the whole Globe of Heaven, the Simples, the Compoundes,
the bowels of the Earth, that something we may gess^ by the outward shape,
something by the Nativity: but to wrest the will of man, or to wreath his
heart to our humors, it is not in the compass of Art, but in the power of
the most highest.

But for because there have been many without doubt, that have given credit to
the vain illusions of Witches or the fond inventions of idle persons, I will
set down such reasons as I have heard and you will laugh at, so I hope I
shall both satisfy your mind, and make you a little merry, for me thinks
there is nothing that can more delyght, then to hear the things which have no
wayghte, to be thought to have wronghte wonders.

If you take Pepper, the seed of a Nettle, and a little quantity of Pyretum,
beaten or pounded altogether, and put into Wine of two years old, whenever
you drink to Camilla, if she love you not, you loose your labor. The cost is
small, but if your belief be constant, you win the goal, for this Receipt,
stands in a strong conceit.

Eggs and Honny blended with the Nuts of a Pine tree, and laid to your left
side, is of as great force when you look upon Camilla to bewitche the mind,
as the Quintessence of Stockfish, is to nourish the body.

An herb there is, called Anacamforitis, a strange name and doubtless of a
strange nature, for whosoever touches it, falls in love, with the person
she next sees. It grows not in England, but here you shall have that which
is not half so good, that will do as much good, and yet truly no more.

The Herb Carisium, moystened with the blood of a Lysard, and hanged about
your neck, will cause Camilla (for her you love best) to dream of your
services, suites, desires, deserts, and whatsoever you would wish her to
think of you, but being wakened, she shall not remember what she dreamed off.
And this Herb is to be found in a Lake near Boetia, of which water who so
drinks shall be caught in love, but never find the Herb: And if he drink
not, the Herb is of no force.

There is in the Frogs side, a bone called Apocycon, and in the head of a young
Colte, a bounch named Hippomanes, both so effectual for the obtaining of love,
that who so gets either of them, shall win any that are willing, but so
injuriously both craft and Nature dealt with young Gentlemen, that seek to
gain good will by these means, that the one is licked off before it can be
gotten, the other breaks, as soon as it is touched. And yet unless
Hippomanes be lycked, it cannot work, and except Apocycon be sound it is
nothing worth.

I omit the Thistle Eryngium, the Herbs Catanenci and Pyteuma, Iuba his
Charito blaepheron, and Orpheus Staphilinus, all of such virtue in cases of
Love, that if Camilla should but taste any one of them in her mouth, she would
never let it go down her throat, least she should be poisoned, for well
you know Gentleman, that Love is a Poison, and therefore by Poison it must be
maintained.

But I will not forget as it were the Methridate of the Magitians, the beast
Hiena, of whom there is no part so small or so vile, but it serves for their
purpose: Insomuch that they account Hiena their God that can do all, and their
Devil that will do all.

If you take seven hayres of Hienas lips and carry them six days in
your-teeth, or a piece of her skin next your bare heart, or her bellye girded
to your left side, if Camilla suffer you not to obtain your purpose,
certeinelye she can-not choose but thank you for your pains.

And if you want medicines to win women, I have yet more, the lungs of a
Vultur, the ashes of Stellio, the left stone of a Cock, the tongue of a Goose,
the brain of a Cat, the last hair of a Wolves tail, things casie to be had,
and commonly practiced, so that I would not have thee stand in doubt of thy
love, when either a young Swallowe famished, or the shrowding sheet of a teere
friend, or a waren Taper, that burnt at his feet, or the inchaunted Needle
that Medea hid in Iasons sleeue, are able not only to make them desire love,
but also dye for love.

How do you now feel your self Philautus? If the least of these charms be
not sufficient for thee, all exorcismes, and coniurations in the world will not
serve thee.

You see Gentleman, into what blind and gross errors in old time we were
led, thinking every old wives tale to be a truth, and every merry word a
very witchcraft. When the Egyptians fell from their God to their Priests of
Memphis, and the Grecians from their Moral questions, to their disputations of
Pyrrhus, and the Romans from Religion, to polycie: than began all
superstition to breed, and all impiety to blome, and to be so great, they
have both grown, that the one being then an Infant is now an Elephant, and the
other being then a Twigge, is now a Tree.

They invented as many inchauntments for love, as they did for the Toothache,
but he that has tried both will say, that the best charm for a tooth is to
pull it out, and the best remedy for love, to wear it out. It incantations, or
potions, or amorous sayings could have prevailed, Circes would never have lost
Ulysses, nor Phaedra Hippolitus, nor Phillis Demophoon. If Coniurations,
Charecters, Circles, Figures, Fiends, or Furies, might have wrought any thing
in love, Medea, would not have suffered Jason to alter his mind.

If the sirrops of Micaonias, or the Uerses of Aeneas, or the Satiren of
Dipsas, were of force to move the mind, they all three would not have been
martired with the torments of love.

No, no Philautus, thou may well poison Camilla with such drugges but never
persuade her: For I confess, that such herbs may alter the body from
strength to weakness, but to think that they can move the mind from virtue
to vice, from chastitye to lust, I am not so simple to believe, neither would
I have thee so sinful as to do it.

Lucilla ministering an amorous potion unto her husband Lucretius, procured his
death, whose life she onelys desired.

Aristotle notes one, that being inflamed with the beauty of a fair Lady,
thought by medicine to procure his bliss, and wrought in the end her baine: So
was Caligula slain of Caesonia, and Lucius Lucuilus of C^hstine.

Persuade thy self Philautus, that to use herbs to win love will weaken the
body, and to think that herbs can further* does hurt the Soul: for as great
force have they in such cases as noble men thought the^ to have in ye old time.
Achimenius the herb was of such force, that it was thought if it were thrown
into the battle, it would make all the soldiers tremble: but where was it when
the Humbri and Tentom were eriled by war, where grew Achiminis, one of whose
leaves would have saved a thousand lives.

The kings of Persia gave their soldiers the Plant Latace, which who so had,
should have plenty of meat and money, and men and all things: but why did
the soldiers of Caesar endure such famine in Pharsalia, if one herb might
have eased so many hearts.

Where is Balis that luba so commends, the which could call the dead to life,
and yet he himself dyed.

Democritus made a confection, that who soever drank it should have a fair, a
fortunate, and a good child. Why did not the Persian Kings swill this Nectar,
having such beformed and unhappy issue?

Cato was of that mind, that three enchaunted words could heal the eyesight:
and Varro, that a verse of Sybilla could ease the gout, yet the one was feign
to use running water, which was but a cold medicine, the other paciencs, which
was but a dry plaster.

I would not have thee think Philautus that love is to be obtained by such
means, but only by Faith, Virtue, and Constancy.

Philip King of Macedon casting his eye upon a fair Uirgin became enamoured,
which Olympias his wife perceiving* thought him to be enchaunted, and caused
one of her servant to bring the Maiden unto her, whom she thought to thrust
both to exile and shame: but viewing her fair face without blemish, her chaste
eyes without glauncing, her modest countenance, her sober and womanly
behavior, finding also her virtues to be no less then her beauty, she said,
in my self there are charms, meaning that there was no greater enchantment in
love then temperaunce, wisdom, beauty and chastity. Fond therefore is the
opinion of those that think the mind to be tied to Magic, and the practice
of those filthy, that seek those means.

Love dwells in the mind, in the will, and in ye hearts, which neither
Coniurer can alter, nor Physic. For as credible it is, that Cupid shoteth his
Arrow and hitteth the heart, as that herbs have the force to bewitch the
heart, only this difference there is, that the one was a fiction of Poetry, the
other of superstition. The will is placed in the Soul, and who can enter
there, but he that created the soul?

No no Gentleman, whatsoever you have heard touching this, believe nothing: for
they in mine opinion which imagine that the mind is either by incantation or
exca^tation to be ruled, are as far from truth, as the East from the West,
and as near impiety against god, as they are to shame among men, and so
contrary is it to the profession of a Christian, as Paganism.

Suffer not your self to be lead with that vile conceit, practice in your love
all kind of loyalty. Be not mute, nor full of babble, be sober, but avoid
sollennesse, use no kind of riot, either by banqueting, which procures
surfeits, nor in attire, which hastes beggary.

If you think well of your wit, be always pleasant, if ill be often silent:
in the one thy talk shall prove thee sharp, in the other thy modesty, wise.

All Fish are not caught with Flies, all women are not allured with
personage. Frame Letters, Ditties, Music, and all means that honesty may
allow: For he wooeth well, that means no ill, and he speedeth sooner that
speaks what he should, then he that utters what he will. Believe me
Philautus I am now old, yet have I in my head a love tooth, and in my mind
there is nothing yt more pearceth the heart of a beautiful Lady, then writing,
where thou may so set down thy passions and her perfection, as she shall
have cause to think well of thee, and better of her self: but yet so warily,
as neither thou seem to praise her too much, or debase thy self too lowlye:
for if thou flatter them without mean, they loath, and if thou make of thy
self above reason, they laugh at it, temper thy words so well, and place
every sentence so wisely, as it may be hard for her to judge, whether thy love
be more faithful, or her beauty amiable.

Lions fawn when they are clawed. Tigers stoop when they are tickled,
Bucephalus lies down when he is curryed, women yield when they are courted.

This is the poison Philautus, the enchauntment, the potions that creeps by sleight into ye mind of a woman, and catches her by assurance, better then ye
fond devices of old dreams, as an Apple with an Auie Marie, or a hasill wand
of a year old crossed with sir Charactors, or the picture of Venus in Uirgin
Ware, or the Image of Camilla, upon a Moulwarpes skin.

It is not once mentioned in the English Court, nor so much as thought of in
any ones conscience, that Love can be procured by such means, or that any can
imagine such mischief, and yet I fear me it is too commen in our Country,
whereby they incur hate of every one and love of none.

Touching my cunning in any vile devices of Magic, it was never my study,
only some delyght, I took in the Mathematickes, which made me known of more
then I would, and of more then think well of me, although I never did hurt any,
nor hindered.

But be thou quiet Philautus, and use those means that may win thy love, not
those that may shorten her life, and if I can any ways stand thee in steed,
use me as thy poor friend and countreyman, harm I will do thee none, good I
cannot. My acquaintance in court is small, and therefore my dealings about the
Court shall be few, for I love to stand aloof from love, and lightning Fire
gives light to things far off, and burns that which is next to it. The
court shines to me that come not there, but sings those that dwell there.
Only my counsel use, that is in writing, and me thou shall find secreate,
wishing thee always fortunate, and if thou make me partaker of thy success,
it shall not turn to thy grief, but as much as in me lies, I will further thee.

When he had finished his discourse, Philautus lyked very well of it, and thus
replied.

WEll Psellus, thou have wrought yt in me, which thou wishest, for if the
baits that are laid for beauty be so ridiculous, I think it of as great
effect in love, to use a Paister, as a Potion.

I now utterly dissent from those that imagine Magic to be the means, and
consent with thee, that think letters to be, which I will use, and how I
speed I will tell thee, in ye mean season pardon me, if I use no longer
answer, for well you know, that he yt has the fit of an Ague upon him, has no
lust to talk but to tumble, and love pinching me I have more desire to chew
upon melancholy, then to dispute upon Magic, but hereafter I will make
repair unto you, and what I now give you in thanks, I will then requite with
amends.

Thus these two countrymen parted with certain Italian embracings and terms
of courtesy, more the^ common. Philautus we shall find in his lodging, Psellus
we will leave in his study, the one musing of his love, the other of his
learning.

Here Gentlewomen you may see, how justly men seeks to entrap you, when
scornfully you go about to reject them, thinking it not unlawful to use Art,
when they perceive you obstinate, their dealings I will not allow, neither can
I excuse yours, and yet what should be the cause of both, I can guess.

When Phydias first painted they used no colors, but black, white, read, and
yeolowe: Zeuxis added green, and every one invented a new shadowing. At the
last, it came to this pass, yt he in painting deserved most praise, that could
set down most colors: whereby there was more contention kindeled about the
color, then ye counterfaite, and greater emulation for variety in show, then
workmanship in substance.

In ye like manner has it fallen out in Love, when Adam weed there was no
policy, but plain dealing, no colors but black and white, Affection was
measured by faith not by fancy: he was not curious, nor Eve cruel: he was not
enamored of her beauty, nor she allured with his personage: and yet then was
she the fairest woman in the world, and he the prop^rest man Since that time
every lover has put too a lynke, and made of a King, a Chain, and an odd
Corner, and framed of a plain Alley, a crooked knot, and of Venus Temple,
Dedalus Laborynth. One curleth his hair, thinking love to be moved with fair
locks, an other lays all his living upon his back, judging that women are
wedded to bravery, some use discourses of Love, to kindle affection, some
ditties to allure the mind, some letters to stir the appetite, diverse
fighting to prove their manhood, sundry sighing to show their maladies, many
attempt with shows to please their Ladies eyes, not few with Music to entice
the ear: Insomuch that there is more strife now, who shall be the finest
Lover, then who is the faithfullest.

This causes you Gentlewomen, to pick out those that can court you, not those
that love you, and he is accounted the best in your conceits, that uses most
colors, not that shows greatest courtesy.

A plain tale of Faith ye laugh at, a picked discourse of fancy, you marvel
at, condemning the simplicity of truth, and preferring the singularity of
deceit, wherein you resemble those fishes yt rather swallow a fair bait with
a sharp hook, then a foulc worm breeding in the mudde.

Heereoff it comes, that true lovers receiving a flout for their faith, and a
mock for their good meaning, are enforced to seek such means as might compel
you, which you knowing impossible, makes you the more disdainful and them the
more desperate. This then is my counsel, that you use your lovers like
friends, and choose them by their faith, not by the show, but by the sound,
neither by the weight, but by the touch, as you do gold: so shall you be
praised, as much for virtue as beauty. But return we again to Philautus, who
thus began to debate with himself.

WHat have thou done Philautus, in seeking to wound her, that thou desire to
win?

With what face can thou look on her, whom thou soughtest to loose? Fie, fie
Philautus, thou bring thy good name into question, and her life into hazard,
having neither care of thine own credit, nor her honor. Is this the love thou
pretendest which is worse then hate? Did not thou seek to poison her, that
never pinched thee?

But why do I recount those things which are past, and I repent, I am now to
consider what I must do, not what I would have done? Follies past, shall be
worn out with faith to come, and my death shall show my desire. Write
Philautus, what say thou? write, no, no, thy rude style will bewray thy mean
estate, and thy rash attempt, will purchase thine overthrow. Venus delights to
hear none but Mercury, Pallas will be stolen of none but Ulysses, it must be a
smooth tongue, and a sweet tale that can enrhaunt Vesta.

Besides that, I dare not trust a messenger to carry it, nor her to read it,
least in showing my letter, she disclose my love, and then shall I be pointed
at of those that hate me, and pitied of those that like me, of her scorned, of
al talked off. No Philautus, be not thou the bye word of the common people,
rather suffer death by silence, then derision by writing.

I, but it is better to reveal thy love, then conceal if, thou know not
what bitter poyso^ lies in sweet words, remember Psellus, who by experience
has tried, that in love one letter is of more force, then a thousand looks.
If they like writings, they read them often, if dislyke them, run them over
once, and this is certain, that she that reads such toys, will also
answer them. Only this be secret in conueyaunce, which is the thing they
thiefliest desire. Then write Philautus write, he that fears every bush, must
never go a birding, he that casts al doubts, shall never be resolved in any
thing. And this assure thy self, that be thy letter never so rude and
barbarous, she will read it, and be it never so loving she will not show it,
which were a thing contrary to her honor, and the next way to call her honesty
into question. For thou have heard, yea and thy self know, that Ladies that
vaunt of their Lovers, or show their letters, are accounted in Italy
counterfaite, and in England they are not thought current.

Thus Philautus determined, hab, nab, to send his letters, flattering himself
with the success, which he to him self feigned: and after long musing, he
thus began to frame the minister of his love.

To the fairest Camilla.
Hard is the choice fair Lady, when one is compelled either by silence to
dye with grief, or by writing to hue with shame: But so sweet is the desire of
life, and so sharp are the passions of love, that I am enforced to prefer an
unseemly suit, before an untimely death. Loath I have been to speak, and in
despair to speed, the one proceeding of mine own cowardice, the other of thy
cruelty. If thou enquire my name, I am the same Philautus, which for thy sake
of late came disguised in a Mask, pleading custom for a privilege, and
courtesy for a pardon. The same Philautusm which then in secrette terms
colored his love, and now with bitter tears bewrayes it. If thou nothing
esteem the brynish water that falls from mine eyes, I would thou could
see the warm blood that droppeth from my heart. Oftentimes I have been in thy
company, where easilye thou might have perceived my wanne cheeks, my hollow
eyes, my scalding sighs, my trembling tongue: to foreshew that then which I
confess now. Then consider with thy self Camilla, the plight I am in by
desire, and the peril I am like to fall into by denial.

To recount the sorrows I sustain, or the service I have vowed, would rather
breed in thee an admiration, then a belief: only this I add for the time,
which ye end shall try for a truth, that if thy answer be sharp, my life will
be short, so far love has wrought in my pining and almost consumed body,
that thou only may breath into me a new life, or bereave me of the old.

Thou art to weigh, not how long I have loved thee, but how faithfully,
neither to examine the worthiness of my person, but the extremity of my
passions: so preferring my deserts before the length of time, and my disease,
before the greatness of my birth, thou will either yield with equity, or deny
with reason, of both the which although the greatest be on my side, yet ye
least shall not dislyke me: for that I have always found in thee a mind
neither repugnant to right, nor void of reason. If thou would but permit me
to talk with thee, or by writing suffer me at large to discourse with thee, I
doubt not but that both the cause of my love would be believed, and the
extremity rewarded, both proceeding of thy beauty and virtue, the one able to
allure, the other ready to pity.

Thou must think that God has not bestowed those rare gifts upon thee to
kill those that are caught, but to cure them. Those that are stunge with the
Scorpion, are bealed with the Scorpion, the fire that burns takes away the
heat of the burn, the Spider Phalaugium that poysoneth, does with her skin
make a plaster for poison, and shall thy beauty which is of force to win
all with love, be of the cruelty to wound any with death? No Camilla, I take
no less delight in thy fair face, then pleasure in thy good conditions,
assuring my self that for affection without lust, thou will not render malice
without cause.

I commit my care to thy consideration, expecting thy letter either as a
Cullife to preserve, or as a sword to destroy, either as Antidotum, or as
Auconitum: If thou delude me, thou shall not long triumph over me living, and
small will thy glory be when I am dead. And I end.

Thine ever, though he be never thine. Philautus.


THis letter being coined, he studied how he might co^uey it, knowing it to be
no less perrillous to trust those he knew not in so weighty a case, then
difficult for himself to have opportunity to deliver it in so suspicious a
company: At the last taking out of his closette a fair Pomgranet, and pulling
all the kernells out of it, he wrapped his letter in it, closing the top of
it finely, that it could not be perceived, whether nature again had knit it of
purpose to further him, or his art had overcome natures cunning.

This Pomgranet he took, being himself both messenger of his Letter, and the
master, and ins^nuating himself into the company of the Gentlewomen, among
whom was also Camilla, he was welcomed, as well for that he had been long time
absent, as for that he was as al times pleasant, much good communication there
was, touching many matters, which here to insert were neither convenient, seeing
it does not concern the History, nor expedient, seeing it is nothing to ye
delivery of Philautus letter. But this it fell out in the end, Camilla whether
longing for so fair a Pomgranet, or willed to ask it, yet loath to require it,
she sodeinely complained of an old disease, wherewith she many times felt her
self grieved, which was an extreme heat in ye stomach, which advantage
Philautus marking, would not let slip, when it was purposely spoken, that he
should not give them the slip, and therefore as one glad to have so convenient a
time to offer both his duty and his devotion, he began thus.

I Have heard Camilla, of Physicians, that there is nothing either more
comfortable, or more profitable for the stomach or enflamed liver, then a
Pomgranet, which if it be true, I am glad that I came in so good time with a
medicine, seeing you were in so il a time supprised with your malady: and
verily this will I say, that there is not one kernel but is able both to ease
your pain, and to double your pleasure, and with that he gave it her, desiring
that as she felt the working of the potion, so she would consider of the
Physician.

Camilla with a smiling countenance neither suspecting the craft, nor the
conueyer, answered him with these thanks.

I thank you Gentleman, as much for your counsel as your courtesy, and if your
cunning be answerable to either of them, I will make you amends for all of them:
yet I will not open so fair a fruit as this is, until I feel the pain yt I
so much fear. As you please quoth Philautus* yet if every morning you take one
kernel, it is ye way to prevent your disease, and me thinks that you should
be as careful to work means before it come, that you have it not, as to use
means to expel it when you have it.

I am content answered Camilla, to try your physic, which as I know it can do
me no great harm, so it may do me much good.

In truth said one of the Gentlewomen then present, I perceive this Gentleman
is not only cunning in Physic, but also very careful for his Patient.

It behooves quoth Philautus, that he that ministers to a Lady, be as desirous
of her health, as his own credit, for that there redoundeth more praise to the
Phisitio^ that has a care to his charge, then to him that has only a show of
his art. And I trust Camilla will better accept of the good will I have to rid
her of her disease, then the gift, which must work the effect.

Otherwise quoth Camilla, I were very much to blame, knowing that in many the
behavior of the man, has wrought more then ye force of the medicine. For I
would always have my Physician of a cheerful countenance, pleasantly
conceipted, and well proportioned, that he might have his sharp Potions mixed
with sweet counsel, and his sower druggs mittigated with merry discourses.
And this is the cause, that in old time, they painted the God of Physic, not
like Saturn but Aesculapius: of a good complexion, fine wit, and excellent
constitution.

For this I know by experience, though I be but young to learn, and have not
often been sick, that the sight of a pleasant and quick witted Physician, has
removed that from my heart with talk, that he could not with all his Triacle.

That might well be, answered Philautus, for the man that wrought the cure, did
perchance cause the disease, and so secreate might the grief be, that none
could heal you, but he that hurt you, neither was your heart to be eased by
any inward potion, but by some outward persuasion: and then it is no marvel
if the ministering of a few words, were more auayleable then Methridate.

Well Gentleman said Camilla, I will neither dispute in Physic, wherein I have
no skill, neither answer you, to your last surmise, which you seem to leuel
at, but thanking you once again both for your gift and good will, we will use
other communication, not forgetting to ask for your friend Euphues, who has
not long time been, where he might have been welcomed at al times, and that he
came not with you at this time, we both marvel, and would feign know.

This question so earnestly asked of Camilla, and so harblye to be answered of
Philautus, nipped him in the head, not withstanding least he should seem by
long silence to incur some suspicion, he thought a bad excuse better then
none at al, saying that Euphues now a days became so studious (or as he
termed it, supersticious) that he could not himself so much, as have his
company.

Belike quoth Camilla, he has either espied some new faults in the women of
England, whereby he seeks to absent himself, or some old haunt that will
cause him to spoil himself.

Not so said Philautus, and yet that it was said so I will tell him.

Thus after much conference, many questions, and long time spent Philautus
took his leave, and being in his chamber, we will there leave him with such
cogitations, as they commonly have, that either attend the sentence of life or
death at the bar, or the answer of hope or despair of their loves, which
none can set down but he that has them, for that they are not to be uttered by
the conjecture of one that would imagine what they should be* but by him that
knows what they are.

Camilla the next morning opened the Pomegranet, and saw the letter, which
reading, pondering, and perusing, she fell into a thousand contrarieties,
whether it were best to answer it or not, at the last, inflamed with a kind of
cholar, for that she knew not what belonged to the perplexities of a Lover, she
requited his fraud and love, with anger and hate, in these terms, or the like.

To Philautus.
I Did long time debate with my self Philautus, whether it might stand with
mine honor to send thee an answer, for comparing my place with thy person,
me thought thy boldness more, then either good manners in thee would permit, or
I with modesty could suffer. Yet at the last, casting with my self, that ye
heat of thy love might clean be razed with ye coldness of my letter, I thought
it good to commit an inconvenience, that I might prevent a mischief, choosing
rather to cut thee off short by rigor, then to give thee any jot of hope by
silence. Green sores are to be dressed roughly least they fester, tettars to
be drawn in the beginning least they spread, ring worms to be anointed when
they first appear, least they compass the whole body, and the assalts of love
to be beaten ba^k at the first siege, least they undermine at the second. Fire
is to be quenched in the spark, weeds are to be rooted in the bud, follies in
the blossom. Thinking this morning to try thy Physic, I perceived thy
fraud, insomuch as the kernel that should have cooled my stomach with moistnes
has kindeled it with cholar, making a flaming fire, where it found but hot
imbers, converting like ye spider a sweet flower, into a bitter poison. I am
Philautus no Italian lady, who commonly are woed with leasings, and won with
lust, entangled with deceit, and enjoyed with delight, caught with sin, and
cast off with shame.

For mine own part, I am too young to know the passions of a lover, and too
wise to believe them, and so far from trusting any, that I suspect all: not
that there is in every one a practice to deceive, but that there wants i^ me a
capacity to conceive.

Seek not then Philautus to make the tender twig crooked by Art, which might
have grown straight by Nature. Corn is not to be gathered in the budde, but
in the ear, nor fruit to be pulled from the tree when it is green, but when
it is mellow, nor Grapes to be cut for ye press, when they first rise, but
when they are full ripe: nor young Ladies to be sued unto, that are fitter for
a rod then a husband, and meeter to bear blows than children.

You must not think of us, as of those in your own country, that no sooner
are out of the cradell, but they are sent to the court, and woed sometimes
before they are weaned, which brings both the Nation and their names, not in
question only of dishonestie, but into oblique.

This I would have thee to take for a flat answer, that I neither mean to
love thee, nor hereafter if thou follow thy suit to hear thee. Thy first
practice in ye Masque I did not allow, the second by thy writing I mislike, if
thou attempt the third means, thou will enforce me to utter that which modesty
now makes me to conceal.

If thy good will be so great as thou tellest, seek to mitigate it by reason or
time, I thank thee for it, but I can not requite it, unless either thou were
not Philautus, or I not Camilla. Thus pardoning thy boldness upon condition, and
resting thy friend if thou rest thy suit, I end.

Neither thine, nor her own. Camilla.


THis letter Camilla stitched into an Italian Petracke which she had,
determining at the next coming of Philautus to deliver it, under the pretense
of asking some question, or the understanding of some word. Philautus
attending hourly ye sucresse of his love, made his repair according to his
accustomable use, and finding the Gentlewomen sitting in an herbor, saluted
them curteouslye, not forgetting to be inquisitiue how Camilla was eased by his
Pomegranet, which oftentimes asking of her, she answered him thus.

In faith Philautus, it had a fair coat, but a rotten kernel, which so much
offended my weak stomach, that the very sight caused me to loath it, and the
sent to throw it into the fire.

I am sorry quoth Philautus (who spoke no less then truth) that the medicine
could not works that, which my mind wished, and with that stood as one in a
trance, which Camilla perceiving, thought best to ru^ no more on that gall,
least the standers by should espy where Philautus shoe wrong him.

Well said Camilla, let it go, I must impute it to my ill fortune, that where
I looked for a restoritie, I found a consumption: and with that she drew out
her petracke, requesting him to co^ster her a lesson, hoping his learning would
be better for a schoolmaster, then his luck was for a Physician. Thus walking
in the ally she listened to his construction, who tourning the book, found where
the letter was enclosed, and dissembling that he suspected, he said he would
keep her petracke until the morning, do you quoth Camilla.

With that the Gentlewomen clustered about them both, either to hear how
cunningly Philautus could conster, or how readily Camilla could conceive. It
fell out that they turned to such a place, as turned them all to a blanke,
where it was reasoned, whether love came at the sodeine view of beauty, or by
long experience of virtue, a long disputation was like to ensue, had not
Camilla cut it off before they could join issue, as one not willing in the
company of Philautus either to talk of love, or think of love ^east either he
should suspect she had been woed, or might be won, which was not done so
closely, but it was perceived of Philautus, though dissembled.

Thus after many words, they went to their dinner, where I omit their table
talk, least I loose mine.

After their repast, Surius came in with a great train, which lightened
Camillas heart, and was a dagger to Philautus breast, who tarried no longer then
he had leisure to take his leave, either desirous to read his Ladies answer, or
not willing to enjoy Surius his company, whom also I will now forsake, and
follow Philautus, to hear how his mind is quieted with Camillas courtesy.

Philautus no sooner entered his chamber, but he read her letter, which wrought
such skirmishes in his mind, that he had almost forgot reason, falling into
the old vain of his rage in this manner.

Ah cruel Camilla and accursed Philautus, I see now that it fares with thee,
as it does with the Hare Sea, which having made one astonished with her fair
sight, turns him into a stone with her venomous savor, and with me as it
does with those that view the Basilike, whose eyes procure delight to the
looker at the first glymse, and death at the second glaunce.

Is this the courtesy of England toward strangers, to entreat them so
despightfully? Is my good will not only rejected without cause, but also
disdained without color? I but Philautus praise at thy parting, if she had
not liked thee, she would never have answered thee. Know thou not, that
where they love much, they dissemble most, that as fair weather comes after
a foul storm, so sweet terms succeed sour tauntes?

Assaye once again Philautus by letters to win her love, and follow not the
unkind hound, who leaves the sent because he is rated, or the bastard
Spaniell, which being once rebuked, never retriueth his game. Let Atla^ta run
never so swiftlye, she will look back upon Hyppomanes, let Medea be as
cruel as a fend to all Gentlemen, she will at the last respect Jason. A
denial at the first is accounted a grant, a gentle aunsweare a mockery.
Ladies use their Lovers as the Storke does her young ones, who pecketh them
till they bleed with her bill, and then heals them with her tongue. Cupid
himself must spend one arrowe, and think thou to speed with one Letter?
No no Philautus, he that looks to have clear water must dig deep, he that
longs for sweet Music, must set his stringes at the highest, he that
seeks to win his love must stretch his labor, and hasard his life, Venus
blesses Lions in the fold, and Lambs in the chamber, Eagles at the assault,
and Foxes in counsel, so that thou must be hardy in the pursuit, and meek
in victory, venterous in obtaining, and wise in concealing, so that thou win
that with praise, which otherwise thou will loose with peevishness. Faint
heart Philautus neither wins Castle nor Lady: therefore endure all things
that shall sharpen with patience, and pursue with diligence, thy fortune is to
be tried, not by the accedents but by the end.

Thus Gentlewomen, Philautus, resembles the Uiper, who being stricken with a
reed lies as he were dead, but stricken the second time, recouereth his
strength: having his answer at the first in the Masque he was almost amazed,
and now again denied, he is animated presuming thus much upon the good
disposition and kindness of women, that the higher they sit, the lower they
look, and the more they seem at the first to loath, the more they love at the
last. Whose judgment as I am not altogether to allow, so can I not in some
respect mislyke. For in this they resemble the Crocodile, who when one
approaches near unto him, gathers up himself into the roundnesse of a ball,
but running from him, stretches himself into the length of a tree. The
willing resistance of women was the cause that made Arelius (whose art was only
to draw women) to paint Venus. Cnydia, catching at the ball with her hand,
which she seemed to spurn at with her foot. And in this point they are not
unlike unto the Mirre Tree, which being hewed, gathers in his sap, but not
moved, powers it out like sirrope. Women are never more coye then when they
are beloved, yet in their minds never less constant, seeming to tie
themselves to the mast of the ship with Ulysses, when they are wooed, with a
strong Cable: which being well descerned is a twine threede: throwing a stone
at the head of him, unto whom they immediately cast out an aple, of which
their gentle nature Philautus being persuaded, followed his suit again in this
manner.

Philautus to the fair, Camilla.
I Cannot tell (Camilla) whether thy ingratitude be greater, or my misfortune,
for perusing the few lines thou gave me, I found as small hope of my love
as of thy courtesy. But so extreme are the passions of love, that the more
thou seek to quench them by disdain, the greater flame thou encreasest by
desire. Not unlike unto Iuppiters Well, which extingisheth a fiery brande, and
kindles a wet stick. And no less force has thy beauty over me, then the
fire has over Naplytia, which leapeth into it, wheresoever it sees it.

I am not he Camilla that will leave the Rose, because I pricked my finger, or
forsake the gold that lies in the hot fire, for that I burn my hand, or
refuse the sweet Chestnut, for that it is covered with sharp husks. The mind
of a faithful lover, is neither to be daunted with despite, nor afrighted with
danger. For as the Lodestone, what wind soever blow, tourneth always to
the North, or as Aristotle's Quadratus, which way soever you turn it is
always constant: so the faith of Philautus, is ever more applied to the love
of Camilla, neither to be removed with any wind, or rolled with any force. But
to thy letter.

Thou say green wounds are to be dressed roughly least they feaster:
certainly thou speak like a good Chyrurgian, but dealest like one
unskillful, for making a great wound, thou put in a small tent, cutting
the flesh that is sound before thou cure the place that is sore: striking the
vein with a knife, which thou should stop with lynt. And so have thou
drawn my tettar, (I use thine own term) that in seeking to spoil it in my
chinne, thou have spread it over my body

Thou addest thou art no Italyan Lady, I answer, would thou were, not that I
would have thee wooed, as thou say they are, but that I might win thee as
thou now art: and yet this I dare say, though not to excuse all, or to
disgrace thee, that some there are in Italy too wise to be caught with
leasings, and too honest to be entangled with lust, and as wary to eschew
sin, as they are willing to sustain shame, so that whatsoever the most be,
I would not have thee think ill of the best.

Thou alleadgest thy youth, and allowest thy wisdom, the one not apt to know
the impressions of love, the other suspicious not to believe them. Truly
Camilla I have heard, that young is the Goose that will eat no Oats, and a
very ill Cock that will not crow before he be old, and no right Lion,
that will not feed on hard meat, before he taste sweet milk, and a tender
Uirgin God knows it must be, that measures her affections by her age, when as
naturally they are enclyned (which thou perticularly put to our country)
to play the brydes before they be able to dress their heads.

Many similitudes thou bring in to excuse youth, thy twig, thy corn, thy
fruit, thy grape, and I know not what, which are as easily to be refelled, as
they are to be repeated.

But my good Camilla, I am as unwilling to confute any thing thou speak, as
I am thou should utter it: insomuch as I would swear the Crow were white,
if thou should but say it.

My good will is greater then I can express, and thy courtesy less then I
deserve: thy counsel to expel it with time and reason, of so little force,
that I have neither the will to use the mean, nor the wit to conceive it.
But this I say, that nothing can break off my love but death, nor any thing
hasten my death, but thy discourtesie. And so I attend thy final sentence,
and my fatal destiny.

Thine ever, though he be never thine. Philautus.


THis letter he thought by no means better to be conveyed, then in the same
book he received hirs, so omitting no time, least the iron should cool
before he could strike, he presently went to Camilla, whom he found in
gathering of flowers, with diverse other Ladies and Gentlewomen, which came as
well to recreate themselves for pleasure, as to visit Camilla, whom they all
loved, Philautus somewhat boldened by acquaintance, courteous by nature, and
courtlye by countenance, saluted them all with such terms, as he thought
meet for such personages, not forgetting to call Camilla his scholar, when
she had schooled him being her master.

One of the Ladies who delighted much in mirth, seeing Philautus behold Camilla
so steadfastly, said unto him.

GEntleman what flower like you best in all this border, here be fair Roses,
sweet Uiolets, fragrant primroses, here will be Iillyfloures, Caruations, sops
in wine, sweet John's, and what may either please you for fight, or delyght you
with savor: loath we are you should have a Posie of all, yet willing to give
you one, not that which shall look best, but such a one as you shall like best.
Philautus omitting no opportunity, that might either manifest his affection,
or commend his wit, answered her thus.

LAdy of so many sweet flowers to choose the best, it is hard, seeing they be
all so good: if I should prefer the fairest before the sweetest, you would
happelye imagine, that either I were stopped in the nose, or wanton in the
eyes: if the sweetness before the beauty, then would you guess me either to
live with savors, or to have no judgment in colors, but to tell my mind
(upon correction be it spoken) of all flowers, I love a fair woman.

In deed quoth Flauia, (for so was she named) fair women are set thick but
they come up thin, and when they begin to budde, they are gathered as
though they were blown, of such men as you are Gentleman, who think green
Grass, will never be dry Hay, but when the flower of their youth (being
slipped too young) shall fade before they be old, then I dare say, you would
change your fair flower for a weed, and the woman you loved then, for the
worst Uiolet you refuse now.

Lady answered Philautus, it is a sign that beauty was no niggard of her
slippes in this gardeine, and very envious to other grounds, seeing here are
so many in one Plot, as I shall never find more in all Italy, whether the
reason be, the heat which kills them, or the country that cannot bear
them. As for plucking them up soon, in that we show the desire we have to
them, not the mallyce. Where you conjecture, that men have no respect to things
when they be old, I can-not consent to your saying, for well do they know,
that it fares with women as it does with the Mulbery tree, which the elder it
is, the younger it seems, and therefore has it grown to a Proverb in
Italy, when one sees a woman stricken in age to look amiable, he says she
has eaten a Snake: so that I must of force follow mine old opinion, that I
love fresh flowers well, but fair women better. Flauia would not so leave him,
but thus replied to him.

You are very amorous Gentleman, other-wise you would not take the defense of
that thing which most men contempne, and women will not confess. For wher-as
you go about to currey favor, you make a fault, either in praising us too
much, which we account in England flattery, or pleasing your self in your
own mind, which wise men esteem as follye. For when you endeavor to prove
yt women ye older they are, ye fairer they look, you think the^ either very
credulous to believe, or your talk very effectual to persuade. But as cunning
as you are in your Pater noster, I will add one Article more to your Creed,
that is, you may speak in matters of love, what you will, but women will believe
but what they list, and in extolling their beauties, they give more credit to
their own glasses, than men's gloses, but you have not yet answered my
request, touching what flower you most desire: for women do not resemble
flowers, neither in show nor savor.

Philautus not shrinking for an April shower, followed the chase in this
manner.

Lady, I neither flatter you nor please my self (although it pleases you so
to conjecture) for I have always observed this, that to stand too much in
mine own conceit would gain me but little, and to clawe those, of whom I
sought for no benefit, would profit me less: yet was I never so il brought up,
but yt I could when time and place should serve, give every one their just
co^me^dation, unless it were among those yt were without comparison: offending in
nothing but in this, that being too curious in praising my Lady, I was like to
the Painter Protogenes, who could never leave when his work was well, which
fault is to be excused in him, because he would make it better, and may be
borne within me, for that I wish it excellent.

Touching your first demand, which you seem again to urge in your last
discourse, I say of al flowers I love ye Rose best, yet with this condition,
because I will not eat my word, I like a fair Lady well. Then quoth Flauia,
since you will needs join ye flower with ye woman, among all us (and speak
not parcially) call her your Rose, that you most regard, and if she deny that
name, we will enoyne her a penance for her pride, and reward you with a Uiolet
for your pains.

Philautus being driven to this shift, wished himself in his chamber, for this
he thought, yt if he should choose Camilla, she would not accept it, if an
other, she might justly reied him. If he should discover his love, then would
Camilla think him not to be secret, if conceal it, not to be fervent:
besides, all the Ladies would espy his love, and prevent it, or Camilla
despise his offer, and not regard it. While he was thus in a deep meditation,
Flauia wakened him saying, why Gentleman are you in a dream or is there none
here worthy to make choice off, or are we all so indifferent, that there is
never a good.

Philautus seeing this Lady so courteous, and loving Camilla so earnestly,
could not yet resolve with himself what to do, but at the last, love, which
neither regards what it speaks, nor where, he replied thus at all
adventures.

Ladies and Gentlewomen, I would I were so fortunate that I might thuse every
one of you for a flower, and then would I boldly affirm, that I could show
the fairest posie in the world, but follye it is for me to wyshe that being a
slave, which none can hope for, that is an Emperor. If I make my choice I
shall speed so well, as he that enjoys all Europe. And with that gathering a
Rose, he gave it to Camilla, whose color so increased, as one would have
judged all her face to have been a Rose, had it not been stained with a
natural whiteness, which made her to excel the Rose.

Camilla with a smiling countenance, as though nothing grieved, yet vexed
inwardly to the heart, refused the gift flatly, pretending a ready excuse,
which was, that Philautus was either very much ouer-seene, to take her before
the Lady Flauia, or else disposed to give her a mock above the rest in the
company.

Well quoth Flauia to Philautus, (who now stood like one that had been
vesmered) there is no harm done, for I perceive Camilla is other wise sped,
and if I be not much deceived, she is a flower for Surius wearing, the penance
she shall have, is to make you a Nosegay, which she shall not deny thee,
unless she defy us, and the reward thou shall have, is this, while you tarry
in England my Niece shall be your Uiolet.

This Ladies Cousin was named Frauncis, a fair Gentlewoman, and a wise, young
and of very good conditions, not much inferior to Camilla, equal she could
not be.

Camilla who was loath to be accounted in any company coye, endeavored in the
presence of the Lady Flauia to be very courteous, and gathered for Philautus a
pofie of all the finest flowers in the garden, saying thus unto him. I hope you
will not be offended Philautus, in that I could not be your Rose, but imputing
the fault rather to desteny than discourtesie.

Philautus plucking up his spirits, gave her thanks for her pains, and
immediatelye gathered a Uyolette, which he gave Mistress Frauncis, which she
courteously received, thus all parts were pleased for that time.

Philautus was invited to dinner, so that he could no longer stay, but
pulling out the book where-in his letter was enclosed he delivered it to
Camilla, taking his humble leave of the Lady Flauia and the rest of the
Gentlewomen.

When he was gone there fell much talk of him between the Gentlewomen, one
commending his wit, an other his personage, some his favor, all his good
conditions, insomuch that the Lady Flauia bound it with an oath, that she
thought him both wise and honest.

When the company was dissolved, Camilla not thinking to receive an answer
but a lecture, went to her Italian book where she found the letter of
Philautus, who without any further advise, as one very much offended, or in a
great heat, sent him this bone to gnaw upon.

To Philautus.
SUfficed it not thee Philautus to bewray thy follyes, and move my patience,
but thou must also procure in me a mind to revenge, and to thy self the
means of a farther peril? Where did thou learn that being forbidden to
be bold, thou should grow impudent? or being suffered to be familiar thou
should ware hail fellow? But to so malepert boldness is the demeanor of
young Gentlemen come, that where they have been once welcome for courtesy,
they think themselves worthy to court any Lady by cumstomes: wherein they
imagine they use singular audacitie which we can no otherwise term then
sauciness, thinking women are to be drawn by their coined and co^nterfait
conceits, as the straw is by the Aumber, or the iron by the Loadstone, or the
gold by the mineral Chrysocholla.

But as there is no serpent that can breed in the Box tree for the hardness,
nor will build in the Cypres tree for the bitterness, so is there no fond or
poisoned lover that shall enter into my heart which is hardened like the
Adamant, nor take delight in my words, which shall be more bitter then Gall.

It fares with thee Philautus, as with the droone, who having lost his own
wings, seeks to spoil the Bees of theirs, and thou being clipped of thy
liberty, go about to bereave me of mine, not far differing from the
natures of Dragons, who sucking blood out of the Elephant, kill him, and with
the same, poison themselves: and it may be that by the same means that thou
take in hand to inueigle my mind, thou entrappe thine own: a just reward,
for so unjust dealing, and a fit reueng for so unkind a regard.

But I trust thy purpose shall take no place, and that thy millice shall want
might, wherein thou shall resemble the serpent Porphirius, who is full of
poison but being toothlesse he hurts none but himself, and I doubt not but
thy mind is as full of deceit, as thy words are of flattery, but having no
teeth to bite, I have no cause to fear.

I had not thought to have used so sower words, but where a wande cannot rule
the horse, a spur must. When gentle medicines, have no force to purge, we
must use bitter potions: and where the sore is neither to be dissolved by
plaster, nor to be broken, it is requisite it should be launced.

Herbs that are the worse for watering, are to be rooted out, trees that are
less fertile for the lopping, are to be hewn down, Hawks that ware haggard
by manning, are to be cast off, and fond lovers that increase in their follies
when they be rejected, are to be despised.

But as to be without hair amongst the Mycanions, is accounted no shame
because they be all borne balde, so in Italy to live in love, is thought no
fault, for that there they are all given to lust, which makes thee to
conjecture, that we in England reckon love as the chiefest virtue, which we
abhor as the greatest vice, which grows like the Iuie about the trees, and
kills them by culling them. Thou art always talking of love, and applying
both thy wit and thy wealth in that idle trade: only for that thou think
thy self amiable* not unlike unto the Hedgehogge, who evermore lodges in the
thorns, because he himself is full of prickells.

But take this both for a warning and an answer, that if thou procecute thy
suite, thou shall but undo thy self, for I am neither to be wooed with thy
passions, whilst thou live, nor to repent me of my rigor when thou art
dead, which I would not have thee think to proceed of any hate I bear
thee, for I mallyce none, but for love to mine honor, which neither Italian
shall violate, nor English man diminish. For as the precious stone Chalazyas,
being thrown into the fire keeps still his colduesse, not to be warmed with
any heat, so my heart although dented at with the arrows of thy burning
affections, and as it were environed with the fire of thy love, shall always
keep his hardness, and be so far from being mollysted, that thou shall not
perceive it moved.

The Uiolet Lady Flauia bestowed on thee, I wish thee, and if thou like it I
will further thee, otherwise if thou persist in thine old follyes, whereby to
increase my new griefs, I will never come where thou art, nor shall thou have
access to the place where I am For as little agreement shall there be
between us, as is betwixt the Uine and the Cabish, the Dke and the Dlyue tree,
the Serpent and the Ash tree, the Iron and Theamides.

And if ever thou did love me manifest it in this, that hereafter thou
never write to me, so shall I both be persuaded of thy faith, and eased of mine
own fear. But if thou attempt again to wring water out of the Pommice, thou
shall but bewray thy falsehood, and augment thy shame, and my severity.

For this I swear, by her whose lights can never die, Vesta, and by her whose
heasts are not to be broken, Diana, that I will never consent to love him, whose
sight (if I may so say with modesty) is more bitter unto me then death.

If this answer will not content thee, I will show thy letters, disclose thy
love, and make thee ashamed to undertake that, which thou cannesse never bring
to pass. And so I end, thine, if thou leave to be mine.

Camilla.


CAmilla dispatched this letter with speed, and sent it to Philautus by her
man, which Philautus having read, I commit the plight he was in, to the
consideration of you Gentlemen that have been in the like: he tare his hair,
rent his clothes, and fell from the passions of a Lover to the panges of
frenzy, but at the last calling his wits to him, forgetting both the charge
Camilla gave him, and the contents of her letter, he greeted her immediately
again, with an answer by her own Messenger in this manner.

To the cruel Camilla. greeting.
IF I were as far in thy beekes, to be believed, as thou art in mine to be
beloved, theu should either soon be made a wife, or ever remain a Hirgin,
the one would rid me of hope, the other acquit me of fear.

But seeing there wants wit in me to persuade, and will in thee to
consent, I mean to manifest she beginning of my love, by the end of my life,
the affectes of the one, shall appear by the effects of the other.

When as neither solemn oath, nor sound persuasion, nor any reason can work
in thee a remorce, I mean by death to show my desire, the which the sooner it
comes, the sweeter it shall be, and the shortness of the force, shall abate
the sharpness of the sorrow. I can-not tell, whether thou laugh at my folly,
or lament my frenzy, but this I say, and with salt tears trickling down my
cheeks, I swear, that thou never foundest more pleasure in rejecting my love,
than thou shall feel pain in remembering my loss, and as bitter shall life be
to thee, as death to me, and as sorrowful shall my friends be to see thee
prosper, as thine glad to see me perish.

Thou think all I write, of course, and make all I speak, of small
account: but God who reuengeth the periuries of the dissembler, is witness of
my truth, of whom I desire no longer to live, than I mean simply to love.

I will not use many words, for if thou be wise, few are sufficient, if
froward, superfluous: one line is enough if thou be courteous, one word too
much, if thou be cruel. Yet this I add, and that in bitterness of soul, that
neither my hand dares write that, which my heart intends, nor my tongue
utter that which my hand shall execute. And so farewell, unto whom only I
wish well.

Thine ever, though shortly never. Philautus.


THis letter being written in the extremity of his rage, he sent by him that
brought hirs. Camilla perceiving a fresh reply, was not a little melancholy,
but digesting it with company, and burning the Letter, she determined never to
write to him, nor after that to see him, so resolute was she in her opinion. I
dare not say obstinate, least you Gentlewomen should take Pepper in the nose,
when I put but salt in your mouths. But this I dare boldly affirm, that
ladies are to be woed with Appelles pencill, Orpheus harp, Mercuries tongue,
Adoms beauty, Croesus wealth, or else never to be won: for their beauties
being blazed, their ears tickeled, their minds moved, their eyes pleased,
their appetite satisfied, their Coffers filled, when they have al things they
should have, and would have, then men need not to stand in doubt, of their
coming, but of their constancy.

But let me follow Philautus, who now both loathing his life, and cursing his
luck, called to remembrance his old friend Euphues, whom he was wont to have
always in mirth a pleasant companion, in grief a comforter, in all his life,
the only stay of his liberty, the discurtesie which he offered him, so
increased his grief, that he fell into these terms of rage, as one either in
an Extacie, or in a Lunacie.

NOw Philautus dispute no more with thy self of thy love, but be desperate to
end thy life, thou have cast off thy friend, and thy Lady has forsaken thee,
thou destitute of both, can neither have comfort of Camilla, who^ thou see
obstinate, nor counsel of Euphues, whom thou have made envious.

Ah my good friend Euphues, I see now at length though too late, that a true
friend is of more price then a kingdom, and that the faith of thee, is to be
preferred before the beauty of Camilla. For as safe being is it in the
company of a trusty mate, as sleeping in the grass Trifole, where there is
no Serpent so venomous, that dare v^nture.

Thou wast ever careful for my estate, and I careless for thine, thou did
always fear in me the fire of love, I ever flattered my self with ye bridle
of wisdom, when thou wast earnest to give me counsel, I wart^ angry to hear
it, if thou did suspect me upon iu^te cause, I fell out with thee for
every light occasion: now, now, Euphues, I see what it is to want a friend, and
what it is to lose one, thy words are come to pass, which once I thought thou
spakest in sport, but now I find them as a Prophecy, that I should be
constrained to stand at Euphues door as the true owner.

What shall I do in this extremity? which way shall I turn me? of whom shall I
seek remedy? Euphues will reject thee, and why should he not? Camilla has
rejected me, and why should she? the one I have offended with too much grief,
the other I have served with too great good will, the one is lost with love,
the other with hate, he for that I cared not for him, she, because I cared for
her. I but though Camilla be not to be moved, Euphues may be mollified. Try
him Philautus, sue to him, make friends, write to him, leave nothing undone,
that may either show in thee a sorrowful heart, or move in him a mind that
is pitiful. Thou know he is of nature courteous, one that hates none, that
loves thee, that is tractable in all things, Lions spare those that couch to
them, the Tygresse byteth not when she is clawed, Cerberus barketh not if
Orpheus pipe sweetly, assure thy self that if thou be penitent be will be
pleased: and the old friendship will be better than the new.

Thus Philautus ioying now in nothing, but only in the hope he had to recover
yt friendship with repentance, which he had broken off by rashness, determined
to greet his friend Euphues, who all this while lost no time at his book in
London, but how he employed it, he shall him self utter, for that I am neither
of his counsel nor court, but what he has done he will not conceal, for
rather he wishes to bewray his ignorance, than his idleness, and willynger you
shall find him to make excuse of rudeness, than lasinesse. But thus Philautus
saluted him.

Philautus to Euphues.
THe sharp Northeast wind (my good Euphues) does never last three days,
tempests have but a short time, and the more violent the thunder is, the less
permanent it is. In the like manner, it falls out with the iarres and
crossings of friends, which begun in a minute are ended in a moment.

Necessary it is that among friends there should be some ouerthwarting, but
to continue in anger not convenient, the Camill first troubles the water
before he drink, ye Frankencense is burned before it smell, friends are tried
before they be trusted, least shining like ye Carbuncle as though they had
fire, they be found being touched to be without fire.

Friendship should be like the Wine which Homer much commending, calls
Maroneum, where-off one pint being mingled with five quartes of water, yet it
keeps his old strength and virtue, not to be quallified by any discourtesie.
Where salt does grow nothing else can breed, where friendship is buylt no
offense can harbor.

Then good Euphues, let the falling out of friends be the renewing of
affection, that in this we may resemble the bones of the Lion, which lying
still and not moved begin to rot, but being stricken one against another break
out like fire, and ware green.

The anger of friends is not unlike unto the Physicians Cucurbitae which
drawing all the infection in ye body into one place, does purge all diseases,
and the iarres of friends, reaping up all the hidden mallices, or suspicions or
follyes that lay lurking in the mind, makes the knot more durable: For as the
body being purged of melantholy waxes light and apt to al labor* so the mind
as it were scoured of mistrust, becomes fit ever after for belief. But why
do I not confess that which I have committed, or knowing my self guilty, why
use I to gloss I have unjustly my good Euphues, picked a quarrel against thee,
forgetting the counsel thou give me, and dispistng that which I now
desire. Which as often as I call to my mind, I cannot but blushe to my self
for shame, and fall out with my self for anger.

For in falling out with thee I have done no otherwise then he that desiring to
sail safely kills him at the helm, resembling him that having need to
alight, spurreth his horse to make him stand still, or him that swimming upon
another back, seeks to stop his breath.

It was in thee Euphues that I put all my trust, and yet upon thee that I
poured out all my malice, more cruel then the Crocadile, who suffers the
bird to breed in her mouth, that scoureth her teeth; and nothing so gentle as
the princely Lion, who saved his life, that helped his foot. But if either thy
good nature can forget, that which my ill tongue does repent, or thy
accustomable kindness forgive, that my unbridled fury did commit, I will
hereafter be as willing to be thy servant, as I am now desirous to be thy
friend, and as ready to take an injury, as I was to give an offense.

What I have done in thine absence I will certify at thy coming, and yet I
doubt not but thou cannest guess by my condition, yet this I add, that I am as
ready to die as to live, and were I not animated with ye hope of thy good
counsel, I would rather have suffered the death I wish for, then sustained
the shame I sought for.

But now in these extremities reposing both my life in thy hands, and my
service at thy commandment, I attend thine answer, and rest thine to use
more then his own.

Philautus


THis letter he dispatched by his boy^, which Euphues reading, could not tell
whether he should more rejoice at his friends submission, or mistrust his
subtlety, therefore as one not resolving himself to determine any thing, as
yet answered him thus immediatelye by his own messenger.

Euphues to him, that was his Philautus.
I Have received thy letter, and know the man: I read it and perceived the
matter, which I am as far from knowing how to answer, as I was from
looking for such an errand.

Thou beginnest to infer a necessity that friends should fall out when as I
cannot allow a conuenience. For if it be among such as are faithful, there
should be no cause of breach: if between dissemblers, no care of
reconciliation.

The Camel say thou, loves water, when it is troubled, and I say, the Heart
thirsfeth for the clear stream: and fitly did thou bring it in against
thy self (though applied it, I know not how aptly for thy self) for such
friendship do thou like where braules may be stirred, not quietness sought.

The wine Maroneum which thou commendest, and the salt ground which thou
inferrest, the one is neither fit for thy drinkng, nor the other for thy taste,
for such strong Wines will overcome such light wits, and so good salt cannot
relysh in so unsavory a mouth, neither as thou desire to apply them, can
they stand thee in steed. For oftentimes have I found much Water in thy
deeds, but not one drop of such wine, and the ground where salt should grow,
but never one corn that had savor.

After many reasons to conclude, that iarres were requisite, thou fa^^est to a
kind of submission, which I marvel at: For if I gave no cause why did
thou pick a quarrel: if any, why should thou crave a pardon? If thou
can defy thy best friend, what will thou do to thine enemy? Certeinely
this must needs ensue, that if thou can not be constant to thy friend; when
he does thee good, thou will never bear with him, when he shall do thee
harm: thou that seek to spill the blood of the innocent, can she we
small mercy to an offender: thou that treadest a Worm on the tail, wilt
crush a Waspe on the head: thou that art angrye for no cause; wilt I think
run mad for a light occasion.

Truly Philautus, that once I loved thee I can-not deny, that now I should
again do so, I refuse: For small confidence shall I repose in thee, when I am
guilty, that can find no refuge in innocence.

The mallyce of a friend is like the sting of an Aspe, which nothing can
remedy, for being pierced in ye hand it must be cut off, and a friend thrust
to the heart it must be pulled out.

I had as liefe Philautus have a wound that inwardly might lightly grieve me,
then a scarre that outwardly should greatly shame me.

In that thou seem so earnest to crave atonement thou causest me the more
to suspect thy truth: for either thou art compelled by necessity, and then it
is not worth thanks, or else disposed again to abuse me, and then it deserves
revenge. Eeles cannot be held in a wet hand yet are they stayed with a bitter
Fig leaf, the Lamprey is not to be killed with a cugell, yet is she spoiled
with a cane, so friends that are so slipperye, and wavering in all their
dealings, are not be kept with fair and smooth talk, but with rough and
sharp taunts: and contrariwise, those which with blows are not to be
reformed, are oftentimes won with light persuasions.

Which way I should use thee I know not, for now a sharp word moved thee,
when otherwhiles a sword will not, then a friendly check kills thee, when a
rasor cannot raze thee.

But to conclude Philautus, it fares with me now, as with those that have been once bitten with the Scorpion, who never after feel any sting, either of
the Waspe, or the Hornet, or the Be, for I having been pricked with thy
falsehoode, shall never I hope again be touched with any other dissembler,
flatterer, or fickle friend.

Touching thy life in my absence, I fear me it has been too loose, but seeing
my counsel is no more welcome unto thee then water into a ship, I will not
wast wind to instruct him, that wastes himself to destroy others.

Yet if I were as fullye persuaded of thy conversion, as thou would have me
of thy confession, I might happily do that which now I will not.

And so farewell Philautus, and though thou little esteem my counsel, yet
have respect to thine own credit: So in working thine own good, thou shall
keep me from harm.

Thine once Euphues.


This letter pinched Philautus at the first, yet trusting much to the good
disposition of Euphues, he determined to persevere both in his suite and
amendment, and therefore as one beating his iron that he might frame it while
it were hot, answered him in this manner.

To mine only friend Euphues.
THere is no bone so hard but being laid in vinegar, it may be wrought, nor
Iuory so tough, but seasoned with Zutho it may be engraven, nor Box so knottie,
that dipped in oil can-not be carved, and can there be a heart in Euphues, which
neither will yield to softness with gentle persuasions, nor true
perseueraunce? What can thou require at my hand that I will deny thee? have
I broken the league of friendship? I confess it, have I misused thee in
terms? I will not deny it. But being sorrowful for either, why should
not thou forgive both.

Water is praised, for that it sauoureth of nothing, Fire, for yt it yields
to nothing: ^ such should the nature of a true friend be, yt it should not
savor of any rigor, and such ye effect, yt it may not be conquered with any
offense: otherwise, faith put into the breast that bears grudges, or
contracted with him, that can remember griefs, is not unlike unto Wine poured
into Fur vessels, which is present death to the drinker.

Friends must be used as the Musicians tune their strings, who finding them in
a discord, do not break the^, but either by intention or remission, frame them
to a pleasant consent: or as Riders handle their young colts, who finding them
wild and intractable, bring them to a good pace, with a gentle rain, not with
a sharp spur, or as the Scythians ruled their slaves, not with cruel
weapons, but with the show of small whippes. Then Euphues consider with thy
self what I may be, not what I have been, and forsake me not for that I
deceived thee, if thou do, thy discourtesie will breed my destruction. For as
there is no beast that touches the herb whereon the Bear has breathed, so
there is no man that will come near him, upon whom the suspicion of deceit is
fastened.

Concerning my life passed I conceal it, though to thee I mean hereafter to
confess it: yet has it not ben so wicked that thou should be ashamed,
though so unfortunate, that I am grieved. Consider we are in England, where
our demeanor will be narrowly marked if we tread awrye, and our follyes mocked
if we use wranglyng. I think thou art willing that no such thing should happen,
and I know thou art wise to prevent it.

I was of late in the company of diverse gentlewomen, among whom Camilla was
present, who meruayled not a little, that thou soughtest either to absent thy
self, of some conceived injury, where there was none given, or of set purpose,
because thou would give one.

I think it requisite, as well to avoid the suspicion of malice, as to
shun the note of ingratitude, that thou repair thither, both to purge thy
self of the opinion, may be conceived, and to give thanks for the benefittes
received.

Thus assuring my self, thou will answer my expectation, and renew our old
amity, I end, thine assured to command.

Philautus.


PHilautus did not sleep about his business, but presently sent his letter,
thinking that if once he could fasten friendship again upon Euphues, that by
his means, he should compass his love with Camilla, and yet this I durst
affirm, that Philautus was both willing to have Euphues, and sorrowful that
he lost him by his own lavishness.

Euphues perused this letter oftentimes, being in a mammering what to answer,
at the last he determined once again to lie a loofe, thinking that if
Philautus meant faithfully, he would not desist from his suit, and therefore he
returned salutations in this manner.

Euphues to Philautus.
THere is an Herb in India, Philautus, of pleasant smell, but who so comes
to it, feels present smart, for that there breed in it, a number of small
Serpents. And it may be, that though thy letter be full of sweet words, there
breed in thy heart many bitter thoughts, so that in giving credit to thy
letters, I may be deceiue^ with thy leasings.

The Box tree is always green, but the seed is poison: Tilia has a sweet
Kind and a pleasant leaf, but the fruit so bitter, that no beast will bite
it, a dissembler has evermore Honny in his mouth, and Gall in his mind, which
makes me to suspect their wyles, though I cannot ever prevent them.

Thou set down the office of a friend, which if thou could as well
perform as thou can describe, I would be as willing to confirm our old
league, as I am to believe thy new laws. Water that sauoureth nothing (as thou
say) may be heated and scalde thee, and fire which yields to nothing, may
be quenched when thou would warm thee. So the friend, in whom there was no
intent to offend, may through ye sinister dealings of his fellow be turned to
heat, being before cold, and the faith which wrought like a flame in him, be
quenched and have no spark.

The pouring of Wine into Fur vessels, serves thee to no purpose, for if it
be good Wine there is no man so foolish to put it into Fur, if bad, who would
power it into better then Fur.

Mustie Caskes are fit for rotten Grapes, a barrel of poisoned Iuie, is good
enough for a tun of stinking Oil, and cruelty, too mild a medicine for
craft.

How Musitions tune their instruments I know, but how a man should temper his
friend I cannot felt, yet oftentimes the string breaks that the Musition
seeks to tune, and the friend cracketh which good counsel should tame, such
Coltes are to be ridden with a sharp snaffle, not with a pleasant bit, and
little will the Scithian whippe be regarded, where the sharpness of the sword
is derided.

If thy luck have been inforunate, it is a sign thy living has not been
godly, for commonly there comes an ill end, where there was a naughtye
beginning.

But learn Philautus to live heere-after, as though thou should not live at
all, be constant to them that trust thee, and trust them that thou have tried,
dissemble not with thy friend, either for fear to displease him, or for
mallyce to deceive him, know this, that the best simples are very simple if the
Physician could not apply them, that precious stones were no better than
Pebbles, if Lapidaries did not know them, that the best friend is worse than a
foe, if a man do not use him.

Methridate must be taken inwardlye, not spread on Playsters, Purgations must
be used like drink, not like Bathes, the counsel of a friend must be
fastened to the mind not to the ear, followed, not praised, employed in good
living, not talked off, in good meaning.

I know Philautus we are in England, but I would we were not, not that the
place is too base, but that we are too badde, and God grant thou have done
nothing, which may turn thee to discredit, or me to displeasure. Thou say
thou were of late with Camilla, I fear me too late, and yet perhaps too
soon, I have always told thee, that she was too high for thee to clymbe, and
too fair for others to catch, and too virtuous for any to inueigle.

But wild Horses break high Hedges, though they can-not leap over him, eager
Wolves bark at the Moon, though they cannot reach it, and Mercury whisteleth
for Vesta, though he can-not win her.

For absenting my self, I hope they can take no cause of offense, neither that
I know, have I given any. I love not to be bold, yet would I be welcome, but
guestes and fish, say we in Athens, are ever stale within three days, shartly
I will visit them, and excuse my self, in the mean season I think so well
of them, as it is possible for a man to think of women, and how well that is,
I appeal to thee, who always made them no worse then sancts in heaven, and
shrines in no worse place then thy heart.

For aunswering thy suite I am not yet so hasty, for accepting thy service, I
am not imperious, for in friendship there must be an equal^tie of estates,
and that may be in us, also a similitude of manners* and that cannot, unless
thou learn a new lesson and leave the old, until which time I leave thee:
wishing thee wall as to my self.

Euphues.


THis letter was written in have sent with speed, and answered again in
post. For Philautus seeing so good counsel could not proceed of any ill
conceit, thought once again to sollycite his friend, and that in such terms
as he might be most agreeable to Euphues tune* In this manner.

To Euphues health in body and quietness in mind.
IN Music there are many discords, before there can be framed a Diapason, and
in contracting of good will, many iarres before there be established
afrindshippe, but by these means, the Music is more sweet, and the amity
more sound. I have received thy letter, where-in there is as much good
counsel contained, as either I would wish, or thou thy self coul^est give:
but ever thou harnest on that string* which long since was out of tune, but
now is broken, my inconstancy.

Certes my good Euphues, as I cannot but commend thy wisdom in making a stay
of reconciliation (for that thou find so little stay in me) so can I not but
marvel at thy incredulity in not believing me, since yt thou see a
reformation in me.

But it may be thou dealest with me, as the Philosopher did with his knife, who
being many years in making of it, always dealing by the observation of the
stars, caused it at the last to cut the hard whetstone, saying that it
skilled not how long things were a doing, but how well they were done.

And thou hold me off with many delays, using I know not what observations,
thinking thereby to make me a friend at last, that shall last: I praise thy
good meaning, but I mislyke thy rigor.

Me thou shall use in what thou will, and do that with a sle^der twist, that
none can do with a tough with. As for my being with Camilla, good Euphues,
rub there no more, least I winch, for deny I will not, that I am wrong on the
withers.

This one thing touching my self I say, and before him that sees all things
I swear, that hereafter I will neither dissemble to delude thee, nor pick
quarrels to fall out with thee, thou shall find me constant to one,
faithless to none, in prayer devout, in manners reformed, in life chaste, in
words modest: not framing my fancy to the humor of love, but my deeds to the
rule of zeal: And such a man as heretofore merrily thou said I was, but
now truly thou shall see I am, and as I know thou art.

Then Euphues appoint the place where we may meet, and reconcite the minds,
which I confess by mine own follyes were severed. And if ever after this, I
shall seem jealous over thee, or blinded toward my self, use me as I deserve,
shamefully.

Thus attending thy speedye answer, for that delays are perilous,
especially as my case now stands* I end thine ever to use as thine own.

Philautus.


EVphues seeing such speedye return of an other answer, thought Philautus to
be very sharps set, for to recover him, and weighing with him self, that often
in marriages there have fallen out bra^^^^, where the chiefest love should be,
and yet again reconciliations, that none ought at any time so to love, that he
should find in his heart, at any time to hate. Furthermore, casting in his
mind the good he might ^o to Philautus by his friendship, and the mischief
that might ensue by his fellows follye, answered him thus again speedely, as
well to prevent the course he might otherwise take* as also to prescribe what
wa^ he should take.

Euphues to his friend Philautus.
NEttells Philautus have no pr^cke^^^, yet they sting, and words have no
points, yet they pearre: though outwardly thou protest great amendment, yet
oftentimes the softness of Wool, which the Seres send, sticks so fast to
the shinne, that when one looks it should keep him warm, it fetches
blood, and thy smooth talk, thy sweet promises may when I shall think to have
them performed so delight me, be a corosiue to destroy me.

But I will not cast beyond the Moon, for that in all things I know there must
be a mean.

Thou swears now that thy life shall be lead by my line, that thou will
give no cause of offense by thy disorders, nor take any by my good meaning,
which if it be (...), I am as willing to be thy friend, as I am to be mine
own.

But this take for a warning, if ever thou ^arre when thou should jest, or
follow thine own will, when thou art to hear my counsel, then will I
depart from thee, and so display thee, as none that is wise shall trust thee,
nor any that is honest shall live with thee.

I now am resolved by the letter, of that which I was almost persuaded off,
by ^ine own* conjecture, touching Camilla.

Why Philautus, (...) thou so mad without acquaintance of thy part o^
su^^^^liarit^^ of (...), to attempt a thing which will not only be a disgrace
to thee, but also a discredit so her* Think thou thy self either worthy to
wood her, or she willing to w^doe thee? either thou able to frame thy tale to
her (...), or the ready to give care to thy conclusions?

No, no Philautus, thou art too young to woo in England, though old enough to
win in Italy, for here they measure more the man by the qualities of his
mind, then the proportion of his body. They are too expert in love, having
learned in this time of their long peace, every wrinckle that is to be seen or
imagined.

It is neither an ill tale well told* nor a good historye made better, neither
invention of new fables, nor the reciting of old, that ran either allure in
them an appetite to love, or almost an attention to hear.

It fares not with them as it does with those in Italy, who prefer a sharp
wit* before (...) wisdom, or a proper man before a perfect mind: they live
not by shadows, nor feed of the Air, nor lust after wind. Their love is
not tied to Art, but reason, not to the precepts of Ovid, but to the
persuasions of honesty.

But I cannot but mer^aile at thy audacitie, that thou ^iddest once dare to
move her to love, whom I always feared to solicit in questioning, as well
doubting to be grauelled by her quick and ready wit, as to be con^uted, by her
grave and wise aunsweres.

But thou will say she was of no great birth, of meaner parentage, than thy
self. I but Philautus, they he most noble who are commended more for their
perfection, than their petegree, and let this suffice thee, that her honor
confisted in virtue, beauty, wit, not blood, ancestors antiquity. But more
of this, at our next meeting, where I think I shall be merry to hear the
discourse of thy madness, for I imagine to my self, that she handeled thee
very hardly, considering both the place she served in, and the person that
served her. And sure I am she did not hang for thy mowing.

A Phoenix is no food for Philautus, that dainty tooth of thine, must be
pulled out, else will thou surfette with desire, and that Eagles eye picked out,
else will it be daseled with delyght. My counsel must rule thy conceit, least
thou confound us both.

I will this evening come to thy lodging where we will confer, And till then, I
commend me to thee.

Thine ever to use, if thou be thine own. Euphues.


THis letter was so thankfully received of Philautus, that he almost ran
beyond himself for joy, preparing all things necessary, for the
enterteinment of his friend, who at the hour appointed failed not.

Many embracings there were, much strange courtesy, many pretty glaunces,
being almost for the time but strangers, biause of their long absence.

But growing to questioning one with another, they fell to the whole discourse
of Philautus love, who left out nothing that before I put in, which I must
omit, least I set before you Cole-wortes twice sodden, which will both offend
your ears which I seek to delight, and trouble my hand which I covet to case.

But this I am sure, that Euphues conclusion was this, between waking and
winking, that our English Ladies and Gentlewomen were so running in love, that
the labor were more easy in Italy to wed one and bury her, than here to woe
one and marry her. And thus they with long talking wared weary, where I leave
them, not willing to talk any longer, but to sleep their fills til morning.

Now Gentlewomen, I appeal in this controversy to your consciences, whether
there be in you an Art to love as Euphues thinks, or whether it breed in you
as it does in me^: by sight, if one be beautiful, by hearing, if one be witty,
by deserts, if one be courteous, by desire, if one be virtuous, which I would
not know, to this intent yt I might be instructed how to win any of you, but to
ye end I might wonder at you al: For if there be in love an Art, the^ do I not
meruel to see men yt every way are to be beloved, so oftentimes to be rejected.
But so secret is this matter perteining nothing to our sex, I will not farther
enquire of it, lest happily in gessing what Art women use in love, I should
minister an art they never before knew: And so in thinking to be wray the bayt
that has caught one, I give them a net to draw many, putting a sword into the
hand, where there is but a sheath, teaching them to strike, that put us to our
tryings by warding, which would double our peril, who without Art cannot
allure them, and increase their tyranny, who without they torment, will come to
no parley.

But this I admonish you, that as your own beauties make you not covetous of
your alms toward true lovers, so other men's flattery make you not prodigal
of your honors toward dissemblers. Let not them yt speak fairest be believed
soonest, for true love lacks a tongue, and is tried by the eyes, which in a
heart that means well, are as far from wanton glaunces, as the mind, is
from idle thoughts.

And this Art I will give you, which we men do commonly practice, if you
behold any one that either your courtesy has allured, or your beauty, or
both, triumph not over him, but the more earnest you see him, the more ready
be to follow him, and when he thinks himself nearest, let him be farthest
off: Then if he take that with patience, assure your self he cannot be
faithless.

He that Angleth, plucketh the bayte away when he is near a byte, to the end
the fish may be more eager to swallowe the hook, Birds are trained with a
sweet call, but caught with a broad net: and lovers come with fair looks,
but are entangled with disdainefull eyes.

The Spaniel that fawneth when he is beaten, will never forsake his master, the
man that doateth when he is disdayned, will never forgo his Mistres.

But too much of this String, which sowndeth too much out of square, and
return we to Euphues and Philautus.

The next morning when they were risen, they went into a gallerie, where
Euphues, who perceived Philautus grievously perplexed for the love of Camilla,
began thus between jest and earnest to talk with him.

PHilautus, I have well nigh all this night been disputing with my self of thy
distress, yet can I resolve my self in nothing that either may content me,
or quiet thee.

What metal art thou made off Philautus, that think of nothing but Love,
and art rewarded with nothing less than love: Lucilla was too badde, yet
did thou court her, thy sweet heart now in Naples is none of the best,
yet did thou follow her, Camilla exceeding all, where thou wast to have
least hope, thou have wo^d not without great hazard to thy person, and grief
to mine.

I have perused her letters which in my simple judgment are so far from
allowing thy suit, that they seem to loath thy service. I will not flatter
thee in thy follies, she is no match for thee, nor thou for her, the one
wanting living to maintain a wife, the other birthe to advance an husband.
Surius whom I remember thou did name in thy discourse, I remember in the
Court, a man of great birth and noble blood, singular wit and rare personage,
if he go about to get credit, I muse what hope thou could conceive to have
a good countenance. Well Philautus to set down precepts against thy Love, will
nothing prevail, to persuade thee to go forward, were very perilous, for I
know in the one, love will regard no laws, and in the other persuasions can
purchase to liberty. Thou art too heady to enter in, where no heed can help
one out.

Theseus would not go into the Laborinth without a threede that might show
him the way out, neither any wise man enter into the crooked corners of love,
unless he knew by what means he might get out. Love which should continue for
ever should not be begone in an hour, but slowly be taken in hand, and by
length of time finished: resemblyng Zeuxis that wise Painter, who in things,
that he would have last long, took greatest leisure.

I have not forgotten one Mistres Frauncis, which the Lady Flauia gave thee
for a Uiolette, and by thy description, though she be not equal with Camilla,
yet is she fitter for Philautus. If thy humor be such, yt nothing can feed
it but love, cast thy mind on her, confer the impossibilytie thou have to
win Camilla, with the lykelyhoode thou may have to enjoy thy Uyolet: and in
this I will endeavor both my wit and my good will, so that nothing shall want
in me, that may work ease in thee. Thy Uiolet if she be honest is worthy of
thee, beautiful thou say she is, and therefore too worthy: Hot fire is not
only quenched by the clear fountain, nor love only satisfied by the fair
face. Therefore in this tell me thy mind, yt either we may proceed in that
matter, or seek a new medicine. Philautus thus replied.

OH my good Euphues, I have neither the power to forsake mine own Camilla, nor
the heart to deny thy counsel, it is easy to fall into a net, but hard to
get out. Notwithstanding I will go against the hair in all things, so I may
please thee in any thing, O my Camilla. With that Euphues stayed him, saying.

^E that has sore eyes must not behold the candle, nor he that would leave his
love, fall to the remembering of his Lady, the one causes the eye to smart, ye
other the heart to bleed: well quoth Philautus, I am content to have the wound
searched, yet unwilling to have it cured, but si^hens that sick men are not to
prescribe diots but to keep them, I am ready to take potions, and if wealth
serve, to pay thee for them, yet one thing makes me to fear that in running
after two Hares, I catch neither. And certeinely quoth Euphues, I know many
good hunters that take more delight to have the Hare on foot, and never catch
it, then to have no cry and yet kill in the form: whereby I guess, there
comes greater delight in the hunting, then in the eating. It may be said
Philautus, but I were then very unfit for such pastimes, for what sport soever
I have all the day, I love to have the game in my dish at night.

And truly answered Euphues, you are worse made for a hound then a hunter,
for you mar your sent with carre^ before you start your game, which makes
you hu^t oftentimes counter, whereas if you had kept it pure, you might ere
this time have turned the Hare you winded, and caught the game you coursed.
Why then I perceive quoth Philautus, that to talk with Gentlewomen, touching
the discourses of love, to eat with them, to confer with them, to laugh with
them, is as great pleasure as to enjoy the^, to the which thou may by some
fallacy drive me, but never persuade me: For then were it as pleasant to
behold fruit, as to eat them, or to see fair bread as to taste it. Thou errest
Philautus, said Euphues, if thou be not of that mind, for he that comes into
fine garde^s is as much recreated to smell the flower, as to gather it. And
many we see more delighted with pictures, then desirous to be Painters: the
effect of love is faith, not lust, delightful conference, not detestable
concupiscence, which begins with folly, and ends with repentance. For
mine own part, I would wish nothing, if again I should fall into that vain,
then to have the company of her in common conference that I best loved, to
hear her sober talk, her wise aunsweres, to behold her sharp capacity, and
to be persuaded of her constancy: and in these things do we only differ from
brute beasts, who have no pleasure but in sensual appetite. You preach
heresic, quoth Philautus, and besides so repugnant to the text you have taken,
that I am more ready to pull thee out of thy Pulpit, then to believe thy gloses.

I love the company of women well, yet to have them in lawful Matrimony, I like
much better, if thy reasons should go as current, the^ were love no torment, for
hardly does it fall out with him, that is denied ye sight and talk of his lady.
Hungry stomachs are not to be sed with sayings against surfettings, nor thirst
to be quenched with sentences against drunkenness. To love women and never enjoy
them, is as much as to love wine, and never taste it, or to be delighted with
fair apparel, and never wear it. An idle love is yt, and fit for him yt has
nothing but ears, yt is satisfied to hear her speak, not desirous to have
himself speed. Why then Euphues, to have ye picture of his Lady, is as much, as
to enjoy her presence, and to read her letters, of as great force, as to hear
her answers: which if it be, my suit in love should be as much to the painter
to draw her with an amiable face, as to my Lady to write an amorous letter,
both which, with little suite being obtained, I may live with love, and never
wet my foot, nor break my sleeps, nor waste my money, nor torment my mind.

But this works as much delight in ye mind of a lover, as the Apples that
hang at Tantalus nose, or ye River that runs close by his chin. And in one
word, it would do me no more good, to see my Lady and not to embrace her, in
the heat of my desire, then to see fire and not to warm me in the extremity
of my cold.

No, no Euphues, thou make love nothing but a continual woing, if thou bar
it of the effect, and then is it infinite, if thou allow it, and yet forbid
it, a perpetual warfare, and then is it intolerable. From this opinion no man
shall withdraw me, that the end of fishing is catching, not angling: of
birding, taking, not whistling: of love, wedding, not woing Otherwise it is no
better then hanging, Euphues smyling to see Philautus so earnest, urged him
again, in this manner.

WHy Philautus, what harm were it in love, if ye heart should yield his right
to the eye, or the fancy his force to the care. I have read of many, and some
I know, between whom there was as fervent affection as might be, that never
desired any thing, but sweet talk, and continual company at bankets, at
plays, and other assemblies, as Phrigius and Pieria, whose constant faith was
such, that there was never word nor thought of any uncleanness. Pigmalion
loved his Iuory image, being enamored only by ye sight, and why should not ye
chaste love of others, be builded rather in agreeing in heavenly meditations,
then temporal actions. Believe me Philautus, if thou knew what it were to
love, thou would be as far from the opinion thou hold, as I am.
Philautus thinking no greater absurdity to be held in the world then this,
replied before the other could end, as follows.

IN deed Euphues, if the king would resign his right to his Legate, then were
it not amiss for the heart to yield to the eyes. Thou know Euphues yt the
eye is the messenger of love, not ye Master, that the ear is the caryer of
news, the heart the disgester. Besides this suppose one have neither ears to
hear his lady speak, nor eyes to see her beauty, shall he not therefore be
subject to the impression of love. If thou answer no, I can allege diverse,
both deaf and blind, that have been wounded, if thou grant it, the^
confess the heart must have his hope, which is neither seeing nor hearing, and
what is the third?

Touching Phrigius and Peria, think them both fools in this, for he that
keeketh a Hen in his house to cackle and not lay, or a Cock to crow and not to
tread, is not unlike unto him yt having sown his wheat never reapeth it, or
reaping it never thresheth it, taking more pleasure to see fair corn then to
eat fine bread: Pigmalion makes against this, for Venus seeing him so
earnestly to love, and so effectually to pray, granted him his request, which
had he not by importunate suite obtained, I doubt not but he would rather have
hewed her in pieces the^ honored her with passions, and set her up in some
Temple for an image, not kept her in his house for a wife. He yt desires only
to talk and view without any further suite, is not far different from him
that likes to see a painted rose better then to smell to a perfect Uiolet, or
to hear a bird sing in a bush, rather then to have her at home in his own
cage.

This will I follow, that to plead for love, and request nothing but looks,
and to deserve works, and live only by words, is as one should plowe his
ground, and never so we it, grind his colors and never paint, saddle his
horse and never ride.

As they were thus communing, there came from the Lady Flauia a Gentleman, who
invited them both that night to supper, which they with humble thanks given
promised to do so, and till supper time I leave them debating their question.

Now Gentlewomen, in this matter I would I knew your minds, and yet I can
somewhat guess at your meaninges, if any of you should love a Gentleman of
such perfection as you can wish, would it content you only to hear him, to
see him dance, to mark his personage, to delyght in his wit, to wonder at all
his qualyties, and desire no other solace? If you like to hear his pleasant
voice to sing, his fine singers to play, his proper personage to undertake any
exployte, would you covet no more of your love? As good it were to be silent
and think no, as to blush and say I.

I must needs conclude with Philautus, though I should cauil with Euphues, that
the end of love, is the full fruition of the party beloved, at all times and
in all places. For it cannot follow in reason, that because the sauce is good
which should provoke mine appetite, therefore I should forsake the meat for which
it was made. Believe me the qualities of the mind, the beauty of the body,
either in man or woman, are but sauce to whet our stomachs, not meat to fill
them. For they that live by the view of beauty still, look very lean, and
they that seed only upon virtue at boorde, will go with an hungry belly to
bed.

But I will not crave here in, your resolute answer, because between them
it was not determined, but every one as he lyketh, and then.

Euphues and Philautus being now again sent for to the Lady Flauia her house,
they came presently, where they found the worthy Gentleman Surius, Camilla,
Mistress Frauncis, with many other Gentlemen and Gentlewome^.

At their first entrance doing their duty, they saluted all the company, and
were welcomed.

The Lady Flauia entertained them both very lovingly, thanking Philautus for
his last company, saying be merry Gentleman at this time of the year, a
Uiolet is better than a Rose, and so she arose and went her way, leaving
Philautus in a muse at her words, who before was in a maze at Camillas looks.
Camilla came to Euphues in this manner.

I am sorry Euphues that we have no green Rushes, considering you have been so
great a stranger, you make me almost to think that of you, which commonly I
am not accustomed to judge of any, that either you thought your self too good,
or our cheer too badde, other cause of absence I cannot imagine, unless seeing
us very idle, you sought means to be well employed, but I pray you hereafter
be bold, and those things which were amiss shall be redressed, for we-wil
have Quails to amend your commons, and some questions to sharpen your wits, so
that you shall neither find fault with your dyot for the grosenesse, nor with
your exercise for easiness. As for your fellow and friend Philautus we are
bound to him, for he would oftentimes see us, but seldom eat with us, which
made us think that he cared more for our company, than our meat.

Euphues as one that knew his good, answered her in this wise.

Fair Lady, it were unseemly to strew green rushes for his coming, whose
company is not worth a straw, or to account him a stranger, whose boldness,
has been strange to all those that knew him to be a stranger.

The small ability in me to requit, compared with the great cheer I received,
might happily make me refrain which is contrary to your conjecture: Whether was
I ever so busied in any weighty affairs, which I accounted not as lost time
in respect of the exercise I always found in your company, which makes me
think yt your latter objection proceeded rather to convince me for a truant,
then to manifest a truth.

As for the Quails you promise me, I can be content with beef, and for the
questions they must be easy, else shall I not answer them, for my wit will
show with what gross dyot I have been brought up, so that conferring my rude
replies with my base birth, you will think that mean cheer will serve me, and
reasonable questions deceive me, so that I shall neither find fault for my
repast, nor favor for my reasons, Philautus in deed takes as much delyght in
good company as in good cates, who shall answer for himself, with that
Philautus said.

Truly Camilla where I think my self welcome, I love to be bold, and when my
stomach is filled I care for no meat, so that I hope you will not blame me, if
I come often and eat little.

I do not blame you by my faith quoth Camilla, you mistake me, for the oftener
you come, the better welcome, and the less you eat, the more is saved.

Much talk passed, which being only as it were a repetition of former things,
I omit as superfluous, but this I must note, that Camilla earnestly desired
Surius to be acquainted with Euphues, who very willingly accomplished her
request, desiring Euphues for the good report he had heard of him, that he
would be as bold with him, as with any one in England, Euphues humbly showing
his duetye, promised also as occasion should serve, to try him.

It now grew toward Supper time, when the table being covered, and the meat
served in, Lady Flauia placed Surius over against Camilla, and Philautus next
Mistres Frauncis, she took Euphues and the rest, and placed them in such
order, as she thought best. What cheer they had I know not, what talk they
used I heard not: but Supper being ended, they sat still, the Lady Flauia
speaking as follows.

GEntlemen and Gentlewomen these Lenten Euenings be long, and a shame it were
to go to bed: cold they are, and therefore follye it were to walk abroad:
to play at Cards is common, at Chestes tedious, at Dice unseemly, with
Christmas games untimely. In my opinion therefore, to pass away these long
nights, I would have some pastime that might be pleasant, but not
unprofitable, rare but not without reasoning: so shall we all account the
Evening well spent, be it never so long, which otherwise would be tedious, were
it never so short.

Surius the best in the company, and therefore best worthy to answer, and the
wisest, and therefore best able, replied in this manner.

GOod Madame you have prevented my request with your own, for as the case now
stands, there can be nothing either more agreeable to my humor or these
Gentlewomens desires, to use some discourse, as well to renew old traditions,
which have been heertosore used, as to increase friendship, which has been by
the means of certain odd persons defaced. Every one gave his consent with
Surius, yielding the choice of that nights pastime, to the discretion of the
Lady Flauia, who thus proposed her mind.

Your task Surius shall be to dispute with Camilla, and choose your own
argument, Philautus shall argue with Mistres Frauncis, Martius with my self.
And all having finished their discourses, Euphues shall be as Judge, who* has
done best, and whatsoever he shall allot either for reward, to ye worthiest, or
for penance to ye worst, shall be presently accomplished. This liked the^ al
exceedingly. And thus Surius with a good grace and pleasant speech, began to
enter the listes with Camilla.

Fair Lady, you know I flatter not, I have read yt the sting of an Aspe were
incurable, had not nature given them dim eyes, and the beauty of a woman no
less infectious, had not nature bestowed upon the^ gentle hearts, which makes
me ground my reason upon this common place, that beautiful women are ever
merciful, if merciful, virtuous, if virtuous constant, if constant, though no
more than goddesses, yet no less then Saints, all these things granted, I
urge my question without condition.

If Camilla, one wounded with your beauty (for under that name I comprehend
all other virtues) should sue to open his affection, serve to try it, and
drive you to so narrow a point, that were you never so incredulous, he should
prove it, yea so far to be from suspicion of deceit, that you would
confess he were clear from distrust, what answer would you make, if you
gave your consent, or what excuse if you deny his courtesy.

Camilla, who desired nothing more then to be questioning with Surius, with a
modest countenance, yet somewhat bashful (which added more commondation to her
speech then disgrace) replied in this manner.

THough there be no cause noble Gentleman, to suspect an injury where a good
turn has been received ^ot is it wisdom to be careful, what answer be made,
where the question is difficult. I have heard that the Torteise in India, when
the Sun shines swimmeth above the water with her back, and being delighted
with the fair weather, forgets her self, until the heat of the Sun so
harden her shell, that she cannot sincke when she would* whereby she is caught.
And so may it fare with me, that in this good company, dasplaying my mind,
having more regard to my delight in talking, then to the ears of the hearers,
I forget what I speak, and so ^e taken insou^^ thing, I should not utter,
which happily ye itching ears of young Gentlemen would so canuas, that when I
would call it in, I cannot, and so be caught with the Torteise, when I would not.

Therefore if any thing be spoken either unawares or unjustly, I am to crane
pardon for both: having but a weak memory, and a worse wit, which you cannot
deny me for that we say women are to be borne with all if they offend
against their wills, and not much to be blamed if they trip with their wills,
ye one proceeding of forgetfulness, the other, of their natural weakness,
but to the matter.

IF my beauty (which God knows how simple it is) should entangle any with
desire, then should I thus think, that either he were enflamed with lust rather
the^ love (for that he is moved by my countenance, not enquiring of my
conditions,) or else that I gave some occasion of lightness, because he gathers
a hope to speed, where he never had the heart to speak. But if at the last I
should perceive that his faith were tried like gold in the fire, that his
affection proceeded from a mind to please, not from a mouth to delude, then
would I either answer his love with lyking, or weane him from it by reason.
For I hope sir you will not think this, but that there should be in a woman
as well a tongue to deny, as in a man to desire, that as men have reason to like
for beauty, where they love, so women have wit to refuse for sundry causes,
where they love not.

Otherwise were we bound to such an inconvenience, that whosoever served us, we
should answer his suite, when in every respect we mistike his conditions, so
that Nature might be said to frame us for others humors, not for our own
appetites. Where-in to some we should be thought very courteous, but to the
most, scarce honest. For mine own part, if there be any thing in me to be
lyked of any, I think it reason to bestow on such a one, as has also somewhat
to content me, so that where I know my selse loved, and do love again, I would
upon just trial of his constancy, take him. Surius without any stop or long
pause replied presently.

LAdy if the Torteyse you spoke off in India, were as cunning in swimming, as
you are in speking he would neither fear the heat of ye Sun, nor the ginne
of the Fisher. But that excuse was brought in, rather to show what you could
say, then to crave pardon, for that you have said. But to your answer.

What your beauty is, I will not here dispute, least either your modest ears
should glow to hear your own praises, or my smooth tongue trippe in being
curious to your perfection, so yt what I cannot commend sufficiently, I will not
cease continually to marvel at. You wander in one thing out of ye way, where
you say that many are enflamed with ye countenance, not enquiring of the
conditions, when this position was before grounded, that there was none
beautiful, but she was also merciful, and so drawing by the face of her
beauty, al other morral virtues, for as one ring being touched with the
Loadstone draws another, and that his fellow, till it come to a thaine, so a
Lady endewed with beauty, pulls on courtesy, courtesy mercy, and one virtue
linkes it self to another, until there be a rare perfection.

Besides touching your own lightness, you must not imagine that love breeds
in the heart of man by your looks, but by his own eyes, neither by your words
when you speak wittily, but by his own ears, which conceive aptly. So that
were you dumb and could not speak, or blind, and could not see, yet should
you be beloved, which argues plainly, that the eye of the man is ye arrow, the
beauty of the woman the white, which shoots not, but receives, being the
patient, not the agent: upon trial you confess you would trust, but what
trial you require you conceal, which makes mo suspecte that either you would
have a trial without mean, or without end, either not to be sustained being
impossible, or not to be finished being infinite. Wherein you would have one run
in a circle, where there is no way out, or build in ye air, where there is no
means how.

This trial Camilla must be sifted to narrower points, least in seeking to try
your lover like a Ienet, you tire him like a Jade.

Then you require this liberty (which truly I cannot deny you) that you may
have ye choice as well to refuse, as the man has to offer, requiring by that
reason some qualities in the person you would bestow your love on: yet craftily
hiding what properties either please you best, or like women well: wherein
again you move a doubt, whether personage, or wealth, or wit, or all, are to
be required: so that what with the close trial of his faith, and the subtle
wishing of his qualities, you make either your Lover so holy, that for faith he
must be made al of truth, or so exquisite that for shape he must be framed in
ware: which if it be your opinion, the beauty you have will be withered before
you be wedded, and your wooers good old Gentlemen before they be speeders.

Camilla not permitting Surius to leap over ye hedge, which she set for to
keep him in, with a smiling countenance shaped him this answer.

IF your position be granted, that where beauty is, there is also virtue, then
might you add that where a fair flower is, there is also a sweet savor,
which how repugnaunt it is to our common experience, there is none but knows,
and how contrary the other is to truth, there is none but sees. Why then do
you not set down this for a rule which is as agreeable to reason, yt Rhodope
being beautiful (if a good complexion and fair favor be termed beauty) was
also virtuous? that Lais excelling, was also honest? that Phrine surpassing
them both in beauty, was also courteous? But it is a reason among your
Philosophers, that the disposition of the mind, follows the composition of ye
body, how true in arguing it may be, I know not, how false in trial it is, who
knows not?

Beauty, though it be amiable, works many things contrary to her fair show,
not unlike unto silver, which being white, draws black lines, or resembling
the tal trees in Ida, which allured many to rest in them under their shadow,
and then infected them with their sent.

Now where-as you set down, that love comes not from the eyes of the
woman, but from the glaunces of the man (under correction be it spoken) it is
as far from the truth, as the head from the toe. For were a Lady blind, in
what can she be beautiful? if dumb, in what manifest her wit? when as the eye
has ever ben thought the Pearl of the face, and the tongue the Ambassador of
the heart? If there were such a Lady in this company Surius that should wink
with both eyes, when you would have her see your amorous looks, or be no
blabbe of her tongue, when you would have her answer to your questions, I
can-not think, that either her virtuous conditions, or her white and red
complexion could move you to love.

Although this might somewhat procure your lyking, that doing what you list,
she will not see it, and speaking what you would, she will not utter it, two
notable virtues and rare in our sex, patience, and silence.

But why talk I about Ladies that have no eyes, when there is no man that will
love them, if he himself have eyes. More reason there is to woo one that is
dumb, for that she cannot deny your suite, and yet having ears to hear, she
may as well give an answer with a sign as a sentence. But to the purpose.

Love comes not from him that loves, but from the party loved, else must he
take his love upon no cause, and then it is lust, or think himself the
cause, and then it is no love. Then must you conclude thus, if there be not in
women the occasion, they are foolrs to trust men yt praise them, if the cause
be in them, then are not men wise to arrogate it to themselves.

It is the eye of the women that is made of Adamant, the heart of the man that
is framed of iron, and I cannot think you will say that the virtue attractiue is
in ye iron which is drawn by force, but in the Adamant that searches it
perforce. And this is the reason, that many men have been entangled against
their wills with love, and kept in it, with their wills.

You know Surius that the fire is in the flint that is stricken, not in the
steel that strikes, the light in the Sun that lends, not in the Moon that
boroweth, the love in the woman that is served, not in the man that sueth.

The similitude you brought in of the arrow, flew nothing right to beauty,
wherefore I must shoot that shafte at your own breast. For if the eye of man be
the arrow, and beauty the white (a fair mark for him that draws in Cupids
bow) then must it necessarily ensue, that ye archer desires with an aim to
hitte the white, not ye white the arrow, that the mark allureth the Archer,
not the shooter the mark, and therefore is Venus said in one eye to have two
Apples, which is commonly applied to those yt witch with the eyes, and not
those that woo with their eyes.

Touching trial, I am neither so foolish to desire things impossible, nor so
froward to request that which has no ende^^ ^ut words shall never make me
believe without works, least in following a fair shadow, I lose the firm
substance, and in one word set down the only trial that a Lady requires of
her lover, it is this, that he perform as much as he swear, that every oath be
a deed, every gloase a gospel, promising nothing in his talk, that he
perform not in his trial.

The qualities that are required of the mind are good conditions, as
temperance, not to exceed in diet, chastity, not to sin in desire, constancy,
not to covet change, wit to delight, wisdom to instruct, mirth to please
without offense, and modesty to govern without preciseness.

Concerning the body, as there is no Gentlewoman so curious to have him in
print, so is there no one so careless to have him a wretch, only his right shape
to show him a man, his Christendom to prove his faith, indifferent wealth to
maintain his family, expecting all things necessary, nothing superfluous. And
to conclude with you Surius, unless I might have such a one, I had as leave be
buried as married, wishing rather to have no beauty and dye a chaste virgin,
the^ no joy and live a cursed wife. Surius as one daunted having little to
answer, yet delighted to hear her speak, with a short speech uttered these
words.

I Perceive Camilla, that be your cloth never so bad, it will take some color,
and your cause never so false, it will bear some show of probability, wherein
you manifest the right nature of a woman, who having no way to win, thinks
to overcome with words. This I gather by your answer, that beauty may
have fair leaves, and foul fruit, that all that are amiable are not honest,
that love proceeds of the woman's perfection, and the man's follies, that the
trial looked for, is to perform whatsoever they promise, that in mind he be
virtuous, in body comely, such a husband in my opinion is to be wished for,
but not looked for. Take heed Camilla, that seeking all the Wood for a
straight stick, you choose not at the last a crooked staff, or describing a
good coun^aile to others, thou thy self follow the worste: much like to
Chius, who selling the best wine to others, drank himself of the lees.

Truly quoth Camilla, my Wool was black, and therefore it could take no other
color, and my cause good, and therefore admits no cauil: as for the rules I
set down of love, they were not coined of me, but learned, and being so true,
believed. If my fortune be soil that searching for a wande, I gather a camocke,
or selling wine to other, I drink viniger my self, I must be content yt of the
worst poor help patience, which by so much the more is to be borne, by how
much the more it is perforce.

As Surius was speaking, the Lady Flauia prevented him, saying, it is time yt
you break off your speech, least we have nothing to speak, for should you
wade any farther, you would both waste the night, and leave us no time, and
take our reasons, and leave us no matter, that every one therefore may say
somewhat, we command you to cease, that you have both said so well, we give
you thanks. Thus letting Surius and Camilla to whisper by themselves (whose
talk we will not hear) the Lady began in this manner to greet Martius.

We see Martius that where young folks are, they treat of love, when soldiers
meet they confer of war, painters of their colors, Musicians of their
crochets, and every one talks of that most, he lyketh best. Which seeing it
is so, it behooves us, that have more years, to have more wisdom, not to
measure our talk by the affections we have had, but by those we should have.

In this therefore I would know thy mind, whether it be convenient for women
to haunt such places where Gentlemen are, or for men to have access to
Gentlewomen, which me thinks in reason can-not be tolerable, knowing that
there is nothing more pernicious to either, then love, and that love breeds by
nothing sooner than looks. They that fear water will come near no wells,
they that stand in dread of burning, fly from the fire: and ought not they
that would not be entangled with desire, to refrain company? If love have the
pangs which ye passi^na^^ set down, why do they not abstain from the cause? if
it be pleasant why do they dispraise it.

We shun the place of pestilence for fear of infection, the eyes of
Catherismes, because of diseases, ye sight of ye Basilisk, for dread of death,
and shall we not eschew the company of them that may entrap us in love, which
is more bitter then any destruction?

If we fly thieves that stale our goods, shall we follow murderers that cut
our throats? If we be heedie to come where Waspes be, least we be strong*
shall we hazard to run where Cupid is, where we shall be stifeled? Truly
Martius in my opinion there is nothing either more repugnant to reason, or
abhorring from nature, then to seek that we should shun, leaving the
clear stream to drink of the muddy ditch, or in the extreamitie of heat to
lie in the parching Sun, when he may sleep in the cold shaddowe, or being
free from fancy, to seek after love, which is as much as to cool a hot
Liver with strong wine, or to cure a weak stomach with raw flesh. In this I
would hear thy sentence, induced the rather to this discourse, for that Surius
and Camilla have begun it, then that I like it: Love in me has neither power
to command, nor persuasion to entreat. Which how idle a thing it is, and how
pestilent to youth, I partly know, and you I am sure can guess.

Martius not very young to discourse of these matters, yet desirous to utter
his mind, whether it were to flatter Surius in his will, or to make trial of
the Ladies wit: Began thus to frame his answer.

MAdam, there is in Chio the Image of Diana which to those that enter seems
sharp and sower, but returning after their suites made, looks with a merry
and pleasant countenance. And it may be that at the entrance of my
discourse ye will bend your brows as one displeased, but hearing my proof
be delighted and satisfied.

The question you move is, whether it be requisite, that Gentlemen and
Gentlewomen should meet.

Truly among lovers it is convenient to augement desire, amongst those that are
firm, necessary to maintain society. For to take away all meeting for fear
of love, were to kindle amongst all, the fire of hate. There is greater danger
Madame, by absence, which breeds melancholy, then by presence, which
engenders affection.

If the sight be so perilous, that the company should be barred, why then
admit you those to see banquets, that may thereby surfeit, or suffer them to
eat their meat by a candle that have sore eyes? To be separated from one I
love, would make me more constant, and to keep company with her I love not,
would not kindle desire. Love comes as well in at the ears, by the report
of good conditions, as in at the eyes by the amiable countenance, which is
the cause that diverse have loved those they never saw, and seen those they
never loved.

You allege that those that fear drowning, come near no wells, nor they that
dread burning, near no fire. Why then let them stand in doubt also to wash
their hands in a shallowe brook: for that Serapus falling into a channel was
drowned: and let him that is cold never warm his hands, for that a spark
fell into the eyes of Actina, whereoff she dyed. Let none come into the company
of women, for that diverse have been allured to love, and being refused, have
used violence to themselves.

Let this be set down for a law, that none walk abroad in the day but men,
least meeting a beautiful woman, he fall in love, and loose his liberty.

I think Madam you will not be so precise, to cut off all conference,
because love comes by often communication, which if you do, let us all now
presently depart, least in seeing the beauty which daseleth our eyes, and
hearing the wisdom which tickleth our ears, we be enflamed with love.

But you shall never beat the Fly from the Candell though he burn, nor the
Quail from the Hemloch though it be poison, nor the lover from the company of
his Lady though it be perilous.

It falls out sundry times, that company is the cause to shake off love,
working the effects of the root Rubarbe, which being full of choler, purges
choler, or of the Scorpions sting, which being full of poison, is a remedy for
poison.

But this I conclude, that to bar one that is in love of the company of his
Lady, makes him rather mad then mortified, for him to refrain that never
knew love, is either to suspect him of folly without cause, or the next way for
him to fall into folly when he knows the cause.

A lover is like ye herb Heliotropium, which always enclyneth to that place
where the Sun shines, and being deprived of the Sun, dies. For as Lunaris
herb, as long as the Moon wareth, brings forth leaves, and in the waning
shakes them off: so a lover whilst he is in the company of his Lady, where all
joys increase, utters many pleasant conceits, but banished from the sight
of his Mistress, where all mirth decreaseth either lives in melancholye, or
dies with desperation.

The Lady Flauia speaking in his cast, proceeded in this manner.

LKuely Martius I had not thought that as yet your costs tooth stuck in your
mouth, or that so old a trewant in love, could hitherto remember his lesson.
You seem not to infer that it is requisite they should meet, but being in
love yt it is convenient, least falling i^^o a mad mood, they pine in their
own peevishness. Why then let it follow, that the Drunckarde which sur^^^eth
with wine be always quaffing, because he likes it, or the Epicure which
glutteth himself with meat be ever eating, for that it contenteth him not
seeking at any time the means to redress their vices, but to renew (...). But
it fares with the Lover as it does with him that powers in much wine, who is
ever more thirsty, then he that drinks moderately, for having once tasted
the delights of love, he desires most the thing that hurts him most, not
laying a plaster to the wound, but a corrasiue.

I am of this mind, that if it be dangerous, to lay Flare to the fire, Salt
to the eyes, Sulphur to ye nose, that then it cannot be but perilous to let
one Lover come in presence of the other. For Surius ouer-hearing the Lady, and
seeing her so carnest, although he were more earnest in his suite to Camilla,
cut her off with these words.

GOod Madame give me leave either to depart, or to speak, for in truth you
gall me more with these terms, then you wist, in seeming to inueigh so
bitterly against the meeting of lovers, which is the only Marrowe of love,
and though I doubt not but that Martius is sufficiently armed to answer you,
yet would I not have those reasons refelled, which I loath to have repeated. It
may be you utter them not of malice you bear to love, but only to move
controversy where there is no question: For if thou envy to have lovers
meet, why did you grant us, if allow it, why seek you to separate us?

The good Lady could not refrain from laughter, when she saw Surius so
angrye, who in the midst of his own tale was troubled with hirs, whom she
thus again answered.

I cry you mercy gentleman, I had not thought to have catched you, when I
fished for an other, but I perceive now, yt with one bean it is easy to get
two Pigeons, and with one bayte to have diverse bits, I see that others may
guess where the shoe wrings, besides him that wears it.

Madame quoth Surius, you have caught a Frog, if I be not deceived, and
therefore as good it were not to hurt him, as not to eat him, but if all this
while you angled to have a bit at a Lover, you should have used no bitter
medicines but pleasant baits.

I cannot tell answered Flauia, whether my bayght were bitter or not, but sure
I am I have the Fish by the gyll that does me good.

Camilla not thinking to be silent, put in her speak as she thought into the
best wheel, saying.

Lady your cunning may deceive you in fishing with an Angle, therefore to
catch him you would have, you were best to use a Net. A Net quoth Flauia, I
need none, for my Fish plays in a net already, with that Surius began to
winch, replying immediately, So does many a Fish good Lady that slippeth out,
when the Fisher thinks him fast in, and it may be, that either your net is
too weak to hold him, or your hand too wet. A wet hand quoth Flauia will
hold a dead Hearing: I quoth Surius, but Eeles are no Hearings, but Lovers
are, said Flauia.

Surius not willing to have the Grass mowen, where off he meant to make his
hay, began thus to conclude.

GOod Lady leave off fishing for this time, and though it be Lent, rather break
a statute which is but penal, than sew a Ponde that may be perpetual.

I am content quoth Flauia, rather to fast for once, than to want a pleasure
for ever: yet Surius betwixt us two, I will at large prove, that there is
nothing in love more venomous than meeting, which fills the mind with
grief, and the body with diseases, for having the one, he cannot fail of the
other. But now Philautus and Niece Frauncis, since I am cut off, begin you: but
be short, because the time is short, and that I was more short than I would.

Frauncis who was ever of wit quick, and of nature pleasant, seeing Philautus
all this while to be in his dumpes, began thus to play with him.

GEntleman, either you are musing who shall be your second wife, or who shall
father your first child, else would you not all this while hang your head,
neither attending to the discourses that you have heard, nor regarding the
company you are in: or it may be (which of both conjectures is lykelyest) that
hearing so much talk of love, you are either driven to the remembrance of the
Italian Ladies which once you served, or else to the service of those in
England, which you have since your coming seen, for as Andromache, when so
ever she saw the Tomb of Hector could not refrain from weeping, or as
Laodamia could never behold the picture of Protesilaus in wax, but she
always fainted: so Lovers whenever they view the Image of their Ladies,
though not the same substance, yet the similitude in shadow, they are so
benumbed in their joints, and so berefte of their wits, that they have neither
the power to move their bodies to show life, nor their tongues to make
answer, so that I thinking that with your other senses, you had also lost
your smellyng, thought rather to be a Thorn, whose point might make you feel
somewhat, than a Uyolet whose savor could cause you to smell nothing.

Philautus seeing this Gentlewoman so pleasauntlye disposed, replied in this
manner.

Gentlewoman to study for a second wife, before I know my first, were to
resemble the good huswife in Naples, who took thought to bring forth her
Chickens, before she had Hens to lay Eggs, and to muse who should father my
first child, were to doubt when the Cow is mine, who should owe the Calfe. But
I will neither be so hasty to beat my brains about two wives, before I know
where to get one, nor so jealous to mistrust her fidelytie, when I have one.
Touching the view of ladies, or the remembrance of my loves, me thinks it
should rather sharp the point in me, then abate the edge. My senses are not
lost, though my labor be, and therefore my good Uyolet prick not him forward
with sharpness, whom thou should rather comfort with savors. But to put
you out of doubt that my wits were not all this while a wol-gathering, I was
debating with my self, whether in love, it were better to be constant,
bewraying all the counsayles, or secret being ready every hour to flinch: And
so many reasons came to confirm either, that I could not be resolved in any.
To be constant, what thing more requisite in love, when it shall always be
green like the Iuie, though the Sun parch it, that shall ever be hard like
the true Diamond, though ye hammer beat it, that still grows with the good
vine, though the knife cut it. Constancy is like unto the Storke, who
wheresoever she fly comes into no Neaste, but her own, or the Lapwing whom
nothing can drive from her young ones but death: But to reveal the secrets of
Love, the counsayles, the conclusions, what greater despite to his Lady, or
more shameful discredit to himself can be imagined, when there shall no
Letter pass but it shall be disclosed, no talk uttered, but it shall be
again repeated, nothing done but it shall be revealed: Which when I
considered, me thought it better, to have one that should be secreate though
fickle, than a blabbe, though constant. For what is there in the world that
more delights a lover than secrecy, which is void of fear, without
suspicion, free from envy: the only hope a woman has to buyld both her
honor and honesty upon.

The tongue of a lover should be like the point in the Dial, which though it
go, none can see it gooing, or a young tree, which though it grow, none can
perceive it growing, having always the stone in their mouth, which the Cranes
use, when they fly over Mountains, least they make a noise, but to be silent,
and lyghtlye to esteem of his Lady, to shake her off, though he be secret, to
change for every thing, though he bewraye nothing, is the only thing that
cutteth the heart in pieces, of a true and constant lover, which deeply waying
with my self, I preferred him that would never remove, though he reveal all,
before him that would conceal all, and ever be flyding: thus wasting too and
fro, I appeal to you my good Uyolet, whether in love be more required secrecy
or constancy.

Frauncis with her accustomable bolonesse yet modestly, replied as follows.

GEntleman, if I should ask you whether in the making of a good sword, iron
were more to be required or steel, sure I am you would answer that both were
necessary: Or if I should be so curious, to demand whether in a tale told to
your Ladies disposition, or mention most convenient, I cannot think but you
would judge them both expedient, for as one metal is to be tempered with an
other in fashioning a good blade, least either being al of steel it quickly
break, or al of iron it never cut: so fares it in speech, which if it be not
seasoned as well with wit to move delyght, as with Art to manifest cunning,
there is no eloquence, and in no other manner stands it with Love, for to be
secret and not constant, or constant and not secret, were to build a house of
mortar without stones, or a wall of stones without mortar.

There is no lively picture drawn without couldur, no curious image wrought
with one tool, no perfect Music played with one string, and would thou
have love the pattern of eternity, colored either with constancy alone, or
only secrecy?

There must in every triangle be three lines, she first begins, the second
augmenteth, the third concludes it a figure. So in love three virtues,
affection, which draws the heart, secrecte, which inereaseth the hope,
constancy, which finish the wor^ie: without any of these lines there can be no
triangle, without any of these virtues, no love.

There is no man that runs with one ledgge, no bird that flies with one
winge, no love that l^^eth with one lym. Love is lykened to the Emerald (...)
cracketh rather then consents to any (...), and can there be any greater
villainy then being secreat, not to be constant, or being constant not to be
se^^^^t^. But it falls out with those that being constant and yet full of
babble, as it does with the serpent Fabulus and the ^iper, who burst with their
own brood, as these ^^ ^o^e with their own tongues.

It is no question Philautus to astle which is vest ^^^^ being not joined there
is never a good* If thou make a question where there is no doubt, thou must
take an answer where there is no reason. Why then also do thou not enquire
whether it were better for a horse to want his foreleggs or his hinder, when
having not all he cannot trauelt: why art thou not inquisitiue whether it were
more convenient for the wrastlers in the games of Olympia to be without arms
or without feet, or for frees to want roots or lack tops, when either is
impossible? There is no true lover believe me Philautus* sense tells me so,
not trial that has not faith, secrecy, and constancy. If thou want, either
it is lust, no love, and that thou have not them all, thy profounde question
assures me: which if thou did ask to try my wit, thou thoughtest me
very dull, if thou resolve thy self of a doubt, I cannot think thee very
sharps.

Philatus that perceived her to be so sharp, thought once again like a
whetstone to make her sharper, and in these words returned his answer.

MY sweet Uiolet, you are not unlike unto those, who having gotten the startte
in a race, think none to be near their heels, because they be foremost: For
having the tale in your mouth, you imagine it is all truth, and that none can
control it.

Frauncis who was not willing to hear him go forward in so fond an argument,
cut him off before h^^ should come to his conclusion.

GEntleman, the faster you run after me, the farther you are from me:
therefore I would wish you to take heed, that in seeking to strike at my
heels, you trippe not up your own* You would feign with your wit cast a
white upon black, wherein you are not unlike unto those, that seeing their
shadow very short in the Sun* think to for^h their head with their heel,
and putting forth their leg are farther from it, then when they stood still.
In my opinion it were better to sit on the ground with little ease, then to
rise and fall with great danger.

Philatus being in a maze to what end this talk should tend, thought that
either Camilla had made her privy to his love, or that she meant by suspision
to entrap him: Therefore meaning to leave his former question, and to answer
her speech, proceeded thus.

Mystris Frauncis, you resemble in your sayings the Painter Tamantes, in whose
pi^tures there was ever, more understood then painted, for (...) a gloss you
seem to shadow that, which in (...) you will not show. It cannot be my Uiolet
that the faster I run after you, the farther I should be from you (...) that
either you have wings (...) your (...), (...) thorns thrust into mine. The
last (...) catches the Hare, though the (...) him ^ the flow. Snaile climeth
the Tower at law, though the swift Swallowe mount it, the last^st (...) the
go^e, sometimes though the lightest be nee^^ it* ^n (...) I had as liefe stand
at the recei^e, as at the (...) running rather end^^re long with an (...)ble,
then leave off being out of wind, with a (...): Esspecially when I run as
Hippomanes (...) with Atlanta, who was last in the course, bu^ (...) the
crown: So that I guess that women are either easy to be out stripped, or
writing.

I seek not to trippe at you, (...) I might to hinder you and hurt my self:
for in sitting your course by striking at your (...) heels, you would when I
should ^raue pardon, show me a high (...).

As for my shadow, I never go as out ^^ ^^^th it, but when the Sun is at the
highest, for then is my shadow at the shortest, so that it is not (...) its to
t^u^h my head with my heel, when it lye^^ (...) under my heel.

You say it is better so fit (...) to (...) and (...), and I say he that (...)
clymbeth for (...) of falling* is like unto him that (...) of sur^eting.

If you think either the (...) so (...), wherein I run, that I must ^^eede^
fa^^, (...) feet so chill that I must needs founder, (...) change thy court
heere-after ^ but ^ mean to (...) it now: for I had rather fall out of a low
window to the ground then hang in the midde way by a bryer.

Frauncis who took no little pleasure to hear Philautus talk began to come
on roundly in these terms.

IT is a sign Gentleman that your footemanshippe is better then your stomach,
for whatsoever you say, me thinks you had rather be held in a slip, then let
slip, wherein you resemble the grayehounde, that seeing his game, leapeth
upon him that holds him, not running after that he is held for: or the
Hawke which being cast off at a Partridge, takes a stand to prune her
feathers, when she should take her flight. For it seems you bear good will to
the game you can-not play at, or will not, or dare not, wherein you imitate the
Cat that leaves the Mouse, to follow the milkpan: for I perceive that you let
the Hare go by, to hunt the Badger.

Philautus astonished at this speech, knew not which way to frame his answer,
thinking nows that she perceived his tale to be adressed to her, though his
love were fired on Camilla: But to rid her of suspicion, though loath that
Camilla should conceive any inckling, he played fast and loose in this manner.

GEntlewoman you mistake me very much, for I have been better taught then
fed, and therefore I know how to follow my game, if it be for my gain: For
were there two Hares to run at, I would endeavor not to catch the first that
I followed, but the last that I started: yet so as the first should not escape,
nor the last be caught.

You speak contraries quoth Frauncis, and you will work wonders, but take
heed your cunning in hunting, make you not to loose both.

Both said Philautus why I seek but for one, and yet of two quoth Frauncis,
you cannot tell which to follow, one runs so fast you will never catch her,
the other is so at the squat, you can never find her.

The Lady Flauia, whether desirous to sleep, or loath these iestes should be
too broad, as Moderater commanding them both to silence, willing Euphues as
Umper in these matters, briefly to speak his mind. Camilla and Surius are yet
talking, Frauncis and Philautus are not idle, yet all attentive to hear
Euphues, as well for the expectation they had of his-wit, as to know the drifte
of their discourses, who thus began the conclusion of all their speeches.

IT was a Law among the Persians, that the Musition should not judge the
Painter, nor any one meddle in that handie craft, wherein he was not expert,
which makes me marvel good Madame, that you should appoint him to be an
Umper in Love, who never yet had skill in his laws. For although I seemed to
consent by my silence, before I knew the argument where-off you would dispute,
yet hearing nothing but reasons for love* I must either call back my promise,
or call in your discourses, and better it were in my opinion, not to have your
reasons concluded, then to have them confuted. But sure I am that neither a
good excuse will serve, where authority is rigorous, nor a bad one be heard,
where necessity co^pelleth. But least I be longer in breaking a web, than the
spider is in wearing it, your pardons obtained, if I offend in sharpness, and
your patience granted, if molest in length, I thus begin to conclude against
you al, not as one singular in his own conceit, but to be tried by your
gentle constructions.

SVrius begins with Love, which proceeds by beauty (under the which he
comprehends all other virtues) Lady Flauia moves a question, whether the
meering of lovers be tolerable. Philautus comes in with two branches in his
hand, as though there were no more leaves of that tree, asking whether
constancy or secrecy be most to be required: great hold there has been who
should prove his love best, when in my opinion there is none good. But such is
the vanity of youth, that it thinks nothing worthy either of commendation or
conference but only love, whereoff they sow much, and reap little, wherein
they spend all, and gain nothing, whereby they runue into dangers before they
wist, and repent their desires before they would. I dde not discommende honest
affection, which is grounded upon virtue as the mean, but disordinate fancy,
which is builded upon lust, as an extremity: and lust I must term that,
which is begun in an hour, and ended in a minute, the common love in this our
age, where Ladies are courted for beauty, not for virtue, men loved for
proportion in body, not perfection in mind.

It fares with Lovers, as with those that drink of the river Iellus in
Phrigia, where-off sipping moderately is a medicine, but swillyng with excess
it breeds madness.

Lycurgus set it down for a law, that where men were commonly dronken, the Uines
should be destroyed, and I am of that mind, that where youth are given to
love, the means should be removed. For as the earth wherein the Mines of silver
and gold are hidden, is profitable for no other thing but metals, so the
heart wherein love is harbored, receives no other seed but affection. Lovers
seek not those things which are most profitable, but most pleasant,
resemblyng those that make garlands, who choose the fairest flowers not the
wholsomest, and being once entangled with desire, they always have the
disease, not unlike unto the Goat, who is never without an Ague, then being
once in, they follow the note at the Nightingale, which is fayd, with
continual ^raining to sing, to perish in her sweet lays, as they do in
their sugared lives: where is it possible either to eat, or drink or walk,
but he shall hear some question of love? insomuch that love is become so
common, that there is no artificer of so base a craft, no clown so simple, no
beggar so poor, but either talks of love, or lives in love, when they
neither know the means to come by it, nor the wisdom to increase it: And what
can be the cause of these loving worms, but only Iolenesse?

But to set down as a moderator the true perfection of love? not like as an
enemy to talk of ye infection (which is neither the part of my office, nor
pleasant to your ears,) this is my judgment.

True and virtuous love is to be grounded upon Time, Reason, Favor, and
Virtue. Time to make trial, not at ye first glaunce so to settle his mind, as
though he were willing to be caught, when he might escape, but so by observation
and experience, to buyld and augment his desires, that he be not deceived with
beauty, but persuaded with constancy. Reason that all his doings and
proceedings seem not to flow from a mind enflamed with lust, but a heart
kindeled with love. Favor to delyght his eyes, which are the first messengers
of affection. Virtue to allure the soul, for the which all things are to be
destred.

The arguments of faith in a man, are constancy, not be removed, secrecy not
to utter, security not to mistrust, credulytie to believe: in a woman patience
to endure, jealousy to suspect, lyberalytie to bestow, feruencie,
faithfulness, one of the which branches if either ye man want or the woman,
it may be a lyking between them for the time, but no love to continue for ever.

Touching Surius his question, whether love come from the man or the woman, it
is manifest that it begins in both, else can it not end in both.

To the Lady Flauias demand concerning company, it is requisite, they should
meet, and though they be hindered by diverse means, yet is it impossible but
that they will meet.

Philautus must thus think, that constancy without secrecy avails little,
and secrecy without constancy profits less.

Thus have I good Madame, according to my simple skill in love, set down my
judgment, which you may at your Ladishippes pleasure correct, for he that
never took the oar in hand, must not think scorn to be taught.

Well quoth the Lady, you can say more if you list, but either you fear to
offend our ears, or to bewray your own follyes: one may easelye perceive,
that you have been of late in the painters shop, by the colors that stick in
your coat, but at this time I will urge nothing, though I suspect somewhat.

Surius gave Euphues thanks, allowing his judgment in the description of
love, especially in this, that he would have a woman if she were faithful, to be
also jealous, which is as necessary to be required in them as constancy.

Camilla smilyng said, that Euphues was deceived, for he would have said, that
men should have been jealous, and yet that had been but superfluous, for they are
never other-wise.

Philautus thinking Camilla to use that speech to gird him, for that all ye
night he viewed her with a suspicious eye, answered, that jealousy in a man
was to be pardoned, because there is no difference in the look of a lover,
that can distinguish a jealous eye, from a loving.

Frauncis who thought her part not to be the least, said, that in all things
Euphues spoke Gospel, saving in that he bound a woman to patience, which is to
make them fools.

Thus every one gave his verdite, and so with thanks to the lady Flauia, they
all took their leave for that night. Surius went to his lodging, Euphues and
Philautus to theirs, Camilla accompanied with her women and her waiting maid,
departed to her home, whom I mean to bring to her chamber, leaving all the rest
to their rest.

Camilla no sooner had entered in her chamber, but she began in strange terms
to utter this strange tale, her door being close shut, and her chamber voyded.

AH Camilla, ah wretched wench Camilla, I perceive now, that when the Hoppe
grows high it must have a pole, when the Iuie spreads, it cleaves to the
flint, when the Nine rises, it wreatheth about ye Elm, when virgins war in
years, they follow that which belongs to their appetites, love, love? Yea
love Camilla, the force whereof thou know not, and yet must endure the
furye. Where is that precious herb Panace, which cures al diseases? Or that
herb Nepenthes that procures al delights? No no Camilla: love is not to be
cured by herbs which comes by fancy, neither can plasters take away the
grief, which is grown so great by persuasions. For as the stone Draconites
can by no means be polished, unless the Lapidarie burn it, so ye mind of
Camilla can by no means be cured, except Surius ease it.

I see that love is not unlike unto the stone Pantura, which draws all other
stones, be they never so heavy, having in it the three roots which they
attribute to Music, Mirth, Melancholy, Madness.

I but Camilla dissemble thy love, though it shorten thy life, for better it
were to dye with grief, then live with shame. The sponge is full of water, yet
is it not seen, the herb Adyaton though it be wette, looks always dry, and
a wise lover be she never so much tormented, behaueth her self as though she
were not touched. I but fire cannot be hidden in the flar without smoke, nor
Musk in the bosom without smell, nor love in the breast without suspicion:
Why then confess thy love to Surius, Camilla, who is ready to ask before thou
grant. But it fares in love as it does with the root of the Keede, which
being put unto the fern takes away al his strength: and likewise the root of
the fern put to the Keede, depriueth it of al his force: so the looks of
Surius having taken al freedom from the eyes of Camilla, it may be the
glaunces of Camilla have bereaved Surius of all liberty, which if it were so,
how happy should thou be, and that it is so, why should not thou hope. I
but Surius is noble, I but love regards no birth, I but his friends will not
consent, I but love knows no kindred, I but he is not willing to love nor
thou worthy to be wooed, I but love makes the proudest to stoop, and to court
the poorest.

Whylest she was thus debating, one of her Maidens chanced to knock, which
she hearing left of that, which all you Gentlewomen would gladly hear, for no
doubt she determined to make a long sermon, had not she been interrupted: But
by ye preamble you may guess to what purpose the drift tended* This I note,
that they that are most wise, most virtuous, most beautiful, are not free from
the impressions of Fancy: For who would have thought that Camilla who seemed to
disdain love, should so soon be entangled. But as the straightest wands are
to be bent when they be small, so ye precisest virgins are to be won when they
be young. But I will leave Camilla, with whose love I have nothing to meddle, for
yt it makes nothing to my matter. And return we to Euphues, who must play the
last part.

EVphues, bestowing his time in the Court, began to mark diligently the men
and their manners, not as one curious to misconster, but desirous to be
instructed. Many days he used speech with ye Ladies, sundry times with the
Gentlewomen, with all became so familyar, that he was of all earnestly beloved.

Philautus had taken such a smack in ye good entertainment of the Lady Flauia,
that he began to look askewe upon Camilla, dri^ing out the remembrance of his
old love, with the recording of the new. Who now but his Uiolet, who but
Mistress Frauncis, whom if once every day he had not seen, he would have been
so solen, that no man should have seen him.

Euphues who watched his friend, demanded how his love proceeded with Camilla,
unto whom Philautus gave no answer but a smile, by ye which Euphues thought
his affection but small. At the last thinking it both contrary to his oath and
his honesty to conceal any thing from Euphues, he confessed, that his mind
was changed from Camilla to Frau^cis. Love quoth Euphues will never make thee
mad, for it comes by fits* not like a quotidian, but a tertian. In deed
quoth Philautus, if ever I kill my self for love, it shall be with a sigh, not
with a sword.

Thus they passed the time many days in England, Euphues commonly in the court
to learn fashions, Philautus ever in the country to love Frauncis: so sweet
a violet to his nose, that he could hardly suffer it to be an hour from his
nose.

But now came the time that Euphues was to try Philautus truth, for it happened
that letters were directed from Athens to London, concerning serious and
weighty affairs of his own, which incited him to hasten his departure, ye
contents of the which, when he had imparted to Philautus and requested his
company, his friend was so fast tied by the eyes, that he found thorns in his
heel, which Euphues knew to be thoughts in his heart and by no means he could
persuade him to go into Italy so sweet was the very smoke of England.

Euphues knowing the tide would tarry for no man, and seeing his business to
require such speed, being for his great preferment, determined sodeinly to
depart, yet not without taking of his leave courteously, and giving thanks to al
those which since his coming had used him friend lie: Which that it might be
done with one breath, he desired ye Merchaunt with whom all this white he
soiourned to inuit a great number to dinner, some of great calling, many of
good credit, among the which Surius as chief, the Lady Flauia, Camilla and
Mistress Frauncis were not forgotten.

The time being come of meeting, he faluted them all in this manner.

I was never more desirous to come into England, the^ I am loath to depart, such
courtesy have I found, which I looked not for, and such qualities as I could
not look for, which I speak not to flatter any, when in truth it is known to
you all. But now the time is come that Euphues must pack from those, whom he
best loves, and go to the Seas, which he hardly brooketh. But I would Fortune
had dealt so favorable with a poor Grecian, yt he might have either been
borne here, or able to live here: which seeing the one is past and cannot be,
the other unlikely, and therefore not easy to be, I must endure the cruelty of
the one, and with patience bear the necessity of the other.

Yet this I earnestly crave of you all, that you will in stead of a recompense
accept thanks, and of him that is able to give nothing, take prayer for
payment. What my good mind is to you all, my tongue cannot utter, what my true
meaning is, your hearts cannot conceive: yet as occasion shall serve, I will
show yt I have not forgotten any, though I may not requite one. Philautus not
wyser then I in this, though bolder, is determined to tarry behind: for he
says, that he had as liefe be buried in England, as married in Italy* so holy
does he think ye ground here, or so homely the women there, whom although I
would gladly have with me, yet seeing I cannot, I am most earnestly to request
you all, not for my sake, who ought to desire nothing, nor for his sake who is
able to deserve little, but for the courtesies sake of England, that you use him
not so well as you have done, which would make him proud, but no worse then I
wish him, which will make him pure: for though I speak before his face, you
shall find true behind his back, that he is yet but wax, which must be
wrought whilst the water is warm, and iron which being hot, is apt either to
make a Keye or a lock.

It may be Ladies and Gentlewomen all, that though England be not for Euphues
to dwell in, yet it is for Euphues to send to.

When he had thus said, he could scarce speak for weeping, all the company were
sorry to forgo him, some proffered him money, some lands, some houses, but he
refused them all, telling them, that not the necessity of lack caused him to
depart, but of importance.

This done, they sat down all to dinner, but Euphues could not be merry, for
that he should so soon depart the feast being ended, which was very sumptuous,
as Merchaunts never spare for cost, when they have full Coffers, they al
heartily took their leaves of Euphues, Camilla who liked very well of his
company, taking him by the hand, desired him that bring in Athens, he would not
forget his friends in England, and the rather for your sake quoth she, your
friend shall be better welcome, yea, and to me for his own sake quoth Flauia,
whereat Philautus rejoiced, and Frauncis was not sorry, who began a little to
listen to the lure of love.

Euphues having all things in a readiness, went immediately toward Dover,
whether Philautus also accompanied him, yet not forgetting by the way to visit
ye good old father Fidus, whose courtesy they received at their coming. Fidus
glad to see them, made them great cheer according to his ability, which had
it bin less, would have been answerable to their desires. Much communication
they had of the Court, but Euphues cried quittance, for he said, things that
are commonly known, it were folly to repeat, and secrets, it were against mine
honesty to utter. The next morning they went to Dover, where Euphues being
ready to take ship, he first took his farewell of Philautus in these words.

PHilautus, the care that I have had of thee, from time to time, has been tried
by the counsel I have always given thee, which if thou have forgotten, I
mean no more to write in water, if thou remember, imprint it still. But seeing
my departure from thee is as it were my death, for that I know not whether ever
I shall see thee, take this as my last testament of good will.

Be humble to thy superiors, gentle to thy equals, to thy inferiors
favorable, envy not thy betters, iustle not thy fellows, oppress not the
poor.

The stipend that is allowed to maintein thee* use suisely, be neither
prodigal to spend all, nor covetous to keep all, cut thy coat according to
thy cloth, and think it better to be accounted thriftie among the wise, then
a good companion among the riotous.

For thy study or trade of life, use thy book in the morning* thy bow after
dinner, or what other exercise shall please thee best, but always have an eye
to the maine, whatsoever thou art chanced at ye buy. Let thy practice be law,
for the practice of Physic is too base for so fine a stomach as thine, and
divinity too curious for so fickle a head as thou have. Touching thy
proceedings in love, be constant to one, and try but one, otherwise thou shall
bring thy credit into question, and thy love into derision.

Wean thy self from Camilla, deal wisely with Frauncis, for in England thou
shall find those that will decipher thy dealings be they never so polytique, be
secret to thy self and trust none in matters of love, as thou love thy life.

Certify me of thy proceedings by thy letters, and think that Euphues cannot
forget Philautus, who is as dear to me as my self Commend me to all my
friends: And so farewell good Philautus, and well shall thou fare if thou
follow the counsel of Euphues.

PHilautus the water standing in his eyes, not able to answer one word, until
he had well wept, replied at the last as it were in one word, saying, that his
counsel should be engraven in his heart, and he would follow every thing that
was prescribed him, certifiing him of his success as either occasion, or
opportunity should serve.

But when friends at departing would utter most, then tears hinder most,
which brake off both his answer, and stayde Euphues replye, so after many
millions of embracings, at the last they departed, Philautus to London where I
leave him, Euphues to Athens, where I mean to follow him, for he it is that I
am to go with, not Philautus.

There was nothing that happened on the Seas worthy the writing, but within few
days Euphues having a merry wind, arrived at Athens, where after he had
visited his friends, and set an order in his affairs, he began to address
his letters to Liuia, touching the state of England in this manner.

LIuia I salute thee in the Lord, etc.
I am at length returned out of England, a place in my opinion, (if any such
may be in the earth) not inferior to a Paradise.

I have here enclosed sent thee the description, the manners, the conditions,
the government and entertainment of that country.

I have thought it good to dedicate it to the Ladies of Italy, if thou think it
worthy, as thou can not otherwise, cause it to be imprinted, that the praise
of such an Isle, may cause those that dwell else where, both to commend it, and
marvel at it.

Philautus I have left behind me, who like an old Dog follows his old sent,
Love, wiser he is, then he was wont, but as yet nothing more fortunate. I am in
health, and that thou art so, I hear nothing to ye contrary, but I know not
how it fares with me, for I cannot as yet brook mine own country, I am so
delighted with another.

Advertise me by letters what estate thou art in, also how thou lykest the
state of England, which I have sent thee. And so farewell.

Thine to use, Euphues.


To the Ladies and Gentlewomen of Italy: Euphues wishes health and honor.
IF I had brought (Ladies) little dogs from Malta, or strange stones from
India, or fine carpets from Turkey, I am sure that either you would have woed
me to have them, or wished to see them.

But I am come out of England with a Glass* wherein you shall behold the things
which you never saw, and marvel at the sights which you have seen. Not a
glass to make you beautiful, but to make you blush, yet not at your vices,
but others virtues, not a glass to dress your hairs, but to redress your
harms, by the which if you every morning correct your manners, being as
careful to amend faults in your hearts, as you are curious to find faults in
your heads, you shall in short time be as much commended for virtue of the wise,
as for beauty of the wanton.

Yet at the first sight if you seem deformed by looking in this Glass, you
must not think that the fault is in the glass, but in your manners, not
resembling Lauia, who seeing her beauty in a true glass to be but deformity,
washed her face, and broke the glass.

Here you shall see beauty accompanied with virginiie, temperance, mercy,
justice, magnanimity, and all other virtues whatsoever, rare in your sex, and
but one, and rarer then the Phoenix, where I think there is not one.

In this glass shall you see that the glasses which you carry in your fannes
of feathers, show you to be lighter then feathers, that the Glasses wherein you
carouse your wine, make you to be more wanton then Bacchus, that the new found
glass Cheynes, that you were about your necks, argue you to be more bryttle
the^ glass. But your eyes being to old to judge of so rare a spectacle, my
counsel is, that you look with spectacles, for ill can you abide the beams
of the clear Sun, being skant able to view the blase of a dim candle. The
spectacles I would have you use, are for the one eye judgment without
flattering your selves, for the other eye, belief without mistrusting of me.

And then I doubt not but you shall both thank me for this Glass (which I
send also into all places of Europe) and think worse of your garysh Glasses,
which makes you of no more price then broken glasses.

Thus fair Ladies, hoping you will be as willing to pry in this Glass for
amendment of manners, as you are to prancke your selves in a looking glass,
for commendation of men, I wish you as much beauty as you would have, so as
you would endeavor to have as much virtue as you should have* And so farewell.

Euphues.


Euphues Glass for Europe.
THere is an Isle lying in the Ocean Sea, directly against that part of
France, which contains Picardie and Normandy, called now England,
heretofore named Britain, it has Ireland upon the West side, on the North
the maine Sea, on the East side, the German Ocean* This Island is in circuit,
1720. miles, in form like unto a Triangle, being broadest in the South part,
and gathering narrower and narrower till it come to the farthest point of
Cathnesse, Northward, where it is narrowest, and there ends in manner of a
Promonterie. To repeat the ancient manner of this Island, or what sundry
Nations have inhabited there, to set down the Giaunts, which in highness of
bone have passed the common fise, and almost common credit, to rehearse what
diversities of languages have been used, into how many kingdoms it has been
divided, what religions have been followed before ye coming of Christ, although
it would breed great delight to your ears, yet might it happily seem
tedious: for that Honny taken excessiuely cloyeth the stomach, though it be
Honny.

But my mind is briefly to touch such things as at my being there I gathered
by mine own study and inquiry, not meaning to write a Chronicle, but to set
down in a word what I heard by conference.

It has in it twenty and six Cities, of the which the chiefest is named
London, a place both for the beauty of building, infinite riches, variety of
all things, that excels all the Cities in the world: insomuch that it may be
called the storehouse and Mart of all Europe. Close by this City runs the
famous River called the Thames, which from the head where it rises named Isis,
unto the fall midway, it is thought to be an hundred and fourscore miles. What
can there be in any place under the heavens, that is not in this noble City,
either to be bought or borrowed.

It has diverse Hospitals for the relieuing of ye poor, six-score fair
Churches, for divine service, a glorious Burse which they call the Royal
Exchange, for the meeting of Merchants of all countries, where any traffic is
to be had. And among all the strange and beautiful shows* me thinks there
is none so notable, as ye Bridge which crosses ye Theames, which is in manner
of a continual street, well replinished with large and stately houses on both
sides, and situate upon twenty Arches, wher-of each one is made of excellent
free stone squared, every one of them being threescore foot in height, and
full twenty in distance one from an other.

To this place the whole Realm has his recourse, where-by it seems so
populous, that one would scarce think so many people to be in the whole
Islande, as he shall see sometimes in London.

This makes Gentlemen brave, and Merchaunts rich, Citizens to purchase, and
soiourns to morgage, so that it is to be thought, that the greatest wealth and
substance of the whole Realm is couched with-in the walls of London, where
they that be rich keep it from those that be riotous, not deteyning it from
the lusty youths of England by rigor, but increasing it until young men shall
savor of reason, wherein they show themselves Treasurers for others, not
horders for themselves, yet although it be sure enough, would they had it, in
my opinion, it were better to be in the Gentle-mens purse, then in the
Merchauntes hands.

There are in this Isle two and twenty Bishops, which are as it were
superentendauntes over the Church, men of great zeal, and deep knowledge,
diligent Preachers of the word, earnest followers of their doctrine, careful
watchmen that the Woulfe devour not the Sheep, in civil government
politic, in ruling the spiritual sword (as far as to them under their
Prince apperteineth) just, cutting off those members from the Church by rigor,
that are obstinate in their herisies, and instructing those that are ignorant,
appointing godly and learned Ministers in every of their Seas, that in their
absence may be lights to such as are in darkness, salt to those that are
vnsauozie, leaven to such as are not seasoned.

Uisitations are holden oftentimes, wher-by abuses and disorders, either in the
laity for negligence, or in the clergy for superstition, or in all, for wicked
living there are punishments, by due execution whereof, the divine service of God
is honored with more purity, and followed with greater senceritie.

There are also in this Island two famous Uniuersities, the one Oxforde, the
other Cambredge, both for the profession of all sciences, for Divinity,
Physic, Law, and all kind of learning, excelling all the Uniuersities in
Christendom.

I was my self in either of them, and like them both so well, that I mean not
in the way of controversy to prefer any for ye better in England, but both for
the best in the world, saving this, yt Colleges in Oxenforde are much more
stately for the building, and Cambridge much more sumptuous for the houses in
ye town, but the learning neither lies in the free stones of the one, nor ye
fine streates of the other, for out of them both do daily proceed men of
great wisdom, to rule in ye commonwealth, of learning to instruct ye common
people, of all singular kind of professions to do good to all. And let this
suffice, not to enquire which of them is the superior, but that neither of
them have their equal, neither to ask which of them is the most ancient, but
whether any other be so famous.

But to proceed in England, their buildinges are not very stately, unless it
be the houses of noble men and here and there, the place of a Gentleman, but
much amended, as they report yt have told me. For their munition they have not
only great store, but also great running to use them, and courage to practice
the^, their armor is not unlike unto that which in other countries they use,
as Corslets, Almaine Kiuetts, shirts of male, iacks quilted, and covered over
with Leather, Fustio^ or Canuas, over thick plates of iron, that are sowed in
the same.

The ordinance they have is great, and thereof great store.

Their Navy is divided as it were into three sorts, of the which, the one
serves for wars, the other for burden, the third for fishermen. And some
vessels there be (I know not by experience; and yet I believe by circumstance,
that will sail nine hundred miles in a week, when I should scarce think that
a bird could fly four hundred.

Touching other commodities, they have four bathes, the first called Saint
Vincents, the second, Hallie well, the third, Buxton, the fourth (as in old
time they read) Cair Bledud, but now taking his name of a town near
adjoining, it is called the Bath.

Besides this, many wonders there are to be found in this Island, which I will not
repeat, because I my self never saw them, and you have heard of greater.

Concerning their diet, in number of dishes and change of meat, the Nobility
of England do exceed most, having all things that either may be bought for
money, or gotten for the season: Gentlemen and Merchaunts feed very finely,
and a poor man it is, that dineth with one dish, and yet so content with a
little, that having half dined, they say as it were in a Proverb, that they are
as well satisfied as the Lord Mayor of London, whom they think to fare best,
though he eat not most.

In their meals there is great silence and gravity, using wine rather to ease
the stomarke, then to load it, not like unto other nations, who never think yt
they have dined till they be drunken.

The attire they use, is rather led by the imitation of others, then their own
invention, so that there is nothing in England more constant, than ye
inconstancy of attire, now using the French fashion, now the Spanish, then the
Morisco gowns, then one thing, then another, insomuch that in drawing of an
Englishman, ye painter sets him down naked, having in the one hand a pair
of sheeres, in the other a piece of cloth, who having cut his cholar after ye
French guyse, is ready to make his sleeue after the Barbarian manner. And
although this were the greatest enormitie that I could see in England, yet is
it to be excused, for they that cannot maintein this pride, must leave of
necessity, and they that be able, will leave when they see the vanity.

The laws they use are different from ours, for although the common and civil
law be not abolished, yet are they not had in so great reputation as their own
common laws which they term the laws of the Crown.

The regement that they have, depends upon statute law, and that is by
Parliament, which is the highest court, consisting of three several sorts of
people, the Nobilytie, Clergy, and Commons of the Realm, so as whatsoever be
among them enacted, the Queen strikes the stroke, allowing such things, as to
her Majesty seems best.

Then upon common law, which stands upon Maxims and principles, years and
terms, the cases in this law are called plees or actions, and they are either
criminal or civil, the mean to determine are writs, some original, some
judicial: Their trialls and recoueries are either by verdit or demur,
confession or defalt, wherein if any falt have been committed, either in process
or form, matter or judgment, the party grieved may have a writ of error.

Then upon customable law, which consists upon laudable customs, used in
some private country.

Last of all, upon prescription, which is a certain custom continued time out
of mind, but it is more particular then their customary law.

Murderers and thieves are hanged, witches burnt, al other villainies that
deserve death, punished with death, insomuch that there are very few heinous
offenses practiced, in respect of those that in other countries are commonly
used.

Of savage beasts and vermyne they have no great store, nor any that are
noisome, the cattle they keep for profit, are Oren, Horses, Sheep, Goats,
and Swine, and such like, wheroff they have abundance, wild foul and fish
they want none, nor any thing that either may serve for pleasure or profit.

They have more store of pasture then tillage, their meddows better then their
corn fields, which makes more grasiors, then Cornmongers, yet sufficient
store of both.

They excel for one thing, their Dogs of all sorts, spaniels, hounds, mastifs,
and diverse such, yt one they keep for hunting and hawking, the other for
necessary uses about their houses, as to draw water, to watch thieves, etc. and
thereoff they derive the word Mastife, of Mase and thief.

There is in that Isle Salt made, and Saffron, there are great quarries of
stones for building, sundry minerals of Quicksiluer, Antimony, Sulphur, black
Lead, and Orpiment read and yeolow. Also there grows the finest Alum yt is,
Uermilion, Bittament, Chrisocolla, Coporus, the mineral stone whereoff
Petreolum is made, and that which is most strange, the mineral pearl, which as
they are for greatness and color most excellent, so are they dug out of the
maine land, in places far distant from the shore.

Besides these, though not strange, yet necessary, they have Cole mines, salt
Peter for ordinance, Salt Sode for Glass.

They want no Tin nor Lead, there grows Iron, Steel and Copper, and what
not, so has God blessed that country, as it should seem not only to have
sufficient to serve their own turns, but also others necessities, wheroff there
was an old saying, Al countries stand in need of Britain, and Britain of
none.

Their Air is very wholesome and pleasant, their civility not inferior to
those yt deserve best, their wits very sharp and quick, although I have heard
that the Italian and the Frenchman have accounted them but gross and dull
pated, which I think came not to pass by ye proof, they made of their wits,
but by the Englishmans report. For this is strange (and yet how true it is there
is none that ever trauayled thither, but can report) that it is always
incident to an Englishman to think worst of his own nation, either in
learning, experience, common reason, or wit, preferring always a stranger
rather for the name, then the wisdom. I for mine own part think, that in
all Europe there are not Lawyers more learned, Divines more profounde,
Physicians more expert, than are in England.

But that which most allureth a stranger, is their courtesy, their civility,
and good enterteinment, I speak this by experience, that I found more courtesy
in England among those I never knew, in one year, then I have done in Athens or
Italy among those I ever loved, in twenty.

But having entreated sufficiently of the country, and their conditions, let me
come to the glass I promised, being the Court, where although I should as order
requires begin with the chiefest, yet I am enforced with the Painter, to
reserve my best colors to end Venus, and to lay the ground with the basest.

First then I must tell you of the grave and wise Counsailours, whose foresight
in peace, warranteth safety in war, whose provision in plenty, makes
sufficient in dearth, whose care in health, is as it were a preparatiue against
sickness, how great their wisdom has been in all things, the twenty two years
peace does both show and prove. For what subtlety has there been wrought so
closely, what privy attempts so craftily, what rebellions stirred up so
disorderly, but they have by policy bewraied, prevented by wisdom, repressed
by justice? What conspiracies abroad, what co^federacies at home, what injuries
in any place has there ben contrived, the which they have not either foreseen
before they could kindle, or quenched before they could flame?

If any wily Ulysses should feign madness, there was among them always some
Palamedes to reveal him, if any Thetis went about to keep her son from the
doing of his country service, there was also a wise Ulysses in the court to
bewraye it: If Sinon came with a smooth tale to bring in the horse into Troy,
there has been always some courageous Lacaon to throw his spear against
the bowelles, which being not bewitched with Lacaon, has unfolded that which
Lacaon suspected.

If Argus with his hundred eyes went prying to undermine Iuppiter, yet met he
with Mercury, who whiselled all his eyes out: in-somuch as there could never
yet any craft prevail against their pollycie, or any challenge against their
courage. There has always been Achilles at home, to buckle with Hector
abroad, Nestors gravity to counteruaile Priams counsel, Ulysses subtilties
to match with Antenois policies. England has all those, that ran and have
wrestled with all others, whereof we can require no greater proof then
experience.

Besides they have al a zealous care for the increasing of true religion, whose
faiths for the most part has been tried thorough the fire, which they had felt,
had not they fled over the water. Moreover the great study they bend
toward schools of learning, both sufficientlye declare, that they are not
only furtherers of learning, but fathers of the learned. O thrice happle
England where such Counsailours are, where such people live, where such virtue
springs.

Among these shall you find Zopirus that will mangle himself to do his
country good, Atchates that will never starte an ynch from his Prince Aeneas,
Nausicla that never wanted a shift in extremity, Cato that ever counseled to
the best, Ptholomeus Philadelphus that always maintained learning. Among the
number of al which noble and wise counsailours (I cannot but for his honors
sake remember) the most prudent and right honorable the Lord Burgleigh, high
Treasurer of that Kealme, no less reverenced for his wisdom, then renowned
for his office, more loved at home then feared a broad, and yet more feared
for his counsel among other nations, then sword or fire, in whom the
saying of Agamemnun may be verified who rather wished for one such as Nestor,
then many such as Ajax.

This noble man I found so ready being but a stranger, to do me good, that
neither I ought to forget him, neither cease to pray for him, that as he has
the wisdom of Nestor, so he may have the age, that having the policies of
Ulysses, he may have his honor, worthy to live long, by whom so many live in
quiet, and not unworthy to be advanced, by whose care so many have been
preferred.

Is not this a Glass fair Ladies for all other countries to behold, where
there is not only an agreement in faith, relygion, and counsel, but in
friendship, brotherhoode and living? By whose good endeavors vice is
punished, virtue rewarded, peace established, foreign broils repressed,
domestical rares appeased? what nation can of Counsailours desire more? what
Dominion, that excepted, has so much? when neither courage can prevail
against their chivalry, nor craft take place against their counsel, nor both
ioynde in one be of force to undermine their country, when you have daseled
your eyes with this Glass, behold here an other. It was my fortune to be
acquainted with certain English Gentlemen, which brought me to the court,
where when I came, I was driven into a maze to behold the lusty and brave
gallants, the beautiful and chaste Ladies, the rare and godly orders, so as I
could not tell whether I should most commend virtue or bravery. At the last
coming oftener thither then it beseemed one of my degree, yet not so often as
they desired my company, I began to prye after their manners, natures, and
lives, and that which follows I saw, whereof who so doubts I will swear.

The Ladies spend the morning in devout prayer, not resembling the Gentle
women in Greece and Italy, who begin their morning at mid^^oone, and make their
evening at midnight, using ^onets for Psalms, and pastimes for prayers,
reading the Epistle of a lover, when they should peruse the Gospel of our
Lord, drawing wanton lines when death is before their face, as Archimedes did
triangles and circles when the enemy was at his back. Behold Ladies in this
glass, that the service of God is to be preferred before all things, imitate
ye English Damoselles, who have their books tied to their gyrdles, not feathers,
who are as cunning in ye scriptures, as you are in Ariosto or Petrack or any
book that likes you best, and becomes you worst.

For bravery I cannot say that you crceede them, for certainly it is the most
gargeoust court that ever I have seen, read, or heard of, but yet do they not
use their apparel so nicelye as you in Italy, who think scorn (...) kneel
at service, for fear of wrinchless in your (...), who dare not lift up your
head to heaven, for ^eare of ^umpling the rufs in your neck, yet your hands
^^^^fesse are holden up, rather I think to she i^ your ringes, I then to
manifest your righteousness. The bravery they use is for the honor of their
Prince, (...) you wear for the alluring of your pray, the ri^^h apparel
makes their beauty more seen, your (...) causes your faces to be more
suspe^ted, they ^^^^mble in their raiment the Estrich who being gased on*
closes her wings and hides her feathers, you in your robes are not unlike the
pococ^e, who being pray^ed spreads her fail and bewrays her pride.
^elueltes and Silks in them are like gold about a pure Diamond, in you like a
green hedge, about a filthy dunghill. Think not Ladies yt because you are
decked with gold, you are endued with grace, imagine not that shining like the
Sun in earth, yea shall climb the Sun in heaven, look diligently into
this English glass, and then shall you see that the more costly your apparel
is, the greater your courtesy should be, yt you ought to be as far from pride,
as you are from poverty, and as near to princes in beauty, as you are in
brightness. Because you are brave, disdain not those that are base, think with
your selves that russet coats have their Christendom, that the Sun when he
is at his hight shines as well upon course carsie, as cloth of tissue, though
you have pearls in your ears, Jewels in your breasts, precious stones on your
fingers, yet disdain not the stones in the streat, which although they are
nothing so noble, yet are they much more necessary. Let not your robes hinder
your devotion, learn of the English Ladies, that God is worthy to be
worshipped with the most price, to whom you ought to give all praise, then
shall you be like stars to the wise, who now are but staring stocks to the
foolish, then shall you be praised of most, who are now pointed at of all,
then shall God bear with your follye, who now abhors your pride.

As the Ladies in this blessed Island are devout and brave, so are they chaste
and beautiful, insomuch that when I first beheld them, I could not tell
whether some mist had bleared mine eyes, or some strange enchauntment altered
my mind, for it may be, thought I, that in this Island, either some
Artimedorus or Lisimandro, or some odd Nigromancer did inhabit, who would she
we me Fayries, or the body of Helen, or the new shape of Venus, but coming to
my self, and seeing that my senses were not changed, but hindered, that the
place where I stood was no enchaunted castle, but a gallant court, I could
scarce restrain my voice from crying, There is no beauty but in England.

There did I behold them of pure complexion, exceeding the Lylly and the
Rose, of favor (wherein the chiefest beauty consists) surpassing the
pictures that were seyned, or the Magitian that would feign, their eyes
pearcing like the Sun beams, yet chaste: their speech pleasant and sweet,
yet modest and courteous, their gate comely, their bodies straight, their hands
white, all things that man could wish, or women would have: which how much it
is, none can set down, when as the one desires as much as may be, ye other
more. And to these beautiful mouldes, chaste minds: to these comely bodies,
temperaunce, modesty, mildness, sobriety: whom I often beheld merry, yet
wise: conferring with courtiers, yet warily: drinking of wine, yet moderately:
eating of delycates, yet but their ear full: lystening to discourses of love,
but not without reasoning of learning: for there it more delyghteth them to
talk of Robin-hoode, than to shoot in his bow, and greater pleasure they take
to hear of love, than to be in love.

Here Ladies is a Glass, that will make you blush for shame, and look wan
for anger, their beauty comes by Nature, yours by Art: they increase their
favors with fair water, you maintein yours with painters colors, the hair
they lay out grows upon their own heads, your seemelynesse hangs upon
others: theirs is always in their own keeping, yours often in the Dyars:
their beauty is not lost with a sharp blast, yours fades with a soft breath:
Not unlike unto Paper flowers, which break as soon as they are touched,
resemblyng the birds in Egypt called Ibes, who being handeled, loose their
feathers, or the serpent Serapie, which being but touched with a brake bursteth.
They use their beauty, because it is commendable, you, because you would be
common: they, if they have little, do not seek to make it more, you that have
none, endeavor to bespeake most: if theirs wither by age, they nothing esteem
it, if yours wast by years, you go about to keep it: they know that beauty
must fail, if life continue, you swear that it shall not fade if colors last.

But to what end (Ladies) do you alter the gifts of Nature, by the shifts
of Art? Is there no color good, but white, no Planet bright but Venus, no
Linen fair but Lawne? Why go you about to make the face fair by those
means that are most foul, a thing loathsome to man and therefore not lovely,
horrible before God, and therefore not lawful.

Have you not heard, that the beauty of the Cradel is most brightest, that
paintings are for Pictures without sense, not for persons with true reason.
Follow at ye last Ladies the Gentlewomen of England, who being beautiful, do
those things as shall become so amiable faces, if of an indifferent hiew,
those things as shall make them lovely, not adding an ounce to beauty, that
may detract a dram from virtue. Besides this, their chastity and temperaunce
is as rare, as their beauty, not gooing in your footsteps, that drink wins
before you rise to increase your color, and swill it when you are up, to
provoke your lust: They use their needle to banish idleness, not the pen to
nourishe it, not spending their times in aunswering the letters of those that
woo them, but forswearing the company of those that write them, giving no
occasion either by wanton looks, unseemly gestures, unadvised speech, or any
uncomely behavior of lyghtnesse or lyking. Contrary to the custom of many
countries, whers filthy words are accounted to savor of a fine wit, broad
speech of a bold courage, wanton glaunces, of a sharp eye sight, wicked
deeds, of a comely gesture, all vain delights of a right courteous courtesy.

And yet are they not in England precise, but warye: not disdainefull to
confer, but fearful to offend: not without remorce where they perceive
truth, but without replying, where they suspecte treacherye, when as among
other Nations, there is no tale so loathsome to chaste ears, but it is heard
with great sport, and answered with great speed.

Is it not then a shame (Ladies) that that little Island should be a mirror to
you, to Europe, to the whole world?

Where is the temperaunce you profess, when wine is more common, than water?
where the chastitic, when lust is thought lawful? where the modesty, when
your mirth tourneth to uncleanness, uncleanness, to shamelessness,
shamelessness to all sinfulness? Learn Ladies though late, yet at length,
that the chiefest title of honor in earth, is to give all honor to him that
is in Heaven, that the greatest brauerye in this world, is to be burning Lamps
in the world to come, that the clearest beauty, in this life, is to be amiable
to him that shall give life eternal* Look in the Glass of England, too
bright I fear me for your eyes. What is there in your sex, that they have
not, and what that you should not have?

They are in prayer devout, in bravery humble, in beauty chaste, in feasting
temperate, in affection wise, in mirth modest, in all their actions though
courtly, because women, yet Aungells, because virtuous.

Ah (good Ladies) good, I say, for that I love you, I would you could a little
abate that pride of your stomachs, that looseness of mind, that lycentious
behavior which I have seen in you, with no small sorrow, and cannot remedy
with continual sighs.

They in England pray when you play, sow when you sleep, fast, when you feast,
and weep for their sins, when you laugh at your sensualytie.

They frequent the church to serve God, you to see gallants, they deck
themselves for cleanlines, you for pride, they maintain their beauty, for
their own lyking, you for others lust, they refrain Wine, because they fear
to take too much, you because you can take no more. Come Ladies, with tears I
call you, look in this glass, repent your sins past, refrain your present
vices, abhor vanities to come, say this with one voice. We can see our faults
only in the English Glass: a Glass of grace to them, of grief to you: to
them in steed of righteousness, to you in place of repentance.

The Lords and Gentlemen, in that court, are also an example for all others to
follow, true tipes of Nobility, the only stay and staff of honor, brave
courtiers, stout soldiers, apt to revel in peace, and ride in ware. In fight
fierce, not dreading death, in friendship firm, not breaking promise,
courteous to all that deserve well, cruel to none, that deserve ill. Their
adversaries they trust not, that she weth their wisdom, their enemies they
fear not, that argues their courage. They are not apt to profer injuries, nor
fit to take any: loath to pick quarrels, but longing to revenge them.

Active they are in all things, whether it be to wrestle in the games of
Olympia, or to fight at Barriers in Palestra, able to carry as great burdens as
Milo, of strength to throw as big stones as Turnus, and what not, that
either man has done, or may do, worthy of such Ladies, and none but they,
and Ladies willing to have such Lords, and none but such.

This is a Glass for our youth in Greece, for your young ones in Italy, the
English glass, behold it Ladies and Lords all, that either mean to have
piety, use braueric, increase beauty, or that desire temperancie, chastity,
wit, wisdom, valor, or any thing that may delyght your selves, or deserve
praise of others.

But an other sight there is in my Glass, which makes me sigh for grief I
cannot show it, and yet had I rather offend in derogating from my Glass, than
my good will.

Blessed is that Land, that has all commodities to increase the common
wealth, happy is that Islande that has wise counsailours to maintain it,
virtuous courtiers to beautify it, noble Gentlemen to advance it, but to have
such a Prince to govern it, as is their Sovereign Queen, I know not whether
I should think the people to be more fortunate, or the Prince famous, whether
their felicity be more to be had in admiration, that have such a ruler, or her
virtues to be honored, that has such royalty: for such is their estate
there, that I am enforced to think, that every day is as luckie to the
Englishmen, as the sixth day of February has been to the Grecians.

But I see you gase until I show this Glass, which you having once seen,
will make you giddy: Oh Ladies I know not when to begin, nor where to end:
for the more I go about to express the brightness, the more I find mine eyes
bleared, the nearer I desire to come to it, the farther I seem from it, not
unlike unto Simonides, who being curious to set down what God was, the more
leisure he took, the more loath he was to meddle saying that in things above
reach, it was easy to catch a strain, but impossible to touch a Star: and
therefore scarce tolerable to point at that, which one can never pull at. When
Alexander had commanded that none should paint him but Appelles, none carue
him but Lysippus, none engraue him but Pirgoteles, Parrhasius, framed a Table
squared, every way two hundredth foot, which in the borders he trimmed with
fresh colors, and limmed with fine gold, leaving all the other room without
knotte or line, which table he presented to Alexander, who no less merueiling
at the bigness, then at the bareness demanded to what end he gave him a frame
without face, being so naked, and without fashion being so great. Parrhasius,
answered him, let it be lawefull for Parrhasius, O Alexander to show a Table
where-in he would paint Alexander, if it were not unlawful, and for others to
square Timber, though Lysippus carue it, and for all to cast brass though
Pirgoteles ingraue it. Alexander perceiving the good mind of Parrhasius,
pardoned his boldness, and preferred his art: yet enquiring why he framed
the table so big, he answered that he thought that frame to be but little
enough for his picture, when the whole world was to little for his person,
saying that Alexander must as well be praised as painted, and that all his
victoryes and virtues were not for to be drawn in the compass of a Signet,
but in a field.

This answer Alexander both liked and rewarded, insomuch that it was lawful
ever after for Parrhasius both to praise that noble king and to paint him.

In the like manner I hope, that though it be not requisite that any should
paint their Prince in England that cannot sufficiently perfect her, yet it
shall not be thought rashness or rudeness for Euphues to frame a table for
Elizabeth, though he presume not to paint her. Let Appelles show his fine
Art, Euphues will manifest his faithful heart, the one can but prove his
conceit to blase his cunning, the other his good will to grind his colors:
he that whetteth the tools is not to be misliked, though he cannot carue the
Image, the worm that spinneth the silk, is to be esteemed, though she
cannot work the sampler, they that fell timber for ships are not to be
blamed, because they cannot build ships.

He that carries mortar furdereth the building, though he be no expert Mason,
he that diggeth the garden, is to be considered, though he cannot tread the
knottes, the Golde-smithes boy must have his wages for blowing the fire, though
he can-not fashion the Jewel.

Then Ladies I hope poor Euphues shall not be reviled, though he deserve not
to be rewarded.

I will set down this Elizabeth, as near as I can: And it may be, that as the
Venus of Appelles, not finished, the Tindarides of Nichomachus not ended, the
Medea of Timomachus not perfected, the Table of Parrhasius not colored,
brought greater desire to them to consumate them and to others to see them: so
the Elizabeth of Euphues, being but shadowed for others to vernish, but
begun for others to end, but drawn with a black coal, for others to blase
with a bright color, may work either a desire in Euphues hereafter if he
live, to end it, or a mind in those that are better able to amend it, or in
all (if none can work it) a will to wish it. In the mean season I say as
Zeuxis did when he had drawn the picture of Atalanta, more will envy me then
imitate me, and not commend it though they cannot amend it. But I come to my
England.

There were for a long time civil wars in this country, by reason of
several claymes to the Crown, between the two famous and noble houses of
Lancaster and York, either of them pretending to be of the royal blood,
which caused them both to spend their vytall blood, these iarres continued
long, not without great loss, both to the Nobility and Eommunaltie, who
joining not in one, but diverse parts, turned the Realm to great ruin, having
almost destroyed their country before they could anoint a king.

But the living God who was loath to oppress England, at last began to repress
injuries, and to give an end by mercy, to those that could find no end of
malice, nor look for any end of mischief. So tender a care has he always
had of that England, as of a new Israel, his chosen and peculier people.

This peace began by a marriage solemnized by Gods special providence,
between Henry Earl of Ritchmond heir of the house of Lancaster* and
Elizabeth daughter to Edward the fourth, the undoubted issue and heir of the
house of York, whereby (as they term it) the red Rose and the white, were
united and joined together. Out of these Roses sprange two noble buddes, Prince
Arthur and Henry, the eldest dying without issue, the other of most famous
memory, leaving behind him three children, Prince Edward, the Lady Marie,
the Lady Elyzabeth. King Edward lived not long, which could never for that
Realm have lived too long, but sharp frostes bite forward springes, Easterly
winds blasteth towardlye blossoms, cruel death spares not those, which we
our selves living cannot spare.

The elder sister the Princes Marie, succeeded as next heir to the crown, and
as it chanced next heir to the grave, touching whose life, I can say little
because I was scarce borne, and what others say, of me shall be forborne.

This Queen being disceased, Elyzabeth being of the age of xxii. years, of
more beauty then honor, and yet of more honor then any earthly creature, was
called from a prisoner to be a Prince, from the castle to the crown, from the
fear of loosing her head, to be supreme head. And here Ladies it may be
you will move a question, why this noble Lady was either in danger of death,
or cause of distress, which had you thought to have passed in silence, I would
notwithstanding have revealed.

This Lady all the time of her sisters reign was kept close, as one that
tendered not those proceedings, which were contrary to her conscience, who
having diverse enemies, endured many crosses, but so patientlye as in her
deepest sorrow, she would rather sigh for the liberty of ye gospel, then her
own freedom. Suffering her inferiors to triumph over her, her foes to
threaten her, her dissembling friends to undermine her, learning in all this
misery only the patience yt Zeno taught Eretricus to bear and forbear,
never seeking revenge, but with good Lycurgus, to loose her own eye, rather
than to hurt an others eye.

But being now placed in the seat royal, she first of all stablished religion,
banished Popery, advanced ye word, that before was so much defaced, who
having in her hand the sword to revenge, used rather bountifully to reward:
being as far from rigor when she might have killed, as her enemies were from
honesty, when they could not, giving a general pardon, when she had cause to
use particular punishments, preferring the name of pity, before the
remembrance of perils, thinking no revenge more princely, than to spare when
she might spill, to stay when she might strike, to profer to save with mercy,
when she might have destroyed with Justice.

Here is the clemency worthy commendation and admiration, nothing inferior
to ye gentle disposition of Aristides, who after his exile did not so much as
note them, that banished him, saying with Alexander, that there can be nothing
more noble, then to do well to those, that deserve ill.

This mighty and merciful Queen, having many bills of private persons that
sought before time to betray her, burnt them all, resemblyng Julius Caesar, who
being presented with the like complaints of his Commons, threw them into the
fire, saying: that he had rather not know the names of Rebels, than have
occasion to revenge, thinking it better to be ignorant of those that hated him,
than to be angry with them.

This clemency did her Majesty not only show at her coming to ye crown,
but also throughout her whole government, when she has spared to shed their
bloods, that sought to spill hirs, not racking the Laws to extremity, but
mittigating the rigor with mercy, insomuch as it may be said of ye royal
Monarch as it was of Antonius, surnamed the godly Emperor, who reigned many
years without the effusion of blood. What greater virtue can there be in a
prince tha^ mercy, what greater praise than to abate the edge which she should
whet, to pardon where she should punish, to reward where she should revenge.

I my self being in England, when her Majesty was for her recreation in her
Barge upon the Thames, hard of a Gun that was shot off, though of the party
unwittingly, yet to her noble person daungerously, which fact she most
gratiouslye pardoned, accepting a just excuse before a great amends, taking
more grief for her poor Bargeman, that was a little hurt, than care for her
self, that stood in greatest hazard: O rare example of pity, O singular
spectacle of piety.

Diverse besides have there been: which by private conspiracies, open rebellions,
close wyles, cruel witchcraftes, have sought to end her life, which saves all
their lives, whose practices by the divine providence of the almighty, have
ever been disclosed, insomuch that he has kept her safe in ye Whales belly,
when her subjects went about to throw her into the Sea, preserved her in che
hot Oven, when her enemies increased the fire, not suffering a hair to fall
from her, much less any harm to fasten upon her.

These injuries and treasons of her subjects, these policies and undermining
of foreign Nations, so little moved her, that she would often say: Let them
know, that though it be not lawful for them to speak what they list, yet is
it lawful for us to do with them what we list, being always of that
merciful mind, which was in Theodosius, who wished rather, that he might call
the dead to life, than put the living to death, saying with Augustus, when she
should set her hand to any condempnation, I would to God we could not write.
Infinite were the ensamples, yt might be alleged, and almost incredible,
whereby she has showed her self a Lamb in meekness, when^she had cause to be
a Lion in might, proved a Dove in favor, when she was provoked to be an Eagle
in fierceness, requiting injuries with benefits, revenging grudges with
gifts, in highest Majesty bearing the lowest mind, forgiving all that sued
for mercy, and forgetting all that deserved Justice, O divine Nature, O
heavenly nobilitic, what thing can there be more required in a Prince, then in
greatest power to show greatest patience, in chiefest glory to bring forth
chiefest grace, in abu^daunce of all earthly pomp, to manifest abundance of
all heavenly piety? O fortunate England, that has such a Qeene, ungrateful
if thou pray not for her, wicked if thou do not love her, miserable, if thou
loose her.

Here Ladies is a Glass for all Princes to behold, that being called to
dignity, they use moderation, not might, tempering the severity of the Laws
with the mildness of love, not executing all they will, but showing what they
may. Happy are they, and only they that are under this glorious and gracious
Souereigntie: insomuch, that I account all those abiectes, that be not her
subjects.

But why do I tread still in one path, when I have so large a field to walk,
or linger about one flower, when I have many to gather: wherein I resemble
those, that being delighted with ye little brook, neglect ye fountains head,
or that painter, that being curious to color Cupids bow, forgot to paint the
string.

As this noble Prince is endewed with mercy, patience, and moderation, so is
she adourned with singular beauty, and chastity, excelling in the one Venus,
in the other Vesta. Who knows not how rare a thing it is (Ladies) to match
virginity with beauty, a chaste mind with an amyable face, divine
cogitacions with a comelye countenance? But such is the grace bestowed upon
this Earthlye Goddess, that having the beauty that might allure all Princes,
she has the chastity also to refuse all, accompting it no less praise to be
called a Uirgin, than to be esteemed a Venus, thinking it as great honor to
be found chaste, as thought amiable.

Where is now Electra, the chaste Daughter of Agamemnon? Where is Lala that
renoumed Uirgin? Where is Aemilia, that through her chastity wrought wonders,
in mainteining continual fire at the Altar of Vesta?

Where is Claudia, that to manifest her Uirginitie, set the ship on floate
with her finger, that multitudes could not remove by force? Where is Tuscia,
one of the same order, that brought to pass no less meruailes by carrying
water in a sieve, not shedding one drop from Tiber to the Temple of Vesta? If
Uirginitie have such force, then what has this chaste Uirgin Elizabeth done,
who by the space of twenty and odd years, with continual peace against all
policies, with sundry miracles contrary to all hope, has governed that noble
Island. Against whom neither foreign force, nor civil fraud, neither discord
at home, nor conspiracies abroad could prevail.

What greater marvel has happened since the beginning of the world, than for
a young and tender Maiden to govern strong and valiant men, than for a
Uirgin, to make the whole world, if not to stand in awe of her, yet to honor
her, yea, and to live in spite of all those that spite her, with her sword in
the sheath, with her armor in the Tower, with her soldiers in their gowns,
insomuch as her peace may be called more blessed, than the quiet reign of Numa
Pompilius, in whose government the Bees have made their Hiues in the
Soldiers Helmets.

Now is the Temple of Ianus removed from Rome, to England, whose door has not
been opened this twenty years, more to be merualed at, than the regiment of
Debora, who ruled twenty years with Religion, or Semiriamis that governed
long with power, or Zenobia, that reigned six years in prosperity.

This is the only miracle that virginity ever wrought, for a little Island
environed round about with wars, to stand in peace, for the walls of France
to burn, and the houses of England to freese, for all other nations either
with cruel sword to be divided, or with foreign foes to be invaded, and that
country neither to be molested with broils in their own bosoms, nor
threatened with blasts of other borderers: But always though not laughing, yet
looking through an Emeraud at others iarres.

Their fields have been sown with corn, strangers theirs pytched with
Camps, they have their men reaping their harvest, when others are mustring in
their harneis, they use their pieces to foul for pleasure, others their
Caliuers for fear of peril.

O blessed peace, oh happy Prince, O fortunate people: The living God is only
the English God, where he has placed peace, which brings all plenty,
anointed a Uirgin Queen, which with a wande rules her own subjects, and
with her worthiness, wins the good wills of strangers, so that she is no
less gracious among her own, then glorious to others, no less loved of her
people, then meruailed at of other nations.

This is the blessing that Christ always gave to his people, peace: This is ye
curse that he gives to the wicked, there shall be no peace to the ungodly: This
was the only salutation he used to his Disciples, peace be unto you: And
therefore is he called the God of love, and peace, in holy writ.

In peace was the Temple of the Lord builte by Salamon, Christ would not be
borne, until there were peace throughout the whole world, this was the only
thing that Esechias prayed for, let there be truth and peace, O Lord in my
days. All which examples do manifestly prove, that there can be nothing given
of god to man more notable then peace.

This peace has the Lord continued with great and unspeakable good-nesse
among his chosen people of England. How much is that nation bound to such a
Prince, by whom they enjoy all benefits of peace, having their barnes full,
when others fami^^, their Cofers stuffed with gold, when others have no
silver, their wives without danger, when others are defamed, their daughters
chaste when others are defloured, their houses furnished when others are fired,
where they have all things for superfluity, others nothing to sustain their
need. This peace has GOD given for her virtues, pity, moderation,
virginity, which peace, the same GOD of peace continue for his names sake.

TOuching the beauty of this Prince, her countenance, her personage, her
majesty, I can-not think that it may be sufficiently commended, when it
cannot be too much meruayled at: So that I am constrained to say as Praxitiles
did when he began to paint Venus and her son, who doubted, whether the
world could affoorde colors good enough for two such fair faces, and I
whether our tongue can yield words to blase that beauty, the perfection
whereof none can imagine, which seeing it is so, I must do like those that
want a clear sight, who being not able to discern the Sun in the Sky, are
enforced to behold it in the water, Zeuxis having before him fifty fair
virgins of Sparta where-by to draw one amiable Venus, said, that fifty more
fayrer then those could not minister sufficient beauty to show the goddsse of
beauty, therefore being in despair either by Art to shadow her, or by
immagination to comprehend her, he drew in a table a fair Temple, the gates
open, and Venus going in, so as nothing could be perceived but her back,
wherein he used such cunning, that Appelles himself seeing this work, wished
that Venus would turn her face, saying, that if it were in all parts
agreeable to the back, he would become apprentice to Zeuxis, and slave to
Venus. In the like manner fares it with me, for having all the Ladies in
Italye more then fifty hundred, whereby to color Elizabeth, I must say with
Zeuxis, that as many more will not suffice, and therefore in as great an agony
paint her court with her back toward you, for that I cannot by art portray
her beauty, where in though I want the skill to do it as Zeuxis did, yet
viewing it narowly and comparing it wisely, you al will say that if her face be
aunswerable to her back, you will like my handi-crafte, and become her
handmaides. In the mean season I leave you gasing, until she turn her face,
imagining her to be such a one as nature framed, to that end that no art
should immitate, where-in she has proved her self to be exquisite, and
Painters to be Apes.

This Beautiful moulde when I beheld to be endued with chastity,
temperance, mildness, and all other good gifts of Nature (as hereafter
shall appear) when I saw her to surpass all in beauty, and yet a Uirgin, to
excel all in piety and yet a Prince, to be inferior to none in all the
liniamentes of the body, and yet superior to every one in all gifts of the
mind, I beeganne thus to pray, that as she has lived forty years a virgin
in great majesty, so she may live foure-score years a mother, with great
joy, that as with her we have long time had peace and plenty, so by her
we may ever have quietness and abundance, wishing this even from the
bottom of a heart that wishes well to England, though fears ill, that
either the world may end before she dye, or she live to see her childrens
children in the world: otherwise hawe tickle their state is that now triumph,
upon what a twist they hang that now are in honor, they that live shall see,
which I to think on, sigh. But God for his mercies sake, Christ for his merits
sake, the holy Ghost for his names sake, grant to that realm, comefort
without any ill chance, and the Prince they have without any other change,
that the longer she lives the sweeter she may smell, like the bird Ibis, that
she may be triumphant in victoryes like the Palm tree, fruitful in her age
like the Uyne, in all ages prosperous, to all men gracious, in all places
glorious: so that there be no end of her praise until the end of all flesh.

Thus did I often talk with my self, and wish with mine whole soul.

What should I talk of her sharp wit, excellent wisdom, exquisite learning,
and all other qualities of the mind, wherein she seems as far to excel
those that have been accounted singular, as the learned have surpassed those,
that have been thought simple.

In questioning not inferior to Nicaulia the Queen of Saba, that did put so
many hard doubts to Salamon, equal to Nicostrata in the Greek tongue, who was
thought to give precepts for the better perfection: more learned in the Latin
their Amalasunta: passing Aspasia in Philosophye, who taught Pericles:
exceeding in judgment Themistoclea, who instructed Pithagoras, add to these
qualyties, those, that none of these hadd^, the French tongue, the Spanish, the
Italyan, not mean in every one, but excellent in all, readier to correct
escapes in those languages, then to be controlled, fitter to teach others then
learn of any, more able to add new rules, then to err in the old:
Insomuch as there is no Ambassador, that comes into her court, but she is
willing and able both to understand his message, and utter her mind, not like
unto the kings of Assiria, who answer Ambassades by messengers, while they
themselves either dally in sin, or snort in sleep. Her Godly zeal to
learning, with her great skill, has been so manifestly approved, yt I cannot
tell whether she deserve more honor for her knowledge, or admiration for her
courtesy, who in great pomp, has twice directed her Progress, unto the
Uniuersities, with no less joy to the Students, than glory to her State,
where after long and solemn disputations in Law, Physic, and Divinity, not
as one wearyed with Scholars arguments, but wedded to their Orations, when
every one feared to offend in length, she in her own person, with no less
praise to her Majesty, than delyght to her subjects, with a wise and learned
conclusion, both gave them thanks and put her self to pains.

O noble pattern of a Princely mind, not like to the Kings of Persia, who in
their progresses, did nothing else but cut sticks to drive away the time, nor
like the delicate lives of the Sybarites, who would not admit any Art to be
exercised within their City, that might make the least noise. Her wit so
sharp, that if I should repeat the apt aunsweres, the subtle questions, the
fine speeches, the pithie sentences, which on ye sudden she has uttered, they
would rather breed admiration than credit.

But such are the gifts that the living God has endued her withal, yt look
in what Art or Language, wit or learning, virtue or beauty, any one has
perticularly excelled most, she only has generally exceeded every one in
all, insomuch that there is nothing to be added, that either man would wish in
a woman, or God does give to a creature.

I let pass her skill in Music, her knowledge in all the other sciences,
when as I fear least by my simplicity I should make them less then they are,
in seeking to show how great they are, unless I were praising her in the
gallery of Olympia, where giving forth one word, I might hear seven.

But all these graces, although they be to be wondered at, yet her polytique
government, her prudent counsel, her zeal to Religion, her clemency to
those that submit, her stoutnesse to those that threaten, so far exceed all
other virtues, that they are more easy to be meruayled at, then imitated.

Two and twenty years has she borne the sword with such Justice, yt neither
offenders could complain of rigor, nor the innocent of wrong, yet so
tempered with mercy, as malefactors have been sometimes pardoned upon hope
of grace, and the iniuried requitted to ease their grief, insomuch that in the
whole course of her glorious reign, it could never be said, yt either the
poor were oppressed without remedy, or the guyltie repressed without cause,
bearing this engraven in her noble heart, that Justice without mercy were
extreme injury, and pity without equity plain partiality, and that it is
as great tyranny not to mittigate Laws, as iniquity to break them.

Her care for the flourishing of the Gospel has well appeared, when as neither
the curses of the Pope, (which are blessings to good people) nor ye threatenings
of Kings, (which are perilous to a Prince) nor the persuasions of Papists,
(which are honny to ye mouth) could either fear her, or allure her, to vyolate
the holy league contracted with Christ, or to maculate the blood of the
ancient Lamb, which is Christ. But always constant in the true faith, she
has to the exceeding joy of her subjects, to the unspeakable comfort of her
soul, to the great glory of God, established that Religion, the maintenance
where-off, she rather seeks to confirm by fortitude, than leave off for
fear, knowing that there is nothing that smells sweeter to ye Lord, than a
sound spirit, which neither the hoasts of the ungodly, nor the horror of death,
can either remove, or move.

This Gospel with invincible courage, with rare constancy, with hot zeal, she
has maintained in her own countries with out change, and defended against
all Kingdoms that sought change, insomuch that all Nations round about her
threatening alteration, shaking swords throwing fire, mena^ing famine,
murder, destruction, desolation, she only has stood, like a Lamp, on the
top of a hill, not fearing the blasts of the sharp winds, but trusting in
his providence, that rydeth upon the wings of the four Winds. Next follows
the love she bears to her subjects, who no less tendereth them, than ye
apple of her own eye, she wing her self a Mother to the afflicted, a
Physician to the sick, a Sovereign and mild Gouernesse to all.

Touching her Magnanimity, her Majesty, her Estate royal, there was neither
Alexander nor Galba the Emperor, nor any that might be compared with her.

This is she that resemblyng the noble Queen of Nauarr, uses the Marigolde
for her flower, which at the rising of the Sun, opens her leaves, and at
the setting shuts them, re^erring all her actions and endeauours, to him
that rules the Sun. This is that Caesar that first bound the Crocodile to
the palm tree, bridling those that sought to rain her: This is that good
Pellycan, that to feed her people spares not to rend her own person: This is
that mighty Eagle, that has thrown dust into the eyes of the Heart, that went
about to work destruction to her subjects, into whose wings although the
blind Beetle would have crept, and so being carried into her Neast, destroyed
her young ones, yet has she with the virtue of her feathers, consumed that
fly in his own fraud.

She has exiled the Swallow that sought to spoil the Grasshopper, and given
bitter Almonds to the ravenous Wolves, that endeavored to devour the sillye
Lambs, burning even with the breath of her mouth like the Princely Stag, the
Serpents that were engendered by the breath of the huge Elephant, so that now
all her enemies are as whist as the Bird Attagen, who never sings any tune
after she is taken, nor they being so ouer-taken.

But whether do I wade Lad^^^ as one forgetting himself, thinking to sound
the depth of her virtues with a few fadomes, when there is no bottom: For I
know nothow it comes to pass, that being in this Laborinth, I may sooner
loose my self, then find the end.

Behold Ladies in this Glass, a Queen, a Woman, a Uirgin, in all gifts of the
body, in all graces of the mind, in all perfection of either, so far to
excel all men, that I know not whether I may think the place too badde for
her to dwell among men.

To talk of other things in that Court, were to bring Eggs after Apples, or
after the setting out of the Sun, to tell a tale of a shadow. But this I say,
that all Offices are looked too with great care, that virtue is embraced of
all, vice hated, Religion daily increased, manners reformed, that who so sees
the Place there, will think it rather a Church for divine service, than a
court for Princes delyght.

This is the Glass Ladies, where-in I would have you gaze, wherein I took my
whole delyght, imitate the Ladies in England, amend your manners, rub out the
wrinckles of the mind, and be not curious about the weams in the face. As for
their Elizabeth, ^ith you can neither sufficiently marvel at her, nor I
praise her, let us all pray for her, which is the only duty we can perform,
and the greatest that we can profer.

Yours to command. Euphues*

IOVIS ELIZABETH.
PAllas, Juno, Venus, cum Nympham numine plenam
Spectarunt, nostra haec, quaeque triumphat, erit.
Contendunt auide, sic tandem regia Juno,
Est mea, de magnis stemma petiui^ auis.
Hoc leave, (nec sperno tantorum insignia patrum)
Ingenio pollet, dos mea, Pallas ait.
Dulce Venus risit, vultusque in lumina fixit,
Hec mea dixit erit, nam quod ametur habet.
Iudicio Paraidis, cum sit praelata venustas:
Ingenium Pallas? Juno quid vrgit auos?
Haec Venus: impatiens veteris Saturnia damni,
Arbiter in coelis, non Paris, inquit erit.
Intumuit Pallas numquam passura priorem,
Priamides Helenam, dixit adulter amet.
Risit, and erubuit, mixto Cytherea color,
Iudicium dixit Iuppiter ipse ferat.
Assensere, Iouem, compellant vocibus vltro,
Incipit affari regia Juno Iouem.
Iuppiter, Elizabeth vestras si venit ad aures,
(Quam certe omnino coelica turba stupent)
Hanc propriam, and merito sem^^r vult esse Monarcham,
Quaeque suam, namque est pulchra, deserta, potens.
Quod pulchra, est Veneris, quod polleat art, Mineruae,
Quod Princeps, Nympham quis neget esse meam?
Arbiter istius, modo vis, certaminis esto,
Sin minus, est nullum lis habitura modum.
Obst^pet Omnipotens, durum est quod pos^stic, in quit,
Est tamen arbitrio res peragenda meo.
Tu foror and coniux Juno, tu filia Pallas,
Es quoque quid simulem? ter mihi chara Venus.
Non tua da veniam Juno, nec Palsadis illa est,
Nec Veneris, credas hoc licet alma Venus*
Haec Juno, haec Pallas, Venus haec, and quaeque; Dearum,
Diuisum Elizabeth cum Jove numen habet.
Ergo quid obstrepitis? frustra contenditis inquit,
Vltima vox haec est, Elizabetha mea est.
Euphues.
Es Iouis Elizabeth, nec quid Jove maius habendum,
Et Jove test Ioui est, Juno, Minerua, Venus.


THese Uerses Euphues sent also under his Glass, which having once finished,
he gave himself to his book, determining to end his life in Athens, although
he had a months mind to England, who at all times, and in all companies, was
no niggard of his good speech to that nation, as one willing to live in that
Court, and wedded to the manners of that country.

It chanced that being in Athens not passing one quarter of a year, he
received letters out of England, from Philautus, which I thought necessary
also to insert, that I might give some end to the matters in England, which at
Euphues departure were but rawly left. And thus they follow.

Philautus to his own Euphues.
I Have oftentimes Euphues since the departure complained of the distaunce of
place, that I am so far from thee, of the length of time that I could not
hear of thee, of the spite of Fortune, that I might not send to thee, but time
at length, and not too late, because at last has recompensed the injuries of
all, offering me both a convenient messenger by whom to send, and strange
news whereof to write.

Thou know h^we froward matters went, when thou tokest ship, and thou
would marvel to hear how forward they were before thou strokest sail,
for I had not been long in London, sure I am thou-wast not then at Athens,
when as the cornewhich was green in the blade began to war ripe in the ear,
when the seed which I scarce thought to have taken root, began to spring,
when the love of Surius which hardly I would have gessed to have a blossom,
showed a budde. But so unkind a year it has been in England, that we felt
the heat of the Summer, before we could discern the temperature of the
spring, insomuch that we were ready to make Hay before we could mow grass,
having in effect the Ioes of May, before the Calendes of March, which seeing
it is so forward in these things, I meruailed the less to see it so ready in
matters of love, where offentimes they clap hands before they know the
bargain, and seal the Dbligation, before they read the condition.

At my being in the house of Camilla, it happened I found Surius accompanied
with two knights, and the Lady Flauia with three other Ladies, I drew back as
one somewhat shamefast, when I was willed to draw near, as one that was
wished for. Who thinking of nothing less then to hear a contract for
marriage, where I only exspected a conceit of mirth. I suddenly yet
solempnly, heard those words of assurance between Surius and Camilla, in the
which I had rather have been a party, then a witness, I was not a little
amazed to ^ them strike the iron which I thought cold* and to make an end
before I could hear a beginning. When they saw me as it were in a trance,
Surius taking me by the hand, began thus to jest.

You muse Philautus to see Camilla and me to be assured, not that you doubted
it unlikely to come to pass, but that you were ignorant of the practices,
thinking the dial to stand still, because you cannot perceive it to move. But
had you been privy to all proofs, both of her good meaning toward me, and
of my good will toward her, you would rather have thought great have to be
made, then long deliberation. For this understand, that my friends are
unwilling that I should match so low, not knowing yt love thinks the Juniper
shrub, to be as high as the tal Oak, or the Nightingales lays, to be more
precious then the Ostritches feathers, or the Lark that breeds in the
ground, to be better then the Hobbie that mounteth to the clouds. I have
always hitherto preferred beauty before riches, and honesty before blood,
knowing that birth is the praise we receive of our ancestors, honesty the
renown we leave to our successors, and of two britle goods, riches and
beauty, I had rather choose that which might delight me, then destroy me.
Made marriages by friends, how dangerous they have been I know Philautus, and
some present have proved, which can be likened to nothing else so well, then as
if a man should be constrained to pull on a shoe by an others last, not by the
length of his own foot, which being to little, wrings him that wears it,
not him that made it, if too big, shameth him that has it, not him that gave
it. In meats, I love to crave where I like, and in marriage shall I be craved
where I like not? I had as liefe an other should take measure by his back, of
my apparel, as appoint what wife I shall have, by his mind.

In the choice of a wife, sundry men are of sundry ^indes, one looks high,
as one that fears no chips, saying yt the oil that swimmeth in the top is ^
wholsomest, and other poreth in the ground, as dreading al dangers yt happen
in great stocks, alleging that the honny that lies in the bottom is the
sweetest, I assent to neither, as one willing to follow the mean, thinking
that the wine which is in the midst to be the finest. That I might therefore
match to mine own mind, I have chosen Camilla, a Uirgin of no noble race, nor
yet the child of a base father, but between both, a Gentlewoman of an
ancient and worshipful house, in beauty inferior to none, in virtue
superior to a number.

Long time we loved, but neither durst the manifest her affection because I was
noble, nor I utter mine, for fear of offense, seeing in her always a mind
more willing to carry Torches before Vesta, than Tapers before Juno But as fire
when it bursteth out, catches hold soonest of the dryest wood, so Love, when
it is revealed, fasteneth easiest upon the affectionate will: which came to
pass in both of us, for talking of Love, of his laws, of his delyghts,
torments, and all other branches, I could neither so dissemble my lyking, but
that she espied it, whereat I began to sigh, not she so cloak her love, but
that I perceived it, whereat she began to blush: at the last, though long time
strayning courtesy who should go over the style, when we had both haste, I
(for that I knew women would rather dye than seem to desire) began first to
unfold the extremities of my passions, the causes of my love, the constancy
of my faith, the which she knowing to be true, easily believed, and replied in
the like manner, which I thought not certain, not that I misdoubted her faith,
but that I could not persuade my self, of so good fortune.

Having thus made each other privy to our wished desires, I frequented more
often to Camilla, which caused my friends to suspect that, which now they
shall find true, and this was the cause that we all meet here, that before
this good company, we might knitte that knotte with our tongues, that we shall
never undo with our teeth.

This was Surius speech unto me, which Camilla with the rest affirmed. But I
Euphues, in whose heart the stumpes of love were yet sticking, began to
change color, feeling as it were new storms, to arise after a pleasant
calm, but thinking with my self, that the time was past to woo her, that an
other was to wedde, I digested the Pill which had almost choakt me. But Time
caused me to sing a new Tune, as after thou shall hear.

After much talk and great theere, I taking my leave departed, being willed to
visit the Lady Flauia at my leisure, which word was to me in steed of a
welcome.

With-in a while after, it was noised that Surius was assured to Camilla, which
bread quarrels, but he like a noble Gentleman rejoicing more in his love, than
esteeming the loss of his friends, maugre them all, was married, not in a
chamber privately as one fearing tumults, but openly in the Church, as one
ready to answer any objections.

This marriage solemnized, could not be recalled, which raused his Allies to
consent, and so all parties pleased, I think them the happiest couple in the
world.

Now Euphues thou shall understand, that all hope being cut off from obteining
Camilla, I began to use the advantage of ye word, that ye lady Flauia cast
out, whom I visited more like to a soiourner, than a stranger, being absent at
no time, from breakfast till evening.

Draffe was mine arrand but drink I would, my great courtesy was to excuse
my grievous torments: for I ceased not continually to court my violet, whom I
never found so coy, as I thought, nor so courteous as I wished. At the last
thinking not to spend all my wooing in signs, I fell to flat sayings,
reuealyng the bitter sweetes that I sustained, the joy at her presence, the
grief at her absence, with all speeches that a Lover might frame: she not
degenerating from the wyles of a woman, seemed to accuse men of inconstancy,
that the painted words were but wind, that feigned sighs were but flights,
that all their love was but to laugh, laying eayghts to catch the fish, that
they meant again to throw into the River, practicing, only cunning to deceive,
not courtesy to tell truth, wherein she compared all Lovers to Mizaldus ^he
Poet, which was so light, that every wind would blow him away, unless he had
lead tied to his heels, and to the fugitive stone in Cicyco, which runs
away if it be not fastened to some post.

Thus would she dally, a wench euer-more given to such disport: I answered for
my self as I could, and for all men as I thought.

Thus oftentimes had we conference, but no conclusion, many meetings, but few
pastimes, until at the last, Surius, one that could quicklye perceive, on
which side my bread was buttered, began to break with more touching
Frauncis, not as though he had heard any thing, but as one that would understand
some thing, I durst not seem strange when I found him so courteous, knowing
that in this matter, he might almost work al to my lyking.

I unfolded to him from time to time, the whole disscourses I had with my
Uiolet, my earnest desire to obtain her, my lands, goods, and revenues, who
hearing my tale, promised to further my suite, where-in he so besturred his
study, that with-in one month, I was in passibilytie to have her I most
wished, and least looked for.

It were too too long to write an Historye, being but determined to send a
Letter: therefore I will defer all the actions and accidents that happened,
until occasion shall serve either to meet thee, or minister leisure to me.

To this end it grew, that conditions drawn for the performaunce of a
certain ioynter (for the which I had many Italians bound) we were both made as
sure, as Surius and Camilla.

Her dowry was in ready money a thousand pounds, and a fair house, wherein I
mean shortly to dwell. The ioynter I must make, is four hundred pounds
yearly, the which I must here purchase in England, and sell my lands in
Italy.

Now Euphues imagine with thy self that Philautus begins to change,
although in one year to marry and to thrive it be hard.

But would I might once again see thee here, unto whom thou shall be no
less welcome, than to thy best friend.

Surius that noble Gentleman commends him unto thee, Camilla forgets thee
not, both, earnestly wish thy return, with great promises to do thee good,
whether thou wish it in the Court or in the Country, and this I durst swear,
that if thou come again into England, thou will be so friendlye entreated,
that either thou will altogether dwell here, or tarry here longer.

The Lady Flauia saluteth thee, and also my Uyolet, every one wishes thee so
well, as thou can wish thy self no better.

Other news here is none, but that which little apperteineth to me, and
nothing to thee.

Two requests I have to make, as well from Surius as my self, the one to come
into England, the other to hear thine answer. And thus in haste I bid
thee farewell. From London, the first of February. 1579.

Thine or not his own, Philautus.


THis letter being delivered to Euphues, and well perused, caused him both to
marvel and to joy, seeing all things so straungely concluded, and his friend
so happily contracted: having therefore by the same means opportuntie to send
answer, by the which he had pleasure to receive news, he dispatched his
Letter in this form.

Euphues to Philautus.
THere could nothing have come out of England, to Euphues more welcome the^ thy
letters, unless it had been thy person, which when I had thoroughly perused, I
could not at the first, either believe them for the strangeness, or at the
last for the happiness: for upon the sudden to hear such alterations of
Surius, passed all credit, and to understand so fortunate success to
Philautus, all expectation: yet considering that many things fall between the
cup and the lip, that in one luckie hour more rare things come to pass, the^
sometimes in seven year, yt marriages are made in heaven, though consumated
in earth, I was brought both to believe the events, and to allow them. Touching
Surius and Camilla, there is no doubt but that they both will live well in
marriage, who loved so well before their matching: and in my mind he dealt
both wisely and honorably, to prefer virtue before vainglory, and the godly
ornaments of nature before the rich armor of nobility: for this must we all
think, (how well so ever we think of our selves) that virtue is most noble,
by the which men became first noble. As for thine own estate, I will be bold
to counsel thee, knowing it never to be more necessary to use advise the^ in
marriage. Solon gave counsel yt before one assured himself he should be so
wary, that in tying himself fast, he did not undo himself, wishing them
first to eat a Quince pear, yt is, to have sweet conference without brawles,
then salt to be wise without boasting.

In B^etia they covered the Bride with Asparagonia* the nature of the which
plant is, to bring sweet fruit out* of a sharp throne, whereby they noted
that although the Uirgin were somewhat shre wish at the first, yet in time she
might become a sheep. Therefore Philautus, if thy Uiolet s^^moth in the first
month either to chide or chafe, thou must hear without replye, and endure
with patience, for they that cannot suffer the wranglings of young married
women, are not like unto those, that tasting the grape to be sower before it be
ripe, leave to gather it when it is ripe, resembling them, that being stung
with the Be, for sake the Honny.

Thou must use sweet words, not bitter checkes, and though happily thou will
say, that wandes are to be wrought when they are green, least they rather
break then bend when they be dry, yet know also that he that bends a
twigge, because he would see if it would bow by strength, may chance to have a
crooked tree, when he would have a straight.

It is pretely noted of a contention between the Wind and the Sun, who
should have the victory. A Gentleman walking abroad the wind thought to blow
of his cloak, which with great blasts and blusteringes, striving to unloose it,
made it to stick faster to his back, for the more the wind increased, the
closer the cloak clapped to his body: then the Sun shining with his hot
beams, began to warm this Gentleman, who waring somewhat saint in this fair
weather, did not only put off his cloak but his coat, which ye wind
perceiving, yielded ye conquest to the Sun. In ye very like manner fares it with
young wives, for if their husbands with great threatmings, with iarres, with
braules seek to make them tractable, or bend their kn^ees, the more stiff
they make them in the joints, the oftener they go about by force to rule them,
the more froward they find them, but using mild words, gentle persuasions,
familiar counsel, entreatie, submission, they shall not only make them to bow
their knees, but to hold up their hands, not only cause them to honor them,
but to stand in awe of them: for their stomachs are all framed of Diamond,
which is not to be bruised with a hammer but blood, not by force, but flattery,
rese^bling the cock, who is not to be feared by a Serpent, but a glead, They
that fear their Uines will make to sharp wine, must not cut the arms, but
graft next to them Mandrage, which causes the grape to be more pleasant. They
that fear to have cursed wives, must not with rigor seek to calm them, but
saying gentle words in every place by them, which makes them more quiet.

Instruments sound sweetest, when they be touched softest, women ware wisest,
when they be used mildest. The Horse strives when he is hardly rayned, but
having the bridle never stirs, women are stark mad if they be ruled by
might, but with a gentle rain they will bear a white mouth. Gall was cast out
from the sacrifice of Juno, which betokened that the marriage bed should be
without bitterness. Thou must be a glass to thy wife, for in thy face must
she see her own, for if when thou laughest, she weep, when thou mournest she
giggle, the one is a manifest sign she delights in others, the other a token
she dispiseth thee. Be in thy behavior modest, temperate, saber, for as thou
framest thy manners, so will thy wife fit hirs. Kings that be wrastlers cause
their subjects to exercise that feate. Princes that are Musicians, incite their
people to use Instruments, husbands that are chaste and godly, cause also their
wives to imitate their goodness.

For thy great dowry that ought to be in thine own hands, for as we call
that wine, where-in there is more then half water, so do we term that, the
goods of the husband which his wife brings though it be all.

Helen gaped for goods, Paris for pleasure, Ulysses was content with chaste
Penelope, so let it be with thee, that whatsoever others marry for, be thou
always satisfied with virtue, otherwise may I use that speech to thee that
Olympias did to a young Gentleman, who only took a wife for beauty, saying:
this Gentleman has only married his eyes, but by yt time he have also wedded
his e^re, he will confess yt a fair shoe wrings, though it be smooth in the
wearing.

Lycurgus made a law that there should be no dowry given with Maidens, to the
end that the virtuous might be married, who commonly have little, not the
amorous, who oftentimes have too much.

Behave thy self modestly with thy wife before company, remembering the
severity of Cato, who removed Manlius from the Senate, for that he was seen
to kiss his wife in presence of his daughter: old men are seldom merry
before children, least their laughter might breed in them looseness, husbands
should scarce jest before their wives, least want of modesty on their parts,
be cause of wantonness on their wives part. Imitate the Kings of Persia, who
when they were given to riot, kept no company with their* wives, but when they
used good order, had their Queens ever at their table. Give no example of
lightness, for look what thou practisest most, that will thy wife follow
most, though it becomes her least. And yet would I not have thy wife so
curious to please thee, that fearing least her husband should think she
painted her face, she should not therefore wash it, only let her refrain
from such things as she knows cannot well like thee, he that comes before
an Elephant will not wear bright colors, nor he that comes to a Bull, red,
nor he that stands by a Tiger, play on a Taber: for yt by the sight or noise
of these things, they are commonly much infensed. In the like manner there is
no wife if she be honest, that will practice those things, that to her mate
shall seem displeasaunt, or move him to cholar.

Be thriftie and wary in thy exspences, for in old time they were as soon
condemned by law yt spent their wives dowry prodigally, as they that divorced
the^ wrongfully.

Fly that vice that is peculiar to all those of thy country, Jealousy: for if
thou suspect without cause, it is the next way to have cause, women are to be
ruled by their own wits, for be they chaste no gold can win them, if
immodest, no grief can amend them, so that all mistrust is either needelesse
or bootelesse.

Be not too imperious over her, that will make her to hate thee, not to
submisse, that will cause her to disdain thee: let her neither be thy slave,
nor thy souereine, for if she lie under thy foot she will never love thee, if
climb above thy head, never care for thee: the one will breed thy shame to
love her so little, the other thy grief to suffer too much.

In governing thy householde, use thine own eye, and her hand, for huswifery
consists as much in seeing things as setlyng things, and yet in that go not
above thy latchet, for Cooks are not to be taught in the Kitchen, nor Painters
in their shoppes, nor Huswiues in their houses let all the keys hang at her
girdell, but the pursse at thine, so shall thou know what thou do spend, and
how she can spare.

Break nothing of thy stock, for as the stone Thyrrenus being whole swimmeth,
but never so little diminished, sinketh to the bottom: so a man having his
stock full, is ever a float, but wasting of his store becomes bankerout.

Enterteine such men as shall be trusty, for if thou keep a Wolf with-in thy
doors to do mischief, or a Fox to work craft and subtlety, thou shall
find it as perrillous, as if in thy barnes thou should mainteyne Myce, or
in thy grounds Moles.

Let thy maidens be such, as shall seem readier to take pains, then follow
pleasure, willinger to dress up their house, then their heads, not so fine
fingered, to call for a Lute, when they should use the distaffe, nor so dayntie
mouthed, that their silken throats should swallowe no packthread.

For thy dyette be not sumptuous, nor yet simple: For thy attire not costly,
nor yet clownish, but cutting thy coat by thy cloth, go no farther then shall
become thy estate, least thou be thought proud, and so envied, nor debase not
thy birth, least thou be deemed poor, and so pitied.

Now thou art come to that honorable estate, forget all thy former follyes,
and debate with thy self, that here-tofore thou did but go about the
world, and that now, thou art come into it, that Love did once make thee to
follow riot, that it must now enforce thee to pursue thrifte, that then there
was no pleasure to be compared to the courting of Ladies, that now there can
be no delight greater then to have a wife.

Commend me humbly to that noble man Surius, and to his good Lady Camilla.

Let my duty to the Lady Flauia be remembered, and to thy Uiolyt, let
nothing that may be added, be forgotten.

Thou would have me come again into England, I would but I can-not: But if
thou desire to see Euphues, when thou art willing to visit thine Uncle, I will
meet thee, in the mean season, know, that it is as far from Athens to
England, as from England to Athens.

Thou say I am much wished for, that many fair promises are made to me:
Truly Philautus I know that a friend in the court is better then a penney in
the purse, but yet I have heard that such a friend cannot be gotten in the
court without pence.

Fair words fat few, great promises without performance, delight for the
time, but yerke ever after.

I cannot but thank Surius, who wishes me well, and all those that at my
being in England lyked me well. And so with my hearty commendations until I
hear from thee, I bid thee farewell.

Thine to use, if marriage change not manners, Euphues.


THis Letter dispatched, Euphues gave himself to solitariness, determining to
soiourne in some uncouth place, until time might turn white salt into fine
sugar: for surely he was both tormented in body and grieved in mind.

And so I leave him, neither in Athens nor else where that I know: But this
order he left with his friends, that if any news came or letters, that they
should direct them to the Mount of Silixsedra, where I leave him, either to his
musing or Muses.

GEntlemen, Euphues is musing in the bottom of the Mountain Silixsedra:
Philautus married in the Isle of England: two friends parted, the one living
in the delights of his new wife, the other in contemplation of his old
griefs.

What Philautus does, they can imagine that are newly married, how Euphues
lives, they may guess that are cruelly martired: I commit them both to stand
to their own bargains, for if I should meddle any farther with the marriage of
Philatus, it might happily make him jealous, if with the melancholy of Euphues,
it might cause him to be cholaricke: so the one would take occasion to rub his
head, fit his hat never so close, and the other offense, to gall his heart, be
his case never so quiet. I Gentlewomen, am indifferent, for it may be, that
Philautus would not have his life known which he leads in marriage, nor
Euphues, his love descryed, which he begins in solitariness: least either
the one being too kind, might be thought to dote, or the other too constant,
might be judged to be mad. But were the truth known, I am sure
Gentlewomen, it would be a hard question among Ladies, whether Philautus were a
better wooer, or a husband, whether Euphues were a better lover, or a scholar.
But let the one mark the other, I leave them both, to confer at their next
meeting, and commit you, to the Almighty.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London, by Thomas East, for (...) Cawood dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard* (...)


