Via tuta: THE SAFE WAY.

Leading all Christians, by the testimonies, and confessions of our best
learned Adversaries, to the true, ancient, and Catholic faith, now professed
in the Church of England.

By HVMFREY LYNDE Knight.

JEREMIAH 6.16. Stand ye in the ways, and see and ask for the old paths,
where is the good way, and walk therein, and you shall find rest for your
souls; but they said, we will not walk therein.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Robert Milbourne, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Gray-hound. 1628.

To the Religious and well affected Gentry of this Kingdom.
IF for no other cause, yet for this alone that the world may know it is no
difficult matter for a mean Layman to prove the ancient visibilitie of the
Protestant profession, I have attempted to send forth this Essay of my poor
endeavors in this cause, being thereunto provoked by a challenge heretofore
sent unto me, by a Jesuit, in these words: (viz.) That Sir Humfrey, or his
friends should prove out of some good Authors, that the Protestant Church was
in all ages visible, especially in the ages before Luther.

It is not my profession, I must confess, to return challenges or publish
works of this nature; yet knowing that Truth is justified of her children; I
have presumed, as a child of that Mother, to vindicat her cause, and maintain
my own reputation: and in answer hereunto I shall present such proofs as are
warranted by Certificat and confession, not only of the most orthodox Fathers,
but of the Romish Bishops and Cardinals, and other modern Writers in the
Roman Church.

It is an undoubted truth and subscribed by both parties, that the faith which
Christ and his Apostles taught in the first age had visible professors in all
ages. It were therefore sufficient (without any further recital of succeeding
witnesses) to prove that the now Faith of the Church of England is that Faith
which was once delivered to the Saints by Christ and his Apostles, but I rather
condescend to meet the Adversary upon his own ground, and to deal with him
at the same weapon which himself has chosen, wherein on our part the Ancient
Fathers shall be my Champions, and his own Romish Bishops, and Cardinals, and
Schoolmen shall be my Seconds, as being Testes veritatis witnesses of Gods
truth professed in our Church.

Of what strength and force is Truth, shall appear (...) his that she extorts
a full and ample testimony from her sworn enemies to make good the visibility
of our Church, nor that only, but she denies antiquity and universality to the
principal Articles of the new Roman Creed, wherein she points forth that old
and true way, and this is acknowledged on both sides to be Via tuta, The safe
Way: upon which ground it is likewise lawful for me to frame a
counterchallenge by demanding, By what authority of Scriptures, and ancient
Fathers they have imposed new Articles of Christian belief upon Priests and
people? sure I am, those twelve new coined Articles declared by their grand
Council of Trent and published by Pope Pius the fourth, are so far short from
the knowledge of antiquity, that as yet they are scarce understood amongst
their own Disciples for Articles of Faith. And their best learned Romanists
profess openly, that most of them were unknown to former ages.

It is no wonder, that a blind obedience and an implicit faith is so much
obtruded to the ignorant of the Roman Church, when their best learned Doctors
are forced to confess touching the chief Articles (wherein they differ from
us) that they can neither subsist by Antiquity, nor stand with the safety of
the believer: Neither may it seem strange that these me^ should create new
Articles of faith, when as they dare alter and detract from the Commandments
of God; witness their Decalogue so often published by the Church of Rome,
(here now prefixed) wherein not only the second Commandment is left out (as it
is usually in all their Psalters) but the fourth Commandment, touching the
Sabbath day is changed into these words: Remember thou sanctify Holy Days:
But as for these peccadillos, the recital of them I account a sufficient
refutation: In the mean time, those men who call for a Catalogue of names of
such Protestants as taught and professed the 39. Articles of Religion of our
Church, in all ages, let them in every age produce one Ancient and orthodox
Father, who did teach and maintain their twelve new Articles de Fide (which
they command under a curse to be believed of all men) I say let them produce
but one in every age, or but anyone in all the ages for 1500. years after
Christ, till the days of Luther, that taught and believed all their twelve new
Articles de Fide as points of faith, and for that one good Authors sake, I will
be so liberal, as to acknowledge their professors visible in all ages; I will
say their Bishops, and Cardinals, and Schoolmen, which have witnessed the
Antiquity of our doctrine, were mistaken, and ought to be reformed by an
Index Expurgatorius, I will testify the Reformed Churches are guilty of
Novelty, and submit my obedience with an implicit faith to the Roman Church.

And, as touching my own particular, I profess, through the provocation of a
Jesuit, I have unwillingly thrust my sickle into other men's harvest; yet I
witness a true confession before God and man, that I have neither willingly,
nor wilfully falsified any one Author either in citation, or translation in
this Treatise: If any slips have happened (which I do confess for want of help
and opportunity may befall me) let it be showed me by answer moderately,
plainly, and faithfully, and I will ingeniously confess the weakness, not of
our doctrine, but of my own handling.

So for this time, until it please God to give opportunity to publish some
further fruits of my labors in this kind: I heartily desire good
interpretation, and favorable acceptance of the beginnings and endeavors of
him, who is

At your service in Christ, and for his Truth, H.L.

THE NEW Creed of the Church of Rome. Bulla Pij Quarti pro forma Iuramenti
professionis fidei Datum Romae. Anno 1564.
1. This new Creed is added to the Nicene Creed, and prescribed by Pope Pius
the fourth to be received with an oath as the true Catholic faith, and that
it might resemble the Apostles Creed, they have set it in an Apostolic form
in twelve Articles.
I Admit and embrace the Apostolical and Ecclesiastical Traditions, and the
other observations and constitutions of the Church.

2. I admit the holy Scriptures according to that sense which the holy Mother
Church has and does hold, whose right is to judge of the true sense and
interpretation of holy Scriptures: neither will I ever receive and expound it,
but according to the Uniform Consent of the Fathers.

3. I profess, that there are truly and properly seven Sacraments of the new
Law instituted by Christ: and the rites received in the solemn administration
of them all, I do embrace.

4. I admit and receive all those points touching original sin and
Justification, which are defined and declared by the Council of Trent.

5. I profess, that there is a true, proper, and propitiatory sacrifice
offered to God in the Mass both for the quick and the dead: and that in the
Eucharist the Bread and the Wine are Transubstantiated into the body and blood
of Christ.

6. I acknowledge that under one kind, whole and perfect Christ, and the true
Sacrament is received.

7. I do constantly hold, that there is Purgatory, and that the souls there
detained, are helped by the Prayers of the faithful.

8. I hold that the Saints are to be worshipped and called upon: and that they
offer prayers for us unto God, and that their relickes are to be worshipped.

9. I do resolutely affirm that the Images of Christ and of the Virgin Marie:
and also of other Saints are to be had and retained: and that due honor and
veneration is to be yielded to them.

10. I do hold that the power of Indulgences was left by Christ in the Church,
and that the use of them is most wholesome to Christian people.

11. I acknowledge the holy Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church, to be the
Mother and Mistrisse of all Churches, and I promise and swear true obedience
to the Bishop of Rome, the successor of Saint Peter, the Prince of the
Apostles, and the Vicar of Jesus Christ.

12. I undoubtedly receive and profess all other things delivered, defined,
and declared by the holy Canons and Oecumenicall Councels, and especially by
the holy Synod of Trent, etc.

The ten Commandments.
1. I Am thy Lord God. The Christian doctrine composed by the Reverend Father
James Ledesma Priest of the society of Jesus: and printed permessu Superiorum.
An. 1609. and 1624.
Thou shall have no other Gods but me. 2. Thou shall not take the name of God
in vain. 3. Remember to sanctify the holy days. 4. Honor thy father and
mother. 5. Thou shall not kill. 6. Thou shall not commit adultery. 7. Thou
shall not steal. 8. Thou shall not bear false witness. 9. Thou shall not
desire thy neighbors wife. 10. Thou shall not desire thy neighbors goods.
The Contents.
Sect. 1. THe causeless bitterness of the Church of Rome against the Reformed
Churches. page 1 Sect. 2. The occasion of the contention betwixt the Churches
originally, proceeded from the Romanists by their own confession. p. 10. Sect.
3. Corruptions both in faith and manners confessed by the members of the Roman
Church, and yet the Reformation denied by the Pope, and why, etc. p 18 Sect 4.
Many learned Romanists convicted by the evidence of Truth, either in part or in
whole, have renounced Popery before their death. p. 26. Sect. 5. Worldly
policy and profit hinders the Reformation of such things which are altogether
inexcusable in themselves. p. 35. Sect. 6. The common pretense of our
Adversaries refusing reformation because we cannot assign the precise time
when errors came in; Refuted. p. 43. Sect. 7. The pedigree of the Romish faith
drawn down from the ancient heretics; and the Protestant faith derived from
Christ and his Apostles. p. 59. Sect. 8. The Testimonies of our Adversaries
touching the Antiquity and universality of the Protestant faith in general.
p. 68. Sect. 9. The Testimonies of our Adversaries touching the Protestant and
the Roman faith in these particular paragraphes. 1. Justification by faith
only. p. 80. 2. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper and the doctrine of
Transubstantiation. p 86. 3. Private Mass. p 116. 4. Seven Sacraments. p 132.
5. Communion in both kinds. p. 164. 6. Prayer and Service in a known tongue. p.
175 7. Worship of Images. p. 189. 8. Indulgences. p. 211.
Sect 10. The Testimonies of our Adversaries touching the infallible certainty
of the Protestant faith, and the uncertainty of the Romish. p. 233. Sect. 11.
The Testimonies of our Adversaries touching the greater safety, comfort, and
benefit of the soul in the Protestant faith, then in the Romish. page 249.
Sect. 12. Our Adversaries convicted by the evident Testimonies of the ancient
Fathers, either ridiculously elude them, or plainly reject them. p 263. Sect.
13. Our Adversaries convinced of a bad cause and an evil conscience, by razing
of our Records, and clipping their own Authors tongues. p. 272. Sect. 14. Our
Adversaries convicted of their defense of a desperate cause by their
blasphemous exception against the Scripture it self. 278. Sect. 15. Our
chiefest Adversary Cardinal Bellarmine testifies the truth of our doctrine in
the principal points of controversy betwixt us. p 287. Sect. 16. Our
Adversaries objection drawn from the Testimonies of pretended Martyrs of their
Religion: Answered. p 295. Sect. 17. Our Adversaries common objection drawn
from the charitable opinion of Protestants touching the salvation of professed
Romanists living and dying in their Church: Answered. p. 303. Sect. 18. Proving
(according to the Title of the book) by the confession of all sides, that the
Protestants Religion is safer, because in all positive points of doctrine, the
Romanists themselves agree with us, but in their additions they stand single by
themselves. p 315.
The safe Way.
Sect. 1. The causlesse bitterness of the Church of Rome against the Reformed
Churches.
WE read in the Ecclesiastical History when the ancient Christians at Antioch
fell at variance amongst themselves: Theodoret sought by a favorable report to
allay the bitterness of their Contention with these words: Both parts make one
and the same Confession of their faith. Theod. lib 3. Hist. Eccles. cap. 4.
For both maintain the Creed of the Nicene Council.

The beautiful and sacred name of Truth, speaks peace to all: and that lovely
name of Peace, gives that sweet counsel to all Christians, which Abraham gave
to Lot: Gen, 13.8.
Let there be no strife betwixt me and thee, for we be brethren.

If the Church of Rome had loved Truth and Peace, without doubt the common bond
of Christianity, and the Creed which is the general Cognizance of our faith,
would have incited them to the like favorable construction of the
Controversies of this age, and the rather because their own learned Cardinal
professes; Bellar, de Verbo Dei. l. 4. c. 11. Primu^ and Nota Secundo.
That the Apostles never propounded as Common Articles of faith; other things
then the Articles of the Apostles Creed, the ten Commandments, and some few of
the Sacraments because (says he) these things are simply necessary and
profitable for all men, the rest are such as a man may be saved without them.

But such is the nature of the malignant Church (and for that cause the Church
of Rome is rightly deciphered by that name) that instead of qualifying the
unquenchable broils, and entirely preserving the seamelesse garment of Christ,
Camp. 1. Rat. Jewel and Harding pa. 222. and 178.
she ^^rmes us Heretics, hell^ounds of Swinglius, Luthers whelps, Turkish
Hugenots, damned persons, and worse then Infidels; which unchristian speeches
dipped in lie and gall, give us just cause to say with Austen: Quotidiana fornax
nostra aduersariorilingua. Aug. Confess. lib. 10. c. 37.
Our daily furnace is our adversaries tongue.

It cannot be denied that the reformed and the ancient Roman Church are two
Sisters, both descended from one and the same Catholic and universal Mother
of us all, but when the world shall understand that the Romish Sister has lost
her breasts, or at leastwise gives her Children little or no sincere milk
out of her two breasts the two Testaments: when the world shall plainly
discern that she does daily practice spiritual fornication with the
inhabitants of the earth, when it shall be witnessed by her self that her
Sister has kept her first love and continued her ancient birthright, from the
time of the Apostles to the days of Luther, Will it not seem a strange folly
or a wilful madness to quarrel with her Sister, because she will not follow
her unknown ways, and go a whoring after her inventions? If for no other
cause yet for this alone, (because she played the Harlot) her Sister might
better justify a separation from her, then to retain fellowship with her
lewdness.

It is the counsel of the Prophet, Hos. 4.15.17.
If Ephraim be joined to Idols, let him alone: If Israel play the Harlot, let
not Judah sin. Babylon was a true Church, with which sometimes the religious
did communicate, but after it was more depraved, the faithful are commanded to
go out of her, and for that cause Abraham was commanded to go forth of Caldea,
wherein he was borne, because the inhabitants of the country were idolators:
and the Hebrews were led out of Egypt by Moses and Aaron, because the
Egyptians were given to vain superstitions; such is our departure from the
Church of Rome, or rather from the errors of that Church that has departed
from her self, and for that cause; Non fugimus sed fugamur, we left her
unwillingly, not voluntarily, That we be not partakers of her sin, Reu. 18.4.
and that we receive not of her plagues.

That saying of Erasmus was no less true then witty: who being demanded of
the Duke of Saxony, what was Luthers capital offense that stirred up so many
opposites against him, made answer: Luther had committed two great sins, for
he had taken away the Crown from the Pope, and had taken down the belly of
the Monks: and surely (setting aside the Popes Lordlines and the luxury of
Priests) it shall appear there is no such cause why she should breathe out,
Anathemas, Curses, Excommunications, with a Tradatur Satanae: let her Sister be
delivered to Satan: There is no such cause why she should daily entertain
Jews into her bosom, when a poor Christian soul, a believing Protestant may
not approach to her sanctuary for fear of the Inquisition.

Nobis non licet esse tam disertos; The children of this world are wiser in
their generation then we profess our selves to be. For as touching the twelve
Articles of the Apostles Creed which are the maine parts of the Christian
Truth, Hoochers Ecclesiastical Politis.
and wherein the Church of Rome does still persist, we gladly acknowledge her
to be of the family of Jesus, (says Hooker) and that which Saint Paul
witnessed of the Israelites, that in one respect they were enemies, Romans 11.28.
but in another they were beloved of God: so likewise as concerning the word of
God, and the Apostles Creed, we give the Church of Rome her due, but in another
respect as she has created twelve new Articles, and coined new expositions
upon the old, far different from the doctrine of the Apostles, as she depends
upon customarie Tenants which makes their chief claim by Tradition, as she
relyes upon the Church for the last resolution of faith, as she maintains and
practices manifest and manifold Idolatry; as she derogateth from the high
price of our Redemption, by adding their own merits and satisfactions to the
Merits of Christ, as she aduanceth the Pope for the Lord Paramont above all
that are called Gods; In these and many like respects we say her Tenure is
mean and base, her Tenets are subject to alienation, her Articles are
evidences of an unknown Truth, her unwritten verities are prescriptions within
the memory of man, her Title is usurpation, her confidence is presumption, her
devotion is superstition, and she her self a professed enemy to the Gospel.

Sect. 2. The occasion of the contention betwixt the Churches originally
proceeded from the Romanists by their own confession.
But before we enter into the debates and differences of these times, it will
not be amiss to look back and examine the cause of this great calamity and
distraction in the Christian Church, and to inquire by whom and what means
this bitter contention is fallen out betwixt two Sisters; Cassander a learned
Papist took special notice that these two sisters were fallen asunder, even
to the dividing of the household: he observed the Author of those fresh
bleeding wounds, and accordingly as an eyewitness of those differences,
protests openly that the fault is to be laid upon those which being puffed
up with vain insolent conceits of their Ecclesiastical power, Cassand.
Consult. 56. and 57.
proudly and scornefully contemned and rejected them which did rightly and
modestly admonish the reformation: If we shall further inquire of him: what
remedy to apply to such incurable diseases: he professes seriously, that the
Church can never hope for any firm peace unless they begin to make it, which
have given the cause of that distraction. If we further press him for his
advise how to procure that Peace from them which first occasioned the falling
off, he replies and confidently assures us, that this cannot be effected,
unless those which are in place of Ecclesiastical government, would be
content to remit some thing of their too much rigor, and yield somewhat to the
peace of the Church, and hearkening unto the earnest prayers and admonitions of
many godly men, will set themselves to correct manifest abuses according to the
rule of divine Scriptures and the Primitive Church, from which they have
swerued.

Here is a plain confession of a learned Romanist, that many abuses are crept
into the Roman Church; here is likewise an acknowledgement of a distemperature
that proceeds from the head (and we know when the head is distempered
commonly the whole body is out of order.) Now to rectify these abuses, he
prescribes a Rule which is the holy Scriptures, and he sets before us an
ancient pattern for our instruction which is the Primitive Church.

If the Scripture be the rule of Truth, and the ancient doctrine be the
pattern of a true Church, how can our Religion be charged with heresy, which
professes the Scripture to be the sole rule of faith, or how can it be justly
accused of Novelty as derived from Luther, when it is a Canon published for
the direction of Preachers and Pastors in our Church, (viz.) that they should
never teach any thing as matter of faith religiously to be observed, Jn lib.
Can. dis. Eccles. Ang. cap. 6. p. 19.
but that which is agreeable to the doctrine of the old and new Testament, and
collected out of the same doctrine by the ancient Fathers and Catholic
Bishops of the Church.

Let us ascend higher and look into former ages, and there let us examine
whether these two Sisters agreed in unity of doctrine in one and the same
house.

It is reported of Redwald king of the East Saxons, Camdens Britannia Eng. pa.
465.
that he was the first of all his Nation that was baptized and received
Christianity: but afterward being seduced by his wife: he had in the self
same Church (says Bid) one Altar for Christ's Religion, and another for
sacrifices unto devils. Such was the state of the Roman Church especially in
the ages after the devil was let loose: there were some that did consecrate
themselves and their service to the right worship of God alone: others to the
adorations of Saints and Images; there were some that did constantly adore the
Creator in his bodily presence in heaven: whilst others in the same Church did
ignorantly worship the Creature in a consecrated host upon the Altar: and
thereupon Michael Cecaenas General of the order of Franciscans, about 400.
years past, observing the different opinions of different members in the same
Church, complained: There were two Churches, Mich. Cecaenas contra Tyrannidem
Papae.
the one of the wicked sort flourishing in which the Pope reigned: the other of
godly and good men, and this Church he persecuted.

This learned Friar by his discovery of two Churches, shows that long since
there was a difference in Religion betwixt the two Sisters, and thereby he
plainly intimates the different estate betwixt Papist and Protestant in the
same Church; the mayor part was subject to the Pope, and that flourished and
was visible in the eyes of the world: but, says the Franciscan, that part
consisted of the wicked, and consequently was the malignant Church: the other
part was obscured and persecuted by the Pope, but (says he) it consisted of
the faithful and true believers, and consequently was the true Church.

I could ascend yet higher, and show that the falling out of the two Sisters
was about a husband; the one was constant to her first love Christ Jesus the
sole head of her Church; the other sought a divorce from her husband,
acknowledging the Pope to be the universal head of all Churches: but I leave
this to a longer time and a larger Tract.

Sect. 3. Corruptions both in faith and manners confessed by the members of the
Roman Church, and yet the reformation denied by the Pope, and why, etc.
IF we look upon the latter ages, we shall easily discern an alteration of
Religion by the complaints of Head and members in the same Church: Anno 1411.
Dixit quod ipse volebat vacare circa reformatione^ Ecclesiae, etc.
Pope Alexander the fifth, in the year 1411. promises solemnly to intend the
Reformation of the Church: and for that purpose to assemble the most learned of
all Nations: yet nothing was performed: At the Council of Senes in the year
1423. this proposition of Reformation was revived: Anno 1423.
but withal it was adiourned de die in diem, Quaestorum abusus -- quorum
malitia ita quotidie magno fideliu^ scandalo and querela deprehenditur vt eorum
emendatione spes nulla relicta videatur. Council. Trident Sess. 21. c. 9. Bin.
Cum multa iam sieve te^porum vitio sieve hominu^ in curia and improbitate
irrepsisse vi deantur quaea tanti sacrificij dignitate aliena sunt. Council.
Trident. Sess. 22. Decretum de obseruandis and euitandis etc.
and the day of their reformation is not yet come. If we come nearer to these
times: the Council of Trent in Paul the thirds time complained of Indulgences,
an Article of the Roman faith: That the Popes officers in collectings of money
for those Indulgences, gave a scandal to all faithful Christians which might
seem to be without all hope of remedy. They complained in general that there
were many errors and corruptions crept into the Mass by the error of time and
wickedness of men: they confess in particular, that Priests for covetousness
and gain made contracts and bargains to say Masses for money: in so much it
was observed that the Priest alone said straggling Masses in a corner of the
Church for a Tester at the request of him that paid for them: Moulin of the
Euchar. cap. 21.
they confess that wanton and lascivious songs were mingled with the Organs
and other Church music: Ab Ecclesijs vero Musicas eas vbi sieve organo, sieve
cantu, lasciuum aut impurum aliquid miscetur, etc. Council. Trid. ibid. Agrippa
de vanit. Scien. cap. 18.
and this is likewise complained of by their own Agrippa: Hodie, etc. (says
he) At this day obsoene and filthy songs have their intercourse with the Canon
of the Mass: and as concerning superstitious Ceremonies, as namely, the
certain number of their candels at their Masses, they confessed, they were
first invented rather out of superstitious devotion then true Religion:
Quorundam vero Missarum and candelarum certum numeru^ qui magis a superstitioso
cultu quam a vera religione inuentus est, omnino ab Ecclesia remoueant Jdem
ibid.
neither did these men seek a reformation in manners only, but in the
doctrine it self; they confessed that the Mass wherein the Priest and people
did communicate together was more fruitful, Council. Trid. Sess. 22. c. 6.
Optaret sacro sancta Synodus, etc.
they professed openly and wished unfeignedly that private Mass might be
restored to the ancient custom, and the practice of the Reformed Churches
which communicate jointly and severally with Priests and people together. And
as concerning Latin Service in their Church, although the council did not
allow that at all times and in all places it should be celebrated in the vulgar
tongue: yet they confess that the Mass does contain great instruction for
the faithful: Etsi Missa magnam co^tineai populi fidelis eruditionem non tamen
expedire visum est Patribus vt vulgari lingua passim celebrar tur: quamobrem ne
oues Christi esuriant neue paruuli panem petant and non sit qui frangat ijs.
Mandat sancta Synodus Pastoribus and singulis cura^ animarum gerentibus vt
frequenter inter M^ssaru^ celebratione^ vel per se vel per alios ex ijs qu^e in
Missa leguntur aliquid exponant, at que inter ^^etera sanctissimi huius
sacrifi^ij mysterium ali quod declarent. Sess. 22. c. 8.
and therefore (say they) lest the sheep of Christ should thirst: and the
children should crave bread and none should be present to break it to them.
Mandat sancta Synodus, etc. The holy Synod commands all Pastors having cure of
souls that frequently at the celebration of the Mass either by themselves or
by some others, to interpret and declare the mystery of the Sacrament unto the
people. How near these men do come to our doctrine who does not perceive? For
touching p^incipall points of their doctrine: First, their great Council of
Trent declares it for a point of faith, that the use of Indulgences is most
wholesome for the people: Bulla Pij quarti Artic. 10.
yet they confessed the scandal that came by them was very great, and without
hope of reformation: their Council accurseth all those that should hold
private Masses unlawful: yet they wish they were restored to the custom of
the reformed Church, where Priest and people communicate together: the Council
accurseth all those that condemn the practice of the Roman Church, for
delivering the Canon of their Mass in a silent or an unknown tongue, and yet
she commands all Massing Priests to explain and expound the meaning of those
words delivered in a silent and unknown manner.

From these and the like confessions of diverse errors in the Church, Decretum
de Reformatione Sess. 22 cap. 9 Biniuus.
the Bishops and Fathers of the Council made a Decree for a Reformation: the
Pope himself caused many Cardinals to assemble and consider of the errors, and
for the easier redress they were commanded to be proposed to the Pope and
Cardinals in the Consistory: and if you question me who did hinder the
reformation, I must say with Cassander, they were such who were puffed with
Ecclesiastical authority, and reputed principal members in the same Church:
Nicholas Scomberg by profession a Dominican, by place a Cardinal, opposed the
Reformation, and pressed the Pope and his Cardinals with these and the like
reasons: Histor. of Trent li. 1. p. 83. Engl.
It would give an occasion to the Lutherans to brag that they had enforced
the Pope to make that Reformation, and above all, it would be a beginning to
take away not only the abuses but good uses also, and so to endanger the whole
state of Religion: for by the Reformation it would be confessed that the
things provided against were deservedly reprehended by the Lutherans which
would be a great abetting to their whole doctrine.

Sect. 4. Many learned Romanists convicted by the evidence of Truth, either in
part or in whole, have renounced Popery before their death.
HOw available these reasons may seem to hinder a reformation, I leave to
every man's judgment: yet sure I am the reformed Churches have done nothing in
this, other then the former Councels had anciently decreed, and diverse of
their own Church had formerly wished to be done; and I am certainly persuaded,
were it not for fear of endangering the Romish Religion (as the Cardinal
rightly observed) our adversaries would come nearer unto us in all the
fundamental points that our Church teaches: for look upon the Communion in
both kinds, and you shall find the Council of Basil about two hundred years
since, did allow the Cup to the Bohemians upon this condition: Genebr. lib. 4.
Chronich.
That they should not find fault with the contrary use, nor sever themselves
from the Catholic Church: Look upon the restraint of Priests marriage, and
you shall hear Aeneas Siluius, afterward Pope Pius, give his Royal assent
with us. Aeneas Sylu. de Council. Basil. l. 2.
As marriage upon weighty reasons was taken from the Priests: so upon weighty
considerations it were wished to be restored. Look upon private Masses, and of
this, says Master Harding, Jewel and Harding ca Private Mass in Initio.
the godly and faithful people have since the time of the Primitive Church
much complained: and for the better correspondence with us in the greatest
mystery of our salvation: Look upon the Scriptures and you shall find the
Rhemist Testament translated into English, and this was done Importunitate
Haereticorum (as they of Doway speak) by the importunity of Heretics: and
to conclude, they have of late granted a dispensation to some men and women
also to read the Scriptures, and this was done Importunitate Haereticorum by
the importunity of Heretics.

It is no wonder that the poor widow in the Gospel did prevail with the
corrupt Judge by importunity, when such heretics as we are reputed to be,
have prevailed by importunity with such true Catholics as they pretend
themselves to be: yet if we look but within the memory of man, we shall find
that most of the Romish proselites did frequent our Church and divine service
for the first eleven years of our blessed Queen Elizabeth, L. Coke de Jure
Regis Ecclesiastice fol. 34.
neither was their communicating with us forbidden by any lawful Council: and
I am verily persuaded, That many at this day in the Church of Rome do assent to
our doctrine that dare not communicate with us openly in the Church: for I
appeal to their own consciences how many of them which are taught the
doctrine of concomitance have wished the restoring of the Sacramental Cup to
the lay people? how many with hands and hearts lifted up, adore Christ Jesus in
his bodily presence in heaven, when the consecrated bread is presented to them
for real flesh upon the Altar? How many worship the invisible God in Spirit
and Truth, when they retain the Images for memory, for history, for ornament,
not for adoration? How many do smile at Indulgences and Pardons, at particular
shrifts, at merry Pilgrimages, at ridiculous and fained miracles, at divine
virtue ascribed to Medals Beads, Agnus Dei, and the like, which are termed
godly deceits, and harmeles guiles to feed the ignorant? How many do prefer
the lawfulness of Priests marriage before the keeping of a Concubine, Grauius
peccare sacerdotem si vxorem ducat quam si domi concubinam foiseat. Coster.
Enchirid. c. 15. propo. 9.
although the contrary be the common doctrine of the Church of Rome? Lastly,
how many for fear of vain glory, and by reason of the uncertainty of their
works, do rely wholly upon the merits of Christ Jesus? Show me that learned
man that lives a professed Papist in the Church of Rome, and dies not a sound
Protestant in this prime foundation of our faith. B. Gardener.
That Bishop who would not have the gap of this doctrine opened to the ignorant
in time of his health, yet in the time of his sickness sets the merits of
Christ in the gappe to stand betwixt Gods judgment and his own sins. And
Cardinal Bellarmine who taught in time of his health that a man had a double
right to the kingdom of God, part by his own merits, part by the merits of
Christ; Yet, I say, this stout and learned defender of his faith, concludes
with a Tutissimum, It is the safest way to rely wholly on the merits of Christ
Jesus; and in time of his sickness when he was to render an account of his
works and doctrine: Et precor me inter sanctos and electos suos non vt
aestimator meriti sed vt veniae largitor admitta^. Bellar. Test. page 89.
Ricard. Tapp. explic. artic. Theolog. Louan. tom. 2. art. 8.
in his last Will and his last words he sounds a retreat and beggeth pardon at
the hands of God: Not as a valuer of merits but as a giver of mercy. And their
own Albertus Piggius who did bitterly inueigh against our Church and doctrine,
especially in the point of Justification, by reading of Caluins Institutions,
with a purpose to confute them in that very point, Controu. 2. tit. de Instito.
fol. 50.
became himself a Caluinist: neither was it his case alone, but Paulus
Vergerius a Romish Bishop, Episcopus Iustino-politareus.
who in like manner began to write a book against the Protestants which he
entitled, Adnersus Apostatas Germaniae, against the Apostates of Germany,
after he had examined their books, and weighed their arguments with a purpose
to confute them, found himself taken and vanquished, and laying aside the hope
of a Cardinalship which at that time the Pope intended him, Sleida. Comment.
Relig. lib. 21.
he traveled to Pola, where Germanus his brother a Romish Bishop was
residing, and after much debate and conference had of the doctrine of
Justification, his brother also yielded and protested against the Romish
doctrine, and both with mutual joy and consent of minds professed and
proclaimed the Protestant faith to all believers.

Sect. 5. Worldly policy and profit hinders the Reformation of such things
which are altogether inexcusable in themselves.
I Speak not this as if there were hope of a Reformation in the Roman Church:
For when I consider that many opinions which formerly crept in the Church are
now established for Articles of faith, when I consider that some of their
points are so linked together, that the unloosing of one is sometimes the loss
of all, when I plainly see upon one point of faith (namely, one Purgatory)
Trentals, Masses, Diriges, Requiems, Prayers for the dead, the doctrine of
Merits, works of Supererogation, Indulgences, Pardons, Iubilies, the power of
binding and loosing; since, I say, all these attend upon the opening and
shutting of Purgatory, and this Purgatory is created a point of faith, and
this faith is confirmed by Councels, merely for the benefit of the Pope and
Clergy. What hope can we have to get these golden keys of Purgatory from
them? by what means can we procure them to exercise the faculty of shutting,
as well as opening: the power of binding as well as loosing, when no man will
give money to be bound, but to be loosed in Purgatory?

Again when I consider the saying of Maldonat the Jesuit, daily practiced by
the Church of Rome against our Church and doctrine, Mald. Comment. in Ioh. 6.62.
viz. Although I have no other Author for my exposition but my self, yet I
allow it rather then Austens, Although his be most probable; because this of
mine does more cross the sense of the Caluinists: When, I say, our Religion is
directly and immediately derived from the Scripture, when our doctrine agrees
in the fundamental points with Saint Austen, and the Fathers; when the
Primitive and Reformed Churches have shaken hands together, is it not a mere
malice to oppose a known ancient doctrine, and to make a league against God
and his Word, against the true religion and her Church? They are base wits
(says Viues) which are so affected, Viues Lib. de causis art. corrupt.
whereas ingenious minds and natures well given will rather seek how true that
is which they hold; then how they may defend it, making greater price of
verity then victory: yet it cannot be denied that this is the common practice
of the Roman Church; for otherwise what man in his right senses would take
upon him to be wiser then God, and in their Psalters leave out the second
Commandment, and hazard that heavy doom: Cursed be he that adds or
detracteth from the least of these sayings? Reu. 22.18.19.
What sense is there, that the Church of Rome should presume to alter Christ's
Institution, and take away the Cup from the Laity, when it is confessed by
their own general Council, Council. Constant. Ses. 13.
that Christ did institute the Cup for the people, and the Primitive Church did
continue it in both kinds? what reason can be alleged why an ignorant man
should pray without understanding, when the Apostle commands us to pray with
the Spirit, 1. Cor. 14.
and to pray with the understanding also? What discretion should lead men to
invoke Saints and Angels, when the Apostle does make this unanswerable
question: How shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed? Romans
10.14.
What confidence and assurance of humane frailty should cause them to lean to
lean to a broken staff of their own merits, when they may safely rely upon
the sole merits of Christ Jesus? What madness is it to adore a piece of bread,
which depends upon the intention of another man, seeing his intention may fail
and cause flat idolatry in the worshipper; when they may safely and certainly
adore Christ Jesus sitting at the right hand of the Father? What stupiditie is
it to worship a picture, the work of men's hands, and to adventure idolatry
upon nice distinctions; when without danger they may worship the true God in
Spirit and truth, Ioh. 4.24.
as he will be worshipped? Lastly, what foolishnes is it for man to rely upon
the Church which is the authority of man that may err, when he may build upon
the infallible rule of Gods word, which is agreed on all hands that cannot
err? If men for advantage of their cause, or for their own preferment, will
by shifts and cauils turn the necks of Scriptures and Fathers clean about,
and wrest them to their own side, let them beware of their example who could
not believe, or if they did believe, durst not confess Christ, Because they
sought the praise of men more then the praise of God! Ioh. 5.44.


Sect. 6. The common pretense of our Adversaries refusing Reformation, because
we cannot assign the precise time when errors came in; Refuted.
HOw far the Church of Rome stands guilty of this crime, I will not take upon
me to censure; but sure I am they are so far from reforming the abuses and
errors in their Church, that they will not acknowledge their points of doctrine
to be errouious, unless we can assign the time, and point at the persons who
first broached them. Now since we are all eye witnesses that the errors of the
Romish Church are at this day so notorious, that a very child may reprehend
them; it were more fit (as I conceive) to redeem the time by correcting those
errors that crept into the Church, then to enquire after times and persons
which are not in their hands?

If a man be sick of a Consumption, will he refuse help of the Physician,
except he can resolve him whether his Lungs or his Liver were first infected,
and show the time when, and the occasion how his body grew first distempered?
When an house is ready to fall, men do not stand to enquire what post or
principal did first decay, or the time when the rain did first begin to rot
it, but they seek to amend that which is most ruinous, and support that part
which is most subject unto falling: If you will have a more familiar example,
Obsecro inquit cogita quomodo huc me liberes non quomodo huc ceciderim quaeras.
Aug. Epist. 29.
S. Austin will give you one, A man (says he) falls into a pit and calls for
help, he that should lend him his hand for present relief, falls to asking
him this question; Quomodo hic cecidisti? How did thou fall in here, but
hear what answer he makes him: I pray advise me how I may come out, never ask
me the question how I came in.

Mat. 13.
In the parable of the Sower, Christ himself gives a full answer to those
impertinent demands: he tells us that the Thief sowed the tares in the night
time when all were asleep, Dormientibus hominibus.
and from this parable common reason will forthwith conclude; If all were
asleep, how could those of the house see him? if they did not see him, how
could they produce him? Now as the Thief came at unawares and in the night
season when there was none so much as dreamt of him: Mat. 24.43.
so likewise of this be sure (says the Evangelist) if the good man of the
house knew at what watch the Thief would come, he would surely have watched:
and then certainly he would have told the time and the person.

The doctrine that we complain of is a mystery of Iniquity, Jniquitas sed
mystica (i.) pietatis nomine palliata.
it is a mystery cloked with the name of piety; and we know mysteries are
secret, and have close and private working; they work not openly and
publicly, but by decrees leasurably, cunningly, and warily to avoid
discoueries; And as Tares sown in good ground being but a small seed, lie long
covered and hid in the earth before they appear, after they appear they
grow to another shape, and so multiply in the seed sown; such is the
condition of errors sowed in the Church: first, it is an opinion broached by
some private man, and happily with a good intention, then by addition becomes an
error of some one, or few, which at first is not easily espied, or not much
regarded: afterward it gathers strength, and multiplyeth it self into diverse
parts and members of the body, and so by continuance becomes a known error,
and then the servant makes complaint to his Master: Sir, did thou not sow
good seed in thy field, from whence then has it Tares? but which is most
obseruable, the husbandman did not epsy the tares until they had almost
choked the good corn.

We say therefore that in the Primitive Church when any heresy did arise,
that endangered the foundation, such as was the heresy of the Arrians, of the
Pelagians, of the Donatists, and the like, the first Authors were observed, the
times were known, the place was pointed at, and forthwith demissarie and
testimonicall letters were written (which were then in use) and were sent to
all the parts and sound members of the Catholic Church, by which public
notice, the steale-truth was discovered, and after publication of his heresy,
the party was repressed and excluded from the communion of the whole Church;
and in this alteration or change of doctrine: Bellarmines reason may take
place; Bellar. lib. 4. cap. 5.
that is, in every great and notorious mutation there may be observed the
Author, the time, and the place, the beginnings, increasings, and resistance
made against it: but the change of Romish doctrine was otherwise, it was like
the cokatrise egg along time in the shell, before the Cokatrise did appear,
it was a secret Apostasy, a falling away from the Truth which was caused at
the first by an error stole into the Church: Sensim sine sensu, insensible and
unawares; and therein appears the difference betwixt open heresy and secret
Apostasy. The open heretic visibly and professedly in a time known by a
person named, with a doctrine publicly professed, proclaims his heresies
against all true Catholics; The secret Apostata closely and warily in the
time of darkness when the husbandman is asleep, unseen and unawares
scatters his seed, the one is easy to be discovered and known both for
time and person, because he works openly in the day, the other scarcely to be
discovered, because he works only in the night.

It is an undeniable truth, that some opinions were condemned in the Primitive
Church for erroneous and superstitious, which now are established for Articles
of faith in the Roman Church, to give an instance: S. Austin complains that in
his time the rude sort of people were entangled with superstition, Noui multos
sepulchrorum and picturarum adoratores sed illud admoneo vt Catholicae
Ecclesiae maledicere desi natis vituperando mores hominum quos and ipsa
condemnat and quos corrigere studet. August. de Moribus Eccles. Cathol. lib. 1.
cap. 34.
even in the true Church. I my self (says he) know many that are worshippers
of Tombs and Pictures, whom the Church condemns, and seeks every day by
correction to amend them as ungracious children. This holy Father complains of
some people in his days which became superstitious in worshipping of Images,
whom the Church did then condemn as corrupters of true Religion, the authors
of this error, he names not, the time when it began, he shows not,
notwithstanding we are all eye witnesses that this corruption has got the
upper hand, and that which was then condemned by Saint Austin and the Church
for superstition, was confirmed four hundred years after; by the second
Council of Nice for Catholic doctrine, and is now decreed by the Council of
Trent for an Article of faith.

He that gave first a Primacy of order to Saint Peter, did never intend a
primacy of power to the Pope, and yet we see the Pope has obtained it: he that
made pictures of Saints for memory, for history, for ornament, did little dream
that the works of his hands should be worshipped, and that worship should be
decreed for an Article of faith; and yet we see it is so established in the
Church of Rome. He that in testimony of the resurrection, and out of humane
affection, commended the memory of dead souls unto God, did never dream of
Purgatory, and yet we see Purgatory is become a point of faith, and made a
gainefull merchandise in the Papal sea: He that stirred up men to charity and
works of piety, did never intend to make works copartners with faith in our
Justification, and yet we see this doctrine is stoutly justified by their
Proselites: He that instructed the Minister at the time of the Sacraments,
religiously and carefully to intend that part of Gods service in the time of
the ministration, did little dream that the Ministers intention should make
good or make void all the seven Sacraments, and yet we see this is the Tenet
of the Romish doctrine. The intention no doubt of many opinions in the first
founders was good, Ferus Annot. in Iud. C^ 8. Colon. 1571 Duplex, etc. Exemplo
sint sesta, ceremoniae, Imagines Missa Monasteria, etc. Nihil hominis ea
intention institutum fuit qua nunc habe^tur, etc.
but the application is now amiss; for the householder made good Laws, but the
enemy added a Gloss: There was a double sin in Gedeon (says Ferus) both in
that he made an Ephod contrary to the word of God, and in that seeing the
abuse thereof he took it not away; now who sees not that the like happens
to the Church? How many things did the Saints ordain with a good intent, which
we see at this day changed, partly by abuse, and partly by superstition. The
Feasts, Ceremonies, Images, Masses, Monasteries, and the like, none of them
were instituted in that sort at first, as now they are used, and yet we Gedeons
hold our peace, they take not away the abuse, they take not away the
superstitions. This complainant was a Friar, and a member of the Roman Church;
he tells us that Masses, and Monasteries and Images are all different from the
meaning of the first founders, yet never tells us of the times nor Authors that
first changed them: Now if the Reformed Churches should have declined a
reformation, because they could not assign the time and Authors of those
errors, who sees not but they had fallen into the sin of Gedeon, who in
seeing the abuse took it not away? Nay more, those Romanists which made great
search and inquiry to know the time and Authors of their errors, although they
profess they cannot precisely set down their first beginnings, yet
ingeniously confess an alteration of diverse Tenets in their own Church; Marius
de Schism. and Council. part. 3. ca. vlt.
The restrain of Priests marriage, to say precisely when it came in (says
Marius) I cannot tell, although I have most diligently enquired after it.
Concerning Prayer in an unknown tongue, Mirumin hac re quam Ecclesiae mutata
sit consuetudo Eras. in 1. Cor. 14.
It is to be wondered how the Church is altered in this point (says Erasmus,)
but the precise time he cannot tell: The Communion in one kind when it got
first footing in the Church, Greg. de Val. de legit. vsu Euchar. c. 10.
Minime constat, it does not appear says Gregory de Valen.

Now if these men could have proved their doctrine originally from the
Scriptu^es, they should not have needed to inquire of us for the first Authors
of their doctrine; for I am confident beyond all belief, if forbidding of
Marriage had been the doctrine of Christ which S. Paul terms the doctrine of
devils: 1. Tim. 4.1.
If Prayer in an unknown tongue had been taught and commended by the Apostle
Saint Paul, as on the contrary it was forbidden and condemned in his first
Epistle to the Corinthians; If the Communion in one kind had been instituted
by Christ as the contrary was, to wit, in both kinds; If these points, I say,
had been derived from the word of God; or had they always been received as
Apostolic Traditions in the Church, the beginning and the Author of their
Tenets had been easily known, and then they might have been published out of
certain knowledge both for time and person: and as touching this and the rest
of straw and stubble which the Church has added to her building, it is
manifest by the Testimonies of our adversaries that there was a known time
when those Tenets were not certainly known, and generally received in the
Roman Church.

The Marriage of Priests was not altogether forbidden till the time of Gregory
the seventh (says Polidore) and this was above a thousand years after Christ:
The number of seven Sacraments was not expressly defined till the days of Peter
Lombard (says Cassander) and this was 1140. years after Christ. Bellar. de
Euch. lib. 3. cap. 23.
The doctrine of Transubstantiation was not received for a point of faith till
the Council of Lateran (says Scotus) and this was above 1200. years after
Christ. The power of Indulgences extended to souls in Purgatory was first
decreed by Boniface the eighth, (says Agrippa) and this was 1300. years after
Christ. The Communion in one kind began to be generally received but a little
before the Council of Constance (says Gregorio de Valentia) and this was
almost 1400. years after Christ.

Sect. 7. The Pedigree of the Romish faith drawn down from the ancient
Heretics, and the Protestant faith derived from Christ and his Apostles
But since these men are so inquisitiue to know of us the first Authors of
their Religion; I will tell them of their Predecessors, and give them a short
Pedigree both of their Roman faith, and our Protestant doctrine, that it may
appear from whom they and we are lineally descended: and first touching the
succession in person and doctrine. I will examine it, Ordine retrogrado, and
ascend upward.

Latin Service.
Latin service and prayer in a strange tongue came into the Church by Pope
Vitalian, (says Wolphius) and this was about the year 666. Wolphius Lect.
Memorab. Centenarius septim p. 189.
if we ascend higher the Heretics, Osseni taught in the first ages There was
no need to make a prayer in a known tongue, Epiph. here is. 19.
says Epiphanius. If you will ascend to the Apostles time, and claim
Antiquity in the highest degree, there were certain Jews (says Ambrose)
amongst the Grecians, ^s namely, Ambr. Epist. 1. ad Cor. c. 14.
the Corinthians who did celebrate the divine Service and the Sacrament,
sometimes in the Syriacke, and most commonly in the Hebrew tongue, which the
common people understood not; For which cause Saint Paul wrote that whole
Chapter of the foureteenth to the first of the Corinthians, which is wholly and
flatly delivered against the Prayer and Service in an unknown tongue. Here you
have the Romish succession in doctrine and person derived from Jews and
Heretics: here is our Protestant doctrine derived from S. Paul the Apostle:
Pray with the spirit, Pray with the understanding also.

The doctrine of Transubstantiation was first decreed at the Council of
Lateran, Transubsta^tiation.
about four hundred years ago: if we ascend higher, it was set afoot by
Damascen and Epiphanius, for bringing in the worship of Images at the Council
of Nice; If we look further, it was practiced by the Helcesaitae, Helcesaitae
duplicem Christum faciunt, alium supra alium infra. Theodoret.
which feined a twofold Christ, one in heaven, another in earth: like the Mass
Priests who admit one body with all his dimensians and properties in heaven,
another body in the Sacrament, which has no properties of a true body. If we
look higher, it was delivered by Marcus the Heretic who by his invocation
over the Sacramental Cup, Ireneus li. 1. c. 9.
caused the wine to appear like blood: if you will look into the Apostles
time, the first Authors were those disciples that believed the gross and
carnal eating of Christ's flesh which murmured against him and forsook him.
Here is their succession in doctrine and person, derived from Idolators, from
heretics, from Capernaites. Here is our faith delivered at the same time by
Christ himself: Ioh. 6.
The words I speak are spirit and life.

The Popes Supremacy was confirmed at the Council of Trent, The Supremacy.
and the Council of Lateran: if we ascend higher, it was first granted by
Phocas the bloody Emperor to the Bishop of Constantinople 600. years after
Christ, Vrspergensis in Phocas. fol. 149.
if they claim Antiquity from the time of the Apostles, the Gentiles were
their first founders and benefactors: For (says Christ) the Kings of the
Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, Luke 22.25.
and they that exercise authority upon them are called benefactors. Here is
their succession in doctrine and person, derived from bloud-suckers and
Gentiles, in usurping right over Kings and kingdoms in things spiritual, in
things temporal; here is our received doctrine from Christ himself, Mat. 20
26.27.
Whosoever will be great among you let him be your Master: and whosoever will
be chief among you let him be your servant.

Worship of Images.
The worship of Images was decreed at the second Council of Nice, almost 800.
years after Christ: but if you claim Antiquity (because it is a point of
faith) Jraeneus lib. 1. cap. 23.24.
Iraeneus tells us the Basilidians and Carporatians in the Primitive times did
worship Images, and professed they had the Image of Christ made by Pilate; Here
is their succession in doctrine and person, derived from the heretics
Basilides and Carporates, here is ours derived from the doctrine of Saint Paul,
Romans 12.3.
from the lesson given by Saint John, 1. Ioh. 5.21.
and from the mouth of God himself, Deu. 4.15.16
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, etc.

The Communion in one kind was decreed at the Council of Constance above
1400. years after Christ: The Communion in one kind.
yet if you stand upon Antiquity, because it is an Article of faith: Leo Sermon.
4. de Quadrages.
Pope Leo tells you the Manichees, a sort of heretics, in his time used the
Sacrament in one kind, viz. in bread only: if you ascend to the time of the
Apostles, the Nazarites (says Bellarmine) had made a vow not to drink wine,
Non est credibile Nazareos contra votum suum bibisse decalice, nec tame^
credibile est eos omnino a communione abstinuisse Bellar. Apolog. contr.
praefat. Regis monitorium B Andr. c. 8. fol. 188.
and therefore in all likelihood they took Sacrament in bread only: here then
is their succession in person and doctrine, derived from Nazarites and
heretics; here is our doctrine taught by Christ himself, and so commended to
our Church, Mat. 26.27.
Drink ye all of this.

Again, look upon their Invocation of Saints and Angels, August. ad quod vult
Deum. c. 39.
and you shall find their founders were the heretics Angelici: Look upon
their doctrine of merits and works of Supererrogation, Isid. Etym. li. 8. cap.
de h^eres. Christ.
and you shall see their first Authors were the Cathari, the Puritans: Look
upon their (...), their worship given to the blessed Virgin, and you shall
discern the Collyridian heretics (which Epiphanius terms Idolators) were
their first leaders: Epiph. here is. 79.
Look upon their restraint of Priests Marriage, and you shall observe that the
heretic Tatianus and the Maniches were their Predecessors, Epiph. here is. 46.
and forbad Marriage in Sacerdotibus, in their Priests: These and the like
errors taught in the Church of Rome, either lineally descended from the
aforesaid heretics, or at leastwise have near affi^itie with their
adulterate issue. And if I have failed in calculating the right nativity of
their ancient doctrine, yet sure I am they are utterly destitute of a right
succession in person and doctrine from the Apostles and the ancient Fathers of
the Primitive Church: as shall appear by many testimonies of the best learned
amongst themselves.

Sect. 8. The Testimonies of our Adversaries touching the Antiquity and
universality of the Protestant faith in general.
IN the mean time I will call the Church of Rome for a witness to our cause,
and if she do not plainly confess the Antiquity of our Tenets, and the
Novelty of her own. If she herself do not proclaim the universality of our
faith: if she do not confess that we are both in the more certain and safer
way in the Protestant Church, I will neither refuse the name, nor the
punishment due to heresy.

He therefore that shall question us where our Church was before Luther, let him
look back into the Primitive Church; nay let him but look into the bosom of
the present Roman Church, and there he shall find and confess, that if ever
Antiquity and Universality were marks of the true Church, of right and
necessity they must belong to ours. The Creed of the Apostles, Nicene
Council, Athanasius, Piu^ the fourth.
Look into the four Creedes which the Church of Rome professes, and you
shall find three of those Creeds are taught and believed in our Church, and
these by our adversaries confession were instituted by the Apostles and the
Fathers of the Primitive Church, not created by Luther. Look into the seven
Sacraments which the Church of Rome holds, and you shall acknowledge that two
of those Sacraments are professed by us; and these by our adversaries
confession were instituted by Christ, not broached by Luther. Look into the
Canon of our Bible, and you shall observe that 22. books of Canonical
Scripture which our Church allows, were universally received in all ages, and
are approved at this day by the Church of Rome, for Canonical Scripture not
devised by Luther. Look into the first seven general Councels, and you shall
confess, that the first 4. general Councels are rati^ed by our Church and
Acts of Parliament, Eliz. 1.
not called by Luther. Look into the Traditions of the Church, and you shall
see and confess that all the Apostolical Traditions which were universally
received, and which the Church of Rome confesses at this day to be
Apostolical, are descended from the Apostles to us, not derived from Luther.
Look into our book of Common Prayer, and compare it with the ancient
Lyturgies, and it will appear the same forms of Prayer (for substance) were
read and published in a known tongue in the ancient Churches, not broached by
Luther. Look into the ordination and calling of Pastors, and it will appear
that the same essential form of ordination which at this day is practiced in
our Church, was used by the Apostles and their successors, not devised by
Luther. If therefore the three Creeds, the two principal Sacraments of the
Church, the 22. books of Canonical Scripture, the first four general
Councels, the Apostolic Traditions, the ancient Lyturgies, the ordination of
Pastors: If, I say, all these were anciently taught and universally received in
all ages in the bosom of the Roman Church, even by the testimonies of our
adversaries themselves, it is but a silly and senseless question to demand of
us where our Church was before Luther.

The positive doctrine which we teach is contained in a few principal points,
and those also have Antiquity and Universality with the Consent of the Roman
Church: The points in controversy which are sub Iudice, in question, are for
the most part, (if not) all additions to the Church, and certainly from those
additions and new Articles of faith, the question does truly and properly
result upon themselves: Where was your Church (that is) Where was your Trent
doctrine and Articles of the Roman Creed received de Fide before Luther?

But admit our doctrine lay inuolued in the bosom of the Roman Church (which
no Romanist can deny) I say admit it became hidden as good corn covered with
chafe, or as fine gold ouerlayed with a greater quantity of dross, was it
therefore new and unknown, because Popery sought by a prevailing faction to
obscure it? was there no good corn in the Granary of the Church, because till
Luthers days it was not severed from the chafe? no pure gold because our
adversaries would not refine it by the fire of Gods word? If the chafe and
dross be ours, or if our Church savor of nothing but Novelty and heresy,
(as some of these men pretend) let them remove from the bosom of their own
Church, that new and heretical doctrine which they say was never heard of
before Luther, and tell me if their Church will not prove a poor and
senseless carcass, and a dead body without a soul. Take away the three Creeds
which we profess, our two Sacraments, the 22. books of Canonical Scripture,
the Apostolical Traditions, the four first general Councels, and tell me
(such light chafe and new heresies as they how style them, being removed) if
their twelve new Articles, their five base Sacraments, the Apostolical
Scriptures, their unwritten verities and Traditions will make a true visible
Church.

It is true that we deny their additions there (aliquod amplius) because they
are grounded on humane authority, and want the foundation of the Scriptures,
we deny Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, Works of Supererrogation, worship
of Images, and the like: and if our Religion be therefore termed Negative for
denial of those things, who sees not but for the like reason they themselves
will stand guilty of the same aspersion? Do not they deny the substance of
bread after Consecration? do not they deny the Scriptures to the Laity?
Marriage to the Priests? the Cup to the Lay people? the Supremacy to their
Sovereign in his own dominions? and may not we for these and the like reasons
protest against them, that therefore theirs is a Negative Religion?

But that the world may know we obtrude not these things by way of
recrimination, it shall appear by their own confession, the Traditions which
we deny, are declined by the best learned amongst themselves. Nay more, they
do not only acknowledge those things which we hold, but the most ingenious of
them are ashamed also of those additions which we deny: As for instance, we
charge them with the worship of Images, they deny it, or leastwise excuse
their manner of adoration; but they condemn not us for not worshipping: We
accuse them for praying in an unknown tongue, they excuse it, that God knows
the meaning of the heart: but they do not condemn us for praying with the
spirit and with understanding. We condemn them for adoring the elements of
bread and wine in the Sacrament, because it depends upon the intention of the
Priest: they excuse it, Jnnocentius the third, Adoro te si tu es Christus.
that they adore upon condition, If the consecrated bread be Christ, but they
do not condemn us for adoring Christ's real body in heaven: we accuse them
for taking away the Cup from the Lay people: they excuse it, that it was not
taken up by the Commandment of the Bishops, Coster. Enchirid. de commun. sub
vtraque specie. Anno 1414.
but it crept in, the Bishops winking thereat (says Costerus) but they did not
condemn us for following Christ's example, and receiving in both kinds. Lastly,
we accuse them for their private Masses, contrary to Christ's institution and
the custom of the Primitive Church; Harding in B. Jewel, ca. Private Mass
they excuse it, That it is through their own default and negligence, whereof
(says Master Harding) the godly and faithful people, since the time of the
Primitive Church, have much complained: and which is remarkable and comfortable
to all believing Protestants, we charge them with flat idolatry, in the
adoration of the Sacrament, in Relics, in Saints, in Images, and howsoever
they excuse themselves, in distinguishing their manner of adoration: yet, I
say, to our endless comfort be it spoken, they cannot charge us in the
positive doctrine of our Church, no not with the least suspicion of idolatry.

Sect. 9. The testimonies of our Adversaries touching the Protestant and the
Roman faith in the particulars.
PARAG. 1. Justification by faith (only.)
THese things premised, I will proceed to the examination of witnesses both for
the Antiquity of our doctrine, and the Novelty of theirs; but before I go to
publication, I will present you with two Records, for two principal points of
our faith, by which evidences it shall appear, that the Word and Sacraments,
the proper marks of a true Church, were rightly preached and duly administered
here in England in the most obscure ages long before Luthers days: I say, it
shall appear that, before and after the Conquest, the Priests and professors
of those times protested openly against the doctrine of Romish merits,
preaching salvation through Christ alone, and withal publicly professed and
administered the same Sacraments in the same faith and truth, which we teach
and administer at this day.

In the days of Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury about the year 1080. there
was a set and public form of prayer prescribed for the visitation of the
sick, Cass. in append. ad opus. Jo. Roffen. de fiducia and misericordia Dei.
and this form (says Cassander) in Bibliothecis passim obuia; was commonly to
be had and read in all Libraries: The words are plain and fully consonant to
the faith our Church professes: Ordo Baptizandi and visitandi edit. venet.
Anno 1575.
Do thou believe to come to glory not by thine own merits, but by the
virtue and merit of the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ? do thou believe
that our Lord Jesus Christ did dye for our salvation, and that none can be
saved by his own merits, or by any other means but by the merit of his
passion? This manner and form of Intergatories was prescribed generally to all
Priests for their visitation of the sick, and the sick party accordingly was
taught to make answer to these and the like questions: Respondeat infirmus
credo.
All this I believe: Upon this confession the Priest concluded with this
instruction to the sick party; Go to therefore, Hosius in Co^fessione
Petriconens, c. 73.
as long as thy soul remains in thee, place thy whole confidence in this
death only, have confidence in no other thing, commit thy self wholly to his
death, with this alone cover thy self wholly, intermingle thy self wholly in
this death, wrap thy whole self in this death: And if the Lord God will judge
thee, say, Lord I oppose the death of our Lord Jesus Christ betwixt me and thy
judgment, and no otherwise do I contend with thee: And if he say unto thee
that thou art a sinner, say, Lord I put the death of our Lord Jesus Christ
betwixt thee and my sins: If he say unto thee thou have deserved damnation:
say, Lord I set the death of our Lord Jesus Christ betwixt thee and my bad
merits, and I offer his merit instead of the merits which I ought to have; but
yet have not: If he say that he is angry with thee: say, Lord I interpose the
death of our Lord Jesus Christ betwixt me and thine anger.

This point of faith was publicly professed in the Church of England, and
generally practiced shortly after the Conquest both by Priests and people, and
as the word was rightly preached in those days (according to the now
Protestant faith, and contrary to the Tenet of the now Roman Church) so
likewise you shall observe, the two Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords
Supper, were publicly taught and duly administered in the same faith and
doctrine before the Conquest, as they are now declared and received in the
Church of England.

PARAG. 2. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and the doctrine of
Transubstantiation.
FIrst, concerning the Sacrament of Baptism, I think there is none so blind
or stupid, that will deny the Baptism now used in our Church, both for matter
and form, to be substantially the same that the Primitive Church ever used,
and that the Romish additions of Salt and Spittle and other Ceremonies used by
them, neither cause a Transubstantiation in the element, nor the want of them
inforceth Rebaptization in the protestant, so that concerning the truth of our
Baptism there can be no question; and as concerning the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, The Sacrament of the Eucharist.
in the days of Aelfrick, about the year (996) there was a Homily appointed
publicly to be read to the people on Easter day, before they did receive the
Communion wherein the same faith and doctrine (which our Church now professes)
was publicly taught and received, and the doctrine of the Real presence which
at that time (had got footing in the Church) was plainly confuted and
rejected; Neither was this the particular doctrine of one Bishop but at the
same time the same matter was delivered to the Clergy by diverse Bishops at
their Synods out of two other writings published by the same Aelfrick, one
whereof was directed to Wulfstius then Bishop of Sherbourne; the other written
to Wulfstane Archbishop of York, wherein both Priests and people by their
Command and directions, were instructed and taught the doctrine of the
Eucharist in these words; There is a great difference betwixt the body wherein
Christ suffered, Aelfricks Homily and B. Usher in his answer to a challenge,
etc. cap Real. pres. p 78. 79.
and the body which is received of the faithful: The body truly that Christ
suffered in was borne of the flesh of Mari^, with blood, and with bone, with
skin, and with sinews, in humane limbs with a reasonable soul living: and
his spiritual body which nourishes the faithful spiritually is gathered of
many corns without blood, and bone, without limb, without soul; and
therefore there is nothing to be understood bodily but spiritually: etc. this
I say, and the like doctrine was approved by the Abbot of Malmsbury, by the
Archbishop of York, by the Bishop of Sherbourne, by diverse Bishops at their
Synods, and by them commended to the rest of the Clergy, who were commanded
to read it publicly to the common people upon Easter day, for their better
preparation and instruction in the Sacrament. If this Protestant Faith then
publicly professed, had been taught only by a multitude of seditious and
factious persons; or had it been received by some few excommunicate members in
the same Church; our adversaries might have some color, some plea, to deny the
Visibility of our Church: but when it appears it was generally published by
the chief Bishops and Pastors of several Congregations; when it appears
these Doctors had their Calling and succession in the Roman Church; when it
appears it was approved by a public Synod at their meetings: I cannot but
account it a Jesuits vain flourish to tell us: Camp. Rat. 3.
That we cannot epsy out so much as one town, one village, one house, for
(1500) years that sauoured of our doctrine; and that you may know, Aelfrick
the Abbot was not the first author of this Homily, but was anciently received
in the Church before his days; it appears plainly, Aelfricus Abbas vulstano
Archiepiscopo salutem in Christo, ecce paruimus vestrae almitatis iussionibus
tra^s. ferentes Anglice duas Epistolas quas Latino eloquio descriptas ante^
annum vobis destinauimus Transcrip. ex lib. Ms. in Bibl. publ. James in his
corrupt. of Fathers. p. 55.
that Aelfrick by the command of the Archbishop of York, did but translate
those Sermons into English, which were anciently published in Latin; so that
if there were any surmise of a Faction then raised in the Church, it was caused
by the receiving of an ancient doctrine, not by bringing in a new, and that
also was performed with the consent of all the Bishops; nay more, if that the
faith of Gregory the Great, published here in England (400) years before that
time; If I say, his faith and doctrine continued the same here in our Island,
without alteration till the coming of Luther, (which our adversaries
confidently maintain,) either this Homily published by the Bishops was the
faith of Gregory, and so our Church continued Visible in the same faith from
his time till ours, or else the Roman doctrine, now taught and believed, has
not continued the same without alteration until the days of Luther.

Thus the Word and Sacraments taught by Christ and his Apostles, were published
and proclaimed by the Bishops, and Archbishops of those times, for the saving
knowledge and known salvation both of Priests and people, so that the most
substantial points of our Religion, were visibly known and generally
published not in private corners, but in public Libraries; not in obscure
assemblies but in open Churches, and general Congregations of our own
Country, in the darkest ages, long before Luthers days.

But observe the coming of our adversary: That book which was published in
Anselmes days for instruction and visitation of the sick; the same book I
say, both for matter and substance, has of late years been printed at Paris,
at Collen, Ordo Baptizandi cum modo visitandi infirmos. Paris. anno 1575.
Colon. anno 1556. Ven. anno 1575.
at Venice; whereby not only the doctrine of merits is ecclipsed, but the now
Roman faith is discovered to differ from the ancient; what therefore can be
expected how these men should justify their own printed Authors? Behold, the
Roman Inquisitors have carefully provided by two Expurgatory Indices, Quiroga
p. 149. Sandoual and Roxas anno 1612.
that the words of comfort which the Priest was enjoined to pronounce to the
sick person, should be all blotted out: and although the Inquisitors have not
as yet passed their sentence upon Aelfricks Homily, Aelfricks Sermon on Easter
day: printed at London, 1623. page 7.
yet in that Homily they have suggested Transubstantiation by two feined
miracles, contrary to the doctrine of the Eucharist then publicly taught, and
far different from the whole Scope of the Author; and the Latin Epistle
written by Aelfricke to the Archbishop of York, is to be seen mangled and
razed in a Manuscript, in Bennets College in Cambridge (as is well observed by
a learned Divine, D. James in his corruption of Fathers, page 55
) and I cannot conceive, but it was done by some Romanist, because it does
plainly confute the doctrine of Transubstantiation. Thus we see what time and
errors has brought to pass; That Protestant faith which in Aelfricks days,
was generally received in England for Catholic doctrine, is now condemned as
heretical by a prevailing faction in the Roman Church; and that word of truth
which was published in Anselmes days, for the salvation of Priests and people
in the English Church; is now condemned by an Index Expurgatorius with a
Deleatur upon those saving words, but I say of them as Saint Ambrose sometimes
pronounced of the Arrians. Ambros. orat. 1. contr. Arrian. Transubsta^tiation.
They may well blot out our letters but our faith they shall never abolish.

Again, look upon their doctrine of Transubstantiation, and you shall see how
miserably their Church is divided touching the antiquity and universality of
that point of faith: some derive it from the words of Christ, others from
Christ's Benediction before the words were uttered; some from the exposition of
the Fathers, others from the council of Lateran, some from the authority of
the Scriptures, others from the determination of the Church, and whereas many
other points of the Romish doctrine are pretended to be Apostolical
Traditions, as having no foundation in the written word, it is observed by
learned Du Plessis, that the Papists generally maintain that their Mass is
proved from the Scripture, insomuch as in the 28. of Matthew, and other places
where there is mention made of the Sacrament, the ordinary Gloss does note
with capital letters in the Margent: Moru. de Miss. lib. 1. c. 1. in initio.
Here is the Institution of the Mass: It was the great vaunt of Campian the
Jesuit: Camp. Rat.
If the Protestants name the Gospel, we join with them, the very words are
for us: This is my body, this is my blood: and Bellarmine, his fellow Jesuit,
professes confidently, that the words. Bellar. de Euch. l. 1. c. 11.
This is my body, are of the essence of the Sacrament, and they are operative.
If we shall further question at what time, whether before or after the words
spoken there is a conversion of the elements into the body and blood of
Christ: Aquinas tells us, Vltimum instans prolationis verborum est primum
instant in quo est in Sacramento corpus Christi, in toto autemtempore
praecedenti est item substantia panis. Aqu. par. 3. q. 75. art. 7. ad. 1.
that the very last instance of the delivery of those words, is the first
instance of Christ's body in the Sacrament, but in all the time before there is
the substance of bread remaining.

If these men therefore have spoken the truth, let them bear witness of the
truth; only let me tell you they want that unity in this point of faith
which they appropriate as a special mark to their Church: and for proof of
this, I will proceed to publication of witnesses, wherein I will produce no
other testimonies but their own learned Authors (and I presume a better proof
then their own confessions none of them can expect) whereby it shall appear
that their grand point of Transubstantiation has neither foundation in our
Scriptures, nor certainty in the Fathers, nor unity among themselves, to
conclude it for an Article of belief. Touching the words of Consecration,
Salmeron the Jesuit speaking in the person of the Grecians, delivers their
opinion in this manner: Cham. lib. 6. de Euch. c. 7.
When the Benediction of the Lord is not superfluous or vain, neither gave he
simply bread, it follows when he gave it, the transmutation was made, and
those words (This is my body) did demonstrate what was contained in the bread,
Ex Catholicis solus Caietanus in Commentario huius Articuli, qui iussu Pij
Quinti in Romana editione expunctus est, docuit, seclusa. Ecclesiae authoritate
verba illa (Hoc est corpus meum) ad veritatem hanc confirmanda^ non sufficere.]
Suar. Tom. 3. disp. 46.
not what was made by them. And Swarez the Jesuit ingeniously professes, that
Cardinal Caietan in his Commentary upon this Article, did affirm that those
words of Christ, This is my body, do not of themselves sufficiently prove
Transubstantiation, without the supposed authority of the Church, and
therefore by the commandment of Pius Quintus that part of his Commentary is
left out of the Romish Edition. Habemus confitentem, we have a fair
confession for a Cardinal, and a friendly caveat touching the spunging of his
authority. And that the world may know these men are better friends to our
cause then many yet conceive them, I will produce both Cardinals, and Bishops,
and Schoolmen, who will testify with us, that there are no words in Scripture
to prove Transubstantiation; that those words, This is my body, are not of the
essence of the Sacrament, that the ancient Fathers did not believe the
substance of the Sacramental bread to be converted into Christ's real flesh:
and lastly, that Transubstantiation was not believed de Fide, as a matter of
faith, above 1000 years after Christ And first I will give you their own
confessions touching the place and proof of Transubstantiation derived from
the Scriptures.

Quomodo fit corpus Christi vtrum per co^uersionem alicuius, etc. Biel in Con.
Missae Lect. 40.
Gabriel Biel] How the body of Christ is in the Sacrament, Non inuenitur in
Canone Bibliae, It is not expressed in the Canon of the Bible.

Patet quod ille modus sit possibilis nec repugnat rationi nec authoritati
Bibliae, imo facilior ad intelligendum and rationabilior quam, etc.] In 4.
Sentent. q. 6. ar. 1.
Cardinal de Alliaco] That manner which supposes the substance of bread to
remain still is possible, neither is it contrary to reason, nor to the
authority of the Scriptures, nay, it is more easy and more reasonable to
conceive, if it could accord with the determination of the Church.

Hactenus Mattheus qui and solus Testamenti noui meminit, neque vllum hic
verbu^ positu^ est quo probetur in nostra Missa veram fieri carnis and
sanguinis Christi praesentia^. I. Fish. contra capt. Babylonicam. N. 8. and O.
I. Fisher Bishop of Rochester] Hitherto Saint Matthew who only makes mention
of the new Testament, neither are there any words here written, whereby it may
be proved that in the Mass is made the very presence of the body and blood of
Christ: and lastly he concludes, Non potest igitur per vllam Scripturam
probari: it cannot be proved by any Scripture.

Durand. Benedixit benedictione caelesti and virtute verbi qua conuertitur
panis in substantiam corporis Christi, etc. Durand. in Rational. l. 4. c. 41.
] Christ blessed the bread by his heavenly benediction, and by virtue of that
word the bread was turned into the substance of Christ's body, and (says he)
Tunc confecit cum benedixit, He then made it when he blessed it.

Odo Cameracensis] Christ blessed the bread, Benedixit, fuii corpus fecit qui
prius erat panis benedictione factus est caro -- non enim post benedictione^
dixisset, Hoc est corpus meu^ nisi in Benedictione fieret corpus suu^.] Odo in
Canonem Did. 4.
and then made that his body which was first bread, and so by blessing, it
became flesh, for otherwise he would not have said after he had blessed it,
This is my body, unless by blessing it he had made it his body.

Cardinal Caietan] That part which the Gospel has not expressed, Quod
Euangelium non explicauit express ab Ecclesia accepi^ius viz. conuersione^
panis in corpus Christi Caiet. 3. 7 75. ar. 1. Christoph lib. de Cap Fontiu^ de
correctione Theolog. Scho. Lege Christophorum fol. 11. 41. 87. ^8. 23. 63. 58.
Fol. 7. 9. etc.
viz. the conversion of the bread into the body and blood of Christ, we have
received expressly from the Church.

Christophorus Archbishop of Caesarea] Before the words (This is my body) were
uttered by Christ, if the bread by benediction had not been his body, that
proposition had not been true, for when Christ said, Take ye, eat ye, if at
that time the bread by benediction were not changed, it will follow that Christ
did command his Disciples to take and eat the substance of bread, and so we
must deny the Article of Transubstantiation: therefore it is most certain
that Christ did not consecrate by those words, neither were they any part of
consecration, and in this opinion both the Council of Trent and all writers
did agree, till the late times of Caietan, that Christ did consecrate the bread
by blessing it, and therefore we conclude this for an infallible truth, to
which both Scriptures, and Councels, Secundo dicit Scotus non extare locum
vllu^ Scripturae tam expressu^ vt sine Ecclesiae determinatione euidenter cogat
Transubstantiationem admittere, atque id non est omnino improbabi^e. Nam
etiamsi Scriptura -- tamen merito dubitari totest cu^ homines doctissimi and
acutissimi qualis inprimis Scotus suit, contrartu^ sentiunt. Bell. de Euchar.
lib. 3. c. 23.
and all Antiquity yield an undeniable testimony and consent, that the words,
This is my body, are not the words of consecration, nor consequently the cause
of Transubstantiation.

Cardinal Bellarmine] It is not altogether improbable that there is no
express place of Scripture to prove Transubstantiation, without the
declaration of the Church (as Scotus said) for although the Scriptures seem to
us so plain that they may compel any but a refractarie man to believe them,
yet it may justly be doubted whether the Text be clear enough to enforce it,
seeing the most acute and learned men, such as Scotus was, have thought the
contrary. Thus the learned Cardinal, who at first did confidently affirm
that the words, This is my body, were of the essence of the Sacrament, and did
effect that which they did signify; Upon the examination of witnesses of his
own side, confesses Merito dubitari potest, etc. It may justly be doubted
whether the Scriptures do prove the bodily presence, and (we all know and
confess that a doubtful opinion cannot be made an Article of faith:) from
which co^fessions I may truly infer, If the consecrated bread be neither
transubstantiated by Christ's benediction before those words were uttered, as
Aquinas, the Roman Catechism, and the Mass Priests commonly affirm; nor by
the words, This is my body, uttered after the Benediction, as the Archbishop of
Caesarea, Cardinal Caietan, and others do affirm, then certainly there are
no words in Scripture to prove Transubstantiation for an Article of belief.

I proceed from Scriptures to Fathers: Alphonsus a Castro was a diligent reader
and obseruer of the ancient Fathers, De Transubstantiatione panis in corpus
Christi raraenim antiquis Scriptoribus mentio. Alphon. lib. 8. contra here is.
verbo Indulgentiae.
yet after great studies and long search in their writings, returns this
answer: Of the conversion of the body and blood of Christ there is seldom
mention in the ancient Fathers. And the reason is given by another learned
writer of his own side: Jn Primitiua Ecclesia de substa^tia fidei erat corpus
Christi subspeciebus contineri tamen non erat de fide substantiam panis in
corpus Christi conuerti and facta consecratione illinc recedere.] Ioh. Yribarne
in 4. d. 11. q. 3 disp. 42. Sect. 1.
In the Primitive Church it was believed for a point of faith that the body of
Christ was contained under the forms of bread and wine, but it was not
believed as a matter of faith, that after consecration the substance of the
bread was converted into the body of Christ: and howsoever our Adversaries
pretend antiquity and universality of Fathers for their doctrine; yet Saint
Austin is so wholly ours in this point, that Maldonat the Jesuit noting his
exposition upon those words of Scripture: The Fathers have eaten Manna and are
dead, etc. makes this confession: I am persuaded that if Saint Austin being so
great an enemy to heretics, Hoc dico perswasum me habere Sanctu^ Augustinumsi
nostra suissot ^tate long aliter sensurum fuisse hominem omni haereticoru^
generi inimicissimum cum videret ad eundem fere modum Caluinistas hunc and
illum D. Pauli locum interpretari. Maldon. in Ioh. 6. v. 50. number. 80. 81.
had lived in these our days, would have been of another mind, when he had
once perceived the Caluinists interpretation to be almost the same: and
Gregory de Valentia, observing the manifest testimonies of Theodoret, (viz.)
That the consecrated elements did remain in their proper substance, and shape,
and figure; returns the like answer. Minime miru^ est si vnut aut alter aut
etiam aliqui ex veteribus minime considerate and recte hac de re senserint.
Greg. de valent. de Transubstan. lib. 2. cap. 7.
It is not to be maruailed, if one or more of the ancient Fathers (before the
question of Transubstantiation was thoroughly debated in the Church) have both
thought less considerately and truly concerning Transubstantiation, and this
is an answer (says he) brief, and simple, and no way inconvenient. Thus it
seems Theodoret with other Fathers were ignorant of the greatest mysteries of
their salvation, and Saint Austin did not rightly understand the corporal
presence, for he would have changed his opinion if he had lived in these
days: but their learned Cardinal Cusanus is not so reserved in his opinion of
the Fathers, he speaks plainly and openly; Cusan. exercet. lib. 6.
that certain of the Ancient Divines are found of this mind, that the bread
in the Sacrament, is not Transubstantiated or changed in nature, but remains
still, and is clothed with an other substance more noble then it self: and
for a conclusion of this point, many writers and Schoolmen in their own
Church, are so far from granting antiquity and universality to this doctrine,
that they profess the Tenet of Transubstantiation was lately received into the
Church for a point of faith. Nota. Vnum addit Scotus quod minime probandu^ quod
ante Lateranense Concilium non fuisse dogma fidei. Bellar. lib. 3. de Euchar.
cap. 23.


Scotus tells us, that before the Council of Lateran, Transubstantiation was
not believed as a point of faith. This did Bellarmine observe as a thing
remarkable: Suar. in 3. Thom. in Enchar. disp. 50. Sect. 2. p. 602
and Suarez his fellow Jesuit protests, the Schoolmen which teach the
doctrine of Transubstantiation is not very ancient ought to be corrected, such
as Scotus was: It is confessed then, that Scotus and other Schoolmen did
acknowledge Transubstantiation for (...) doctrine, and it is most probable,
that such Schoolmen living not long after the Council of Lateran (where that
doctrine was decreed for a point of faith) best understood the Tenets of those
times: In like manner, Durand and some of his fellow Schoolmen after him,
professed openly, that the material part (or substance) of the Sacramental
bread was not converted: These testimonies are so true and evident to the
world, that Bellarmine does confess and avoid that saying of Scotus with a
minime probandum, etc. it must not be allowed; and as touching Durand he
answers, his doctrine is heretical, Bellar. de Euchar. lib. 3. cap. 13.
but he is no heretic, because he is ready to submit to the judgment of the
Church.

To let pass Whicleffe, the Waldenses, and others who were condemned for
heretics for professing the same doctrine: Durand. in 4 Sent. did. 10. q. 1.
number. 13.
Their own Proselites Hostiensis and Gaufridus, tell us that there were others
in those days who taught the substance of bread did remain, and this opinion
say they, was not to be rejected; If we descend to this last age, their own
learned Tonstall professes, that the belief of Transubstantiation within
less then 500 years, was a matter of indifferency, not an Article of faith:
Of the manner and means of the real presence, how it might be either by
Transubstantiation or otherwise, perhaps it had been better to leave to every
man that would be curious to his own conjecture, De modo quo id fieret
fortasse Satius erat curiosu^ quemque relinquere coniectura sicut liberum fuit
ante Concilium Lateranse. Tonstall de Enchaer. lib. 1. p. 46. Eras. Annot. in
Corinth. 7.
as before the Council of Lateran it was left: and lastly, there own Erasmus
concludes with a sero definiuit Ecclesia, etc. It was late ere the Church
defined Transubstantiation.

Since therefore the Protestant faith, touching the Spiritual and Sacramental
participation of Christ's body, was generally taught and believed in the former
and the latter ages; since the doctrine of Transubstantiation has no Unity
amongst the Romish Authors, no Universality amongst the ancient Fathers, no
certainty in the Sacred Scriptures; Saint Austins confession shall be my
conclusion. Sieve de Christo, sieve de Ecclesia, sieve de quacunque alia re quae
pertinet ad fidem vitam que nostram non dicam nos, nequaquam comparandi ei qui
dixit, sed fi Angelus de coelo vobis anuntiauerit preter quam quod in
Scripturis Legalibus and Euangelicis accepistis. Anathema sit. Aug. Contr.
liter. Petil. lib. 3. cap 6.
Whether concerning Christ or his Church, or any thing that appertains to our
faith and life, I will not say if we (who are no way to be compared to him
that so spoke) but if an Angel from heaven shall preach unto you any thing
besides that you have received in the Legal and Evangelical Scriptures, let
him be accursed.

PARAG. 3. Private Mass.
Si quis dixerit Missas in quibus solus sacerdo, Sacrame^taliter communicate
esse illicitas ideoque abrogandas Anathema sit. Council. Trident. can. 8.
IT is decreed by the Council of Trent; If any shall say, that Masses in which
the Priest alone does Communicate are unlawful, and therefore ought to be
abrogated, let him be accursed: Here is a Curse proclaimed against all or any
that shall condemn Private Mass as unlawful, and herein the Protestants
stand in danger of a Cursing Council: for it is an Article of the Reformed
Church. Private Masses, Artic. of Ireland Art. 100.
that is the receiving of the Eucharist by the Priest alone, without a
competent number of Communicants, is contrary to the institution of Christ,
and the practice of the Primitive Church; and hence it will follow, that
Private Mass is unlawful, and therefore to be abrogated; Now he that curses
us, curses Christ that ordained it, and God that commanded us to observe it:
It was the answer in the like case made by a right Reverend and learned Prelate
of our Church: B. Bilson the difference between Chri. Subject. and Antichri.
Rebel. page 657.
If we have altered any part of Christ's Institution, Curse on in Gods name,
and let your Curses take effect, but if the celebration of our Mysteries be
answerable to his will and word that first ordained them; You curse not us whom
You would hurt, but him, that your cursed tongues cannot hurt, which is God to
be blessed for ever.

The Communion which is used, together with Priest and people in our Church, is
derived from Christ himself, for the Evangelists tell us, Mat. 26. Mark 14.
Luke. 22.
Christ took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it to
his Disciples: he took bread that he might break it, he brake it that he
might give it: he gave it that they should eat: and so Christ's words declare
which are both plural, and spoken to others; (Take ye, eat ye) not
singular, or to himself alone; as if the whole course of Christ's actions and
speeches stood in delivering the Sacrament unto others: After Christ's Passion,
the Apostle Saint Paul gives this charge to the Corinthians; 1 Cor. 11.^.
Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ: And in the same Chapter
he shows wherein they should imitate Christ. This was spoken of the Sacrament.
Aug. Epist. 118.
When ye come together (to eat the Lords Supper) tarry one for another, that
ye come not together into condemnation: and as if he had foretold by the
Spirit of Prophecy, the doctrine of these times, he puts the question forcibly
to the Mass Priests; 1 Cor. 10.
The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of
Christ: Post hoc dicitur communio quae appellatur vt omnes communicemus vel
dicitur communio quia in Primitiua Ecclesia populus communicabat quolibet die.
Hugo Cardin. in speculo Ecclesiae.
as if he had said, therefore it is called a Communion, because it is a common
Union of Priests and people; otherwise, (says Hugo) it is called a Communion,
for that the people in the Primitive Church did Communicate every day
(together.)

Look upon the ancient Counsels in the Roman Church, and they are witnesses
of our doctine without exception: It was ordained by the Council at Nantz.
that no Priest should presume to celebrate the solemnities of the Mass alone,
Council. Nanetense. cap. 30. and Cassand. p. 83.
for says they, to whom does the Priest say the Lord be with you and lift up
your hearts, and we give thanks unto the Lord, when there is none to make
answer, or whom does he inuit to pray with him: when he says let us pray,
being none to pray with him, therefore let this ridiculous superstition be
banished from the Cloisters of Monks.

Pope Innocent the Third about (400) years ago, observing this decree, could
not acord with the Masses of his times wherein the Priest alone did partake of
the Altar; devised this answer to make good their new doctrine: Pie credendu^
est quod Angeli Dei comites assista^t orantibus secundum illud Propheticum, In
conspectu Angelorum psallam tibi. An liver des Mistres. chapter 25.
we must piously believe that the Angels accompany them that pray according to
the saying of the Prophet: I will sing Psalms to thee in the presence of the
Angels: and Bellarmine rightly observing it would be thought a mockery for the
Priests to say: As many of (us) as have received of the Sacrament: when as none
but the Priest alone did receive, renders the meaning of those sayings with
this conceit. Bellar. de Missa lib. 2. cap. 10.
Those words were spoken both for the present Communicants if any were
present, and also for those who did Communicate elsewhere: Council. Nanetense.
c. 38. Council. Antioch can. 21. Dionys. eccl. hierar. cap. 3. Inst. Apol. 2.
Theod. in 1 Cor. 11. Haymo in 1 Cor. 11. Chrysostom. homil. 27. Cochleus] Cu^
ille communicandi mos non amplius apud nos obseruetur non minus Laicorum quam
sacerdotum desidia and negligentia inuenit and introduxit Spiritus Sanctus,
pium huius negligentiae supplementum per Missarum, quam soli sacerdotes
peragunt, frequentationem. Cochl. de Sacrificio Missae, contra Musculum. Cass.
Lyturg. 35. page 86.
so that sometimes the Angels, sometimes the absent do supply the room of
those that should be present: It were no hard matter to cite the Ancient
Fathers for the Visibilitie of our Church in this point of doctrine, but our
adversaries shall save me the labor in that kind: wherein you shall hear
them make their own confession, that their private Mass was altogether
unknown to the Primitive Church in the best and first ages.

Cochleus] Anciently all the Priests and people did Communicate together, as
appears by the Canons of the Apostles and writings of ancient Fathers: but
now since the order of Communicating together, has ceased by the negligence of
Priests and Pastors, In Primitiua Ecclesia omnes qui celebrationi Missaru^
intererant singulis diebus communicare solebant, eo quod Apostoli omnes de
calice bibu^t. Domino dicente. Bibbite ex hoc omnes: Offerebant enim magnum
panem and omnibus sufficientem quod adhuc Graeci seruare dicu^tur. Durand. Rat.
4. cap. 53 Antiquitus in vsis Ecclesiae non fuisse (viz) cum null^e Missae sine
Collecta, hoc est coet^ aliquo vna offerentiu^ and Sacramenta participantiu^
agere^tur etc Odo in exposit. Canonis.
the Holy Ghost has taught us a remedy against their slothfulness in
celebrating of Private Mass.

Durandus Mimatensis] In the Primitive Church, all that were present at the
Celebration of the Mass, did every day communicate, because all the Apostles
did drink of the Cup according to Christ's command; Drink ye all of this: and
their oblation was a great loaf, sufficient for all, which the Grecians are
said to continue to this day.

Odo Cameracensis] In the Primitive Church they never had Masses without the
Conuention of the people to Communicate together; afterward it grew to a
custom in the Church to have Private and solitary Masses especially in
Cloisters. Olim in Primitiua Ecclesia singulis diebus qui Canoni Miss
intererant solitos fuisse communicare sed postea, etc. Bethel. in Explicat.
Canonis. c. 50 Dicitur communio quia in Primitiua Ecclesia populus comunicabat
quolibet die. Hugo in speculo Ecclesiae. Initio nasce^tis Ecclesiae Christiani
qui celebrationi Miss aderant post acceptum panem communicare soleba^t.
Durand. de ritibus c. 58 Sciendu^ iuxta antiquos Patres quod soli communicantes
diuinis mysterijs interesse consueuerint etc. Microlog. de eccles. obseruat.


Belethus] We must know for certain, that in the Primitive Church, al those
that were daily to be present at the Canon of the Mass, were wont to
communicate.

Hugo Cardinalis] It is therefore called a Communion, because the people in the
Primitive Church, did communicate every day together.

Durandus Tholosanus] In the Infancy of the Church, the Christians which were
present at the celebration of the mysteries after the blessing were wont to
communicate.

Micrologus] We must know according to the ancient Fathers, that the
Communicants only were wont to be present at the Mysteries, and therefore
before the Communion, the Catechumens and Penitents which were not prepared to
Communicate, were commanded to depart.

Cassander] It cannot be said properly to be a Communion, Proprie communio
dici no^ potest nisi plures de eode^ sacrificio participant, and quidem hunc
antiquum esse Ecclesiae morem, etc. Cassand. de solitarijs Missis.
but where some people are partakers of the same sacrifice with the Priest, and
all the best learned do acknowledge that to have been the ancient custom of
the Roman Church.

Innocentius the Third] In the Primitive Church, In Primitiua quidem Ecclesia
singulis diebus qui celebrationi Missaru^ intererant communicare solebant, sed
excreseente multitudine, etc. Innocent 3. lib. 6. Myster. Miss. c. 5.
every day those that were present at the Sacrament, were wont to communicate;
but the number of the faithful increasing, it was appointed they should
communicate only on the Lords day: afterward, by reason this custom was
neglected, it was ordered that every Christian should celebrate the Communion
thrice every year, and at last this remedy was found out, that instead of the
Communion which was the Mystery of unity, they should greet one another with
an holy kiss.

Res ipsa clamaettam in Graeca quam Latina Ecclesia non so lum sacerdotem
sacrifica^tem sed and reliquos praesbyteros, Diaconos nec no^ and reliquum
plebem aut saltem plebis aliquam partem communicasse, quod quomodo cessauerit,
etc Cassand Consult de solit: Miss. page 966.
Johannes Hoffmeisterus] The thing it self does speak and cry aloud, both in
the Greek and Latin Church, that not only the sacrificing Priest but the
other Priests and Deacons, and the rest of the people, or at least some part of
the people did communicate together, and how this custom ceased it is to be
wondered, and it is to be indeauoured that this good custom may be restored to
the Church.

Master Harding] That others do commonly forbear to communicate with the
Priest, Jewel in cap. of private Mass initie.
is through their own default and negligence, not regarding their own
salvation: whereof the godly and careful Rulers of faithful people have since
the time of the Primitive Church always much complained. Olim quod etiam nunc
Graeci vsurpant ex vno eodemque pane consecrato delibat^^ particulae singulu
tribuebantur vt melius vnio and coniunctio cum Christo atque aepertius
significaretur. Justin. in 1 Cor. 10. Nunquam express legitur a veteribus
oblatum Sacrificium sine communione alicuius vel aliquoru^ preter ipsum
sacerdotem. Bellar. lib. 2. de Missa. c. 9.


Iustinian] In ancient times that which the Greek Church uses at this day of
one loaf of bread consecrated, diverse parts were distributed to all, that by
their Communion, their Union with Christ might be more plainly expressed.

Bestarmine] Although there is no express testimony amongst the Ancients, to
testify that they at any time offered sacrifice without some one or more,
communicating with the Priest, yet it may be gathered by conjectures: so that
there is no certain proof of Antiquity for this point of faith, but only by
conjectures, as Bellarmine himself confesses.

Thus you have heard many of the best learned Romanists, witnessing the
antiquity of our doctrine, and consequently intimating the novelty of their
own; and it seems the learned Fathers of the Trent Council, were very
sensible of that doctrine which the ancient Fathers taught, and proclaimed for
the right Communion in their Church, and thereupon you shall observe, the
Council concludes in that Canon of Private Mass, with a well wishing to the
truth of the Protestant doctrine; Council. Trid. cap. 6. can. 8.
Optaret quidem Sacrosancta Synodus, etc. The sacred Council could w^sh, that
the faithful people which stand by, would communicate with the Priest, not
only in spiritual affection, Quod huiu^ Sanctissimi sacrificij fructus
vberior proueniret. Council. Jbid.
but in Sacramental participation; and the reason is there rendered by the
Council: Because it would be more fruitful and more profitable for the
Receiver: Behold, out of the same mouth proceeds cursing and blessing, in the
first part of the Canon, the Council does accurse all those that term Private
Masses unlawful, and therefore to be abrogated, in the next place, they wish
they were restored to the ancient custom for the benefit of the Receiver: so
that from the particular confessions of many learned Romanists, our Communion
of Priests and people, is adjudged more ancient, and from the general
confession of a general Council, our Communion is concluded to be more
fruitful.

Jewel Artit. 1. in initio.
But put the case says [Master Harding] that the people might be stirred to
such devotion, as to dispose themselves worthily to receive their housell every
day with the Priest as they did (in the Primitive Church) what would these men
have to say? Surely if our adversaries would leave their Private Mass, and
return to our Communion; I presume these men, that is, the Protestants would
say, that the Mass Priests need not then so much complain of the Novelty of
our doctrine: and yet one thing more I will add and say, that if this doctrine
were reformed and restored to the Primitive sincerity, (from which they
confess to have digressed) yet I say, they stand guilty of the like novelty,
and corruptions in their Articles of their own Creed which have as much need
of Reformation even by the Testimonies of the best learned amongst themselves
as shall be presented in the next place.

PARAG. 4. The seven Sacraments.
IT is the third Article of the Roman Creed, that there be truly and properly
seven Sacraments of the new Law, Bulla Pij Quarti Articl. 3.
instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, and necessary to the salvation of
mankind. This Point of faith was grounded upon the Authority of the Council
of Plorence and the Council of Trent, the one did insinuate the number of
seven Sacraments: Suarez. disp. 12. Sect. 1.
the other did expressly decree it for an Article of faith (says Swarez) but
because the Romanists rely wholly upon the Trent Council, it will not be
amiss to examine that Decree, and thereby to observe with what Unity and
Consent their Proselites have prosued this doctrine of faith.

The Council of Trent has defined and declared: Council. Trid. sess 7 can 1.
Ablue, firmo, cibo, piget, vngit, and ordinat vxor, Gerson de 7. Sacram. p. 69.
If any shall say that all the seven Sacraments of new Law were not instituted
by Christ, or that there are more or less then seven, viz. Baptism,
Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Orders and Matrimony;
or that any of these is not truly and properly a Sacrament, let him be
accursed. This Trent Decree is so praeualent with the Church of Rome,
Quodtestimonium etiam si nullum haberemus aliud deberet sufficere. Bellar. de
effectis Sacr. l. 2. c. 25
that Bellarmine professes: This testimony ought to suffice, if they had no
other. And surely it will appear, that other testimonies are scarce and few;
and therefore it may be thought a strange saying; Si tollamus authoritatem
praesentis Ecclesiae and praesentis Concilij in dubium reuocari poteru^t omnium
aliorum Conciliorum decreta and tota fides Christiana. Idem ibid.
that one testimony of a late Council might suffice for an Article of faith,
which by his own Tenet requires Antiquity, Universality, and Consent; yet
this Cardinal proceeds further, and tells us the authority of this Council
is so available for this point, yea for all Articles of faith, that if we
should take away the credit of the Roman Church and Council of Trent, the
decrees of other Councels, nay even Christian faith it self might be called in
question.

If by (Christian faith) the Cardinal understand the present Roman faith,
without doubt this saying is most true; See D. Fearly in his writ of Error
against the Appealer p. 54. 55, etc.
for if we consider their misinterpreting the Ancient Creed, and there creating
of a New, it cannot possibly be defended but by the Roman Church and the Trent
Council; but if he mean the general and saving faith of all true believers, I
may truly say this Tenet is a foundation of Atheism: for who can truly say,
that the word of Christ is not alone sufficient for the faith of all believing
Christians. It is the voice of the blessed Apostle, I have not shunned to
declare unto you all the counsel of God: Acts 20.27. And Bellarmine himself
is forced to confess, That all those things are written by the Apostles which
are necessary for all men, and which the Apostles preached generally to all;
Besides how can the says of Christians depend upon a Church which is fallen
from the faith? or how can a general belief of Christianity rely safely
upon a Council, that is disclaimed by the greatest part of the Christian world,
viz. by England, by France, by Germany? etc. But to let pass the Heluetian,
the Scottish, the Germane, and the English Churches, what will become of the
ancient Church of Rome, nay what will become of their own Schoolmen in the
latter ages? did they all believe and teach that there were neither more nor
less then seven Sacraments? did they maintain they were all instituted by
Christ? did they profess they were all truly and properly Sacraments of the
new Law? If any learned man, or if all the learned men alive, shall prove that
the seven Trent Sacraments were instituted by Christ, and that all the Fathers,
or any one Father in the Primitive Church, or any known Author for above a
thousand years after Christ, did teach that there were neither more nor less
then seven, truly and properly so called, and to be believed of all for an
Article of faith, (all which is the constant doctrine of the Church of Rome)
let the Anathema fall upon my head.

First it is agreed on both sides that the Sacraments of the new Law were
instituted by Christ (for he only has authority to seal the Charter in
whose authority only it is to grant it.) Now as Princes seals confirm and
warrant their deeds and charters, so do the Sacraments witness unto our
consciences that Gods promises are true, and shall continue for ever; Thus does
God make known his secret purpose to his Church: first he declares his
mercies by his word, then he seals it, and assures it by his Sacraments: In
the word we hear his promises, in the Sacraments we see them, The difference
then betwixt the Church of Rome and us stands in this; In the two proper
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, we have the element and the
institution; in the other five there wants either of these, and therefore in
a right meaning are not be taken for Sacraments: In Baptism the element is
water, in the Lords Supper bread and wine: Baptism has the words of
Institution, Mat. 28.19.
Teach all Nations baptizing in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the
holy Ghost: The Lords Supper likewise has the words of Institution: Luke
22.19.
Do this in remembrance of me: and therefore we say these two are properly and
truly called Sacraments, because in them the element is joined to the word, and
they take their ordinance from Christ, and be visible signs of an invisible
saving grace: The other five we call them not Sacraments because they have not
the like institution. Confirmation was ordained by the Apostles (but the Trent
Council confesses, the Sacraments must be ordained by Christ:) Penance and
Orders have not any outward element joined to the Word: and Matrimony was not
ordained by Christ in the new Testament, but by God himself in Paradise;
Besides the grants and seals of Christ, (viz. the Sacraments) are the peculiar
and proper possession of the Church of Christ, insomuch as Turks and Infidels,
may have the benefit of marriage out of the Church, yet cannot have the benefit
of Christ's Sacraments which belong only to his Church. And lastly, how
Marriage should be a Sacrament, which contains not grace in it self, nor
power to sanctify, and how it should be an holy thing (as every Sacrament is
termed) and yet must be forbidden, or rather fornication in the Priests case,
must be preferred be fore it; Durus sermo, This is an hard saying, who can
hear it? If therefore a general Council shall accuse not only those that
deny the number (but si quis dixerit) If any shall say, there are either more
or less then seven) then woe be to all the ancient Fathers, for if they be
conuented before the Council, they will all stand guilty of this curse. De
latere in cruce pendentis lancea percuffo Sacramenta Ecclesiae pro fluxerunt.
Aug. in Ioh. Tract. 15.


Accursed be Ambrose, and Austin, and Chrysostom, and Bid, for they taught
that out of the side of Christ came the two Sacraments of the Church, Blood and
Water; but that there were neither more nor less then seven, they taught not,
they believed not.

Jsid. Originu^ sieve Etimolog. lib. 6.
Accursed be Isidore, for he accounts but of three Sacraments, viz. Baptism,
and Chrysme, and the body and blood of Christ.

Part. 4. q. 5. membr. 2. art. 1. qu. 5. etc.
Accursed be Alexander ab Hales, for he says there are only four, which are
in any sort properly to be said Sacraments of the new Law: and the other three
supposed Sacraments had their being before.

Cypr. Ablutio pedum.
Accursed be the Author bearing the name of Cyprian, for he mentions only
five Sacraments, and one of them is Ablutio pedum, washing of the Apostles
feet, which is none of the seven Sacraments.

Accursed be Durand, Matrimoniu^ no^ est Sacramentu^ stricte^ and proprie
dictu^ sicut alia Sacramenta nouae legis sed est, etc. In lib. 4. Did. 26.
quaest. 3.
for he allows but six proper Sacraments, for Matrimony (says he) is not a
Sacrament strictly and properly so called as other Sacraments are.

Accursed be Cardinal Bessarion, Haec duo sola Sacramenta in Euangelijs
maenifeste tradita legimus Bessa. de Sacram. Euchar.
for he fully concludes with the Protestants; We read of two only Sacraments
which were delivered us plainly in the Gospel.

I need not insist much upon the denial of the certain and definite number of
seven Sacraments known to the Fathers: for Cardinal Bellarmine by way of
prevention gives us to understand that, The Protestants ought not to require of
them to show the number of seven Sacraments either in Scriptures or Fathers,
Non debere adversarios petere vt oste^damus in Scripturis aut Patribus nomen
Septena rij numeri Sacramentoru^. Nam nec ipsi ostendere possunt nomen binarij
vel ternarij, vel quaternarij Scriptura enim and Patres non, etc. Bellar. de
effectu Sacr. lib. 2. c. 24. Satis esse debet quod Patres in varijs locis aut
certe varij Patres eiusdem aetatis omnium septem Sacrame^torum alicubi
meminerint. Idem ca. 27.
for that we cannot show the number of two, nor three, nor four: besides it is
sufficient (says he) that the Fathers in diverse places, and diverse Fathers
of the same Age in some place make mention of those Sacraments. The number
therefore (by our Adueruersaries confession) is not to be expected in the
Primitive Church, and therefore it is more to be wondered why the Roman Church
should impose the peremptory number of seven, with a curse upon al them that
believe them not.

If the Fathers had made mention of the seven Trent Sacraments only (although
they had never mentioned the number of seven, there might have been some plea
for the number also: but when they call many things by the names of Sacraments
which had a mystical sense, because they were types and figures of holy
things; nay more, when they did insist sometimes in the number of two, and so
restrained the proper Sacraments of the Church to the definite number of two
only; It is no way probable that those five Sacraments were of other account
with them, then other holy things which they called Sacraments; for had the
Fathers believed that those Sacraments had been instituted by Christ (as the
Church of Rome does) they would of necessity concluded them for true and proper
Sacraments of the Church, and then without doubt the Fathers who were elegant
in the application of such mysteries would have easily found in them the
mystery of the number seven.

Saint Ambrose in his Treatise of the Sacraments divided into six books,
makes no mention but of two, and in his first book and first Chapter,
proclaims to the believers of his age: De Sacramentis quae accepistis sermonem
adorior: I speak of the Sacraments which you have received: that is to say, of
those two Sacraments which the Church has taught and declared unto you: and
that you may rightly understand what the Roman Church professed concerning the
number of Sacraments in those days, Quaeda^ pauca pro multu, etc. August. de
doct. Christ. li. 3. c. 9.
Saint Austin tells us, Our Lord and his Apostles have delivered unto us a few
Sacraments instead of many, and the same; in doing most easy, in signification
most excellent, in observation most reverend, as is the Sacrament of Baptism,
and the celebration of the body and blood of our Lord: and lastly concludes
them both in the number of two: August de Symbol. ad Catechum.
Haec sunt Ecclesiae gemina Sacramenta, These be the two Sacraments of the
Church. Tunc demum plane sanctificari and esse filij Dei possunt si vtroque
Sacramento nascantur. Cypr. li. 2. Ep. 1. ad Steph.
If we look beyond those times, Saint Cyprian that blessed Martyr lived and
dyed in the faith of two Sacraments only: Then (says he) may we be thoroughly
sanctified and become the children of God, (si vtroque Sacramento, etc.) if we
be borne by both the Sacraments: If we look below them, Fulbertus Bishop of
Chartres, shows us, the way of Christian Religion, Fulbertus Epist. 1.
is to believe the Trinity and verity of the Deity, to know the cause of his
Baptism, and in whom (duo vitae Sacramenta) the two Sacraments of our life are
contained. And in the time of Charles the Great, Sunt Sacramenta Christi in
Ecclesia Catholica Baptismus, and corpus, and sanguis Christi. Paschas. de
caena Domini.
Paschasius an Abbat speaks plainly, and in few words: These be the
Sacraments of Christ in the Catholic Church, Baptism and the body and blood
of Christ. And lastly, Bessarion their own Bishop of Tusculum, professes to
all his Romish Proselites, We read of only two Sacraments which were
plainly delivered in the Gospel.

These learned Doctors rested in the faith of two Sacraments in their days,
and yet notwithstanding called many things by the names of Sacraments, Signa
cum ad res diuinas adhibentur Sacramenta vocantur. Aug de doct. Christ. l. 3.
c. 6.
and the reason is given by Saint Austin, Signs when they be applied to godly
things be called Sacraments: and in this sort many rites and ordinances in the
Church are called Sacraments, because they signify some holy thing. Aug. de
bono coniugali. cap 18. August. in Psalm. 141. Aug lib. 4. de symbol. c. 1. Aug.
lib. 2. de pec. merit. and remis. ca. 26.
Polygamie or marriage of many wives, Saint Austin calls a Sacrament, as
signifying the multitude of the Gentiles that should be subject to God. Again
he terms the sign of the cross, Exorcisme, Holy bread given to the
Catechumenists (beginners in the faith) by the names of Sacraments: Alex. 1.
Ep. 1. ca. 5.
Pope Alexander the first, Ambros li. 3. de Sacram. c. 1 Cypri Sermon de lotion.
pedum. Bernard. de coena Domini
calls Holy water a Sacrament; Saint Ambrose, Cyprian, and Bernard calls Ablutio
pedum, washing of the Apostles feet, a Sacrament. Tertullian calls the whole
state of Christian faith a Sacrament. Religionis Christianae Sacramentu^
Tertul. li. 4 contr. Marcionem. Sacramentu^ orationis, Sacramentum esuritionis,
Sacramentu^ Scripturaru^, Sacramentu^ fletu^, Sacramentum sitis, Hila. in Mat.
Canon. 11. and 12. and Canon. 23.
Saint Hilarie in sundry places speaks of the Sacrament of prayer, the
Sacrament of fasting, the Sacrament of the Scriptures, the Sacrament of
weeping, the Sacrament of thirst. And Saint Hierome speaking of the book of
the Revelation, tells us there are in it, Tot Sacramenta quot verba, as many
Sacraments as words. All these and many like signs and mysteries were called
Sacraments by the Ancients, and yet are none of the seven Sacraments which the
Church of Rome holds; so that if every ordinance called a mystery or a
Sacrament in Scriptures and Fathers make a true Sacrament, they may decree
seventy Sacraments as well as seven.

As these men therefore cannot deny there is mention of the number of two
Sacraments in the Fathers (and not of seven) so likewise we have confessed
there is mention in the Fathers of many Sacraments besides these seven: Now if
Bellarmines reason stand good, that it is sufficient (for an Article of faith)
that the Fathers in diverse places, or diverse Fathers in some place make
mention of their Trent Sacraments, why should not all the Sacraments (before
mentioned by the Fathers) be concluded by the same reason for proper and true
Sacraments as well as there seven?

Let us descend from the Fathers to the later Schoolmen, and upon a reuiew of
the five Sacraments which we deny, you shall find as little unity amongst
their own Schoolmen to prove them true and proper Sacraments, as Antiquity
and Universality amongst the Fathers to prove the number of seven.

1 First, touching Confirmation, Alexander of Hales says, Sacramentum
Cofirmationis vt est Sacramentum neque Dominus instituit neque Apostoli, sed
postea institutum est in Co^cilio Meldensi. Alex. Hal. part 4. quaest. 24.
memb. 1. Hugo in lib. Sacram. Perkins in his Probl.
The Sacrament of Confirmation as it is a Sacrament was not ordained either by
Christ or by the Apostles, but afterward was ordained by the Council of Milda.

2 Touching Penance, Cardinal Hugo of Saint Victors in Paris, excludes it
for a proper Sacrament, and admits holy water which is none of the Trent
Sacraments.

3 Touching Extreme Unction, Mar. 6.13.
Where the Apostles are said to have anointed many sick and healed them:
Bell. lib. 1. de extr. vnct. c. 2
Cardinal Bellarmine makes answer, That oil was not the Sacrament of Extreme
Unction: James 5.14. Ex hoc loco nec ex ver bis nec ex effectibus colligitur
extrema Vnctio illa miraculosa qua^ Christus instituit sanandis aegrotus --
Nan^ textus promittit alleuatione^ infirmi, and de remissione peccatoru^, non
nisi conditionaliter loquitur, and vnctio extremae non nisi in mortis articulo
adhibetur, direct tendit ad remissionem peccatorum. Caietan in Jacob. 5.

Nonnulli negarunt hoc Sacramentu^ fuisse a Christo institutum ex quo plane
sequebatur no^ esse verum Sacramentu^,] Suar. Tom. 4. disp 39. Sect. 2
Ordinatio Episcopalis Sacramentum est vere and proprie d^ctu^ Haec sententia
etiamsi negetur a Dominico Soto, lib. 10 de Iustitia and iure, and q. 1. art 2.
and in 4 did 24. q. 2. ar. 3. Bellar. de Sacram Ordinis. cap. 4.


and where Saint James says, If any be sick, let them anoint them with
oil, etc. Cardinal Caietan makes answer, The Sacrament of Extreme Unction
cannot be hence collected, either by the words or by the effects, for that
Unction properly concerns the healing of bodily diseases, but the Unction of
the Roman Church is used only for the sick past recovery, and tends to
the remission of sins; and (says Suarez) both Hugo, and Peter Lombard, and
Bonauenture, and Alensis, and Altisidonos, the chief Schoolmen of their time,
did deny this Sacrament to be instituted by Christ, and by plain consequence
(says he) it was no true Sacrament.

Touching Ordination of Bishops, Dominicus Soto tells us it is not truly and
properly a Sacrament.

5 Lastly, touching Matrimony, Cardinal Caietan confesses with Saint Paul,
This is a great mystery, Non habes ex hoc loco prudens lector a Paulo
coniugium esse Sacramentum, non enim dicis Sacramentum sed mysterium hoc magnum
est and vere, etc. Chamier. de Sacram. l 4. c. 3. Jn materia and forma huius
Sacramenti (viz.) Matrimonij statuenda adeo sum inconstantes and varij, adeo
incerti and ambigui vt ineptus futurus sit qui in tanta illorum varietate ac
discrepantia rem aliquam certam constantem, explorata^ conetur efficere. Canus
loc. Theolog. l. 8. cap 5.
but (says he) the learned Reader cannot infer from thence, that Marriage is
a Sacrament, for he said not it is a Sacrament, but a mystery: And for a
conclusion their own Canus tells us, The Divines speak so uncertainly of the
matter and form of Matrimony, that he should be accounted a fool who in so
great difference of opinions would take upon him to establish a certain and
known doctrine.

He therefore that shall hear a Council fearfully accursing all those that
will not believe all the seven Sacraments to be instituted by Christ, and yet
shall neither find antiquity and universality among the Fathers, nor unity
and consent among the Schoolmen to make good the Article of that belief,
shall have just cause to enquire upon what ground the seven Sacraments were
first established in the Church: What therefore may we think can be expected
from these men; to enforce such a decree from such a Council for a certain
and definite number of seven?

Cassand. de numero Sacrament.
Cassander who had examined the Novelty of this doctrine, gives us to
understand that some conceited wits found out a mystery in the number of
seven, for otherwise you shall find none (says he) before Peter Lombards time,
who did determine the certain number. This is not only probable but true, for
the Trent Fathers in honor of that number did argue especially for that
purpose: Council. Trid. hist. lib. 2.
that there were seven virtues, seven capital vices, seven Planets, seven
defects which came from original sin, the Lord rested the seventh day and
the like: and Cardinal Bellarmine adds the like proof for the number:
Bellar. de Sacram. in genere. lib. 2. c. 26.
seven days thou shall not eat leauened bread, thou shall shut up the Leaper
7. days, thou shall offer seven bulls, and seven rams, and seven Goats, and
Naaman was commanded to wash seven times in Jordan, and there are seven
Candlestickes, Ex his patet Septenarius Sacramentorum numerus Aquinas par. 3.
q. 65. art. 1.
and seven seals, and seven books, and seven Trumpets, and seven Angels, and
from these says Aquinas appears the number of seven Sacraments.

Tyrabosco.
The Patriarch of Venice was a grave and Learned man, but he was hardly driven
for proofs, when from five barley loaves and two fishes, he concluded seven
Sacraments. Juno Gentillet. Exam. council. Trid. lib. 4. number. 26 Sess.
The Creation of the world (says he) was ended the seventh day, and Christ
satisfied the people with five loaves and two fishes which make seven -- but
that which Andrew said, there is a boy here which has five loaves and two
fishes must be understood of the rank of S. Peter's Successors, and that which
is added, make the people sit down; signifies, that salvation must be offered
them by teaching them the seven Sacraments. In like manner the Schoolmen,
Bonauent. in 2. did. 4. and Chamier. de sacra. lib. 4. cap. 2.
and especially Bonauenture, for want of better proofs, is prodigal of his
witty conceits in honor of that number. When the Sacraments (says he) are
the weapons of the Church Militant, the number must be such likewise: for as it
is said in the Canticles, She is terrible as an army with banners; so the
number is terrible, and strengthened by the Sacrament of Confirmation: It is an
Army, because conjoined and united with the Sacrament of the Eucharist: it is
likewise ordered by the Sacrament of Orders: and because some die, and some
fall away, there is a necessity of supply through Matrimony: after they are
beaten down, there is a recovery by Penance, and because no man comes to an
Army without an Ensign, there is also the Sacrament of Baptism: and lastly,
those that depart from their Army, are served with extreme Unction.

I could add to these mystical conceits, the testimony of Saint John; he tells
us, there is a woman, in whose forehead a name was written (Mystery) he tells
us further, Revel. 17.
this woman had seven heads, and these seven heads are seven Mountains on
which the woman sits, or as (Victorinus) expounds it, on which the City of
Rome sits: Fulk. in Revel. 17.7.
but I confess I am no way delighted with such conceits, especially in a point
of their faith, which they believe concerns their salvation: Yet this I say,
if the belief of our two Sacraments had been grounded upon such reasons, it
had been as easy a matter for us to have proved a mystery in the number of
two: for there are two great Lights, there are two Tables of the Law, two
Cherubins, two Trumpets, two Swords, two Witnesses, but chiefly two
Testaments, and from them only we produce our two Sacraments.

If we consider therefore this Article of the Roman faith, both as it wants
proof of the ancient Fathers in the affirmative; and as it is declined by the
latter Schoolmen in the Negative, our adversaries shall have little cause to
deny the Visibilitie of our Church for our two, and less reason to brag of
their marks of antiquity and universality in the faith of their seven.
Touching our two, they were anciently believed and are received by them and us
for true and proper Sacraments of the Church, touching Confirmation, Penance,
Orders, Matrimony, they are received by the Church of Rome and us, but with
this difference, they are decreed by them for true and proper Sacraments, they
are received and allowed by us for rites and Ordinances in our Church. Touching
the two first they are known and certain, because they were primarily
ordained by Christ himself, touching the other five, they had not that
immediate Institution from Christ, and thereupon the learned Cardinal is
forced to confess: The sacred things which the Sacraments of the new Law
signify, De Baptismo and Eucharistia res notissima est, de alijs Sacramentis
non est ita notum. Bellar. de Sacram. in genere lib. 1. cap. 9.
are threefold, the Grace of Justification, the Passion of Christ and eternal
life, touching Baptism and the Eucharist, the thing is most evident,
concerning the other five, it is not so certain.

Since therefore some of there best learned deny that all the seven Sacraments
were instituted by Christ, others acknowledge, they are not all true and proper
Sacraments of the new Law, others confess that there own five are not so
certain as our two; Saint Austins confession shall be my conclusion. If we,
August. contr. Petil. lib. 3. c. 6.
or an Angel from heaven, preach unto you any thing concerning faith, and
life, besides that you have received in the Legal and Evangelical Scriptures,
let him be accursed.

PARAG. 5. Communion in both kinds.
IT is the sixth Article of the Roman Creed: I confess that under one kind
only all and whole Christ and the true Sacrament is received. This half
Communion is created or declared for an article of faith, and this article of
faith is lately descended from the Council of Cons^ance (1400) years after
Christ; Council. Constam. an. 1414
in which Council, it was declared that Christ did institute in both kinds,
and the Primitive Church did continue it to the faithful in both kinds, but
for weighty reasons (as they term them) contrary to Christ's institution, and
the practice of all antiquity, they decreed a half communion with this
Caution: Council. Constant. Sess. 13
that if any should say it was unlawful, or erroneous to receive in one kind,
he ought to be punished and driven out as an heretic: So that by the Decree
with a (Non obstante) in the Canon (that is) notwithstanding Christ did
institute in both kinds, and the Primitive Church receive it; I say from that
time (as it were in despite of God and man) the whole communion was adjudged
Heresy, Gerson. de here is. communicandi sub vtraque specie.
and which is most remarkable, this Council by reason the first sessions
judged the Council above the Pope, those first sessions were condemned and
rejected by the Council of Florence, Hoc conciliu^ quantum ad primas Sessiones
vbi definit Concilium esse siopra Papam reprobatur vt est in Concilio
Florentino, and quantum ad vltimas Sessiones, and ea omnia que probauit Martin.
5. ab omnibus Catholicis recipitur.
and the last Council of Lateran: but for the last sessions wherein the
communion in both kinds was adjudged heretical, although it were contrary to
Christ's precept and his holy Institution: the Council in this point was
allowed by Pope Martin the Fifth, and says Bellarmine, Bellar de Cocil. and
Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 7.. Quintum Acts 3, 14.
ab omnibus Catholicis recipitur, it is received of all Catholics: neither
can the Council of Trent plead ignorance, that they know not Christ's
Institution, for they pursue the decrees of the former Council, and declare in
like manner. Although our Savior did exhibit in both kinds, Council. Trid.
cap. 3.
yet if any shall say, the holy Catholic Church was not induced for just
causes to communicate the lay people and the non Conficient Priest under one
kind (viz.) of bread only, Can. 2.
and shall say they erred in so doing, let him be accursed.

He that shall hear two great Councels, the one accusing, the other
accursing, all for heretics that deny the vnlawfullnesse of one kind, would
gladly know, what were those causes and reasons that induced the Roman Church
to decree flatly against Christ's precept, and the example of the Primitive
Churh; If neither the words, Drink ye all of this, nor Do this in
remembrance of me, are binding precepts (as without doubt they are) must
therefore Priests and people be adjudged heretics and accursed Christians,
because they follow Christ's example? It is not to be doubted, but that is best
and fittest to be practiced which Christ himself has done: Bellar. de
Euchar. lib. 4. c. 7.
This is Bellarmines Confession, this is ours; besides, how the Church of Rome
should create or declare a point of faith manifestly repugnant to Christ's Word
and his Institution, and contrary to the practice of the Primitive Church; and
yet retain the proper marks of their Church, which are Antiquity,
universality, and consent, this is a doctrine unsearchable, and past finding
out. In the mean time, I will tender them the performance of my promise, which
is the confession of their own learned Doctors in the bosom of their own
Church, who are faithful witnesses in behalf of our Church and doctrine, that
the Communion in both kinds, had known antiquity from Christ, and an eminent
Visibility in the ancient church, and that the half Communion was so far
from a point of faith, that it was not generally received in the true Church
above a thousand years after Christ.

Salmeron] We do ingenuously and openly confess, Salmer.] Ingenui and aperti
confitemur morem generalem extitisse communicandi etiam Laicos sub vtraque
specie. Salmer Tract. 35.
that it was a great custom for the Lay people to communicate under both
kinds, as it is this day used amongst the Graecians, and was used in times past
amongst the Corinthians, and in Africa. Olim Laici communicabant sub vtraque
specie quod tamen antiquatum est. Arbor. Theosophiae lib. 8. cap. 11.


Johannes Arboreus] Anciently the Lay people did communicate under both kinds,
but now it is abolished.

Thomas Aquinas] According to the ancient custom of the Church, Secundum
antiquae Ecclesiae consuetudinem, omnes sicut communicabant corpore ita
communicabant and sanguine. Aquin. in Ioh. 6.
all those that were partakers of the Communion of his body, were partakers
also of the Communion of his blood.

Ruardus Tapper, Deane of Louayne] It were more convenient the Communion were
administered under both kinds then under one alone, Habito respectis ad
Sacramentum -- magis consonum est eius institutions, etc. Cassand. sub vtraque
specie. page 1034
for this were more agreeable to the Institution and fullness thereof, and to
the example of Christ, and the Fathers of the Primitive Church.

Lyra] In the 1. of the Corinthians and the eleventh; Fit hic mentio de duplici
specie, nam in primitiua Ecclesia sic dabatur fidelibus. Lyr. in 1 Cor. 1.11.
there is mention made of the communion in both kinds, for in the Primitive
Church it was given in both kinds to the faithful.

Fisher the Iesuite] Certain it is that the Primitive Church did very often
and frequently use the Communion under both kinds, D. White Fisher in the
Chapter of both kinds.
yea they were bound thereunto by the obligation of custom not divine precept.
Alph.] -- Na^ olim per multa saeculasic apud omnes Catholicos vsitatum esse ex
multorum Sanctorum Scripturis didicimus. Alph. de Castro de hac Controuersia.
Caepit. ea consuetudo in Ecclesia Latina, etc. Greg. de Valent. de legit. vsu
Euchar. cap. 10.


Alphonsus de Castro] Anciently for many ages the Communion in both kinds was
used amongst all Catholics as appears by the writings of many holy men.

Gregory de Valentia] The custom of communicating in one kind, began in the
Latin Church to be generally received, but a little before the Council of
Constance where it was confirmed.

Satis compertum est Orie^tem Christi Ecclesiam hunc vsque diem, Occidentalem
seu Romanam mill amplius, etc. Cassand. Consult. de vtraque specie.
Cassander] It is sufficiently manifest, that the Eastern Church of Christ
until this day, and the Roman Church for more then a thousand years after
Christ did exhibit the Sacrament in both kinds, as it is most evident by
innumerable testimonies both of Greek and Latin Fathers.

Licet Christus post coenam instituerat, -- licet in Primitiua Ecclesia
recipitur a fidelibus, etc. Council. Constam. Sess. 13
The Council of Constance] Though Christ instituted this Venerable Sacrament
under both kinds -- and though in the Primitive Church this Sacrament was
received by the faithful under both kinds, yet this custom that it should be
received by Lay men under the kind of bread only, is to be held for a Law
which may not be refused, etc.

Bellarmine] Christ did institute under both kinds, Christus quidom instituit
sub duplici specie sed non iussit dari omnibus sub duplici -- Ecclesia autem
vetus ministrabat sub duplici specie quando Christiani etc. Bellar. de Euch.
lib. 4. cap. 24.
but he did not command it to be given to all under both kinds: The ancient
Church did administer under both kinds when the number of Christians were but
few, besides, all did not receive in both kinds, -- but the multitude
increasing, the inconvenience appeared more and more, and by degrees, the use
of both kinds ceased.

Thus we have heard with our ears, and our Adversaries have declared unto us,
that our Communion in both kinds was taught by the Fathers in there days, and
in the old time before them; I hope I shall not need any supplementall proof
for the antiquity of our doctrine, and the Visibility of our Church in this
point, when they themselves have given so fair an evidence in our behalf; and
as concerning the half communion which is received in the Roman Church, for
an Article of faith as it wants antiquity and consent of Fathers by their own
confession, so likewise it wants a right foundation in the Scriptures, which an
article of faith ought to have, and therefore Saint Austins confession shall be
my conclusion: If we on an Angel from heaven preach unto you any thing
concerning faith, and life, besides that you have received in the Legal and
Evangelical Scriptures let him be acoursed.

PARAG. 6. Prayer and service in a known tongue.
THe Council of Trent decreed and declared concerning the divine service in an
unknown tongue, that, Council. Trid. Sess. 22. c. 8.
although the Mass do contain in it great instruction for the common people,
yet it does not seem expedient to the fathers of the Council, that it should
be every where celebrated in the vulgar tongue: This decree being past, they
proceeded to judgment, that whosoever shall say he is to be condemned that
pronounces part of the Canon (of the Mass) Jbid. Can. 9. de Sacrificio Missa.
and the words of consecration with a low voice, or that the Mass ought to be
celebrated in the vulgar tongue only, let him be accursed. Now it is worth the
noting, the first part of the decree was adjudged by some Trent Bishops to be
questionable and doubtful in the construction: for say they, Histor. of Trent.
lib 6. page 577.
it seemed a contradiction to declare that, that the Mass does contain much
instruction for the faithful, and yet to command that part of service to be
uttered with a low voice, and in an unknown tongue. This exception, it seems
took some impression in the Council, for in the same Chapter, and in the same
Session, a dispensation was granted with a Non obstante, Notwithstanding the
first part of the Decree; that Retaining the ancient right to every Church,
least the people might hunger and thirst for food, and none be ready to give
it them, it was thenceforth commanded and decreed that the Mass Priests or
some others should frequently expound and declare, the mysteries of the Mass,
which the people could not understand in the Latin tongue: so that from their
own confessions, that the Mass does afford great instruction to the people,
and for that end ought to be interpreted unto them, they consequently affirmed,
that the service and prayer in the Reformed Churches in the vulgar tongue, was
better for the edification of the Church: and without doubt the Apostles
command, (To show forth the Lords death till his coming) was not his meaning
to show it to the walls, or in a silent and unknown voice (as it is now used
in the Roman Church) but to pronounce it openly to be heard and understood of
all the hearers. Haymo in 1 Cor. 14.
I am says Haymo a Grecian, thou an Hebrew, if I speak to thee in Greek, I
shall seem barbarous unto thee, likewise if thou speak to me in Hebrew, thou
shall seem barbarous unto me: nay more, he puts this unanswerable question: If
one knows that only tongue wherein he was borne and bred, If such a one
stand by thee whilst thou do solemly celebrate the Mystery of the Mass, or
make a Sermon, or give a blessing how shall he say Amen at thy blessing, when
he knows not what thou say; for so much as he understanding none but his
Mothers tongue cannot tell what thou speak in that (strange) and barbarous
tongue. If we look higher it will appear that prayers and Sacraments were
administered in the Church for the understanding of the hearer, Just. Imper. in
No. Constit. 123.
Justinian the Emperor commanded all Bishops and Priests to celebrate the
sacred oblation of the Lords Supper, and prayers used in Baptism, not in
secret, but with a loud and clear voice, that the minds of the hearers might
be stirred up with more devotion to express the praises of God -- Let the
Religious Bishops and Priests know (says he) that if they neglect so to do,
they should yield an account in the dreadful judgment of the great God for
it, and we having information of them, will not leave them unpunished. This
care was constantly used by the ancient Roman Church, as appears by the Popes
own Decretals, Decret. Gregor. tit. 3. de Offic. Iud. Ord. c. 14.
wherein it was publicly declared; We command that the Bishops of such Cties
and Diocesses (where Nations are mingled together) provide meet men to
minister the holy service according to the diversity of their manners and
languages: But I will spare the labor for further proof of this question by
citing the particular Fathers, and will produce our Adversaries several
confessions to witness the truth of our doctrine, that Prayer and Service in
the vulgar and known tongue, was altogether used in the best and first ages,
according to the precept of the Apostles and the practice of the ancient
Fathers.

Lyra, Jn Primitiua Ecclesia benedictiones and caetera communia siebant in
vulgari Lyra in 1. Cor. 14.
] If thou bless the spirit, and the people understand thee not, what profit
has the simple people thereby not understanding thee: Therefore in the
Primitive Church, the blessings and all other common devotions were performed
in the vulgar tongue.

Johannes Belethus] (Billet) In the Primitive Church it was forbidden that any
man should speak with tongues, Jn Primitiua Ecclesia prohibitu^ erat ne quu
loqueretur linguis nisi esset qui interpretaretur Quid enim prodesset, etc.
Joh. Billet in su^n. de diuinis officijs.
unless there were some to interpret, for what should speaking avail without
understanding, and hereof grew a laudable custom, that after the Gospel was
read, it should straight way be expounded in the vulgar tongue.

Lingua auditoris non ignota omnia peragebantur and consuetudo ita ferebat vt
omnes psallerent. Gretz. def. c 16. l. 2. de verbo Dei.
Gretzerus,] The ancient Fathers did exhort all to sing together, and that
attentively and diligently the Priests and people should join their voices
together.

Jewel in 3. Artic. Diuis. 28.
Master Harding,] Verily in the Primitive Church (Service in a known tongue)
was necessary where faith was a learning, and therefore the prayers were made
then in a common tongue known to the people, for cause of their instructions,
who being of late converted to the faith, and of Pagans made Christians, had
need in all things to be taught.

Cassander] The Canonical Prayers, Canonicam prece^ and imprimu Dominici
corporis and sanguinis consecratione^ ita veteres legebant vt a populo
intelligi and Amen acclamari possit Cassand. Lyturg.

Fuit ergo ratio talis Benedicendi in Ecclesia tempore Apostoli, cui respondere
solebat non tantum Clerus, sed omnis populus Amen. Wald. in doctr. art. Eccle
tit. 4. c. 31.

Sed quare no^dantur benedictiones in vulgari. -- dicendu^ quod hoc sort fuit
in Ecclesia Primitiua, sed postquam fideles instructi sunt and sciunt que
audiunt fiunt Benedictiones in Latino. Aquin in 1. Cor. 14. Lect. 3.


and especially the words of consecration of the body and blood of our Lord,
the Ancients did so read it that all the people might understand it and say,
Amen.

Waldensis] When thou shall bless with thy spirit how shall the unlearned say,
Amen at the giving of thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say?
therefore in the Apostles time there was reason of such a blessing, that at the
giving of thanks not only the Priest but also all the people were wont to
answer, Amen.

Aquinas] How comes it to pass that thankesgiuings are not made in the known
tongue that the people might understand them? we must say it was in the
Primitive Church; but after the common people were instructed, and knew and
understood their duty, thankesgiuings were made in Latin; Quare omnia in
Ecclesia dicuntur in Latino videtur quod sit similiter insania; dicendum est
quod ideo erat insania in Primitiua Ecclesia quia erant rudes in ritu
Ecclesiastico vnde nesciebant qua fiebant ibi nisi exponeretur eis, modo vero
omnes sunt instructi, etc. Idem Lect. 4.
Again, when all things are done in the Latin tongue in the Church, it
seems to be madness: to this we must answer (says he) that it was madness
in the Primitive Church, which is not so in ours, for then they were rude and
ignorant in Ecclesiastical rites and ceremonies, but now all are so well
instructed, that although it be in Latin, the people understand what is done in
the Church.

Quia Christiani era^t pauci omnes si^ul psallebant in Ecclesia and
respondebant in diuinis officijs and post a crescente populo diuisa sunt magis
officia and solis Clericis relictu^ est vt communes prece, and lauds in
Ecclesia peragant Bell. de verba Dei lib. 2. cap. 16.
Bellarmine,] It may be objected that in the time of the Apostles, all the
people in divine Service did answer one Amen, and this custom continued long,
in the East and West Churches, as appears by Chrysostom, Cyprian, Hierome,
etc. In answer hereunto, he says, When the Christians were but few, they did
all sing together at the time of divine Service, but when the number of people
did increase, the office of public service was divided, and it was left only
to the Church to celebrate the Common Prayers. Here we have the several
confessions of our learned Adversaries, that in the first ages public prayers
were used for the understanding of the people, and they give a special reason
for it, to wit, for the better conformity of the Heathen and ignorant people in
the doctrine of Christianity. Harding.


Now as you have heard the reasons why the Service was used amongst the
Ancients in the known tongue, so likewise you shall understand one special
cause of the alteration of it in the Roman Church: It is reported (says
Honorius) when the Canon of the Mass in the Primitive times was publicly
read and understood of all: Honorius in Gemma Animae. l. 1. de Canone and Cass
Lyturg. c. 28.
certain Shepherds having learned the words of consecration, and pronouncing
them over their bread and wine in the fields, suddenly their bread and wine
were transubstantiated into flesh and blood, and the shepherds likewise for
their presumption (in using the words of Consecration) were stricken dead by
the hand of God. So that by Honorius confession the Canon of the Mass was
anciently read and understood of all, and which is strange, Aut Pastor fuit aut
illud quod dicere nolo. Iuuenal.
shepherds did transubstantiate bread and wine, and as it seems chiefly
occasioned the alteration of the Church service into the Latin and unknown
tongue. Cassander Lyturg. 28. p. 65.
Pope Innocent the third, and Johannes Bilethus relate the same story, but
withal add another reason why the Church decreed the Service in an unknown
language, Ne sacrosancta verba vilescerent: The Church commanded that such
prayers and service should be secretly delivered by the priest, lest that the
known words of the sacred Scripture should grow triuiall and of no account:
Sicut and sacra Scriptura est ne vilescat. Beleth. de diuinis officijs. Cass p.
65.
And the Council of Trent three hundred years after in confirmation of that
decree, adds a more weighty reason for a conclusion, Histor. of Trent. lib.
5. p. 460.
that this inconvenience would follow, all would think themselves Divines, the
authority of Prelates would be disesteemed, and all would become heretics. It
is to be wondered how the Church is altered in this point (says Erasmus) but it
is to be lamented that poor ignorant souls should be captiuated with such
silly reasons, Eras. in 1. Cor. 14.
and that faithful believers should be accursed for heretics, for following
the examples of the Apostles and the Primitive Church, even by the testimonies
of the best learned amongst themselves: since therefore Prayer and Service in
an unknown tongue, wants antiquity from the written word, or rather since it
is forbidden by the word of the Apostle. Saint Austins confession shall be my
conclusion: If we or an Angel from heaven preach unto you any thing concerning
faith and life, besides that you have received in the Legal and Evangelical
Scriptures, let him be accursed.

PARAG. 7. Worship of Images.
IT is the ninth Article of the Roman Creed: Artic. 9.
I do resolutely affirm that the Images of Christ, and of the Virgin Mary,
and also of other Saints are to be had and retained, and that due honor and
veneration is to be yielded to them. This Article was decreed in the ninth
Session of the Council of Trent, where it was declared: Council. Trid. Sess. 9.
We teach that the Images of Christ, the Virgin mother of God, and other Saints
are chiefly in Churches to be had and retained, and that due honor and
worship is to be given unto them.

This doctrine of Image worship we absolutely deny and condemn as a wicked
and blasphemous opinion: first, because their Article of faith does not only
want the authority of the Scripture, (which an Article of faith ought to have)
but because the Scripture does flatly and plainly forbid it. Leuit. 26. Exodus
20. Deuteronomy. 4. Esaias 40.


If we look upon the old Law before the coming of Christ, Vasques the Jesuit
confesses, Vasq disp. 104 in 3. Thom. c. 6.
So far forth every Image was forbidden, as it was dedicated to adoration,
therefore neither the Cherubins nor any other Images had any worship in the
Temple. And Coruel us Agrippa tells us, the Jews did abhor nothing more then
Images, neither did they make any Image that they worshipped, insomuch as when
Caligula the Emperor was desirous to have his own Image set up in the Church
of Jerusalem, king Agrippa makes him this answer: Philo Indaeus lib. de
Legatione ad Caiu^.
This Temple o Caligula from the first beginning to this time never yet
admitted any Image being the house of God, for the works of Painters and
Caruers are the Images of material gods, but to paint the invisible God, or to
feign a representation of him, our Ancestors did account it a wickedness. And
that which is more to be lamented, the worship of Images at this day is such a
stumbling block to the Jews, and a hindrance to their conversion, that when
they come to the Christians Sermons (as in Rome they are enjoined once at least
every year) so long as they see the Preacher direct his speech and prayer to a
little wooden crucifix that stands on the pulpit by him, to call it his Lord
and Savior, to kneel to it, to embrace it, to kiss it, to weep upon it (as
it is the fashion in Italy) it is preaching sufficient for them, and persuades
them more with the very sight of it, Sir Edward Sands his descrip. of the
Religion in the West parts.
to hate Christian Religion, then any reason the world can allege to love it.

It is agreed there on both sides, that in the old Law the Jews never allowed
adoration of Images, for almost four thousand years, and this was concerning
the Images of God the Father. Now let us descend from the Law to the Testament,
and see what order was taken by Christ and his Apostles, for the representation
of him and his Saints after him; It is manifest and without question that the
Law of God made against Images, Vasques] Dico praeceptum illud de non adorandis
figuris non fuisse legis naturae sed tantum positiui^ and ceremoniale, and
temporale, and in tempore Eua^gelij cessare debere. Vasq l. 2. disp. 4. ca. 4
number. 83. etc. 7. number 115
is a Moral Law, and stands in force at this day against Jews and Gentiles;
And although Peresius and Catharinus, and Vasques the Jesuit would understand
the Law against Images to be a positive and Ceremonial Law, and therefore to
cease at the entrance of the Gospel; Haec opinio no bis non probatur. Bellar.
de Jmag. l. 2. c. 7.
yet Bellarmine disauowes that construction, with a Non probatur: This opinion
is not allowed of us, both for the reasons made against the Jews, and for that
Iraeneus, Tertullian, Cyprian, and Augustine do all teach the commandments,
excepting the Sabbath are a Law natural and moral. If therefore the old
commandment be not abrogated, let us see what example or precept there is in
the Gospel for adoration. M. Fisher in D. Whites reply. p. 226.
Master Fisher the Jesuit tells us: In the Scripture there is no express
practice nor precept of worshipping the Image of Christ, yet there be
Principles which (the light of Nature supposed) convince adoration to be
lawful. So that from the law of God and the law of grace, we are at last
returned to the Law of Nature, and from the light of Nature an Article of faith
must be declared.

I have read of Varro a heathen Philosopher, who from the instinct of Nature
professed the contrary doctrine. The Gods (says he) are better served without
Images. Castius Dij obseruantur sine simula. chris. August. de Ciuit. Deo. li.
4. cap. 31.
And Saint Austin conceiues this Tenet of his to be so good a principle in
Nature, that he condescends to his opinion, and testifies thus much in his
behalf: Although Varro attained not to the knowledge of the true God, yet how
near he came to the truth in this saying who does not see it? Now the reason
why these Fathers condemned the worshippers of Images for heretics and
idolaters, is rendered by Eusebius: Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 7. cap. 17. Engl.
Because (says he) the men of old of a Heathenish custom were wont after that
manner to honor such as they counted Saviors; And thereupon after that Images
had got footing among the Christians, the Bishops and Emperors by Councels and
commands took special care to prevent them, both in the making and the
worshipping. The Council of Eliberis at Granado in Spain, Council. Elibert.
Can. 36.
decreed, That no pictures should be in Churches, lest that which was
worshipped should be painted on the walls. And the good Emperors Valens and
Theodosius made proclamation to all Christians against the Images of Christ in
this manner: Petrus Crinitus l. 9. ca. 9.
For as much as we have a diligent care in all things to maintain the
Religion of the most high God, therefore we suffer no man to fashion, to grave
or paint the Image of our Savior either in colors or in stone, or in any
other kind of metal or matter: but wheresoever any such Image shall be
found, we command it to be taken down, assuring our subjects, that we will
most strictly punish all such as shall presume; to attempt any thing contrary
to our decrees and commandments.

I forbear to cite the particular Fathers that opposed and condemned the
worship of Images in the Primitive Church, it may suffice this doctrine wants a
foundation in the Scriptures by their own confession, and now it shall appear
they want the visibilitie of the ancient Church, and the testimonies of holy
Fathers by the like acknowledgement of the learned Romanists amongst themselves.

Recte ob euacuandam superstitione^ ab orthodoxis Patribus definitu^ est.
Picturas in Ecclesia sieri non dabere ne quod coli tur and adoratur, etc.

E Bibliotheca Papyrij Nasoni in ijs libellis de picturis and Imaginibus


Agobardus Bishop of Lyons] The orthodoxe Fathers for avoiding of superstition,
did carefully provide that no pictures should be set up in Churches, lest that
which is worshipped should be painted on the walls. There is no example in all
the Scriptures or Fathers for adoration of Images, they ought to be taken for
an ornament to please the sight, not to instruct the people.

Hinema. Rernens. contr. Hincmarum
Hincmarus, Archbishop of Rhemes,] In the reign of Charles the Great (the sea
Apostolic willing it so to be) a general Synod was kept in Germany by the
convocation of the said Emperor, Jandunense^ Episc. c. 20.
and thereby the rule of Scriptures and doctrine of the Fathers, the false
Council of the Grecians (concerning worship of Images) was confuted and
utterly rejected.

Cassander, Quantum veteres initio ecclesiae ab omni veneratione Imaginum
abhorruerunt, declarat vnus Origin. aduersus Celsu^, etc. Cassand. Consult. de
simulachris.
] How much the ancient Fathers in the Primitive Church did abhor all manner
of worshipping Images, Origin declares against Celsus, and Austin in his
manners of the Catholic Church, and Ambrose in his fifth book of his
Epistles, and 31. do sufficiently declare.

Peresius Aiala, Peers.] Omnes fere Scholastici in hoc sunt quo Image Christi
and sanctorum adorari debeat eadem adoratione qua and res quae representa^tur
-- huius doctrinae nullu^ quod ego viderim afferu^t validu^ fundamentum, non
neque Scripturam, neque traditionem ecclesiae, neque co^mune^ consensu^
sanctorum, neque concilij gratis determinationem aliquam nec etiam ratione^ qua
hoc efficaciter suaderi possit, adducant. Epis copus Guidi xiensis. lib. de
Tradit. par. 2. c. de Imag. p. 158. Statuit olim vniuersalis Ecclesia, legitima
occasion inductae, propter illos qui erant ex Gentibus ad fide^ conuersi, vt
nulle in Templis imagines ponerentur. Nich. Clem. l. de no^ celeb. non in stit.
11. Ea vt. Polyd.] Non medo nostrae religionis expertes, sed test Hieronymo
omnes fere veteres sancti Patres da^nabant ob metum idolatriae, etc. Pol. de
Invent. Reru^. l. 6. c. 13 Vsque ad atatem Hieronymi erant probatae religionis
vi^i, qui in Templis nullam ferebant imagine^ nec pictura^, nec sculpta^, etc.
Eras. in Catechesi. Corruptus Gentiliu^ mos and falsa religio -- nostram quoque
religione^ infecit. etc Cornel. Agr. de vanit. scient. c. 57. Wicel. epist. in
exercit verae Ptetatis.


] All Schoolmen in a manner hold that the Images of Christ, and the Images of
Saints are to be worshipped with the same adoration that there samplars are,
but they produce not (so far as I have seen) any sound proof of this
doctrine, to wit, either Scriptures or Tradition of the Church, or common
consent of Fathers, or the determination of a general Council, or any other
effectual reason sufficient to persuade a man to that belief.

Nicholas Clemangis] The universal Church did anciently decree, that no Images
should be set up in Churches, and this was done for the Gentiles sake who were
converted to Christianity.

Polydore Virgill,] The worshipping of Images, not only those who knew not our
Religion, but as Saint Hierome witnesses almost all the ancient Fathers
condemned for fear of idolatry.

Erasmus,] Unto Saint Hieromes time those of the true Religion would suffer no
Image neither painted nor graven in the Church, no not the picture of Christ.

Cornelius Agrippa,] The corrupt manners and false Religion of the Gentiles
has infected our Religion, and brought into the Church Images and pictures,
with many ceremonies of external pomp, none whereof was found amongst the
first and true Christians.

Wicelius,] I confess it does griue me that under pretense of I know not what,
Dulia it is affirmed that one may and ought to honor with adoration the Saints
and their Images. The Fathers of the ancient Church have taught the people that
they must honor, but not worship the Saints.

Chemnit. exa^. de Imag. p. 41.
The Council of Frankford] It is not to be found that any of the Patriarckes
and Prophets, or Fathers did adore Images, but the Scriptures cry out to
worship one Image (God) and him only to adore and glorify; and the Fathers of
the Primitive Church did forbear the adoration of Images, as it appears by
Epiphanius and Augustine. And others who reckon the worshippers of Images
amongst the Symonians, and the Carpocratian heretics: and this was the
approved doctrine delivered and decreed by three hundred Bishops in the year
794.

From this confession, a doubt will arise touching the lawfulness of making
Images (viz.) for that end to adore them: and another doubt will follow
adoration, in what manner it ought to be extended to the Image or restrained.
Touching the first, Bellarmine says, Bellar. de Relig. and Imag. Sanct. lib.
2. c. 7.
It is proved by the Divine Law, that Images were not absolutely forbidden, by
reason the brazen Serpent, etc. were made by Gods command: He that professes
they were not absolutely forbidden, implies they were in a manner forbidden, or
rather that there is no place of Scripture that commands the contrary for
adoration, (which an Article of faith does require:) but the Cardinals reason,
(that the making of them is not absolutely forbidden by the Law of God, because
God commanded Images to be made) seems to be no reason, for the Jews could
answer, God did lay a general command upon men, and not upon himself, besides
that plea for Images which the Cardinal makes, was the ancient Apology which
the Idolaters used for their Images in the first ages; Tertullian puts the
question, and returns an excellent answer, which may serve for him and us. Sed
dit quidam, etc. cur ergo Moses in Eremo simulachrum Serpentis ex aere fecit.
-- been quod idem Deus and lege ve^^^it similitudine^ fieri extraordinary
praecepto Serpentis similitudinem interdixit. Si cundem Deum obsernas habes
lege^ eius. Ne feceris similitudinem si and praeceptum factae postea
similitudinis respicis and tu imitare Moysen. Ne facias aduersus legem
simulacrum aliquod nisi and tibi Deus iusserit. Tertul. lib. de Idolat. p. 618.
Some will object, why did Moses make the Image of the brazen Serpent in the
Wilderness -- well and good, one and the same God has by his general Law
forbidden an Image to be made, and also by his extraordinary and special
commandment, an Image of a Serpent to be made: If thou be obedient to the same
God, thou have his Law, make thou no Image, but if thou have a regard to the
Image of the Serpent, make not any Image against the Law, unless God command
thee as he did Moses; and thus briefly concerning the making of them.

Concerning the worship of them, the same Cardinal tells us: Nos cum Ecclesia
asserimus, etc. We affirm with the Church, that the Images of Christ and his
Saints are to be honored, so that there be no confidence placed in them, nor
nothing requested of them, nor no Divinity be conceived to be in them, but
that they be honored only for themselves whom they represent: and thus by
Bellarmines reasons, the making of Images is not absolutely forbidden, and the
adoration of them is but conditionally permitted, and surely I could wish they
were absolutely forbidden by them, till those conditions were rightly and
truly performed by the ignorant and Lay people: for I will not slander them,
it is the confession of their own Church men, that there are many of the rude
and ignorant which worship the very Images of wood or stone, Polyd. Virgil. de
Invent. lib. 6. c. 13.
or marble, or brass, or pictures painted upon the walls not as figures, but as
if they had verily sense, and do put more trust in them, then they do in
Christ or other Saints, to whom they are dedicated. Neither is this any new
complaint for this latter age, Gab. Biel in Can. Lect. 14.
for Gabriel Biel there own Schooleman complained before Luthers days, that
the blockish error of certain people was so great, and they were so affected
to Images that they thought some divine grace or Sanctity resided in them, by
which they were able to work miracles and give health; and for that cause they
worshipped them, to the end they might obtain some such benefit at their
hands: and that we may further know that none of Bellarmines conditions are
performed in the worshipping of Images: Cornel. Agrippa de vanit. c. 57.
Their own Cornelius Agrippa declares the peoples demeanor and carriage
toward them in the Roman Church in this manner: We bow our heads to them,
we kiss them, we offer lights to them, we hang up gifts, we apply miracles,
and buy pardons of them: to conclude, we go a pilgrimage to them, we make
vows unto them, we inwardly worship them as well as outwardly, neither can it
be uttered with how great superstition, I may not say Idolatry, the rude and
ignorant are nourished in Images, the Priests wink thereat, and reap thereby
no small gain to their purses.

The conditions then are confessed to be broken, but withal, here we find
the case of Demetrius, he made silver shrines, and brought no small gain to
the craftsmen, and thereupon he cries out, Acts 19.25.
Sirs, you know that by this craft we have our wealth: nor that only, but if
these things should be denied, the Temple of the Great Diana would be despised
whom all the world worshippeth: Here is a true Model of the Roman Church, she
causes Images to be made, she draws from them no small advantage nor that
only, but if they should condemn their worship, being published for an
Article of faith, other Articles would be questioned, and the Church of Rome
would be disesteemed whom all the world admireth.

Since therefore the worship of Images wants the universality and consent of
Fathers in the Primitive Church, since they have no foundation, no footstep in
the Word of God by the confession of their own Church; Saint Austins
confession shall be my conclusion for this Article of Faith: If we or an
Angel from heaven preach unto you any thing concerning faith, and life,
besides that you have received in the Legal and Evangelical Scriptures let
him be accursed.

PARAG. 8. Indulgences.
IT is the Tenth Article of the Roman Creed: I must firmly avouch, that the
power of Indulgences was left by Christ to the Church, and I affirm the use
thereof to be most wholesome for Christ's people.

This doctrine was proclaimed by the Council of Trent, Cum Potestas conferendi
Jndulgenti as a Christo Ecclesiae concessa sit atque huiusmodi potestatem sibi
tradita, etc. Council. Triden^. Sess. 25. Decretu^ de Jndulgentijs.
where it was likewise declared that, whereas Christ did leave Indulgences to
the Church, and the Church did use that divine power so granted in ancient
times, therefore the sacred Council does teach and command them to be
retained in the Church and condemn all them with a curse, which either term
them unprofitable, or deny the Churches authority to grant them: A reason no
doubt sufficient, for the Church of Rome to grant them; and to lay Anathema
upon all such as shall deny them since Christ did first ordain them, and the
Ancient Fathers did exercise that power committed to them by Christ: but when
we come to examination of Witnesses (notwithstanding the Popes Creed and the
Councels Decree) it will be found that neither Christ, nor the Primitive
Fathers ever knew, much less exercised such pardons and Indulgences as are now
daily practiced in the Church of Rome.

In the Primitive Church, when the Christians had committed any capital and
heinous offense for fear of persecution, either in denial of their faith, or
in sacrificing unto Idols, the parties were enjoined a severe and long Penance:
the rigor of this punishment, the Bishops and Pastors of their several
congregations had power (if they saw cause) to mitigate at their discretion;
which mitigation or relaxation of punishment, was called by the name of Pardon
or Indulgence. This doctrine was derived from Saint Paul, who released the
incestuous Corinthian from the bond of excommunication, upon his humiliation
and serious repentance, and writes unto the Corinthians, that they should do
the like, and receive him again to their communion, least he should be
swallowed up with immoderate grief; and this manner of Indulgence was ancient
and continued long in the Church, and of this there is no question.

Indulgentia proprie est absolutio Iudiciaria annexam habens solutionem ex
Thesauro. Bell^^de Jndulg. lib. 1. cap 5.
The Indulgence in the Roman Church, is an absolution from the guilt of
temporal punishment, by the application of the merits of Christ and his
Saints, which merits are termed Thesaurus Ecclesiae, the Treasury of the
Church; and this common Treasury of satisfactions is applied to dead souls
burning in Purgatory; Thus Indulgences which were first used for mirigation of
punishments, are now reduced to private satisfactions, and that which was
formerly left to the discretion of every Bishop in his own Dyoces to dispense
with summum Ius (the extremity of the Law;) is now transferred wholly to the
power and authority of the Pope, nor that only for some few years
imprisonment in this life, but for thousands of years in Purgatory after
death: insomuch, that whosoever in the state of Grace shall say seven prayers
before the Crucifix, Horae beatae Maria Virg. secundum vsum sacru^.
and seven Pater-Nosters, and seven Aue-Maries shall attain six and fifty
thousand years of pardon, fourteen thousand granted by Saint Gregory,
(fourteen thousand by Nicholas the First,) and eight and twenty thousand by
Sixtus the Fourth.

These and the like Indulgences were trained up in the School of Demetrius,
which brought no small benefit to the Pope and Clergy, and therefore their
own Schoolmen, Greg. de Valent. cap. 2.
Gregory de Valentia terms them but a kind of godly deceit, wherewith the
Church does draw men unto some kind of actions of devotion, even as a Father
when he moves a little child to run, promises him an apple, which
notwithstanding he does not give him. But I will proceed to the publication of
Witnesses, whereby it shall appear by the evidence of their own Learned men,
that this point of faith has no more Antiquity, and consent of Fathers and
Schoolmen in the Roman Church, then the Articles before confessed. De
Jndulgentijs pauca dici possunt per certitudinem quia nec scriptura express de
ijs loquitur -- sancti etiam Ambrosius Hilarious, etc. minime loquutur de
Indulgentijs. Durand 49. Sentent. did. 20. q. 3. Indulgentiae authoritate
Scripturae no innoture nobis sed authoritate Ecclesiae Romanae and Romanorum
Pontificum, quae mayor est authoritas. Prier contr. Luth. pro Indulg. Difficile
est modum Jndulgentiarum fundare authentice in Scriptura Sacra, etc. Mayor 4.
d. 2. q 3.


Durand] Little can be said of any certainty, or as undoubtedly true of
Indulgences and pardons, seeing the Scriptures speak not expressly of them,
neither the Fathers, as Augustine, Hillarie, Ambrose, Hierome, etc.

Siluester Prierias] Pardons are not known to us by the authority of the
Scriptures but by the authority of the Church of Rome, and the Popes, which is
greater then the authority of the Scriptures.

Maior] It is hard to ground the manner of Indulgences authentically in
Scriptures, in token of which the three first Doctors of the Church have spoken
but little.

Roffensis Bishop of Rochester] It is not sufficiently manifest from whom
Indulg^nces had their Original, Roffens.] Quamdiis nulla fuerat de Purgatorio
cura, nemo quaesiu^ Indulgentias nam ex illo pendet omnit Indulgentiarum aesti
matio -- caeperunt igitur Indulgentiae postquam ad Purgatorij cruciatus
aliqua^do trepidatum erat. Roffens. art. 18. contra Lutherum.
-- Of Purgatory there is very little or no mention amongst the ancient
Fathers, but after Purgatory began to terrify the world and after a while men
had trembled at the torments thereof, Indulgences began to be in request, as
long as Purgatory was not cared for, there was no man sought for Pardons, for
the whole price of pardons hangs on Purgatory, take away Purgatory, and what
shall we need of Pardons?

-- harum vsus in Ecclesia sero receptus Alph. contr. here is. 8. verbo
Jndulgentia.
Alphonsus a Castro] There is nothing in Scripture less opened, or whereof the
Ancient Fathers have less written then of Indulgences, and it seems the use
of them came but lately into the Church.

Antoninus] There is not any express testimony for proof of Indulgences, De
Indulgentijs n^l express habemus in sacra Scriptura nec etiam, etc. Anton.
part. 1. ut. 10 cap. 3. in principio. De ortu Jndulgentiaru^ si certitudo
habere possit veritatis indagandae open ferret, verum quia null^e Scripturae
Sacra, nulla priscorum Doctorum, Graecorum aut Latinoru^ authoritas Scripta
haec ad nostram de duxit noti^iam. Caiet. opus. 15. c. 1. Neque mirum videri
debet si authors anti quiores non multos habemur qui harum rerum mentione^
s^ciant quonia^, etc. Bellar. de Indulg lib. 2. cap. 17.
either in Scriptures or the writings of the Ancient Fathers, but only out of
Modern Authors.

C. Caietan] If there could be a certainty found touching the beginning of
Indulgences, it would much avail in searching of the truth, but because there
can be no certainty found touching the beginning of them, there is no
authority of Scripture, or Ancient Fathers, Greek or Latin, that brings
them to our knowledge.

Bellarmine] It is not to be wondered, if we have not many Ancient Authors
which makes mention of Indulgences, for many things are contained in the Church
only by use and custom without writing.

This learned Cardinal confesses, that many ancient authorities are not to be
expected for proof of this doctrine, and this seems to me a strange thing,
that an Article of faith should want Antiquity and Universality of Fathers,
(which as they pretend, belongs to al points of faith,) it is strange that a
General Council should declare them to be derived from Christ, and yet they
should want ancient Fathers to witness Christ's doctrine: I rather believe
according to the Article of the Creed, that the use thereof is most wholesome
for the people; (for albeit they are granted only to draw money from them,)
yet withal, the Popes Ministers had this benefit by them, they sometimes set
them to sale for a small price or game at Tables in a Tavern, Guicciard. lib.
13. anno 1520.
to redeem souls out of Purgatory, as it is witnessed by their own Authors.

The Learned Doctors of of the Trent-Councell were not ignorant of this
practice, and of much more exercised by Leo the Tenth, and others of his
Predecessors, but they were so far from belief, that this point of faith
should be derived from Christ and his Apostles, that Ecchius, and Thecel, and
Prierius, for want of Scriptures and Fathers, laid their groundworke on the
Popes authority and consent of Schoolmen, Histor. of Trent. lib. 1. p. 6.
concluding that the Pope not being able to err in matters of faith, and
having approved the doctrine of the Schoolmen, and himself publishing the
Indulgences to all the faithful, it was necessary to believe them as an
Article of faith.

I will not say it was a strange presumption for a Council to determine an
uncertain doctrine for a point of faith, upon the Popes infallibility and
opinion of Schoolmen, but I will say, it is a senseless and weak faith that
gives assent to that doctrine, which wants authority of Scriptures and consent
of Fathers: It was an ingenuous confession of their own Cunerus: Dolendum
simul and mirandu^, etc. It is to be lamented and admired how some Catholics
do write of Indulgences, so timorously, so coldly, so diversely, Chamier. de
satisfacti. lib. 24. cap 2.
so doubtfully, as if their reasons were so far fetched, or so uncertain,
that without great difficulty they could not prove them: and surely if
Cardinal Bellarmine, or Cardinal Caietan and the rest could have found better
proofs for this point of faith, they would never have confessed, that neither
Scriptures nor Fathers do bring them to our knowledge, especially since no
Article of faith can be created without the authority of scriptures; and
therefore Saint Austins confession shall be my conclusion for their Article of
faith. If we or an Angel from heaven preach unto you any thing concerning
faith and life, besides that you have received in the Legal and Evangelical
Scriptures, let him be accursed.

You have heard the confessions of our best learned Adversaries witnessing with
us, that the principal points of their Faith and doctrine now taught and
professed in the Church of Rome, were not known to former ages, whereby we may
easily discern, how the Church of Rome does obtrude strange Articles of
belief upon her Proselites, which have no foundations in the Scriptures, and
want the universality and consent of Fathers: and although the Priests and
Jesuits are bound by an oath to maintain the Papacy, and thereupon they
generaly protest that all the Fathers are on their side, and the ignorant people
out of an affected ignorance and blind obedience easily condescend to that
belief; yet I say it cannot be denied that the Popes sworn servants, our
sworn enemies, there best witnesses and our worst accusers; have testified
these things both against themselves and in behalf of our doctrine, and
howsoever they may be excused, yet sure I am, they are divided amongst
themselves, and consequently want another special mark of their Church which
is unity in points of Faith.

To take a short reuiew of our Adversaries confessions, touching the doctrine
of Merits, they have confessed, that our Justification is by faith and Christ
Jesus only; they have confessed that there is no salvation nor assurance in
our own merits, but in the mercy and merits of our alone Savior: and in this
confession, they intimate the novelty and uncertainty of their own
doctrine, and in this likewise they acknowledge the antiquity and visibility of
our Church long before Luthers days.

Touching Transubsta^tiatio^, they have confessed there is no express place of
scripture to prove the word, nor the meaning of the word; they have confessed
the conversion of the bread into Christ's body, Ante Laterane^se Concilium non
fuit dogma fides. Scotus. in 4. sentent. c. 11. ^3.
was not generally received by the Fathers; they have confessed before the
Council of Lateran, it was not reeeiued for an Article of belief: In these
confessions they plainly intimate the novelty and uncertainty of their own
doctrine, and by these likewise they acknowledge the antiquity and Visibility
of our Church long before Luthers days.

Touching Private Mass, they confessed it was not used in the Ancient Church,
for (say they) the communion of Priests and people together was practiced by
the Fathers: In this confession, they intimate the Novelty of their Religion,
and in this, they acknowledge the antiquity and Visibility of our Church long
before Luthers days.

Touching the Seven Sacraments, they confess the definite and certain number
of Seven was unknown to Scriptures and Fathers, they confess that some of
those Sacraments were not instituted by Christ, they confess that all of them
are not true and proper Sacraments of the new Law, (all which on the contrary
are commanded by their Church to be believed upon a Curse) and in these
confessions they argue the Novelty and uncertainty of their doctrine, and in
this they acknowledge the antiquity and Visibilitie of our Church long before
Luthers days.

Touching the Communion in one kind, they confessed that it was not practiced
by the Apostles nor the ancient Church, for (say they) Christ did institute in
both kinds, and the Primitive Fathers did continue it in both kinds: In this
confession they intimate the novelty and uncertainty of their own doctrine,
in this, they acknowledge the antiquity and visibilitie of our Church long
before Luthers days.

Touching prayer in an unknown tongue, they confessed it was not used in the
Primitive and ancient Church, but, say they, the prayer and service was usually
taught in the vulgar and known tongue. In this confession they intimate the
novelty and uncertainty of their own doctrine, and in this acknowledgement
they witness the antiquity and visibilitie of our Church long before Luthers
days.

Touching Adoration of Images, they confessed that there is no express place
of Scripture that commands their worship; they confessed there is no example
amongst the Fathers for their adoration but rather against them, and in these
confessions, they intimate the novelty and uncertainty of their own doctrine
and practice, and in our worshipping of God in spirit and truth, they
acknowledge the antiquity of our Religion, and the visibilitie of our Church
long before Luthers days.

Lastly, touching Indulgences and Pardons, they confessed that their
Indulgences now used, have no authority from Scriptures or Fathers, and in
this confession they intimate the novelty and uncertainty of their own
doctrine, and consequently the Indulgences which we use, for no other end then
the mitigation and relaxation of punishment, to have had antiquity and
visibilitie in the Church long before Luthers days.

If these witnesses had been ignorant or excommunicate persons, in their own
Church, or had they witnessed the truth, in ceremonies and things doubtful,
there might be some plea why their testimonies should not be admitted, but
when the points in question, are Articles of their own Creed, when they are
witnessed by Popes, by Councels, by Cardinals, by Bishops, by learned Doctors,
and Schoolmen in their own Church in our behalf, and against their own
Tenets, I see no cause why I should not demand judgment in defense of our
Church, and trial of our cause: It is the law of God and man, Ex ore tuo, I
will judge thee out of thine own mouth; and from this decree and their own
confessions upon record, I call men and Angels to witness, that they have
denied antiquity and universality to the Articles of their own Creed, and have
resolved the grand question (touching our Church before Luther) that it was in
Christ, in the Apostles, in the Fathers, in the bosom of the Ancient Church
long before Luthers days.

Sect. 10. The Testimonies of our Adversaries touching the infallible
certainty of the Protestant faith, and the uncertainty of the Romish.
OF what strength and force is truth, it appears by this, that she extorts a
full and ample testimony of her doctrine from her sworn enemies, and yet for
further proof of our cause, I will give another summons to the prime men even
of their grand Inquest, who, without partiality, will testify in our behalf,
that our Church is built upon a more stable and sure foundation then the
Papacy, and that our doctrine is more fruitful and profitable, and every way
more safe and comfortable for the belief of every Christian, and the salvation
of the believer.

Touching the certainty of faith, it is Bellarmines confession, Bellar. de
Jnstit. lib. 3. cap. 8.
None can be certain of the certainty of faith that he does receive a true
Sacrament, for as much as the Sacrament cannot be made without the intention of
the Minister, and none can see another man's intention. This confession being
laid for a positive ground of their Religion, the Church of Rome has over
thrown in one Tenet all certainty of true faith; To begin with the Sacrament
of Baptism: If the Priests intention fail (by their doctrine) the Insant is
not baptized, he is but as a Heathen out of the Church, and consequently in the
state of damnation. Look upon their Sacrament of Orders, it is the confession
of learned Bellar mine: Bellar. de Milit Eccles. ca. 10. ad secundum.
If we consider in Bishops their power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, we have
no more then a Moral certainty that they are true Bishops; and there he gives
the reason for it, Because the Sacrament of Orders depends upon the Intention
of the ordeiner. Look upon the Sacrament of Matrimony, and of this there is no
certainty, because it does depend upon the Intention of the Minister, and if
he fail in his Intention at the time of solemnization, the married people live
all their days in adultery: so that by their own confession there is no
certainty of Christianity by Baptism, no certainty of their Sacrament of
Orders, and consequently no certainty of succession in person, (which they so
much magnify in their Church:) besides if in the whole succession of Popes and
Pastors, the Intention of any one Priest did fail either in Baptism or in
Orders, all succeeding generations that ordain and consecrate both Priest and
people are become utterly void and of none effect. He that is bound upon a
curse to believe seven Sacraments, and yet is not certain of any one, must be
saved by an implicit faith, and yet it is to be feared for want of their
Priests intention, the poor ignorant soul does sometimes worship a piece of
bread, because the consecration of Christ's body depends (say they) upon the
intention of the Priest, and no man does know another man's intention.

Again touching their Invocation of Saints, they are uncertain whether the
Saints do hear their prayers: they are uncertain whether some they pray unto,
be Saints in heaven, or Devils in hell. Touching the first, Biel. in C^n.
Missae Lect. 28. Pet. Lomb. Senten lib. 4. did. 45.
It is not certain (says Biel) but it may seem probable that God reuealeth
unto Saints, all those suits which men present unto them; and says Peter
Lombard, It is not incredible that the souls of Saints hear the prayers of
the suppliants. Here is nothing but probability and uncertainty, and yet
admit it were more then probable, that they did hear our prayers, yet there is
no certainty that al such are Saints which are canonized by the Roman Church:
Accedit quod miracula quae ab Ecclesiae suscipiuntur in Canonizationibus
sanctorum, quae tamen maxim authentica sunt cum humano testimonio innitantur,
non omnino certa sunt, quonia^, etc. Caret. in epusc. de concep. Virg. Mar. ca.
1. Fidei Christianae certitudo non humano more certa esse debet, sed
infallibile omnino debet habere testimonium. Caret. ibid.
It cannot be known infallibly (says Caietan) that the miracles whereon the
Church groundeth the Canonization of Saints be true, by reason the credit
thereof depends on the reports of men, who may deceive others, and be deceived
themselves. And upon this uncertainty Saint Austin complained in his days:
That many were tormented with the devil, who were worshipped by men on earth.
Whose reason and authority was so undoubtedly true, Bellar. de sanct. Beat.
lib. 1. c. 9.
that Bellarmine had no way to avoid it but with a Fortasse etc. Peradventure
(says he) it is none of Austins: and yet if Bellarmines answer were true,
which is but a peradventure, yet, I say, he witnesses from Sulpitius that the
common people did long celebrate one for a Martyr, Idem ibidem cap. 7.
who afterward appeared and told them that he was damned: and their own
Cassander gives us the like example, Cassand. Consult. Artic. 21.
that S. Martin found a place honored in the name of a holy Martyr to be the
Sepulcher of a wicked robber.

Touching Purgatory, Tale aliquid etiam post hanc vitam incredible non est,
and vtrum ^a su quaeri potest. August. ad Laurent. c. 69
it is uncertain: It is not incredible (says Austin) that some such thing
should be after life, but whether it be so or no, it may be a question.
Touching the place the Roman Church, has defined nothing touching the
punishment; Bell lib. 2. de purg. ca. 6. c. 11. and 9.
Whether it be by material fire or some other means it is doubtful, says
Bellarmine: touching the continuance of souls there, it is not certain,
Dominicus Soto thinks that no man continues in this purgation ten years: If
this be true (says the Cardinal) no soul needs stay in purging one hour.
Again Sir Thomas Moore held for certain, that in Purgatory there was no
water, and this he proves out of the Prophet David: Thou have delivered thy
prisoners out of the place where there was no water. Roffensis Bishop of
Rochester, would prove out of the same Prophet, that in Purgatory there is
good store of water, For we have passed through fire and water, says the
Psalmist. Gregor. lib. 4. Dialog. c. 55
Lastly, Gregory who gave the first Credo to Purgatory, tells us some were
purged by fire, some by hot baths, and this he learned by visions and
revelations: and how safe it is to ground an Article of faith upon the spirits
and apparitions of dead men, I leave it to be judged. If we descend to the age
next after Gregory, Bed. Hist. Aug. lib. 5. c. 13.
Venerable Bede by a vision also established a fourth place; he tells us of an
apparition of a ghost, reporting there was an infernal place where souls
suffered no pain, where they had a fair green meadow, with a brook running
through it; Nec improbabile, etc. Neither is it improbable (says Bellarmine)
there should be such an honorable prison, Bellar. li. 2. de purg. c. 7.
Mitissimu^ Purgatorium.
which is a most mild and temperate Purgatory. This Saint Austin held as a
doubtful opinion. Saint Gregory gave credit to it from the visions of dead
men; and Bid received it from the reports of wandering ghosts: the first
conceived it doubtfully to be in fire, the second in hot baths, the third in a
part of hell, where they had meadows and rivers of waters: and from these and
the like uncertainties, we appeal from the Church of Rome in this Article of
faith, and conclude with Saint Austin: Know that when the soul is separated
from the body; August. li. de Vanit. saeculi. ca. 1.
(statim) presently it is either placed in Paradise for his good works, or
cast headlong into the bottom of hell for his sins.

Touching Pardons and Indulgences, Durand tells us, Durand. in 4. did. 2. quae.
3.
Little can be said of any certainty, or as vndoubtfully true, seeing neither
the Scriptures nor Fathers speak expressly of them. Gers. de Indulg. consid. 8
And Gerson says, Whether the power of the keys extend only to such as are
on earth, or to them also that are in Purgatory, the opinions of men are
contrary and uncertain.

Touching the adoration of Images, they are uncertain what worship to give
them: Nicen. Synod. 2. Act. 7. Epist. Tharas. and totius Synod. ad Constant.
and Jraeneum.
Tharrasius in the second Council of Nice teaches, that the Images are to be
adored that is kissed and loved, for (say they) that which a man loves, that
he adoreth, and that which he adoreth, that he earnestly loves. Here they
pretended nothing but a civil kind of embracing, or kissing, without any
corporal submission to Images; about four hundred years after, Thomas
Aquinas and other Schoolmen taught: Because Christ himself is adored with
divine honor, it is consequent that his Image is to be adored with divine
honor. This learned founder had many Proselites, as namely, Bonauenture,
Caieta^, Swarez, Vasques, Iacobus de Graphijs, and diverse others who taught the
same doctrine, and it seems the Images themselves were sensible of so
beneficial a patton. For ( Antoninus tells us) whilst Thomas was praying
devoutly before a Crucifix, he was lifted up a cubit above the ground, and a
voice proceeded from the crucifix, saying, A^ton. Sum. Hist. tit. 23. (7.11.)
O Thomas thou have written worthily concerning me. If we descend to the
Council of Trent, they tell us, due honor and veneration must be given, but
what honor that is, which of due belongs unto them, is not expressed, neither
is it understood of the people. Bellarmine tells them negatiuely, that they are
not to be worshipped (as in the days of Thomas) with divine honor, neither is
it safe to teach so in the hearing of the people: Bellar. de Jmagin. lib. c. 11.
for (says he) those that defend Images to be adored with divine honor, are
driven to use such subtle distinctions, which they themselves can scarcely
understand, much less the ignorant. Thus first they began with ambiguous
terms to teach men to embrace Images (as two friends salute each other) then
they taught the Latria, Nic. Synod. vt supra.
the divine honor to be given in plain deeds: and lastly they say, That
worship must be given improperly to the image which is properly due to Christ.
This uncertainty of doctrine has bred another dangerous consequence, for by
reason idolatry is incident to this doubtful Tenet, Gregory de Valentia
would maintain that there is a kind of idolatry lawful, Lib. 2. de Idolat.
cap. 7.
Otherwise (says he) Pet. 1.4.3.
Saint Peter would not have charged Christians to abstain from unlawful
idolatry, except some had been lawful. By which reason S. Paul likewise did
afford proof for theft and adultery, and the like, Ephesians. 5.11.
for he bids us have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness:
therefore we may as well conclude, some works of darkness are fruitful.

Concerning the two Sacraments of Baptism, Bell. de Sacr. in genesis l. 2. c. 9
and the Eucharist, It is most evident (says Bellarmine) but concerning the
rest of the Sacraments it is not so certain. And says Canus, Can. lib. 8. c.
^.
The Divines speak so uncertainly of the matter and form of matrimony, that
they do not resolve whether it gives grace or not. Lastly, concerning the
undoubted truth in the Church of God: The Scriptures are written (says the
Apostle) that we might have the certainty whereof we are instructed: Grauiter
peccarent in rebus ad salutem animae pertine^tibus, etc. eo sol^ quod certis
incerta preponerent. August. de Bapt. cont. Donat. c. 3.
but it is uncertain whether Traditions and unwritten verities delivered from
hand to hand, having no foundation in the Scriptures, do not vary from their
first institution.

Sect. 11. The testimonies of our Adversaries touching the greater safety,
comfort, and benefit of the soul in the Protestant faith, then in the Romish.
FRom the certain way I will proceed to the safer way, wherein it shall
appear that as our doctrine is more Catholic, more stable and certain; so
likewise it is more profitable, more safe and fruitful (or to use their own
phrase) of greater merit, even by the testimonies of their best learned amongst
themselves. Look upon the all-sufficiencie of the Scriptures: All those things
are written by the Apostles (says Bellarmine) which are necessary for all
men, Bell. de verbo Dei no^ scripto. l. 4 c. 11.
and which the Apostles preached generally unto all. And although this
Cardinal will allow the word of God to be but a partial not a total rule,
yet, De verbo Dei lib. 1. cap. 2.
says he, Regula credendi certissima tutissimaque est, The Scripture is a most
certain and most safe rule of believing. So that it is a safer way to rely
wholly upon the word of God that cannot err, then upon the Pope or Church
which is the authority of man and may err; It is a safer way to adore Christ
Jesus sitting at the right hand of the Father, then to adore the sacramental
bread which depends upon the intention of the Priest, and may fail: It is a
safer way, and we live more in safety (says Austin) if we give all unto God,
rather then if we commit our selves partly to ourselves, and partly unto God:
we will but it is God that works in us to work according to his good
pleasure, this is behoofefull for us both to believe and to speak, this is a
godly, this is a true doctrine, that our confession may be humble and lowly,
and that God may have the whole.

Look upon the Communion in both kinds, The Communion in both kinds.
and the Deane of Louaine will tell us: Cassand. sub vtraque specie.
It were better the Communion were administered in both kinds, in respect of the
perfection thereof, for it were more agreeable to Christ's institution, and it
best agrees with the corporal feeding which is both in bread and drink. And
says Vasques, Probabilior sententia se^per mihi visa est eorum qui dicunt
maiorem frugem gratiae ex vtraque, etc. Chamier. de Euchar. l. 9. ca. 10. Cass.
ab vtraque specie.
Their opinion seems to us more probable, who say that greater fruits of
grace are reaped by the Communion in both kinds then in one. And says
Cassander, Although the Communion in both kinds be not simply necessary nor
contrary to Christ's precept, yet it is much to be preferred before the
Communion in one kind. And their own Schooleman Alexander ^b Hales
professes, Though the order of receiving in one kind be sufficient, Illa
tamen quae est sub duabus est maioru meriti. Alexand. Hal. in 4. Sentent. q. 53
membr. 1.
yet the other of both kinds is: of greater merit, of greater fullness and
power.

Private Mass.
Look upon private Mass and it will appear by a general confession, that the
Communion of Priests and people together, -- quod huius sanctissimi sacrificij
vberior fructus proveniret. etc.
is more safe and profitable then private Mass: It is the confession of their
great and general Council of Trent: Council. Trid. Cap. 6. Can. 8.
Optaret quidem, etc. The Council could wish the people would communicate
together with the Priest, because it would be more fruitful and more
profitable: the like confession is made by Mr. Harding: Jewel. Artic. 1. in
Private Mass.
I deny not (says he) but that it is more commendable and more godly on the
Churches part, Bellar.] Quia Missae celebratio no solum ad sacrificium Deo
offerendu^ sed etiam ad populum nutriendum spirituali populo ordinatur,
propterea ex hac part negari non potest quin sit magi^ perfecta and legitima
M^s^a vbi communi^^stes adsun^ quam vbi desunt.
if many well disposed and examined would be partakers of the blessed Sacrament
with the Priest: and lastly, Bellarmine himself is forced to confess: Because
the celebration of the Mass is ordained not only to offer Sacrifice to God,
but also the spiritual food to the people, therefore it cannot be denied,
Bellar. de Missa. lib. 2. c. 10.
that it is a more perfect and lawful Mass, where the Communicants are
present, then wherein the Private Mass, the Priest alone receives.

Priests Marriage.
Look upon the Marriage of our Ministers, and it will appear by their own
confessions that it is the safer way to live chastely in matrimony, then by a
single life to hazard their souls by Incontinencie. In gestis Council. Basil.
lib. 2.

Credo pro bo no and salute animarum statutum vt non volentes continere possint
contrahere quia experientia docente contrarios prorsus effectus sequitur.
Panor. de Cleric. Coning. cap. cum Olim.


It was the opinion of Aeneas Syluius, afterward Pope Pius: Perhaps it were
not the worst that many Priests were married, for by that means, many might be
saved in married Priesthood, which now in barren Priesthood are damned: and
Panormitan a great Canonist was sensible of the dangers that accompanied a
single life, and thereupon resolves: It were good and behoofefull for the souls
of many, if Priests might marry, because we find by experience, the Law of
single life has brought forth contrary effects: Cass. de Celib. Sacerd. Art.
23.
and Cassander who well understood the life and conversation of Priests
proclaims it to his Church: If ever certes in these our days the change of
the Law (of single life) may be thought necessary, that those which cannot
attain to the perfect degree of chastity, may be permitted to live in the
second degree of chaste marriage.

Look upon our Prayer in a known tongue, Prayer in a known tongue Aquinas]
Constat quod plus lucraiur qui orat and intelligit quod dicit. nam ille qui
intelligit, reficitur and quantum ad intellectum and quantum ad effectum sed
men's ei^us qui non intelligit est sine fructu refectionis.

Si populus intelligit oratione^ sacerdotis melius redu itur in Deu^, and
deuotius respondet Amen. Lyr. in 1. Cor. 14.


and Aquinas their learned Schooleman tells us, It is manifest that he receives
more benefit which prays and understands what he says, for the mind of
him that understands not, is without fruit and refection; and Lyra was of the
same opinion, and withal gives a further reason: If the people understand the
prayer of the Priest, they are better brought to the knowledge of God, and they
answer Amen with greater devotion: and Cardinal Caietan, Ex Pauli doctrina
habetur quod melius est ad Ecclesie edificationem, orationes publicas quae
audiente populo dicuntur, dici lingua communi clerici and populo qua^ dici
Latin. Caiet Com in cap. 14.1. ad Cor. v. 17.
who had often performed the public service in an unknown tongue in the
Church, yet contrary to his practice professes: It is better by Saint Paul's
doctrine for the edifying of the Church, that public prayers were made in a
vulgar tongue, to be understood indifferently by Priests and people, then in
Latin; and Gabriel Biel was so far from approving the vocal prayer in an
unknown tongue, Oportet quod vocalis oration immotescat populo etc. Jn Can.
Miss. lect. 62.
that on the contrary he gives seven special reasons why it should be
understood by the people: First, because it stirs up the mind to inward
devotion: Secondly, it inlightneth the mind: Thirdly, it causes a better
remembrance of things spoken in the time of prayer: Fourthly, it keeps the
thoughts from wandering: Fifthly, It causes a more full performance of our
duty both in body and soul: Sixthly, there is a better redundance from the
soul to the body, by a vehement affection and devotion: Seventhly, it is
better for the instruction of our brethren: and which is obseruable, the
Rhemists themselves in their Annotations upon Saint Paul's Epistle touching
prayer in an unknown tongue make this confession: When a man prays in a
strange tongue which himself understands not, Rhem. Testa^. in Annot. 1.
Cor. 14.
it is not so fruitful for instruction to him as if he knew particularly what
he prayed.

Look upon their worship of Images, Image Worship.
and their own Erasmus tells us; Tulius, It is more safe to remove Images out
of Churches then to pray to them, Vt facilius est ita tutius quoque omnes
Imagines e Templis summouere, etc. Erasm. in Catechesi.
that the mind may be altogether free from superstition, for no man can be
free from show of superstition, that is prostrate before an Image, and does
look on it Intentionally, and does speak unto it, and kiss it; nay, although
he do but (only) pray before an Image: and says Cassander, It were better
in these times to inuit men to worship the true Image of God in releeuing the
poor, Cass. Consult. de Imaginibu^.
then to worship the work of men's hands: and withal concludes; Their opinion
is more sound, which say, that an Image neither as it is considered in it self
as wood and stone, neither as it is considered in the nature of a sign or
representation is to be adored.

Lastly, Merits.
look upon their doctrine of Merits: Dangerous (says Bernard) is the
habitation of those that trust in their own merits: In Psalm. qui habitat. Vbi
tuta firmaque infirmis securitas and requi^^ nisi in vulneribus saluatoru?
tanto illi^ securior habito quanto ille poten^^^ est ad saluandu^ Bernard. in
Canti. Cantic. Sermon. 61.
Again, he proclaims our doctrine for the safest way in the sole confidence
of Christ's merits: Vbi tuta, what safe rest or security can the weak soul
find, but in the wounds of our Savior? as he is mighty to save, so dwell I
there with more safety; and Friar Walden accords with the Protestants in the
same belief: Reputo igitur saniore^ Theologu^, fideliore^ Catholicu^ and
Scripturis sacris magis co^cordem, qui tale meritum simpliciter abnegat etc.
Wald. Tom. 3. de sacramental, tit. 1. C. 7.
I repute him (says he) the sounder Divine and more consonant to the holy
Scriptures, who does simply deny such merit, and (with the qualification of
the Apostle,) confesses, that simply no man meriteth the kingdom of heaven
but by the grace of God or will of the giver, as all the former Saints, until
the late Schoolmen, and the universal Church has written; and for a
Conclusion of this point, Cardinal Bellarmine who does labor and sweat by
subtlety of wit, to maintain merits of condignity and congruity, at last
confidently resolves: For fear of vain glory, Propter incertuudinem propriae
iustitiae and periculum inanis gloriae iutissimum est etc. Bellar. de Iustif.
lib 5. c. 7.
and by reason of the uncertainty of our works, Tutissimum, etc. It is the
safest way to place all our trust in the only merits and favor of God: and
from these several confessions, I may infer that the Protestant faith is
more certain, more safe and sure, more comfortable, and every way more
profitable then the Romish doctrine, by the testimony of our Adversaries
themselves; for we protest against free will, against the Communion in one
kind, against Private Mass, against Prayer in an unknown tongue, against the
worship of Images, against the doctrine of Merits, all which are received for
principal Articles in the Church of Rome, and yet are acknowledged by the
Romanists to want that assurance, that comfort, that benefit, that safety for
the souls of the faithful, which the Reformed Churches teach and profess in
a different doctrine at this day.

Sect. 12. Our Adversaries convicted by the evident Testimonies of the Ancient
Fathers, either ridiculously elude them, or plainly reject them.
IT is no wonder that many Romanists are Testes veritatis, Witnesses of Gods
truth in the bosom of a corrupt Church, but it may seem strange that such men
should establish the antiquity of our doctrine by their own confessions, and
decline the certainty and safety of their own, and that it may yet further
appear, these are not forced or feyned allegations, wrested to an other sense
then their own men delivered them; I will give you the express words and
authorities of the Ancient Fathers themselves, whereby you shall observe, that
the Church of Rome does seek to elude all records and real proofs in Fathers
and other learned Authors, touching the chief points in Controversy betwixt
us.

Chrysostom. in Homil. 49. opus inpers. in Math. Credibile est authorem fuisse
Catholicu^ and opus ipsum doctum, sed non videtur esse Chrysostomi.] Bellar. de
script. Eccles. ad au. 398.
Touching the all-sufficiencie of the Scriptures, Saint Chrysostom says: The
Church is known, tantummodo only by the Scriptures: What say the Romanists to
this doctrine? Bellarmine answers: It is probable the Author was a Catholic,
but it seems to be none of Chrisostomes.

Touching the adoration of Saints, Saint Austin says: Many are tormented with
the devil who are worshipped by men on earth: what say the Romanists to this
doctrine? Bellarmine answers: Respondeo lo cum hunc fortasse non esse
Augustini. Idem de sanct. Beat lib. 1. cap. 9.
This place (fortasse) peradventure is none of Austins.

Touching the Popes Supremacy, Saint Austin says, August. de verb. Domini
sermon. 13.
Thou art Peter, and upon the Rock which thou have confessed, upon this Rock
which thou have known (saying Thou art Christ the Son of the living God)
will I build my Church: what says the Romanists to this doctrine? Stapl.
princip. doctr. lib. 6. c. 3. and Bell. lib. 1. de Pontif. c. 10.
Stapleton answers: It was lapsus humanus a humane error caused by the
diversity of the Greek and Latin tongue, which either he was ignorant of or
marked not.

Touching the Communion in both kinds; (...), etc. In latinis codicibus non
habetur vnus calix omnibus distributus. de Euch. lib. 4. cap. 26.
Ignatius says, One cup is distributed to all: what says Bellarmine to this
doctrine? In the Latin books it is not found, that one cup is given to all,
but for all.

Ego vt libere pronunciem sententiam meam, suspicor hunc locum fuisse ab
haereticis deprauatam. Senens. in Biblio. Sancta lib. 6. annot. 66.
Touching the Sacrament of Christ's body; Origin says, The body of Christ is
typical and Symbolicall: what says Senensis to this doctrine? To speak my
mind freely, I suspect this place to be corrupted.

Touching Transubstantiation, Theodoretus de alijs quibusdam erroribus in
Concilio Ephesino notatus fuit etiamsi postea resipuit. Gregor. de Valentia in
lib. de Transub. c. 7. Sect. 11.
Theodoret says, the substance of bread and wine cease not in the Sacrament;
what answer the Romanists to this doctrine? Gregory de Valentia says,
Theodoret did err in the Council of Ephesus, although he afterward repented
it.

Touching our Justification by faith only: Vna (sola) virtus iustificat Fides,
quae est virtutum fastidium. Chrysostom. sermon. in Psalm. 14. Tom. 1. Hanc Homiliam
neque apud Graecos puto haeberi neque in ea Chrysostomu^ agnosco. Notatio in B.
Chrysostom. ad fine^ Tom. 5.
Chrysostom says: Faith alone does justify, etc. what says, Nobilius
Flaminius to this doctrine? I do not think this Homily is received in
Greek, neither do I acknowledge it to be Chrysostomes.

Touching Images in Churches, Epiphanius says, he found a veil at the
entrance of the Church representing the Image of Christ or some Saint, Verba
illa non sunt Epiphanij sed supposititia. Sa^der. de Imag. lib. 2.] Sunt potius
alicuius Iconoclastarum figmentum quam epiphanij germanu^ scriptum. Baron.
annal. ad anno. 392. number. 59.
and commanded it to be taken down and buried: what says Sanders to this
doctrine? they are not the words of Epiphanius, but some counterfeit: they are
the words (says Baronius) of some Image breaker.

Touching Traditions and unwritten verities: Saint Cyprian says, From whence
is this tradition? for the Lord commanded us to do those things which are
written? what says Bellarmine to this doctrine? Respondeo Cyprianam haec
scripsisse cum errorem suam tueri vellet. Bell. de verbo Dei lib. 4. c. 11.
Saint Cyprian thought to defend his own error, and therefore it is no
marvel if he erred in so reasoning.

Chry. Homil. 3. in Epist. ad Ephesians.] Dico Chrysostomu^ vt quaedam alia per
excessu^ ita esse locutum cum solum hortari cuperet homines ad frequenter and
digne communicandum.] Bellar. lib. 2. de Missa. c. 10.
Touching Private Mass, Chrysostom says, It is better not to be present at
the Sacrifice, then to be present and not communicate (with the priest:) what
says Bellarmine to this doctrine? Chrysostom spoke this as at other times by
exceeding the truth, when he would incite men frequently and worthily to
communicate. Nihil aliud diconisimore Poetico lusisse Prudentium. Bellar. lib.
2. de Purgat. c. 16.


Again, if we cite Prudentius, Bellarmine answers, I say no more of him but
that he played the Poet.

If we object Tertullian, Non magni facienda est eius authoritas cum
contradicit alijs Patribus, cum constat eum hominem Ecclesiae non fuisse.
Bellar. lib. 3. de Euchar. c. 6.

Origine^ plenum fuisse erroribus quos ecclesia semper detestata est. Ribera in
Malach. in proc^m. Hieronymus no est Regula Fidei.] Canus in Theolog. locis
lib. 2. -- 11.

Iustini Irenai Epiphanij atque Oecumenij sententiam non vid^o quo pacto ab
errore possimus defendere. Bellar. lib. 1. de sanct. cap. 6. Locum ab
authoritate esse infirmum and vt prudens quidem pastor dixit. Pauperis est,
etc. and in iudicio plurimorum non acquiesces.] Salmer. Romans 5. disput. 51.


Bellarmine answers: His authority is of no great account, when he contradicts
other Fathers, and when it appears he was no man of the Church.

If we produce Origin; Ribera the Jesuit says: He was full of errors, which
the Church always detested.

If we cite Hierome: Canus makes answer: Hierom is no rule of faith.

If we cite Justin, Irenaeus, Epiphanius, and Oecumenius: Bellarmine answers: I
see not how we can defend these men from error.

Lastly, if we produce the uniform, consent of Fathers against the immaculate
conception of the blessed Virgin: Salmeron the Jesuit makes answer, weak is
the place which is drawn from authority, for Pauperis est numerare pecus: It
is the sign of a poor man to number his cattle.

Thus in behalf of the Protestant doctrine, you have heard the proof of the
Romish witnesses in the chife points, made good by the testimo^ies of the
Fathers themselves, you have heard likewise (notwithstanding their great vaunt
of the Fathers) how lightly they regard them or reject them, when they speak
not Placentia, agreeable to their Church and doctrine; and that no man may
doubt, many in the bosoms of their own Church have spoken freely and truly,
in many particular points of doctrine, both with us, and against their own
Tenets, behold, it is so truly felt, and commonly understood, that the Church
has complained to the Inquisitors, and the Inquisitors have sent out Melius
Inquirendum a new writ of inquiry after such delinquents, and have censured
them with a Deleatur, in those passages that make either for our doctrine, or
against their own.

Sect. 13. Our adversaries convinced of a bad cause and an evil conscience, by
razing of our Records, and clipping their own Authors tongues.
In Bibli. Roberti Stephani c. 7. Deuteron.
IN the Margent of the Bible, it is declared: God forbids graven Images to be
made: what say the Inquisitors to this? Ind. Exp. Quiroga. fol. 8.
Delcatur, let that passage be stricken out.

The Gloss upon Gratian says: Test Ioh. Pappo. in Jndic. Belgic. p. 333.
The Priest cannot say significatiuely of the bread, (This is my body) without
telling of a lie: what say the Inquisitors to this doctrine? Deleatur, let that
old leaven be cast out.

Cassander wrote a whole tract for the Communion in both kinds: Jnd. Exp.
Belgic. page 38.
what say the Inquisitors to this? Deleatur, let the whole Tract be blotted out.

C. Caietan says, Ex Catholicis solus Caietanus in Commentario huius Articuli
qui iussu Pij Quinti in Romana Editione expunctus est, docuit, seclusa
Ecclesi^e authoritate, Verba illa Hoc est corpus meum ad veritatem hanc
confirmanda^ non sufficere] Suarez. Tom. 3. disp. 46.. Tertio.
the words This is my body, do not sufficiently prove Transubstantiation:
what says Paul the fifth to this? Deleatur, let that passage be no more printed
amongst Caietans works.

Vdalricus Bishop of Augusta writes a whole Epistle touching the lawfulness of
Priests marriage: what say the Romanists to this? Deleatur, let that whole
Epistle be blotted out.

Bertram wrote a book of the body and blood of Christ opposite to the doctrine
of Transubstantiation: what say the Inquisitors to this? Jud. Gaspar. Quir^ga
fol. 149. Jdem Ibide^.
Totus liber penitus auferatur, away with that whole book.

Anselme or the author of the book for baptizing and visiting the sick,
says: Do thou believe that our Lord Jesus Christ died for our salvation,
and that there is no means to be saved by our own merits? Quiroga p. 149.
Sandoual. and Roxas Anno 1612.
what say the Inquisitors to this? Deleatur, let it not be spoken at the
visitation of the sick.

Cassan. in Hymnis Eccl. p. 179. vt Cypr.] Miserecordiam adeptus sum (i. e.)
Miserecordiam merui. Annotatio illa de vocabulo Merendi tota Deleatur. Ind.
Expurg. Belg. p. 25.
The word Merit, says Cassander amongst the Ancients, is almost the same as to
obtain: what say the Inquisitors to this doctrine? Deleatur, let that
observation of the word Merit be clean stricken out.

Polydore Virgil says, almost all the Ancient Fathers condemned Images for
fear of Idolatry: what say the Romanists to this doctrine? Deleatur, from the
beginning of that Chapter to the leaf, Index librorum Prohibitorum, page 725.
Lex per praesentes, etc. let it be blotted out.

Langus says, the substance of bread and wine remain after Consecration, what
say the Inquisitors to this doctrine? Deleatur, Ind. Expurg. Belg. fol. 70.
from the page 179. to the page 199. let all be blotted out.

Ferus says, Ridiculum est, It is ridiculous that some will have Cephas for
the head; In their latter edition printed at Rome 1577. they have left out the
words: Ridiculum est: and say, some will have Cephas for the Head.

Non oportet Christianos Ecclesia Dei derelicta abire atque Angelos nominare.
Council. Laodic. can. 35.] Binius.

Non oportet Christianos derelicta Ecclesia Dei abire ad Angulos. Merlin. fol.
68. edit. 1530. Crabbe fol. 226 edit. Anno 1538


Lastly, the ancient Council of Laodicea decreed, Anno 368. We ought not to
leave the Church of God and invoke Angels: In the same Council published by
Merlin and Crabbe; by transmutation of a letter we are taught to say: We ought
not to leave the Church of God, and have recourse to Angles or corners; and
thus are Angeli become Anguli, Angels are become Angles or blind corners,
least so fair an evidence of an ancient Council should be produced against
Invocation of Angels: But what these men have gained by purging and razing of
true Evidences; their late Divinity Reader at Louaine, will give his fellow
Romanists a good account: After I was appointed (says he) to put in execution
the tyrannical decree of the Inquisitors, Sed o incredibilis in me Dei opt
max. beneficentia, post qua^ expurgatorij Indicis, quem tyrannisante Albano,
Benedictus Arias Montanu^in pioru^ vircrum lucubrationes iniurias conceperat,
exequutor inter primos factus sexcentas co^tra falsa doctrinae Pontificiae
capita etc. Henricus Boxhornius. li. 3. de Euch. li. 3 Riuet. c. 12. page 89.
and had noted six hundred several passages to be spunged and blotted out,
which animaduersions of mine I wished I could have washed away with my tears
and blood; my heart at length being smitten, and mine eyes opened by the mercy
of my God, I plainly perceived abomination in the Papacy, an Idol in the
Temple, Tyranny in the commonwealth, poison and infection in Religion. And
thus this learned professor, sometimes a votarie to the Church of Rome, from
the observation of those purging Indices, makes protestation against their
practices, and withal became a true convert to the Protestant faith.

Sect. 14. Our Adversaries convicted of their defense of a desperate cause, by
their blasphemous exception against the Scripture it self.
When therefore we see with the Louanian Doctor, poison in their Religion, and
tirannie in their commonwealth, when we apparently discern the Abomination of
desolation stand in the holy place, Mat. 24.
let us fly (says Chrysostom) to the mountains of the Scriptures. But can
any man be persuaded, that these men, after their purging and condemning all
sorts of writers, will at last come to the trial of the Scriptures? Are we not
all eye witnesses that Christ and his Apostles are called in question at the
Popes Assizes, and there arraigned and condemned of obscurity and
insufficiency in their Gospel? Is not the sacred Bible ranked inter libros
prohibitos? Causabons answer to the Ep. of C. Peron. pa. 38.
has it not the first place in the Catalogue of books prohibited? does not
their own Agrippa proclaim it to the shame of his own religion, that the
Inquisitors deal most cruelly with the Protestants concerning their trial by
the Scriptures? Agrippa de Vanit. Scien. c. ^6.
For (says he) If the party examined shall offer to prove his opinion by
Scriptures, then with swelling and angry countenance, they tell him that he is
not now to deal with scholars in their Schools, but with Judges before their
Tribunal, and therefore he must answer directly, whether he will stand to
the decrees of the Roman Church or not: If he refuse, then they conclude,
saying, they are not to dispute with him by arguments and Scriptures, but with
fire and faggot. Now can any man imagine, why these men should be so angry
with Christ and his Apostles? can they say the word of God is mutable and
uncertain? or can they say it is subject unto alteration, and need an Index
Expurgatorius? No surely these are but peccadilioes small faults, which are
incident to Fathers and Schoolmen, and the Polemicall Authors of these times,
but you shall hear them speak in their own sense, Caracteres mortui.]
wherein they abound (for I tremble to speak it: Lindan l. 3 Stroncatum c. 2.
etc. 6.
Littera mortua occidens,]
) The Scriptures (say they) are dead Characters, a dead and killing letter,
Idem Panopl. l. 1. c. 22.
without life, Muta and inanis quae nec sentit nec intelligit,]
which neither knows nor understands, a mere shell without a kernel, a nose
of wax, a delphich sword, Ide^ l. 5. c. 4.
Merum putamen sine nucleo,]
a leaden rule, a shoe fit for any foot, Sybillas prophecies, Idem lib. 1. c. 6.
Sphinx his riddles, Nasus cerous,]
and matter for contention, a wood of thieves, Canus li 3. c. 2
a shop of heretics, imperfect, doubtful, obscure, Gladius delphicus, Regula
Lesbia, calceus vtrique pediaptus, folis Sybillae, Sphyngi^ aenigmata, materia
litis,
full of perplexities. And says Pigghius, as one has truly and merrily said,
the Scripture is like a nose of wax, Turrianus aduersus Sadeclum, pa. 99.
Lu^us Praedonum, officina haereticorum,
Charon. de tribus vertitatibus. p. 220.
Jmperfecta, dubia, obscura, ambigua, perplexa,
Lessius in consult. que fides sit capescenda Ration. 11. p. 127. and p. 128.
Sunt Scripturae vt non minus vere quum festiue dixit quidam velut nasus cereus,
qui se horsu^ illorsum, and quamcunque volueris partem trabi, retrahi, fingique
facile permittit. Piggh. Hierarch. li. 3. cap. 3.
that easily suffers it self to be drawn backward and forward, to be
molded and fashioned this way and that way, and howsoever ye list. What
further need have we of witnesses, behold you have heard their blasphemy; It is
no wonder that Robertus Tuitiensis cried out before the Pope, Eras. de rat.
conc. l. 3.
Fie upon Peter, Fie upon Paul, when these men dare deliver such accursed
speeches against the whole body of the Scriptures: Certainly the Archangell
contending with the devil, durst not bring against him such railing
accusations, as these men contending with us, have brought against the truth of
God and his heavenly word; If we cite the Fathers, they are slighted by them,
or rejected as counterfeit: if we cite Berengarius, the Waldenses, and the
like, they are charged with heresy, and therefore their testimonies are not
authentical; if we produce their own Doctors and Schoolmen, as Testes
veritatis, witnesses of Gods truth in the bosom of a corrupt Church, these men
(say they) are Catholic Authors, but they stand not Recti in Curia, they are
too lavish of their tongues, and therefore they must be purged. If we cite the
Scriptures, they answer they are imperfect, they are a subject of debate and
contention, a covert for thieves, and a shop for heretics; Give me leave
therefore to use the words of Campian: Camp. Ret. 2.
Can I imagine any of you to be so stuffed in the nose, that being forewarned
cannot quickly smell out this subtle iugling? Can these men challenge
succession in person and doctrine from Christ and his Apostles? can they vaunt
of the general consent of all the Fathers? can they glory in the unity and
universality of all Romish proselites in their own Church, and when they come
to the trial of their cause, will they decline the Scriptures as imperfect,
the Fathers as counterfeit, the Protestants as heretics, and their own
writers as erroneous? If these men would maintain no other Tenet but this
alone, The Scripture is imperfect: they shall never be able to prove their
doctrine Apostolic, nor their Church Catholic: but to wave the Scriptures,
and Fathers, and writers, as imperfect, and yet to cry out with the father of
lies, All is mine: this is a proper piece of policy to delude the ignorant,
and deceive their own souls. For, the truth is, howsoever they pretend that
the sound of their Roman faith goes through the world, (yet the emptiest
vessels make the greatest sound) there silencing of Scriptures, and purging of
learned writers, argues a distrust in their own cause, and a fear lest the
truth should appear: nay more, Chrysostom. in opere imperfecto Homil. 44.
S. Chrysostom rightly observed the like practice amongst the heretical
priests in his days, and gives a further reason why the priests led the people
by an implicit faith, and shut up the gate of truth: Chrysostom. in Opere
imperfect. Homil. 44.
For (says he) they know that if the Truth be once laid open, their Church
shall be forsaken, and they from their pontifical dignity shall be brought
down to the baseness of the people. This reason is so truly accomplished
amongst the Romanists in these days, Scomberg.
that their own Cardinal (as I have showed) withstood the reformation of
known errors in the Roman Church, especially for this cause, lest it should
endanger the whole state of the Roman Church.

Sect. 15. Our chiefest Adversary Cardinal Bellarmine, testifies the truth of
our doctrine in the principal points of controversy betwixt us.
But admit our Translation of the Scriptures were imperfect, the Fathers
doubtful, the Romish writers not refined by the Inquisitors for weighty
reasons best known unto themselves were to be rejected, yet I hope they will
give us leave to produce such writers against whom they take no exception, I
will present unto them their own Cardinal Bellarmine, who I think was the
first and best that wrote the whole body of Controversies on their side, let
him, I say, be conuented and examined without partiality, and it shall appear
upon a reuiew, that in the principal points of difference betwixt us, he is
enforced to confess the antiquity and safety of our doctrine, and plainly to
acknowledge the uncertainty and nouelty of his own.

First touching the uncertainty of all the Trent Sacraments, it is Bellarmines
confession, Bell. de Iustif. l. 3. c. 8.
None can be certain of the certainty of faith, that he does receive a true
Sacrament, because it depends upon the intention of the Minister, and none can
know another man's intention.

Touching the succession in person, it is Bellarmines confession: Idem de Milit
Eccles. ca. 10.
There is no certainty of ordination, because the Sacrament of Orders depends
upon the intention of the Ordeyner.

Touching Transubstantiation, it is Bellarmines confession, Idem de Euchar.
lib. 3. cap. 23.
it is not improbable that there is no express place of Scripture to prove
it, and it may be doubted whether the Text will bear it.

Touching Private Mass, it is Bellarmines confession: Jde^ de Missa li. 2.
cap. 9. and cap. 10.
That is a more perfect and lawful Mass wherein priests and people
communicate together; Neither is there any express mention amongst the
ancients where none did communicate but the Priest alone; but by conjectures.

Touching our prayer in a known tongue, it is Bellarmines confession (in the
Primitive Church) when the Christians were but few, Idem de ver^o Dei. li. 2.
cap. 16.
they did all sing and answer one Amen, at the time of divine Service.

Touching our Communion in both kinds: Idem de Euchar. l. 4. c. 24
it is Bellarmines confession: Christ did institute in both kinds, and the
ancient Church did administer under both kinds, but the multitude increasing,
the inconvenience appeared more and more, and by degrees the use of both kinds
ceased.

Touching our two Sacraments, it is Bellarmines confession: Jdem de Sacrament.
in genere li. 1. c. 9.
As for baptism and the Eucharist, the thing is most evident, concerning the
other five it is not so certain.

Touching faith and good works, it is Bellarmines confession: Bell. de Justif.
l. 3. c. 6.
The Protestants do not deny but that faith and repentance are requisite, that
is a lively faith and an earnest repentance, and that without them no man can
be justified.

Lastly, touching Justification by faith only, it is Bellarmines confession:
Idem l. 5. c. 7.
For fear of vain glory, and by reason of the uncertainty of our works,
Tutissimum, it is the safest way to rely wholly on the mercy of God.

I beg not of our Adversaries the points in question betwixt us, but I wonder
rather why they should send out such (Anathemas) and curses against all or any
of those that deny their doctrine, when as their best learned confess, that
many principal points of their own Religion, yea many Articles of faith are
neither ancient, safe, nor Catholic: It is not the name of Catholic (which
they assume) that makes good the Catholic doctrine, neither is it the opinion
of the great learning, or the multitude on that side which must out face the
truth, for our Savior Christ does especially note the members of his body by
the name of a Little flock, Fear not little flock. Luke 12.32.
as if the paucitie of true believers were the special Caracter of the true
Church: and as for the learned on that side, You see your calling brethren
(says the Apostle,) Not many wise men after the flesh, 1. Cor. 1. 26.
not many mighty, not many noble are called. And if our adversaries list to
assume all learning and knowledge unto themselves, I envy not their great
wisdom, but I rather admire with wonder and pity, Mat. 11.25.
and I thank thee O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. And
if our adversaries please to reflect upon their own Religion, they shall find
likewise that the principal marks of the Roman Church were discovered and
foretold long since by Christ and his Apostles, that it should be after the
working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders: and we know
such miracles are the special caracters of the Roman Church: The Spirit of God
foresaw that their doctrine would consist in forginges, not only of Fathers,
of Councels, of Schoolmen, but of daily miracles in their Church, and for this
deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness, because they received not the love of
truth, that they might be saved: their judgment was foretold, and is now
accomplished. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
God shall send them strong delusions, and they shall believe lies. I list not
to insist upon such feyned miracles wrought either by their Priests or by their
companions for lucre sake: Aliquando in Ecclesia, fit maxima deceptio populi in
miraculu fictis in Sacerdotibus. Nich. Lyra in Dan. ca. 14.
It is sufficient that their own Schoolmen confess it, but I profess with
Austin, As they were necessary before the world believed to induce it to
believe; so he that seeks to be confirmed by wonders, now is to be wondered
as most of all himself, in refusing to believe what all the world believes
besides himself.

Sect. 16. Our Adversaries objection drawn from the Testimomonies of pretended
Martyrs of their Religion: answered.
But observe the cunning and policy of these men, they are not contented to
claim an interest in all ancient and orthodoxe Authors, in behalf of their
Church, but they would seem to confirm the truth of their doctrine by the
sufferings of Saints, and testimonies of holy Martyrs. Camp. Rat. 10
Let us ascend into Heaven by imagination (says Campian) and there we shall
find such as through martyrdom are as ruddie as the Rose, and also such as for
their innocence while they lived, do glister as beautifully as the white
Lillies, there may we see three and thirty Bishops of Rome, which for their
faith were immediately murdered one after another. Thou shall find that they
lived here, and dyed members of the Catholic Church. I confess the name of
Martyrdom carries some show in honor of the Church of Rome, but the truth
being weighed in the balance of sincerity, it will appear but a braggeful of
froth and vain glory; for if those Martyrs and Bishops neither suffered for
that faith at the time of their deaths, nor in all their lives received that
faith which is now published with Anathema to all them that believe it not:
surely those Saints and Martyrs will never be found to have lived and died
members of their Church, although they died Martyrs in the ancient Roman
Church. Let us examine some particulars: did ever any Martyr die upon
confidence of his own merits? or dare any Romanist suffer death in
justification of his own righteousness? was there any of those three and
thirty Bishops canonized a Saint for his adoration given to Images? Did ever
any Martyr take it upon his death, or dare any Romish priest die upon this
confidence, that he has absolute power to remit sins, to dispense with
oaths, to create in the Sacrament the Creator of heaven and earth? Did ever any
ancient Martyr teach that the Scripture was imperfect, without the help of
Traditions, or dare any Romanist take it upon his death, that all the unwritten
verities now taught and received in the Church of Rome, are of equal
authority with the Scripture? Did ever any Martyr take it upon his death, or
dare any Romish Priest die upon confidence, that the consecrated bread
depending upon the Intention of the Priest, is the corporal and real flesh of
Christ? It was the case of certain Mass priests, now or lately living, and in
particular of F. Garnet, who being demanded whether if he were to consecrate
the Sacrament that morning he should suffer death, durst after consecration
pronounce openly over the Cup: B. Andrews resp. ad Apolog Bellar. ^. 1 p. 7.
If this wine in the Cup whose accidents you see, be not the very blood of
Christ, which flowed from his side as he hung upon the cross, let me have no
part either in the blood of Christ, or with Christ hereafter. F. Garnet as a
man perplexed made answer, It might justly be doubted, neither did he conceive
that any one was bound rashly to endanger his salvation by assuming upon his
death, that any Individual Priest at a time certain did transubstantiat the
bread into the body of Christ, but peradventure in general and indefinitely
(says he) it may be resolved that Transubstantiation is made: Ab aliquo,
Alicubi, Aliquando: By some Priest, in some place, at sometime. And as
concerning the Saints and Martyrs of the ancient Church, it is undoubtedly
true, that they could not die in that faith, nor for that Religion which was
altogether unknown to their Church: The doctrine of Private Mass, the
Communion in one kind, the Prayer in an unknown tongue, the works of
Supererogation, the peremptory number of seven Sacraments, the power of
Indulgences, the worship of Images and the like; these are fundamental points,
and most of them taught and received for Articles of faith, yet by our
Adversaries manifold confessions were unknown to former ages, and how those
Bishops and Martyrs could suffer and die in that faith, which was not received
in the ancient Church, is a mystery unsearchable and a Martyrdom past finding
out.

Thus our adversaries have compassed sea and land, and by Imagination ascended
into Heaven to seek for members of their Church, yet their doctrine of faith
which they claim from the Primitive Church, is but an Imaginary faith, their
Martyrs which they challenge and assume into the Catalogue of those Saints, are
but Imaginary persons: their Miracles which they so much magnify, are but
Imaginary and false; and lastly, the Heaven which they claim as a common
appendant to their Church, is the Jesuits heaven but by Imagination.

Sect. 17. Our Adversaries common objection, drawn from the charitable opinion
of Protestans; touching the salvation of professed Romanists living and dying
in their Church, Answered.
I come to the last and greatest wonder: The Romanists have confessed, that
their doctrine is different from the Ancient Church in many principal points
of their faith, yet say they, there is no salvation to be had but in the Roman
Church: Fieri nequit vt Lutheranus moriens saluetur. Coster. resp. ad refut.
Osiandr. propos. 8.
No (says Costerus,) Fieri nequit, etc. It cannot be that any dying a Lutheran
can be saved: No doubt there is a woman, a Church, a City which reigns over
the Kings of the earth, which sits on seven Mountains, which is drunk with
the blood of Saints and Martyrs, which has multitudes, and Nations, and
tongues at her command, and if this be the Lutheran Church, or any of the
Reformed Churches, questionless there is damnation to be feared, for it was
foretold; She ascends out of the bottomless pit, Revel. 17.
and shall go into perdition: but blessed be God, their marks cannot be
applied to our Church: we have no Bishop that assumes a supremacy over Kings
and Princes: We have no Massacres of Saints and faithful Christians in our
Kingdom: no, we have no City built on seven hills which is called the seven
hill'd City: (...).
we account not universality of nations and people, a mark of our Church, but
we say it is a little flock, and the number of Gods Elect are but few.

I will descend to the particular Tenets of both Churches, and in this I shall
appeal to any moderate Romanist, whether they or we (for the faith professed
in their Church or ours) stand guilty of damnation.

Are we accursed because we disclaim all merits in our best works, and rely
wholly upon the merits of Christ? Blessed are all they that put their trust in
him (not in their own righteousness) says the Prophet David. Psalm. 2.12.


Are we accursed, because according to Christ's institution we receive the
Sacrament in both kinds? He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, Ioh. 6.
has life eternal says our Savior.

Are we accursed, because we search the Scriptures, we read them to our
Family, we meditate on them day and night? Psalm. 1.2.
Blessed are they whose delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law will
exercise himself day and night (says the Psalmist.) Again, look upon the
Tenets of the Roman Church, and let the Word of God be Judge between them
and us, whether they or we are in the more safe and blessed way.

Are they blessed that make distinction of meats and forbid marriage to
Priests? Be not high minded, but fear: Forbidding of marriage and meats is
the doctrine of Devils. 1 Timothy 4.


Are they blessed that administer the Sacrament and Service in an unknown
tongue? 1 Cor. 14.
It was a curse at the building of Babel, for them that understood not what was
spoken.
In the Law it is written, with men of other tongues, and other lips, will I
speak unto this people, and so they shall not hear me (says the Apostle.)

Are they blessed, that contrary to the Law of God give adoration to Images?
Confounded be all they that worship carved Images says the Prophet David.
Psalm. 97.7.


Are they blessed that give adoration to Saints, and to the creatures of bread
and wine: Romans 1.28.
They that worship the creature instead of the Creator, God gives them over to
a reprobate mind; and they are accursed.

Are they blessed that add new Traditions to the Scriptures, and detract from
Gods commandments and Christ's Institution in the Sacrament? Revel. 22.
Cursed be he that adds or detracteth from the least of these sayings, says
the Evangelist. Are they blessed that create new Articles of faith, praeterquam
or contra qua^, besides or contrary to the doctrine of the Scriptures? Gal. 1.8.
If an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel then that you have received,
let him be accursed.

From these sew instances, it may easily appear whether they are damned which
believe and receive that faith which was taught by Christ and his Apostles; or
they blessed which obey the Trent-Fathers, and their doctrine which is
condemned by the Apostles and Fathers of the Primitive Church.

But observe the wisdom and policy of these men, they know the ignorant
people of their Church (and their special care is to keep all in ignorance)
would be easily led by an implicit faith to believe the Church in all, if they
were once possessed with some general Rule, that they were in the safe and
certine way of Salvation in their own Church: and thereupon from the
charitable opinion of well disposed Protestants, they have drawn this general
Conclusion: We see the Protestants, at least many of them confess there may
be salvation in our Church, we absolutely deny there may be salvation in
theirs, therefore it is safer to come to ours, then to stay in theirs, to be
where almost all grant salvation, then where the greatest part of the world
deny it. Surely it were great pity that a charitable opinion on our part
should give any Romanist occasion, the rather to live and die in the bosom of
the Roman Church, whereas we should rather give them a warning in the name of
the Apostle: Revel. 18.4.
Come out of her my people, that you be not partaker of her plagues: but it
were more then shame for them to adiudge our religion, therefore the worse,
because we are more charitable: when we say a Papist may be saved, it is
meant only (as I conceive) of those who by an invincible and compelled
ignorance, resign up their own eyesight to look through such spectacles as
their Priests and Pastors have tempered for them: these men so long as they
hold fast the true faith of Christ, according to the Articles of the
Apostolic and Christian belief, without oppositio^ to any ground of
Religion; and have furthermore a mind and purpose to obey God, and keep his
commandments; according to that measure and knowledge of Grace which they have
received, and live for outward things in the Unity of the Church where they
dwell; such men I say, otherwise morallie good, and relying wholly on the merits
and sole mercy of Christ Jesus, that is, living Papists, and dying Protestants
in the principal foundation of our faith, may find mercy because they did it
ignorantly: 1 Timothy 1.14.
This is the best construction charity can afford them, and yet this is no
certainty but a bare possibility: They may be saved.

I must confess, I do incline to the charitable opinion of every poor
ignorant soul, for what have I to do to judge another man's servant, seeing
he stands or falls to his own Master? but I take God, and his holy Angels
to witness, that had I ten thousand souls, I would not adventure one of them
in the Roman faith and the Roman Church, for howsoever I will not, I dare not
pronounce damnation upon their persons as they do on ours, yet I will
proclaim confidently and openly to all the world that their doctrine is
damnable.

Far be it from the thoughts of good men, to think the points in
controversy betwixt them and us, are of an inferior alloy, that a man may
resolve this way or that way, without peril of hu salvation: The fresh
bleeding wounds and sufferings of holy men and blessed Martyrs in our church,
do sufficiently witness the great danger in their Religion and the difference
betwixt us; and that you may yet further know the best learned of our Church
were far from granting salvation to any Papist, living and dying a professed
Papist in the knowledge and belief of the present Roman faith, our Reverend
Whitakers sends this summons to the great Champion of the Roman Church: Whit.
and Ca^p. Rat. 10.
Survey heaven it self and all the heavenly host, look well into all the
parts and coasts of it whilst you list, you shall not find there (upon my
word) one Jesuit, or one Papist, for none shall stand in Mount Sion with the
Lamb, that have received the mark of the Beast, or belong to Antichrist.

Sect. 18. Proving (according to the Title of the book) by the confession of
all sides, that the Protestants Religion is safer, because in all positive
points of our doctrine, the Romanists themselves agree with us, but in their
additions they stand single by themselves.
But admit the Protestants should allow a possibility of salvation, to all
believing Christians in the bosom of the Roman Church (which never yet was
granted) what do our adversaries infer from hence? Therefore (say they) It
is the safer way to persist in that Church where both sides agree, then where
one part stands single in opinion by themselves. Now surely, if that be the
safer way wherein differing parties agree both in one; I will join issue with
them in this very point, and if in this I make not good (the Title of my book)
that we are therefore in the safer way, because they agree in the principal
points of Controversy with our doctrine, I will reconcile my self to the
Roman Church, and creep of all four to his Holiness for a pardon.

First then, we say there is a Heaven and a Hell; It is true say they, but
there is a Purgatory, there is a Limbus Infantum also; In the first part they
join with us, in the latter they stand single by themselves: And that is the
safer way where both sides agree.

We say we shall be saved by the Merits and satisfactions of Christ Jesus: It
is true say they, but there are likewise merits of Saints, and satisfactions of
our own helpful and necessary to salvation: In the first part they join
with us, in the latter they stand single by themselves: And that is the safer
way where both sides agree.

We say the Sacrament of Baptism and the Eucharist, are two proper Sacraments
instituted by Christ: it is true say they, but there are five more to be
received as true and proper Sacraments, de fide for an Article of belief: The
first two they confess with us, in the latter five they stand single by
themselves: And that is the safer way where both sides agree.

We say that Images of Christ and his Saints are ornaments and memorials of
the absent, and may in some Cases serve for History; It is true say they, but
there is also worship and veneration due unto them: In the first part they
agree with us, in the latter they stand single by themselves, And that is the
safer way where both sides agree.

We say with the Evangelist: Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve; It is true say they, but there be Saints and Angels also
that must be inuocated and adored: In the first part they join with us, in the
latter they stand single by themselves: And that is the safer way where both
sides agree.

We say that Christ is the Mediator and Intercessour betwixt God and Man: It is
true say they, but the Saints and Angels are our Intercessors and Mediators
also: In the first part they join with us, in the latter they stand single by
themselves, and that is the safer way where both sides agree.

We say that Christ is the Head and Monarch of the Church, it is true say they,
but there is likewise another visible Head of the Church which is the Pope: In
the first part they join with us, in the latter they stand single by
themselves: And that is the safer way where both sides agree.

We say that Peter had a Primacie of order, that is, a First-ship among the
Apostles: It is true say they, but withal he had a supremacy of power and
Jurisdiction: In the first place they join with us, in the latter they stand
single by themselves: And that is the safer way where both sides agree.

We say there are 22. books of Canonical Scripture, It is true say they, but
there are other books also, as namely To bit, Judith, the Machabees, etc. that
are Canonical, In the first part they approve all that we hold, in the latter
they stand single by themselves: And that is the safer way where both sides
agree.

We say the Scripture is the Rule of faith, It is true say they, but there are
Traditions likewise, and unwritten verities that must be added to the
Scriptures: In the first they join with us, in the latter they stand single by
themselves: And that is the safer way where both sides agree.

Lastly, we say there are 12. Articles of the Creed, and this is the Tenet and
confession of all Christian Churches: It is true say they, but their are 12.
Articles more published by Pope Pius the Fourth, to be received of all men: In
the first place they confess all that we hold, in the latter they stand single
by themselves: And that is the safer way by our adversaries confession where
both sides agree.

Thus by the ample testimonies of the best learned in the Roman Church, there
is nothing taught by the Protestants, de fide, for matter of faith, which the
Church of God has not always held necessary to be believed, nothing but
that which alone is sufficient for every Christian man to know concerning his
salvation, nothing but that which is confessed by our adversaries to be safe
and profitable for all believers, nothing but that wherewith the writings of
all antiquity are consonant, and all Christian confessions agreeable.

Now since I have brought you into Via tuta, the safe Way; Christus est Via and
veritas.
I will briefly commend unto you Christ and his Apostles for your Leaders, the
Ancient Fathers for your Associates and Assistants, and the blessed Spirit for
your guide, and conduct in your safe Way: There are other passengers (viz.)
Cardinals and Bishops, and Schoolmen which do accompany you part of your
way, but they are strangers, and therefore be wary of them and by way of
prevention: Ier. 6.16.
Stand in the ways and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good
way, and ye shall find rest for your souls.

Dxa t THe.
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 17. line. 19. for her, read the. p. 27. l. 20. for Royal, r real. p.
34 l 5. for Germ, r. Johannes Baptista Vergerius p 35 l. ^5. for in, r. into.
p. 36. l. 6. for the power, r. the abused power p. 44 l. 12. for hic, r huc. p.
47. l. ^6. for foundation (add) or openly disturbed the Church. p. 66. l. 9.
for succession, best succession, from heretics or at best from an improbable
example of the Nazarites. p. 67. l 13. in Sacerdotibus, etc. as an unclean
Act. (add) in Marg. August^^. 74. p. 75. l. 20. for Apostolical, r.
Apochryphall p. 93. l. 11. for coming, r cunning. p. 99. l 13. dele our. p.
125. l. 5. for prosued, r. pursued. p. 160 l. 10. woman (add) ^ate on a Beast
which had. p. 192. for Edward, r. Edwin. p. 37. l. 16. for Devils, r. damned
with Devils. p. 248. l. 2. for Apostle, r. Evangelist. p. 275. l. 17. cita
Ferum in cap. 1 Jo. Mogu^. 1550. p. 34.


