TEARS For the never sufficiently bewailed death of the late right honorable
and most worthy of all honorable Titles, ALEXANDER EARL of Dumfermeling,
Lord Fyuie, and Vrquhart late Lord Chancellar of SCOTLAND.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heirs of ANDRO HEART.

ANNO DOM. 1622.

TO MY VERY Honorable and most respected good LADY, Dame Beatrix Ruthven,
LADY Coldenknowes. etc.
Madam
AS I condemn the unnatural custom of the Ancient Thracians, who used to
weep at the birth of their Children, and to rejoice at the death of their
Parents, Kins-folke, and Friends: So I can not but commend your Ladyships
firm-fixt affection to your friends, which (contrary to the common custom of
this time-seruing Age) Death does not diminish which your La. makes manifest
at this time, for no sooner had fame* filled the ears of all, with the
sorrowful report, of the never sufficiently bewailed death of the late right
honorable Lord Chancellar: but your La. to show, that as in this general
loss your loss was more then commone, having lost so honorable a Patron, so
faithful a Friend, and so loving a Father in all your affairs: so you in
sorrow exceeded the most sorrowful, your La. repledged from the fire, this
unpolished ryme, to the which (as unworthy of the worlds view) I condemned the
same, and caused the same so be printed: to the which I condiscended, willing
rather to publish mine own imperfections them that your La. scarce imitable
and unfeigned affection to that Noble Lord should be concealed, accept then
(Madam) in good part those lines which by your own procurment passes to the
Press and as they bear the badges of your Ladyships sorrow for your so great
a loss, let them serve as signs to show the willingness I have to do your
Ladyship all the service I can perform, to the which I am tied both by bands
of blood and nature, and by your Ladyships manifold undeserved courteous
favors to my self, hoping that the Title of your Ladishippes name shall
seruee as a sufficient defense for all the imperfections of those imperfect and
unpolished lines, kissing your Ladyships hands I rest, and shall ever remain.

Your Ladyships Cosen most humbly devoted to serve you John Lyoun.

Tudor rose

a blazon with the monogram of 'A' (Andro) superimposed on (Heart)

Scottish thistle


TEARS For the never sufficiently bewailed death of the late right honorable
and most worthy of all honorable Titles, ALEXANDER EARL of Dumfermeling,
Lord Fyuie, and Vrquhart late Lord Chancellar of SCOTLAND.
AH, must my weak and care-benummed hand,
Paint out the sorrows of this sorrowing Land:
How can my pen make others passions known,
Which as they are, can not express mine own:
This public loss, which was a loss too great,
Some heauen-taught Muse were fitter to relate:
Yet whilst the Learned (who in silence fit)
Frame lofty Lines to serve as signs of wit.
Sad care-crost Muse unto the world proclaim,
With woeful notes this lamentable Theme:
And sing so sadly to each listening ear,
That every eye for tribute pay a tear.
Come every Age, Estate, and Sex, come all,
Come and bewail this stately Cedars fall.
Come all wronged Orphans, come bewail your sire,
Who did of late (but yet too soon) expyre,
Come woeful widows, come you, weep you fast,
Your Anchor, and your hope, your help is past.
Rich Burgers your of whom he once was chief,
With tears bewray unto the world your grief,
You at the Bar who plead your clients cause,
Mourn that ye want the Judge that judged your Laws,
Grave learned Judges all burst forth in moan,
Your Light, your Lantern and your Guide is gone,
State-ruling Peers, true pillars of the Crown,
Fit for Bellona, or the peaceful gownc.
Help to be-waile that euer-famous Lord,
Whose noble parts nobility decor'd:
The heavens themselves as murners do prepare,
With signs of sorrow to increase our care.
For when he died, the heavens on earth did power,
Greiu'd at his death, of tears a liberal shower.
And ere he died, Latona's child so bright
Crab-like retired from his Spears chief hight.
As if he would to every one bewray,
In humane shape an heavenly lights decay.
For he, as where his foolish son did guide
The headstrong horses he was wont to ride,
Obscures his rays and hides his glorious eye,
Loathe on the earth, this woeful sight to see.
Our Day did set when we expected least,
Our Light, when full and at the highest, ceast.
Our Summer ended, or it half was done,
For lo, it ended in the midst of June.
For with his date, our joys received theirs,
His dulefull death gave life unto our cares.
Speak tyrant Death, show if thou can wherefore
Thou spoiled the Stone that did our ring decore?
Did not of late each State a tribute pay?
Did not each-where thy cruelty bear sway?
Peers, Churchmen, Judges all did tribute give,
And were content so he alone might live.
But thou insatiate monster who is glad,
To see the world struck with amazement sad.
In this thou preast thy powerful force to show,
Hurling all States by giving such a blow.
Yet do thy worst, in spite of Time and Thee,
His best parts still shall live and never die.
His soul which from the Heavens to Earth descended,
Bake from the Earth is to the Heavens ascended.
There still to live with that great KING of Kings,
Where Angels ever Halleluiah sings.
And here on earth still famous shall remain,
His famous Acts in spite of Times disdain.
No Marble, Porphire, Gold, Corinthiane Brass,
Or Monument yet half so lasting was.
Proud Pyramids of Artemisian frame,
Vain Monuments of quick decaying fame,
Will with their builders perish and decay,
That where they stood scarce coming time can say,
But he more wise has built a Tomb more strong,
Which still shall last, in spite of Envies wrong,
Truth, Justice, Mercy, Policy, and Peace,
Shall this rare Hero's Tomb with dicton grace,
For Truth shall say (and Truth can never lie)
His rare true worth vnparalel'd shall be.
Justice and Mercy fitting for a Judge,
He wisely mixed and in his breast did Judge:
Justice to none he never did refuse,
Yet did stern Law with mercy of times use,
That Pylian Sage, of whom his Ruler said,
Troy could not stand, if but ten such he had,
Might well be spared, did he in Counsel sit,
Whose rypned Judgment led each younger wit.
And as on Hybla or Hymetus Hill,
The honey Birds the flowrie mountains fill.
Searching from grass to grass, from flower to flower,
To bring their sweet food to their sweetened Bower.
Look to the travel of his younger years,
And like to those his policy appears:
For lo, he Bee-like past from place to place,
Knowledge to gain which might his Country grace,
Pains, travel, hazard, he esteemed naught,
To gain the wished for knowledge which he sought.
Loire, Seine, and Rhine, with Tiber, Arne, and Poe,
Their Banks he past to make his learning grow,
And as the Be from every flower does take,
The sweetest juice his pleasing food to make.
Wherewith full fraught he hastes him to his Hyue,
Where Drones decay, but thristie Bees do thryue.
So in his travels with judicious eye,
He did the best of foreign parts epsy,
And what in virtues Gardens he found rare,
He brought them home, and made them flourish fair.
Which made his Prince (true Judge of noble parts,
Sole cherisher of virtue, worth and arts)
To raise this Lord upon the Stage of State,
To show his wit in Judgments highest seat.
Where whilst he spoke with judgment, wit, and Art,
He ravished every ear, and every heart:
His wise grave sentences so each man moved,
He was of all admired, of all beloved.
That scarce this envious world afforded one,
That for his greatness grieved, ever gave a groan.
O wonder rare! most wonderful to see,
A Statesman great, and welbelou'd to be:
Yet he his greatness managed with such skill,
As he heap'tvp huge treasure of good will.
Which now is known, for now each one may spy,
What secret thought, in every breast did lie,
For lo, the State grieves at this public loss,
Each private man thinks this a private cross.
That greatness gone (which as some man did think,
Might make hid malice in some bosom shrink)
There Is none that lives, or breathes this common air,
But for his death seems overcome with care.
And reason would it that it should be so,
Since public good did from his greatness grow.
His chief designs were for the Common-good,
Which who so crossed his counsel still with-stood.
Yet Princes favor, honor, virtue, love,
Could not stern Death to mild compassion move.
O blind and deaf insatiat monster Death,
Had thou had seen when as thou robbed his breath,
His Ladies beauty or her careful cries,
Had pearc't thine ear, or moved thine hood-winkt eyes,
His Friends complaints, his Childrens ruthful tears,
Did plead for pity at thy deafned ears.
Yet naught could stay thine hand from such a deed,
As makes our hearts with woeful wounds to bleed.
For Heavens decree this judgment gives to all,
That Prince and Peasant both by Death shall fall:
Since Deaths strait doom can be eschew'd of none,
Why for his death should we sigh, weep, and groan?
For we did know when as he was most hye,
That he was mortal, and was borne to dye.
And thus to grudge against IEHOVAHS will,
May bring on us a far more greater ill.
And well we know, he died to live again,
His death was but a period to his pain.
We grudge not against the Architect of wonders,
Whose fearful voice speaks in the mids of thunders.
We only wail to testify our love,
For his perfections did affection move.
Those peerless parts he living did inherit,
Now being dead, this at our hands does merit.
That as our bakes this badge of mourning bears,
We should to Grief pay tribute with our tears.
But ah, my Muse break off and come away,
Thou shows too much of this our sad decay,
Let brauer wits this deep task undergo.
To wail his want and manifest our woe.
Life's uncertainty.
BEhold vain man how frail a thing thou art,
Proud of a puff, of soon consumed breath:
Which with a blast will suddenly depart,
When thou art cited by devouring death.
Thy Pride, thy State, thine Honor, Blood and Gold,
Can not Deaths stroke one minutes space withold
Count from thy Cradle even unto thy Tomb,
And thou shall find Life but a Map of cares.
For when thou first comes from thy Mothers womb,
Thy life's first minut it is spent in tears,
As if when borne thou did perfeclie know
That thou wast borne to bear a birth of woe.
And if more years thou happen to attain,
Thy grief shall grow still as thy years increasse,
The more thy days, the more shall be thy pain,
Few days shall pass without a new distress,
Friends, ^^rents, Children, Kins-folk, credits loss,
Or some such care shall still increase thy woes.
Yea, if the World w^^ld pour into thy lap,
Her richest treasures in a liberal shoure,
Yet think not much of this imagined hap,
Which may be spent, or perish in an hour.
Earths flying joys are like a summer field,
Whose blossoms must to flower-quell winter yield
Imagine this (which to be found is rare,
Thy joys were never interrupt with grief,
Thy lifetime spent without a dram of care,
Yet at the last Death like a subtle Thief,
Will steal thy joys, which is a fading treasure,
To make thee know how perishing is pleasure.
Life which the Worldings do so much adore:
Is like a dream, a blast of wavering wind,
A shade, a span, a smoke, an airie store,
A gulf of grief, where few contentment find.
A sea of sorrows and a ship of toys,
Fraught full of certain cares, uncertain joys.
Since life is such, then let us learn to die,
That we by death a better life may gain,
Let us this Scilla this Charibdis flee,
Haste to the port and flee the troubled Maine,
Where we shall find contentment, and till then,
No true contentment is to mortal men.
FINIS.

