A TREATISE OF THE IVDGE OF CONTROVERSIES.

WRITTEN In Latin, by the R. Father Martinus Becanus of the Society of Jesus,
Professor in Divinity.

AND Englished by W. W. Gent.

printer's device (?) containing Jesuit emblem (IHS with a cross resting on the
crossbar of the H; three nails below) IHS


Permissu Superiorum. M. DC. XIX.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
GENTLE Reader, having perused this short Treatise, translated into English,
and sent unto me by a friend; I was straight moved with earnest desire to set
the same forth in Print, hoping that many would reap great benefit by reading
it, and come to be resolved in the may nest of the Controuersyes that now
disturb the Christian world: yea such a Co^trouersy, as the knowledge thereof
is the beginning of al Truth, and contrariwise Error therein the fountain of
all Contentions. For if both sides, Protestants as well as Catholics, would
admit some visible Judge, living on earth, endued with full authority to decide
their controuersyes, about the sense of holy scripture, by sentence infallible
and not obnoxious unto deceit, Contentions might be soon ended, and an
universal peace throughout Christendom, for in matters of Religion,
established.

Now the contrary current persuasion, That Scripturs are clear and perspicuous
in all points of Controversy, and their true sense apparent and obuious to
every simple man, that shall attentively peruse the Text; has opened a wide
gap for all Heresies to enter into Christendom, rending in peeees the Peace
and Unity thereof, and depriving the same of all means by which Co^tentions may
be brought to some final end. For men being once persuaded, that they see the
Truth in all points of Religion controuerted, no lesie clearly shining in the
Holy Scriptures, then the Sun does at noone day; they must needs condemn, as
erring, and wanting the light of Gods spirit, all others that shall understand
the Scriptures otherwise then they do. And this so peremptorily, as they will
contemn the sentence of any Pastor or Pastors, that shall sit in judgment
upon the Co^trouersy.

This presumption of light to understand the Scriptures above their Elders, so
much proclaimed in Protestants pulpits, makes our Adversaries disagree
implacably, and without hope of reconcilement, not only from us, but also
between themselves: Yea (as a Protestant of great name, well acquainted Hook.
Eccles. folis. page 119.
with the proceedings of their Churches, complains) this conceit has made
thousands so headstrong, even in gross and palpable errors; that a man, whose
capacity will scarce serve him to utter five words in sensible manner, blusheth
not, in any doubt concerning matter of Scripture, to think his own bare Yea,
as good as the Nay of all the wise, grave, and learned judgments that are in
the whole world: which Insolency must be repressed, or it willbe the bane of
Christian Religion. Thus he.

This insolent doctrine is in this Treatise solidely, briefly, and
perspicuously confuted, and the necessity of a living Judge, assisted by Gods
special providence infailibly to decide the Controuersyes of Religion, is so
clearly demonstrated, that I conceive great hope, that many by the perusal
thereof, will cast off the foresaid proud Heretical persuasion, which
themselves are forced to confess to be the bane of Christianity. I pray God
this my wish may take effect, and thou that art a Christian, reap as much
comfort by the reading thereof, as I wish unto thee.

OF THE IVDGE OF CONTROVERSIES.
HERE We treat of the Judge of Controversies in matters concerning Faith and
Religion: about which we Catholics, and our Adversaries do differ. Our
Adversaries for the most part do hold, that Scripture alone is the Rule and
Judge of all Controversies in matters of faith and religion: And that out of it
alone all controversies Whatsoever* may be decided and ended, without any other
Traditions, or authority of the Church. This they prove three ways.

First because God in the old Testament did send the Jews to Scripture only,
as unto their Judge; for we read Isa. 8. 20
in the Prophet Isaias: To the law and testimony. The same also does Christ in
the Joan. 5. 39.
new, when he says, Search the Scriptures. And the men of Beroea followed this
counsel of Christ, of whom it is written, that they were daily searching the
Act. 17. 11.
Scriptures if these things were so.

Secondly because God in the old Testament has commanded that nothing should
be added to the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
you shall not ad to the word (says he) that I speak to you. And again,
What I command Deuteronomy 12. 32.
thee, that only do to our Lord: neither add any thing nor diminish. Likewise
Christ him self and his Apostles, in the new Law do condemn all Traditions,
and will have us to be satisfied with Scripture only; as in S. Matthew, You
have Mat. 15. 6.
made frustrate the commandment of God for your Tradition. And again. I
persecuted the Galat. 1. 13.
Church of God (says S. Paul) being more abundantly an emulatour of the
traditions of my sore-fathers. And also: Beware least any Colloss. 2. 8.
man seduce you by Philosophy, and vain fallacy according to the tradition of
men.

Thirdly, because S. Paul plainly does confess, that only Scripture by it
self is sufficient, when he says, All 2. Tim. 3. 16.
scripture inspired of God, is profitable to teach, to argue, to convert, to
instruct in justice: that the man of God may be perfect, instructed to every
good work. And the same Apostle accurseth them who think that any thing ought
to be added to the Scripture. If any (says he) Euangelize to you besides that
which you have received, be he anathema. The same also S. John does witness. I
testify (says he) to every one hearing the words of the Prophesy of this
book, if any man shall ad to these things, God shall ad upon him the plagues
written in this book. So far our Adversaries.

But Catholics make a distinction betwixt the Judge and the Rule. They call
that the Judge which gives sentence betwixt them that contend. And that the
Rule according to the which sentence is given by the Judge. They supposing this
distinction teach three things. S. Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy
faith may not sail: Neither the Counsels lawfully assembled, by reason of the
promise of Christ; Behold I am with you always, even to the consummation of
the world.

Now to the end I may the better confirm this opinion and convince the other,
I purpose to use six arguments by the which I will manifestly prove that the
scripture only is not sufficient to be the Judge of all Controversies. The
First shall be taken from the office of a Judge which cannot be given to the
Scripture. The second from the Scripture it self, in the which two things are
to be considered, the bare letter, and the meaning thereof. The bare letter does
kill, as the Apostle says: the meaning or sense is obscure and hard to be
understood, and therefore it necdeth some other Judge or interpreter. The third
shall be drawn from the controversies themselves which are in question, for
there are some controversies which cannot be decided by scripture seeing there
is no mention at all made of them in the scripiture. The fourth shall be taken
out from the use and practice of the old testament, in the which not the
scripture but the high Priest is acknowledged to be Judge. The fifth out of the
like use and practice of the new testament. The sixth is gathered out of the
Analogy or proportion of the Civil Judge, concerning the questions and
controversies which fall out in the civil government or Common Wealth. For the
written law is not the Judge of such controversies, but the Prince or some
peculiar Judge appointed by him or his Counsel.

Moreover I will examine the testimonies of the Scripture, brought in against
us in the beginning. By the examining of the which I will infer three things.
First that some of them do rather make for the Catholics then for the
Protestants, and especially that of the which most of all they brag and
boast, Search the scriptures. Secondly that others of them belong nothing to
the matter of which we speak. And lastly that the Protestants, who only seek
to obtain the victory out of the scripture, are altogether ignorant of the
sense or meaning of it. But now I will begin with our own arguments.

The Scripture alone is not the Judge of Controversies, concerning matters of
Faith and Religion.
I. ARGUMENT, Drawn from the Office of a Judge.
THE first argument which is drawn from the office of the Judge thus I
propound. He that is the Judge betwixt two at variance, ought in such manner to
pronounce the sentence that both of them may plainly perceive what the sentence
of the Judge is, so that the one may see it is for him, and the other that it
is against him, otherwise the adversaries will never leave of their
contentions, but both will still continue defending their cause. But the
Scripture cannot do this, therefore the Scripture cannot be the Judge of al
controversies. The Maiot is clear. The Minor I prove; Because the Lutherans
and the Caluinists for these many years have iarred and warred concerning all
these articles.

1. The Baptism of Children. 2. The real presence of Christ in the Holy
Eucharist. 3. Predestination. 4. The person of Christ. 5. Exorcismes. 6. The
number and Canon of books of the Scripture.
And yet notwithstanding the scripture which they would have to be Judge, could
not hitherto, nor can decide or put an end to these controversies. Hitherto it
has never been heard that ever sentence was so pronounced by the scripture,
that either the Luthera^s or the Caluinists have confessed, that it was
pronounced either against the one or the other of them. And this is plain. For
as yet they both go forward, most bitterly striving and contending. Which
doubtless they would never do, if they did perceive that the sentence were
plainly given in their controversies; for then either the parties condemned
would cease from contending any longer, and submit themselves to the sentence,
or else they would appeal to some other Judge, pretending themselves to be
unjustly condemned. But neither of these do neither.

Now therefore that the force of this argument may more plainly appear, two
things are to be considered: The one is, that the Lutherans and Caluinists do
openly confess, that they acknowledge no other Judge then scripture only. Which
they affirm to be plain, mainfest, evident, and sufficient by it self to
decide all controversies whatsoever in matters of faith and religion, and that
no falsity or error can be found in it. The other is, that although they have
this Judge, yet notwithstanding they obtain nothing by, it but that their
contentions still grow greater, and greater, and they themselves become more
hateful to each other. Out of which it follows, that either the scripture
has not hither to pronounced clearly, evidently, and sufficiently that
sentence, or if it have, that either the Lutherans or the Caluinists are very
stubborn and obstinate, who will not yield to so manifest and so evident a
sentence, of which two let them make their choice.

II. ARGUMENT, Drawn out of the Scripture it self.
IN the Scripture two things are always to be considered, to wit the bare
letter, and the sense, even as in a man, the soul and the body. Of these two,
the holy Apostle as some interpret does speak, when he says, the letter
kills but the spirit quickneth, as though 21 Cor. 3. 6.
he had said, if thou follow the true meaning and sense of the Scripture, which
is like the quickening soul and spirit, it will help thee to salvation. But if
thou neglect the true and lawful sense thereof, and stick only to the plain,
bare, and outward letter, and strive to make that the meaning and sense, which
the bare letter only seems to import, without doubt very often thou will fall
into error; This interpretation S. Augustine does approve. Oftentimes (says
he) O my dearly beloved Aug ser. 7 de temp.
brethren, I have admonished your Charity, that in the Lessons which these
days are read in the Church, we ought not to attend only to that which we are
taught by the bare letter, but that we must seek faithfully (removing away the
veil of the letter) a true quickening spirit: for the Apostle says, that the
letter kills, but the spirit quickneth. For the unhappy Jews, and the more
unhappy Heretics whilst they regard the mere sound of the letter, as a body
without the soul, so they remain dead, without the quickening spirit The like
he has in his third book of Christian doctrine in the 5. Chapter.

This presupposed two things are to be proved. The one is that the scripture if
we respect the bare letter cannot possibly be the Judge of controversies. The
other is, that albeit we mark also the sense and meaning of it, yet neither so
it can be the Judge. The former part is certain, for that which leads men
into error and heresy, cannot be the infallible Judge of all controversies,
but the scripture if we respect the bare letter thereof leads men into error
and heresy, therefore it cannot be the infallible Judge of controversies. The
Mayor is plain of it self, because we seek an infallible Judge to the end we
may not err: therefore that which leads us into error is not an infallible
Judge. The Minor is evident out of the Apostle: because the scripture according
to the letter kills, which is as much to say, it leads us into error.

So it killed the Jews who understood all those things which were foretold of
Christ, according unto the bare letter, and did not perceive the inward sense
thereof. Of whom the Apostle speaks saying, for even until this 2. Cor. 3.
15.
day when Moses is read, a veil is put upon their hearts: that is, yet the
Jews do not understand Moses whom daily they read, by reason that they do not
search into the inward sense and meaning of him, but are satisfied with the
bare letter. Or else more plainly: They do not acknowledge Christ, who is hidden
in Moses from their sight under the external ceremonies and sacrifices even
as under a covering veyle. For even yet they stick in the veyle, not
considering what does ly hid under it.

And this is it that Christ reprehendeth in saying: Search the scriptures, for
you think in them to have life everlasting: And the Joan. 5. 39.
same are they that give testimony of me, and you will not come to me that you
may have life. As though he had said, If you desire to know certainly that I am
the Messiah promised of God (of whom Moses and the Prophets have written) you
must not only content your selves with reading of the scripture, but also
search diligently into the inward sense and meaning, which lies hidden under
the outward letter as under a certain figure and shadow. But this hitherto
you have not practiced. For although you be persuaded that everlasting life is
to be found in the Scriptures, yet in what particular manner you are to seek
it there, that you may find it, hereof you are altogether ignorant. It is not
placed in the outward letter, or in the external figures and ceremonies, as
you imagine but in the spirit, sense and secret mysteries thereof: There seek
me, and you shall find me.

But the letter kills not only the Jews, but also the heretics. For many
therefore have died in their own errors, because they having forsaken the
true sense of scripture, which the holy and Catholic Church does follow, took
hold of another sense according to the outward bare letter. The which I will
briefly make plain by setting down some few examples.

The Sabellians held that there were not three divine persons of the B. Trinity
but one only, to the which they gave three diverse names in regard of three
diverse offices or operations. For they called the same person the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost but in a diverse respect. The Father for that he was
the author of all creatures the Son because he took our human nature of
the B. Virgin, the holy Ghost for that he sanctified us, by his everlasting
grace. Out of their own opinion therefore is necessarily inferred, that God the
Father did dye and suffer. For if there be but one person which is called the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and that person did dye and suffer, it follows
thereupon that God the father did dye and suffer; For this Aug. lib. de her.
cap. 41.
opinion they are called by S. Augustine, Patropassians: but from whence
proceeds this so great an error? Truly from the letter that kills. For
according to the outward letter they understood that place of S. John, I and
the Father am one, that Joan. 10. 30.
the Father and the Son (and consequently the holy Ghost) were one in person,
and yet in the sense of the holy Church, although they be but one in nature,
yet they are two in person.

The Arians said that Christ was not God, but inferior to him. But from whom
had they this error, but because they forsaking the sense of the Church
expounded the words of Christ Joan. 14. v. 28.
according to the letter. The Father (says he) is greater then I, as if he had
meant, to wit the Father is absolutely and in every respect greater then he. But
the sense of Vide Ath^. ora. 2. cont. Arian. Hila. lib. 5. de Trini. August.
lib. 3. cont. Maxi. cap. 24. and 25. and lib. de Trin. c. 7*
the Church is that Christ according to his human nature only is less then
God the Father, but equal according to his divine. In the former sense is that
to be understood, The Father is greater then I: in the other this, I and the
Father are one, and so all do agree very well together.

The Macedonians did deny the holy Ghost to be God, but out of what ground? Out
of the killing letter: for expounding that of the Apostle according to the law
the spirit searches all things, yea even the profundities 1. Cor. 2. v. 10.
of God. Wherhence they inferred* He that searches seeks, he that seeks
doubts, he that doubts is ignorant, he that is ignorant is not God. See
Theophilact. D. Thoman^ and others* upon that place. 1. Paral. 28. v. 9. Psalm.
7 10. Iere. 17. 10.
Therefore the holy Ghost is not God. But the Church interprets that place
thus. The spirit searches all, that is, does penetrate orpiere and comprehend
all. In the which sense God the Father also is said to search all. God does
search the hearts of all. God searching the hearts and reins. I the Lord
searching hearts.

The Manichees did affirm that the old Testament was contrary to the new, and
wherefore? Because they squared all according to the outward letter, into the
which only if we look, the one may seem to disagree with the Gen 1. 1. Joan.
1. 3. Gen 1. 27. Joan. 8. v. 44. Genesis 2. 2. Joan. 5. 17. August. lib. cont.
Ad^mant.
other. For the old says that God created all things; the new, that the Word
created all. Again the old says, that God made man according to his image.
But the new that man is of the devil. In like manner the old says that God
did rest the seventh day from all his work. The new, that God works until
now. But S. Augustine she weth out of the sense of the Catholic Church how all
these places agree well together, the which seem to be contrary according to
the letter. For it does not ^e^ugne that God made all, and notwithstanding that
also all were made by the Word, as by the art and example of God. Neither does
it repugne, that man was made according to the image of God in respect of his
nature, and nevertheless was of the devil in respect of his malice, and that
God did cease the seventh day from the work of creating the world, yet now
does always work in governing, and conseruing the world.

The Pelagians did deny original sin, affirming that the sin of Adam did
only hurt himself, but not his posterity. But from whence do they prove this?
Out of the bare letter that kills, because it is written, that the Ezech. 18.
20.
child shall not carry the iniquity of his Father. But the true sense of this
place, according to the exposition of the Catholic Vide Aug. in lib. post.
collation. cap. 7.
Church, is, that the son who is not partaker of the sin of his Father,
shall not carry the iniquity of his Father. But if he be partaker of it he
shall of necessity carry it. But now it is certain that all Adams posterity
were partakers of his sin, according to that of S. Paul, in whom all sinned.
But in what manner Romans 5. 12*
all sinned in Adam, is to be taught in another place: yet here in the mean
time I say that all sinned in Adam, because God conditioned with him as with
the first origin, common roore and head of his whole posterity, that if the
commandment which God had given him, to wit that he should not taste of the
fruit forbidden, both he and his posterity should remain in Paradise, but if
not, then both he and all his posterity being guilty and transgressors of Gods
law should be cast out of paradise, which afterward so fell out.

There were also some ancient Heretics, who altogether denied the resurrection
of our flesh, because they found it written, It is the spirit that quickneth,
the flesh profits nothing. Which place Joan: 6. 63
they understanding only according to the outward letter, not searching any
Refert. Tertull. in lib deresur. car. c. 37.
further into the inward sense and meaning thereof, argued in this manner: To
what purpose should the flesh rise at all, since it profits nothing? And out
of the self same place the Caluinists conclude against another verity. To what
purpose (say they) should Christ impart to us his flesh in the Eucharist, if
the flesh profit nothing? But truly they both are deceived by looking only into
the bare letter which kills: Otherwise one might conclude in like manner, if
the flesh does profit nothing Vide Maldonatum in cap. 6. Joan.
at all, to what end did Christ take flesh to redeem man? To what end was the
word made flesh? To what end did he suffer in it upon the Cross? Certainly he
did not all this to no purpose.

That the Scripture according to the sense and meaning thereof, cannot be Judge.
BUT this being sufficient about the former part, where it is manifest both by
the authority of the Apostles and also by diverse sundry examples, that the
Scripture if we respect only the bare and outward letter thereof, cannot be the
infallible Judge in matters of Controversy, because that the bare letter
kills, and bredeth great errors and heresies: But now let us proceed to the
latter part of this our argument, wherein I will declare, that if we regard the
very sense and meaning of the Scripture, the same can be noe competent Judge of
all Controversies in matters of faith and Religion. The which I prove in this
manner: The Scriptures according unto the true sense thereof often times is
obscure, and very hard to be understood, and oftentimes about discerning the
true sense and meaning of it great Controversies do arise. But every
Controversy does require some judge to determine the same, it is therefore
necessary that some Judge be appointed who certainly may determine which is the
true sense of the Scripture, which cannot be the Scripture it self, for of the
sense and meaning thereof there is Controversy: and therefore it is necessary
that some other be assigned besides the Scripture. In this discourse are
certain principles grounded, which are to be explicated and proved in
particular one after another. The first is.

That the Scripture often times, according unto the sense, is obscure and hard
to be understood.
THIS S. Peter does testify in his later Canonical Epistle, where speaking of
the Epistles of S. Paul he 1. Pet. 3. 16. Luc. 24. 27.
uses these words. In the which (says he) there are some things hard to be
understood. Also it may be confirmed diverse ways. First by the example of the
disciples going unto Emaus, who understanding not the Scriptures, were taught
by Christ. Secondly by the Eunuch in the 8. Chapter of the Acts 13. verse, who
being asked of S. Philip, whether he understood the Prophet Isay which he was
then reading, answered in this manner, How can I (said he) unless some man
show Act. 8. 31.
me. Thirdly by the example of the Apostles, who understood not many Mat. 13.
36.
things which Christ had taught them. For his Disciples coming to him said,
Mat, 16. 11.
expound us the Parable of the Cockle seed. Again, why do you not understand
that I said not Luc. 18. 34.
of bread to you? and they understood none of these things, and this word was
hid from them, and they understood not the things that were said. Fourthly by
the common consent of all the interpreters. For if the Scripture were easy,
what need were there of so many interpreters? so many commentaries? so many
questions and controversies. Fifthly by many particular places and books of
Scripture I prove it hard: For who does not perceive Ezechiels prophesy about
the vision of the four beasts to be most obscure? Moreover it plainly
appears Daniels prophesy of the 70. weeks, and of the abomination of
desolation to be most hard, since that in the searching into it and in the
explaining of it, it has hitherto and even yet does put many to their wits
end, as concerning the which Christ himself said, he that reads let him
understand. Mat. 24. 15.
Furthermore even in the whole Apocalips of S. John many obscure places and
full of secret mysteries may be found. And S. Hierom also affirms in a
certain epistle of his to Paulinus, that in it there are as many Sacraments or
secret mysteries as words.

But that in the other books of Scripture also, many obscure and difficult
places are to be found, is well known to such as read them: and to omit others
let them speak who in times past, notwithstanding their daily reading of
Scripture with great diligence, confessed themselves to have been very
ignorant in many passages thereof, in which to be instructed and resolved they
had recourse to S. Augustine, S. Hierome, and other most learned Fathers of the
Church. Whereof the Epistles of the ancient Fathers themselves do give ample
testimony, out of the which I will put down some.

We read then, that Pope Damasus asked counsel of S. Hierome about these
Questions.

1. What signified this, whosoever shall Genesis 4. 15. Epist. 124. 125. inter
Epist. Hiero. Ibidem.
kill Cain, shall be punished seven fould.

2. If all things which God had made were very good, to what end did he
command Noe to take into the Arc as well those beasts which were unclean, as
those which were clean, since that nothing can be good which is unclean.

3. Wherefore did Abraham receive Circumcision for a sign or seal of his
faith? And wherefore did Isaac though Ibid.
a just man, and dear to God, deceived by error, bless not whom he would,
but whom he would not.

4. What was the interpretation of Isay Epist. 142.
the Prophets vision, concerning the Seraphim and Trisagio.

Euagrius asked of the same S. Hierom, Epist. 126.
Whether Melchisedech who blessed Abraham, were of a more divine nature, and
not be taken for a man.

Dardanus also inquired as concerning Epist. 124.
this. What that Land of promise was from whence the Jews returning out of
Egypt are said to have possessed, seeing that it could not be Palestine,
because that was possessed of their ancestors before, and might seem rather
to be reserved then promised.

Vital^^ demanded of the same great Epist. 132.
Doctor; Whether it were true which we find recorded in Scripture, that
Solomon and Achaz begat children when they were but eleven years old. Epist.
39.


Cyprian asked what was the true exposition of that most hard Psalm, which
begins thus: Domine refugium factus es nobis.

Marcella a noble woman of Rome among others proposed these questions to him.

1. What Ephodbad, and Teraphim signified Epist. 130.
in the Hebrew tongue?

2. What was the signification, of Epist. 137.
Alleluia, Amen Maranatha?

3. What was Diapsalma. Epist. 138. Epist. 141.


4. Wha^ was Panisdoloris? what filij excussorum, of the which is made mention
in the 126. psalm.

5. What are those things which neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard,
nor have ascended into the heart of man, which God has prepared for them that
love him. And how again Epist. 148.
the Apostle does inser: But God by the holy Ghost has reueiled unto us. And
if it were reueiled to the Apostle, whether he also did repeal it to others.

6. When the Apostle says: Then 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17*
we that live, that are left, withal shall be taken up together with them in the
clouds to meet Christ into the air. Whether this is to be understood of some
that went to heaven with Christ before they dyed, seeing that Henoch and Elias
shall die, as it is said Ibid.
in the Apocalips of S. John, least that any may not be said to dye.

Principia a Virgin of Rome desired of Epist. 140.
him the exposition of that psalm, Eructauit cor meum verbum bonum. Epist. 135.


Sunia and Fretella requested by writing whether in that Contention in the
which the Latins dissent from the Grecians concerning David's Psalter, the Jews
agree more with the Grecians the^ with the Latins.

Hedibia a noble woman of France Epist. 150.
sent to S. Hierom by a Pilgrim to propose these doubts.

1. How that place of Christ should Mat. 26. 29
be understood, to wit, I will not drink from henceforth of this fruit of the
vine, until that Ibid.
day when I shall drink it with you new in the Kingdom of my Father.

2. Wherefore S. Matthew said, that Christ rose in the evening, and S. Marck in
the morning.

3. What that signified which was Ibidem.
written in S. Matthew: the veil of the temple was rent into two pieces from
the top even to the bottom? And that which follows.

4. How it happened that Christ, in S. John, breathed the holy Ghost upon his
Apostles, and yet we read in S. Luke that he promised to send them the holy
Ghost after his Ascension.

5. How that of the Apostle is interpreted, what shall we say then? Is their
Ibid.
iniquity with God? God forbid: and all to the other place, unless the Lord of
Saboath Romans 9. 14.
had lest us seed, we had been made like Sodom.

Algasia also another French woman by the same Pilgrim propounded these other
doubts unto him.

1. Wherefore did S. John send his disciples to Christ to ask him: Ar thou
Epist. 151.
he who art about to come, or do we expect another? Since that he before that
time, had spoken of Christ, saying: Behold the lamb of God, behold who takes
away the sins of the world. Ibid. Math. 12. 20.


2. What Christ did mean by these words. The reed bruised he shall not
break, and smoking flax he shall not extinguish.

3. What also is the meaning of Ibid. Math. 16. 24. Ibid. Math. 24. 19. Ibid.
our Savior saying. If any will come after me, let him deny himself.

4. How is to be understood that he says: Woe to them that are with child, and
that give suck in those days.

5. In what sense that place of S. Luke is to be taken. And it came to pass
whiles the days of his assumption were accomplishing, and he fixed his face to
go into Jerusalem. And a little after where he speaks of the Sacraments. And
they received him, not because his face was to go to Jerusalem.

6. Who was the Bayliffe of iniquity Ibid. Romans 5. 7.
whom our Lord praised.

7. What the Apostle meant when he said. For scarce for a just man does any
die: for perhaps for a good man durst some man did. Ibid. Romans 7. 8.


8. What the sense was of that speech of S. Paul. But occasion being taken,
sin by the commandment wrought in me all Concupiscense.

But now omitting many and diverse such like questions of Scripture, which were
brought to S. Hierome to be resolved out of many parts of the Christian world,
I come to S. Augustine, to whom no fewer were brought then to the other.

Volusianus asked his counsel in this, Aug. Epist. 2.
How the immortal God could be shut up in the womb of a virgin: And whether
in the mean time he left of all ear of the world.

Marcellinus asked him, wherefore Epist. 4. and 5.
God did alter the Sacrifices of Moses, which he had once before ordained?
since that those things which are once ordained well cannot be altered but
unjustly.

The same Marcellinus propounded Epist. 7.
unto him this other question also. How it came to pass, that the Magitians of
Pharao could find any water to change into blood, since that before that time
all the water of Egypt was changed into blood by Moses.

Bonifacius the Bishop also asked him this question, Wherefore the faith of
parents is profitable for their children in baptism, seeing that their impiety
after their Baptism is nothing hurtful to them? And how the God fathers, in
Baptism could promise that the infants believe, since they do not then believe,
and it is uncertain whether ever they will believe or no.

Dardanus. How it may be believed Epist. 23.
that Christ is now in heaven, seeing he said to the thief upon the Cross:
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise: Epist. 57.
And whether from hence do follow that Christ, God and man, is every where.

Paulinus. What is that which is said Epist. 58. and 59.
in the 15. Psalm, Sanctisqui sunt in terra eius mirific^u^ omnes voluntates
me as inter illes. To the Saints that are in his land he has made all my wills
marvelous in Psalm. 67. 22.
them. In like manner what is the meaning of that in the Psalm: Veruntamen
etc. But yet God will break the heads of his enemies: the hairy crown of them
that walk in their sins.

Likewise when the Apostle says: Epist. 4. 11. Ibid.
He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists and some
Pastors and Doctors: His Question was how these names might be distinguished,
and also what office and function was due to each one: What office for the
Apostles, what for the Prophets, what for the Evangelists, and what for
Pastors and Doctors.

Moreover he asked him this, that Ibidem. 1. Tim. 2. 1.
seeing the Apostle writes, I desire therefore, first of all, that obsecrations
prayers, postulations, thanksgiuings be made for all men, what difference could
be made in these words.

Also what that signified, that the Ibid. Romans 11. 28.
Apostle says of the Jews: According to the Gospel indeed enemies for you,
but according to the election most dear for the Fathers. Again. What that
other place of S. Paul Ibid. Colo. 2. 18.
meant: Let no man seduce you, willing in the humility and religion of Angels,
walking in the things which he has not seen, in vain puffed up by the sense
of his flesh, and not holding the head.

Euodius the Bishop asked of him, Epist. 98. and 99. 1. Pet. 3. 19.
what spirit it was of whom S. Peter spoke, in his first Canonical Epist. In
the which spirit coming he preached to them also that were in prison. Epist.
120. Psalm. 120.


Honoratus also, what that speech of our Lord signified, Deus Deus meus, quare
me dereliquisti.

Moreover how that other place of Ibid. Ephesians. 3. 17.
S. Paul was interpreted: Rooted and founded in Charity, that you may be able
to comprehend withal the Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and height,
and depth.

Who were also the five foolish Virgins, and who were the wise. Mat. 25. 2.

Again, what was the outward Ibid.
darkness Matthew. 22. 13. And how that place of S. John was understood, the
word was made flesh. Joan. 1. 14.

Simplicianus asked him, what that lib 1. ad Simpli. quaest. ^ Romans 7. 7.
place of the Apostle meant, where he says, What shall we say then? is the
law sin? God forbid: and to that, unhappy man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death. Ibid. quaest. ^^ Romans 9. 10^ lib. 2. quaest. ^. 1.
Reg. 10. 10. 1. Reg. 16. 24.


What was the meaning of that in S. Paul: But Rebecca conceiving of one
copulation of Isaac our Father, and all the rest forward to that, Unless the
Lord of Saboath had left us seed.

And how it is said in one place that, the spirit of our Lord seized upon Saul,
seeing in another place it is written, that a wicked spirit vexed him. Ibid.
quest. 2. 1 Reg. 15. 21. Ibid. quaest. 3.


And in what sense it is said by God in the book of Kings, it repents me
that I have made Saul King. And again. Whether that unclean spirit which was
in Pythonissa could make Samuel who was dead before come to see Saul, and
speak with him?

Also he asked him as concerning Ibid. quaest. 5. 3. Reg. 17. 20.
that speech of Elias, O my Lord, what even the VVidow also by whom I am after
a sort sustained have thou afflicted, that thou would st kill her son.

Now by these questions it appears manifestly that the Scripture in many
places is obscure and hard to be understood. And that many most learned men of
whom we have here made mention confessed themselves not to understand many
things without being instructed by more learned then themselves. Now therefore
let us go forward in explicating what may be the causes of so great obscurity.

What are the causes why the Scripture is obscure?
I find two causes especially. The one is drawn from the things themselves
which are treated of in the Scripture. The other from the manner of treating of
them. The things of the which the Scripture treats, are of four kinds. 1.
Histories, as in the book of Genesis, Exodus, Numeri, Deuteronomi, Iosue, the
books of Judges, of Kings, Paralipomenon, Esdras, Judith, Tobias, Hester, the
Machabees, and also the Ghospel, and the Acts of the Apostles. Secondly
Prophesies, such as for the most part are contained in the psalms, in the
greater and lesser Prophets, and in the Apocalips of S. John. Thirdly mysteries
of our faith, especially about the blessed Trinity, the Incarnation of Christ,
about predestination, and reprobation, about the force and efficacy of the holy
Sacraments, about the presence of Christ in the Eucharist, about justifying
faith, about the Resurection of the dead, and such like other points. Fourthly
Precepts and moral documents, as concerning virtues and vices. For albeit that
neither in these, nor in histories, there is perchance any great obscurity in
regard of the things treated of; yet notwithstanding there is great obscurity
in the prophesies, and mysteries of faith. For these are above man's capacity
and understanding, so that we 1. Cor. 13. 12.
cannot perceive them but after a dark manner, as the Apostle says.

Now the manner of treating of these things oftentimes is obscure, for these
causes. First because there be many improper speeches in the Scripture as
figures, allegories and parables, under the whichly hidden many truths, the
which are not presently understood of the reader.

Also the obscurity thereof is increased by some word, which is taken sometimes
in the same sentence, one while properly, and another while figuratively: as in
this place for example. Every one that drinks of this water shall Joan. 4. 13.
thirst again, but he that shall drink of the water that I will give him,
shall not thirst for ever. Where to drink of water, and to thirst, in the
former part of the sentence, is taken corporally, and in the latter part
spiritually. And again in the very same Chapter. Do not you say, that yet
there are Ibid. v. 35.
four months, and harvest comes? Behold, I say to you, lift up your eyes,
and see the countries that they are white already to harvest. For hear in the
first place, the word harvest is taken in it proper signification, but in the
latter figuratively.

And again in the same Apostle. Joan. 9. 39^
For judgment came I into this word: that they that see not may see: and they
that see may become blind: where the former part is taken for corporal sight,
and the latter for spiritual.

And in S. Paul: Him who knew no sin, 2. Cor. 5. 21.
for us, he has made sin. Where sin in one place is taken properly for
sin, but in the other place figuratively for a sacrifice offered for sin:
for the sense Vide. Orig 3. com. in. Epist. ad Romans and Augu. lib. 2. de
consen. Evangelist. cap. 30.
of that place is, that it was Gods will that Christ who never had sinned,
should be a sacrifice for the sin of mankind.

Secondly, not only figures are found in the words, as I have already showed,
but also in the very things themselves. For one thing oftentimes is a figure
and type of another signified by it: even as the Paschall Lamb was a figure of
Christ, the red Sea of Baptism, Manna of the Eucharist, Mont Sio^ of the
Church, and so of others. From hence does proceed a triple obscurity.

First it does not straight appear of which thing another thing is a figure,
for example sake: Agar Abraham his maid to have been a figure of the
Sinagogue, and Sara Abraham's wife to Galat. 4. 14.
have been a figure of the Church, unless the Apostle by the instinct of the
holy Ghost had explicated them so. Likewise how should it have been Ierem. 1.
11.
known, that the waking rod signified the speedy execution of Gods divine
sentence against the Jews and Gentiles. And that the burning pot was a figure
Ierem. 13. Ierem. 16. 2.
of Nabuchodonosor. And that Jeremy who was forbidden to marry a wife, was a
figure of the spoils hanging over Iewry. And that by the chalice of the fury
of our Lord, the power and fury of Iere. 15. 15.
the King of Babylon was signified: and by arotten girdle the ruin of the
people Iere. 13. v. 1.
in Captivity. And by the Flagon to be filled with wine, the inhabitants of
Jerusalem to be made drunk with the Iere, 13. 12.
wine of the fury of our Lord. And by the two baskets of the best and worst
figgs two kind of men, of whom some were happy who past over with the King,
some miserable and unhappy who remained behind in Jerusalem. Iere. 24. v. 2.
Iere. 18. 6.
And by the clay in the potters hand, the people of the Jews in the hand of
God. And by the chains and fetters of Jeremy Iere. 27. 2.
the captivity of diverse nations. And by the breaking of the earthen pot, the
crushing of the people and the City of Jerusalem. And by the four beasts,
four Kingdoms, and Empires. And by the Iere. 19. 10^ Dan. 7. v. 3. Dan. 8. 20.
Ram the king of the Medians and Persians. And by the Goat the king of the
Grecians. These I say, and many such would never have been so understood
unless they had been declared particulerly by God, and after this declaration
also without an interpreter they can be scarce understood.

The other obscurity does arise upon this, that one thing somtymes is a figure
of diverse things which are contrary and repugnant one to another. As Jonas was
the figure of Christ: For as Jonas was in the belly of the Whale three days
and three nights, so shall the son of man be in the heart of the earth three
days and three nights. The same Jonas was the figure of the people of Israel,
who were contrary to Christ: For as Ion^ did greiue at the Conversion Ion. 4.
1^. August. Epist. 49. quaest. 6. ^.
of the Nimuits, even so the Jews in the Conversion of the Gentills. That
which is said of Jonas, may be said also of the deluge, of the Rock, and such
like. For the Deluge was both the figure of Aug ep. 99. ad Euodium.
the Baptism of the faithful, and together the type of the punishment of the
unfaithful. And the Rock which 1. Pet. 2. 8.
is Christ, was the stone of scandal and offense to them that perish, and to
Romans 9. v. ^2.
them that believe the Cornerstone.

The last obscurity arises upon this, that sometimes one certain thing which
is the figure of another does represent the same in one respect, and is
altogether unlike unto it in another. As for example the fornicating woman whom
the Prophet Oseas was commanded to marry, was a figure of the Sinagogue, which
she represented in this, to wit, that as she had committed carnal fornication,
so the Sinagogue had committed spiritual, which did consist in the worshipping
of Idols. But in this it did disagree, that she after her marriage to Oseas
did never return to her former carnal fornication, as many probably do
affirm. But the Sinagogue after she was reconciled to God fell again into
Idolatry.

Thirdly in the Scripture are to be found many apparent contradictions which
cannot but breed great difficulty in the mind of the reader: of many I will
relate some.

1. Moses says, that God created Genesis 1. ^.
heaven and earth in six days and rested the seventh; but in the eighteen of
Eccles. cap. 18. ^.
Ecclesiast. it is said, who lives for ever did create altogether.

2. Moses tells us, that the children Genesis 15. 3. Acts 7. Galat. 3 17.
of Israel were in Egypt four hundred years. But the Apostle says, that
they were there four hundred thirty years.

3. Jacob the Patriarch says: I have Genesis 32. 30.
seen God face to face, and my soul was saved. But we have the contrary Exodus
33. 20. for God says, man shall not see me and live.

4. In Exodus 20. v. 5. it is said, I am thy Lord God visiting the iniquity of
the Fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them* But
the contrary is found in Ezechiel: The son shall not carry the iniquity of
his Father.

5. Honor thy Father, and thy Exodus 20. 12. Luc. 14. v. 26.
Mother that thou may live long upon the earth: but contrary to this Christ
says, who does not hate his Father, and his Mother, cannot be my Disciple.

6. Thou shall fear thy Lord God Deuteronomy. 6. 3. Math. 5. 34.
and swear by his name. Which is contrary to that: But I say to you, do not
swear at all.

7. It repents me that I have made 1. Reg. 15. 11. Romans 11. 29.
Saul King: contrary to that, without repentance are the gifts and vocation of
God.

8. In the Arc there was nothing 3. Reg. ^. 9.
else but two tables of stone which Moses put in it in Horeb; contrary to that
of Hebr. 9. 4.
S Paul: In the Arc there was a goulden pot having Manna, and the rod of Aaron
that had blossomed, and the tables of the Testament.

9. The impious shall not rise in Psalm. 1. 5.
judgment; contrary to that: we shall 1. Cor. 15. v. 51.
all indeed rise again, but we shall not all be changed.

10. God has spoken once; contrary Psalm. 6. 12. Hebr. 1. 1.
to that: diversely and many ways in times past God spoke to the Fathers in the
Prophets, last of all in these days has spoken to us in his son.

11. Every man is a liar: contrary Psalm. 115. ^. Apoc. 14. 5. Prou. 6. 6.
to that, and in their mouth was found no ly. Go to the emot, o sluggard and
learn wisdom, the which does prepare her meat in summer, and gather in the
harvest that she may eat, contrary Math. 6. v. 34.
to that: Be not careful therefore for the morrow.

12. Transgress not the ancient Pro. 22. 28. Ezec. 20. 18.
bounds which thy Fathers have put; contrary to that, In the precepts of your
Fathers walk not, neither keep you their judgments.

13. Answer not a fool according Pro. 26. 4. Ibid. Sap. 1. 13.
to his folly least thou be made like to him; contrary to that, Answer a fool
according to his folly, least he esteem himself to be wise.

14. God has not made death; contrary Eccles. 11. 14.
to that: Good things, and evil life, and death, poverty, and honesty, are of
God. Sap. 11. 25.


15. Thou love all things that are, and hate nothing of those which thou
have made; contrary to that, Jacob I loved, Romans 9. 13. Eccl. 10. 15. 1. Tim. 6.
but Esau I hated.

16. The beginning of all sin is prvde: contrary to that, the root of all
evil is covetousness.

17. Do good to the humble and give Eccl. 12. 6. Luc. 6. 30.
not to the impious: prohibit to give him bread; contrary to that, give to
every one that asks thee.

18. They that eat me shall yet Eccl. 24. 28. Joan. 4. 13.
hunger, and they that drink me shall yet thirst; contrary to that, he who
shall drink of the water which I will give him, shall not thirst for ever.

19. As yet forty days, and Niniue Joan. 3 4. Joan. 4. 11.
shall be subverted, contrary to that, shall not I spare Niniue the great City?

20. Gratis you have received, Gratis Mat. 10. 8. Luc. 10. 7.
give you: contrary to that, the workman is worthy of his wages.

21. Take nothing in the way, neither skrip, shoes, nor rod; contrary to Math.
10. 10. Marc. 6. 8.
that, and he has commanded them that they should take nothing in the way,
but a rod only.

22. After 6. days Jesus took Peter, Mat. 17. 1. Luc. 9. 28.
James, and John; contrary to that: It came to pass after these words, almost
eight days, and he took Peter etc.

23. But if thy brother shall offend Mat. 18. 15.
against thee, go and rebuke him between thee and him alone; contrary to 1.
Tim 5. 20.
that: Them that sin rebuke before all, that the rest also may have fear.

24. None is good but one God; Mar. ^0. 19. Luc. 6. 45.
contrary to that: The goodman of the good treasure of his heart brings forth
good.

25. Go preach the Gospel to every Mar. 16. 15. Math. 10. 5.
creature; contrary to that: Into the way of the Gentiles do not go, and into
cities of the Samaritans enter ye not: But, go to the sheep that are
perished of the house of Israel.

26. You are they that have remained Luc. 22. 28. Math. 26. 31.
with me in my temptations, contrary to that, you shall all suffer scandal in
me.

27. If I give testimony of my self Joan. 5. 31.
my testimony is not true; contrary to Joan. 8. 14.
this; Although I give testimony of my self, my testimony is true.

28. I do not receive testimony of Joan. 5. 34. Joan. 15. 27.
man; contrary to this: And you shall give testimony of me.

29. He that eats my flesh and Joan. 6. 55. Ibidem. v. 63.
drinks my blood has life everlasting; contrary to that, It is the spirit
that quickneththe, flesh profitteth nothing.

30. All things whatsoever I have Joan. 15. 15. Joan. 16. 1^.
heard of my Father, I have notified unto you; contrary to this; I have yet
many things to tell you.

31. Mary Magdalen came early to Joan. 20. 1. Mar. 16. 2.
the monument when it was yet dark; contrary to that: she came to the monument
the sun being now risen.

32. Circumcision indeed profits Romans 2. 25.
if thou observe the Law; contrary to that: Behold I Paul tell you, that if
you be circumcised, Galat. 5. 2.
Christ will profit you nothing.

33. We account a man to be justified by Romans 3. 28. James 2. 20. 24. Romans ^.
v. 19. Act. 7. v. 51. Romans 11. v. 34^ 1. Cor. 2. v. 16. 1. Cor. 13. v. 3.
faith without works: Contrary to that of S. James: Faith if it have not works
is dead in it self. And again: you see that man is justified by works, and
not by faith alone.

34. For who resists his will; contrary to that; you always have resisted
the holy Ghost as also your Fathers.

35. Who has known the mind of our Lord; contrary to that; But we have the
sense of Christ.

36. If I shall distribute all my goods to be meat for the poor, and have not
charity, it does Luc. 11. v. 41.
profit me nothing; contrary to that: give alms and all things are clean to
you.

37. And as in Adam all die, so also in Christ 1. Cor. 13. v. 32. Joan. 5. v.
21. Galat. 1. v. 10. 1 Cor. 10. v. 33.
all shall be made alive; contrary to that: The Son quickneth whom he will.

38. Do I seek to please men? If I yet did please men, I should not be the
servant of Christ; contrary to that, be without offense, even as I in all
things do please all men.

39. Bear ye one another burden; Galat. 6. 2. Ibid. v. 5.
contrary to this: Every one shall bear his own burden.

40. God inhabiteth light not accessible; contrary to that: Come to him, 1.
Tim. 6. 16. Psalm. 33. 6. 1. John. 1. 8. 1. Joan. 3. 9.
and you may be illuminated.

41. If we shall say that we have no sin we seduce our selves; contrary to
that: Every one that is borne of God, commiteth not sin.

These and such like apparent contradictions, which are found in many places of
the Scripture, oftentimes do trouble the reader, and cause excessive pains and
labor even to the most learned of all. The ancient Fathers do give testimony
of this, who spent much time in the according of these and such like
contradictions, as S. Augustine for example wrote certain books of the
agreement amongst the Evangelists: and diverse others also who took great
pains in interpreting the Scripture, whose labors if we had not been
partaker of, we should have yet been ignorant and blind in many matters of
great importance. And thus far about the third cause of obscurity in Scripture.

The fourth arises upon this, that often times the words of Scripture make a
doubtful sense, by reason of the want of some distinction. For sometimes where
a distinction is needful there is none at all. Which most commonly happens
in these cases. 1. When it makes mention of God. 2. When of Christ. 3. When it
insinuates the coming of Christ. 4. When it speaks of the Church. For there
belongs unto God, either Unity of essence, or Trinity of persons. To Christ
either the humane nature or divine. Moreover Christ's coming is twofould, the
one in his nat^uity, the other in the day of Judgment. Also the Church is
either militant upon earth, or triumphant in heaven* Therefore when the
Scripture makes mention either of God, or of Christ, or of the Church, it is
doubtful and obscure, in what sense there they are to be taken: as if it
speak of God, whether it mean thereby as he is one in essence, or as he is
three in person: if of Christ, whether it be understood as he is God, or as he
is man: or when mention is made of his coming, whether it be of his first or of
his last: or when the Church is named whether the militant or triumphant
thereby is signified it is hard to understand. But to explain it the better I
will give an example of every one.

The Scripture makes mention of Mar. 6. v. 9.
God, in saying: Our Father which art in heaven. Now it is doubtful whether it
be spoken of God according to the unity of his essence, or according to the
distinction of his persons, or, as the Deuines do propound it, whether the name
of Father be taken there essentially as it is common to three persons, or
personally as applied to the first person only? There are authors of both
parts: yet it is more likely to be taken in that place essentially as it is to
be gathered out of these words of Christ, Joan. 2. 17.
I ascend to my Father and your Father. Where the word Father is taken both
ways. For the Father of Christ according to his eternal generation, is the
first divine person, as he is distinguished from the son, and the holy Ghost.
But our Father according to our creation, governing and adoption, is the whole
Trinity, as he is one God. Therefore when he says: I ascend to my Father, he
speaks only of the first person, but when he adds, and your Father, he
speaks of three persons as they are one in essence and nature.

S. Paul makes mention of Christ, Who is the Image of the invisible God, the
first Colos* 1. 15.
borne of all creatures, because in him were created all things, and he is the
head of the body the Church, first borne of the dead. Here also it is
doubtful, whether this be to be understood of Christ in respect of his
divinity or humanity. Many think that some part of the senteuce is to be
understood one way, some part another; with whom I agree. For Christ according
to his divinity is the Image of God the Father, and also by him and in him all
things are made: but according to his humanity he is the head of the Church and
first borne of the dead. And in both senses he may be called the first borne of
every creature, according to the sundry expositions of the interpreters, as may
be seen in their comments upon that same place.

There is also a certain speech of the coming of Christ. And when again Heb.
1. ^.
he brings in the first begotten into the world he says: And let all the
Angels of God adore him. Wherein consists a question, whether this was spoken
of his first coming at his nativity, or of his last coming in the day of
judgment. If were spect that word, again, it seems rather to be of his later
coming. But taking all the circumstances together, it may appear to be of his
former* So the interpreters of this place. Of the Church also the Apostle
writes: But that Ilierusalem which is above, is free, which is our mother.
Gal. 4. ^6.
For it is written, Rejoice thou barren that bear not, break forth and cry
that trauailest not, because many are the children of the desolate, more then
of her that has a husband. Here therefore is a difficulty to know whether it
be meant, of the Church militant or triumphant? Which difficulty is in another
place of S. Paul. But you are Heb. 12, 22.
come to mount Sion, and the City of the living God heavenly Jerusalem, and
the Church of the first borne. And in the same Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 25.
Christ loved the Church and delivered himself for it, that he might sanctify
it, cleansing it by the lauer of water in the word of life, that he might
present to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle.

To this kind of obscurity, may also be reduced, that some things which are
spoken of Christ in Scripture, are to be understood of the head of the Church,
which is Christ, somtymes of both as S. Augustine notes.

For the head of the Church Christ is taken in that place of the Apostle: lib.
3. de doctrina Chri. c. 31. Math. 28. ^0.
Behold I am with you all days, even to the consummation of the world. Where
Christ as the head of the Church, promises to the body and members thereof his
perpetual assistance, protection, and government.

For of the body and members of the Church is that place of the acts to be
understood. Saul, Saul why do thou persecute Act. 9. 4.
me? For Saul did not persecute the person of Christ (seeing that he was in
heaven where he could not be persecuted) but his Apostles who were the members
of his Church. Also that of Zachary; After glory he sent me to the nations.
Zach. ^. 8.
Where Christ speaks in person of the Apostles. As though he had said, my
heavenly Father will send me (to wit my Apostles) to the conversion of the
Gentills. But when will he send me? after glory (that is) after I have showed
my glory and divinity in my Resurrection and Ascension. After the same manner
also S. Austine in the exposition of the 147. Psalm, does interpret that place
of S. Matthew. Then if any man shall say Math. 24. 23.
unto you, lo here is Christ or there, do not believe him. For he thinks
that there by Christ is signified his Church whose words are these. There shall
rise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall say, lo here and lo there
but they shall not speak of the head himself, behold here and behold there
(for it is certain that Christ is in heaven) but of the Church. And out of
this place he confuteth the Donatists who said: Behold here in Afric is the
Church, and in no other place besides.

And that of the Prophet Isay of Isay 61. 10.
both. He has clothed me with the garment of salvation, and with the garment
of justice: he has compassed me as a bridegroom decked with a Crown, and as
a bride adorned with her Jewels. Where Christ is called the bride and the
bridegroom, that is, the head and the body: and that of the Psalm, Psalm. 2.
The kings of the earth have stood up and the Princes have gathered together
against our Lord and against his Christ. Which was fullfilled in the head, and
daily is fullfilled in the members.

The first cause of the obscurity of scripture arises from this, that
oftentimes, when we think least, passage is made from the litterall sense to
the mystical, from carnal things to spiritual, from temporal to eternal,
from the Kings of Israel, to Christ the king himself, and contrariwise. This
especially is performed in the Psalms and the Prophets, as is to be seen in
the 7. Chapter of Isay, where from the History of two kings (of the which one
was Rasin King of Syria, and the other Phacee King of Israel) passage is made
presently to the B. Virgin: Behold (says he) a virgin shall conceive, and
shall bring forth a son, and his name shall be called Emanuel. And in the 14.
Chapter, where the Prophet passes from the king of Babylon unto Lucifer: and
in the 71. Psalm passage is made from Solomon unto Christ; All the kings of
earth shall adore him: Vide D. Hieron. l. 5. in psalm. cap. 16.
and in the sixth Chapter of S. John, the Evangelist passes from barley loaves
to the Eucharistical or Sacramental bread. And so often times in other places.

The sixth obscurity arises from this, that in the Histories of Scripture
things are not set down in that order in which they were done. In like manner
that the computation of years does not appear plain and manifest. Lastly
that certain books often times are cited, which if they were extant, they
would help the reader very much, but seeing they are not to be found, they
leave him doubtful and in suspense, as are these which follow.

1. The book of the wars of our Numer. 21. v. 14. Iosue 10. v. 13. 3. Reg.
11. v. 41. 3. Reg. 14. etc.
Lord. 2. The book of the Just. 3. The book of the words, concerning the
days of Solomon. 4. The book of the speeches concerning the days of the
kings of Judah, and the kings of Israel. 5. The book of Samuel the Prophet 1.
Paral. 29. v. 29. Ibidem.
concerning the acts of David. 6. The book of Nathan the Prophet concerning
the same things. 7. The volume of Gad the Prophet. Ibid. 2. Paral. 9. v. 19.
Ibid. Ibid.
8. The book of Nathan the Prophet concerning the acts of Solomon. 9. The
book of Achias the Silonite of the same. 10. The vision of Addo the Prophet 2.
Paral. 20. v. ^4.
against Jeroboam the son of Nabat. 11. The history of the kings of Israel
written by Iehu the son of Hanan. ^. Paral. 26. v. 22.
12. The history of king Ozias, written by Isay the son of Amos. 13. The
sermons of Ose, concerning 2. Paral 33. v. 19. 2. Paral. 35. v. 25 Iere. ^6. v.
6.
the deeds of Manasses. 14. The lamentation of Jeremy in the funeral of king
Josias. 15. The volume of Jeremy concerning the ruin of the City, and the
captivity of the people. 16. The book of Jeremy concerning Iere. 51. v. 61. 1.
Machab. 16. v. 24. 2. Macha. 2. 1.
the destruction of Babylon. 17. The book of the time of the preisthood of
John Hircanus. 18. Descriptions of Jeremy the Prophet. 19. The book of Henoch.
Epist. I^d^ Apostoli.

Besides these causes, there are many others the which I will touch in passing.
For first somtymes there are many sentences couched together between the
which, either there is no connection, or at least the connection does not
appear. 2. Hebrew words occur the which of few are understood. 3 Oftentimes
the answer which is made seems not to be so fit, and to the purpose of the
question propounded. 4. Very often words are doubtful, so that it cannot be
discerned in what sense they are to be taken, as in this place of the first to
the Corinthians. For other foundation no 1. Cor. ^. v 11.
man can lay, besides that which is laid which is Christ Jesus. And if any man
build upon this foundation gould, silver, precious stones wood, hay stubble,
the work of every one shall be manifest: for the day of our Lord will declare,
because it shall be revealed in fire: and the work of every one of what kind it
is, the fire shall try. If any man's work abide which he built thereupon: he
shall receive reward, if any man's work he shall suffer detryment, but himself
shall be saved, yet so as by fire.

This place without doubt is most hard. 1. Because it is hard to understand
what is meant, by gould, silver, hay, and stubble. 2. What is meant by the day
of our Lord. 3. What by fire. 4. What it is to burn, and to suffer detriment.
Lastly what it is to be saved so as by fire. Whereupon S. Augustine writes
Aug. in l. d^^i^e and oper. c. 15
plainly, that this is one of these places of which S. Peter spoke in his last
epistle, when he said, there are some things in the epistles of S. Paul hard to
be understood. Petr. ^ost. epist 3. 16.


That other place of S. Paul is as hard. What shall they do that are baptized
1. Cor. 15. ^^.
for the dead, if the dead rise not again at all? why also are they baptized
for them? for it is not easy to explicate what to be baptized signifies in
this place; and what to be baptized for the dead. As concerning the which, six
diverse opinions are extant in Bellarmine. Bell. lib. 1. d^ Purg. c. 4.


Likewise in the same Apostle this sentence is found. It is impossible for them
that were once illuminated, have tasted also of the heavenly gift, and were
made partakers of the holy Ghost: have moreover tasted the good word of God,
and the powers of the world to come, and are fallen to be renewed again to
penance, crucifying again to themselves the son of God. Which words are
most obscure, and by the ill understanding of them, the heresy of the Nouatians
arose in S. Cyprians time, who said, that neither penance, nor pardon was to be
given to them that fell; and therefore they called themselves Catharos, that is
pure and clean. And this is sufficient about the causes whereby the Scripture
according to the true and lawful sense thereof is very hard and obscure. There
remains yet another question, which shall be briefly examined.

Wherefore is it Gods will, that the Scripture should be obscure?
THIS truly is a great question and worthy to be sought out, wherefore the
Scripture being by reason of the things themselves, and the mysteries therein
contained very obscure, is made yet more obscure by reason of the manner of
treating thereof, and this according unto the will and disposition of God. And
wherefore rather by his will and disposition are not those mysteries which
seem obscure by themselves, so clearly propounded, that there may be no
difficulty to any in the understanding of them? Truly there be diverse reasons
of this, of the which I will here set down some few.

The first reason is. Because God as he is willing that an order be kept in all
other things, even so also in his Church to wit, that there should be some who
might teach, and some who might be taught, which order could not be kept, if
the Scripture were so plain that it might easily be understood of all, to the
which that place of S. Paul does belong. He gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and Ephesians 4. 11.
other some Evangelists, and other some pastors and Doctors, to the
consumation of the Saints unto the work of the ministry, unto the edifying of
the body of Christ, that is of the Church. And also that to the Corinthians:
Are all Apostles? are all, Prophets? are all doctors? do 1. Cor. 12* 29.
all interpret? as though he had said in no wise. For it is the office of some
to teach and interpret, of others to learn and give ear, which in the same
place is declared with a noble example taken from man's body. For even as in a
man's body there be many members, yet not all of them are exercised about the
same office: even so in the Church which is Christ's body there be many
faithful, yet all are not partakers of the same grace proceeding from God. For
to one 1 Cor. 12. 8. and 9.
is given the work of wisdom, to another the working of miracles, to another
the discerning of spirits, to another the interpretation of languages. And as
the same Apostle speaks in another place. To every one as God has Romans 12. 5.
divided the measure of his faith, where he adds in the same place: I say to
all that Romans 12. 3.
are among you not to be more wise then behooves to be wise. Which is as much
to say: even as the eyes have not the office of hearing, nor the ears of
seeing, nor the arms of walking, nor the feet of eating, because it is not
granted them so by nature: even so in the Church, not all ought to use the
office of teaching, not all of interpreting the scripture, not all of working
miracles (for that were to be more wise then behooves to be wise) but every one
does that which he ought to do even as it is given him from God, in division of
graces.

But our adversaries do err exceedingly against this divine ordination, who
permit the liberty of reading and interpreting of Scripture to all; as to all
mere lay men, yea to poor and silly women. For seeing that they be not called
of God to the office, they do appear most unfit to thrust themselves into it.
For now it is come to that pass, that there is not one, whether he be Tapster,
Tailor, or Tinker (Lutheran or Caluinist) who does not think himself
skillfull enough in understanding and interpreting the Scripture, only by his
own labor, without the help and instruction of any other. But let them hear
what the Apostle says, the eye cannot say to the 1. Cor. 1^. 21.
hand, I need not thy help: or again, the head to the feet, you are not
necessary for me.

Let them hear that of the first to 1. Tim. 2. 11. 1. Cor. 14. v. 34.
Timothy. Let the women learn in silence withal subjection: But to teach I
permit not the woman, nor to have dominion over the man, but to be in silence.
And to the Corinthians. Let women hold their peace in the Church, for it is not
permitted them to speak, but to be subject. But if they list to learn any
thing let them ask their own husbands at home. But to what end all this? Truly
to this, that the order set down of God in his Church ought to be observed.
Are all Doctors? do all interpret? No, For there are divisions of graces:
from hence follows that those silly women who pratle much out of the
Scriptures, and blush not to blab out their own private opinions concerning
controversies of faith, do most foolishly arrogate unto themselves that which
neither they have on or belongs unto them. But in this they imitate their
Mother Eua, who could not hold her peace in paradise, but her husband being
silent she began to dispute with the serpent, and presently was overcome by him
and deceived, as her husband also by her, and many such Eues are found in this
age which do the same.

The second reason, if the Scripture were easy, it would be understood not only
of the faithful who are in the Church, but also of those who are Infidells and
no members of the Church: and so by little and little the Majesty and authority
of it would be overthrown. To this purpose is that which is said in S. Math.
Give not that which is holy to dogs, Math. 7. 6.
neither cast ye your pearls before swyne least perhaps they tread them which
their feet. As D. Thomas 1. p. q. 1. art. 9. ad 2. and S. Aug. (aut quisquis
aut hoc ille est) hom. 7 in Apocalip.
It is understood by S. Augustine, and S. Thomas.

If the Scripture were plain and easy, doubtless it would be less esteemed
both of the infidells and Christians then is fitting. Moreover to many it would
be an occasion of pride and arogancy. For if they should perceive that these
things which treat of profound mysteries were plain and apparent, they would
brag of themselves excessiuely, and imagine nothing to be so hard which they
could not by their own wit and learning conceive and understand. But now
contrariwise they see the obscurity of the Scripture to be so great, that by no
means they are able to overcome it, and therefore finding themselves ignorant
and wanting the instruction of others, they fly seriously to God, to the end
that he may open their eyes and illuminate their understanding, that his divine
mysteries may be laid open unto them. As David did who said: Open my eyes and I
will consider Psalm. 118. verse. 18. 34.
the wonders of thy law. And a little after. Give me understanding and I will
search the law. And again in the same Psalm. Illumimate thy face upon thy
servant and teach me thy iustifications. And very well: for the sense of the
Scripture can proceed from none but from the Author of the Scripture: But the
author of the Scripture is the holy Ghost, and therefore it is called the word
of God: the sense therefore of the scripture can come from none but from the
holy Ghost, to which that place of S. Peter does belong, no prophecy 2. Petr.
1. 20.
of Scripture is made by private interpretation. The cause headdeth: For not by
man's will was prophecy brought at any time, but the holy men of God spoke,
inspired with the holy Ghost.

And thus it comes to pass, that proud and arogant men who are wise in their
own judgments, and attribut much to their own wits, do never obtain the true
sense, because God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. And
Math. 11. 25.
this is it that Christ spoke of in the Gospel: I confess to the O Father,
because thou have hid these things from the wise and the prudent, and have
revealed them to little ones. And also the Apostle, saying themselves wise,
they become foolish.

It follows necessarily out of the obscurity of the Scripture, that many
Controversies arise amongst Christians.
THIS is another principle of those which I set down before. And truly it
needs no other confirmation then daily experience. For it is generally well
known that in all ages even from the Apostles time unto this our present age,
that there has sprung out always new controversies about the true and lawful
sense of Scripture. But now letting pass all those which have been set
abroach in the time of Arius, Macedonius, Donatus, and other ancient
heretics; Infinite they are that occur in this present time, of which I will
set down some: as for example, there is a controversy.

1. In what sense those words of Christ are to be understood: This is my body.
The Lutherans understand it so, this bread is my body. The Caluinists, this
bread signifies my body. The Catholics agree with neither of them.

2. How that of S. John is to be understood: Joan. 3. 5^
Unless a man be borne again of the water and the spirit, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of God. The Catholics and the Lutherans do understand
thereby the necessity of baptism with water; and also out of it do gather that
infants without baptism can in no wise be saved. The Caluinists deny all this.

3. What Christ's meaning was when he spoke these words to the young man of whom
mention is made in S. Matthew: If thou will enter into life, keep the
comaundments. Calvin interprets it to be spoken in jest; the Catholics hold
it to have been said in earnest.

4. Whether out of these words: Jesus came the doors being shut, and stood in
the Joan. 20. 26.
midst of them, may be gathered that Christ pierced the doors shut. The
Catholics affirm it. Others deny it And surely, Oecolampadius he thinks,
that whilst the doors were shut, Christ crept in at the window: others imagine
I know not what chinkes by the which they say he entered in.

5. Whether Christ spoke of the Sacrament of the Eucharist when he said:
Unless you eat the flesh of the son of Joan. 6. 53.
man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life in you. The Catholics
affirm it: the Lutherans deny it.

6. Whether Christ binds all lay men to receive the Chalice, when he says:
Drink yea all of this. Calvin Call. lib. 4. Instit. c. 17.. 47.. 48.
holds he does. There is a decree (says he) from the eternal God, that all
drink. And a little after. They are words of him commanding: Drink ye all
of this Chalice. But the Catholics teach, that these words only belonged to
the Apostles, as S. Marck declares, when he says, Mark. 14. 24.
and they all drank of it.

7. Whether sin he taken properly Romans 6. 12.
of the Apostle: Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body. The
Lutherans and the Caluinists hold that it is: and from thence they gather that
concupiscense (of the which the Apostle there speaks) is original sin: but
the Catholics teach, that the word sin is there improperly taken, to wit for
the cause of sin; because concupiscense though it be not properly a sin,
yet it does provoke to sin.

8. Whether out of that place of S. Paul: we account a man to be justified by
Romans 3 28.
faith without the works of the law; may be gathered that only faith
justifies. The Lutherans affirm it. The Catholics deny it.

9. Whether that place of the Apostle: But he shall be saved, yet so as by fire;
be understood of Purgatory fire? The Catholics do affirm it with S. Aug. upon
the 37. Psalm, and other more ancient Fathers. The Lutherans and the
Caluinists deny it.

10. Whether it may be gathered out of S. Paul, that the Apostles had wives,
where he says: Have we not 1. Cor. 9. 5.
power to lead about a woman a sister, as also the rest of the Apostles? The
Lutherans affirm it out of Luthers Gloss which is this, of leading about a
woman wi^e. But truly the Catholics will not admit this gloss.

11. Of what faith Christ speaks when he says: believe only, and she Luc. 8.
50.
shall be safe. The Lutherans interpret it to be justifying faith, whose effect
is the remission of sin. But the Catholics understand it of that faith which
Iarus Prince of the Sinagogue did believe that his daughter then dead could be
raised again by Christ.

12. And what the sense of that place is: Do good or evil if you can: Out of
Isay. 41. 23.
which Luther proves that men have not free will; because they cannot do good
and ill as they list. The Catholics laugh at this their argument, because
those words are not spoken to men, but to the Idols of the Gentills, which
although they be worshipped of the Gentills as Gods, yet they be not Gods,
because they can neither profit their worshippers, nor hurt their contemners.

13. Whether out of that which is written of S. John Baptist: The infant in
Luc. 1. 44.
my womb did leap for joy, may be gathered that all infants when they are
baptized have actual faith? The Lutherans say yea, the Catholics no.

14. Whether God commanded all to be married, when he said, Increase Genesis 1. 28^
and multiply. The Lutherans hold that in those words are implied a precept to
marry. But the Catholics take it as Genesis 9. 1.
a blessing, given to marriage already contracted, as appears in the text it
self.

15. Whether this place of S. Paul: 1. Tim. 2. 5.
There is one mediator of God and men, man Christ Jesus, does exclude the
invocation and intercession of Saints, as the adversaries affirm. Or do not as
we Catholics maintain, and prove, because it does not exclude the invocation
of Saints upon earth: otherwise the Apostle world not have said, Brethren pray
for us. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 25.


16. Who are these two witnesses of whom is made mention in the 11. of the
Apocalips: And I will give to my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a
thousand two hundred sixty days, clothed with sack-clothes. Some of our
adversaries say, that Luther and Calvin are meant thereby. Others the old and
the new testament: but the Catholics say Henoch, and Helias, or Moses, and
Helias.

17. What that signifies which is written of Antichrist in the Apocalips. And
he did great signs, so that he also made fire to come down from heaven. Our
aduesaries do understand by fire descending Pow. lib. 1. de. Ant. cap. 26.
Bald. in dispu. de Anti^h. cap. 6.
from heaven, the Pope his excommunication, as Powell the Caluinist, and
Balduinus the Lutheran do hold, and hereby they prove that the Pope is
Antichrist. The Catholics contemn these follies.

The Scripture cannot be the Judge of these, and the like Controversies.
IT is certain that in these and such like Controversies which are about the
sense of the Scripture, some certain judge is needful, who may decide the
same, and plainly pronounce that this is true, and not the other. But now I
will prove with two arguments that the Scripture it self cannot be this judge.

The first is drawn out of that which I said before in this manner: The Judge
so ought to pronounce sentence that both parties at variance may well
understand it, otherwise he should pronounce it to no purpose; But the
Scripture when the sense thereof is obscure, and doubtful (which falls out
often as I have showed above) cannot so plainly pronounce sentence, that it may
be understood of both parties at variance. For if it should clearly pronounce
sentence in any such case, the sense of the Scripture should not be obscure,
but plain and manifest, which is contrary to our supposition. Therefore in
such a case the Scripture cannot be judge.

Perchance you will say, that although the sense of the Scripture in one place
be obscure, yet notwithstanding in some other place it is very plain, and
therefore the Scripture by that place which is clear, may pronounce sentence
of that place which is obscure.

I answer. The heretics harp on this string but in vain. For first, if it
be so, wherefore by that means do they not end all controversies between them?
wherefore I say, do not the Lutherans and the Caluinists, seeing they so long
contend about some obscure place, run presently to another which is plain? or
if they do so, why make they not an end of all their strife? Here they are at a
nonplus, and know not what to say.

Furthermore that the words of the Scripture are plain, is one thing, but that
the sense is plain is another. For the plainness of the words depends upon
the knowledge of grammar. but the sense upon the intention and counsel of the
holy Ghost. And doubtless oftentimes it may happen that one may be perfect in
the knowledge of his grammar, and yet very ignorant of the meaning of the holy
Ghost. So that it may fall out very well, that the words of the Scripture may
be plain, yet the sense of the words as they be intended of the holy Ghost may
be obscure. To show this to the eye I will declare it with this example. The
words of Christ in the scripture be these: This is my body: This is my blood.
Which words if they be taken according to their proper signification, are so
manifest and plain that they may be well understood of all men, whether they
be Christians, Jews, Turks, or Ethnicks. But about the sense of them intended
by the holy Ghost almost infinite controversies are amongst Christians. The
like is to be found in those words of S. John. Mary Magdalen comes early to
the monument when it was yet dark. And in those of S. Mark. She came to the
monument the sun being risen. Then the which words nothing could be spoken
more plainly, yet because the first do seem to be contrary to the second, it
may be doubted, and that with great reason, what the proper sense of them is,
and how they may agree one with another.

Moreover I say that oftentimes it happens that the one party thinks that
place clear and manifest which the other houldeth to be obscure and intricate.
Now then what is to be done in such a case? or what judge is to be admitted?
doubtless the scripture cannot be the judge, seeing the controversy is about
the sense of it, when some think it plain, others obscure, and of some it is
construed in this sense, of others in another. What counsel shall we take
therefore? must not then another judge be sought out. For example. There is
contention betwixt us and the Caluinists, as concerning the true descending of
Christ into hell which they deny, we mantaine, and do for our belief bring a
double testimony. The one is out of the Creed: He descended into hell, the
other out of the acts: Thou will not leave my soul in hell. We say that both
of these be clear and evident; The Caluinists deny both, and with their
obscure interpretation they make both places most obscure. For they interpret
the first in this sense: He descended into hell, that is (say they) he suffered
upon the Cross most cruel and horrible torments of a damned and forlorn man,
that pressed with anguish he was forced to cry out, My God, why have thou
forsaken me? So Calvin. But Call. lib. 2. inst. c. 16.. 10. 11. and. catechism^
Hidelberg^ quaest. 44.
they take the latter in this sense: Thou shall not leave my Carcass in the
grave. What is to be done here? To what judge shall we appeal? If we ask
counsel of the Scripture, it will say the same that it said before. It will
not ad so much as any one jot to that set down. Now of that which is said
before is the controversy, which can never be ended by that which is said
before. If then after the Controversy begun, the Scripture say no new thing at
all, but remain still in the same ancient terms, truly by it the contention
cannot be decided, but of necessity we must either go to some other Judge, or
one of the parties contending must yield voluntarily, or else they are forced
still to continue in their endless strife and contention.

The other argument is this. There are many testimonies of the Scripture which
can by no means be interpreted according to the true sense, but by the
authority and tradition of the Church: Therefore if a Controversy should arise
about these testimonies, the Scripture only cannot be judge, but we ought to
fly to the tradition and authority of the Church: as for example Christ says,
Teach ye all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son and of the holy Ghost. The true and lawful sense is, that in baptism we
are to pronounce these words. I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost. And that baptism without such a verbal and
express pronuntiation of those words is no true baptism. We and our
adversaries agree in this. But if one should deny this to be the sense, and
should say, that these words were not needful: In the name of the Father, and
the Son, and the holy Ghost, but that an inward will and intention of
baptizing him, in the name of the holy Trinity were sufficient; how should he
be confuted? only out of the words of the Scripture? Nothing less, seeing the
words be these baptizing them in the name of the Father etc. where there is
not any vocal invocation of the blessed Trinity insinuated, to be of
necessity? From whence have we then that it ought to be verily from the
practice and tradition of the Church? If thou do reject this, thou shall not
have help against the adversary, who shall deny the pronouncing of these words
to be necessary.

Another example is this. Christ says, Unless a man be borne again of water
and spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. This place according to
the true and lawful sense is understood of the necessity of baptism with
water, as the Lutheranes themselves do confess, yet the Caluinists
notwithstanding deny it. How therefore can they be confuted of the Lutherans?
Truly not out of the Word alleged. For although water be named there, yet it
is not so expressly named, as though it ought to be understood of true and
natural water. For in another place it is called fire as in S. Luke: He shall
baptize Lue. 3. v. 1^.
you in spirit and fire, and yet it is not understood of true fire. Therefore
how can it appear that in the former place true water is to be understood? or
how will the Lutherans prove it against the Caluinists? Not by any other
means, then by the practice, order, and tradition of the Church.

Another. Christ in his last supper did not only institute the blessed
Sacrament, but also he adjoined the washing of feet, and in the institution of
the blessed Sacrament he said, Eat and drink: but in the washing of eete, and
you ought one to wash the feet of another. Here the Adversaries say, that in
the first words there is a precept, but not in the last. And so the faithful
by Gods commaundment are obliged to receive the blessed Sacrament in both
kinds, but not so to the washing of feet. Now I ask, how they are certain
of this? or by what pretense do they think themselves bound to the receiving
of both kinds, and yet free from the washing of feet? Certainly they cannot
pretend the words of Scripture: For they seem rather to show the contrary. For
these words, Eat and drink, seem to signify no more of themselves, then if a
houskeeper should say to his guests, eat and drink, and be merry. And if the
houskeeper should say so, it would not be thought that be meant thereby to bynd
them by a precept. Therefore seeing Christ spoke in the same manner, how is it
certain that he intended by that manner of speaking to oblige all the
faithful to the receiving of both kinds? But these words; You ought to wash
the feet of one another, seem to signify a precept no less, then if the
master should say to the servant: Thou must cover the table. How therefore
know they that by these words they are not obliged to wash the feet of one
another, seeing the words themselves do show plainly an obligation? Only by the
practice, and Tradition of the Church. For the Church never has used this
washing as necessary, which notwithstanding she would have done if she had
thought that she had been obliged to it, and that by Christ's commaundment.

I omit many like examples which are easy to be found. And out of these I
conclude thus: The Scripture may be considered two ways. 1. According to the
bare and outward letter. 2. According to the inward sense which is intended of
the holy Ghost. But neither of these two ways can it be judge of
Controversies. Not the former way as we have proved in the first part of this
second argument. Neither as it is taken in the second way, because the sense of
the Scripture often times is so obscure and doubtful, that there is need of
some other judge who may define this to be the true meaning, which is intended
of the holy Ghost, and not any other contrary. And this is sufficient about the
second Argument drawn from the Scripture.

THE III. ARGUMENT. Which is drawn out of the Controversies them selves.
THIS argument, thus I propound. There are many Controuersyes about faith and
Religion, of the which in the Scripture there is no mention made at all, or at
least not so much as is sufficient, so that the Scripture may give sentence of
them: therefore in deciding of them, some other judge is to be sought. Such
Controuersyes be these.

The first, whether the Books of Toby, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and
the Machabees be Canonical land divine? The Lutherans, and the Caluinists say
no. But the Catholics say the contrary. Now who must be judge to decide this
contention? The Scripture cannot be. Neither the Lutherans nor the Caluinists
(which is well to be noted) do appeal to the Scripture, but to the Canon and
tradition of the Jews. They say therefore that those Books cannot be found in
the Canon of the Jews, which is extant in S. Hierome, and therefore they are
not to be accounted Canonical and Divine. Hence they confess, that in this
case there ought to be some other judge besides the Scripture. And who is that?
The tradition of the Jews say they. But is not this strange, to see our
Adversaries make more reckoning of Jews, then of Christians? For although they
be desirous to be accounted Christians they are deadly enemies to the
traditions of Christ, and his Apostles, and yet notwithstanding make great
account of the Jews traditions. Wherefore say they not rather with S.
Augustine: Not August. l. ^8. de ciuit. Dei c. 36.
the Jews, but the Church holds the Books of the Machabees for Canonical?
or with Isidorus: The Jews do not receive the books of Toby, Judith, and the
Machabees, but the Church does number them among the Canonical Scriptures?
Ifidor. in l. Pro^m. de lib. vet. and no^. Test.
And in the same place: The Book of Wisdom, and Ecclesiasticus are known
to have the like authority that other Canonical Books have?

The second is, how many Sacraments there be of the new Law? Our adversaries
say but two, Baptism, and the Lords supper: The Catholics believe seven. But
what says the Scripture? Nothing as concerning any certain number, and
therefore it cannot be the Judge in this Controversy. From whence therefore
receive the Catholics the number of seven, if not out of Scripture? From the
tradition and consent of the Church. From whence the adversaries the number of
2.? Let them look from whence. Truly they have it not from the Scripture: but
if they think they have, let them perform these three things. First let them
show out of Scripture, that the name of a Sacrament is attributed to Baptism,
and to the Eucharist, and not as well to Confirmation, Order, Penance,
Matrimony, and Extreme Unction. Secondly out of Scripture let them define a
Sacrament. Thirdly let them show, that the definition agrees fitly with
Baptism, and the Eucharist, and not as well to the rest. If they can do this
they do something: but that they neither will, nor ever can do this I am most
certain.

For first where will they find in Scripture, that the name of a Sacrament is
attributed to Baptism, and the Eucharist. Truly in no place. But I will find
where it is applied to Matrimony. For so writes the Apostle. For this cause
shall man leave his Father and Mother, and Ephesians. 5. 31.
shall cleave to his wife and they shallbe two in one flesh. This is a great
Sacrament: But I speak in Christ, and in the Church. As though he had said,
That a man shall leave his parents and cleave to his wife. This is a great
Sacrament, because it is a sign of the vnio^ of Christ with his Church that
is, the marriage of Christ, and his Church.

Secondly where will they find Luth. in l. de captiu Bab ^. vlt Melan. in ep.
Conf. August. art. 13. Mel. in locis* ommun^^us tit. d^ numero Sacramentorum.
in the Scripture the definition of a Sacrament? Luther indeed does thus define
it: A Sacrament is a promise annexed to an external sign.

Melancthon thus: A Sacrament is a rite which has the commandment of God, to
which is adjoined a promise of grace, that is to say, of free reconciliation,
or remission of sins, as he explicateth himself.

Calvin in this manner: A Sacrament is an outward sign by the which Calu. l.
4. Instit cap. 14.. ^.
our Lord does seal to our consciences the promise of his good will to
underprop the weakness of our faith. But verily none of all these definitions
are in the Scripture. Nay one of them does not agree with another. For Luther
in his definition says, that the promise is of the essence of a Sacrament.
Melancthon houldeth, that it is annexed to the Sacrament. But Calvin
insinuates in his, that the promise is not annexed to the Sacrament, but
rather that the Sacrament is annexed and added to the promise; and not that the
promise is of the effect of Gods good will toward us. Therefore according to
Melancthon thus the promise were to be expressed if any shall receive the
sacrament of Baptism, or of the Eucharist; Him I promise the remission of his
sins. But according to Calvin in this manner; God has promised to you
remission of sins and life everlasting, and this promise he declares and seals
by the Sacraments.

Thirdly, whatsoever is to be thought of these definitions, which our
Adversaries have newly invented, how will they show out of the Scripture, that
they agree to Baptism, and the Eucharist? I for my part see not. But let us
try. One definition is this* A Sacrament is a rite which has a Commandment of
God, to which is annexed a promise of remission of sins. Let our adversaries
prove out of scripture, that this definition is agreeable to the Eucharist. Let
them prove I say this out of Scripture, that the Eucharist has a promise of
remission of sins annexed unto it. Or, that which is all one, That God in the
Scripture does promise us remission of our sins if we receive this Sacrament.
They can never prove it. For this Sacrament is not ordained of God to remit a
man his sins, or to make of a wicked man, or a sinner a just and holy man,
but rather it is instituted to the end, that it may nourish, confirm, and
increase that justice, grace and sanctity, which was in him before he received
this Sacrament. Nay rather it is so far off from remitting of sins, as it
is pernicious to a sinner if he come to it, knowing himself guilty of deadly
sin. Hence it is of the Apostle to the Corinthians. But let a man prove
himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that chalice, for he
that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to himself.
And Christ in his last supper would not give the Eucharist to his Apostles
before he had washed their feet, to the end that he might give us to understand
that none unless they be washed pure, and free from all mortal sin are to be
admitted to the holy table of our Lord. And the reason is plain out of the
nature of this Sacrament. For what is the Eucharist, but a kind of spiritual
meat, and drink by the which our soul is refreshed and made strong? For my
flesh, says Christ, is truly meat, and my blood is truly drink. And
therefore as corporal meat and drink does not profit the body, unless it be
alive: even so neither the Eucharist does help the soul, unless it be void of
sin, which is the death of the soul.

The third Controversy is, whether exorcismes, and other ceremonies used in the
Catholic Church may be admitted in Baptism? That Lutherans admit them, the
Caluinists reject the^. Yet neither of them both can confirm their opinion out
Scripture. Not the Lutherans, because the Scripture in no place makes mention,
that such ceremonies ought to be used: but only we receive them from the
tradition of the Church. Of the which thus S. Augustine writes. By the most
ancient tradition of the Church (says he) children are exercised Aug l. 2. de
nupt. and concup. cap. 29.
and breathed upon, that they may be translated to the kingdom of Christ, from
the power of darkness. Not the Caluinists, without it be in this manner. No
ceremonies are to be used in the Church, but those of the which there is
express command in the Scripture: But there is no command of the ceremonies,
which the Catholics use in Baptism: Therefore such Ceremonies are not to be
used. But the M^ior is both false and contrary to the Caluinists themselves.
For the Caluinists do use many ceremonies in Baptism, of the which there is no
command in the whole Suripture, such are these. 1. That the infant must be
baptized before all the people, and that it should be on a Sunday, or some other
day when the people is wont to come together. 2. That they who bring the
infant to be baptized should be asked whether they will promise to instruct the
child in faith and manners, after he shall grow to perfect age. 3. That a name
should be imposed upon the infant, who is baptized 4. That the form of
Baptism should be pronounced in their country language. 5. That the Creed, our
Lords prayer and others also should be recyted. Which ceremonies Calvin
prescribes in a little book treating of the form of ministering the
Sacraments. But where I pray you, is commanded in Scripture Baptism ought to
be ministered? Certainly in no place. Hence therefore follows, that either they
must reject all those their ceremonies, or else grant, that all those which we
use are not therefore to be condemned, because they are not expressly commanded
in Scripture.

The fourth Controversy. Whether those who are baptized of heretics, are to be
baptized again? S. Crprian in times past who was Bishop of Carthage did
affirm it with some others. But S. Augustine did deny it, and followed that
doctrine which was more true, the which he did defend by no other means then
by the Apostolical tradition, and practice of the Church. For so he writes
against the Donatists. Which custom (says he) to wit that baptism may not
be iterated, I believe to have proceeded Aug. l. 2. cont. Donat. c. 7.
out of the Apostolical tradition. And again. That custom which was opposed
against Cyprian, is to be believed to have received it beginning from the
Apostolical tradition, to the which Cyprian did not yeald, because it seemed
to him utterly destitute of any authority from the Scripture.

There are many other such like controversies which cannot be decided out of
Scripture alone, but they must of necessity have some other Judge which here I
will briefly point to. 1. Whether Baptism may be given by one dipping. 2.
Whether Christians may worship Sunday in place of the Sabboath. 3. Whether our
Lady remained a Virgin after her Childbirth. 4. Whether S. Peter the Apostle
was Bishop of the Roman Church. 5. Whether the Creed be Canonical and
Apostolical. 6. Whether in the old Testament there was some outward remedy for
women against original sin.

THE IIII. ARGUMENT. Which is taken out of the use and practice of the old
Testament, where not the Scripture, but the Bishop was acknowleged for the
Judge.
IT is certain, that in the old Testament all legal controversies which were
of great moment were to be ended and decided by the High Priest, as by the
supreme Judge upon earth, and not by the Scripture only. Witness of this is
Joseph in these words. The high Priest does offer up sacrifice to God before
all other Priests, he keeps the laws, he is judge of controuersyes, he
punishes offenders, whoseuer is disobedient to him is punished as impious
against God.

And this is plainly deduced out of that place of Deuteronomy. If thou perceive
Deuteronomy. 17. 8.
that the judgment with thee be hard and doubtful between blood and blood,
cause and cause, leprosy and not leprosy, and thou see that the words of the
Judges within thy gates do vary: arise and go up to the place which thy Lord
thy God shall choose, and thou shall come to the Priests of the Leuiticall
stock, and to the Judge that shallbe at that time, and thou shall ask of
them, who shall show thee the truth of the judgment, neither shall thou decline
to the right hand, nor to the left hand: but he that shallbe proud refusing to
obey the Commandment of the Priest which at that time ministereth to our Lord
thy God, and the decree of the Judge, that man shall dye.

About this passage we must note, first that amongst the Jews there were
diverse Controuersyes: in this two especially are recorded. The one concerning
b^oud. The other concerning leprosy: but in other places we find four as in
the second of Paral p. in these words. Wheresoever there is question of the 2.
Paral. 19. v. 10.
Law, of the Commandment, of Ceremonies, of justification. Where Lyranus tells
us, that some did arise out of the Law of the Decalogue, some out of the moral
Commandments, which are not in the Law of the Decalogue: some out of the
Ceremonial Precepts belonging to the worship of God. Some lastly out of those
which were judicial, and very convenient for the preserving of outward peace
and justice.

Again we must note, that in every City there were placed inferior judges,
who according to their office were bound to decide such Controuersyes, as is
set down in the 16. of Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 16. 18.
Judges and Masters shall thou appoint in all thy gates which our Lord thy God
shall given thee in every of thy Tribs, that they may judge the people with just
judgment, and not decline to either part. And again, he appointed judges of
the Land in all the fenced Cittyes 2. Paral. 19. 5.
of Judah in every place.

Moreover we must observe, that when inferior Judges could not agree amongst
themselves, nor decide those conferences, which were presented to them for some
peculiar difficulty, then they were forced to repair to Jerusalem to those
who were superior judges, over whom the high Priest was President or supreme
judge, to whose sentence all were bound to obey under pain of death. This is
plain out of the words, which are set down before Duet. 17. 8.

From hence we gather that there was a double Tabernacle seat or Counsel
amongst the Jews; the one was greater, the other less. Between them there was
great difference. First because the greater was only at Jerusalem, the lesser
in every City 2. In the greater were decided matters of greater moment, in the
lesser those which were easy. 3. In greater the high Priest was President, not
so in the lesser. 4. It was lawful to appeal from the less to the greater,
not so from the greater to the lesser. 5. In the greater there was 70. persons
besides the high Priest, in the lesser 23. 6. The greater was called Mark. 14.
^5. Luc. 9. 22. Act. 4. 5.
Sanedrin, or Synedrion or the Council of the Elders, the lesser not so. Of
the greater is often made mention in the Gospel.

Both these Counsels had their beginning under Moses. The lesser was ordained
according to the Counsel of Iethro, but the greater according to the
Commandment of God. The occasion of ordeyning the lesser is described in
Exodus, in these words: And the next day Exodus 18. 13.
Moses sat to judge the people, who stood by Moses from morning until
night, which thing when his Allied had seen, to wit all things that he did in
the people, he says; What is this thou do in the people? Why sit thou
alone, and all the people attends from morning until night? To whom Moses
answered: The people comes to me seeking the sentence of God, and when any
Controversy chances among them, they come unto me to judge between them, and
to show the Precepts of God, and his laws. But he said, Thou do not well,
thou art tired with foolish labor, both thou, and this people that is with
thee, the business is above thy strengh, thou alone can not sustain it. But
hear my words and counsels, and God shallbe with thee. Be thou to the people
in these things that pertain to God, to report their words unto him, and to
show to the people the ceremonies, and rite of worshipping, and the way wherein
they ought to walk, and the work that they ought to do, and provide out of
all the people men that are wise, and do fear God, in whom there is truth,
and that do hate avarice, and appoint of the Tribunes and Centurions, and
Quinquagenarians, and Decanes which may judge the people at all times, and what
great matter soever shall fall out. let them refer it to thee, and let them
judge the less matters only.

Of the Institution of the greater Council, thus we read. And our Lord Number.
11. 16.
said to Moses; Gather me seauenty men of the ancients of Israel, whom thou
know to be the ancients of the people* and Masters, and thou shall bring
them to the door of the Tabernacle of Covenant, and thalt make them to stand
there with thee, that I may descend, and speak to thee: and I will take off
thy spirit and will deliver it to them that they may sustain with thee the
burden of the people, and thou only be not Ibid. v. 24
burdened. And in another place. Moses therefore came and told the people the
words of our Lord assembling seauenty men of the ancients of Israel, whom he
caused to stand about the Tabernacle: and our Lord descended in a cloud* and
spoke to him, taking away off the spirit that was in Moses and giving it to
the seauenty men. And when the spirit had rested on them, they prophesied,
neither ceased they any more.

But when the Council was almost overthrown, it was restored again by
Iosaphat King of Judah, as is related in these words. Iosaphat therefore dwelt
in Jerusalem, and went forth to the people again from Bersabee unto mount
Ephraim, and recouciled them to our Lord the God of their Fathers. And he
appointed Judges of the Land in all the fenced Cittyes of Judah in every place:
and commanding the Judges he said: Take heed what you do, for you exercise not
the judgment of man but of our Lord, and whatsoever you shall judge, it shall
redound to you. All these words are understood of the lesser Council. But now
of the greater. In Jerusalem also Iosaphat appointed Leuits, and Priests, and
Princes Ibid. v. ^.
of familyes of Israel, that they should judge the judgment and cause of our
Lord to the inhabitants thereof. And he commanded them saying: Thus shall you
do in the fear of our Lord faithfully, and with a perfect heart. Every cause
that shall come to you of your brethren, that dwell in their Cittyes, between
kindred and kindred, wheresoever there is question of the Law, of the
Commandment, of Ceremonies, of Iustifications, show it them that they sin not
against our Lord, and least there come wrath upon you, and your Brethren, so
long therefore you shall not sin. And Amarias the Priest, and your Bishop
shallbe chief in these things, which pertain to God. Moreover Zabidias the
son of Isinahell who is the Prince in the house of Judah, shall be over those
works which pertain to the Kings office.

Now therefore that I may repeat in a word, that which is said. The matter was
thus done by Moses in the desert. First Moses alone (who was an extraordinary
high Priest) did judge all Controuersyes amongst the people. Then a while
after, that he might be released a little from his burden, there were added to
him Tribunes, and Centurions about the number of fifty, and also Decanes, who
judged of the lesser causes, and passed over the greater only unto him: lastly
to his greater comfort 70. Seniors were elected, who might also assist him in
greater causes. After the death of Moses, when the children of Israel were
come into the Land of Promise, there was a double Tribunal and judgment
constituted. The one at Jerusalem, to judge of more hard causes, and the other
in every City was placed, for those which were more easy. This last was given
from the Council of Decanes, and Tribunes, but the first from the Council of
the seauenty Seniors.

Hither may be adjoined, that it was done other wise in the desert under
Moses, then it was under the other high Priests in the Land of promise; for
there was a double difference, the one by reason of the high Priest, the other
by reason of the Council of the Seniors. For the high Priest after his
entrance into the Land of promise did not decyde Controuersyes, but only out of
the written Law. But Moses did decyde many out of the lively voice, and oracle
of God before the law was yet written. Among other were these three. Number. 9. ^.
First what was to be done with them who for their Legal uncleanness, could Number.
15. 32.
not celebrate the Pasch with the rest? Secondly what punishment was to be laid
upon him, who was found gathering Number. 27. 1.
wood upon the Sabbath? Thirdly whether the daughters of Salphaad could have
inheritance amongst the kindred of their Father? Of all which there was nothing
at all written in the Law. Therefore Moses asked Counsel of God by a lively
voice, and receiving an answer did follow the will of God. And then first all
these were translated into the Law.

Of the part of the Council of the Seninors, there was this difference. The
seauenty Seniors, who were elected of Moses, received the spirit of prophesy
even at their election. But whether the rest who succeeded them, by course of
time did receive the same it is uncertain. But this is very credible, that
whenever they consulted of hard matters, they were helped by the singular
assistance of God. And that this assistance was granted especially to the
Bishop, who was chief of them, when he did perform the office of a Judge in
giving of sentence. As concerning the which I will say something heereafer.

AN OBJECTION.
IT may be you will say, that all this is to be understood of Legal
Controuersyes, in the which the High Priest was the supreme Judge, as it is
sufficiently proved: but not of Controuersyes in matters of faith, in the which
the Scripture alone was to be the judge. I answer. This truly is said without
any ground at all. For all Controuersyes, whether they were of faith, or of
other matters were called Legal, for two causes. First they did rise out of
the Law it self not well understood. Secondly, because they we^e to be decyded
by the true interpre^^^^ of the Law. Moreover all of them, without any
exception did belong to the Bishop, even as to the supreme Deuteronomy. 17. 10.
Judge, even those which were of faith and Religion. This is manifest out of
these words cyted a little before: Amarias your Bishop shall be chief in these
things, which appertain to God. But Controuersyes of faith and religion do
belong especially to God, therefore the Bishop was chief in those
Controuersyes. But what is it to be chief in Controuersyes, but to play the
part of a Judge? Also out of the precedent words, Wheresoever question is
made of the Law, of the Commandment of ceremonies, of iustifications, all these
questions were brought to the Bishop, and beside these there were no other,
therefore there were none exempted from the jurisdiction of the Bishop.

And it is confirmed by an example. For among the Controuersyes of Faith, of
which we now especially treat, a principal one was concerning the Messiah. But
even this Controversy ^as referred to the Council of Priests, ^^ether that the
Messiah was borne yet or no, in which the High Priest was the chief. Which to
be so appears by the Gospel: And Herod the King hearing this, was troubled,
and Jerusalem with Matt. 2. 3.
him. And gathering together all the High Priests and Scribes of the people, he
enquired of them, where Christ should be borne. But they said to him. In
Bethleem of Judah; for so it is written by the Prophet: And thou Bethleem the
Land of Judah art not the least among the Princes of Judah, for out of thee shall
come forth the Captain that shall rule my people Israel. In which place,
three things are to be noted. First that King Herod was doubtful of the place
where the Messiah was to be borne. Secondly that he referred the resolution of
this doubt to the Council of Priests. Thirdly that the Priests according to
their office resolved this doubt out of the Scripture, as the rule to the which
they conformed themselves.

Moreover that the Scripture, neither was, nor could be by it self a judge of
these Controuersyes may easily be proved. For the Scripture which then was
extant, especially in some of the first ages, was no other but the law of
Moses, or a volume of the Covenant, and Deuteronomy. But of this volume, there
are three things certain. The Autographum or first copy thereof, was written
by Moses, and placed of the Priests Deuteronomy. 31. 14.
in the Arc of the covenant of our Lord and there kept, that it should be an
authentical instrument, of the which it might be manifest what the will and
Deuteronomy. 17. 8. and Aggaei. 2. 12. and Malach. 2. 7.
disposition of God was. Secondly that the interpretation thereof in doubtful
cases was committed unto Priests, and especially to the high Priest. Thirdly
that this authentical copy was to be read of the Priests unto all the people,
in the Solemnity of the Tabernacles, but once in seven years when it was the
year of remission. Deuteronomy. 31. 10.


Heerehence it follows first, that the people had not the first and
authentical copy of the law of Moses, but only the Priests. If therefore out
of the solemnity of the Tabernacles, in any time of the seven year any legal
Controversy had risen, the people could not ask Council of the authentical
copy, which then they had not, but were to go to the Priest, and ask the
final sentence of him as of the ordinary Judge. Secondly it follows, that
although the people had the copy, yet out of it they could not decyde any
Controversy. For it was not the office of the people, but of the Priest, and
especially of the High Priest, to interpret the law of Moses, from the which
those Controuersyes had their beginning.

But perchance you may ask, wherefore the interpretation of the law and
consequently the deciding of legal controversies belonged rather unto the high
Priest then to others? Seeing that well it might be that the other Priests were
as skillfull, yea and more skillfull in the law then the high Priest himself?
I answer. If we respect humane industry it is certain that others might have
been as killfull in understanding and interpreting of the law, as the high
Priest. But if we respect the assistance of the holy Ghost, which is especially
to be regarded in this business, the same was communicated rather to the high
Priest then to others, as we have an example in Moses. For God grounted
greater assistance to ^oyses then to 70. Seniors who all were ministers to him
in his office. This is gathered Number. 11. 7.
out of that our Lord says to Moses: I will take from thy spirit and deliver
unto them, that they may support with thee the burden of the people. Where by
the spirit we are to understand a certain gift of grace which is necessary in
them, who will rightly govern others and end their controversies. This
therefore is the sense. I will take from thy spirit, and deliver unto them,
that is, I will give to them a gift of grace, but yet inferior to that gift
which thou have. To thee who art the chief judge it is behoueable that more be
given, then to them who are subject to thee.

THE V. ARGUMENT. Drawn from the custom, use, and practice of the new
Testament.
EVEN as in the old Testament (as I have already showed) the Scripture was not
the judge of Controversies but ^^e high Priest and Council of the Seniours: so
also in the new it has hitherto been; yet I will briefly show it, that it may
appear plainly. And first in the time of the Apostles there was a controversy
arose about Circumcision, to wit, whether that the new Christians, who did
receive the faith of the Gospel could not be saved, unless they were
circumcised and kept their legal ceremonies? which controversy was especially
understood of the Gentills converted unto faith. But there was a double opinion
about this. The one of some who of Jews were made Christians, who held that
the Gentiles could not be saved by the faith of Christ, unless they were
circumcised, and observed the ceremonies of the law. The other was of S. Paul,
and Barnabas, who affirmed that there was no need of circumcision, and the
observation of legal ceremonies.

But now how was this controversy decided and ended? was it brought to the
Scripture alone, even as to the common judge? Nothing less. But rather by the
common consent of both parties, some were elected who might go to Jerusalem,
unto the Apostles, that they in solemn Council being informed in the whole
matter, might pronounce there final sentence. Which was so done. For of the
one side S. Paul and Barnabas were appointed, and of the other some other men.
Who going together to Jerusalem, went to the Apostles and Seniours of the
City. These after there was a council gathered and the holy Ghost called
upon, answered in these words. It seems good to the holy Ghost and to us* to
lay no further burden upon Act. 15. 28.
you then these necessary things. That you absteyne from the things immolated
to Idols, and blood and that which is strangled* and fornication. Which words
were sent in manner of an Epistle to the Christians converted from Gentility
whom they especially concerned. And the sense is this. We will not put upon
you the burden of circumcision or other legal ceremonies which is troublesome,
but to abstain from those things, which were named before, and this will not
be troublesome to you.

Here two things are to be noted which are much to our purpose. The Act. 13. 1.
first is that this controversy of circumcision and legal rites could
sufficiently Act. 13. 2.
have been decided by S. Paul and Barnabas, who both were Apostles, Prophets
and Doctors: Who also were chosen especially of the holy Ghost that they might
preach the Gospel to all Act. 14. ^^.
nations: And also had preached it in many places and provinces, yet neither of
them would take that office, to the end that they might teach by their example,
that such controversies which concern matters of faith and religion ought to
be brought to the ordinary Prelates of the Church, or to the Council consisting
of them.

The other is that the Council of the Apostles in the which that controversy
was determined, there was no testimony of scripture brought, which belonged
directly to Circumcision, though there be many for both parts, if it had been
fitting one of them only to have ended the contention. For this place might
have been brought for circumcision: This is my Covenant which you shall
observe between me and you, and thy Genesis 17. 10.
seed after th^^. All the male Kind of you shall be circumcised, and you shall
circumcise the flesh of your prepuce, that it may be for a sign of the
Covenant between me and you etc. as well the homebred, as the bought servant
of whom soever he is, not of your stock, and my covenant shall be in your flesh
for a perpetual covenant. But if it be an external covenant as here it is
said, it is of necessity to be always kept, even in the Evangelical law: And
not only of the Jews but of others also who are not of the stock of the
Jews. On the other side might be alleged that of Deuteronomy. Our Lord thy
God will circumcise thy heart, and the Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
heart of thy seed. Where it is insinuated, that Circumcision of flesh is not to
remain in the new Testament, but that the circumcision of the heart is to
succeed in the place thereof. As also that of Jeremy: Be circumcised to our
Lord, and take away the prepuce of your hearts, as if he should say, I do not
require the circumcision of flesh, but of the heart, which consists in the
inward contrition and grief for sins. These and such like might be taken out
of the Scripture for both parts. But it was not so done. For the Apostles being
gathered together in Council gave sentence, by the direction and assistance of
God, the which God had promised to them and their successors for ever.

After the time of the Apostles there arose other new controuesies in diverse
places and ages, which is certain out of the Ecclesiastical histories to have
been decided either by the Roman bishops, or by some approved Counsels. And
those who would not yeald to their sentence, were accounted always and
condemned for heretics. I will bring forth some plain examples even of those
which do first occure.

The first controversy was: whether the Pasch ought to be celebrated with the
Jews, on the fourteenth day of the first month, as many did hold Vide Eusebius.
l. 5. hist. Eccles. cap. 23. and sequent.
in Asia, who for that cause were called Quartadecimani, or only upon Sunday as
now it is. This truly after many Counsels and assemblies of diverse Bishops was
decided and ended by Victor the Pope, Anno Domini 198.

The second was, whether the Church might absolve the^ from sins, Vide Baron.
circa eundem annum.
who were fallen after baptism. Nouatian did deny it. But he was condemned of
error in the Roman Council by Pope Cornelius, Anno Christi 255.

The third was, whether in God there was three persons really distinct.
Sabellius denied it, affirming that there was but one person which had three
offices, of creation, redemption, and Sanctification. But he also was condemned
Iuxta Baron.
in the Council of Alexandria, in the time of Pope Siluester, Anno Christi 319*

The fourth, whether Christ be a pure man, as other who be mortal, and has
nothing more in nature and person then we have? Paulus Samosatenus did affirm
it: But he also was condemned in the council of Antioch in the time of Pope
Dionysius, Anno Christi 266* Iuxta Baron. vide Eusebius. l 7. cap. 27.


The first was. Whether Christ were the eternal word of his Father, and of the
same substance with him? Arius denied it, affirming that the word of the word
not to have been from eternity, but created of God in time of Vide duas epist.
Alexan. E. pics Alex. quarum vna extat apud Socra. lib. 1. c. ^. altera apud
Theod. l. 2. cap. 4.
nothing, and of another substance from God. And therefore that God was not
always a Father, but that there was some time, when he was not Father. But he
was condemned in the first general Council of Nice in the time of Pope
Siluester, and Constantine the Emperor, Anno 325.

The fixed was, whether in Christ there be two Persons, as there are two
natures, divine and human? Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople did affirm it,
but he was likewise condemned in the General Council of Ephesus, in the time
of Pope Celestine, and Theodosiu^ ^he Emperor Anno 434. and before by Cyrill
in the Council of Alexandria Anno 431.

The seaueth was, whether in Christ there be two natures? Eutiches, and
Dioscorus said, that before the hypostaticall union, there was two natures Vide
Ga^. Vasq. tom. 1. in 3. par. D. Thom. in disp. 14.
divine and human: But after the union that both two came into one, and were
made one. But they both were condemned in the general Council of Chalcedon,
in the time of Pope Leo* and Marcian the Emperor Anno 454.

The eight, whether there was one will only in Christ? Macarius Patriarch of
Antioch, Cyrus of Alexandria, Sergius of Constantinople, and some others
although they acknowledged two natures to be in Christ, yet they said that
there was in him but one will, to wit the divine, In 3. p. 1. 18. art. 1.
as is recorded by S. Thomas, and therefore they were called Monothelites: this
their opinion was condemned in the third general Council of Constantinople
under Pope Agatho, and the Emperor Constantine the 4. in the year 679. But
whether these understood by Vide Baro.
the name of will, the power or the operation, is to be seen in Gabriel
Vasquez.

The 9. Whether the holy Ghost be God, The Macedonians deny it, of Tom. 1. dis.
73. cap. 1.
whom thus writes S. Augustine. The Macedonians came from one Macedonius who
was bishop of Co^sta^tinople: these of the Greeks are called also (...),
because they co^tended about the holy Ghost. For as concerning the Father and
the Son, they believe aright, that they are of one and the same substance
nature and essence, but they deny this of the holy Ghost, saying that he is but
a creature. These were condemned in the first general Council of
Constantinople under Pope Damasus and the Emperor Theodosius.

The tenth is: Whether baptism may be reiterated, or one may be baptized
twice? Which controversy may be two ways understood. First whether baptism if
it be once given well, may be reiterated again. Marcion Epiph. haer. 42. paulo
post princip.
affirmed it, as Epiphanius is witness; for he writes thus of Marcion: After
he had deflowerd (says he) a certain Virgin in the City, and was fled away,
but yet afterward found in that great fault, the cousener invented a second
lauer to himself, affirming that three were lawful, to wit, three Baptismes
for the remission of sins, to the end that if any shall sin after the first
doing penance, he might take the second, and also the third, if he should be
found in fault after the second. Again it may be understood, whether Baptism
given of Heretics may be reiterated? The Donatists affirmed it, who did
baptize again all those who were baptized of Catholics, as S. Augustine does
witness, because they Aug. in l. de haer. cap. 69.
accounted Catholics for Heretics, and so thought that Baptism given of
Heretics was of no value, as is to be seen in Vasquez. These were condemned
V^sq. disp. 146. c. 2.
in the Roman Council under Melchiades the Pope, Anno Domini 313.

The eleventh is, whether a man Apud Baron.
without the grace of God can fulfill the Law only by the force of nature, if
he be willing. Pelagius and Celestius affirmed it, but they were both condemned
in the Counsels of Carthage and Mileuitane in the time of Pope Innocentius the
first, Anno 416. iuxta computum.

The twelft, whether Children are borne in original sin, and to wash away
the same do need Baptism? The same Authors denied it Pelagius and Celestius, as
S. Augustine does affirm: They deny (says he) that children borne carnally of
Adam, do contract the infection of the old death in their first nativity. For
so they affirm, that they are borne without any bond of original sin, as
though there were not any thing to be remitted in their second nativity. But
that therefore they are baptized, to the end, that being adopted by
regeneration, they maybe admitted to the kingdom of God, as translated from
good to better, not being absolved by this renouation from any evil of the old
obligation. But this error was condemned in the Mileuitane Council cap. 2.
and afterward of Pope Zosinus, as S. Augustine also Aug. in l. de pecc. orig.
cap. 6. and sequen.
is witness.

In these and such like Controuersyes, which now for breuity I omit, three
things are to be considered. First that one part of them who contended is
clearly and manifestly condemned. Secondly that this condemnation was uttered
and pronounced by the Catholic Church, as judge: which sometimes gave sentence
by the Pope, who is the head and pastor of the same Church, and sometimes by
Counsels which represent the whole Church. Thirdly, that the Lutherans, and
the Caluinists do confess that this condemnation was lawfully pronounced. For
they confess, that Nouatian, Sabellius, Samosatenus, Arius, Nestorius,
Eutiches, and Dioscorus, and the Monothelits, the Macedonians, the Donatists,
and the Pelagians to have been justly condemned, and that they are and ought
to be accounted for Heretics. And that by no other means then by the sentence
of the Catholic Church. For if the Scripture only should have been Judge, and
the Church should not have given sentence at all, these Controuersyes would
have continued even to this present day: nor yet would it ever have been
clear and manifest to all, that those Authors aforementioned were to be had, and
accounted for Heretics. Now seeing that they were condemned by the Church, the
matter is plain, and without all doubt.

Perchance you will say, what if the Church her self should have erred in
giving sentence? I answer. This to be just as much, as though one should say.
What if Christ his Apostles and Prophets should lie? For they tell us, that the
Church cannot err, because, as Christ himself says, his Church is founded
upon a rock, and Math. 16. 18. 1. Tim. 5. ^5. Is^. 54. Ibid. v. 12. Ibid. v.
17.
the gates of hell shall not prevail against her. She is the pillar and
firmament of truth to S. Paul. And Isaias says she shall never blush, nor be
confounded. And in another place: A lasperstone is in the defense thereof. And
a little after: Every tongue resisting in judgment, shall be condemned.

THE VI. ARGUMENT, Drawn from the Analogy and proportion of the Civil Judge
concerning matters belonging to the common wealth.
THIS argument, which may best illustrate the matter, may well be propounded in
this manner. A manifold Analogy, or proportion may be seen between things
apertaining to faith and Religion on the one side, and things merely
Politic, and Civil on the other. First, for even as in politic, and Civil
affairs oftentimes controuersyes, and contentions do arise, which require some
judge, who may give sentence between the contending parties; so falls it out
in matters of faith, and religion. 2. As in Civil controversies, these three
things are distinguished, The Judge, the written law, and the custom: so also
in controversies of faith, these three, the Judge, the whole Scripture of both
testaments and tradition. 3. As a secular Prince or Magistrate does exercise
the office of a judge in deciding of Civil controversies: so also the Prince
of the Church or Ecclesiastical Synod does exercise the like office in
decyding controversies of faith. 4. As the written law is a certain rule which
the secular Judge does follow in deciding of Civil contentions, so also the
Scripture of both Testaments, is a certain line or rule which the
Ecclesiastical Judge does follow in decyding controversies of faith. 5. As
only the written law is not a sufficient rule for all Civil causes but the
written law and custom withal: so also the Scripture only of both Testaments,
is not a sufficient and entire rule of all controversies of faith, unless
tradition be adjoined.

These hitherto are manifest. Yet least that there be any doubt therein, I will
expound them all briefly. And first that the secular Prince or Magistrate may
use the office of a judge in Civil causes, needs no long proof. For daily
experience does witness this in all Provinces and Kingdoms. For in every
place, Civil causes and contentions are brought to the secular Prince or
Magistrate, whom the parties at variance do acknowledge to be their lawful
Judge, which is well known by the Civil and Canon law: for in each of them
there are titles concerning the ordinary Judge, and him who is the judge
delegate. Neither is there any so ignorant and foolish that by the ordinary or
delegate judge understands the written law, when it is certain that he is
the ordinary, who has the ordinary jurisdiction and power, and him to be a
judge delegate who receiving power of the ordinary supplies his office and
place.

Moreover that the written law cannot be judge may easily be proved, and most
plainly in these three cases. First when it is obscure and doubtful; for then
there is need of some other judge or interpreter who may expound the meaning of
it. Secondly when one law seems to repugne another which happenth very often:
For then a judge is needful who may reconcile them together. Thirdly when the
words of the law which are general, ought to be restrained in some particular
case, yet they are in no wise limited. Which then happens, when some
particular case does occur, which the law did not foresee might happen. And yet
perchance if he had known would not have comprehended it in the law: therefore
in such a case one must judge against the words of the law. But then who shall be
judge? Not the law it self, for it never gives sentence against it self.
Therefore there must be some other Judge besides the law.

Now lastly, that only the written law cannot be a sufficient rule for the
deciding of all Civil controversies whatsoever, but besides it, also custom
is to be admitted, is most certain amongst the Lawyers* And especially in two
cases. First when some controversy does arise, of the which Leg. 3^. ff. de
legibus.
there is no written law; for then custom is to be taken for law, and ought to
be no less observed, according to that: Those things which are approved by
long custom, and observed for many years as a secret agreement of the
Citizens, are to be kept no less the^ those things which are written.

Secondly, when there is extant indeed a written law, yet there is some doubt
about the sense or meaning thereof, which cannot be known but by custom or
tradition that takes place of which is said in the law: For then the best
interpreter of the Laws is Custom: and that our Emperor Seuerus has
written, how that in doubts Leg. ^7. ff. de legibus.
which proceed from Laws, either custom or the authority of things judged
always in the same manner ought to have the force of a law.

Perchance you will say: what if some controversy occur which neither Ibid. leg.
38.
can be defined out of the written law, nor out of any custom: what then
shall be the rule that the judge ought to follow? I answer: Then the matter must
be taken up according to that equity which does proceed out of the law of
nature But this especially happens, when some certain Case does occur, which
is understood according to the words of the law, but not to the meaning of the
lawgiver, as before was said. For then the Judge is to give sentence according
to that which he thinks to be just and right. The very same may happen in
Controversies of faith. For if any controversy should arise which cannot
manifestly be decided neither by Scripture nor tradition, recourse presently
were to be made to the help of the holy Ghost, who although he assist the
Church in all occasions, yet in this especially he does teach her al truth, as
Christ himself has promised. And this remedy also the Apostles have used in
that Council of Jerusalem, where they were assembled about circumcision and
the observation of legal rites and ceremonies. Now these be the arguments by
which hitherto has been proved, that the Scripture cannot be ludge of
controversies in faith, but that the Church may. Now it remains that we
diligently weigh and consider the testimonies of Scripture which were
propounded in the beginning, and which are objected and often repeated by our
adversaries against this doctrine, but not in that order as they were
propounded, but as they are placed in the Scripture of the old and new
testament one after another. And truly by the examining of these, as I did
before insinuate, it will be manifest that some of them are nothing to the
purpose, and the rest rather make for us then for them. But to conclude and
speak freely as the matter is indeed, I affirm, that our adversaries who
always so much boast and brag of Scripture, understand nothing less then
the true sense and meaning of the Scripture.

The Testimonies of Scripture brought against us here are examined.
THE I. TESTIMONY.
YOU shall not ad to the word that I speak to you. And this also. What I
command Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Deuteronomy. 12. 32.
thee, that only do to our Lord, neither ad any thing nor diminish.

Out of which the adversaries generally gather these two points. First that all
Traditions which Catholics admit ought to be utterly rejected. But what is
their reason? Because forsooth nothing is to be added to the written word of
God. Secondly that no huma^ precepts (such as are the commandments of fasting
lent, abstinence from flesh on Friday and Saturday, of the single life of
Priests and such like) ought to be observed. But wherefore? Because say they,
that only is to be done which Christ has commanded: whatsoever men command
is not to be done. Thus they, but very foolishly* as I will show two ways.
First by disprouing their false interpretation. And again by showing the true
sense and meaning of these places of Scripture.

Now first that their interpretation is false, they themselves cannot deny
unless they will altogether be accounted foolish and impudent. For if all
traditions ought to be refused, the Apostle himself must be rejected, who
says, Hold the Traditions which you 2. These. 2. 14.
have learned, whether it be by words, or by our Epistle. Likewise if al human
precepts should be contemned, and that only should be done, which God
commands; What should we say of the Rechabits, who most diligently observed
the precept of their Father Ionadab? did they amiss therein? This tru^y were
to be said according to our Adversaries; but it is far otherwise, seeing that
for so doing they are commended by God himself.

If our Adversaries know not this, let them here Hieremy the Prophet speaking
in these words: The word that I^e. 35. 1.
was made to* Jeremy from our Lord in the days of Ioakim, the Son of Josias,
the King of Judah, saying, Go to the house of the Rechabits, and speak to them,
and thou shall bring them into the house of our Lord, into one chamber of the
treasuries, and thou shall give them wine to drink. And I took ^ezonias the
son of Ieremias, the Son of Habsamias and his brethren, and all his sons
and the whole house of the Rechabites. And I brought them into the house of our
Lord etc. And I set before the sons of the house of the Rechabits gobletts
full of wine, and cups, and I said to them, drink wine: who answered we will
not drink wine, because Ionadab the son of Recab our Father commanded us
saying: you shall not drink wine, you and your Children for ever: And you
shall not build howses and you shall not sow seed, and you shall not plant
vineyards nor have any, but you shall dwell in tabernacles al your days, that
you may live many days upon the face of the land wherein you are strangers: we
therefore have obeyed the voice of Ionadab the son of Rechab our Father in all
things that he commanded us: so that we drink not any wine all our days, we
and our wives, our sons and our Daughters: And we build not howses to
inhabit, and vineyard, and seild, and seed we have not had: but we have dwelt
in tabernacles, and we have been obedient according to all things that Ionadab
our Father commanded us etc. And the word of our Lord was to Jeremy saying:
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel; go and say to the men of Judah
and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Why will you not receive discipline, to
obey my words, says our Lord; The words of Ionadab the son of Rechab have
prevailed, which he commanded his sons not to drink wine, and they have not
drunk until this day, because they have obeyed the commandment of their
Father: but I have spoken to you early rising, and speaking and you have not
obeyed me. And I have sent to you all my servants the Prophets rising early,
and sending and saying: Return ye every one from his most wicked way, and make
your studies good* etc. And you have not inclined your ear nor heard me. The
Children therefore of Ionadab the son of Rechab, have firmly kept the
precepts of their Father which he commanded them: But this people have not
obeyed me. Therefore thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel: behold
I will bring upon Judah, and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem all the
affliction, which I have spoken against them, because I have spoken to them and
they have not heard: I have called them and they have not answered me: but to
the house of the Rechabits Jeremy said: Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God
of Israel: For that you have obeyed the commaundment of Ionadab your Father,
and have kept all his commaundments, and have done all things that he
commanded you. Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts the God of Israel:
There shall not want a man of the stock of Ionadab the son of Rechab
standing in my sight all days.

In this example three things are to be noted. First that the precept which was
given to the Rechabites was most hard. For what is harder then that husbands
and wives, young men, and young maids, not only for a short time, as the
Nazareans did, but as long as ever they lived should abstain from all kind of
wine, and never should dwell in howses, nor sow their grounds, nor plant any
vineyards? Secondly that this precept was not divine but humane, it appears
by the opposition which God made. For thus he argues. The Rechabits did
observe the precept which they received from man; how much more ought the Jews
to keep the precept which they received from God? Thirdly that the Rechabits
not only did well and commendably in observing the precept of their Father
Ionadab, but also thereby deserved a peculiar blessing from God: whereas
contrare wise the Jews deserved nothing but great punishment. For it is said
to the Rechabits. There shall not want a man of the stock of Ionadab the son
of Rechab standing in my sight al days. But to the Jews: I will bring upon
you affliction.

Now from hence let our adversaries if they be wise infer these few verities.
First that the Catholics observing the precepts of the Church, do no less
well and laudably then did theRechabites, by keeping the precept of their
Father Ionadab. For doubtless it is no less commendable to obey the Church
our common mother then it was for them to obey a private man their Father. And
even as the Rechabites did not sin against that aforsaid place, what I
command you that only do to our Lord: even so neither the Catholics sin
against it. Secondly the cause why Catholics have continued and do continue
still, is because they keep diligently the commaundments of the Church: and how
much more diligently one does observe them so many more benefits he shall
receive from God, and that some others do not prosper, because of the one side
they contemn the precepts of the Church, in the which they are not so perfect
as the Rechabits were. And on the other they do not observe the ten
commaundments, in the which they are like the Jews. But that they may pretend
some kind of excuse for this their damnable lasinesse, they hold that the ten
commandment are impossible to be kept: In the which they make God a tyrant,
as though he would command man that which is not in his power to fulfill.

But this may suffice to overthrow their false interpretation. The true
interpretation therefore is this: You shall not Deuteronomy. 4. 1.
ad to the word that I speak to you* neither shall you take away from it.
Which is generally to be understood of ceremonial and judicial precepts,
which were given of God by Moses. And this is the sense: I have given
ceremonial precepts to you which prescribe the rites of worshipping God, and
Judicial which prescribe the rites of keeping justice in Civil matters and
those which belong to the Common wealth. Both of which you ought perfectly and
entirely to observe: for this is the signification of that, You shall not ad,
nor take away. Which truly in other words, but in the same sense is explicated
in another place, where it is said, do not decline either from the right Deuteronomy.
2^. 14. Deuteronomy. 17. 20.
hand or the lest. And again. That he may learn to fear our Lord his God and
keep his words and ceremonies, nor decline to the right side nor to the left.
And a little after. For I Deuteronomy. 31. 29.
know that after my death you will do wickedly* and will decline quickly from
the way that I have commanded you; and like wise in the Iosue. 7.
book of Iosue, Take courage and be strong, that thou keep and do all the Law
which Moses my Servant has commanded thee: decline not from it to the right
hand or to the left.

Therefore our of that place so understood, as truly it ought to be understood,
the adversaries cannot argue otherwise then thus. The Jews ought to observe
the precepts of God wholly and entirely, not declining from them neither to the
right hand nor to the left, therefore we Christians, besides the Scripture,
ought not to admit any tradition which we have received from the Apostles,
Spectatum admissi etc.

But that place in Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 11. 32*
What I command thee, this only do to our Lord, neither add any thing nor
diminish, is especially understood of one ceremonial precept, to wit of the
precept of sacrificing as appears. Of which this is the sense and meaning.
When thou come into the land of Palestine in the which thou go, and thou
shall offer a sacrifice to thy Lord thy God, thou shall not imitate the
Gentills, who offer their sons and daughters to false Gods by fire. But this
only thou shall offer, the which I command thee, as of Beasts, Sheep, Goats,
Kidds, Oxen, Calves, Pigeons, Sparowes, and Turtle-doues: of fruits of the
Earth, Bread, Meal, Salt, Frankincense, a bundle of green ears of Corn, and
wheat: of Liquors, Blood, Wine, Oily, and Water. Do this only, that is, offer
to our Lord: Neither ad any thing, of the sacrifices of the Gentills, nor
diminish any thing of them which were now particulerly set down. Now out of
this place the adversaries can no otherwise conclud then in this manner. The
Jews ought only to offer those things in sacrifice, which were prescribed of
God: therefore we Christians may not keep the precepts of the Church: which is
even as foolish as the former.

THE II. TESTIMONY.
ISAY 8. 20. Rather to the law, and to the testimony.

From hence the adversaries gather that the Jews in the old Testament, when
any controversy did arise, were sent presently to the law and testimony, that
is to the Scripture even as to their judge. But they err grossly. First because
it has been showed before, that the Judge of controversies in the old
Testament was not the Scripture, but the High Priest. Secondly, because those
words, to the law and testimony much other ways are to be understood then our
adversaries suppose, as appears by the precedent words which are these: And
when they shall say to you: Ask of Pytho^s and of Deuiners, which whisper in
their 1. cap. 8. 19.
inchantements: shall not the people ask vision of their God for the living of
the dead? To the law rather, and to the testimony. And if they speak not
according to this word, they shall not have the morning light. Where it is
plainly spoken against them who ask counsel of the Pythones and Deuiners,
about future events, and are remitted plainly to the law which forbids it.

When thou art entered the land which our Deuteronomy. 1^. ^.
Lord thy God shall give then, beware thou be not willing to imitate the
abominations of those nations. Neither let there be sound in thee any that
consulteth with Pytho^s or Deuiners, and seeks the truth of the dead, partly
to the testimony of the Prophets, who where placed of God, to foretell future
things, as in the third of Kings we may see. And Iosaphat said: is their not
here some Prophet R^g ^. ^ap. 22. v. 7.
of our Lord, that we may ask by him?

Therefore the sense of the words to the law and testimony, is this: If you
will be certified of future events, you ought not to ask Counsel of the
Pythons as 1 Reg. 28. 7.
Saul did, because God has forbidden this to be done by his law, unto the
which I remit you: but ask Counsel of the Prophets of our Lord, whose office
is to pronounce of future events. But what is this to the judge of the
Controversies? Verily nothing at a^l: Unless our adversaries will argue in
this manner: As concerning future events, it is not lawful to ask Counsel of
the Pythones: therefore only the Scripture is the judge of Controversies. Truly
most foolishly, and yet which is to be admired their very chief Rabbis of all
are not ashamed to use such manner of arguing, of whom Christ himself has
forewarned us sayi^g: Let such follows alone, for they are blind themselves,
and leaders of them that are blind.

THE III. TESTIMONY.
YOU have made frustrate the commaundment Math. 15. ^. Colos. 2. ^. 1. ^et. 1.
18.
of God for your own tradition. And the other place in S. Paul: Beware least
any man deceive you by Philosophy, and vain fallacy, according to the
tradition of men. And that in S. Peter: You are redeemed from your vain
conversation of your Fathers tradition.

From hence our adversaries gather that all traditions are condemned of Christ
and his Apostles, and that Scripture alone is sufficient. But it is not so. For
these cited places are understood of the Jews traditions, which were observed
of the Pharisees: but not of the traditions of Christ and his Apostles, which
our adversaries oppugn, and we defend. But that there were diverse traditions
of the Jews, appears out of the Scripture.

The first was, that their hands were to be washed before taking of meat, as in
this place: Then came to him from Jerusalem Math 15.
Scribes and Pharisees saying, why do thy disciples transgress the traditions
of the ancients? For they wash not their hands when they eat bread.

The second is, that this washing was often to be used whylst they were eating,
as in S. Mark: The Pharisees and all the Jews, unless they often wash their
hands, Mark. 7. 3.
eat not, holding the traditions of the ancients. Also at the marriage in Cana
in Galilee six water pots were put according to the purification of the Jews.
In the which water potts there was water wherewith they washed their hands at
dinner.

The third was, that unless they ware washed they could not take meat coming
from the market, as S. Marck records: And from the market unless they Mar.
7. 4.
be washed they eat not: and many other things there be that were delivered
unto them to observe, as the washing of Cupps, and Cruses, and of brazen
vessels, and Bedds.

The fourth is, that meat was not to be taken with sinners, as is written in
S. Matthew: And the Pharisees seeing this said Math. 9. 11.
to his Disciples, why does your master eat with Publicanes and sinners? And
in S. Luke: Luke 5. 30.
The Pharisees and Scribes murmured, saying to his Disciples, why do you eat
and drink with Publicanes and sinners?

The fifth was that none should be permitted to be touched of sinners as S.
Luke records: And the Pharisee that Luke 7. 39.
had bid him seeing it, spoke within himself, saying: this man if were a
Prophet would know certes, who and what manner of woman she is which touches
him, that she is a sinner. Where it manifestly appears, that the Pharisee
wondered, that Christ should suffer himself to be touched of a woman that was a
sinner, because it was contrary to the custom and tradition of the Pharisees,
whose speech was this: Depart from me, thou shall not came near me because
Isa. 65. 5.
thou art unclean.

The sixth was, that upon the Sabbath it was not lawful to cure the sick as S.
Luke says: The Scribes and Pharisees Luke 6. 7.
watched if he would cure on the Sab^th, that they might find how to accuse
him. And likewise S. John writes, that certain of the Pharisees John. 9. 16.
said: This man is not of God, that keeps not the Saboath. Where they spoke
of Christ, who on the Saboath restored sight to a man that was blind from his
nativity.

The seventh was, that those who were hungry, might not gather and eat ears
of Corn on the Saboath, as it is said in S. Matthew. Jesus went through Math.
12. 1.
the Corn on the Saboath, and his disciples being hungry began to pluck the
ears and eat. And the Pharisees seeing them said to him. Lo thy Disciples do
that which is not lawful for them to do on the Saboath day.

The eight was, that they should fast and pray often, as is recorded in S.
Math. Why do we and the Pharisees fast often Math. 9. 15.
but thy Disciples do not fast? And in S. Luke. Why do the Disciples of John
fast often and make Luk 5. 35.
observations; but thine do eat and drink.

The ninth was, that the tithes of all things even of the very least should be
offered to God, as we read in S. Math. that Christ said. VVo to you Scribes
Math. 23. ^^.
and Pharisees, Hipocrits, because you tith mint and anise, and cummin, and
have left the weightier things of the law, judgment and mercy and faith, these
things you ought to have done and not omitted those. Here to tyth is taken for
to give tithes, and this is the true sense: You Pharisees give tithes of all
things whatsoever, even of the very least of all, which you do not as by a
precept in the law of Moses, but by your one tradition which is not written,
and in the mean time you omit those things which are commanded in the law,
these things you should do, and not omit the other. Where it is to be noted,
that there was no precept in the law of Moses, about giving of tithes of the
least things of which mention is here made, but only of the tithes of wine,
wheat, and oil. Notwithstanding Deuteronomy. 14. 2^.
the Pharisees in this had a peculiar custom and tradition beyond others of
the Jews, because they gave the tithes of all kind of herbs which Luke 11.
42.
others did not. For the which cause one of the Pharisees did boast saying, I
Luke 18. 11.
am not as the rest of men etc. I fast twice a week, and I give tithes of all
that I possess.

The tenth was, that whosoever Vide Ia^sen. in concord Euan. cap. 84.
should swear by the Temple or by the Altar, he was not guilty of any fault?
But he that should swear by gould of the temple, or sacrifices which were made
on the Altar, was guilty, as in S. Matthew* is written. VVo to you blind guides
that say, whosoever shall swear by the Math. ^^. 16.
Temple, it is nothing, but he that shall swear by the gould of the temple, is
bound. Ye foolish and blind, for whether is greater, the gould or the temple
which sanctifies the gould? And whosoever shall swear by the Altar it is
nothing, but whosoever shall swear by the gift that is upon it, is bound. You
foolish and blind, for whether is greater the gift, or the Altar that
sanctifies the gift?

The eleventh was, that Children were not bound to honor their parents, or to
be beneficial unto them, but that it would suffice abundantly to offer some
gift unto God as we read in S. Matthew, Why do you transgress the
commandment of God for your tradition? For God said, honor Father and Mother,
and he that shall curse Father or Mother, dying let him die. But you say,
whosoever shall say to the Father or Mother, the gift whatsoever proceeds
from me shall profit thee, and shall not honor his Father or his Mother, and
you have made frustrate the Commandment of God for your own tradition.

These were the chief traditions of the Pharisees. For as much as we can
gather out of the Gospel. And although some of them were good in their kind,
others ill, certain doubfull or unprofitable: Yet notwithstanding the
Pharisees were reprehended in them all for these chief causes.

First because they by the observation of then sought vain glory and to be
esteemed holy amongst men when they were nothing less then holy and godly as
S. Matthew. speaks of them: Math. 23. 5
But they do all their works, for to be seen of of men. And very often, yea
and almost every where in the Gospel they are called Hypocrites, and whited
Scpulchers.

Secondly because, out of the observing of them, they gaped after wealth and
riches, especially out of long prayers which they recited to that end, as is
said of Christ in S. Matthew. Math. 23. 14.
VVo to you Scribes and Pharisees Hipocrits, because you devour widows
howses, praying long prayers. And likewise in S. Mark. Take heed of the
Scribes, who denoure widows howses under the pretense of long prayer. Where
to eat and devour widows howses is nothing else but to spoil and exhaust
them. For the Widows came to the Pharisees, even as unto holy men (for they
feigned sanctity) and bought their prayers with money.

Thirdly, because they superstitiously did observe some things which were to
little purpose, and did neglect those which were of greater moment, as we
showed a little before. For they gave tithes of those things which were least
of all, and did neglect mercy and judgment, in judging of those causes which
were brought unto them. And that of S. Matthew. may be taken in this sense: They
strain a gnat and swallow a Camel.

Now out of these it appears that all the traditions of the Jews were not
reprehended by Christ, although the Pharisees were blamed deservedly because
they made all use of them. For one of their traditions was, to tithe mint, rue,
and every herb. Which doubtless was good of it self, for it is very good to
give tithes to God not only of some things which we have, but of all things we
possess. And this is confirmed by Christ himself, who says: these things you
ought to have done, and not to have ommitted those: that is, you ought to have
kept the precept of justice and mercy, and not omit the tradition of tything
mint, and all kind of herbs.

From whence it directly follows that the Lutherans and the Caluinists seeing
they condemn all Traditions, do condemn the very judgment of Christ who
approved some of them. For in the judgment of Christ there be some traditions
which are not to be omitted. But in their opinion all are to be rejected, and
the Scripture only to be admited. These two opinions are contrary one to the
other. But which of them must we embrace? Christ's doubtless if we be wise.

Out of which I infer again, that the Lutherans and the Caluinists can conclud
out of this no otherwise then this. Some traditions of the Jews were evil,
therefore all the traditions of the Christians are evil.

Which is no consequence at all. But this is much better. The Jews had some
traditions, besides the Scripture, which ought not be omitted, therefore also
the Christians may have some, although there be great difference betwixt them
both. For the traditions of the Christians which we now defend were received
from Christ and his Apostles: but so were not these of the Jews.

THE IIII. TESTIMONY.
SEARCH the Scriptures.

Lo, say our adversaries Christ remitteth Joan. ^. ^^.
us to the Scripture, even as to the judge of Controversies. This truly they
would not say, if they understood the meanning of Christ, for Christ in that
Chapter disputes with the Jews who denied him to be the Son of God, and
therefore he proved by four kind of testimonies that he was. First by the
testimony of S. John Baptist. You have, says he, sent to John, and he gave
testimony to the truth. But this was his testimony. Behold the Lamb of God,
behold John. 1. 34.
who takes away* the sins of the world. And again, I have given testimony,
that this is the Son of God.

Secondly by the testimony of those Miracles which he wrought. I have says he,
testimony greater then John's For the Joan. 3. 36.
works which my Father has given me to persit them, the very works
themselves which I do give testimony of me, that the Father has sent me.

Thirdly by the testimony of God the Father. And the Father that sent me
himself Joan. 5 ^7.
has given testimony of me. As also when he spoke out of heaven. This is my
well-beloved Math 3. 17.
son in whom I am well pleased hear him. Fourthly by the testimony of the
old testament. Search the Scripturs, for you think in them to have life
everlasting, and the same are they that give testimony of me, and you will not
come to me, that you may have life. As if he should say. If you will not
receive the three former testimonies, which are most forcible (otherwise I
would not have made mention of them) at least you cannot reject the testimonies
of Scriptures, of the which you brag so much. And those if you search
diligently, give testimony of me, that I am the true Messiah promised of God:
Wherefore then do ye not believe?

Here hence I conclude that our adversaries oppugn themselves more then us.
For they contend that Scripture only is the judge of Controversies and that
Christ remitteth us to the Scripture alone. But the quite contrary is true. For
Christ in the Controversy which he had with the Jews, to wit, whether he were
the Son of God, sent them not only to the Scripture but first to the
testimony of S. John Baptist. Secondly to the testimony of Miracles, which show
him to be God. Thirdly to the testimony of God the Father, who confirmed the
same with a voice from heaven. And after al these at least he sends them to the
Scriptures.

We Catholics do follow Christ in this matter. For in these controversies
which we have with our adversaries, not only we use the testimony of Scripture,
but also that of the holy Fathers, that of the Church our Mother, and likewise
that of Miracles, which oftentimes are wrought for the confirmation of our
faith. But our adversaries, as though they were wiser then Christ, will hear
nothing but that which is contained in the Scripture. In the which they
resemble not a l^t^le those Jews with whom Christ had to do. For these
rejecting all other testimonies did only admit the scripture, the which they
neither then understood, nor do yet if we may believe S. Paul, for their senses
are dulled 1. Cor. 3. 1^.
says he: and a little after: until this present day when Moses is read a
veyle is put upon their heart. All this in this case may be not vnsittly applied
to these our modern adversaries, as to faithful scholars, and just
cosen-Germans to those most ignorant blind and obstinate Jews.

THE V. TESTIMONY.
DAILY searching the Scriptures, if th^se Acts. 1^. ^^.
things were so.

But here again our adversaries cry out that the men of Beroea did not
hastily and rashly believe those things with the Apostles told them, but
examined all things according to the rule of the Scripture, and therefore say
they it is also fitting that we should follow their example, and acknowledge the
Scripture only to be the rule and judge. But all this is in vain, which will
easily be seen if we consider the matter it self, whereof they spoke* For
thus it was. S. Paul the Apostle as it is expressly showed in the same
Chapter, first at Thessalonica, and after with them of Beroea did discourse out
of the Scriptures* declaring and insinuating that it behooved Christ to suffer
and to rise again from the dead, and that this is Jesus Christ whom I preach
to you. But now what did those of Beroea? in the self same place it follows,
they received the word with all greediness, daily searching the Scriptures if
these things were so*

This therefore is the true sense of that place. The men of Beroea when they
heard S. Paul cite certain testimonies of the Scripture in the old Testament,
by the which he affirmed Christ's death and resuriection, they searched whether
the doctrine of S. Paul were agreeable to those testimonies. Not truly, as
though they doubted of the death and resurrection of Christ, for it was
sufficiently confirmed by the force of many Miracles wrought by 1 These. 1* 5.
the Apostle: But that they might be more steadfastly confirmed in faith, if
they should see those things which S. Paul had preached to have been told and
signified long before by the Prophets.

Now what think you can our adversaries conclude by this? Nothing doubtless
to the purpose. Unless peradventure they conclude in this manner. The men of
Beroea searched the testimonies of the Scripture cited of S. Paul therefore the
Scripture only is the judge of controversies: which is even like unto this the:
Lutherans search out the testimonies of S. August. cited by Bellar. therefore
S. Aug. only is the judge of controversies. Or thus. The Clownes search out the
testimonies of Luther cited by the ministers, therefore Luther only is the judge
of all Controversies. Or thus. Kemnitius in the examen of the Council of Trent
searches out the traditions alleged of Catholics, therefore traditions are
the only judge of Controversies. Or Lastly Scholars search out the testimonies
of Cicero cited of their master: therefore Cicero only is the author of the
Latin tongue. Away with such consequences which are not all worth a rush. And
yet our adversaries make great account of them because they have no better.

THE VI. TESTIMONY.
IT any euangelize to you besides that which you Galat. 19.
have received, be he anathema.

Therefore, say our adversaries besides the Gospel we must not admit any
traditions: but infer the quite contrary in this manner. If any shall
Euangelize to you any thing besides that which S. Paul has Euangelized, be he
anathema: But the Lutherans and the Caluinists do euangelize something besides
that which S. Paul euangelized, because they oppugn traditions, which he has
commanded when he said, keep 2. These. 2. 14.
the traditions, therefore the Lutherans and the Caluinists are anathema.

But now let us see the drift of the Apostle, for thence it will appear
whether traditions are altogether to be condemned or no. Truly the drift of the
Apostle is this. The Galathians were taught of S. Paul that the ceremonies Gal.
2. 15.
of the law of Moses were abrogated, and that none could be justified by those
ceremonies but by faith in Christ: but afterward they were brought from this
doctrine by certain false Apostles who taught them that they could not be
saved by faith in Christ, unless they were also circumcised, and observed the
other ceremonies of Moses law, as is manifest by the course of the whole
Epistle, but especially in these chapters 1. v. ^. etc. 3. v. 1. and. 4 v. 9.
and. ^. v. 1.
cited in the margent. And against these false Apostles does S. Paul here
dispute, when he says. If any euangelize to you, besides that which you have
recaued, be he anathema. As though he had said: You have received of me, that a
man is justified by faith in Christ, and not by the observation of the law of
Moses. If any do teach you otherwise, affirming that faith in Christ does
profit nothing unless circumcision, and other legal ceremonies be adjoined,
be he anathema. But from hence it does not follow that the Apostolical
traditions are to be rejected, but rather that they are to be retained, because
they are not contrary to that which S. Paul has euangelized to the Galathians
of justification, but rather they are the same which he has euangelized to the
Thessalonians, when he said, keep the traditions with you have learned

THE VII. TESTIMONY.
ALL Scripture inspired of God is profitable 2. Tim. 3* 16.
to teach, to argue, to correct, to instruct in justice, that the man of God
may be perfect, instructed to every good work.

Out of which place our adversaries argue two ways: Some of them thus. All
scripture is profitable to teach and to argue: Therefore traditions are
superfluous, which is much like unto this: All meat is profitable to nourish:
Luc. 11. 41. and Dan. 4. 24.
Therefore drink is needless: or else thus: All alsmedeedes are profitable to
Salvation, therefore prayer is needless, and the Sacraments are needless.
Alas who will not pity such follies.

Or thus. All scripture is profitable that is sufficient: therefore traditions
are needless. But what an exposition is this? Is it the same to be profitable,
and to be sufficient? if it be so, one may also interpret that place of S. Paul
in the 1. Tim. 4. 8.
same place: Piety is profitable to all things, that is, Piety is sufficient
for all things, therefore all other things are needless. And likewise that:
Take 2. Tim. 4. ^1.
Mark, and bring him with thee, for he is profitable to me for the ministry,
that is, sufficient: Therefore Timothy Titus, and Onesimus and all the rest
were needless. But who does not now evidently perceive, that if this license
of interpreting the Scripture were once permitted, how easy it were to corrupt
it all.

But that the matter may appear more plainly, the text of the Apostles is well
to be considered. For the Apostle in the cited Chapter does exhort Timothy the
Bishop, that he should instruct his subjects in faith and good works; and that
he should reprehend his adversaries who being corrupted in mind, and reprobate
concerning faith 1. Tim. 3. 16.
did resist the truth. And that he might show that he was able to perform it,
he adds. But thou continue in those things which Ibid. paulo post.
thou have learned, and are commtted to thee: knowing of whom thou have
learned. And because from thine infancy thou have known the holy Scriptures,
which can instruct thee to Salvation, by the faith that is in Christ Jesus. For
all Scripture inspired of God is profitable to teach etc. Where by the holy
Scripturs which he says Timothy to have known, he means the Scripture of
the old Testament. For at that time when Timothy was a Child, the Scripture of
the new Testament was not extant.

Therefore the Apostle in that text thus does argue. All Scripture inspired of
God is profitable to teach subjects, and reprehend adversaries. But the
Scripture of the old Testament which thou have known from thy infancy, is
inspired of God. Therefore it is profitable to teach thy subjects, and to
reprehend thy adversaries. And when thou art well instructed with the knowledge
of that Scripture, thou will obtain great aid thereby to perform that which
I have told thee.

And from the same head, one may conclud in this manner: All Scripture inspired
of God is profitable to teach and argue. And whosoever is instructed with the
knowledge of this Scripture, shall obtain great aid thereby to perform them
both.

Now out of both these arguments it follows, that these three propositions
are true according to the Apostle. 1. All Scripture inspired of God is
profitable to teach and argue. 2. That the Scripture of the old Testament is
profitable to teach and to argue. 3. That the Scripture of the new testament is
profitable to teach, and to argue. As therefore it does not follow, the
Scripture of the old Testament is profitable, therefore the Scripture of the
new Testament is needless and superfluous. Nor the contrary: The Scripture of
the New Testament is profitable, therefore the Scripture of the old Testament
is superfluous. So also it does not follow, that tradition is superfluous,
because the old and the new Testament are profitable.

THE VIII. TESTIMONY.
FOR I testify to every one hearing the words ^po. 22. 18.
of the Prophecy of this book. If any man shall add to these things, God shall
add upon him the plagues written in this book. And if any man shall diminish
of the word of the book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out of
the book of life.

Hereby our adversaries conclude in this manner. If any man shall add to the
words of this Apocalypticall Prophecy, he shall be punished of God. But the
Catholics add traditions: Therefore the Catholics shall be punished of God.
They may also conclude in this manner. If any man shall add to the words of
this Apocalipticall prophecy he shall be punished of God. But the Caluinists add
Ghospells, Epistles of the Apostles, the institutions of Calvin, the
Cathechisme of Hidelberge, Athanasius Creed, and also the first four general
Counsels. Therefore the Caluinists shall be punished of God. Or in this manner:
If any man shall diminish of the words of this Apocalipticall prophecy, he
shall be taken out of the book of life: But the Lutherans do not only diminish
of the words of this Apocalipticall prophesy, but also bring it into question
whether it be true or no; and not acknowledging it to be divine and Canonical,
tell us in plain terms that it is counterfeit and Apocalipticall: Therefore
they shall be taken out of the book of life.

But now to the purpose. S. John forbids nothing else, but only that the
words of the Apocryphal prophecy be not corrupted of any: Which he insinuates
to be done two ways, first by addition, as if one should add any thing to the
Apocalipticall prophecy, to be as a part of it, which is not. Secondly by
diminishing, as if one should take something from it, although it did not
belong to it, which certainly does. The Catholics do neither. But with an
example I will declare it better.

S. John foretells, that in a certain time two Prophets shall come, clothed
with sackcloath, who shall prophesy a thousand two hundred sixty days, and
shall have power to shut heaven that it rain not in the days of their
prophesy, and to turn the water into blood etc. To which prophecy the
catholics ad nothing at all, which does not belong unto it, nor take any thing
away which is added thereto: but leave it whole, as it was prophesied of S.
John. But our adversaries do the contrary, especially those who say that Luther
and Calvin were the two Prophets. For these, who say this must of necessity
diminish of the words of this prophecy; seeing that it is certain that Luther
and Calvin were not clothed in sackcloathes, nor had any power of shutting
heaven, nor also had those properties which follow.

The Conclusion of all that is contained in this Book.
TWo things I have hitherto endeavored to perform. The one is to show that
the Scriptures cannot be the judge of Controversies, but the Church. And this I
have declared six ways. First, by the office of the judge, which is not
fitting for the Scripture because the Scripture cannot pronounce sentence in
that manner between two at variance so that the one party may see it is for
him, and the other perceive it is against him. Secondly out of the scripture it
self, in the which two things are to be considered, the letter and the sense;
The letter kills as the Apostle says, and is cause of many heresies, as was
showed by diverse examples. The sense oftentimes is obscure and doubtful, both
for the apparent contradictions which are found in every place, and also for
many other causes which before were numbered, and therefore there is need of
some Judge who may manifestly desine, that this is the lawful sense, and that
the unlawful. Thirdly out of the Controversies themselves, because there are
many controversies, of the which no mention is made in the Scripture, and so
consequently can neither be defined out of Scripture. Fourthly out of the use
and custom of the old Testament, where the Scripture did not use the office of
a Judge, but high Priest, who was Prince of the Sinagogue whose precept was to
be obeyed under pain of death. Fifthly by the use and practice of the new
Testament, wherein all Controversies hitherto have been decided by the
Prelates of the Church. Sixthly out of the proportion of Civil causes, which
are not decided by the written law, but by the Prince of the Common wealth, nor
according to the rule of the written law only, but also according to the
ancient customs not written.

The other is to show that the testimonies of Scripture, which are objected
against us, either to be nothing to the purpose or to be rather for us the^
Isa. 8. 20.
against us, and not to be expounded truly by them, as for example. To the law
and testimony, is nothing to the purpose, because it is not understood of I^an.
5. 39.
Controversies of faith, but of the future events of casual things. And also
that other place, Search the Scriptures does rather help us then our
adversaries. For Christ when he said this to the Jews did not dispute with
them out of Scripture only (as our adversaries would have us believe) but also
out of the testimony of S. John Baptist, to the which he added the testimony of
Miracles, and also the voice of God the Father speaking down from heaven,
therefore he never dreamed that Scripture only was the Judge of Controversies.
The rest as I have showed are no better expounded by our adversaries, as out of
our confutation the Reader if he b^ but indifferent may easily perceive
himself.

An Objection of the vulgar people aginst all that has been hitherto said.
MANY that be of the more simple (...) thus object against us. The Judge of
Controversies in matters of faith ought to be so infallible that he cannot
err. Because if he err all others following him should be deceived in
embracing his opinion. But now it is most plain and manifest of the one part,
that the scripture is infallible, seeing it is the very word of God, which can
by no means err, and of the otherside that no man can be infallible is no
less certain, seeing that every man is a liar and not any one can be found who
is Romans 3. 4.
not subject to error. According to that of S. Paul. God is true, but every
man a liar. Therefore the Scripture may be an infallible judge. Men seeing they
be liars cannot: But the Pope is a man, and the Church is nothing but a
congregation of men. Therefore the Pope and the Church are liars and may err.
And so consequently none is safe and secure in matters of faith who follows
their doctrine.

This objection if there be any force in it, is no lessle against our
adversaries then against us. For if every man be a liar and may err, it
follows also that Moses, all the Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists* Luther
also and Calvin and all the Lutherans and Calumisticall preachers are liars and
subject to error, because they are men, therefore they are not to be believed
or trusted in any thing whatsoever, and they ought to be doubted of, and
accounted as uncertain. Where then is faith? Neither does it help them to say,
that they preach the word of God and not of man* for if they be liars, even in
so saying they may ly. Nothing therefore is certain.

But God forbid that we should either say so, or think so. For it is far
otherwise. And first we confess that the scripture is certain and infallible,
because it is the word of God. But this we add, that seeing it is obscure, the
lawful sense thereof is not manifest to every one. And therefore that there is
need of some other judge who may infallibly deliver which is the true and
lawful sense of scripture. But every private man cannot be this Judge, because
otherwise, there would be as many diverse Judges as there be diverse heads and
opinions. And so no controversy could ever be composed. For every one would say
that he understood it rightly, and al other falsely. Therefore it is necessary
that there be some public Judge, who with authority may have power to decide,
and end the matter betwixt the parties at contention.

Moreover we affirm that men may Genesis ^ ^1. ^ psalm. ^^. 6.
be considered two ways. First as they are the Children of Adam subject to
diverse corruptions of nature. And so by that means may be prone to lying and
falsity. Secondly as they are directed and governed by the holy Ghost for the
instruction of others, and so they may be infallible and void of all error.
Such an one in the old Testament was Moses and the whole Senate of the
Seniors. Such also were the high Priests who followed the^. Such were the
Prophets Isaias, Jeremy, Ezechiel, Daniel, and Number. 11. 7. Deuteronomy. ^^. ^. Agga.
^. 1^. (...) ^0. 7. Ierem. r. 7. Joan. 15. 16. Joan. 16. 1^.
others. Such in the new Testament were the Apostles, to whom it was said of
Christ: I will send you from my father the spirit of truth. And also this:
When that spirit of truth shall come, he will teach you all truth. But where
there is all truth, certainly there cannot be any falsehood or error.

To conclude such has been and at this day is the Church, which by reason of
the perpetual assistance and direction of the holy Ghost, never hitherto has
erred, nor ever can err hereafter. Matthew. 1^. ^8. 1. Tim. 3. 1^. Isa 54. 4.
Ibid. v. ^2. Ibid. v. 17.
For it is built upon a firm rock and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it. It is the pillar and ground of truth. It shall never be consounded
nor blush. The Jasper stone is the munition of it. And it shall judge every
tongue resisting it in Judgment. Therefore it is the infallible Judge which we
seek.

But now there is a question, whether all who are in the Church, have so much
assistance and direction of the holy Ghost that they cannot err, or no. Which
truly is very easy to be resolved. For all certainly have it, but with a
certain kind of dependence from the Church. Therefore as long as they remain
united to the Church, they cannot err, but if they once depart from it then
they begin to err, which may be declared with two similitudes: the one is
taken from the proportion of a man's body. For if you should ask whether all
the members which are in a man's body have vital and sensible spiritts in them,
by the which life in them is preserved. I answer that indeed all have, but
with a certain kind of dependence from the head and the heart, for these
spirits are derived from the head and the heart, as from a double origin, spring
or fountain into the other members. From whence it comes that if those pores
and passages be stopped and intercepted, through the which that distribution of
spirits is made, it follows also that the other members are destitute of
their spirits and cannot exercise their office at all, but if they be patent
and open, all is well. Even so in the Church all the faithful who are as
members of the Church have the assistance and direction of the holy Ghost, but
which a certain kind of dependence of the Pope who is as the head of the
Church: and from the Counsels which are as the heart of the Church. As long
therefore as they remain united to the doctrine of the Pope and Cou^cells,
they are pertakers of the assist^nce and government of the holy Ghost, and
cannot err in faith. But if they once depart by obstinacy and stubbornness
then they begin to shut up all their passages that the divine assistance and
direction cannot be distributed unto them. And so they begin to swerve from the
truth, and become subject to error which happened to Arius, Nestorius,
Macedonius, Pelagius and six hundred others* And truly least the same happen
unto us, let us hear the Counsel of the Apostle, who in every place does
exhort us, to the agreement and unity of doctrine. As when he writes thus to
the Romans. And I desire you brethren (says he) Romans 16. 17.
to mark them that make dissentions and scandalls contrary to the doctrine
which you have learned, and avoid them. And to the Corinthians. I beseech you
brethren by the name of our Lord 1. Cor. 1. 10.
Jesus Christ, that you all say one thing, and that there be no schism among
you. And to the Ephesians. Becarefull to use the spirit of truth in the bond of
peace. One body and one spirit, as Ephesians. 4. 3.
you are called in one hope of your Salvation: One Lord, one faith, one
Baptism. And likewise to the Hebrews With variances and strange Heb. 13. 9.
doctrines be not led away.

Another similitude may be borrowed from a flock of sheep, which very well
does represent the Church. For as a whole flock being gathered together in one
fould, or one place, has the continual assistance of their shepherd who
does defend them all with his hook and his dog from the cruelty of wolves:
eue^ so the whole Church of the faithful being collected in one faith and in
one spirit, has the perpetual assistance of that divine shepherd. Joan. 10.
14. Matthew. 28. 20.
who said, I am the good Pastor and I know my sheep. And again: Behold I am
with you all days even to the consu^matio^ of the world. Also, even as the
sheep as long as they remain together with the flock and their Pastor, they
are safe from the biting of wolves: even so all Christians, as long as they
remain united with the Church, that is, agreeing with the doctrine of the
Church, they are safe and secure from all dangers of error and infidelity: And
finally, as sheep which stray from the flock are destitute of the protection
of their Pastor, and so subject to be devoured of the ravening wolves: even so
Christians who disagree from the common sense and doctrine of the Church, are
quite destitute of the assistance of the holy Ghost, and so in danger to fall
certainly into pestiferous and damnable errors. From the which Christ free us
all.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK
OF the Judge of Controversies the Preface. Page 1. The Scripture alone is not
the Judge of Controversies, concerning matters of Faith and Religion. I.
ARGUMENT, Drawn from the Office of a Judge. Page 6. II. ARGUMENT, Drawn out
of the Scripture it self. Page 9. That the Scripture according* to the sense
and meaning thereof, cannot be Judge. Page 19. That the Scripture often times,
according unto the sense, is obscure and hard to be understood. Page 20. What
are the causes why the Scripture is obscure? Page 33. Wherefore is it Gods
will, that the Scripture should be obscure? Page 58. It follows necessarily
out of the obscurity of the Scripture, that many Controversies arise amongst
Christians. Page 64. The Scripture cannot be the Judge of these, and the like
Controversies. Page 71.
THE III. ARGUMENT. Which is drawn out of the Controversies themselves. Page
81. THE IIII. ARGUMENT. Which is taken out of the use and practice of the old
Testament, where not the Scripture, but the Bishop was acknowledged for the
Judge. Page 91. THE V. ARGUMENT. Drawn from the custom, use, and practice of
the new Testament. Page 106. THE VI. ARGUMENT. Drawn from the Analogy, and
proportion of the Civil Judge, concerning matters belonging to the common
Wealth. Page 118. The Testimonies of Scripture brought against us here are
examined. THE I. TESTIMONY. Page 125. THE II. TESTIMONY. Page 134. THE III.
TESTIMONY. Page 136. THE IIII. TESTIMONY. Page 145. THE V. TESTIMONY. Page 149.
THE VI. TESTIMONY. Page 151. THE VII. TESTIMONY. Page 153. THE VIII. TESTIMONY.
Page 157.
The Conclusion of all that is contained in this Book. Page 160. An Objection
of the vulgar people against all that has been hitherto said. Page 162.
FINIS.

