NEVVES Of Sr. Walter Rauleigh. WITH The true Description of GVIANA: As also a
Relation of the excellent Government, and much hope of the prosperity of the
Voyage.

Sent from a Gentleman of his Fleet, to a most especial Friend of his in
London.

From the River of Caliana, on the Coast of Guiana, Nouemb. 17. 1617.



LONDON, Printed for H.G. and are to be sold by I. Wright, at the sign of the
Bible without Newgate. 1618.

NEWS OF Sr. Walter Rauleigh.
IN these queasie and most dangerous times, wherein Truth is manacled by
Opinion and Imagination, every man making his own thoughts a Comment upon
other men's labors, and by scrues or wrests winding every design to that which
best suites with their fancies: I could not choose but borrow so much time from
the necessity of mine occasions, as to acquaint you with some particular
passages in our voyage: Which though in the value it may be much short both of
what your self and others expect, because at this time our design is but an
Embrion, conceived, and far from that happy perfection to which I doubt not
(the divine will assisting us) but we shall, to the comfort of our noble and
good friends, and the honor of our Nation, with all prosperity of fortune
bring to pass: Yet in as much as I know the malice of many envious and evil
disposed people, Against Backbiters.
who build the groundwork of their own honors upon other men's disgraces, and
with the venom of their aspersions seek (as much as in their malice lies) to
poison the worthy labors of the most noble attempters. To which our Voyage
(being most hopeful to our friends, and most dreadful to our contraries) is
infinitely subject, and that such rancour does await and follow us, as the
great Leuiathan of the Sea pursues the Bonittos, I doubt not but my present
Relation shall give you (whose virtue I seek only to satisfy) that assurance
of good hope in our attemptings, as shall arm you against whatsoever slander
or imputation shall be able (in misty thick fogs of disdain) to throw before
you.

And albeit to the judgment of every virtuous good man, there needs no other
Apology for the hope of our success, then the wisdom, experience, and
vndefatigable labors, in the like designs, of our General, who now setting
all Christendom; nay, almost the whole world at gaze upon him, if he should
not to such beholders give a renowned satisfaction, it were against all rules
of worth and policy to imagine. Yet above all, this me thinks should
satisfy every reasonable soul, and make Envy feed only upon his own
Serpent, when not alone the entyre wisdom of our Land, but the suffrage and
allowance of our Sovereign (who is the very soul of that wisdom) does both
give way to our action, whose goodness what man would be so ungrateful to
abuse, or what folly could be so strong in any sencible soul, as to seek to
go invisible before God.

But Sir, these arguments are needless against a slander of such weakness,
nor will I trouble your ears with a confutation of them, who stand already
confounded in all good men's opinions: suffice it, that hitherto our success is
answerable to our hopes, and our hope as strong as any that has passed from
our Kingdom since the first discovery, and no doubt but the end will bring
forth as worthy, if not a much better issue: In as much as we have had both
the clear lights of all other men's experience, and the approved knowledge of a
great part of our design in our Generals noble and personal trial.

Besides, we know that the tops of hye Scales, Mountains, or Pyramides are
not to be attained unto by leaping or iumping at, but by flow degrees, and by
secure and safe steps, even lento pede, as the Parrat climbes with both beak
and feet: For if we look into the courses of all the most excellent men of
our Nation which have made it as famous for sea-actions as any Nation in the
world, we shall find, how even by little and little, as Hanibal with Vinegar
wasted the Alps, and made a passage (where never any before was discerned) for
not himself alone, but a whole Army to pass over: So our famous and excellent
Attempters have by degrees, man after man, adding step unto step, made such a
way over the whole world, that except the very heart of all, (which as in the
Anatomy of man's body, it is not to be found out, or touched, till a man have
past through first both all the exterior and interior members, and so
likewise of the brain: Nature as it were defending all her most excellent
works from every ordinary assault and invasion) so there is at this day not
left any Climate unsearched or undiscovered, but only this, which as for its
site and place, being the middle of the world, and also for the excellency of
it, may well be styled The heart of the world, as the most principal and
renowned part of it. At which if it be our fortunes to arrive, the work will
be worthy the Doer, and a fair Jewel for his Crown, who is the Royal Author
and Comforter of so great an Attempt, by so many Kings and Princes attempted,
and yet vnachiued.

And that we may walk up this Scale, with as much ease and safety, as all
mortal hope can allow us, let us turn back our eyes and look into the
actions of most of the most famous and noble Gentlemen which have gone before
us, and made those most fair and large paths, through which we daily walk:
we shall see that M. William Haukins, M. William Haukins his travel.
the Father of Sir John Haukins a man of infinite virtue and great action made
his first Discoueries but to the Southern Islands, called the Grand Canaria,
and found there great Trade, and great Commodity: which for the benefit might
well have taken up the rest of any man's mind (whose end had been wealth and
no other) but the Gentleman having a more worthy aim, (though then in the
winter and last quarter of his age) from thence discovered some part of the
small Islands which belonged to the West Indies, learnt intelligence of the
maine and out of his judgment saw what was fittest both for Traffic and
other more material Discoueries. This (not able to furnish himself) he
imparted to his most worthy Son Sir John Haukins, Sr. John Haukins Travel.
and making him rich with his knowledge, so armd him for the Enterprise, that
in the year 1562. he made a Voyage thither, with three small Ships, and but
100. men, and made Discovery of the Island of Hispaniola, De Plata, Monte
Christi, and the Islands of Caicos, where by way of traffic he made such
merchandise that he not only laded all his own ships, but diverse other
Hulkes which he there hyres, and so returned home with more wealth and honor
then ever any had done before his time.

Yet since he had gone not a step higher then his father had done before him,
and made the scale no larger nor easier for others that should pursue him; out
of the excellency of his disposition and love to his Country, in the year
1564. he betook himself to the Sea again, Sr. John's second Voyage.
and with a Fleet of four Ships and 170. men, went again to the West Indies,
and in his way did discover the Island Sambula, and other parts of Affricke:
thence to the Island called Sancta Dominica, so to Margarita, thence to Tortuga,
after to Barbarotta, then to the Islands of Curasao, Ranchario, Rio de la H^cha,
and others, thence to Cape Sr. Anthony, and so to the sandy Islands: and lastly
by Florida, where he showned that excellency of good nature and rare humanity
to certain distressed Frenchmen, that the remembrance will live whilst there
lives any record of goodness, or any thankfulness in France: and thus he
returned home the second time, laden with as much wealth and honor, as ever any
had done before him, and to his brave heroical scale of Discovery, had now
added diverse noble and spacious Stayres, which albeit might have very well
deterd him from any more trouble and vexation, both considering the goods and
goodness he had gotten, and the honorable places, with the favor of his
dearest Sovereign.

Yet all this not valued with the debt he owed his Country, Sir John's third
Voyage.
he went again the third time to Sea with a Fleet of six fair Ships, and
traded in all such places as he had traded in before: and moreover discovered
Carthagena, and diverse other Islands about it, after went to Sr. John Vllua, and
other parts bordering upon Mexico, where he made him self Master of twelve
Ships, in value, worth two hundred thousand pounds, and seized the Island: But
out of his noble nature (considering the amity at that time betwixt Spain and
England) restored all again; which, had his ends tended as much to lucre as
his enemies did to perfidie and treachery, he might not only have brought home
that, but six millions of treasure more, all which was at his commandment:
thence he searched the whole Bay of Mexico, and thence went to Ponte Vedra, and
so returned home.

In this Discovery he got great perfection of knowledge touching the
wonderful wealth and riches of those Southern parts, and though he had done
more then any English man before his time, yet he saw there was a super
excellence remaining as it were hidden, and possible to be found out; at
which, with all his endeauours, he aimed most earnestly, only he found that a
greater strength and a greater industry: then either he was yet master of, or
had occasion to use, must be employed in the same, and therefore the fourth
time he returned unto the Sea with 27 tall Ships, Sir John's fourth Voyage.
and 2500. men: But it pleased God the design should be preserved either for
some other man, or some other time, so that Sir John Haukins, falling sick,
dyed at Sr. John de Puertorico, and by that means the great end of the journey
failed, yet did he leave behind him such brave examples for imitation, and so
fair a scale for others to ascend by; that many became his Scholars, and
howsoever their renownes wanne to themselves particular names of particular
eminence, yet they arrived not beyond him, or got a skill that was to him
vnacquianted.

Only that most famous and worthy Knight Sir Francis Drake, Sir Francis Drake
travel.
who had (as it is reported) taken from him the most and greatest part of his
breeding, being (as some men say) for a long time his ordinary household
Servant, and one that had attended him in the success of some of his voyages,
seeing and aquainting himself with the happy rules of such a happy master,
betook himself to the Sea in the year of our Lord 1572. and discovered most
of the hithermost parts of the small Islands of America, and returned home with
more knowledge then substance, and yet with more substance then might defray
the charge of three times such a voyage, by the strength of which success he
made him self fit for the Sea the second time, Sir Francis second Voyage.
in the year 1577. in which Voyage he made himself more familiar with all
the richest parts of the West Indies, and with some parts of the maine body of
the same: and so returned home with a competent substance, yet far inferior
to the largenes of his mind, because these two first attempts still opened to
his judgment matters of much greater hope and renowned consequence, so that
the third time again he put to Sea, in the year of our Lord 1585. with a full
resolution to do something answerable to the greatness of his heart, Sir Francis
3. Voyage.
and the honor of the Nation he challenged, and in this voyage he went about
the circumference of the whole World, and returned home with his Ship laden
with gold and treasure, of that infinite and inestimable value, that never any
man before him attained to any small degree in his comparison, and yet in this
unspeakable Journey for infinite wealth and infinite labor (not any mortal
man having formerly done the like) the experience he gained did so far
precede his riches, that he made it of no value,and knew that there yet
remained that undiscovered (at least out of Christian commandment) which would
make all he knew pitifully poor, and of no reconing: and therefore to achiue
this Magisteri or true Philosophers stone, being indeed the mother of all mines
and perfect treasure, he again betook himself to the Sca in the year of our
Lord 1595. with a very goodly Navy, and many most noble and worthy personages,
admirably well experienced both in Land and Sea services: But it was not the
pleasure of the everliving God, that by him the work should be finished and
therefore in this voyage he sickened, and in the West Indies died, so that the
end of the Journey being by a twofold way defeyted, as by his death, and the
taking of a certain surgeon which belonged to a Ship, called the Solomon, as
also by the taking of another Ship called the Francis, and by them the whole
Voyage discovered to the enemy, the rest of the Fleet was enforced to return
home altogether unsatisfied.

Now whilst these Gentlemen were thus searching the South and South-west parts
of the world, and had almost brought their hopes within a step or two of the
highest scale, Sir Hugh Willoughbies trauells to the North.
an honorable emulation raised up diverse other Gentlemen of like virtue and
fitnes for action, to search into the North and North-west Seas, for the
finding out of the easiest most safe ways into the East Indies, a place
esteemed for riches equal with the former: but in merchandise by much far
beyond it, and in this Discovery Sir Hugh Willoughby was exceeding well
deserving, who made diverse fair steps to the Scale, and though he perished and
died in the action, yet he left such excellent hopes behind him that many
became pursuers of his project, amongst whom none is more remarkable and
exquisite then that famous worthy Gentleman, Sir Martin Forbisher Knight, Sir
Martin Forbisher to China.
who by many experiences and intelligences of the state, condition, Climate,
and height, of China: knew that if a way might by any industry be found out
from the North-west to lead unto the same, that then it must needs be most
short, most easy, and most safe, and that doubtless the wealth which would
arise by rich Merchandise from thence, would exceed the whole trade of the
world beside, nay that the mines, which was hopeful there to be found, might
go near to counteruayle the great hopes which were built on the South-west,
if not exceed it. And thereupon having all those experiences, which Sir Hugh
Willoughby had left behind, together with his own knowledge, he betook
himself to the Sea in the year 1576 with two good Ships, and having past the
fair Island, and Swinborne in Scotland, he came to Fowlay in Friesland, thence
to Labrador, so to the Islands Gabriels and Bourchers, where he saw and
conferred with many people of that Island, being a Savage people, much like unto
the Tartars, with broad faces, flat noses, and long black hayres below their
shoulders, their attire only Seal skins, nor is there between the men and
women any difference, more then a few blew streakes down their cheeks and
about their eyes, these he saw on the water, not on the land, in certain
small Boats which were made of Seal skins, being sharp at each end and
broad in the bottom, with small wooden keeles made of broad splinters, and in
shape or proportion not much unlike unto the Spanish Shallops. With these
people, whom he enticed to come to him by all fair and gentle means, and by
giving them certain third points and other toys, in which they infinitely
delighted, he had very much conference, both touching the nature of those
Seas, and other occurrents meet for his Discovery, by whom he understood that
the year time being then spent, and the Ice in those places infinitely
increasing, it was at that time impossible to attempt further, without most
assured loss, which accordingly he found by his own experience, and
therefore returned homeward by Trumpets Island, and other places which both for
victual and fresh water he found of great consequence for the furthering of
this Discovery hereafter.

Now having thus erected these few steps to this much wished for Scale, and
finding great hope likely to ensue upon the attempt, he betook himself
again to the Sea, Sir Martins Second Voyage to Cataya.
in the year of our Lord 1577. and taking a better advantage of the year
time, passed all the former places, which before he had discovered and from
thence held his course even unto the maine of Cataia, though with many dangers
and interruptions, for not any man that seeks ways unknown, but must of
necessity many times err, neither can the judgment be satisfied by the first
superficial sight of the eye, but by a more serious time to contemplate and
meditate upon the same, discourse ever crowning all actions with perfection.
And hence it came that making a longer stay upon this Coast, then before he
imagined any necessity would have drawn him, the year time so passed on, that
he could by no possible means proceed further in the discovery, but was
forced to approve what particular profits he could find in that place to
recompense his travel, finding by the Climat and all other good likelihoods
that of force there must be something of great valuation, whereupon after some
curious search of many well experienst men in mynerall business, Gold Mines in
Cataya.
(which at that time attended upon him) he found at length certain strange
mines which yielded a kind of black shining Ore, both massy and wealthy, which
they called the black stone, and by such small trial as that place (with the
accommodation of their Shipping) could afford them, they found it a very rich
gold Ore, so that not being able to stay there to refine any great quantity
thereof, as well for the necessity of the year time, as the want of other most
necessary provisions, he presently laded all his Ships with that Oar, being
one tall Ship and two smaller Barks, and then taking a man, a woman, and a
child of that Country into his Ship also, he returned with them home into
England, to the much contentment of the Queens Majesty his Sovereign, and all
other adventurers which had then shared in his fortunes; and still he found an
increase of his hopes and made his way larger and larger, so that the third
time he put forth to the Sea in the year of our Lord 1588. St. Martins third
Voyage.
But it pleased God that he could not perfect his intent, only returned home
with much wealth and a great deal of knowledge, which has since been pursued
by diverse worthy Adventurers, and though not perfited in that exquisite height
and perfection which the greatness of their minds and wishes aimed at, yet still
it gave that luster and strong hope of success in the action, that a very
noble and worthy Gentleman, Mr. Thomas Cauendish led as well by their former
attempts and experiences, Mr. Thomas Cauendish Travel.
as also by his own knowledge, drawn from certain approved assurances and
intelligences,touching the wonderful and almost inexpressible wealth of China,
with great judgment and advice of many most excellent Seamen, engaged himself
into this worthy discovery, and finding many hard difficulties in the
North-west passage, by good advice resolved to try the contrary, which is the
South-west, knowing that of necessity those lines must in the end meet in one
period: And therefore with all good accommodations he betook himself to the
Sea in the year of our Lord 1586. and passing the Grand Canaries, came to Cape
Verde, and thence to the Tropicke Line, discovering all the hithermost parts of
the East Indies; and from thence attained the very maine and body of China,
where he fraught his Ships with that wealth (as Cloth of Gold, Tyssue, Veluets,
Sattens, Damaskes, and a world of other commodities of no less value) that it
is thought, excepting Drake, not any Englishman ever returned with the like
wealth, insomuch that it set a world of noble hearts on fire, to enter into the
like action.

But he having compassed an end of his profit, (but not of his experience)
refused to return back again by one and the same way, but keeping his course
forward, went round about the whole Circumference of the earth; and in the end
came into England without any abatement of the great substance he had formerly
attained, to the infinite joy of all his friends, the great honor of the
Kingdom, and the much admiration of all foreign Nations.

But did this Experience give him a full satisfaction, or show that end to his
designs, that he might with his honor or reputation say with Hercules, Ne
plus vltra? No surely, but after a clean contrary manner, opened unto him such
a fair way to greater glory and renown, that he accounted this neither worthy
of his beast, nor fit in any small degree to contain the least part of his
actions: being in comparison of those things which he heard there related,
(and indeed not far removed from that Continent) but poor, base and
beggarly.

The glory of which famous action so enticed him, that the second time he went
to the Sea, M. Cauendish his second Voyage
in the year of our Lord 1591. so accommodated with all necessary provisions,
both of men, munition, and victuals, that not any Gentleman ever went forth (in
his own particular) better or more bravely provided. But it pleased God (who
is the strength and guide of these actions) not to mark him out for this great
work: for in this Voyage he sickned and dyed, whose greatest directions
living enclosed in his own breast, the Voyage queld, and his ships returned
home again for England, but the infinite profit which has sprung his example
may be beheld in our East Indian Trade, the like whereof I think no Nation in
the world can boast, being of all other the wealthiest, the fruitfullest, and
the most certain, affording us not only a nurcery of Merchants and Seamen,
but such an invincible strength of Shipping, and other warlike acoustrements,
that any Nation under the Sun may tremble to offend us.

To these Discoueries I could add the Discovery of Virginia, by the ever
memorable and valiant Knight Sir Richard Grinuile, Sr Richard Grinuile his
Discovery of Virginia.
and the Plantation there: which doubtless promises and already restores
much benefit to our Kingdom, having continued there almost from the year
1585. till this hour; and how even in that Discovery he both heard and
understood of the incomparable and not to be equald wealth which yet lay hidden
in the South parts of America.

But I fear I have troubled your ears already too much with my tedious
digression, which is not altogether vain and impertinent, since by it you may
see how even from the infancy of our English travel, every man has had a
noble ambition, and most probable assurances of good hope to attain a height
of honor and wealth, which yet rests vnattained: Sir Walter Rauleigh.
At which questionless our General bends his aim, being diverse ways wooed
and induced thereunto, more then any Englishman whatsoever, both in respect of
his former experience (at this day not to be paralleld) his wisdom, learning,
and conference, with the experience of places he has formerly held, that it
is impossible any thing of note should be hidden from him: Therefore to
reconcile those things already written, with the Relation I intend to pursue,
you shall understand that whatsoever has been done formerly by any of those
already rehearsed, or by any other, whether English, Spanish, Dutch, French, or
any other Nation of Christendom, all their knowledges and experiences have
liberally been brought to his remembrance; Love, Duty, his place of
Authority, or the chance of War, tendering the same unto him as a rent due
to his noble mind and actions. And above all an English Knight, Sir Robert
Dudley was an especial man that long since both from his experience at sea,
Sir Robert Dudley.
(having consumed infinite wealth and much time in these Discoueries) as also
by means of certain Letters which he had intercepted from the Spaniards and
taken in his trauells, gave our General a strong assurance, that yet there
remained out of the hands of all the Kings and Princes in Christendom, in the
South parts of America, the very Magazine of all rich Mettalls, and such an
Empire as whosoever shall have the fortune to conquer it, shall so darken all
the actions either of Cortez or Pescaro, that nothing but poverty will appear
in their deeds, neither Mexico nor Peru be worthy to be compared with it, and
what Prince soever shall possess it, shall be Lord of more gold, of a more
beautiful Empire, and of more Cities and people then either the King of
Spain or the great Turk. At this questionless our hopes promise that his
noble ends do bend, for being full as great, and having been much greater
then any man whatsoever of our nation that has followed the like course to
what should his great heart look? or what should he dedicate to so gracious and
merciful a King as he enjoys, but the very ^oppe and Garland of all
Heroyicall actions? But in as much as yet nothing is done worthy relation,
because we are not yet arrived at the hithermost end of our designs, all our
success remaining in hope, and least my too much love might make me too saucy
in prophecy, I will leave all to his holy will which gouernes all; only I
will acquaint you with some particulars touching the general government of our
Fleet, which although other men doubtless in their Voyages have in some
measure observed, yet in all the great Volumes which have been written
touching Voyages, there is no president of so godly, severe and Martial
government, which not only in it self is laudable and worthy imitation, but
also fit to be written and engraven in every man's Soul, that couets to do
honor to his King and Country in these or the like attempts: The true Copy of
which Laws, Articles, and especial Commandments, are these which here after
follow; and at this present we observe.

Orders to be observed by the Commanders of the Fleet, and land Companies,
under the charge and conduct of Sr. Walter Rauleigh Knight, bound for the South
parts of America or else where. Given at Plymouth in Deuon. the third of May.
1617.
FIrst, because no action nor Enterprise can prosper (be it by Sea or Land)
without the favor and assistance of Almighty God, the Lord and strength of
Hoasts and Armies, you shall not fail to cause Divine Service to be read in
your Ship morning and evening, in the morning before Dinner, and at night
before Supper, or at least (if there be interruption by soul weather) once the
day, praising God every night with singing of a Psalm at the setting of the
Watch.

Secondly, you shall take especial care that God be not blasphemed in your
Ship, but that after admonition given, if the offenders do not refrain
themselves, you shall cause them of the better sort to be fined out of their
adventures, by which course, if no amendment be found, you shall acquaint me
with all: For if it be threatened in the Scriptures, that The Curse shall not
depart from the house of the Swearer, much less from the Ship of the Swearer.

Thirdly, no man shall refuse to obey his Officer in all that he is commanded,
for the benefit of the Journey: no man (being in health) refuse to wait his
turn as he shall be directed: the Saylors by the Master and Boatswaine: the
Landmen by their Captain, Liefetenant and others.

You shall make in every Ship two Captains of the watch, who shall make choice
of two Soldiers every night to search between the Decks, that no fire nor
candle light be carried about the Ship, after the watch set, nor that any
Candles be burning in any Caben without a Lantern, and that neither but while
they are to make themselves unready, for there is no danger so inevitable as
the Ships firing, which may also as well happen by taking of Tobacco between
the Decks, and therefore forbidden to all men but aloft the upper Deck.

You shall cause the Land men to learn the names and places of the ropes, that
they may assist the Sailors in their labors upon the Decks, though they cannot
go up to the tops and yards.

You shall train and instruct your Sailers, (so many as shall be found fit)
as you do your Land-men, and register their names in the Lists of your
Companies, making no difference of professions; but that all be esteemed
Saylors and all Soldiers, for your troops will be very weak when you come to
Land, without the assistance of your Seafaring men.

You shall not give chase, or send aboard any Ship, but by order from the
General: And if you come near any Ship in your course, if she be
belonging to any Prince or State in league or amity with his Majesty, you
shall not take any thing from them by force, upon pain of punishment as a
Pirate, although in manifest extremity or want you may, (agreeing for the
price) relieve your selves with things necessary, (giving bond for the same)
provided that it be not to the disfurnishing of any such Ship, whereby the
Owner or Merchants be endangered for the Ship or goods.

You shall every night fall a stern the Generals Ship, and follow his
light, receiving instructions in the Morning what course to hold, and if you
shall at any time be separated by foul Weather, you shall receive certain
Billettes sealed up, the first to be opened on this side the North Cape, (if
there be cause) the second to be opened at the South Cape: the third, after
you shall pass 23. degrees, and the fourth from the height of Cape de Vert.

If you discover any sail at Sea, either to windward or to lee-ward of the
Admiral, or if any two or three of our Fleet, shall discover any such sail
which the Admiral cannot discern: If she be a great Ship and but one, you
shall strike your maine top-saile, and hoyst it again so often as you shall
judge it to be 100. Tons of burden, as if you judge her to be 200. Tons
to strike and hoyst twice, if 300. thrice and so answerable to her greatness.

If you discern a small Ship, you shall do the like with your fore top-saile,
but if you discover many great Ships, you shall not only strike your maine
top-Saile often, but put out your Ensign in the maine top, and if such Ships
or Fleet go large before the wind, you shall also (after your signs given)
go large, and stand as any of the Fleet does, I mean no longer then that you
may judge the Admiral and the rest have seen your signs and your so
standing. And if you went large at the time of the Discovery, you shall hale
often your sheats for a little time, and then go large again, that the rest may
know that you go large, to show us that the Ships or Fleet discovered keep
that course, so you shall do if the Ships or Fleet discovered have their tacks
aboard, namely if you had also your tacks aboard at the time of the discovery,
you shall bear up for a little time and after hale your sheat often again to
show us what course the Ship or Feet holds.

If you discover any Ship or Fleet by night, if the Ship or Fleet be to
windeward of you, and you to windeward of the Admiral, you shall presently
bear up to give us knowledge: but if you think you might speak with her,
then you shall keep your loofe and shoot off a piece of Ordnance to give us
knowledge thereby.

For a General rule, let no man presume to shoot off any piece of Ordinance
but in discovering a Ship or Fleet by night, or by being in danger of the
enemy, or in danger of fire, or in danger of sinking, it may be unto us all a
most certain intelligence of some matter of importance, and you shall make us
know the difference by this, for if you give chase, and being near a Ship, you
shoot to make her strike, we shall see and know you shoot to that end, (if it
be by day) if by night, we shall then know that you have seen a Ship or Fleet
more then our own, and if you suspect we do not hear the first piece, then
you may shoot a second but not otherwise, and you must take almost a quarter
of an hour between your two pieces: If you be in danger by a leake (I mean
in present danger) you shall shoot two pieces presently one after another. And
if in danger of fire three pieces presently one after another.

In foul weather every man shall fit his Sails to keep company with the rest
of the Fleet, and not run so far a head by day, but that he may fall a
stern the Admiral before night: in case we should be set upon by Sea, the
Captain shall appoint sufficient company to assist the Gunners, after which
(if the fight require it) the Cabens between the Decks shall be taken down,
all beds and sacks employed for Bulwarks; the Musketeers of every Ship shall
be divided under Captains, or other Officers, some for the fore-Castell,
others for the wast, the rest for the poope, where they shall abide (if they
be not otherwise directed) the Gunners shall not shoot any great Ordnance at
other distance then point blanke. An Officer or two shall be appointed to take
care that no loose powder be carried between the Decks, or near any
linstocke, or match in hand: you shall saw diverse Hogs heads in two parts, and
filled with water, set them aloft the Deckes: you shall divide your Carpenters
some in the hold, (if any shot come between wind and water) and the rest
between the Decks, with plates of lead, plugs, with all things necessary laid
by them: you shall also lay by your tubs of water, certain wet blankets to
cast upon and choke any fire, the Master and Boat-swaine shall appoint a
certain number of Sailers to every sail, and to every such company a Masters
mate, Boat-swaines Mate, or quarter Master, so as when every man knows his
charge and place, things may be done without noise or confusion, and no man to
speak but the Officers: As for example, if the Master or his Mate bid heave
out the maine Top-saile, the Masters mate, Boat-swains mate, or quarter
Master which has charge of that sail, shall with his company perform it
without calling out to others, and so for the fore-saile, fore top-saile,
sprit-saile, and the rest: the Boat-swaine himself taking no particular charge
of any Sail, but ouerlooking all, and seeing every one do his duty.

No man shall board a Ship of the enemy without order, because the loss of a
Ship to us is of more importance, then of ten to the enemy, as also by one man's
bording all our Fleet may be engaged, it being a great dishonor to loose the
least of our Fleet. Every Ship being under the lee of the enemy shall labor to
recover the wind, if the Admiral endeavor it, and we find an enemy to leeward
of us, the whole Fleet shall follow the Admiral, Vice Admiral, or other
leading Ships within Musket shot of the enemy, giving so much liberty to the
leading Ships after her broad side discovered, she may stay and trim her
sails, then is the second Ship to give her side, and the third and fourth,
which done they shall all take as the first Ship, and giving the enemy the
other side shall keep him under a perpetual volley: Thus must you do to the
windermost Ship of the enemy, which you shall batter in pieces, or force her to
bear up and entangle the rest falling foul one of another to their great
confusion.

If the Admiral give chase and be head-most man, the next Ship shall take up
his Boat if other order be not given: or if any other Ship be appointed to
give chase, the next Ship, if the chasing Ship have a boat at her stern, shall
take her up: if any make a Ship to strike, he shall not enter her till the
Admiral come up.

The Musketeers divided into certain quarters of the Ship shall not deliver
their shot but at such distances as their Commander shall direct them: you
shall take a special care for the keeping of the Ship clean between the
Decks, to have your Ordnance in order and not cloyd with trunkes, and chests.
Let those that have provision of victuals, deliver it to the Steward, and
every man put his apparel in canuase Clokebags, except some few Chests which
do not pester the Ship: Every one that uses any weapon of fire, be it Musket
or other Piece, shall keep it clean, and if he be not able to amend it
being out of order, he shall presently acquaint his Officer therewith who
shall command the Armorer to amend it.

No man shall keep any feasting or drinking between meals, nor drink any
healths on the Ships provision: Every Captain by his Purser, Steward, or other
Officer shall take a weekly account how the Victuals wast: The Steward shall
not deliver any Candles to any private man, or to any private use.

Whosoever shall steal from his fellows, either apparel or any thing else,
shall be punished as a thief, or if any one steal any victuals, either by
breaking into the hold, or otherwise, he shall receive the punishment of a
thief and the murderer of his fellows.

There is no man shall strike any Officer, be he Captain, Lieftenant,
Ensign, Sergeant, Corporal of the Field, a quarter Master, nor the Master
of any Ship, Masters mate, Boat-swaine, or quarter Master, I say no man shall
offer any violence to any of these, but the Supreme Officer to the inferior,
in time of Service upon pain of death: No private man shall strike one another
upon pain of receiving such punishment as a Marshall Court shall think him
worthy of.

No man shall play at Cards or Dice, either for his Apparill or Arms upon
pain of being disarmed, and made a Swabber; and whosoever shall show himself
a coward upon any landing or otherwise, he shall be disarmed, and made a
Labourer and carrier of victuals for the rest.

No man shall land any men in any foreign parts, without order from the
General, the Sergeant Mayor or other chief Officer, upon pain of death; and
wheresoever we shall have cause to land, no Man shall force any Woman, be
she Christian or Heathen upon pain of death: And you shall take especial
care when God shall suffer us to land in the Indies, not to eat any fruits
unknown, such fruits as you do not find eaten by birds on the tree or beasts
under the tree you shall avoid.

You shall not sleep on the ground nor eat any new flesh till it be salted,
two or three hours, which otherwise, will breed a most dangerous flux, so
will the eating of over fat hoggs or Turkies: you shall also have a great care,
that you swim not in any Rivers but where you see the Indians swin, because
most of the Rivers are full of Allegators: you shall not take any thing from
any Indian by force, for from thenceforth we shall never be relieved; but you
must use them with all courtesy. And for trading or exchanging with them it
must be done by one or two of every Ship for all the rest, and the price to be
directed by the Cape Merchant, for otherwise all our commodities will be of
small price, and greatly to our hinderance.

For other orders on the Land we will establish them (when God shall send us
thither) by general consent, in the mean time I will value every man's honor
according to their degree and valor, and taking care for the service of God and
prosperity of our enterprise.

When the Admiral shall hang out a Flag or Ensign on the Missen shrouds, you
shall know it to be a Flag of Counsel to come aboard.

A Reference of the Voyage to the Directions.
BY these Orders and Commandedements, you may see to what Coast we are bound,
and namely to the South parts of America, and no doubt to the only best part
thereof: For as all the Springs and Rivers in the world have but one head,
namely, the Sea: so it is thought all the wealthy Mines in the world have but
one Sovereign, which is an Empire placed in these parts, and that is the great
Empire of Guiana, Of Guyani, and the wealth.
ruled by the great Emperor Inga: of the great wealth and riches whereof
Francisco Lopez and others thus report; That all the vessels of the Emperors
house, Tables, and Kitchen were of Silver and Gold, and the very meanest of all
of Silver and Copper, for the strength and hardness of the metal: That in
his Wardrobe were hollow Statues of gold, which seemed giants, and Figures in
proportion and bigness of all the Beasts, Birds, Trees, and Herbs, that the
earth brings forth in pure Gold also, and of all the Fishes that the Sea and
waters of that Empire breeds. Also there was Ropes, Budgets, Chests, and
Troughs of Gold and Silver; great heaps of Billets of Gold, which seemed wood
marked out to burn; nay, that there was nothing in all that Empire (the most
flourishing of the whole world) whereof there was not a counterfeit in pure
Gold.

Besides, there was seen in a certain Island near the Emperors Court, a
Garden of pleasure, in which was all kind of Garden-hearbs, flowers and trees,
of Gold and Silver. As also in other places diverse great infinits of Gold and
silver unwrought, as in one place to the value of fifty two thousand Marks of
pure Silver, and one Million and three hundred twenty and six thousand and
five hundred Pesoes in Gold.

A very strange custom.
Now it is to be understood that all this wealth belonged but to one Emperor:
for the custom of the Country is, that whosoever dies has all his Treasure
buried with him, so that even from the first Ruler to the Emperor now living,
it is thought no less Treasure will be found in every Monument; which how
unspeakable it is, I leave to judgment.

Martines his testimony, and first Christian that saw Guyana.
And this does also witness Martines, a Spanyard, who lived seven Months in
the great City Manoa (which he called El Dorado, the place of gold) with the
great Emperor Inga, and saw with his eyes what Lopez had written. And further,
he did affirm of himself, that when he first entered into that City, (which
for buildings, state and popularitie, and all other outward excellencies, he
thought the goodliest in the whole world) it was near noone, and then they
uncovered his face (for in his whole travel he was led by the Indians
blindfold before) and he traveled all that day till dark night, and the next
day from Sunne-rise till Sunne-set, directly forward within the City, before
he came to the Emperors Court, which expresses a mass of buildings far
beyond our apprehensions.

But here it will be objected by the curious, A curious Objection answered.
that without all question if this were possible to be so, that the Conquest
thereof had been attempted many years ago, and that the Spanyard who has
got Peru and Mexico, would not have slept in a Design of this great
consequence: Or if he had, that then these knowledges would have inflamed all
the great Spirits of Christendom to have joined their forces together in so
worthy a Conquest. And surely the Objection is true, nor has either the
Spanyard or other Princes been sloathfull in this attempt, though it has
please God their labors have not hitherto taken effect. For first, Oreliano
the I. attempter for Guyana.
the Marquess of Pescaro employed Oreliano about the Discovery of this Empire
in the year 1542. and he was the first that found out the River of Amazons,
but failed in his first purpose.

After him Ordace, Ordace the attempter.
who was Knight of the order of St. Iago, did attempt the same design, under
whom Martines (before mentioned) was master of the Munition, this Ordace was
slain by a mutiny upon the Coast of Guiana, with all such as likewise favored
him; by reason whereof the attempt failed, and few or none of the Company
returned, being six hundred foot, and thirty horse.

After the death of Ordace, Pedro de Osua a Knight undertook the attempt,
Pedro de Osua, the third attemptor.
and having spent much time and search in the River Amazons, and wearied his
soldiers, was also by a mutiny stird up by one Agiri, a man of mean quality,
put to the sword, and with him all such as loved him.

Then Agiri being chief, took on him the attempt; Agiri the fourth attemptor.
but not being able by that River to find any passage to Guiana, he returned
back, and committing diverse rebellious outrages, was in the end overthrown in
Nueuo reigno, and finding no way to escape, first slew his Children to save
them from defamation, and after himself.

After him succeeded in this enterprise Ieronimo Ortal de Saragosa, Ieronimo
Ortal de Saragosa, the fifth attemptor.
but failing of his entrance was cast on a contrary Coast, and so proceeded no
further.

Then followed Don Pedro de Siluas, Don Pedro de Siluas, the sixth attemptor.
but he also entering by the River Amazons, was by those warlike Women
defeated, and but seven of his Company escaped, whereof but two only returned.

Then came Pedro Hernandez de Serpa, Pedro Hernandez the seventh attemptor.
and undertook the action, but marching by Land to the River Orenoque, was met
by an Army of the Indians and overthrown, so that of his whole power returned
but eighteen persons.

This overthrow heard of the Adalantado, Don Gonzales Cemenes de Casada
undertook the action, Gonzales Cemenes, the eight attemptor.
and sought his passage by the River which is called Papamene, but he also,
sailing in the true entrance, returned with the loss of much labor and cost:
This Gonzales gave his Daughter in marriage to a very brave and stout Spaniard
(but a little persidious) called Bereo, binding him by his oath and honor to
pursue the Action to his last substance, or the loss of his life, which Bereo
undertook; Anthonio Bereo the ninth attemptor.
and all be it he had the experience of all those which had gone before, and
of diverse others, and was well persuaded of their errors and mistakings, yet
he failed as much as any other, nor ever could come to any true light thereof
till he got conference with an ancient King of that Country called Carapana.
This Bereo was after taken Prisoner by Sir Walter Rauleigh, Bereo taken
Prisoner.
our noble General at Trinidado, from whom he exacted much of that has been
formerly written in the year of our Lord 1595. at which time Sir Walter
attempted the discovery of Guiana, Sr. Walter Rauleigh first Discouerer of
Guiana.
and proceeded further therein (being but himself and one hundred followers of
all sorts) then ever any man had done before; he entered by one of the maine
branches of Orenoque, being nine in number which fall out of the North side,
and seven out of the South, and passed the Country of the Tiuitiuas, Of the
Tiuitiuas.
which are people that in the Summer dwell in houses on the ground, but in the
Winter, upon the tops of trees.

Of the River Amana.
Thence he came into the goodly River of Amana, on whose borders he saw grow
abundance of fruit Trees, good and pleasant to eat, which was a very great
relief to his Company when their victuals were spent, and such strange plants
and flowers as was most wonderful.

Then he went to a Town of the Arwacas, Of the Arwacas.
where he found relief of victuals, and other necessaries, and a most
delicate and sweet Country, and in less then fifteen days after he came to
descry the mountains of Guiana: thence he went to the Town of Toparimaca an
Indian Casiquy, which Town is called Arwacas, and there feasted, was
refreshed, and got a Pilot to bring him to Guiana; so that thence he passed by
the Island Assapano, The Island Assapano, and others.
and the Island Icoana: thence to the I Will Ocaywita, whence he sent two
Guianians to tell the Lord of that Country of his coming, so he passed by the
plains of the Samay, which reach to Cumana and Caracas; thence he went up to
Aromaia, which was the Country of Morequito, that was formerly slain by Bereo,
where in the Port thereof he anchored, and the King of Aromaia came a foot,
Sir Walters conference with the King of Aromaia.
unto him, being fourteen English miles, and brought him all sorts of
provisions, with this King (being a man of an hundred and ten years old)
Sir Walter discoursed in private, and understood that Country to be a part of
Guiana, and withal he learnd from him the ways and passages to Manoa, the
strength and government of the great Empire, and lastly, the nature and
disposition of the people, and what Nations and Countries were adverse unto
them. After this discourse Sir Walter gave him leave to depart, the old man
promising him upon his return, all things necessary that he should want:
Thence Sir Walter went to view the famous River Caroli, The great river Caroli.
and so to to the Island Caiama: thence to Canuria, where he had conference with
the Cassique thereof, and from him learned also more of the state of Guiana,
and of the great wealth, and of certain Silver Mines, Discovery of Silver
Mines.
which were then upon the borders of that River, where he then anchored, and
that also he was then very near unto Macureguarai the first civil Town of
Guiana: But now the time of the year being past, and the Rivers beginning to
rise and break forth, he could ascend no further upward by water, yet he
sent diverse especial Gentlemen of good judgment over the land, who discovered
a great part of that Country, and himself in person diverse places of especial
account also, amongst which he beheld the wonderful strange fall of waters
which fell from the River Caroli, being about ten or twelve ouer-falls, every
one higher then another above the height of an ordinary Church steeple: but
touching the excellency of the Country, The excellenc^ of those bordering
Countries.
the beauty, riches, sweet air, and plenty of all things necessary for
pleasure, as dear, foul, fish, and other commodities no Nation in the world
could exceed it, and in this place he found diverse very precious stones, and
other Mineral things of great value, here also he saw the great Lake of
Cassipa, The great Lake of Cassipa.
from which in the Summer time is gathered great abundance of grains of pure
gold, and took also a full suruay of many other Nations adjoining to both
sides of that River, but by this time the Rivers grew to an extraordinary
height above their banks, so as he was compeld to proceed no further in the
attempt at that time, but returned back unto his Ships by the Easterly
Coast, discovering all such Nations as on that side they had not beheld, and in
this return he had conference with diverse Kings and Cassiques of those
Nations, whom with his virtue, wisdom, clemency, and noble cartiage, he so
wan unto him, that they offered him all the aid and assistance (to any attempt
he should take in hand) that either their lives or estates were able to
accomplish; withal, giving him an account for the defects of other men's
attempts upon that Country, and showing him the safe and readiest way how he
might here after make himself Master of the same, with diverse other cautions
of great consequence, and here also he got some store of gold, of gold Oar,
and other Jewels: hence he came into the Country of the Cassique Putuma who
showed him a wonderful great Mine of Gold in manner of a Rock or hard golden
stones, Of gold mines
which without especial strong engines which they wanted, was not to be
pierst: Hence he came into another branch of the River of Orenoque, called
Winicapora, where he beheld a mountain of Crystal, Of a Mountain of
Crystal.
which to their eyes appeared like a white Church Tower of a most exceeding
height: where also he saw and heard the greatest fall of water that any part of
the world can produce. And in this place he was assured there was many rich
Diamonds and other precious stones of inestimable value, which were to be
beheld a great way off. But the year time being spent, the over flow of waters
coming, and the way much impassible, at that time he would not come near unto
it: here he received a great number of Spleen stones, and other wealth,
besides much provision of food and other necessaries. Here also he got further
intelligence, and further assurances of aid, if he should attempt any thing.
Hence he came back to Assapano, and thence with much danger to Trinidado,
where he found his ships, the sight and joy whereof hardly any can express
that has not tried the same hazard; and so thence returned home for England.

Neither has this Attempt been approved only by the Spanyard and English (as
is before rehearsed) but has also been taken in hand by diverse brave spirits
of France, Attempts by the French, for Guiana.
as Mounseir Vislieres and diverse others, which were here very tedious to
repeat: but they all likewise failed therein. For making their way by the
River Amazons, they were ever crossed in their purpose, and could find no
certain entrance into that wealthy Empire yet notwithstanding, in that River,
and in the branches thereof they found great trade of Gold, which came from the
borders of Guiana, and so ever returned home very wealthy, together with other
rich merchandise of great estimation.

Thus you may see this El Dorado, or golden seat, has been sought by many
worthy Spaniards, one Noble Englishman, and diverse Frenchmen, yet none so
successful as the English, which makes me Prophetiquely suppose, Hope of good
hap.
that the glory of the action is reserved for us only, and the Kingdom such a
Paragon and rich stone as shall adorn no crown but the crown of King James.

The rest I leave to their judgment which shall read what has been formerly
written of it, or else these few protestations which do follow.

First, Sir Walter Rauleigh himself protests from his own sight and
knowledge, Sir Walters protestation touching the wealth of Guyana.
that upon this maine River in which he sailed, whose branches do run and
divide into diverse Nations and Countries, above two thousand miles to the East
and West, and eight hundred miles South and North, a man may see as many
several Kingdoms and Provinces as may satisfy any industrious judgment
whatsoever; and of them, the most, either rich in Gold or in other Merchandise:
that in this place the Soldier may fight for Gold, and pay himself in stead
of pence with plates of gold a foot broad: that the Commanders which shoot at
honor and abundance, may find there more beautiful Cities, more Temples
adorned with Golden Images, more Sepulchers filled with Treasure, the either
was found in Mexico or Peru: and that the shining glory of this Conquest would
eclypse all the beams of the Spanish Nation.

Also he says, there is no Country which yields more pleasure to the
Inhabitants, for the delights of Hunting, Hawking, Fishing, Fowling, and the
rest, then these Lands which he saw did. They have also so many plains,
clear Rivers, abundance of Pheasants, Partridges, Quails, Rayles, Cranes,
Herons, and all other Foul: Dear of all sorts, Porkes, Hares, Lions, Tigers,
Leopards, and diverse other sorts of Beasts either for chase or food, that no
Nation of the world can exceed them.

And to conclude, he says, that both for health, good Air, pleasure and
riches, it is not to be equald by any Region either in the East or West: and
that there is in it great store of Brasill-wood, and diverse Berryes which dye a
most perfect Crimson and Carnation; and for painting, not all France, Italy,
nor the East Indies yield any such, for the more the skin is washed, the
fairer the color appears.

Also there is great store of Cotton, of Silk, of Balsamum, and of those
kinds most excellent, and never known in Europe. There are all sorts of
Gummes, of Indian Pepper, besides what the Country may afford in wardly, which
he had not leisure to search, is yet unknown. Also the Soil is so excellent
and so full of Rivers, that it will bear Sugar, Ginger, and all commodities
that the West Indies has.

Now for the easiness of the Navigations, he says it may be sailed in six
weeks thither, Ensines for Navigations.
and in six weeks back again: and by the way neither be shore, enemies
coast, rocks, nor sands; all which other Voyages are subject unto.

Also he says, the best time to sail from England thither, is in July,
because the Summer in Guiana is in October, November, December, January,
February, and March, and so shipping may return from thence in April, and
arrive at home in England, in June; and by that means never be subject to
winter weather, either coming, going, or staying, which no doubt is an
excellent comfort to all men that shall undertake the Action.

And thus much touching his worthy and noble Relation, who being an
eyewitness, would not for his honor and virtues sake abuse his Sovereign
with untruths.

Now let us see what the Spaniards say of this rich Kingdom. First, Alonso,
The testimony of the Spaniards for the wealth of Guina.
a chief Governor in the Grand Canaria, says; that there was a Land newly
discovered, called Nueuo Dorado, in which was abundance of Gold, and wonderful
riches above imagination: that the course to fall with it, was fifty leagues to
the winde-ward to the Marguarita.

Again he says in another affirmation, that in Nueuo Dorado lately found out
there was gold in that abundance, as the like has never formerly been heard
of, nor was any part of the world to be compared with it; and the like
affirms Domingo de Vera who was Camp Master and General for Anthony Bereo
in this Discovery, and no less says Rodrigo de Caranca Register for the Sea,
and many others: So that to conclude your trouble and the tediousnes of my
weary discourse, The conclusion
this Empire is that rich Magazany which yet has her Maidenhead never sacked,
turned, nor wrought, the face of the earth has not been turned nor the virtue
and salt of the soil spent by manurance, The graves have not been opened for
Gold, the Mines not broken with the sledge or pickaxe, nor their Images pulled
down out of their Temples. It has never been entered by any army of strength,
and never conquered or possessed by any Christian Prince: Besides by the report
of all former Discouerers, especially our General, it is so defensible and
easy to be kept from the assaults of any inuaders, that if two Forts be
builded in one of the Provinces which he beheld and took especial note of;
the flood sets in so near the bank where the channel also lies that no
Ship can pass up, but within a pikes length, of the artillery, first of the
one, and afterward of the other, which two Forts he supposes will bea
sufficient guard, both to the Empire of Inga, and to one hundred other several
Kingdoms, all lying within the great River of Orenoque, even to the City of
Quito in Peru.

Of this Empire if it shall please God to make the King our Master Sovereign,
what honor and reward it will bring him and his Subjects may easily be
coniectured by what is before written; and since it is or may be undertaken by
his own vassaile, and one who is bound in extraordinary bond more then every
common Subject, to spend the uttermost of his life in the same, no doubt but
he will effect it with that wisdom, diligence, and care which shall be
suitable to the greatness of the action, and the trust reposed, being thus far
forth further encouraged by Anthonio Bereo the Spaniard, who in great
earnestnes, and upon his Souls health protested, A strange Prophecy.
that he had seen amongst diverse most ancient Prophesies in Peru (at such
time as that Empire was reduced to the Spanish obedience) one that affirmed,
that from Inglatierra (which is to say, England) those Ingas should be again
in time to come restored and delivered from the servitude of the former
Conquerors, and this he auowed to have seen in diverse or their most
principal and chiefest Temples, preserved with great reverence and care, and
till this day believed of all the Indians: Now an entrance in former years our
General did make, as you have read, with that success that not any before or
since has ever equalled and displanted the first garrisons, if then now he
succeed and have fortune answerable to his rare wisdom, industry and
direction, whether it be in this nor any other to himself only concealed,
there is no doubt but (God assisting) he will with such honor and high
thoughts, pass and go through the same, that his nation shall have praise, his
friends comfort, and himself the true advancement of his merits.

But to give you a little taste of what has succeeded in our present Journey,
you shall understand that we departed from Plymouth to Cork in Ireland, where
after some refreshment we set sail out of the river of Cork, and thence
sailed more then three Months before we came to the Coast of Guiana, which
albeit generally it be ever run in seven or eight weeks, yet were the winds
so strangely cross unto us, (a thing seldom seen in that passage) that in
less time we could not effect our purpose: So that upon the seventh day of
November last past, 1617. we discovered the Coast of Guiana, during which time
of our being at Sea, we had a great visitation of Sickness, so that many were
sick, and some are dead, amongst which, the most eminent persons that dyed
were these. Captain John Pygot our Lieftenant General, worthy Captain
Hastings, my Lord of Huntington, brother, a Gentleman of so much foreward hope,
and goodness, that he was couerd with many tears, and much mourning; also there
died Master Talbot Scholar, which has been long employed by our General; M
Newhall, the master Surgeon of our Generals Ship, and others, with which I
will not trouble your ears.

Upon the discovering of the Coast, we came into the fair River of Caltana,
being (as it appears to me) a branch of Oerenoque, where my Lord, our
General cast Anchor, and does purpose to refresh his sick men, and to take in
fresh water and other necessary provisions, of which that Coast abounddeth, and
so to proceed in his enterprise which God in his mercy prosper, for our hopes
every day grow stronger and stronger. This part of Guiana in which we now are,
is to me a very Paradise, and so excellent in all perfections and beauties,
that Nature seems only here to have her Temple; we have even now (being the
Month of November) a much more delicate Summer, then is in England at
Mid-sommer, the Sun and Air so wholesome and pleasant without offense or
scorching, the trees and ground so bravely flourishing, and every thing in
General so absolute and full of fruitful promise, that more cannot be by man
desired: for mine own part I dare assure you, that in my life time I never saw
or tasted more strange, more delicate, and more pleasant fruits, then here we
may continually gather in most infinite abundance, being besides so wondrous
wholesome and vnoffensiue, that I have not heard any complain either of surfeit,
or other accidental sickness, as worms, fluxes and such like, which commonly
follow the much eating of sweet and pleasant fruit. To enter into a Description
of the beautiful prospect of this Country which we now see, although it be
but the out-borders and skirts of the Empire, so nearer a neighbor to the
maine Ocean, that in reason it should promise the least fertility; yet I say
again, to describe the goodlinesse thereof, the bravery of the Hills, and
comeliness of the valleys, both shadowed and adorned with goodly tall green
trees; the pleasantness and coolness of the Rivers which run and mix
themselves in the most conuenientest places, plentifully stored with fish of
several natures; the variety of rare colored Birds which fly up and down in
every place about us, no color almost under the Sun but being revealed in
their feathers: were to draw a Landscape of that excellent perfection, which no
Art could better, hardly imitate. For truly hitherto to mine eye this Country
has appeared a very earthly Paradise, and therefore doubtless is full of
strong promises, that our attemptings cannot return without much honor and
reward, a rent hopefully due to every such noble action. But since it yet
rests in hope, I will leave it to the will and direction of the great GOD of
Heaven: To whose protection I refer you, with this assurance, that as our
success shall happen, and the action either decrease or diminish, so you shall
by writing more amply understand thereof.

From the River of Caliana on the Coast of Guiana, this seventeenth of
November. 1617. R.M.

FINIS.

