The Castle of comfort, in the which it is evidently proved, yt God alone
absolueth, and freli forgeueth the sins of so many as unfeignedly repent, and
turn unto him Lately compyled by Thomas Becon.

Prouer. xviii. The name of the Lord is a strong castle, unto that does the
righteous run, and he shall be preserved. Csa. lv. COme to the waters all ye,
that be thyrsty, and ye that have no money come, bye, that ye may have too
eat.

Come, bye wine and milk without money, or money worth. Wherefore do ye lay
out your money for ye thing y^ fedeth not, and spend your labor about the
thing y^ satisfies you not. But harke^ rather unto me, and ye shall ^at of y^
best, and your soul shall have her pleasure in ple^teousnes. Incline iour
ears, and come unto me, take heed, and your soul shall live. For I will make an
everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies that were promised to David.

Johan. vii. If any man be thyrstye, let him come unto me and drink.

Psalm. xxxiiii. Oh taste and se, how sweet the Lord is, blessed is that man
that puts his trust in him.

To the most honorable and verteous Lady Marie, duchess of Rychemo^de her
grace, Thomas Beco^ wissheth from God the father through our Lord Jesus Christ, a
faithful perseueraunce in gods most holy word unto the end.
IT is not without a great cause (most godly Lady) that y^ holy Apostle
saint Paul desired the Thessalonians to hold fast y^ doctrine, ii. These. ii.
that he had taught the^ before, and not sodenli to be moved from their knowledge
and understanding, nor to be troubled neither by spirit, neither by words,
nor yet by letter. For he undoubtedly did before se by the reuelacion of Gods
spirit, Mat. xxiiii.
that there should arise false anointed and false preachers, which should
work great miracles and wonders, insomuch that if it were possible, the very
elect and chosen people of God should be brought into error, which also
should say, behold here is Christ, or there is Christ, bringing in
damnable sects, and utterly denyenge the Lord that bought them, i. Pet. ii.
as Peter says. He considered the imbecillitie, weakness and chyldishe hertes
of men, which, except they be corroborated and fortefied with y^ strength of
Gods spirit, Heb. x^^i.
are sone carried about with diverse and strange learninges, embrasing no less
gredely that that is to them selfs noisome and pestiferous, than that which is
good and profitable, as we at this present time se daily before our eyes, both
in the Papists and Anabaptists, with such other damnable sectaries. Therefore
this most excellent Apostle desired the Thessalonians, yea, and so many of us,
Math. x.
as profess Christ unfeignedly, to persevere and abide in the word of truth
eue^ unto the end, that we may be saved, and not lightly to be moved with the
subtle and crafty persuasions of them, that teach weak and beggarly
tradicions with humayne constitucions, Galat. iiii.
which give head to fables and men's commandments that turn away the
folowers of them from Tit. i.
the truth, which profess that they know God, but with their deeds they deny
him, inasmoch as they are abominable and disobedient, yea, ^. Timo. iii.
and unmeet to al good works, which love their own pleasurs more than God,
having an utter apperans of godly living, but denyeng the power thereof, which
run from house to house and bring into bondage both men and women lode^ with
sin, which are led with diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to
come unto the knowledge of the truth which are enemies of the cross of Christ,
Phil. iii.
which call that is evil good, and y^ is good, Esa. v.
evil and ce. Act. xx.
In few, which are rauenynge wolfes, not sparyng the flock. Does the world
want these enemies of Gods glory? Have not we also need to take heed unto the
aforesaid wholesome admonicion of the holy Apostle saint Paul? Does not
the world at this day norishe such ungodly monstures? What age has been
without them syns the beginning of the world? What need I to speak of that
great whore of Babilo^, the mother of fornicacions and abhominacions of the
earth, Apoc. xviii.
which has made dronken with the wine of the wrath of her whoredom all the
nations of y^ earth, yea, the very kings and rulers of the earth have playde
the aduouterers with her. The fornicacio^ of that most filthy and stinking
strompet is so openly known, and made manifest unto us, both by godly books
and learned sermons, that it needs not here to be rehearsed. And would God,
that as the name of this Babilonical strompet is exiled out of men's mouths
and rased out of books among us, so in like manner her whoredom I mean, the
popysh and deuelish decrees, which fight with y^ manifest word of God, might
ones be utterly exiled, banyshed, and for ever driven away from the bonds of
Christendom, that all things in the Christen public weal, both in this and
in other foren Realms might be instituted, ordered and appointed, according
to the verity of Christ's most blessed Gospel. But besides this monstrous
beast, are there risen, not a few, which are plain Antichrists, and daily
labor to obscure the glory of God. No marvel, seeing that in the Apostles time,
i. Joan. ii. iiii.
blessed John confesses that there were many Antichrists and false Prophets.
^. Joan. i
What need I to speak of them, which teach that Christ by his most precious
death delivered us only from original sin? Which teach that man is
justified by his own works and not by the faith alone, Roma. iii. viiii.
that he has in Christ's most blessed death? which teach, that by obseruinge
men's tradicions everlasting life is got^e^? Ephe. ii.
Which teach that external ceremonies justify and put away sin? Which
teach that man is able of his own strength to fulfill the law, and to
satisfy the justice of God? i. Timo. ii.
which teach that our prayers can not be heard without the intercession of
other? i. Joan. i.
Which teach that all honor pertayneth not too God alone? which teach that
the blood of our savior Jesus Christ is not a sufficient Purgatory i. Joan.
i.
for all our sins, except we be broyled, boiled and perboyled in y^ Popes
furnace? Which teach that the Lord Christ gave not him self so Heb. vii.
ix. x.
plenteously a sweet smelling sacrifice to God the father for us, Ephe. v.
that with the one oblacion of his most blessed body, Ma^h. ix.
he has made the^ perfect for evermore, Marc. ii.
that are sanctified? Luc. v.
Which teach that God alone forgeueth not sin, but synnefull man also? Are
not these very Antichrists? enemies of ye cross of Christ? defacers of Gods
glory falls anointed? falls preachers ravening wolfs? clouds without water? ii.
Pet. ii
trees without fruit? raging waves of y^ sea, foming out their own shame?
wa^dring stars, to whom is reserved y^ myste of darkness for ever? me^
pleasers, having men in great reverence for advantage sake? curssed children,
which have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray? these are they
doubtless, of whom both Christ and his apostles bid us take heed in so many
places of the holy scripturs. Against these ought all men to fight, that
tender y^ glory of God. Luc. xxii.
To confound these Antichrists, ought we to sell walet, scrippe, cote, with
all that ever we have, and to bye us a sword, I mean y^ sword of the spirit,
which is the word of God. And to this end that I may provoke other
valeauntly, and boldly to fight against these aforesaid Antichrists. I
according to the talent given me, have taken upon me to wrestle with those
wicked Papists, which believe and teach that God alone does not forgive sin,
but man also with y^ same power, and like authority Which thing I take in
hand the more gladly, because I se y^ this kind of doctrine is a great
defacing of Gods glory, and that it throws many into great danger,
forasmuch as they look for that at the hand of man, which only is the gift
of God, yea, it encourages not a few to live dissolutely, and without the
fear of God, seeing they are persuaded, that if the Priest lays his hand
ones upon their head, and say Ego absoluo te, they are quyte delivered of
their synneful burden, and though they return straight ways unto their filthy
vomyte, what skylleth it? Ego a^soluo te will dispatche all together. ii. T^s.
ii.
If any man sits in the temple of God, bosting him self as God, surely they
do it, which take upon the^ the office of God, that is to remitte and forgive
sin. Esa. xi.
But they shall be slain with the breath of the Lords mouth. The order, which
I will observe in the treatise following is this. First I will prove with manifest
scriptures, that God alone forgeueth sin. Seco^dli that the Priest is but a
minister appointed of God, to declare fre remission of sins to the truly
penitent, to declare, I say and not to forgive. Thirdly I will answer to the
objections of the adversaries, and utterly wype them away, restorynge the
scriptures to their native sense. At the last, lest I should seem to despise
the true and Christen absolucion of a faithful Minister, and the use of y^
keys, which consists in preaching, I will express my mind, concerning
them also, so that to any indifferent person, I doubt not, but that my
judgment shall appear godly and confirmab^e to the true vayn of the holy
scriptures. This littel treatise (most virtuous Lady) I send unto your
grace, as a testimonye of my redye ben^ good will, and seruiseable heart toward
your grace, being provoked hereunto, through your exceeding love and fervent
z^le, which your most honorable Ladyshippe bear, both toward the word
of God, and the true professors of the same, most humbly, besechynge your
grace, to take in good part, this my rude and simple gift. God, which by his
holy spirit, has wroughte in your heart this ent^er love toward the Gospel of
his son Christ Jesus, moughte also bring forth in your grace plenteousnes
of good works, unto the glory of his blessed name, and the profit of his holy
congregation.

AMEN.
Your graces most humble and faithful oratoure Thomas Becon.

The Castle of comfort.
THat God alone absolueth ye truly penitent, and only forgeueth the sins of
so many as with unfeigned faith and hearty repentance convert, turn and fle
unto his mercy, it is manifestly proved by diverse textes of y^ holy scripture.
First let us hear, Esa. xlii^
what God him self says by the Prophet, I am he yea, I am he in deed, which
puts away thy sins, yea, and that for mine own sake, and I will remember
thy sins no more. Call to remembrance, and let us be judged together. Tell, if
thou haste any thing y^ thou may be justified. Thy first father sinned, and
thy Prophets have trespassed against me.

Are not these words evident enough? Math. xxiiii*
God the father perceiving right well, that there should arise falls anointed
and falls preachers, which without all shame would arrogantlye arrogate, and
proudely challenge to them selfs that power of forgeuinge sin, which alone
pertayneth to him, plainly here affirms, that he alone puts away our
sins. And because he would have us the more seriously and earnestly to believe
it, he repetethe this word, I twyse, saying, I am he, yea, I am he in deed,
which puts away thy sins, yea, and that for mine own sake. And least
any man should think, that one may more forgive another his sins (I speak
of those sins, which are between God and our conscience, and not of the
brotherly reconciliation) he affirms that our first father Adam, and all
Prophets and preachers have sinned, so that of them no remission of sins is
to be looked for. Joan. iii.
Can flesh purifye the soul? Roma. iii..
that which is borne of flesh, Roma. xi*
is flesh says Christ. All have sinned, says saint Paul, and want y^
glory of God. Again, God has wrapped all nations, says he in unbelief, that
he might have mercy on all. Ephe. ii.
If al be sinners, flesh, and the children of wrath, Luce. xvii.
if al be hipocrites, unprofitable servants, earth, dust and ashes, if all be
the enemies of God and unfaithful, how dare we be so bold, as to take upon
us one to forgive another their sins? Is a traytoure a mete man to purchase a
pardon of a Price for another traytoure? Can one traytoure forgive another his
treason? Ca^ one sinner forgive another his sin? Job xiiii*
Of the unclean what ca^ be made clean? as Job says: Who can make him clean,
that is conceived of unclean sede? Is it not thou alone o Lord? It is the
Lord alone in deed, Psalm. x. ii.
as David says, thou o Lord, shalt sprinkle me with Hysop, and I shall be
made clean, yea, I shall be made whyther than snow. And as our savior Christ
said unto Peter, Joan. xiii.
If I wash the not, thou haste no part with me. If God washes us not from
our filthiness, we have no part in the heritage of Christ. Again the
aforesaid Prophet says, Ese. xxxiii
the Lord is our judge, the Lord is our Lawegeuer, the Lord is our King, and
he it is that shall save us. How often is the Lord here repeted, to show y^
it is he alone, which works all good things in us, which forgeueth our
sins, and saves us, yea, and none but he alone. Again the Lord him self
says by the same Prophet, (...).
I am the Lord and there is no Savior besides me. Here God him self
confesses, that he alone is the Lord, and that there is none other savior
besides him, that is too say, none that forgeueth sin and gives eternal
life, but he alone. (...). xii^.
By another Prophet he also says, thy destruccio^, o Israel, comes of thy
self, only of me comes thy healpe and salvation. David that holy king and
godly Prophet, knowing his deliverance from sin to be of God alone, stireth
up his inward man to magnify the Lord, saying: magnifye the Lord, o my
soul, and all that are within me, praise his holy name. O my soul bless y^
Lord and forget nor al his benefits. (...).
For he it is that pardonneth al thine iniquities, and that heals all thy
diseases, yea, he it is, y^ delivers thy life from destruction, and crouneth
the in mercy and loving kyndnesse. Again let Israel trust in the Lord, Psalm.
(...).
for with the Lord there is infinite mercy, and plenteous rede^ptio^. And he it
is that redemeth Israel from all their sins. Whosoever therefore takes on him
to forgive sin, makes him self a savior, and says with the Angel
Apostata, Es^. xiiii.
I will clyme up above the high clouds and I will be like unto y^ most
highest. But let him know, that pride will have a faule, and that the Lord is
a ielous God, and will give his glory to none other. Esa. x^ii
Who delivered Adam from everlasting damnacion, Gene. iii.
when he with his wife had transgressed the commandment of the high Lord? Who
absolved Nohe from his dronkennes? Who delivered Loath from the uncleanness, which
he committed with his daughters? Gene. xix.
Who saved Moses, and forgave him his manslaughter? Exodus ii.
Who absolved David from his adultry? iii. Reg. xi.
Who had compassion on the Ninevites wha^ they repented, Ionus. iiii.
believed and converted? To be short, who forgave and absolved all the
Patriarckes, Kings, Prophets, prestes, etc with all other of the old
testament, when they knowledged their sins, and returned unto the Lord their
God, with faithful repentance, but only God alone? to whom did theif^e for
remission of sins, but to God alone? In whom did they put their afflaunce
and trust, but in God alone? as the Psalmographe testifies, Psalm. xx^^.
saying: Our fathers trusted in the, o Lord, yea they trusted in the, and thou
deliuerest them. They cried unto the, and they were made safe, in the o Lord,
they trusted, and were not confounded. Are not these the words of blessed
David? I said, Psa. xxxii.
I will confess my sins unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the wickedness of
my sin. Here is no mencio^ made of Aaron or of any of that priesthode, nor
yet of Pope, Patriarcke, Cardinal, Archbishop Bishop, Priest, or of any
other man to forgive us our sins, but of God alone. So follows it, that the
Lord alone remitteth the ungodliness of our sin, and that he alone absolueth
a pena et culpa. This was godly doctrine in the old testament, neither was he
counted of godly me^ any Heretyke that taught this kind of learning at that
time. God was tha^ the Lord alone omnisufficient for all his people that truly
repented and converted to his unmeasurable mercy, neither had he need at that
time of any other to be conjoined with him, as he him self said unto Abraham,
Gene. xv.
fear not Abraham, I am thy defender and thine altogether sufficient rewarder,
and is the Lords hand now so abbreuiated and shortened, Esa. lix.
that he can save no more? or is his ear so stopped that he can not hear?
Lord God, what a so^e^ change is this? But I steadfastly believe, that he is
the same Lord now, that he was in the old time, and of no less power to remit
sin at this present, than he was many thousand years before these our
days, in as much as he abides ever one, and is not chau^geable, as he says
by the Prophet Malachie, Malac. iii.
I am the Lord and am not changed.

Hitherto have I been hold in few words to prove, y^ in the time of the old
law, God alone forgave the sins of his people without the help, either of
Bishop, Prophet, priest, leuite or any other, yt the whole glory of their
salvation might be ascribed to him alone. Now let us also labor to declare,
that God alone does the very same thing in the new testament, y^ he alone may
still remain the God of health against the pestilent doctrine of the wicked
Papists, which so borishelye sweat to maintain their usurped power, and
feigned authority to the great obscuringe of Gods glory, and that to him
alone all honor and praise may be given. i. Timo. i


We read in the holy gospel that when a certain man being diseased of the
palsy, was brought unto Christ to be made whole, Christ said unto him: Son
be on a good conforte, Math. ix
thy sins are forgiven the. The Scribes hearing these words of forgeuing
sin, thinking with the^ selfs y^ Christ was not God, but man only, and that it
was the office of God alone too remit and forgive sin, spoke on this manner
within them selfs. Hic blasphemat, this fellow blasphemeth, Marc. ii.
or as Mark and Luke writes, Luce. v
Who is he y^ speaks blasphemies? Who is able to forgive sin but God alone?
here the Scribes te^dering more the glory of God then our papists and pharisees
do at this time, could not abide y^ Christ, whom they judged only man, should
challenge to him power to forgive sin, seeing y^ alone pertained to God. And
upon this place of ye scripture many write yt y^ Scribes erred not in this
confession y^ God alone forgeueth sin, but in this they sai, they were
deceived because they believed not, y^ christ was both God and man. If Christ
had been nothing but man, he had blasphemed in deed, that is to say, taken
that thing upon him, which is the office of God alone, but forasmuch as he
was not only man, but also God, he blasphemeth not, he challenged nothing but
that was his right. So did the Scribes and not Christ blaspheme. Let all men
therefore learn of this history, that God alone forgeueth sin. Does not
Christ also in the aforesaid chapter of Matthew, Math. ix
call him self a Physician, and show that he came to call sinners unto
repentance, and to make them whole? Why calls he him self a physician, but
because it is his office to cure and heal? Iere. xvii.
Jeremy prayed unto this physician, saying: heal me o Lord, and I shall be
healed, save thou me, and I shall be safe, for thou art he whom I will
magnifye. For he did know full well, that all other phisicions were
unprofitable without his help, and no more mete to cure sick consci^ces of
them selfs, then the old Lion was to heal the horse, of whom Esope writes
in his fables, which notwithstanding take on him to practice physic wha^ of
that same science he was altogether ignorante. Math. xi.
Moreover Christ calls all them y^ labor and are laden to him, and
promises that he will refreshe, ease and conforte them. He sends them not
away to other, but calls them all without excepcion to him, whereby he
shows that no creature, neither in heaven nor in earth can truly and
sufficiently heal our infirm and sick consciences, but he alone, Joan. x^.
which says, I am the resurrection and life. He that believes in me,
although he be dead, shall live, and every one that lives and believes in me,
shall never dye. For who can forgive me my sin, but he alone, which is without
al sin? Who can deliver me from death and hell, i. Pe^. ii^
but he alone, which has overcome them both? Ose. xiii.
Who ca^ make me good, but he alone, which only is good? Math. xix.
Who ca^ make me wise, righteous and holy, but he alone, which is appointed of
God the father to be our wisdom, righteousness, and sanctification? i. Cor. ^.
Finally, who ca^ engraffe in me life and virtue, but he alone, in whom is all
hope of life and virtue? Eccle. xxiiii
Therefore full well does Christ call so many as labor and are laden with the
burden of sin to him, Mat. xi.
and promises that he will refresh them, that is to say, absolve and deliver
them from their sins. Hereto belongs the saying of blessed Johan
Baptiste, Joan. i.
Behold that la^be of God, which takes away the sin of the world. Here
blessed Baptiste confesses, that it is Christ alone, which absolueth and
takes away the sin of the world. Does not also the holy Evangelist saint
Johan in the aforesaid Chapter call Christ that true light, which lighteneth
every man that comes into this world: what other thing is it to lighten,
tha^ too put away the clouds of sins, and to send into our hertes the
radiante and glisteringe beams of the eternal son, which is the knowledge
of Gods most holy will. And this, says saint Johan, is the office of
Christ alone.

Why does Christ call so many as thyrste unto him, Esa. iv.
and promyseth that floudes of lyuysh water shall flow out of their bellies:
Joan. vii.
yea, ^poc. xxii.
and that he will give them the water of life freely* but only to show, that
whosoever is thyrsty, and heartily desires remission of sins, must with all
haste come to him, Psalm* (...).
and say with the Psalmographe, Like as the heart desires the water brokes,
so longs my soul after the, o God. My soul is a thyrste for God, yea, even
for ye living God. etc. Furthermore Christ commands yt repentance and
remission of sins should be preached in his name. (...). ^i^ iii.
Where we may learn, that forgeuenes of sin comes only by the name of
Christ. And in the Acts of y^ Apostles we find, y^ when any famous and
notable act or miracle was done* the people, as many at this day, did
ascribe it to the virtue and power of the Apostles, willing to do sacrifice
unto them for it, but the Apostles did reiecte and cast away all such
immerited honor and undeserved praise, contendyng and maynly laboring to
persuade the people, Act. ^iii. and. xiii^
that whatsoever was don, came not to pass by their power, but by the virtue
of Jesus Christ, whom God raised up from death. And when they made mention of
remission of sins, they did never remember and rehearse their own power to
forgive sin, but only preached, that so many as believed and were baptized
into the remission of sins, should be absolved and freely forgeuen by the
name of Jesus Christ. And in the acts of the apostles blessed Peter plainly
confesses, Act. x.
y^ there is no health, no life, no remission of sins, but in Christ alone,
and that there is none other name given unto me^ under heaven, wherein they
must be saved, Act. iiii.
but the name of Jesus Christ alone. Neither did the Apostles absolve any
otherwise than by the preaching of gods word, which when it was heard and
believed, than were y^ diligent hearers, and faithful beleuers of the same truly
absolved, as Christ says. Now are ye clean for the words sake that I have
spoken unto you, that is. Now are ye delivered from your sins because ye have
believed my preaching. ^^an. xv.
The faith of y^ heart justifies, says saint Paul. Where it may be
learned, Roma* x.
y^ if faith be not given to the word there is no absolucion or deliuerau^ce
from sin. Roma. xiii
For whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, and where faith is not, there
abides the wrath of God, as holy Johan Baptist says, Joan. iii
he y^ believes y^ son, has everlasting life, but he that believes not the
son, shall not se life, but the wrath of God abides upon him. Math. viii ix.
xv.
Therefore before Christ absolved any man of his sins, Marc. v. ix.
he did behold and se, Luc. xvii. xv^
whether he had faith or not. Joan. xi.
If Christ found true faith in his heart, tha^ he alwais said, thy faith has
saved the. Seeing than ye none can search the heart, whyther it be faithful or
unfaithful* but God alone, seeing also that the absolution bears no strength,
but where faith is, it follows that none can absolve me of my sins, Iere.
xvii.
but that Lord alone, which searches the raynes and the heart. Psalm. vii.
The priest is only Gods minister, Apoc. ^i.
appointed of God (if he be truly sent) to preach that absolucion and fre
deliverance from my sin, through the name of Jesus Christ, which pre^chinge
if I believe, I am so sure to be delivered from all my sins, as though Christ
him self had said unto me, ^oan. xv.
I freely absolve the, or thy sins are forgiven the for thy faythes sake in my
name. Are not these the words of Christ, Tit. (...).
which is the self truth and can not lie, spoken too all faithful Ministers?
Luc. x
He that hears you, hears me, and he that de^pyseth you, despises me, and
he that despyseth me, despises him y^ sent me. But let us rehearse mo
scriptures, although too any Christen heart, these, which hitherto I have
recyted, may seem abundantly too suffice.

Blessed Paul in his Epistel to the Romans proves manifestly, Roma. viii.
that God alone iusti^ieth us. If our iustificacion comes from God alone, than
follows it well, that the remission of our sins comes from God alone also.
For remission of sins goes before Justification. Roma. iiii.
By Christ's death are we delivered from our sins but by his resurreccion are
we insti^ide and made righteous. So does it evidently appear, that it is God
alone, i. Cor. i.
which both remitteth the sin, and also justifies y^ sinner for Christ's
sake, which is our righteousness. Roma. viii.
Again the aforesaid Apostle says, that God has not only given us his
son, but also all things with him. Ergo absolucion of sins. So se we y^
God alone absolueth and forgeueth us our sins for Christ's sake. Saint Paul
to the Galathians affirms, Galat. i.
that Christ gave him self for our sins, that he might deliver us from this
present evil world, that is to say, from all evil in this present world.
Ergo God alone it is, ^. Cor. vi.
which delivers us from our sins in this vale of misery. Ye are washed
away from your sins, says he, yea, ye are sanctified and made righteous by
y^ name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. Ergo our absolucion,
our deliverance from sin, our sanctification, our justification and all
that ever good is comes from God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Again he
says, Ephe. i.
God y^ father has blessed us with all spiritual blessings, ergo with the
blessinge of absolucion and fre deliverance from all our sins. Colos. i.
God has delivered us from the power of darkness, and carried us into the
kyngedome of his well-beloved son, by whom we have redemption, even by his
blood remission of sins. Ergo by Christ's blood are we absolved and
delivered from our sins.

Every good gift and every perfect gift, Iac. ^.
says James, comes from above, and desce^deth from the father of light.
Ergo absolucion, which is a good and perfect gift, comes down from the
father of light. Blessed Ihon in his epistle says: If we confess our
sins, god is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins and to make us
cle^ne from all iniquite. Here saynct Ihon affirms, i. Joan. i
that God for^eueth us our sins, and ma^^h us clean from all unrighteousness.
He says also, that the bl^ude of Jesus Christ gods ow^ ^onne, i. Joan. ii.
makes us clean (...) sin. And in the chap^^ ^olowyng he says, If any ^an
synneth, we have an advocate with the father Jesus Christ that righteous one.
And he it is that obtains mercy for our sins, not for our sins only, but
for all the world also. Again he says, I writ unto you, o ye little children,
that your sins are forgeuen you for Christ's name sake. Here se we again that
by Christ remission of sins comes to us from God the father. Moreover
bl^ssed Ihon in his reuelacion writteth on this manner, Apoc. i.
Christ has loved us, and washed us from our sins by his blood. Here se we
y^ all our sins be washed away by Christ's blood alone. What should I write
more* If I go forth to gather together all the places of holy scripture, y^
prove the absolucion of our sins to come from God alone, I should not only
trouble the most godly Reader, but also writ a volume more Prol^rior tha^
the Iliades of the greek poet Homere, when to any christen judgment I may
justly seem all ready to have poroued my article true and sufficiently christian
me^ unto y^ great shame of all these Papists, which cease not with their
ste^torous voices to speak evil of the true preachers of Gods word, and to
obscure or deface the glory of God. Take away the power of only remittinge
sins from God, and what remains there, wherefore we should confess our
selfs bound to him? I speak of matters concerning the salvation of our
souls. If all that be of the shaven nation, have power to absolve men of their
sins at their pleasure, and to remit or retayn, whose iniquities it pleases
them, than is God well promoted, eue^ out of y^ Halle into y^ Kytchyn, as they
use to say.

So should it also follow, that so many as pleased the priests should have
their sins forgeuen them, and so be saved, otherwise not. O intolerable
blasphemy. But as God alone remitted the sins of the fathers of the old
Testament, so in like manner does he now in the new testament. Luc. vii.
Who absolved Mary Magdalene from her sins, but Christ? Who forgave the
thief his robbery and ma^slaughter, Luc. xxiii.
but Christ? Who had compassion on Peter, wha^ he had denied his master christ,
but Christ? Math. ix
Who made of Mat thew the publica^e and tolgatherer, a faithful apostle and
preacher, but Christ? Luc. ^v.
Who is that good shepeharde, John. x.
that fetches home the strayeshepe, lovingly upon his shulders unto the
shepefolde, is it not Christ, which says of him self, I am that good
shepeharde? A good shepeharde gives his life for the sheep. Who received home
joyfully the lost son, was it not Christ? Luc. ^v.
Who healed the wounded manne? the Priest or the Leuite? Or rather Christ the
Samaritane? who made of Saul the persecutour, Paul an Apostle, was it not
Christ? Who absolved al these with many other in y^ scripture from their
sins, but Christ alone, the son of the living God? Mat. xxviii
Does not al power belong to Christ, both in heaven and in earth? to him
therefore alone does the power of remi^tinge sin pertayne. Seeing than y^ this
is true, and nothing more true, why may we not be bold to say, ^agre the
Papists, y^ God alone absolueth the truly penitent, and only remitteth the
sins of so many as with an unfeigned faith convert and fle unto his mercy? If
this be heresy, which we only confess and teach. I could allege diverse
sentences out of the holy doctors of Christ's church, which maintain this
doctrine. But seeing I fight not for the auauncement of man, but for y^ glory
of God, I will not satisfy this my work with man's doctrine, but with the
infallible verite of Gods word. For I know that every man is a liar, Psalm. ^.
(...)
but God is true, Esa. xl.
and his word abides for evermore.

Now will I prepare my self to the second part of this treatise, and
afterward make answer to the obieccio^s of the adversaries, that God may
still remain a glorious God in the presence of al men, and al other recou^ted
duste and ashes in comparison of him. The second part of this treatise is
this, as concerning the priest, he forgeueth not the sin, but only is a
minister of God, appointed to utter and declare that fre remission of sins
purchased for us of God the father, by the most precious blood of Jesus
Christ. This makes the Papists to cry, ad ignem, ad ignem. For this doctrine
plucketh them down one staff lower than they were before. They may now become
no more Checkemate with God. For before they were not only not contented to be
his ministers, but also they would be heylefellow well met with hi^. Now
shall they be feign, either to be y^ messengers and servants of God, or else
plain Antichrists and papists. But let us se, what the scripture says.

That the priest forgeueth not sin but God alone, it is sufficiently proved
before. Now must we learn of y^ holy scriptures, whyther y^ priest be but
only a minister appointed of God to utter and declare y^ absolucio^ and fre
deliuerau^ce from sin, or not. That this is his office, it is manifest by
diverse places of y^ new testament. Wha^ Christ sent forth his disciples, he
said unto them on this manner: Go into y^ universal world, and preach y^
Gospel to every creatur, Max^. xvi.
who so shall believe and be baptized, he shall be saved, but who so will not
believe shall be condemned. Here is it evident enough, what authority prestes
have, and what their office is, verily to preach y^ Gospel and to baptize.
Mark y^ they must preach y^ Gospel, as s. Paul says, Christ sent me not
only to baptize, but to preach y^ Gospel. Again, woe is unto me, i. Cor. ^.
if I preach not y^ Gospel. i. Cor. ix.
And in y^ discripsio^ of a spiritual minister he shows yt such one ought to
be chosen, as is not only learned, but also apt too teach, able to exhort
with wholesome doctrine, (...)
and to convince or overcome them that speak against the truth of Christ's
gospel. And saint Peter says, ye elders feed the flock of Christ, somuche
as in you is. What other thing is it to preach the gospel, than to declare
unto the people, that their sins be forgeuen them freely of God, if they
repent and believe in Christ, as it is written. He that believes y^ son, has
everlasting life. Joan. iii.
If sins be forgeuen of God, and the ministers commanded to declare that
same to the people than does it follow, that they forgive not the sin, but
only are ministers appointed of god to publishe that benefit of our salvation.
If a Prince pardonneth his subject for his treason committed against his
person, and sends his, letters of favor to the traytoure, by one of his
faithful servants, co^maundynge him to declare his pitefull mercy to the
gilty, who forgeueth the fau^^ the messenger or the king? I am sure it will be
answered the king. And not unjustly. For y^ prince alone pardons, the
messenger only declares his princes pleasure to the traytoure. Even so all we
have offended, and worthily deserved eternal death. Now the good pleasure of
our most mighty prince is to forgive us even of his own fre mercy, without
our deserts or merits for Christ's sake, and that his unspeakable goodness
toward mankind may be known, he has appointed his ministers to publishe it
abroad. The sum of their commission is this, that whosoever will repent his
former life and believe to have remission of their sins through the mercy of
God in Jesus Christ our Lord, they, shall be forgeuen. The ministers of God
publish these ioiful news exhort unto repentance and faith. The people
repent and believe, their sins are forgeuen. Who forgeueth the sins of y^
faithful repentau^te? The grau^ter of the commission, or the declarer thereof?
God or man? I doubt not, but that ye will answer, God. If god alone, whom we
offend, forgeueth the sin, and not the declarers of y^ forgeuenes, I have
gotten that I have desired for the probacion of the second part of this littel
treatise. But let us hear what Christ says, Joan. x^.
as my father sent me, so send I you. Now I pray you how was Christ sent,
and for what purpose?

Let us hear, what he him self says, and than shall I be blameless. By the
Prophet Esaye he speaks on this manner. Esa. lxi.
The spirit of the Lord is upon me, Luc. ii^^
because he has anointed me, to preach y^ Gospel too the poor he has
send me, to heal the br^ken ha^ted, to preach deliverance to the captive,
and sight to the blind freely to set at liberte them that are brosed, and to
preach the acceptable year of the Lord. Again he says, Luc. ^iii.
I must preach the glad and joyful tydinges of y^ kingdom of God to other
cities also, fortherfore am I sent. Once again he says: Ma^e. ^
let us go into y^ next tounes, that I may preach there also, for therefore am I
come Al these se^te^ces declare manifestly, y^ that Christ was sent to preach
the kingdom of God, that is to say, fre deliverance from sin to so many
as repent and believe. If they will not be above Christ, they must be contented
to preach the will of the celestial father, as he was, and not to take upon
them, that thing whereof only they are ministers. Does not saint Paul, James,
Peter, and Jude, call the^ selfs the servants of Jesus Christ in all their
Epistles, declaringe thereby, that they are not the self master, by whom
remission and absolucion of sins comes, but only the ministers of him,
which infundeth and pours into all men grace, favor, remission of sins
and everlasting life? there is but one master, that is to say, Mat. xxiii.
Christ, the other are servants, as saynct Paul witnesses, We preach not
our selfs, but Christ Jesus the Lord, ii. Cor. iiii.
and we your servants for Jesus sake. Again, let a man this wise esteem us,
even as the ministers of Christ, and stewardes of y^ secrets of God. i. Cor.
iiii.
All these textes declare manifestlye, that priests, if they be true
ministers, and not rather idolles, are nothing but ministers and servants
appointed of God to declare unto the christen congregation, that fre remission
of sins comes unto us from God alone, through the glorious name of Jesus
christ, so far is it of, that the priests contrary to their commission ca^
forgive sins, whose office consists in declaring, and not in geuinge
remission of sins.

Therefore let them be contented no more from hensforth arroga^tly to arrogate
yt unto them, which pertayne to God alone. but humbly confess, that God only
forgeueth the sin, and that they are but commissioners, appointed of God, to
publishe and setforth the same, I mean the remission of sins given to the
faithful penitent of God alone. Neither let them frown at this doctrine,
which sets them in their right place, but rather (as it becomes good and
faithful servants) let them give the glory of our salvation to God alone,
and be glad that they are called unto so worthy and honorable office to declare
the mysteries of God to the people, whose preachinges or sermons, whosoever
believes, may be so certainly assured of y^ remission of their sins, as though
God hi^ self had said unto the^, your sins are forgiven you. For this sayng
of Christ is an infallible verite, he y^ hears you hears me. Lu^. x.
Now let us behold ye obieccio^s of y^ papists, and briefly confute the^, y^
all y^ glory may be the Lords. First they allege this saying of Christ,
loosen him and let him go away. Joan. xl.
Again, loosen the^ a bring the^ unto me. Math. xxi.
Here is simple poor shyfte too prove their absolucion, when they are
compelled to fle unto y^ vnteiyng of a vile shete, and loseninge of a simple
rude Ass. Look whersoeuer the papists find any word that comes of this
verb Soluo, that makes for absolucio^ straight ways. I marvel how this
escaped them, Math. xviii.
Solue quod debes. I think if Salve regina had been turned into Solue
regina, as some of them that be not very fine mouthed pronounce it, they would
not have been ashamed to have alleged it for absolutio^, even as some of the
papists do, which, where so ever they find, Ignis, take it for Purgatory
streyght-wayes. O noble doctors of Tyrology, rather than of Theology.

As concerning the first text, which is that Christ commanded that Lazarus
should be let loose, and suffered freely to go his way, if they will gather
their absolucion of that, it may than be proved, y^ all other men and women
have that same power so well as they. For there were at that time present, not
only the disciples of Christ, but also diverse Jews with certain women,
which I am sure were not all priests. Have they not made a good market? they
have brought a shillinge to.ix. pens, yea, rather to nothing.

They have done fair by them selfs by my fay. While they labor to make them
selfs gods, and to excel all other in dignity, they go so wisely to work
that they have made them selfs equal to the most inferioure. O crafty
dawbers. Which of them all is able too prove that Christ spoke these words,
loosen him and let him go, rather to his Disciples than to all the other
indifferently? I think rather that he spoke them to y^ women, as most
commonly occupied about such things. But to whom he spoke, the text makes no
mencio^, therefore ca^ they prove nothing.

As touching the losoninge Math. xxi.
of y^ Ass, who sees not their folishnes? the occasion why christ sent the
disciples for the Ass, was not to give them power to losen men from their
sins at their pleasure, but to fulfill ye prophecy of zachary, which so long
before prophesied y^ Christ should come riding mekely upon an Ass, contrary
to the expectacion of the ambicious and vain glorious Jews. What is this to
the purpose? Where as Christ by this example teaches humilite, the papists
gather pride. ii. These. iii
Christ submits him self, even with the most lowest, and they exalt the^
selfs with the most highest, yea, above all that is called God or that is
worshypped, and sit in the temple of God, and show them selfs as God. Tell me
good Reader, are not these sweet Allegorymakers? I would they would ones
cease to moralyse, for they have lied too long.

Some of them also allege this saying of Christ, Whatsoever thou shall bind
on the earth, shall be also bound in heaven. And whatsoever thou shall loosen on
earth, shall be loosoned in heaven. Here they esteem them selfs more tha^
Gods. By this text, they think they may do, whatsoever pleases them,
save or condemn, bind or loose, hold up or cast down, build or subuerte,
bring to heaven or cast down to hell, but if the good men would take the
pains to look what goes before, their co^be should sone be plucked down,
they would not make so much of their painted shethe. Christ says a littel
before, I will give y^, the keys of y^ kingdom of heaven. He says not, I
give y^. Christ in this place only promised y^ keys to the congregation, and
performed his promise after his resurreccion, as we may se in y^ Gospel of
Ihon. Hereof may y^ papists rightwell perceive, y^ this text, whereof
hitherto they have so greatly gloried, and out of the which they have sucked
so great advantage, makes littel unto the aduaunceme^t of their feigned power.

Their last and most strong bulwark, Joan. xx.
where y^ keys were given to the true ministers, is this text, Whosoever
sins ye forgive, they are forgeuen unto them. And whosoeuers sins ye
retain, they are retained. Here they triumph and persuade themselfes, that
they have gotten the victory, though they never fight stroke. But if they will
be favorable to God, and work no injury to the other scriptures before
rehearsed, they shall have no cause to lift up their bristles. Christ speaks
here after the manner of our speech, which diligently must be noted, unless we
will deprive God of his glory. When we se a man restored to his health, which
long before has been vexed of some grievous disease, and is made whole through
the diligence of some Physician we use to say, Doctor Turner made this man
whole, or doctor Byll, or some other, which is expert in that kind of
science, and yet is it not the doctor that made him whole, but rather ye
emplastures and medecines y^ he ministered unto him, yea, rather god, if we will
speak truly which gave such virtue to his creatures to work health unto the
sick. So does the scripture speak. Sometime it attributes our health to the
ministers of the word, as in this aforesaid place, sometime and most como^ly
to God him self, as we tofore have abundantly heard, and sometime to the word
of God, Joan. xv
as it is written. Now are ye clean for the words sake which I have spoken
unto you, Ite^, Sapi. xvi.
Neither herb nor emplasture has healed the^, but thy word, o Lord, y^
heals al things. Hereto pertains ye saying of ye Psalmographe, Psalm. e. vii
he sent his word, and healed the^, and delivered the^ from their
destruccions, and yet does God only make us whole, and forgive us our sins
as he himself witnesses by the Prophet, Ose. xiii.
saying, thy destruccio^ o Israel comes of thy self, only of me comes thy
help and salvation. What ca^ be more plainly spoke? Who is able once to hiske
against these things? Who will once open his mouth to barcke against this
doctrine? Noma^ I suppose, except he be altogether drouned in papisme. This
therefore is the true meaning of thaforesayd text. Wha^ soever y^ ministers of
y^ Lords word declare unto me y^ sweet promises of God y^ father made to me
in Christ's blood, Note.
and I believe the^, tha^ are my sins forgeuen me at y^ very instau^t, but if
I do not believe the^, than are my sins retained, y^ is to say, not forgiven.
And forasmuch as I either repent and believe, or else co^tinew still in mine old
damnable state, at the preaching of y^ Lords ministers, therefore y^ scripture
attributes my deliuerau^s from sin or otherwise to the^, when
notwithstanding God alone remitteth my sin, if I repent and believe. If I do
not, the uncircumcision of my heart, that is, my incredulity and unfaithfulness
is the occasion that my sins are retained and not forgeuen. For this saying
always must needs avyde true, thy destruccio^, o Israel, comes of thy self,
only of me comes thy help and salvation. So yt the priests (I mean the
ministers of Gods word) are counted to forgive sin, when they preach to the
truly repentau^te remission of sins through Christ, and to retain sin,
when they declare too the unfaithful damnacion, and that the wrath of God
abides upon them, so long as they remain still in their incredulity and
unfaithfulness, as it is written, He that believes not on y^ son shall not see
life, Joan. i^^.
but the wrath of God abides upon him. Thus se we, that those te^te^ of the
holy scripture, which the papists allege for y^ maintenance of their feigned
and usurped power in remitting sin, makes nothing for their purpose, if they
be truly alleged and understand, according to the vain of the holy
scriptures. The scriptures of God may not be rent and torn, neither harked
nor wrested to serve the private affectes of men, but every text must be so
weyed, po^dered, alleged, and understood, that it may agree with the other
textes of the holy Bible, that all the glory of our salvation may be ascribed to
God alone, which is both the beginner and finisher of all our health, to him
therefore be all honor and praise for ever. Amen.

NOw will I make have to the last part of Math. xvi.
this treatise, which requires y^ I should express my mind, concerning the
keys, which Christ before his passion promised too his church, Joan. xx
and after his resurreccion performed his promise, and show by the sacred
scriptures, that the gift of the keys is no vain and idle gift, but a
necessary, joyful and confortable treasure. For ye Papists will here
obiecte, If remission of sins comes from God alone than were the keys given
to the congregation in vain. But to the intent, that I may stop the mouths
of ye adversaries, and that they may have no occasion to bark against the
glory of God after this, mark well good Reader, what shall be spoken. Esa liiii.
Truth it is y^ God alone teaches men his verite by the holy Ghost, ^ere.
xxxi.
as it is written, Joan. vi.
Al shall be taught of God. Heb. viii.
Again I will pour out of my spirit upon all flesh, Joel. ii.
and your sons and your daughters shall prophecye. ^ct. ii.
The Psalmographe also says: Psalm. i.
I will hear what the Lord speaks in me, Joan. v. viii. ^.
yet will he that they should be studious of the holy scriptures, both day
and night, as it is commanded of Christ. Search the scriptures, and also
diligently hear the preaching of his word, as it is written. He that is of
God, hears the words of God.

My sheep hear my voice. Every one that is of the truth, hears my voice. So
in like manner although God alone remitteth all sin, yet will he y^ remission
of sins should be preached to the people, that by this means they may
repent believe and be made whole, as Christ testifies, Lu^. xxii ^.
saying: It behooved Christ to suffer, and too rise again from death the third
day, and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his
name among all nations. (...)
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. For the ministers
of the gospel are the organnes and instruments of Christ, by whom God works
through his holy spirit, health and salvation in so many as are predestinate
unto eternal life. They are Gods laborers and ministers, by whom we believe, ^.
Cor. iii.
eue^ as the Lord gives every man grace. They are the orators, messengers,
interpreters, Asigels, Apostles and Ambassadors of the Lord as the Apostle
says, all things are of God, which has reconciled us unto him self by Jesus
Christ, and has given us the office to preach the atonement. For God was in
Christ, and reconciled the world unto him self, ii. Cor. v.
and imputed not their sins unto them, and among us has he set up the word
of atonement. Now then are we messengers in the room of Christ, even as
though God exhorted by us. We beseech you now therefore in Christ's stead,
that y^ be at one with god. Goolat. iiii.
Again to the Galathians he writteth on this manner, Ye did not despise nor
abhor me, but received me as an Angel of God, yea, even as Christ Jesus.
Hereto pertayneth his saying to the Thessalonians, i. These. iiii.
He that casts away us, casts not away men, but God, which has given
his holy spirit into us. Moses also in times paste, said to the people that
murmured against him, Exodus xvi.
The Lord has heard your grudgynge and murmuryng, wherewith ye murmr
against him. For what are we? Your murmuri^gs are not against us, but against
the Lord. So likewise read we in the Gospel, Math. x.
that the Lord spoke of his ministers, Uerely, verily I say unto you: He that
receives, wl^ome soever I shall send, receives me. And he that receives me,
receives him that also that sent me. Luc. x.
Again he says: he that hears you, hears me, and he that despyseth you,
despises me, and he that despyseth ^e, despyseth him also that sent me. Here
se we that the ministers of Gods word, are not to be despised, for they are
necessary instruments unto the health of men and they are worthy of double
honor, as the Apostle says. Therefore may it be concluded that the
absolucion of the i. Timo. v.
Priest is not too be despised, seeing it is none other thing, if it be a
true and Christen absolucion, than the preaching of fre remission of our
sins in Christ's name. ^. Cor. iii.
And although he y^ pla^teth, be nothing and he that wattereth be nothing, but
God, which gives the increase, again, albeit the Lord blesses us with all
spiritual benediction, yet inasmuche as the inestimable kyndnes and manyfolde
benefytes of God toward us can not be known nor believed without preachinge
(for faith comes by hearing, (...). x.
and hearing by the word of God) therefore has God appointed his ministers to
open and declare unto men those excellent mysteries, those confortable and
joyful promyses of Gods mercy and good will toward mankind, that they may
perceive, learn and understand, what is given them of the Lord, what they
ought to believe, how they should obtain the gifts of God, and led a life
worthy the kyndnes of so bounteous a father, God also has appointed the
ministers to beget men in Christ Jesus by the Gospel, Luc. i.
too open the eyes of the blind, to turn the^ from darkness to light, to
co^uerte the hertes of fathers into children, and the disobedient to the
wisdom of the righteous. He has commanded them to preach repa^taunce and
remission of sins in his name unto Luce. xxiiii.
all nations, Go your way, says he into the world universal, and preach
the gospel to every creature. Marc. xvi.
He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. He that believes not shall be
condemned. Moreover he has given to his faithful ministers the keys of the
kyngedom Math. xv^
of heaven, that whatsoever they loosen in earth, may be also loosened in
heaven. And whatsoever they bind in earth may also be bound in heaven, that
is to say: he has committed to them the office of preaching the Gospel, yt
they should go forth into the world, and preach unto all men the grace and
favor that is given of God the father for Christ's sake, yea and that they
should proclaim, publish and set abroad unto all men, that so many as repent
and believe, are losoned from the captivity of satan, purged from syn,
delivered from death, and made enheritours of eternal life: Again that so many
as believe not, remain still y^ captives and bond s^aues of satan, and
co^tinew bound in their sins, and in the state of damnacion, and that
therefore they shall dye the death, and for ever more be damned, except they
repent, turn and believe. And thus their preaching is so certain and sure
before God, that whatsoever they pronounce, being conformable to the word of
God, shall as certainly come to pass, as though God him self had spoken it.
As for an example, When soever the ministers and preachers of Gods word in
this world shall declare to the faithful repentance, remission of sins,
and tell them that they be losoned from y^ captivity of satan, it is even as
certain and sure, as though God him self had said these words unto them: Thy
sins are forgiven the. In like manner when they shall say to the
unfaithful, that they remain still bound in their sin, and that the wrath
of God abides upon them, and therefore they shall be damned, God
approapproueth their saying, and it shall undoubtedly come to pass according
to their preachinge. So that whatsoever the minister of Gods word says,
according to the word of God, ought to be received with great reverence, and
taken as an oraele, sent down from heaven, and undoubtedly believed, as a
manifest and infallible verity of God. And this preaching of remittyng or
retaynyng sins are the keys of the kingdom of heaven, which Christ promised
his Apostles before his death, as we may se in Matthew, Math. xvi.
and after his resurrection performed his promise, as we read in the Gospel of
saint Johan. Joan. xx.
And by a Metaphore Christ calls the preaching of his word a keye. For as a
keye has two properties, one too shut, another to open, so has the word
of God. It opens to the faithful the treasure of the gifts of God, grace,
mercy, fauou^e, remission of sins, quietness of conscience, and everlasting
life, but to the unfaithful it shuts all his treasures, and suffers the^,
to receive none of them all, so long as they persiste and remain in their
incredulity and unfaithfulness. These keys are given too so many, as being
truly called unto the office of ministracion, preach y^ word of God. They
loosen, that is to say, they preach to the faithful remission of sins by
Christ. They also bind, that is, they declare to y^ unfaithful damnacion.
But he y^ preaches not the word of God, Note.
can neither bind nor loose, though he challenge never so great dignity,
authority and power. For Christ calls it the keye of knowledge. Luc. xi.
And the Prophet says, y^ lyppes of a Priest keep knowledge, and at his mouth
shall they require the law, for he is the Angel or messenger of the Lord of
hoostes. Malach. ii
Therefore where there is no k^^wlege, there is no keye. And where there is no
keye, there is neither opening nor shuttinge, that is, neither byndynge nor
loosonynge. Here let all men judge what is to be thought of the Papists
absolucion, whereof they crake so much, which also they sell derely. If no
remission of sins comes from them, but by preaching Gods word, it
follows that their absolucion avails but littel, seeing they never preach,
neither the law of God, nor the sweet promyses of him, but only mumble a few
words in the latin tongue, yea, and this is not understood, so likewise many
times contrary too the divine scriptures, and ye glory of god. Miserable
doub^les is that congregation, which has a blind guide to their Curate, which
has neither the gift nor the knowledge of preaching. Mark. xv.
For if the blind leads the blind both fall into ye dyche. Again, greatly
fortunate is that Paryshe, and hyghly blessed of God, to whom a learned
shepeheard has chanced, which can feed them with knowledge and doctrine.
Whatsoever they shall hear of such a learned and godly minister, let them
believe it as a voice coming down from heaven. And so often as by such a
shepeharde remission of sins in ye blood of Christ is preached unto the
congregation, let the^ esteem that preachinge none otherwise, than if the Lord
him self had preached it. Let them steadfastly believe the word of God, and
undoubtedly by their faith th^row the grace of God, they shall obtain
remission of all their sins. Contrariwise, i^ they believe not, their sins
are retained and by no means forgeuen. These things have I spoken, concerning
the abs^l^cion or the keys, which consists only in preaching Gods word,
that the Papists may have no occasion, justly to bark against me, as they
have done hitherto both for my sermons and bkes. God forgive them, and send
them a better mind. Now, forasmuch as the true and Christen absolution is
nothing else but the preachinge of fre deliverance from sin, by y^ death of
Jesus Christ, it ought not to be contemned and despised, but rather to be
received with great humility and reverence, even as a divine oracle, sent down
from the father of lights. For no man ca^ express, Iaco. i.
how greatly it conforteth infirm and weak consciences, which are troubled
with y^ fear of Gods judgments. When the Prophet Nathan came unto king
David, ii. Reg. xi^^
and rebuked him for sleyng Urias the Hethite, and for taki^g his wife Bethsabe
unto his wife, and told him how greatly God was angrye with him, and what
plages should fall upon his house, yea, upon him self for his wickedness, it
is not to be doubted, but that David was stryken with a wonderful great
heaviness, and his heart pearsed with an inward sorrow, insomuche that he was
right ashamed of him self, of his fault, of his wickedness, and was compelled
even of conscience to braste out into the knowledge of his sin, and to say, I
have sinned against the Lord. As David was now full of sorrow, grief, trouble,
disquietnes in his heart, and had joy of nothing (unto such shame and
confusion was he brought in his conscience) so likewise it is not to be
doubted, but that he was wonderfully revived, maruelouslye restored unto the
peace and quietness of his conscience, yea, and plenteously replenisshed with
joy in his mind, when the Prophet said these words unto him: The Lord has
put away thy sin, thou shall not dye. Luc. vii.
Mary magdalen was a famous sinner, and when she herd her unclean conversation
rebuked by the word of God, she hertely repented, and was replenished with an
inward sorrow, lamenting greatly, that she had offended so bounteous a Lord
and merciful God, insomuche that a large fountain of tears followed out of
her tender eyes. All this time undoubtedly her sorrow was greater tha^ it can be
here expressed. But when she herd this confortable absolucion of our savior
Christ, Remittu^tur tibi peccata. Thy sins are forgeuen the. Again, thy
faith has made the safe Go thy way in peace, that is to say, with a quiet
and merry conscience. O good God, who is able to express with how great joy and
singular solace she was affected? So sure and confortable is it to weak and
troubled consciences too hear the sweet and confortable words of our fre
deliverance from the grievous burden of ^ynnes by Christ's blood. (...). xxiii.
The thief was full of great anguysh and trouble in his conscience, when he
hanged upon the cross in y^ time of Christ's passion, and confessed that both
he and his fellow thief suffered worthily, even according to their deserts,
and in the mids of his troubled conscience, he cried unto the Lord Christ on
this manner, saying: Lord remember me, wha^ thou come into thy kingdom. But
when Christ had made him answer and said, Uerely I say unto the, this day
shall thou be with me in Paradyse, O with what a quiet conscience suffered he
his pains, and with how glad an heart yelde^ he up his spirit into the
hands of the eternal father? So confortable a thing is it to a troubled
conscience, for to hear any thing that may quiet it. Again wha^ blessed
Peter preached unto the Jews and told the^, Act. ii.
that they had crucifyde Christ the Lord, the scripture says, that they were
pricked in their hertes, and said unto Peter and unto y^ other Apostles: Ye
me^ and brethren, what shall we do? Peter said unto them: Repent and be
baptized every one of you, in y^ name of Jesus Christ for the remission of
sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. As they were
greatly dismayde, wha^ the holy Apostle opened unto them their malicious fact,
in sleayng Christ the Lord, so were they very much conforted, when they heard
of saint Peter, yt there was hope of their sins to be forgeuen, so that they
repented them of their wickedness, and were baptized in y^ name of Jesus Christ.
With how entier and unspeakable sorrow is it to be thought, that the famous and
notable adulterer among the Corinthians was overwhelmed, Cor. v.
wha^ at y^ commandment of s. Paul he was delivered unto satan,
excommunicate, put out of the christian company, and reputed among them as an
Ethnycke and Publicane? Contrariwyse, with what excedyng joy was he
replenished, when after his repentance and sorrow he heard the sweet promyses
of Goods mercy declared unto him, that lygheth bent out toward all sinners
that repent in faith, and afterward was received into the company of the
faithful Christianes? ii. Cor. ii.
I pass over diverse other histories, both of the old and new testamente,
which do abundantly declare, what great conforte the faithful penitent sinners
have always had in hearing the confortable promises of Gods mercy. Now the
absolucion being, as I said before, nothing else but the preaching of fre
deliverance from sin, by the death of Jesus Christ (for God alone forgeueth
sin and absolueth the faithful penitent) it ought not to be contemned and
despised, but whansoeuer the Mynyster of the Lords word, be it privately or
openly, shall rehearse unto ^en, the sweet and confortable words of Gods
mercy, toward all them that repent in faith, they ought too give earnest
faith unto them, being undoubtedly persuaded, that their sins at that time
be assuredly forgeuen the^, (...).
as though God him self had spoken these words, according to this saying of
Christ, he that hears you, hears me. But it were expedient, that al true
ministers should pray that their form or manner of absolucion be pure and
agreeable to y^ vayn of the holy scriptures, without the intermixtion of any
man's authority, in remittinge sin either of Peter, Paul, Fraunces,
Dominike, Benet, or any other, or yet of the^ selfs, again y^ it be declared
to the penitent that God alone forgeueth the sin, and that the Priests are
but the ministers of God, too whom he has given the keys of the kingdom of
heaven for to show to y^ true penitent loosoning, that is to say: remission
of their sins, to the obstinate and hardeharted sinners byndyng, that is,
that they remayn still in the danger of damnacion, and shall be damned, except
they repent and believe. It would also be provided, that when the faithful
penitent is desirous to have his conscience confyrmed, stablished and conforted
with the word of God, it should not be mu^bled in the latin tongue as the
Papists have hitherto used in their absolucions, but in the mother tongue,
that the Idiote and unlearned may understand it and be edifyed. Or else what
faith shall he co^ceyue in his heart? How shall he repent? How shall he know
the goodness of God toward sinners? How shall he arm him self with faith
against satan, sin and desperacion? How shall he prepare him self too give
God thanks for his kindness, and live worthy of his profession? God grant that
al things may be done unto his glory, and unto the profit of his holy
congregation.

Here have thou (most godly Reader) my mind, concerning the absolucion and
forgeuenes of sins, which if it be examined by the scriptures of God, al
man's doctrine set aparte, I doubt not, but it will stand so strong, that
the gates of hell shall not once be able too prevail against it. Farewell most
gentle Reader, and pray that the Lords word may have fre passage, that y^
name of the great God, and our savior Jesus Christ may be glorified among
all nations, and that al discension laid aside, we may agree in one faith and
one truth.

Amen.
Give the glory to God alone.
Imprinted at London by Ihon Day, dwellinge in Aldersgate, and William Se^es,
dwellinge in Peter College

These books are too be sold by the little Co^duite in Chepeside.

Cum gracia et Priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.




