A LETTER OF S.r HVMFREY LINDE, To a Lady of great Worth, much afflicted for
Sir Humfreys sake, hearing him ill spoken of, for not answering the Whetstone,
and the Spectacles, that were written against his Via tuta.

AND Also for that he is greatly taxed for lying, and corrupting of many
Authors.

In which Letter he does clear himself.

Printed Anno M.DC.XXXIIII.

MADAME,
The affliction you endure for my sake is a sharp Arrow, shot eue^ to my heart,
and is not thence to be removed, until your grief be removed, by this my
Letter, which I know, to you (who are so zealous a lover of the Word, and hater
of the Pope) will give abundant satisfaction. As for the Church-going Papists
therefore, and some other that are not of the purer sort of the reformed
Church, who as you say, do dash you in the teeth with my lies, 150. and odd, in
my first Book called Via tuta, and the Lord knows how many in my second,
called Via deuia; so that when you would sound forth my everlasting praises,
they stop your pure Mouth, with my infinite numbers of corruptions, shifts,
Foxian, Iewellian, and Mortonian falsifications; crying out, that I have had
too printed Books sent me, one called the Spectacles to see my way, the other
the Whetstone, the just reward of my desert, for lying so egregiously, with
many other papers of like nature displaying my untruths: Know dear Lady, that
a Brother, or Sister that spring, from the pure bowels of the reformed Church
(as your Honor and I do) must suffer much more then this, by that vile,
deformed, and Antichristian Crew, the Wicked. But now to the matter.

This only I request at your Honors hands, that if you know any should be
desirous (before my printed Books come forth) to receive any further
satisfaction then this my Letter to your Ladishippe will give them, they may be
sent on the Lords name either to my own House, or to the Wine-Office, where I
and many of our learned and zealous brethren meet often, about a further
reformation of Religion: desiring, that not so much as a ragge of Popery, may
remain in the House of the Lord; neither Bells nor Organs, Rochets or Myters,
square Caps, or Surplisses, Cross or Image: for I am assured, a true Brother,
or Sister had rather see Antichrist himself then any of these; nay we trust in
the Lord to put the Word Catholic, out of the Creed, as well as out of
Tombestones, and in place thereof, to say, I believe in the Reformed Church.

And though our enemies show, that Lying is one of the Marks of our Church,
and that I for the glory of it, have told over again all the lies of M. Bell,
Fox, Jewel, White, Morton, and others in a new fashion: yet, all this
notwithstanding, I hope to give any reasonable man full satisfaction.

For put case, there has been now and then a slip or two, and that out of the
abundance of my zeal I have sometimes ouerlashed, or stretched a point for
the love of the Gospel; I hope this will be no such Capital Crime, amongst
the pure little Flock, who know right well, what latitude may be used for the
splendour of the Gospel: and what our Elders and Forefathers in this kind
have done, no learned knight can be ignorant. What therefore I have done, was
not without authority: yea herein I have tracked the very footsteps of the most
famous D. Luther, and the pure preacher of the word D. Calvin. These were the
lights sent from heaven it self to drive away the dark clouds of papistry.
These were they who made their doctrine odious to the world. And wot you how?
why thus: Those reverend Fathers of our Church affirmed, how Papists bragged of
being able to keep Gods Commandments without Gods grace; how they put their
trust in their own Merits, and not in Christ's; how they adored Bread, Statues,
Images, and Idols.

Now the Papists ashamed, denied it stoutly; Again, those Reverend Fathers
affirmed it boldly, and so convinced them. What, is not our affirmation a
sufficient refutation of their denial? Sure I am this manner of arguinge has
been allowed of, this fourscore years in our Churches, and pulpits. When D.
Luther ( tom. de matrim. f. 119.) began to teach (from above no doubt) that
this in Genesis Multiply, and increase, was not a Precept only, but more then a
Precept, and that it was not within the power of a man to be without a woman:
And again, that if the wife would not yield she should be sent packing; marry
Hesther and put away Vasthi: and that if the husband were impotent the wife
might marry another, or with his consent lie secretly with his brother, or some
other man: What did the Papists? Oh it vexed them to hear of reformation, they
urged Scripture too, Matt. 5. where it is said; that Whosoever dismisseth his
wife, unless for fornication, and marieth another, commits adultery.

But alas, they have not the spirit of interpreting Scriptures, and their old
Fathers, and Grandsires were blinded, and therefore according to his Tenet well
says D. Luther: Be it that the Church, Augustine, and other Doctors, Peter,
Apollo, yea an Angel from heaven teach otherwise, yet is my doctrine such as
sets forth Gods only glory. Nay he had authority from heaven to reprehend
the Apostles themselves, and to put in and out what he pleased of the holy Word
of the Lord: for so he himself affirms in his book against King Henry the
8. I am certain (says he) I have my doctrine from heaven; and yet mark the
humility of the man) it is not mine (says he) but Christ's. And therefore you
see, how afterward King Henry obeyed him, and his doctrine, which he would
never have done, had it not been from God, or had it not been most pure and
holy doctrine: and therefore you may read how zealous King Henry became, how
purely and chastely he lived, being converted from Popery.

Again, D. Luther added to the Text, Romans 3. this word alone: Man is justified
by faith alone. And this not without both authority from God, (as before you
have heard out of his own mouth, and no doubt do firmly believe) but also with
great reason, to wit, to vex the old Papists. O this does silence them, this
makes the^ chafe and sweat. Let them cry, we falsify the Scripture: I will
study no further answer for them, then this of D. Luthers which is never to be
answered: A Papist, and an Ass, are all one thing: So I will have it, so I
command it, my will must stand for a reason. And good reason, for thy Will was
the Lords will, and the Lords will was thy Will. So in the 2. of Peter he has
thrust out good Works, as not beseeming these holy times, when a lively faith
excludes all good Works; all counsels of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience.
Give me faith, and let the Papists go with their good Works, and Restitutions
whither they will. I Will none.

This doctrine we exactly follow, and protest never to do good work so long as
we breath. Here you see my grounds for it out of this prophet, sent from
heaven to reform the world; and you see also that we may justly alter the
text, and use our wits in clearing of the Scripture, purifying our doctrine,
and deluding the Papists.

I cannot omit another Prophet D. Calvin, so named by himself: I am a Propheth
(says he) I have the spirit of God etc. thus, full of zeal in his 4. book of
Institutions cap. 12. and else where. Now mark the spirit and zeal of this
man. In the preface of his Institutions, he tells us that the Counsel of
Basil, was a lawful Council, and persisted in full authority and dignity to
the end. Now then, he proves most learnedly, that the Papist Church has
failed: for that Counsel deposed Eugenius and chose Felix; yet the Council
being ended, Eugenius stole again into the chair without any Canonical
election; and so from him (a false Pope) all the succeeding Popes have sprunge,
making ever since a false Church.

Thus that rare and eminent star John Calvin, whose wisdom thought it not
convenient in those times to be so foolishly scrupulous, as to speak truth,
and to lay open, that indeed it was first a true Council, but after when it
deposed Eugenius, and chose Felix, it was a diabolical and seditious Council,
so called by the Lateran Council, Sessione 11.

Now in verity tell me, what zealous man is there of ours that does not follow
this example of M. Calvin? And who will not, to defend an article of our Faith
(to wit, That the Church may err) dissemble, or equivocate, I will not say
lie? though the Scripture say, Omnis homo mendax, Every man is a liar, which
must be fulfilled sometimes especially in necessity: and when is there more
necessity then for the Gospel, to vex the Papists that cry for truth and
plain dealing forsooth? Yes, with them, who hate us, and would destroy the
Gospel.

Now for M. Calvin, who can once doubt but that he had a revelation to deal
thus with the Pope. In his third book of Institutions cap. 20. he says, The
Papists in their hymns and Letanies never make mention of Christ, but pray
always to dead men. This doctrine our men teach also in their Pulpits, taken,
as you see, from M. Calvin. This mads the Papists, calling us falsifiers,
untrue dealers etc. and that this is one of our ordinary lies, because they say
in their Letanies, Lord have mercy on us: Christ have mercy on us: God the
Father of heaven, have mercy on us etc. Alas this is only a poor shift, put
only for a show: but let them talk in the mean time what they will; so long
as the contrary is preached in our pulpits, this makes the papists odious
amongst the people. Again in the same place he says: They invoke Saints as
Gods. They deny it. Calvin and all our Brethren affirm it. One Calvin, one
Melancthon, one Minister of the Lord is to be believed before a thousand
Papists, though it be in a point of their own Religion.

I must let pass for breuity sake infinite other of our Ancients, that have
given us good example how to deal with the Pope; and for my part I have not
been backward like a towardly disciple to follow their example, neither will
as long as I live.

But now let us look upon our own learned Countrymen, in this business of so
great importance. God be praised, there are so many I know not where to
begin: Pity it is I must leave most of the^ out, or else I should make a
volume as big as John Foxes Acts and Monuments, that grave, simple, and upright
man, who is so falsely accused by that crafty Jesuit Parsons, for telling in
his Acts a thousand lies, and in three leaves 120. Believe him who please, for
i will be hanged first, unless some of our own Congregation will take the pains
to show me them.

First therefore, I will begin with Bishop Jewel, a man of famous memory for
deluding the Papists arguments. In his book called The defense page 7. he
joins the Manichees and Papists together, both forbidding Marriage, and
allowing of Fornication. The Papists are madd, deny it, and esteem it
blasphemy against the Church, condemn his proofs as false, which he brings
out of Panormitan, and others, who only affirm, that Fornication was not
punished now so rigorously as in the primitive times; and from thence they
infer, that the Bishop has injured, and belyed their doctrine, and falsified
Panormitan: and this they say, in him is plain. But what says the Jewel?
Alas, he counts this answer as ridiculous.

Again D. Harding, a notable old Papist, affirms, he has convinced him of
hundreds of lies: But were there time, I could show you how bravely he comes
off, of all. Tush let the Papists say what they please, we will say with Paul.
2. Cor. 3. We are called deceauers, and yet we say truth. The Reverend Doctor
and Bishop aforsaid in another place objects against them their private, or
sole Communion. The Papists answer diverse ways, out of the ancient Fathers,
Basil, and the monks of Egypt, and I know not where. But after all their
labor, mark, I beseech you, how wittily the Jewel answers, and confuteth
them, pitying their poor proofs: If says he, M. Harding could find any
thing in the Church, he would not thus hunt after the mountains, and fly for
aid into Egypt, if he could find it nearer home. Was not this a wise answer,
for so far fetch a proof?

Again, the Papists, forsooth, will not have their Church to err, God must
take heed of breaking his promise with them, and they hold him to it. Matthew.
26. and John 14. The gates of hell shall never prevail against it. I will be
with you, till the consummation of the world. The holy Ghost shall remain with
you for ever, with like authorities out of Scriptures, and multitudes of
Fathers, and they think to kill it dead. But mark the Jewel in this point
how he answers Harding. You papists (says he) say it stands not with Gods
promise to forsake his Church a thousand years together (now he plyes them;)
It is not much for you openly the break Gods commandments, to defyle his
holy sanctuary, to turn light into darkness, and yet nevertheless you will not
stick to bind him to his promise. Here you see the Consciences of the
Papists; they may break their promises, transgress the Law, offend their
God, but God must not break with them. See how divinely this learned Bishow
quelleth the arguments of his importune adversaries. An answer it is,
certainly inspired by the Lord of truth, and that of our Truth, and not by the
Devil, as the Romanists say.

Well, I am sorry I must leave out infinite places of this reverend Bishop, by
which he has taught me, and many others, to deal with the papists as they
deserve, but he is dead and gone, and no doubt rewarded for his labors: we will
no more of the dead, but of the living, and those no small fools I can tell
you, both in their own and our eyes. Appear then in thy likeness grave D.
White, as thy picture shows thee in thy last work. But now that is changed
together with thy titles, for thou art a Bishop, and that well deserving it,
and that not for thy Lying, as the Papists pretend, but for thy witty writings
against those thy inueterate Enemies, as I shall make appear most manifestly.

Observe therefore, O honorable Lady, how wittily he brings their own authors,
their Cardinals, and Fathers against themselves. And first Cardinal Hosius,
in his expresso verbo Dei, Express word of God, who (as the Bishop relates in
his reply to the Jesuit Fisher page 15. in the end, and page 152. in the
beginning) has this doctrine: A man ought not to be learned in the Scriptures,
but taught of God: it is labor lost to spend time in Scripture, for it is but
a creature, yea an empty element: it becomes not a Christian to be conversant
in Scripture. Madame is not here Blasphemy? does not the Doctor justly insult
here over the Pope and the Jesuits his Bandoggs, that bark continually against
the pure lovers of the Word, who had rather see the devil then a Jesuit or a
Seminary Priest, which I thank the Lord for, I ever thought to be monsters, I
was so purely educated in the house of the Lord, ever harkening diligently how
eloquently our Ministers continually reviled them; so that I have been bred up
with a holy hatred to them, and with pure eyes lifted up to heaven, I praise
the Lord for it, I still hate them as zealously, as the good Recorder of
Salisbury did the Image of God the Father, which he valiantly brake in pieces,
although his leg, and almost his neck was broken for it, out of malice
infallibly of the devil for his doing so good a deed.

But now to the answer of the Papists against the Doctor. Forsooth they say,
this doctrine is not theirs, and that Hosius has not these words of his own,
but relates them as the blasphemous words of the Swinckfeldian Sect, called
the Heavenly Prophets, Swinckfeldius a Hater of Friars and Monks being their
captain, and reprehends and censures them. Yea Hosius himself being taxed
therewith by some learned men of ours in his life time, answers indeed the same,
and says that if he for his own part should have taught any such doctrine, he
had been worthy to have been hanged up in the marketplace.

But alas, this will not help them, for what reason had our learned Doctor to
take the pains to search whether they were Hosius his words or no, it was
sufficient I hope for him to find them there, and so finding them, to take
them, and stop the Papists throtes with them in what sense soever Hosius spoke
them. I assure you this was done most eloquently, or rather spiritually, to
make the Papists know, they deal with men of Authority, and such as know how
to vex a Papist, and delude their arguments, and bring their own best
Authors against themselves. This I assure you, Madame, is now all in all
amongst our learned Writers, and I hope I have played my part herin (as shall be
seen anon) as well as the best of the^.

But this Bishop has not left them so, I trow. No: he has yet laid another of
their Red caps doctrine open, and consequently of theirs, to wit Bellarmines.
Although (says Bellarmine) the Books of the Apostles and Prophets be divine,
yet should I not certainly believe them, except I have before hand believed the
Scripture: for also in sundry places of Mahomets Alcaron we read that the same
was of God from Heaven, and yet we do not believe it. Thus M. Bellarmine. But
now behold M Doctor how wittily he catches this grave Cardinal in his own
trap. Orthodox. page 136. he makes the Cardinal say thus: A man is not bound
to believe the Scripture to be divine, because the Scripture it self says so,
more then one is bound to believe the Alcaron to be of God, because in many
places thereof, we read that it was sent from heaven of God. Behold the
excellency of this Doctors wit, how cunningly he reprehends the Cardinal of
blasphemy against the Word of God.

O Madame, this is a thing that nips the Jesuits to the heart, and makes them
scratch their heads to defend their Cardinal, and behold when all is done what
a poor shift they are forced to fly unto. They are feign to say forsooth, that
this Reverend Doctor is a most egregious liar, and falsifier of Bellarmine.
Yes, forsooth, if we would follow their Counsel, D. White should be forced to
do Penance, and make restitution to Bellarmine, for his injurious defamation,
and leaving out those words, except I have before hand believed the Scripture.

But I warrant you, the Doctor is wise enough, and we too. We Will have nothing
to do with their Pennances and Restitutions; they are things as hateful unto
us, as the Mass it self. Let them count us falsifiers, liars, deceauers and
the like, they shall find we are no such men, but true zealous professors of
the Word, and such as know how to beat down Popery, as well as the best. And
as for the Bishop himself, howsoever they allege he had his Bishopric for
lying, let them know that had he not sold (as they say he has) his library to
raise his family, and provide for his children, never to be stained with the
least spot of Popery, he had answered the Nine-Reasons long before this.

Now Madame, craving your patience (for I know your Goodness will never think
that time to long which is spent in reuewing the witty proceedings of our
learned Doctors) enter D. Morton Bishop of Durham, for nimblenes of wit in
this kind inferior to none. None more taxed by the Wicked then he for
corruption, lying, shifting, and falsifying, in one Book 600. But let them
talk, he is rare in interpreting learned Authors, according to his own sense;
he can make them speak as pleases himself; and for paying the Papists home
with scoffs, taunts, and jests none more excellent then he: and thus he is
able to put the best of them to silence, with all their Scriptures, Fathers,
and Authorities.

One way of arguing I have learned of him, and it is a rare one indeed, to wit,
to bring the Papists own objections for their solutions, as you may see in the
4. page of his Discovery, where he cites a text of Gratiam, causa 15 cap. 99
gloss. 4. If I have sworn to pay any money to one excommunicated after my
oath, I am not bound to pay it him; the reason is, because we ought to vex
evil men by what means soever, to the end they may cease from doing ill.
Where, if you mark, in these last words we have authority by their own
Authors to vex them all we can, being a wicked people.

Now it is true, that the words of of the Gloss contain only an objection
upon that clause of the Canon concerning paying of money to an excommunicated
person, and the objection is made by the Author of the Gloss in these words:
What will you say, if I swear to pay one money and afterward he is
excommunicated, am I bound to pay it, or no? Afterward he argues the question
on both sides, and then concludes, that the Debtour ought to pay the money,
though the other cannot demand it. Now, the ingenious Bishop to make the
Papists doctrine odious, leaves out both the first words, that show it is an
objection, and the last, to wit, that such a one is bound to pay it, which is
the solution, and very wittily, he makes the sentence go thus: If I have sworn
to pay any one money that is excommunicated, I am not bound to pay it. This was
artificially done. Again he relates that D. Boucher holds, that a King may
be killed by a private man, when D. Boucher holds absolutely the contrary.
This is to make the world believe the Truth, and make them say that which they
do not; which is an honest, good, and profitable policy.

In his Preamble page 90. he has so zealous a hatred against the Pope, that he
affirms with great joy, that Adrian the English Pope was choked with a fly,
and cites Nauclerus for it, who only does mention it, as a fable, and refutes
it.

Though Parsons have proved Equivocation in some cases to be lawful, both out
of Scripture, even by Christ himself, Io. 2. Chap. 5. and S. Paul to the
Hebrews saying: Melchisedech had neither Father nor Mother; Toby the 5. that
the Angel that appeared, calling himself the son of great Ananias, his name
was Azarias: These they say, were no lies etc. So School Divines out of
Augustine in Psalm. 5. that albeyt a lie be unlawful, yet to conceal a truth
it may be lawful. So, many are brought by Parsons in his Mitigation, as to
save the life of a Priest. But what of all this? the simple people never come
to read this Book of Parsons, or others of that side; and for the learned it
stands the^ upon to concur together, by all means to beat down Papistry,
and therefore the Bishop cried out: not one jot of Scripture, no one example of
antiquity, no one reason in the natural wit of man, no one Author Greek or
Latin do make for Equivocation, as the Papists teach it.

So he alleges Azor a Jesuit in his Preamble page 84. and 85. to condemn all
use of Equivocation, and that by five rules, but he leaves out four of the
said five rules, as directly against him, allowing in some cases Equivocation.
In the same manner he brings another Jesuit Emanuel Sa. Now to bring their
own Authors against them is both witty and learned. Bellarmine has not
escaped him: and you may see, eue^ by Parsons own works, the Mitigation and
the Sober Reckoning, how rare a man Bishop Morton is.

But I will end here with this, that you may see how the Papists are vexed with
this right worthy and true dealing Bishop. For after great labor to show
hundreds of lies and corruptions, as they say; then forsooth, they dare presume
to condemn him of ignorance, even in Logic, showing that his Syllogism is
neither true in matter or form, but has six terms, and concludes no more
then he which proves the learned Bishop to be an Ass, if you will believe the
Papists: Every Man is a living creature,
Every Ox is a foure-footed beast,
Ergo, every Ass has two long ears.


Now, if this worthy and learned Doctor be thus abused by the wicked Crew,
what must I expect? If he that styles himself, A Minister of simple Truth, in
his Preamble, and yet presently after (as they would show) corrupts Polidor
Virgill; if this man be taxed, what will they do to me his scholar, who have
imitated him and others, as M. Perkins, Fulke, Bell, Sutcliffe, Jewel; and
others of my own rank, as Sir Edward Cook, Hoby, Hastings, Plessis Mornay,
who all, with them, are notorious liars. But for all this, it behooves a Knight
to take courage, and not to be daunted, and never to yield that there is the
least corruption in any of our Writings; for to confess a fault, is rather
Vility, then Humility in our Religion.

And therefore with the greatest magnanimity of spirit will I begin to defend
my self (relying upon these a foresaid Authors) that ever did noble knight.
They tax me with many lies; but will you know the cause? The truth is they are
galled to see my works, and my self so highly esteemed for them, as I am
indeed, and I do glorify my self, and the Lord for it.

Now therefore, with sword and shield to defend my honor; they are much
troubled with my 7. Section, because in it I show their pedigree from old
Heretics; and therefore I have told 9. or 10. lies (say they.) Now what is
the first I pray you? Against their Mass forsooth. And who would not labor to
beat it down, seeing the very Devil himself hates it so much, that he
taught D. Luther to write against it. But now to my Charges.

First Charge.
I said, Vitalian the Pope that lived in the year 666. brought in the Latin
service. They not enduring this, tell me to my face, that Gregory the great
(who lived in the year 590. there being 11. Popes between him and Vitalian)
sent the Latin service hither by Augustine the Monk: and to make the matter
more clear, they bring Cyprian in his Sermon upon the Lords Prayer, to affirm
the same preface of the Mass to be said in Latin, that is now said. And
Augustine in his second book of Christian Doctrine ca. 13. in his book de bono
perseuerantiae cap. 3. affirms, that in the Mass, after Habemus ad Dominum,
presently the Priest answers, Gratias agamus Domino Deo nostro; and then
follows, Dignum and iustumest. Thus they bring their old Mass Priests against
me for their own Mass. Would any man have made so simple an answer?

Then they will convince me with John Stow, a good, honest, simple fellow that
in his Chronicle says, that the English service began first in K. Edward the
sixth his days. Now, why should not I answer with all my learned Ancestors?
What is Cyprian? What is Augustine? Were they not men? What have we to do with
them when they are against us? When they are for us, we have reason to urge
them against the Papists, because they honor them, and rely upon them, but
not we; for we protest to rely only upon the Word of God according to our own
interpretations. For we be more then assured, that the Lord will not suffer us,
the predestinate, to err. Now it pleases me, that I may with D. Luther,
Calvin, Fulke, D Humfrey, and all other of the reformed Church, reject the
Fathers, not caring for a thousand Augustins, Cypria^s etc. And thus I answer
for the Latin service, desiring them to keep the Fathers to themselves, for we
make no account of them. Now comes a greater business about.

The second Charge.
I said, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation began in the Lateran Counsel 400.
years ago. The Papists will have it more ancient, saying, that my own
Masters will give me the lie; and that only the word (Transubstantiation)
began then against Berengarius, who opposed the doctrine before the Council,
and therefore it was taught before: and so they tell me that John Fox, a good
honest dealing man (that has told but 1000. lies in his Acts and Monuments,
and 120. within the space of three leaves) gives my Worship the Whetstone, he
might as well say, the lie. John Fox in the book of his Acts printed 1576.
page 1121. affirms the denying of Transubstantiation began to be accounted
herely 1060. and in that number was one Berengarius, who lived about the year
1060. Now, says my Papist, what does your Knightship say to the Fox? Marry I
say, the Fox is a Goose, and deserves to be hanged in chains for not abusing
the Papists more in those Primitive times.

Again they bring D. Humfrey who says: Gregory the great and Augustine
brought Transubstantiation into England: So he in his Iesuitisme 2. part. rat.
5. page 626. Peter Martyr in his Epistle to Beza, dislikes S. Cyril for this
doctrine. M. Whitgift in his defense against Cartwrights reply. pa. 408. says
Ignatius the disciple of S. John said of the heretics of those times, they do
not admit the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ, which
flesh suffered for our sins. Here, he says, he could bring the ancient
Fathers, to change the name of Sir Humfrey Linde, into Sir Humfrey Lies; so
omitting, as he says, the authority of Christ himself in Scripture, the
Fathers, Councels, and Figures of the old Testament, leaves me to consider how
true a Knight I am. And by this you may see how graceless a Papist he is, to
give a Knight the lie.

Yet he urges me further and says, Judas was the first of my opinion in the
denial of Transubstantiation: from him and the Capharnaits Berengarius, and so
from him Luther and Calvin, then to Grandsire Fox, Father Morton, and so to
his worship Sir Humfrey Lind: so Judas was the root, and the Knight comes
directly from his line. I confess, this did put me into choler, in which I
swear that if I knew this Papist, he should well know, that I am a
Knight-fighter as well as a Knight-writer, which few know of I confess. He
promises a more ample pedigree, but let him keep it to himself, I desire it
not, I say I am wronged, and will revenge it when, and where I can.

The third Charge.
Because I said Phocas was the first that granted Supremacy to the Bishop of
Constantinople, they make my Author Vrspergensis say, Rome. But let that pass.
Again they say, he is corupted by us, and that Phocas could not give
Supremacy, because he never had any such power, neither could he be the first,
seeing Justinian ratified the Decrees and Canons of the Popes Supremacy, with
an Edict, as all Catholic Princes do now; So Phocas only set forth the
Decrees. But my own Masters will vex me worse (he says.) M. Whitaker, and
M. Fulke say, That Pope Victor was the first that exercised jurisdiction over
forrayne Churches; so M. Whitaker against Duraeus lib 7. M. Fulke in his answer
to a Cou^terfeyt Catholic page 36. And at this time the Church of Rome was in
great purity (says the Bishop of Canterbury) being near to the Apostles, in
the year 158. So Bishop Whitgift sets forth Victor, and the Church of Rome in
those days. Thus with a brag of conuincing me of an untruth, and referring
me to Sciptures and Fathers, he ends this Charge.

But I will not take so much pains, seeing I can have a true Notebooke of a
true Minister; where every thing is Featly set down; their notes are my
Scriptures and Fathers, upon their words and credits I receive them, for I
know they will not deceive Me, though they should belie the Papists.

The fourth Charge.
Because I said, the worship of Images was decreed by the Council of Nice,
almost 800. years since Christ; here the Papists say, If I mean divine
worship, as my Rabbis teach out of the pulpit the ignorant people, then it is
false, they have no such Doctrine: if I mean relatiuely, and transitorily with
respect to the person it represents, as good subjects do to the Chair of
State, with reference to his Majesty, then I fail of the time; for that
Isaurus opposed this doctrine before that Council was assembled anno 726. and
that the Fathers of that time, as Damascene, Germanus, and others condemn this
Heresy of the Iconoclasts, which began by Jews, Turks, Saracens, and
Heretics, and is still maintained by the learned, and noble Knight Sir Humfrey
Linde, against Christ, and all the ancient Fathers: And by most of the English
Clergy, as appeared lately in Star Chamber (an. 1633.) there was granted the
pious use of them; and the Papists have not any other in them, and so they tell
me, the Council condemned the Heresy, not decreed the doctrine.

But who knows not, that we disclayme from their Councels? For as D. Luther
truly said, art. 115. Councels are but as Parlaments of Princes, and what is
defyned by them, is subjected to the Judgment of every private man. It is a
mad thing that what a Council concludes should be believed, seeing what is to
be believed and what not, is left to every spiritual man's judgment, and so
farewell all Councels and Fathers. Give me the pure word, and a pure spirit
that knows only what books are Canonical. This is the doctrine of D.
Luther, and D. Calvin which I follow, and so my Spirit is with theirs; and so I
hope I have answered their Counsels and Fathers sufficiently.

The fifth Charge.
Because I tell them, Irenaeus in his first book cap. 3. says, that the
Basilidians and Carpocratians worshipped Images, and from them I derive their
pedigree: The first of these, say the Papists, as Irenaeus witnesses, used
Images and Inchantements, but makes no mention of worship. Of the later they
say, they had the Image of Christ, but honored it as the Heathens did their
Idols, and placed it together with the Images of Pluto, Pythagoras, Aristotle,
and used them as Gentiles do: So that here he says I have grossly abused
them, and belyed Irenaeus, and that I agree with the Basilidians and
Carpocratians in many points of my Religion. But he will prove this when I have
defended my self, and cleared my self of this false dealing, which will never
be.

The sixth Charge.
Because I say, the Communion in one kind was decreed by the Council of
Co^stance above 1400. years after Christ, the lie was told long since (say
they) by my Father Luther, as Card. Bellarm. notes lib. 4. de Eucharist cap.
26. M. Crashaw and others have it; so that it is a stale lie, and they find
great fault because he cites Authors that the whole world esteems liars, as
Mornay Plessis who is convinced of 4000. lies (a goodly company) a man no doubt
of great zeal, and of a brave Spirit: for being urged with these untruths
before the King of France, his stomach was so full, that he cast it up even in
the Papists faces, and in the very presence of the King of France Henry the IV.
this I say, was a true Roman, a brave Spirit, and the spirit of his Ancestors
shined in him.

Here my Papist intreates me to read Parsons three Conuersions, for that I may
learn to lie out of M. Fox, and Mornay Plessis, both whom are painted forth
in their own true colors; But I scorn to read Parsons, or to learn to lie
of any man, neither Parson nor Minister shall teach me to lie. And here also
the wonderful Papist falls into a wonder at me, for wrangling about the Cup,
seeing my own Rabbis have deprived me both of Cup and Sacrament, meat and
drink too.

He is angry likewise because I cite not the place in the Counsel; but for
that I have my reasons. He denies that there is any such thing in the
Council; but only in the 13. Session there are these words: Though Christ did
institute the Venerable Sacrament after supper, and administered the same in
both kinds to his disciples, yet the laudable authority of sacred Canons, and
approved Customs of the Church has practiced, and does still practice, that
the Sacrament ought not to be consecrated after supper, nor be received of the
faithful but fasting. And so calls to me for a Decree as though I were bound to
cite places at his pleasure: and like a malepert Jack he says, that in this
point we may be termed the giddy builders of Babylon, so great is our
dissension about the Eucharist.

And for the Communion in both kinds, or one kind, it was left to the
judgment of the Church; and that life eternal is promised for eating one
kind, and so Christ himself gave it. He says he will not stand to cite places
of Scripture, seeing that I believe never a word in the Scripture and that he
were better deal with an Infidel, then with an obstinate heretic. And that,
I with all my Divinity cannot distinguish between a Divine Institution, and a
Divine Precept: for though he instituted it in both kinds, yet he commanded it
not to be received in both kinds; for many things are instituted, yet not
commanded, as Matrimony etc.

Lastly, if I loathed wine (as he hears I do not) he does not doubt to get me
a dispensatio^, to wash down the supper of the Lord with a Cup of good March
beer, or Ale. For my untruth in this matter I must look upon Vrbanus Regius a
learned man of our own, who confesses that the Sacrament of one kind was
ordained in the first Council of Ephesus 1000. years before the Synod of
Constance, for the extinguishing the Nestorian heresy, who held the body to be
without the blood in one kind, and the blood to be without the body in another
kind: but the Knight, says he, holds it in neither kind, and therefore but
kindly dealt withal, to have his kind lying showed to the whole Congregation
of his learned Brethren, that may give him better counsel.

The VII. Charge.
Because I affirm in my 7. Section, that the heretics Angelici were the
first founders of praying to Saints, I cite for this Aug. lib. de haeres. who
(the Papists say) does not so much as name Saints in that place by me cited:
and that it is a plain iugling trick to bring Augustine against that doctrine
which the world knows he practiced, as it is seen in his Meditations cap.
40. S. Michael, S. Gabriel, S. Raphael supplicate for me. Now, say they, these
Angelici, held that Angels were to be adored as Gods, or that they thought
Angels made the world, or that they boasted that they lived Angelical lives,
and therefore placed themselves in the Order of Angels: from hence they had
their name, and from hence S. Augustine numbers them among Heretics; and, say
the Papists, they number the Knight amongst them for his Via tuta; this is
because I have laid out their wicked doctrine, but I promise to make them more
odious if I can.

For the Collyridians, S. Aug. reprehe^ds them for honoring the blessed Virgin
as a Goddess, and not for honoring her as Catholics do; and so out of his
authority bids me, learn the difference between Idolatry, and honoring the
friends and Saints of God.

The VIII. Charge.
Because I derive their doctrine of Merit, and works of superogation from the
Cathari; this (say they) is as true as the rest; for they boasted of their
purity, as I and Puritans do; that the Cathari and I agree in 16. Points; they
denied Penna^ce as the Knight does; and although Scripture threaten death
eternal to those that do not pe^nance, yet they Knight will none. Nouatianus
the Captain of the Cathari made his followers take a solemn oath that they
would never return to the Pope who the^ was Cornelius; so has the Knight
sworn to hate the Pope etc. which I deny not, and I love the Cathari the
better for their zeal.

Now, for the Merit, they say, there is no mention of it, but of their
hypocrisy: and for their doctrine of good Works, they send me to learn, for
that there are many things belonging to make a good work merito^ious in the
sight of God. I have bin often taught (they say) and therefore they will not
stand to repeat my lesson to me again, but send me to their learned Authors.
Neither will I spend time to learn their doctrine which I hate, and so I do
all their good Works, vowing never to do any while I live for their sakes: for
in this I am of D. Luthers mind, to be opposite to the Pope in all things.

The IX. Charge.
Because I say the restraint of their Priests marriage was the heresy of Tatian
and the Maniches, for which I cite haeres. 46. they Papists say, that Tatians
heresy was for denial of marriages, and comparing them with fornication:
neither would he receive any into his Sect that was married; and there is not
one syllable of the marriage of Priests, and that all the Papists condemn this
for heresy, holding marriage a Sacrament. That of the Maniches was another most
abominable Heresy: for they using matrimonial acts, yet most sinnefully
shunned Conception: So Aug. haeres. 46. and so conclude, I am a most true
dealing Knight which is more praise then I deserve.

The Papist in a letter to me, noted also Nine Falsifications of Bellarmine in
my Via tuta, and might have done many more but that it was troblesome to him; I
desired him not to trouble himself with making these: but it is no matter, for
I hope to show that I have cited Bellarmine truly, and to teach the Papists to
be wary how they write books against a Knight; for shortly I will put forth a
Book that shall utterly disgrace both Pope and Papists: and this the sooner,
if I shall hear that your Lap. is satisfied by this Letter, and thereby also
to answer for me to those scoffing Neutralists.

And so, Right Honorable, desiring ever to be esteemed one of your Servants,
and one I hope that shall be ready in this kind, against all Papists, to do you
Knights Service, I rest,

Your Honors Servant, ever ready to dye in your quarrel, and for the truth of
the pure Word. H. Linde.

FINIS.

