PARAPHRASTICALL AND DEVOVT DISCOURSES UPON THE PSALM MISERERE, COMPOSED BY
CHAPTER M.

Rent your hearts and not your garments, and turn to the Lord your God:
because he is benign and merciful, patient and of much mercy, and ready to
be gracious upon the malice. Joel 2. ANNO M.DC.XXXV.

TO THE READER.
DIVERSE of the learned Catholics of our nation (Gentle Reader) have written
sundry books in our vulgar language to inform and instruct thy understanding
in matters of faith and Religion, and I also according to my little ability
and slender Talentes, have not been wanting in that kind. And diverse also
have either translated other men's books, or published their own to move and
stir up thy will to piety and devotion: whom I desiring to imitate, have
compiled for thee these Paraphrasticall discourses upon the Psalm Miserere: In
which I bring in the Royal Prophet David much lamenting, bewailing, and ruing
his two great sins, the murder of Vrias, and his adultery with his wife
Bersabee: and thereby I endeavor to move the wills of all sinners to sorrovv
and repentance of their sins, and amendment of their lives. These discourses
I intend principally for great sinners, who also still persist in their
sinful state of life, though I exclude not other sinners, whose sins are
not so great as David's sins were, no not any the least sinners: because
though some sins be mortal, some venial, some great some lesser, yet if
they be compared to the Divine Majesty which they offend, no sins are to be
esteemed little, be they in themselves never so little: and so they also may take
benefit by these my discourses. I have lived long out of my Country, and so
know not who are the greater, who the lesser sinners: yet this I know in
general, that there must needs be many, and great sinners in England: because
where there are ill-beleeuers, there, ordinarily, are ill livers, and where
there are many believers (as there are in England) there are many ill believers
(true faith and belief being but one) and consequently many ill livers, true
faith being the rule and square of good life. For although sometimes true and
good believers are not good livers, because they live not according to the rule
of their faith and Religion; and sometimes ill believers do live well
morallie, because guided by God his grace, which is vvanting to none, they
follovv natural reason, and their own virtuous inclination and disposition,
not the precepts of their Religion: yet ordinarily, ill believers are not
good livers; and at least, amongst good believers you shall find more good
livers then amongst ill believers. Wherefore these my Paraphrasticall
Discourses and pitiful lamentations of King David, (who was a true believer,
and yet some times an ill liver, but in this psalm shows himself a true
penitent) I entend for all sinners as well Catholics as not Catholics, and
of what so ever Religion, I being debtour to all: and because I would have
them all to peruse these discourses, Romans 1.
I abstain from Controversies in Religion, least I should auert any from the
reading of them; only in paraphrasing the last two verses of this psalm,
occasion being offered, I speak of the unbloody and daily sacrifice of the
Altar, but so, that I rather touch it then handle it, mention it then treat of
it, suppose it then prove it in that manner as I might, hoping that this
doctrine now, will not be distasteful; for seeing that now in England in very
many churches, Altars, which heretofore were thrown down, are again erected
according to the laudable example and pious use, and custom of the Catholic,
and eue^ primitive Church; to auerre a true sacrifice, will not be ill taken,
because to allow of Altars is to allow of a true sacrifice, which uses to be
offered on them, an Altar, and a true and proper sacrifice being correlatiues,
of which the one infers the other, and so the one can not be auerred without
the other, nor the one denied without the other. And although (as I said) there
vva^t not books of piety and devotion in England, to move the good to
devotion, piety and good life, and sinners also to repentance, the beginning
(after faith) of all good life: yet I would not therefore be silent; rather by
the example of other vvriters, I was encouraged to offer my myte, and my small
endeauours also for the conversion of sinners, and to follow therein not only
their examples, but the example also of my Savior JESUS CHRIST, and his
Apostles. For he dyed for sinners, and came not to call the just, but sinners
to penance, and he left nintie nine in the desert, Luc. 5,
to seek out one sheep that was last, and he and his Angels rejoice more
upon one sinner that does penance, Luc. 15
then upon nintie nine just that need no penance. And his Apostles trauersed
the world through many storms of persecution, to gain the souls of sinners,
and to gain them, thought it no loss, to loose their own lives. And as
sin through human frayltie, does so domineere in this life, that, as the
Prophet David says; Psalm. 13
All have sinned and transgressed, all have declined, and there is not one that
does good, no not one, to wit so, as not sometime to sin: so nothing is
more necessary in this life then penance, it being the only remedy against
sin, and the ground of Justification and salvation. In Paradise there was no
penance, because there was no sin; that place being a place of innoce^cie;
In Heaven there is no penance, because, sin being a misery, can not have
access to that place of felicity; In Hell there is no true penance because
though there, be sin, yet that place is a place of obstinacy, and sin
there, is not pardonable. But in this life and world, penance is necessary,
because this life is subject to sin, and in this life sin is also
pardonable, vvhilest the sinner lives. And therefore Holy scripture
inculcateth nothing more then penance and repentance. Ezech. 18. Math. 3. Luc.
13. Act. 2. Hieron. epist. 8. ad Demetr. cap. 6.
Penance as S. Hierom tells us is a second table after Shipwreck, by which
we may escape drowning, and svvimme out of the sea of sin to the hauer and
haven of of grace. Penance is a salve against all the vvounds of the soul, it
is a plaster against all her sores of sin, it is a sovereign receite against
all her spiritual diseases. And whereas many wounds and diseases corporal,
are incurable by corporal physic, no disease of sin in this life is
incurable, but only final impenitence, because it excludes penance. And
whereas no corporal physic can of old, make us young, or of dead, living
again: penna^ce will make the soul after she is old and decrepite by sin,
young again by grace and newnes of life: 2. Co. 4 Ephesians. 4. 4. Collos. 3. Epla
ad Tit. c. 3. 1. Pet. 1. 1. Romans 6. and 12. Gal. 6.
It makes us put of the old man, and put on the new, it regenerateth us and
makes us new creatures, and after we are dead in soul by sin, it restores
us to the life of grace, yea and glory also, if we persevere in grace. For
these causes I have made these Paraphrasticall Discourses, to allure sinners to
repentance, knowing how miserable a thing it is to live in sin, how
dangerous to defer repentance, and how hopeless to dye in sin without it.
And if by these my small labors, I shall be so happy as to convert any
sinners, yea but one sinner, I shall esteem it no small benefit, not only to
the sinner converted, but also to myself: because S. James assures me, that
he that makes a sinner to be converted from the error of his ways, Iacobi 5.
shall save his soul from death and cover a multitude of sins, not only of
the sinner whom he conuerteth, but also of his own; because the conversion
of a sinners soul, is a sacrifice for the conuerters soul more pleasing to
God, then if he had offered an hecatombe, yea a world to God for his own
sins. For, as S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. ho 3. in 1. ad Corinth.
nullius rei pretiu^ est cu^ anima conferendu^, ne totus quidem mundus; quare
etiamsi diuitias innumeras dederis pauperibus, nihil tale efficies, quale is
qui conuertit animam. The price of nothing, no not of the whole world, is to
be compared to a soul. Wherefore although thou shall give innumerable riches
to the poor, thou shall not do so great a work, as he that conuerteth a
soul. But of penance and the effects of it, I shall not need in this Epistle
to use more words, it being the principal subject of my ensuing Paraphrasticall
Discourses; and therefore here I shall take my leave of my Reader, and desire
him whether he be Catholicque or not Catholicque, to take in good part this
my little labor, intended and taken for the one, as well as for the other: and
if he take profit by it, let him thank God the Author of all that is good;
if, through my default, it move him not to that repentance and amendment of
life, which I intended, I must desire him to pardon me: I was not so able, as
vvilling.

APPROBATIO.
POEnitentiae coronam hanc, in qu^ nihil quod fidei Catholicae splendori,
morumue sanctorum integritati non sit consentaneum, de speciosissimis Psalmi
quinquagefimi floribus Poenitentium Principis memoriae site contexuit pius hic
Paraphrastes.

Ita sentio Ed. St. S. T. D.

APPROBATIO.
NIhil est in hac Paraphrasi Psalmi quinquagesimi fidei Catholicae, aut bonis
moribus contrarium, sed plurima ad poenitentiam excitandam and iuuandam
conduce^ntia: qua propter vtiliter excudi poterit.

Actum Duaci die 30. Martij 1635. Georgius Colvenerius, Sacrae Theol. Doctor,
and Regius ordinariusque Professor, Duacensis Academiae Cancellarius, and
librorum Censor.



PARAPHRASTICAL AND DEVOVT DISCOURSES UPON THE FIFTITH PSALM MISERERE.
Miserere mei Deus.

Have mercy on me, o God.


THE Royal Prophet David, having, through human frayltie, committed twoe
great offenses against the divine Majesty, 2 Reg. 1^. and 12.
no less then adalterie with BERSABEE, and murder of her husband Vrias; and
being reproved thereof by the Prophet Nathan accused by his own conscience,
and moved by the divine grace; he conceiueth such a detestation and horror
of those his sins, and is so ashamed and confounded with the horride aspect
of them, that he falls down prostrate at the feet of his GOD, whom he had
thus offended. And at the first sorrow hindered his tongue from craving pardon:
but his eyes undertook the office of the mouth and tongue, and pleaded better
for the delinquent, by tears, then the mouth could have done by tongue and
words, tears being the best orators. At length his speech coming to him,
he sings, or rather sobbeth forth this his doleful Psalm and sonnette; and
peradventure he plays to it with his harp, but assuredly with his heart:
and so makes a sweet consort of his heart by sorrow, of his eyes by tears,
and of his voice by a lamentable tune. And fearing God his Justice, he flies
to his mercy, and begins with that doleful note miserere; have mereie. As
if he had said:

1. THOU art just, o Lord, Psalm. 118.
and thy Judgment is right: Joel 2.
but thou art also benign and merciful, patient, and of much mercy, and
ready to be gracious upon the malice. If thou were just only, I should
despair, knowing my two so great offenses, which now especially I lament. If
thou were merciful only I should presume: but because thou art just and
merciful, my fear is mixed with hope, and my hope with fear, and I so fear
thy justice, as I hope in thy mercy. Thou art o Lord (I confess) so just,
that thou art justice it self, and this makes me fear, but thou art also so
merciful, that thou art mercy it self, and this makes me hope: that
discourageth me very much; this as much encourages, and gives me the heart to
say, Miserere mei Deus: Have mercy on me o God. If I were o Lord as just and
holy as a Saint, yet durst I not appear before the eyes of thy justice, Job
4. Job 25.
which in the Angels found wickedness, and in whose sight the moon does not
shine, and the stars are not clean: but seeing that I am noe Saint but a
wretched sinner, conceived in sin, borne in sin, brought up in sin, and
guilty of the twoe mentioned and many other sins; how shall I dare to
appear, before thy justice? For if the just man trembles before the Tribunal
of thy Justice, how shall the sinner stand before it?

2. But I appeal, o Lord, (says David) from thy justice to thy mercy, not as
to an higher Tribunal (for thy justice and mercy are both infinite, and so
equal) but as to a Tribunal more benign, more clement and gentle. And
although I be guilty of grievous and enormous sins, and those so great,
that if I regard them only and their ill disertes, Genesis 4.
I may say with Cain: mine iniquity is greater, then that I may deserve
pardon: Yet they are not so great, but thy mercy is infinitely greater, and
so compared to it, they are not so great, but they may deserve pardon: for if
thou please, o Lord, to put not only my sins, but also all the sins of all
men in one scale of thy divine balance, and thy mercy in the other, thy mercy
would out way and ouersway them, and as the sands of the sea, Job 6.
thy mercy would appear heavier.

3. Wherefore, o merciful Lord, not daring to appear before thee as a just
Judge, I present my self before thee as a merciful and loving Father. He that
is presented as guilty before a Judge, uses to deny, or diminish, or excuse
the fault: but I prese^ting my self before thee, o Lord, as before a merciful
father, do neither deny nor excuse nor extenuat my fault; thy prophet Nathan,
2. Reg. 12.
thy under Judge, having condemned me as guilty of no less then adultery and
murder, and mine own conscience having pronounced sentence against me, crying
in my name, peccaui: but standing before thee as a condemned person, I bring in
no witness to defend me, no slightes nor excuses to hide my faults (as who
can hide any thing from thee, whose eyes do penetrate the most secret corners
of our hearts) only I plead, beg, and claim thy mercy, crying Miserere
mei Deus: Have mercy on me, o God. Psalm. 119.
for if thou shall observe iniquities o Lord, Lord who shall sustain it? And
therefore, Psalm. 142.
enter not into Judgment with thy once servant David, examine not his case and
cause, according to the order of justice, but according to thy mercy: I
confess all, and I have nothing to say for my self but Miserere, Have mercy.
I hide not my fault, nor can I, it is too well known unto thee, only I can
say Miserere, Have mercy.

4. Deal not with me, o Lord, (says David) according to thy Justice; that
would cast me in all law, but according to thy mercy; by that only I can be
saved. Thou art (it is true) sovereign Lord of heaven and earth, to whom even
Kings and potentates are but vassals; but Lords also do pardon their
servants, when with tears of eyes and sorrow of heart they demand pardon: I
demand it in the same manner. Apoc. 5.
Thou art a a Lion, and a Lion of the Tribe of Judah, but Lions also will spare
them who prostrate themselves before them; I prostrat both body and soul unto
thee.

5. I confess that by sin I am become, Psalm. 31
Sicut equus and mulas in quibus non est intellectus: as a horse and mule which
have noe understanding. And my brutish appetites, to which I have been a slave,
have metamorphized me and made me so brutish, that I am in life and
conversation rather a brute beast then a reasonable creature: Psalm. 35
but yet, Men and beasts thou will save o Lord: and in the law delivered by
Moses, though it be a law of terror, thou had pity even of brute beasts,
and therefore woldst not permit the Jew to plough with an ox and an ass,
Deuteronomy. 22.
Exodus 23. and Deuteronomy. 14.
least the ass should be over labored; nor to seethe the kidde in the milk
of his damme, that seeming cruelty, nor in a nest to kill or take the old bird
with the young ones, Deuteronomy. 22.
nor to moosel the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn. Have mercy
then on me, though by sin more a beast then they.

6. If I were the only sinner o Lord, thou should have less reason to
pardon me, but seeing all have sinned, and transgressed, Psalm. 13
seeing that all have declined, and that there is not that does good, noe not
one: if thou should exercise justice only, on sinners, thou shoulest find
none on whom thou could exercise thy mercy. If thou should punish all
sinners, thou should have none to pardon: and so thy most grateful attribute
mercy, should never show it self. And yet none of thy divine attributes is
so grateful as thy clemency, none do make thee so popular as thy mercy;
neither has thy divine nature any thing greater then that thou can remitte
sins, nor more pleasing to men and Angels, then that thou will. If no
sinner, o merciful Lord, had ever obtained mercy and pardon at thy hands,
then might it seem arrogancy in me to demand mercy: but if many and very
grievous sinners have found mercy at thy hands, then do thou vouch safe to
pardon me, whom by pardoning others thou have caused to hope for pardon; and be
not displeased if the burden of my doleful sonnet be still the same, Miserere
mei Deus, have mercy on me o God, o most merciful God. And thou o Christian
soul who have sinned with David, cry peccaui; I have sinned, with him cry,
miserere mei Deus, have mercy on me o God.

7. Rue the day and hour, yea the many days and hours in which thou have
offended God, and acknowledge therein thy to too great ingratitude, because in
offending him thou have offended thy creator, by whom thou have thy natural
being, by whom thou live and breathest, thou have offended thy Redeemer, who
to ra^some thee from death, the devil and sin became man for thee, and
suffered the most shameful and most painful death of the cross to give to
thee here in this life a spiritual life and being by grace, and in the next
life an eternal life, and being by glory. Say unto him: I ought my self
wholly unto thee for my creation, and I ought my self again wholly unto thee
for my redemption, and so I but one, am twice thine, and twyse due unto thee.
And if I owe my self and consequently my all for my creation, what shall I
give thee for my redemption? What shall I render to our Lord, Psalm. 115.
for all things that he has rendered to me. I am less, o Lord, then either
of these benefits of creation and redemption, yea then the least of thy graces
and favors. How ungrateful then was I to offend thee, and thereby as much as
lay in me, to take from thee, who can never give thee sufficient, to iniure
thee, disgrace, dishonor thee, who can never render thee sufficient for the
least of thy benefitts though I give all I am and have, yea though I could
give ten thousand times more then I am and have But seeing I owe more then I am
and have, and yet have also bee^ so ungrateful as to offend thee, what will thou expect of me? Thou know, o Lord, that of an ill and unable debtor, thou
can expecte nothing but an acknowledgement of the debte, and an humble
demand of pardon for the offense and remission of the debte, as I do in
David's doleful cry: Which I repeat after him. Miserere mei Deus: Have mercy
on me o God.

8. And o my not only ingratitude but impudency who being not so much as a
vile worm, compared unto thee, o Lord, durst offend thine infinite Majesty:
and was not ashamed to commit those my heinous offenses not only before thee,
but also against thee, which I would have shamed to commit before my servant,
or in presence of the poorest beggar: as though I had thought there had been no
God, or that thou, who madst the eye did not see, or that thou who art every
where had not been present. I said then in effect as the fornicatour, or
adulterer did in Ecclesiasticus: Ecclesiastici 23.
Who sees me? darkness compasses me, and the walls cover me, and no man
beholds me: whom do I fear? The Highest will not be mindful of my sins.
O Good God, where was then my understanding that I could think that I could
hide any thing from thy all seeing eyes? That I could Imagine, or could behave
my self, as though Thy eyes were not brighter then the sun, Ecclesiastici 23.
beholding round about all the vvayes of men, and the bottom of the depth, and
the hearts of men. Or if I did know or think that thou did see the sins
which I committed in the dark or in the secret closet of my heart; how
impudent and shameless was I, Who feared not to do that before thy divine eyes
and in thy divine presence, which I should have shamed and blushed to do in
the presence of the poorest beggar? how could thou, o God, endure this
impudency of so vile a sinner? O ye blessed Angels, who carry the sword of
God his justice, how could you hold your hands seeing your Lord and Prince so
contemned by so vile, malapert, and saucie a varlet?

But what shall I do, o Lord? If my sins past could so be recalled, as not
to have been, I would revoke and recall all my offenses. But seeing I can no
more recall my former evil actions then the day or hour paste; I can only
vvish that I had never sinned, and be heartily sorry that I have sinned: and
that I do, and so doing, I can not but hope that thou vvilt forgive and forget
my sins; for so thou have promised by thy Prophet Ezechiel, and I take thee
at thy word. And this is thy promise: Ezech. 18.
But if the impious shall do penance from all his sins, which he has
wrought, etc. living he shall live, and shall not dye. All his iniquities which
he has wrought, I will not remember them. In this thy promise I will hope,
because I know thou art verity it self, and so can not deceive or be
deceived, and thou art goodness it self, and so vvilt not deceive. On this
promise I will rely, because I know thou art able and willing to forgive their
sins who are penitent for them: If thou were able only but not vvilling, I
could not easily hope, nor could I, if thou were willing only, and not able:
but seeing that thou art both able and vvilling, I will hope for pardon for my
sins, and I will never let my hold go of this hope, it being grounded in
thy promise; but (as Job said: Job 13.
) Although thou shall kill me, I will trust in thee: and animated and
encouraged by this hope, though I be a grievous sinner, and a great offendour,
I dare crave mercy with David and cry: Miserere mei Deus: Have mercy on me,
o God.

9. I intend, o Lord, to leave the state of sin, and to amend my life for
hereafter, and seeing that thy mercy is the source and beginning of all thy
works, I desire that by thy mercy this work of mine amendment may be
begun. Mercy was the beginning of creation: for when we were nothing, we
could not deserve any thing, and so it was thy mercy, of nothing to make us
something, and thy great mercy to make us the greatest and noblest thing after
the Angels. Mercy is the beginning of the great grace of predestination,
which distinguishes the elect, from the reprobate, as appears by those thy
words to Moses alleged by thy Apostle. Exodus 33. Romans 9. See S. Aug. ep.
105. ad Sixtum.
I will have mercy on whom, I will have mercy, and I will shevve mercy,
to whom I will show mercy. Whence S. Paul infers, That it is not of the
vviller nor the runner, but of God that shows mercy. And a little after:
therefore on whom he will, he has mercy, and whom he will he does
indurate, to wit, permissiuelie. And so it is not to be imputed to any merit
of ours that we are predestined, but to the only mercy of God. Though to
the reprobate also he gives grace sufficient to be saved. Mercy was the
beginning of the Incarnation, which is the ground of all man's grace, merit and
glory; because it was decreed and effected by God, S. Th. 3. p. q. 1. ^. 3.
not for ma^s merit, but out of God his mercy, and compassion he took on man's
misery, into which by Adams sin, he was fallen: and it being the beginning
of all grace and merit, could not be prevented by the merit of man, but only
by the mercy of God: Mercy is the beginning of our redemption: for although
to Christ his passion, and its value and merit our redemption was due by right
of justice, yet that he did suffer for us and suffering redeemed us, it was his
mercy not our merit: Mercy is the beginning of our Justification, and
remission of sins, because we are justified gratis, Romans 3.
by his grace, and grace is given gratis, for no merit of ours, but only for
God his mercy; for as S. Paul says: Romans 11.
If by grace; not for works, or merits, otherwise grace were not grace:
Mercy also is the beginning of our glorification, for although glory be given
for our merits, and so in that respect be a reward, Vide Aug. ep. 105. ad
Sixtum. Romans 6.
yet our merits would not be merits, if they proceeded not from grace which is
given gratis, and therefore S. Paul says, The grace of God, life everlasting:
And so I with David desiring justification from my sins and after it glory
and life everlasting, do humbly crave thy mercy the ground of both, saying
with David: Miserere mei Deus: Have mercy on me o God.

Secundum magnam misericordiam tuam.

According to thy great mercy.


1. IT is not so proper to the sun o Lord, to illuminate and give light, nor
to the fire to vvarme and give heat, as it is to thee to have mercy: because
it is but an accidental propriety to the sun to illuminate, as it is also
for the fire to heat; but thou, o Lord, art essentiallie merciful and mercy
it self, and therefore if thou will show thy self to be thyselfe, have mercy
on my sinful soul; and because thy mercy is infinite, Have mercy on me
according to this thy great mercy. Little miseries, as sicknesses and diseases
of the body require but little mercy, and may often times be healed and cured
by Physicians; but sin, if it be mortal, is a great misery (as which
depriueth the soul of her life of grace, makes her odious and deformed in the
sight of God, makes her an enemy to God, and his Saints, and a friend only
to the devil, depriueth her of life everlasting, and of the clear vision and
fruition of God, and if she repent not in time, tumbleth her headlong into hell,
and into that inextinguible fire for ever, (where the damned shall ever burn,
and never be consumed, where they shall be dying and never dead, where torments
shall be without ease, miseries without end) and therefore requires a great,
and an infinite mercy, and can not be pardoned but by God, or by special power
and authority from him, which he only granted to his Apostles and their
lawful successors, Mar. 2.
for to them only Christ said, Joan. 20.
Whose sins you shall forgive they are forgiven them. And therefore David
whose conscience accused him of mortal sins, which he knew to be great
miseries, desired God to have mercy on him according to his great mercy. 2.
Reg. 11. and 12.
He had committed two great and heinous sins, for he had committed
adultery with Bersabee, and to cover it, he had killed Vrias her husband, and
so he stood in need of a great mercy.

2. O David although thou had formerlie been a good King, Act. 13.
and a man according to God his heart, yet I can not excuse thee now from great
sin and great ingratitude; and this thou thy self see and confessest. Thou
did violate the wife of Vrias thy faithful servant and valiant soldiour, and
to cover this fault thou addest an other, to wit, the death of this thy
innocent and faithful soldiour. O David does not the zeal of Vrias thy
soldiour confound thee! he would not lie with his own wife whilst, 2. Reg.
11. and 12.
The Ark of God and Israel and Judah, dwelled in pauilions, and his Lord Ioab
and the servants of his Lord aboade upon the face of the earth; thou at that
time lie with his wife in a soft bed, take thy unlawful pleasure with her;
He exposed his life for thee, thy kingdom, and the cause of God, and thou
causest him to be unjustly and cruelly murdered, and to be sure to kill him,
thou exposest to danger of death many other soldiers, and thereby give
occasion to the Infidelles to insult over the army of God, and to blaspheme
the name of God, who had elevated to the dignity of a King, thee, who now
dealest more traitrously then many of them would have done.

3. And this treachery, cruelty, injustice, and ingratitude thou co^mittest,
o David, after many guiftes of grace and nature, which God had hestowed on
thee; Psalm. 77.
after he had chosen thee and taken thee from the flocks of sheep, from after
the ewes with young: and had made thee of a shephearde a King, and of a
governor of a flock of sheep a King and Pastor of the people of God, after
he had honored thee with so many victories, first over Golias, and then over
the Philistians and Assyrians; after he had delivered thee so often from the
hatred, envy and malice of Saul; after he had endued thee with the light of
prophecy and knowledge of divine mysteries, yea and and with great sanctity
also; after he had promised to establish the scepter of Judah in thy family,
Psalm. 88.
and had begun to fulfill his promise: Thou, o David, for one filthy and
short pleasure (o inconstancy, o leuitie, o ingratitude,) forgetting all these
graces and favors, could find in thy heart to forsake so good a God, and so
great a benefactour, for so short and so brutish a pleasure, and to offend him
so greeuouslie, who had been so beneficial to thee. But this thy great fault,
o David, I need not to aggrauate, thou know it better then any man else, and
thou acknowledgest it, and therefore for so great a sin and misery, thou
desire, not whatsoever, but a great mercy.

4. God almighty his mercy in it self is always great, and so great, that
it is God him self (for whatsoever is in God, is God, and so, infinite as he
is) but yet this divine attribute of mercy in its effects, is greater and
lesser; greater in those to whom many and great sins are forgiven; less in
those to whom lesser and fewer sins are pardoned. David therefore desires
God to show mercy unto him in effect according as he had showed to the greater
sinners.

5. And I o Lord (say so o sinful Cstristia^) acknowledging my self with
David a great sinner, and if not in the same kind of sin, at least in some
other kind as great or greater, and if not in carnal, S. Tho. 1.2. q. 73.
art. 5.
at least in spiritual sins, which are of themselves greater then carnal
sins, as in Schism, Heresy, envy, pride, ambition, hatred of my neighbor,
and the like, do desire thee to have mercy on me according to thy great
mercy in effect, according to that mercy which thou shewedst to David,
Manasses and other great sinners in the old law, according to that great
mercy thou shewedst to S. Peter, S. Matthew, S. Paul and S. Marie Magdalen, in
the new law; for my sins being great, do require a great mercy. Or have
mercy on me according to that great work of mercy the Incarnation, to which
peradventure David alluded, for out of thy mercy only not for our merit, thou
wast incarnate: Or have mercy on me according to that great work of mercy,
thy painful death and Passion, which out of mercy and compassion thou
sufferdst for ma^s redemption. And if, o heavenly father, out of thy mercy and
compassion toward us thou sparedst not thy own son, Romans 8.
though equal and consubsta^tiall unto thee, but for us all deliueredst him,
unto death, no doubt thou art ready on thy part for this so extraordinary work
of mercy, to have mercy on the greatest sinners. Or else thou whosoever have
sinned with David, say with him; have mercy on me o God, according to thy
great and infinite attribute of mercy, which is as great as thy self, who
are essentiallie mercy, and is so infinite, that all the sins of the world
are but little drops, in regard of that sea of mercy. In this mercy, o Lord,
that is in thy self who art this mercy, I principally hope, and next in that
great effect and work of mercy, thy Incarnation and bitter passion. And if
in the Ocean sea I can not want water to wash and cool me, If in the sun I
can not want light to illuminate me, nor in the fire heat to vvarme me; much
less can I want mercy in this Ocean of mercy, or light of grace in this
sun of mercy, which shines on the good and the badde; or can my cold
sins make me shiuer for want of heat of charity, in this infinite fire of
mercy, which consumes sins, but saves souls?

Et secundum multitudinem miserationum tuarum, dele iniquitatem meam.

And according to the multitude, of thy commiserations, take away mine
iniquity.


1. MY sins o merciful God (says David) are not only great, but also
many, Prou. 24.
for if the Just finneth seven times in a day venially, I who have of long time
ledd a sinful life, who seldom resisted tentations, and as seldom flyed the
occasions of sins, but rather sought for them: who have sinned so often that
I may say with Manasses, Orat. Manas. and 2. Par. 33
Peccaui super numerum arenae maris. I have sinned above the number of the sand
of the sea. And as Ecclesiasticus said, Eccles. c. 10.
Arenam maris and pluuiae guttas and dies saeculi quis dinumerauit? The sand of
the sea, and the drops of rain, and the days of the world who has nu^bred?
so may I say: my sins of mouth, heart, deed, my many sins of my five senses
of the body, and of the faculties and powers of my soul, which I committed
every day and night, every hour and moment, in this place, in that place,
and in all places; who can reckon? they are so many that I my self can not
number them, thou only, o Lord, have the^ all in thy cou^t-booke, which one
day will be produced against me, if in the mean time by my sorrow, with thy
grace, they be not ca^celled. And whilst I thus multiplied my sins, what
patience, what mercy; o Lord, did thou show unto me? when I provoked on my
part more and more by often sinning thy wrath and indignation, thou extendedst
thy patience and mercy? for when thou mighst have justly taken me in my
sins, and for the^, by sudden death, mighst have sent me presently to hell,
there to receive my just punishment, as thou have dealt with many no greater,
yea lesser sinners then I, yet thou grau^tedst me lesure and grace to repent,
and whilst I contemned thy goodness and patience, and longanimitie, thy
benignity expected me to penance, wherefore resolving by thy grace, to
multiply my sins no more, yea never to add any one mortal sin to my
former, I desire thee to pardon my former sins, and because they are very
many, to have mercy on me, According to the multitude of thy commiserations,
and mercies.

2. And thou o Christian, who have multiplied sins upon sins with David,
and peradventure more then he, desire God, with him, to have mercy on thee
according to the multitude of his mercies* 2. Reg. 12.
Say, with him: Thou forgauest penitent David, penitent Ezechias, and penitent
Manasses, thou pardone^st S. Peter, S. Paul, S. Matthew, S. Marie Magdalene,
and thousands other great sinners; pardon me also, o sweet Lord, according to
these thy so many mercies, Psalm. 88
and commiseratio^s. Where are thine old mercies o Lord, which thou shewedst
heretofore to sinners? Psalm. 21
In thee our forefathers (though sinners as we) have hoped, they have hoped and
thou did deliver the^, They ried to thee and were saved: they hoped and were
not confounded I cry, o Lord, with them, hear me as thou did them, I hope
with them for mercy, let me find mercy at thy hands as they did, and let not
me be confounded. Are all thy mercies spent? are none left for me? May I say
unto thee as Esau said to his Father Isaac? Genes, 27.
Have thou not reserved me also a blessing, a mercy? Have thou one only
blessing, Father? Have thou no more blessings nor mercies left for me? no I can
not say so. Thou art, o Lord, infinitely more rich in mercies, then Isaac was
in blessings. Thou have bestowed thousands and millions of mercies on sinners,
and yet thou have infinite mercies reserved for other sinners that cry unto
thee for mercy. Thy mercies are infinite, and an infinite number can not be
exhausted, thy mercies are above the sands of the sea, Thy mercy is a sea
which can not want the cooling waters of mercies: sooner may the sea be dried
up then the Ocean of thy mercies drawn dry. Wherefore I cry with David, Have
mercy on me o God according to thy great mercy, because my sins are great,
and according to the multitude of thy commiserations, and mercies, because my
sins are many; and as he cried peccaui for his sins, so will I send forth
from heart and tongue many a peccaui, and day and night, and howerlie and
whenever my sins occur to my memory, I will cry peccaui.

3. And because I can not safely enough rely (in my opinion) on my peccauies,
not knowing whether they proceed from a truly co^trite heart or no, I will
have recourse to thy infinite mercies, o Son of God, which are merits in
respect of thee, as which deserved of thy Father our redemption, but in respect
of me, who deserved them not, they are mercies; And I shall offer unto thee
all the steps thou vvalkedst on earth for me, all the hours thou liuedst for
me, all the words thou spakest, all the prayers and exhortations thou madst,
all thy Theandricke or humane-diuine works and operations, all thy miracles,
all the drops of sweat thou swetst for me in the garden, all those lashes thou
enduredst for me at the Pillar, all the pricks thou feltst in thy coronatio^
with thorns, all the pearsinges of the nails, all the panges on the cross,
all that shower of blood which rained from the heavenly cloud of thy sacred
humanity, yea all the drops of that shower, of which every one was a mercy
to me, of which every one was such a merit in respect of thee, that the least
would have been sufficient to redeem a thousand worlds, And according to this
multitude of thy commiserations, and mercies; take away mine iniquity. And
take our all the staynes and blottes which sin has left in my soul, and
cross and cancel by thy death and passion, out of thy book of accountes, all
the Items and debtes I owe, take away my sins from my soul, from thy eyes,
from thy memory, that they may not only be forgiven, but also forgotten, and
so buried in perpetual oblivion.

4. For although thou can not forget any sins committed against thee, no
not S. Marie Magdalens sins, which were vvashed away with many tears of
eyes and heart; yet when sins by true repentance and hearty sorrow are
remitted, and quite effaced and taken away, thou do no more impute them, nor
do thou punish them, at least with eternal pain, as if thou had
forgotten them: and therefore thou have promised, and this promise is my
comfort, that whensoever a sinner shall repent himself of his sins, Thou will not remember them, Ezech. 18.
that is, so, as to punish them, or to be offended with the sinner for them,
because by contrition and the grace thereof they are taken away, as if they
never had been.

Amplius laua me ab iniquitate mea, and a peccato meo munda me.

Wash me more amply from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.


1. A Foul cloth, and especially if it be also stained, requires much
washing and no less rubbing; and a soul that has much sinned, requires much
washinge by the tears of contrition, and much rubbing by the austere works of
penance. King David having cried peccaui Domino, 2. Reg. 1^.
I have sinned to our Lord, for his great and manifold sins, deserved to
hear from Nathan the Prophets mouth: Dominus quoque transtulit peccatum tuu^:
our Lord also has taken away thy sin, and so by that peccaui, spoken with
sorrow of heart, the malice of his mortal sins was washed away, yet he not
attending so much to Nathans revelation, as to the greatness of his sin
committed, desires to be more amply washed, to wit not only from the
malice of his mortal sins (of which he will not be secure, and of which
one can not by grace and contrition be remitted without the rest, grace being
equally opposite to all) but also from his venial sins, and the temporal
pain due to mortal sin remitted. For although the eternal pain due to
mortal sin be always remitted with the sin, yet not the te^porall pain,
unless the contrition be extraordinary, as it was in S. Marie Magdalene; And
therefore after that Nathan had told David, 2 Reg. 12.
that our Lord had taken away his sin, he told him also that because by his
sin he had made the enemies of our Lord to blaspheme, for this thiag the
son that is born to thee, dying shall die. Yea Nathan told David, that the
sword should not depart from his house. 2. Reg. 13. 2. Reg. 18. 3. Reg. 1 2.
Par. 21.24.25.35.
As indeed three of his own sons, Ammon, Absalon, and Adonias were slain,
as were also many others of David's race and family. Finally David, in
desiering to be more amply washed, desired to be cleansed from all the
relics of sin.

2. But thou, o sinful Christian, because thou have not that revelation which
David had, to wit that our Lord has taken away thy sin, 2. Reg. 12.
Desire him to vvash thee clean, even from the malice of sin, yea and to
wash thee more amply, that is from the pain and relics of sin. Say unto
thy merciful God: o Lord how often have I wallowed in my filthy pleasures,
and in the foul puddle of sin, by which I have polluted body and soul, yea
the earth on which I have vvalked, and the air in which I have breathed; in so
much that I have defiled by sin the Image of God engraven in my soul, and
have caused my soul to savor so ill to thy divine senses, and to seem so
ugly to thy divine eyes, that thou have turned thy face from me.

3. And if it seem strange to any, that sin should pollute the soul, which
is of a spiritual, immortal, and incorruptible substance, he must know, that
then a thing is polluted or defiled when it is united or mixed with a baser
thing then it self: See S. Tho. 2.2 q 7. ar. 2. in corp.
then graced or embellished when it is mixed with a thing more noble then it
self. And so silver is defiled when it falls in the dirt, or into molte^
lead, but when a silver ring falls into molten gold, it is gilded and
graced; And seeing that by sin our soul auerteth it self from God, and
conuerteth and unites, and as it were mingleth it self by inordinate
affection with creatures, as corporal and beastly pleasures of the body, the
trash and pelf of the world, baser then she, and inferior to her, she is
contaminated and defiled, but when she conuerteth her self to God the creator
by charity and love, then is she graced and adorned, because then she is
united to a more noble substance then her self: And therefore as one can not
touch pitch, Eccl. 13
coals or other filthy things but he shall file his hands, so a sinner can
not touch creatures by inordinate affection, but he shall be defiled in soul.

4. S. Tho. 1.2. qu. 86. ar. 1. and 2.
Hence it is that Divines do affirm that every mortal sin leaves behind
it maculam a spott or blott, which blurreth, staineth, and defiles the soul,
and makes her odious in the sight of God. Wherefore God by Hieremie the
Prophet tells the Jewish Synagogue, which had defiled her self by many
sins and even by Idolatry, Hier. 2.
If thou should wash thy self with nitre and multiply to thy self the
herb borith, thou art spotted in thine iniquity before me. And of our
Blessed Lady, because she was free from all sin, at least actual, Cant. 4
the Spouse says in the Canticles, Thou art all fair, my love, and there is
not a spott in thee, Ephesians. 5
And S. Paul says that Christ so loved the Church that he delivered him self
to death for it, that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it by the lauer of
water in the word, that he might present to him self a glorious Church not
having spott or vvrinkle.

5. And this spott and filth of sin, is the filthiest of all filthes; for
corporal filthes do only pollute, and defile bodies, and cannot defile any
spiritual substance. And therefore if an Angel, or a man's soul should paste
through the most filthy puddle that is, it would not be defiled, and hence it
is that in a lepours body the soul of man is not a vvhitt contaminated; but
sin is so foul and filthy, that it defiled Lucifer and the Angels that
followed him in his rebellion against God, and it blurreth, spotteth and
polluteth our souls, as I have showed. And therefore God who has created all
things, even those which seem to us foul and unclean, and yet never defiled
his hands, and who is in all things by essence, power, and presence, S. Tho.
1 pa q. 8. ar. 3.
and yet is no more contaminated by them then the sun is when he shines on
the puddle or dunghill: yet if he could create or be Author of sin, he
should be contaminated, and therefore he can not be Author of it, because he
can not be contaminated.

6. From this filth David cries to be washed and cleansed: But what water, o
penitent David would thou have to wash and cleanse thee from this filth? the
filth of sin is so abominable, that neither the water of the Cistern of
Bethleem which thou once so greedily desiredst: nor the Probatica Pond, 1.
Para. 11. Joan. 5.4. Reg. 5. Luc. 4.
which being stirred by an Angel cured the corporal lame and blind, nor the
river of Jordan, in which Naaman was cleansed from his leprosy, can wash away
this filth of sin, or take out the stayne thereof. And therefore most
wisely, o Royal Prophet, thou specifiest none of these waters, but only
dema^dest that water and lauer which has force to wash out the filth of
sin, and leauest to God to find out the water, at which also by faith, thou
thy self aymedst.

7. And what is this lauer? it is the blood of the Lamb CHRIST JESUS which
he shedd for all sinners, Apoc. 1 1. Joan. 1.
and in which he has washed us from our sins. By virtue of this Blood, all
the sins that were ever remitted from the fall of Adam, have been vvashed,
and our souls have been cleansed from them: And therefore this lamb of God is
said to have been killed from the beginning of the world. Apoc. 13.
Not only because he was in figure killed in Abel, but also because all who
have had remission of their sins from the beginning of the world, have had
it by faith in Christ, and by virtue of his sacred blood which was shed for us.
O Lord, says David, wash me and rinse me in this holy bathe and lauer of thy
blood, that I may be cleansed from all fylth of sin, and appear grateful
hereafter to thy divine sight.

8. But although this sacred blood and passion of Christ be the general cause
of all remission of sins, yet there are many other particular causes, which
in virtue of that do also remitte sins; as Baptism, and other Sacraments in
the new Law, and the water of contrition in all Laws. And this lauer of
Christ's blood, David by faith forsawe, and desired to be washed and bathed in
it, and to be cleansed from the filth of sin by it.

9. We are defiled in general by twoe sins, to wit original and Actual or
personal sin; and because original sin is contracted not by our own
personal act or will, but by the will of our first parent Adam, Romans 5.
in whom as S. Paul says, All have sinned, therefore to wash out the fylth
of this sin, no personal act of ours is required (as children are not
capable of any such act,) but in the Law of nature, the faith of the parents
manifested by some external sign was sufficient, in the Law of Moses
circumcision, and in the new Law, Baptism does suffice. But because our
actual sins are committed by our own proper Wills, a lauer and Baptism of
contrition, called by the Divines Baptismus flaminis, baptism of the Spirit,
was ever in all Laws necessary. And for this water David cried when he said,
Wash me more amply from mine iniquity.

10. And almighty God out of compassion of the thirst David suffered in this
kind, stroke the rock of his stony heart hardened by sin and made the waters
of contrition to gush forth in that abundance and with that impetuositie, that
he says in an other place: Psalm. 118.
mine eyes have gushed forth issues of waters, and he will not weep once
only for his sins, he will weep day and night, and this lauer of tears
where in he desires to wash his soul, shall not be a torrent, which runs
impetuously, but for a time; it shall be an ever running fountain, Psalm. 6.
for says he I will every night wash my bed, I will water my couche with
tears. See Genebrard on this Psalm.
And the Hebrew text by an hyperboly explicateth yet more the abundance of his
tears, for whereas our vulgar Latin text has, Lauabo per singulas noctes
lectu^ meu^. I will every night wash my bed. The Hebrew has natare faciam. I
will make my bed swim with the floudes of my tears. S. Marie Magdalen
though beautiful in body, by sin was become so loathsome a creature in
soul, and in the sight of God, that she durst not look Christ in the face,
but Standing behind besides his feet, Luc. 7.
began to water his feet with tears, yet being bathed in this water she
became as white as driven snow. S. Peter what a sin did he wash away by this
lauer? He had denied his master Christ Jesus three times, and not at the
threatening of a Tyrant, but at the voice of a wooman and she a wench and an
handmaid, and he had also abiured him, Mat. 26 Mar. 14 Luc. 2.
with oaths and curses most unworthily and vngratfully, considering his
masters love unto him, and yet goeing forth and weeping bitterly, this great
sin was vvashed so clean away as if it had never been.

11. Say then, o sinful Wighte, unto thy merciful God, If David, Manasses,
Marie Magdalene, and other great sinners have been vvashed clean from their
sins, why should I dispare to be vvashed from the filth of my sins. I
Confess that I am a great sinner, and consequently defiled and polluted from
top to toe, but I desire thee, o Lord, to vvash me in the water of contrition,
which has virtue from thy blood, for then I make no doubt to be cleansed: I
cry o Lord with Hieremie the Prophet: Who will give water to my head,
Hier. 9
and to mine eyes a fountain of this water, that I may weep day and night,
For less will not serve to vvash my defiled soul? 1. Par. 11.
I cry with David, o that some man (Christ Jesus, God and man) would give me
water of this cisterne of Bethleem. Genesis 6.
This water of contrition is an other Noes flood which drowneth sins and
saves souls, to which water if the sinners of the world at that time had
had recourse, they had never been drowned in the deluge. It is an other read
sea, Exodus 14.
read with the blood of Christ, from which it has its virtue, which
drowneth the Egyptia^s, the devil and all his hellish troops of sins, but
saues souls and the true Israelites, by which out of Egipte, that is, out of
the state of sin, we pass to the land of promise, heaven, the home of our
soul, and the land of the living and blessed. This water is distilled in the
limbecke of our heart, by the Holy Ghost and the fire of charity, which makes
it to ascend to the eyes, and thence to Heaven, because it is: Joan. 4.
Aqua saliens in vitam aeternam, water which stringeth to life everlasting.

12. O Lord, I demand not with thy blessed virgin mother, for wine for the
Bride, I cry only for this water that vvasheth away the fylthe of sin,
cools the heat of concupiscence, mollifieth our stony hearts, and like an
heavenly rain makes fertille the soil of our soul, and causes it to bring
forth the flourishing plants and sweet herbs and flowers of all manner of
virtues, which sets a new gloss on our soul, and makes the Image of God
therein engraven to appear most amiable to God, and his Angels and Saints,
asswageth God his ire and indignation, and extinguisheth the fire of hell. Give
me this water o Lord, and I shall esteem it above the most precious vvines,
It shall be meat and drink unto me, and I shall say with our Royal Prophet:
Fuerunt mibi lacrymae mea panes die ac nocte: Psalm. 41.
my tears have been breads unto me day and night, and the grateful refection
of my soul.

13. And give me, o sweet God, a vvaterie ground above and a vvaterie beneath,
Iudie. 1
as Axa asked of Caleb. Water, I beseech thee, with this water of contrition
not only the eyes of my body but also the eyes of my foul, and not only
the inferior part of my soul but also the superior. If the eyes of my soul
and superior part be watered with this heavenly water, it is sufficient,
although the eyes of my body should be dry, but I desire thee to water both,
that not only my heart and eyes of my soul may weep, but that also the eyes
of my body may gush forth with tears, for that one helps the other, and
many times the sorrovv of the superior part redounds to the inferior, and
when the heart sorroweth the eyes shed forth tears. I desire not tears for
temporal losses, I defier to behold them with dry eyes, and if I should
weep never so much for such losses, weeping would not help me give me grace
to weep only for spiritual losses, for having offended thee by sin, for
having by sin lost thy grace, thy favor, yea life everlasting; because
tears shed for sin and spiritual losses are never in vain, are never
frustrated; because tears to obtain those favors are better orators then
words, and the eyes by tears do sooner persuade, then the mouth by words,
wherefore Hieremie the Prophet in his Threnes or Lamentations, wishes
Jerusalem then captiuated and desolate (and in her he speaks to every
sinful soul) to shed tears as a torrent by day and night, Hier^e. ^am. 2.
s^u Thren. 2.
to give no rest to her self, neither to let the aple of her eye be silent. I
desire of thee, o Lord, this torre^t, yea fountain of tears, which from the
heart uses to fall in to the eyes, that I may shed for my sins not a
fevve drops but a torrent, and not a torre^t only which runs for a time,
but a fountain also which runs perpetually: that I may cry as David did,
not only with mouth, and tongue, but with heart and eyes also, not only
with words, but also with tears? Wash me more amelie from my iniquity,
and cleanse me from my sin.

Quoniam iniquitatem meam ego cognosco, and peccatum meum contra me est semper.

Because I do know mine iniquity and my sin is before me alvvayes.


1. BEfore that I vvashed my self (says David) in the water of co^trition I
was a great sinner, but did not know nor acknovvledge as I ought to have
done, the greatenes of my sin, I was defiled yet savve not my own
filthynes; but since I have beholden and looked my self in this water, I see
my sins and I know mine iniquity and my sin is before me alvvaies. No
marvel then that God did not pardon David before he acknowledged his fault,
and no marvel that before his contrition of heart, he did not acknowledge it,
because his eyes were bleared and blinded with carnal lust, and so he did
not see nor know his sin; but after the tears of contrition, his eyes were
cleared, and then in this water, he savve his sin, and seeing it, he
acknowledged it, and acknovvledging it he asked pardon, and asking pardon, he
deserved it, and deserving it, he obtained it.

2. The vulgar Latin text has. Et peccatum meum contra me est semper; which
may be translated not only, and my sin is before me alvvayes, but also, and
my sin is alvvayes against me, as is were accusing me, yea and tormenting me
with the remorse and gnavving worm of conscience, which it engenders: And
indeed God has engraven in our hearts, and souls a conscience of sin,
which like a law dictateth unto us what is lawful, what unlawful, and
tells the thief and murderer that they sin against Justice, the
fornicatour that he offends against Chastity, the liar that he contradicts
the truth. The conscience is also a witness which accuses the sinner before
God even of his most secret sins: and whether he be in bed or at board, at
home or abroad, alone or in company, it still cries against him, guilty: And
like a Judge it condemns him, and like an executioner by remorse, it
tormenteth the delinquent, by day and by night: and in the night vexes him
with fearful dreams, in the day crosses his recreations and pastimes with
melancholicke dumpes, and mixeth his wine with water, that is his joy with
sorrow. So that as the murderer has always his murder and the Judge and
executioner before his eyes or imagination; so a sinner has no sooner
committed his sin, but conscience puts it before his eyes, and places it
also as an enemy against him. So that sin is at it were always in arms
against us, terrifying and threatening, and therefore the sinner should alvvaies
be in arms against it, detesting it, vvishing he had never committed it,
punnishing it by works of penance and satisfaction.

3. And here I note that David says, mine iniquity, my sin: signifying by
the Pronownes possessiue my and mine, that sin is the sinners possession, so
we say my land, my house, my gold my silver. But o the unhappy possession; by
possessing temporal goods, and riches we are rich and happy for this world,
but by possessing sin we are poor, not rich, being deprived of grace and
all spiritual riches of the soul, we are miserable, not happy, Sin being
the greatest misery that is. We possess sin, as a snake, or viper in our
bosom, or as a plague, or mortal sickness. And whereas we may leave or give
away our temporal lands, money and other things at our own pleasure, we can
not be rid of sin without Gods grace, and our much sorrovv, and as we take
possession of it with pleasure, we can not be dispossessed of it but by
sorrovve, and contrition of heart and many austerities of penance.

4. As David said that his sin was always before him, and against him, so
may every sinner say. Cain had no sooner killed his brother Abel, but his
conscience presented unto him his sin in that heinous manner, that he hung
down the head like a sheep byter, and (to use the phrase of the Scripture)
his countenance was fallen, Genesis 4.
and go he where he would, he could not put from his eyes the sight of his
sin, but it scarred him so, that he feared that every one he met would
kill him. The sons of Jacob after they had unnaturally sold their Brother
Joseph to the Ismaelites, Genesis 37
this their sin still crossed their sight, and whensoever any adversity
happened to them, they imputed it to this their sin, Genesis 42
saying: Worthily do we suffer these things, because we have sinned against
our Brother.

5. And some sinners when their sins present themselves before their eyes,
Genesis 5.
despair, as Cain did, but others so soon as their sins show themselves in
their ugly hew, do acknowledge them, and acknovvledginge them do cry to God
for mercy, knowing that his mercy is greater then all the sins of the
world. So David did, 2. Reg. 12.
who not only when Nathan the Prophet checked him for his murder of Vrias,
and adultery with Bersabee his wife, but in this psalm in every verse
almost, and in all his life time cried peccaui, and even in the night when his
eyes should have slepte, he made them awake to gush forth tears, and to
water his bed with them.

6. So S. Peter's denial of his Master came often into his mind, Niceph. lib.
2. c. 37. Baron anno Christi 69.
and especially when the cock crowed, and moved him to such tears, that it is
written of him that his eyes were read with often weeping and his face
furrovved with the trickling down of his tears. And so, o Merciful God, let
my sins be alvvayes before mine eyes, to humiliat me, and to make me know
mine own frayltie, to make me take heed for hereafter, to make me abhor
these mo^sters, to make me deteste these vipers, to make me cry often to thee
for mercy to make me lament my misery, and to endeavor always, to pacify
thee for my offense, and to satisfy thee by works of penance for the
injuries I have done against thee.

Tibi soli peccaui and malum coram te feci vt iustificeris in sermonibus tuis
and vincas cu^ iudicaris.

To thee only have I sinned and have done evil before thee, that thou may
be justified in thy words, and may overcome when thou art judged.


1. I am an absolute King, and sovereign Prince, made so by thee, o Lord, and
by thy goodness, and authority, and so I have no judge nor superior on earth,
whom I need to fear; or who can call me to an account, or punish or pardon
me; and so, in this sense, I have sinned against thee only, because none, but
thou, can call me to an account, none but thou can Judge, punish, or pardon me,
and therefore to thee only I confess, my sin, and cry peccaui, and of thee
only I crave pardon.

2. I confess I have offended against Vrias in causing him to be murdered, and
against him and his Wife in violating her, yea and against Ioab also in
commanding him to expose Vrias to danger: 2. Reg. 11.
yet thee only I have offended principally, because I have transgressed thy
law which forbids murder, adultery and all sin* yet thee only I have
offended principally, because that, which most aggrauateth my sin, is thy
divine majesty which I have not feared, thy divine goodness which I have not
regarded thy infinite power, which I have contemned, though thou only
could by thy omnipotency annihilate me, by thy Justice punish me even with
hell fire, and by thy goodness and mercy pardon me. And so although I have
sinned against men, yet my sin especially showed its malice, in that by it I
have offended thee so great and so good a God, who have created me and all men,
who have redeemed me and all men, and who have made me in particular King of
thy people, and have taken the crown from Saul his head to put it on mine, and
have deprived his family of the scepter to bestow it on mine.

3. To thee only have I sinned because Vrias knew not of the wrong I did him,
Bersabee was consenting, and not offended, my sin was done secretelie in my
secret chamber, none but thou, o Lord, did know of it, and so in this sense
also I offended thee only. But, o inconsiderat wretch that I was, who
chose to, commit this sin because men saw me not, vvheras I should have
feared to commit it because thou saw me, and should have more feared to
commit it before thine eyes, then in the sight of all the world: But thou have
dealt Justly with me; because the sin which I thought to conceal from the
world, thou have diuulged to all the world, according as thou toldst me by
the Prophet Nathan. Thou have done this secretly, 2 Reg. 12.
but I will do this word in the sight of Israel and in the sight of the sun.

4. And thou Christian who have sinned with David, say also with him. To thee
only I have sinned and do^^ evil before thee. That is, to thee only I have
sinned principally, for although I have sinned against men; as against my
superiors by disobedience and breach of their commandments, against my
neigbour by detracting from his good name, stealing his goods, or killing or
wounding his body, and against mine own body also by carnal sins, in
which, as S. Paul's says, we sin against our body, 1. Cor. 6.
yea and against mine own soul also in killing it spirituallie by mortal
sin, which depriueth it of the life of grace, because as the wise man says,
Sap. 1.
the mouth that lies (to wit perniciously and to the notable dommage of an
other) kills the soul: Yet in all these sins I sinned principally against
thee who forbadst these things, and my sin is much more aggrauated in that
it is against thee and thy infinite majesty, then in that it is against men of
whatsoever dignity they be, the circomstance of the person against whom we
sin, aggravating the sin. Say also, o Christian soul unto thy God: To the
only I have sinned and done evil before thee, When in my secret chamber, or
in the dark night I sinned, and hid my sins from the sight of men, but not
frou thy all-seeing eyes: To thee only I sinned when in the secret cabinet
of my heart, by thought and consent, resolution or will to sin, I offended
thy divine Majesty, for, voluntas reputatur pro facto, the will before God is
reputed for the deed: To thee only I then sinned: because thou only vvast
conscious of these my sins, which I could co^ceale from men, but could not
hide them from thy all-pearcing eyes.

5. But seeing that, o Lord, in all my sins even those that I committed
against men, I have principally offended against thy divine Majesty, how
shall I dare to appear before thee, and thy dreadful Tribunal, who as thou
art the party cheeflie of (...), so thou art the Judge, and witness, and
accuser of all. Thou art the supreme Judge, even of Kings and Emperors,
because thou art the sovereign Lord, and King even of Kings. How shall I
avoid such a Judge who is so wise that he can not be deceived, so upright
that he will not be corrupted? how shall I defend my self against such a
witness, who knows the truth, and never says but the truth? how shall I
excuse my self against such an accuser, who because he knows all can prove
all he says? I will therefore confess all, and so avoid all: because
confession of the fault, is a vomit which makes the sinner cast up all the
fylth of sin, it is a lancing of the sore of sin which makes the filthy
matter run out; confess before men and thou art condemned, but confess
before God, and thou shall be repriued, yea quite pardoned.

6. I will lay open my faults, that by thee (o Lord) they may be covered, I
will confess all that thou may pardon all, I will accuse my self, that
thou may excuse me, I will Judge and condemn my self, that thou may not
condemn me, according to the promise made by thine Apostle, 1. Cor. 11.
If we did Judge our selves we should not be Judged, that is, condemned

7. I will make mine own process against my self, and that shall be to
accuse my self, to bear witness against my self, and to condemn my self;
and for my self I will plead only. Miscrere, have mercy: vvash me more
amply from mine iniquity; that thou may be justified in thy words, and
may overcome, when thou are Judged. That is, that thou having promised
mercy and forgiveness to all repentant sinners, may justify and show thy
self to keep thy promise in forgiuinge me, who do so hartelie repent my
self of my sins, that I rue the time and moment that ever I sinned; and so
may overcome, when thou art presumptuously Judged, not to have kept this
promise. Or when thou art Judged to be so just in punishing sinners, as that
thou are not also merciful in pardoning them, when from the heart the sinner
cries for mercy, thou may overcome. Or else (which perhaps was also David's
meaning) pardon me, o Lord, and do not forsake me and my family for this
sin, as thou forsookest Saul and his family, for his disobedience: that if
any presume to Judge that thou vvilt also forsake and cast me of as thou did
him, not vvithstanding that thou have promised to establish the Kingdom of
Judah and Israel in my family, thou by pardoning this my fault, may prove
thy self true in thy promise, and so may overcome, Psalm. 88
those rash Judges, Thou have sworn to David thy servant: Ibidem.
for ever will I prepare thy seed. Thou have said; I will put his seed for
ever and ever: Ibidem.
and his Throne as the days of heaven. Ibidem.
And again, once have I sworn to my holy, if I lie to David, his seed shall
continue for ever. And again: Our Lord has sworn truth to David, and he
will not disappoint it: of the fruit of thy vvo^be I will set upon thy seat.
Keep these promises, o Lord, notvvithstanding my sin that thou may
overcome those, who think that for my sin thou vvilt forsake me and my
family. Or lastly, when any do rashly Judge that thou sometimes punishest
sinners in this life to rigorously (as thou punishedst David seuerly, partly in
him self, permitting his son Absalon to rebel against him, and to abuse his
wives and concubines, partly in his children and Royal issue, Thou may
overcome when thou art so Judged, thy judgments being often secret, never
unjust.

8. And say thou, o Christian sinner unto thy God; I for my part, o Lord, do
confess that thou art Lord of life and death, and may without any injustice
punish or annihilate even the Innocent at thy pleasure, and no man can justly
say why did thou so? For, Sap. 12.
as the wiseman says. Who shall impute it to thee, if the nations perish
which thou have made? much more may thou punish those who dare offend thy
so great majesty. One mortal sin deserves an eternal Hell, much more does
it deserve all temporal punishment of this life, and therefore, o Lord, say
what temporal punishment thou vvilt on me, I shall never complain of thy
justice, but shall think thou dealest favorably with me, so thou sparest me
eternally. Hic ure, hic seca, vt in aternum parcas: Here burn me, here cut and
lance me, that thou may spare me eternally.

9. I desire thee, Sweet Lord, to give me true penance, which may quite
vvash away my mortal sins, and change the eternal pain due to them into
te^porall pain, and although temporallie thou punish me for it, as thou
punishedst David, yea though thou should chastise me all my life time, I
shall cry. Psalm. 118.
Iustus es Domine and rectum iudicium tuum: Thou art just, o Lord, and thy
judgment is right. And seeing I have begun to speak unto thee, Genesis 18
though I be but dust and ashes, and have adue^tured to beg of thee that
repentance which may wash away the malice of my mortal sins, and the
eternal pain due unto them, I will not be affrayd to ask of thee also, thou
being so liberal a Lord, such a repentance, such a flood of tears, as thou
gave to that penitent sinner Marie Magdalen, by which I may not only vvash
away all the malice of my sins, but also all the pain eue^ temporal due
unto the^: And if after both my sin and pain due to it be quite abolished,
thou shall think it good to punish me for that I have sinned, I shall not
complain of thy severity, but shall kiss thy rod, as being laid on by a
loving Father; for that will be for my greater caveat, and better warning, for
my increase of grace, merit, and virtue, as also for my greater security. Yea
I will be content to weep daily for my sins forgiven, and to exercise my
self in works of penance and satisfaction, as fasting, prayers, and
almesdeedes, and according to the counsel of the wiseman, Eccl. 50.
of sin forgiven I will not be without fear. But following the example of
S. Peter, S. Marie Magdalene, and other penitent sinners, and conforming my
self to my Savior JESUS CHRIST, who though he never did nor could committ
the least sin, yet led a most austere life: I will spend the rest of my
days in weeping, and satisfying for my sin past, though peradventure quite
pardoned.

Ecce enim in iniquitatibus conceptus sum, and in peccatis concepit me matter
mea.

For behold I was conceived in iniquities, and my Mother conceived me in sins.


1. THat I may the better facilitate my pardon, o Lord, and induce thee the
more easelie to mercy, I desire thee (says David) to consider of what stock
and and race I am descended. If the root of the tree be infected, sound fruit
can not be expected of it, if the sown seed be tainted, the corn must needs
taste of it, if the fountain be muddie, the river can not run clear, if the
foundation be ill laid, the house builded upon it, can not choose but totter
with every blast of wind, and if one be borne lame, he can not but halt or go
awrye all his life time. So it is with me, o my merciful God, the very root
and beginning of my life was infected with original sin, in the which I
was conceived: pardon me then if my works, which are my fruits be sower
and infected with sin, they proceeding from this infected and infecting
root. Quis potest facere mundum de immundo conceptum semine. Job 14.
Who can make clean him that is conceived of unclean seed. The foundation of
my life, o Lord, was ill laid, not by thee, for thou laydst a fundation of an
innocent and happy life in Paradise, by original justice, but by Adams sin
who being our head infected all his members and being our first parent
transfused his sin, and the infection with it to all his posterity; Pardon
me then, o merciful God, if I shake at every tentation of the world, flesh
and devil, yea if I fall at the puffes and blastes of these vvyndes, my
foundation being not firmly laid; And seeing I was borne, yea co^ceiud lame,
and crooked even in soul, not through thy default (for thou createdst Adam and
us in him, right and upright in soul and body, in so much that by original
justice his body was subject, and obedient to his soul, his sensuality to
reason, and the inferior part of his soul to the superior) but through Adams
sin, who brake this goodly frame, and made the first discord in this
heavenly harmony, And vvheras thou madst man (the first man) right, he has
entangled him self with infinite questions, and oppositions betwixt reason and
sensuality, out of which, we his children can not extricate our selves. How
then, o Lord, can thou expecte of me that am borne lame and crooked, to walk
so right in the way of thy co^mandeme^ts, as never to halt, never to stumble;
never to go awrye, never to swerve from the rule of reason, and thy eternal
Law? Consider, o Lord, that this original sin, by dispoiling me of
original justice (which was the bridle and curb of sensuality, and which in
Adam, before his sin, was prepared for me) has caused in me a great
pronenesse and propension to sensuality, to sin and vice, which being hard
to resist may make some excuse for my manifold sin.

2. And thou, o Christian penitent sinner, allege also with David thy
pronenesse to sin, for thou wast conceived in sin as deeply as he, and
consequently have contracted thereby the like prope^sio^ to sin. For this
may induce thy merciful God, in that respect, to be the more forward to
pardon thee. The Angels that fell by sin, could not allege this excuse,
because they had not this pronenesse to sin, and so deserved not mercy, but
seeing thou art conceived and borne in sin, and have contracted this
propensio^ to sin, which is called fomes peccati, and which stirs up to
sin, cry unto thy Lord, Have mercy on me, o God, for behold I am conceived
in sin, and thereby I have contracted a great pronenesse to sin, which with
thy ordinary grace I can hardly resist, and without it not at all: Have
mercy then upon me, o merciful Father, and excuse thy childs sin, to which
he was so much inclined.

3. I have, I confess, so much yielded to this my propension, that whereas
thou have given me reason, and grace also sufficient to resist this propensio^
yet I yielding to it, did like the prodigal son, lavish out prodigally my
child's portion both of reason and grace, and gave my self to all
licentiousnes: But thou o merciful God, art not less loving the^ was that
Father, and I, as I hope, no less penitent then that his son. Luc. 15
For, as he did, so do I confess, that I have sinned against heaven and
earth, and am not vvorthie to be called thy son: And, as he did, so do I
return unto thee again by sorrow and repentance. Embrace me then o Lord, and
receive me in to grace, as that Father did his son, and be not thou, o
Eternal Father, inferior to that Temporal Father, in mercy and compassion;
and show thy self as thou art, more prone to mercy, then I am to sin, more
prone to pardon, then I was to offend.

Ecce enim veritatem dilexisti, incerta and occulta sapientiaetuae manifestasti
mihi.

For behold thou have loved truth, the uncertain and hidden things of thy
wisdom thou have made manifest unto me.


1. THou have, o Lord, loved verity, truth and sincerity of heart in me, and
that before my fall) I was a sincere and true lover of thee, and thy law (no
double dealer in any my words or actions,) thou have liked in me, and for that
cause thou have revealed unto me many things uncertain to men (though not to
thee) yea altogether hidden to them, to wit the mystery of the Incarnation,
thy life and death, Resurrection and Ascension, which are the verities of the
figures of the old law under which I live, and which verities thou love, o
Lord before all those shadows, and figures: for partly by faith, partly by
spirit of prophecy and revelation, I have had such knowledge of future
things, that there is almost no mystery of the new law, no promise made unto
it, which thou have not revealed unto me, and which I have not forseene, and
fortold also in my psalms. And so thou, who have done me so many favors,
vvilt not, I hope, deny me that grace, without which all the rest of thy
benefits will be cast away, and will not any vvhitt pleasure me, but will
rather be to my greater damnation. And what is that? it is remission of my
sins, without the which to have been good will not benefit me, without the
which the guifte of prophecy and miracles, and all other guiftes will not save
me, but rather aggrauate my sins, and augment my da^natio^. Wherefore, o
Lord, knowing my self to be a great sinner, I still cry unto thee, as I did
in the beginning of this my penitential psalm. Have mercy on me, o God,
according to thy great mercy.

2. Or (says this Royal Prophet and penitent sinner) I might, o Lord, in some
sort cover my fault, and extenuate and excuse my sins, because (as I have
said in the precedent verse) I was conceived in iniquities, and in a great
pronenesse and propensio^ to sin: but I know thou love truth, that is a
sincere heart and a true tongue that confesses the truth. And therefore I
sincerlye confess, that this pronenesse to sin does not quite excuse me from
sin, because it could not enforce me against my will, I by faith in the
Messiah ( who is the way verity and life, and by his life and death which was
revealed to me, and by grace from his death and passion, which was not wanting
to me) having had grace sufficient, by which, maugre this pronenesse to sin,
I might have resisted and overcome all tentation to sin; And therefore I will
not excuse my self by my pronenesse to sin, but ingenuouslie, sincerlie, and
in verity confessing it, I fly only to thy goodness and pronenesse to mercy.

3. And o Christian soul say thou also with David unto thy Lord: I
acknowledge that I have received many benefits and favors at thy hands. Thou
have created me of nothing, and made me of nothing something, and not what
thing soever, but a reasonable creature, resembling thee by the image of thy
self, which thou have drawn and engraued in me. I by sin, as I confess
have marred, what thou have made, and have blurred, slurred, blotted and
defaced this thy so glorious image. But, what o Lord! will thou therefore
aba^don thy creature, thy own handworke? To have created me is a great
benefit; but if thou leave me to my self, and in the misery into which sin
has plunged me, this thy benefit of creation will be to me no benefit,
because better it is not to have been, then to be miserable, as sin makes me
now, and will make me more miserable herafter in hell, into which it will
tumbleme, unless thou first forgiuest and remittest it. Thou then, o Lord, who
have done so much for me as to make me, vouchsafe to renew me, and to set a
new gloss and hew on me by thy grace, which may vvash away my sin, and
rid me of this misery.

4. Thou have not only created me, but also conserved me in the being thou
gave me by creation, yea thou have preserved me from many corporal dangers:
And great are these benefits in themselves, but unless thou remitte my sin
which makes me miserable, better had it been for me, that thou should not
have conserved me, but rather annihilated me, and so prevented this my misery;
better had it been for me, that thou had not preserved me from corporal
dangers of fire, water and the like, then to preserve and conserve me, and so
give me the time to fall in to a greater damage, to wit of sin, which
offends thee, makes me miserable, and exposes me to hazard of hell it self.

5. Thou have heretofore justified me and cleansed me from original sin by
Baptism, and from Actual sin by contrition, the Sacrament of penance, and
other sacraments: Great are these benefits, but if thou do not again
justify me by thy grace, and remitte these my last sins, it will be little
benefit to me: rather thy former grace of justification will aggrauate my
sins committed after it; and these my sins having deprived me of the grace
of justification, have mortified also my former merits done in grace, and so
all will be lost, unless thou again take mercy on me, and again remitte my
sins.

6. Thou have redeemed me, and did bind thy self to thy eternal Father to
pay no less (o the dear bargain) for my ransom, then thy precious blood and
death: And will thou now cast me of who cost thee so dearly? Truly all this
is lost in me, and I with it, unless thou again forgive me, and by thy grace
apply this price paid for me unto me, and so again pardon me.

7. Thou have called me to be a Christian, and have revealed unto me, as thou
did to David many hidden mysteries, as the sacred Trinity, the son of God
incarnate, his life, death, Resurrection, and Ascension, and many other
mysteries, the secrets of thy wisdom, which thou did hide from the
Philosophers and Sages of the world. And have thou done all this for me, and
vvilt not do this one thing for me (to wit pardon my sins) without which
all the rest will not profit me, but rather will augme^t my damnation? Thou
said, o Lord, Matthew. ^. Luc. 5.
that thou camst not to call the just, but sinners to penance. And behold I
confess my self a great and grievous sinner, and I harken to thy call,
desiring thee to harken to my petition, which is, have mercy on me according
to thy great mercy, which I hope thou vviltt not deny, thou having bestowed
so many other benefits on me, which yet are all lost, unless thou add this
also unto them.

8. Or else I also, o Lord, might aleadge with David, that I was conceived and
borne in sin, and thereby contracted a propension to sin. And I might add
thereunto my corrupt nature, mine evil complexion and disposition, my evil
customs, and ill company, which have allured me to sin: but because I know
thou love truth, and sincerity of heart I confess ingenuouslie, and I truly
acknovvledge, that notwithstanding all this, I might with thy grace (which is
never wanting to them that demand it, or will accept and use it) have
resisted all these allureme^ts and incitements to sin; and therefore I will
not use any such excuse (for these might excuse (as divines say) A tanto, non a
toto, from part, but not from all) but plainly truly and sincerlie
confessing my grievous sin, I fly only to thy mercy, and under the shadovv
or wings of that, I desire only to shroude my self. All I have to say is
peccaui, as David said, and I beseech thee to speak those comfortable words to
me, which thou vtteredst to him, 2. Reg 12.
And our Lord has taken away thy sin.

Asperges me Hyssopo and mundabor, lauabis me and super niuem dealbabor.

Thou shall sprinckle me with hyssope and I shall be cleansed, thou shall wash
me, and I shall be whiter then snow.


1. I Cry not (says David) to Moses, nor Aaron, nor the Preistes of the old
law, under which I live, but to thee, o Eternal son of God, God and man,
the Messiah and Redeemer of the world, to sprinkle, and wash me, and cleanse
me from the fylthe of my sins; They could vvash the body from legal
immundicities, but not from the fylthe of sin, from which I desire to be
cleansed; nay they could not cure the corporal leprosy, but only could
pronounce a declaratiue sentence, Leuit. 14.
when it was healed: but thou can even heal; and cleanse my soul from the
leprosy and fylthe of sin, and therefore my hope is that thou vvilst
sprinkle me, not with the Cedar wood, Leuit. 14.
scarlet, Number. 19. Vide Augu. to 4. q. 33. super Numer.
and hyssope dipped in the blood of the immolated sparow, nor with the ashes
of the red cow, but with the blood of thy sacred human nature, ruddie by
its passion, and prefigured by those figures, by this blood shed in thy
passion, and sprinkled by the means of the humble hyssope of the cross, I
hope thou shall sprinkle me, and I shall be whiter then the snow.

2. In this blood is my hope, because this only can take out the stain of
sin, this only can wash away the fylthe of sin, wherewith my soul is
defiled. The blood of goats and oxen, and such like sacrifices sprinkled
(says David) can vvash away legal immundicities, but it can not vvash away
the fylthe of sins, but thy blood, o Blessed Savior, can sanctify and
mundifie our souls from all filth of sin.

3. I forsee, says David, by faith in Christ, that by the Sacraments of
Baptism and penance in the new law, and by co^trition in all laws, souls
are vvashed from the filthiness of sin, but yet by the blood also of the
lamb Christ Jesus, from which they take their virtue. Thy blood, o Blessed
Savior, is the general cause, they are particular causes appointed to apply
that: thy blood and passion is the principal moral cause of grace and
remission of sins, they are but instrume^tall causes, which work in virtue
of that principal.

4. And although now by wallovving my self in the puddle of sin, I am in
soul more foul, then the hog that vvalloweth himself in the mire, yet this
lauer of thy blood, o Lord, will vvash me so clean, that I shall be whiter
then driven snow. And although my sins were as scarlet, Isa. 1.
they shall be made white as snow. And if they be red as vermilion they
shall be white as wool: and my soul vvatred with this blood, and heavenly
rain, which rayned out of the cloud of thy sacred human nature, shall be
made fertile, and apt to bring forth the green plants, and sweet herbs
and flovvers of all manner of virtue, and bathed in this bathe it shall recover
its former luster and beauty of grace, which it had lost by sin, and of a
vessel of base service which it yielded to the world, flesh, and Devil, it
shall be a vessel of honor ( Because take away the rust from silver, Prou.
25.
and there shall come forth a most pure vessel) and a goodly piece of plate,
fit to be set on thy cup-boord, o Lord, and to be served in at that table in
Heaven, where the Angels are vvaiters, and the blessed are commensalls, and thy
divinity is the viande on which they feed by clear vision and fruition, for
all eternity.

5. And thou, o penitent Christian, confess with David, that by sin thou
art slurredd and defiled more then the sovve vvashed in volutabro luti, 2 Pet.
2.
in the wallowing of mire, and so, as thou need to cry with David to be
sprinkled with the blood of the immaculate lamb Christ Jesus, by the means
of the humble and contemptible hyssope of the cross. The blood of Goats and
oxen and the ashes of an heifer being sprinkled, sanctifyeth the polluted to
the cleansing of the flesh, how much more has the blood of Christ, Heb. 9.
who by the Holy Ghost offered himself unspotted unto God, cleansed our
conscience from dead works to serve the living God? This lauer of this blood I
desire because it cle^aseth the soul from dead works, that is deadly sins
which bring death to the soul: Sprinkle then and vvash me, o Lord, with this
blood, Apoc. 7.
that I maybe on of those happy ones, who have washed their robes, and made
them white in the blood of the lamb. For whereas my soul by sin is ugly
in thy sight, and therefore forsaken of thee, and divorced from thee, and
betrothed to the Devil; after she shall be vvashed in this lauer, and restored
to her former beauty, which she received by baptism, she may break with
the Devil, and with all that is contrary to thy will and pleasure, and may
be made again a grateful spouse unto thee, vvorthie thy love in this life,
and thy eternal imbracementes in the next.

Auditui meo dabis gaudium and latitiam, and exultabunt ossa humiliata.

To my hearing thou shall give joy and gladness, and the bones humbled shall
rejoice.


1. ANd when thou have forgiven me my sins, and cleansed my soul from the
fylth of them, then shall the remorse and worm of conscience (the brood of
sin) be killed, and my conscience no more gnawed with it, but instead of it
a great calmenes and quietness, yea a gladness of heart shall follow, which
shall be a continual banquet to my soul, because as the wiseman says, A
secure mind, Prou. 15.
is as it were a continual feast: and the ears of my soul, shall alvvayes
hear those comfortable words, which by thy Prophet Natha^ thou vtterdst unto
me: ^. Reg. 12.
And our Lord has taken away thy sin; then, to the ears of my
understanding thou shall give joy and gladness, and then to them nothing shall
sound not melodious, nothing not grateful, nothing not comfortable, which
shall so comfort my soul, that my bones humbled, that is the forces and powers
of my soul, which were debilitated and dejected, and which were even faynte
with fear of thy judgments, shall rejoice, and shall recover their
spiritual forces and strength again: by which I shall be made constant and
courageous to resist all tentations, and to persiste for ever hereafter in thy
service, and so ever enjoy the joy and gladness of heart, with which thou
feedest and refreshest all thy devoted friends and servants.

2. Demand thou also, o penitent sinner, with David the joy and gladness of
heart and conscience, in lieu of the remorse and gnawing worm bredde by
sin, which continually tormenteth the conscience. For if ever thou possess
this calm of conscience and joy of heart (which God his Spirit imparteth
when it gives testimony, that is a moral certitude, to our spirit, and
conscience, that we are the sons of God, if sons, heirs also, Romans 8.
heirs truly of God, and cohey^es of Christ:) then the yoke of CHRIST will
seem sweet, and the burden of his law easy, and his service honor and
pleasure: then fasting will seem feasting, prayer will never seem long, In
almsdeeds we shall seem rather to receive, then to give: at least it will
seem beatius ^are, quam accipere, a more blessed thing to give, Act. 20
then to take: Then virtue will appear in its own luster, amiable, and vice,
though seasoned with never so much corporal pleasure, will seem brutish,
ugly, and beastly. O Lord, let me never loose this joy and gladness, by virtue
of which my bones, and spiritual forces of my soul humbled and weakened by
sin, may rejoice and receive their forces again, and I thereby may walk
cherfullie in the ways of thy commandments, and so vvalking, may carry this
joy and gladness of heart (grounded in grace and the observations of thy
commandments) with me to Heaven, and even to those eternal joys, which
there are laid up in store for all those that depart hence with Joy and
gladness, of conscience, deuoid of all sin.

Auerte faciem tuam a peccatis meis: and omnes iniquitates meas dele.

Turn away thy face from my sins: and wipe away all mine iniquities.


1. ANd after my conscience shall have enjoyed this calm and quietness, after
the storm of sin shall be appeased, which made debate betwixt thee and me,
and incensed me against thee by malice, and provoked thee against me by anger;
I beseech thee, o Lord, says David, to turn away for hereafter thy face from
my sins. There is no child that has committed a fault, but fears the eyes
and face of his Father, there is no scholar that has played the trewant, who
dreadeth not the sight of his Master, no thief that quaketh not at the sight
of the Judge; no marueill then, if David feared the stern countenance of God,
he being his Father, whom he disobeyed, his Master, whom he had neglected,
his Judge, whom he had slighted, and therefore he had reason to desire God to
turn away his face from his sins.

2. I know, says David, my sins can not be hidden from thy all-seeing eyes,
which reach to the sight of all things past, present and future: But yet I
desire thee to turn away thy frowning and angry countenance from them, and
not to be displeased any more with me for them, and to lay aside all
cogitation of punishing me for them. Thou still remembrest the most penitent
sinners sins, and offenses, but yet since they were washed away by the
tears of contrition, and remitted, and pardoned by thy grace and mercy, thou
do not remember the^ so, as to be displeased with the penitent sinner for
the^, or so as to have the thought of punishing him, at least eternally. Thou
see still the penitent sinners sins, though long since remitted, but thou
art no more displeased with him for the^; nor do thou think of punishing
him at least eternally for the^. Thou look on him still and his sins past,
but thou look not on him with an angry, but with an amiable look; And in
this sense says David I desire thee after my sins are forgiven, and after
the joy of conscience which follows their forgiveness, to turn away thine
angry countenance from me and the^, not to be any more displeased with me for
the^, nor to think of punishing me at least eternally for the^, but to be
have thy self toward me hereafter, as though thou did no more remember
the^, as though thy face and eyes wese turned from them: and so to love me
hereafter, so to behold me, and with such a mild aspect and countenance, as
though I had never sinned, for so thou beholdest all truly penitent sinners,
and turning away thy angry face from me, and behoulding me with a mild
countenance, wype away all my iniquities.

3. Thou promisedst, o sweet Lord, Ezech. 18.
by the Prophet Ezechiel that if the impious shall do penance of all his
sins, etc. ehou wilt not remember them, that is, so, as to punish them, at
least eternally. Forget, o Lord, my sins also in the same manner. Thou
promisedst by thy Prophet Micheas, Michea 7.
that thou will cast our sins into the bottom of the sea, that is, of the
sea of thy mercy, that they may be seen no more, cast my sins into this
sea, that they may be drowned and hidden from thy face. Thou did cast all the
sins of Ezechias behind thy back, Isai: 38
cast also mine and turn thy face from them.

4. I also o Lord (say so o penitent sinner) have sinned with David, and I
fear with him to appear before thy face, or to come in thy sight or presence:
And therefore, as my first Parents Adam and Eve did, Genesis 3.
I desire to hyde my self from thee, if it might be in some bush or thicket:
Genesis 4.
and as Cain had no sooner sinned but his countenance was abated and fallen, so
I guilty of many and grievous sins, dare not look thee in the face: I count
my self with Manasses unworthy to look up to the height of Heaven, Orat.
Manaes. Lucae 18.
and with the penitent Publican I dare not so much as to lift up my eyes
toward Heaven, where thou art. Wherefore, o Lord I cry to thee, with David,
to turn thy face from my sins: It is not convenient that thy Divine eyes
should cast their light and beams on so vile obiectes; It is not convenient
they should look on such filthiness, least they provoke thee to disdain, to
Indignation, and anger; remember them no more so as to be displeased with me
for them, remember them no more, so as to punish me, at least eternally, for
them: but as thou remembrest S. Marie Magdalenes sins, and yet since her
repentance art not depleased with her, nor do punish her for them: so deal
with me, and in this sense, turn thy face from my sins, and behave thy self
toward me.

5. But let mine own eyes, o Lord, and cogitations be ever fixed on my sins,
not to approve the^, not to take delight in them, nor yet thereby to despair
of thy mercy toward me, but as often as I think of them, to deteste and
abhor them, to humble my self, and to take notice of mine own frayltie by
the^, to think into what danger of damnation they brought me, and how
grateful I should be to thee, who have delivered me from this danger; To take
heed hereafter least I fall again into them, to weep for them, and to cry
thee mercy for them, so often as I think on them, and by so fixing mine eyes
and cogitations on them, to cause thee, to turn thy face and Divine eyes from
them, and by thy grace and mercy, to wipe away all mine iniquities.

Cor mundum crea in me Deus, and Spiritum rectum innoua in visceribus meis.

Create a clean heart in me o God, and renew a right Spirit in my bowels.


1. THere is no merit or desert in me, o Lord, says David on which, as on a
subject thou may work my Justification from sin, and cleanenesse of heart;
but as thou createdst the whole world of nothing, so thou must create a clean,
right, and just heart in me of nothing that is mine; that is of no precedent
merit of mine, because the grace of justification by which my heart is to be
clea^sed from sin, is not given for any precedent good work or deserte of
mine. For if by grace, Romans 11
I be Justified then not by works, otherwise grace were not grace, no free
gift, but a reward.

2. The alms I gave to the poor, the fasting wherewith I chastised my body,
my many prayers then made to thee; o Lord, and whatsoever good work I did
whilst I was in the state of mortal sin, were dead works, the works of a
dead man, dead in soul by sin, and so could not merit my Justification, and
therefore having nothing in me, which could merit my Justification, and
cleanenesse of heart, thou, o Lord out of thy mercy, and for the merit of thy
sacred passion, must justify me, and not for any thing in me: and so thou must
create my heart, thou must create me a new creature of nothing of mine, but
only of thine, that is of thy grace and mercy. A sinner as a sinner is no
creature of God, and therefore in the Canticle Benedicite, where all creatures,
even to winds, tempests, dew, snow, yea and brute beasts, are invited to
praise and bless God, the sinner is not invited, because he, as a sinner, is
no creature of God, but a mo^ster of his own perverse will, yea a nothing,
sin being no real thing; and if it be true, as it is most true, which the
wiseman says, fear God and observe his commandementes, ^cclesiastes. 12.
for this is every man: then a sinner who is not this, because he nether
fears God, nor observes his commandments, must be no man, nothing: and
consequently, if God will make him of a sinner just, and an obseruer of his
commandments, he must make him of nothing, and therefore David uses the
word create, which signifies a productio^ of nothing, as when God created the
world of nothing; And seeing that as cold is not expelled but by heat, nor
darkness but by light, nor any contrary, but by its contrary, my heart, says
David, can not be freed from the darkness of sin but by the light of grace,
nor from the filth of sin but by the clean, and cleansing quality of grace,
and therefore I desire thee, o Lord (says he) to create in me this grace of
nothing of mine, that thereby my heart may be mu^dified, and renewed.

3. A perverse heart is abominable to our Lord, says the wise man, Prou. 11.
and therefore, o Lord, create in me a new heart, which shall be clean, and
pleasing unto thee: my old heart was become by sin old, and was clothed in
the old habit of the old man the first Adam, and the first sinner of me^: take
this oldnesse of sin from me and from my heart, and create in me a new heart,
a clean heart.

4. O Lord, thou promisedst that thou would give to thy people a new heart,
Ezech. 36.
and would put a new spirit in the midst of them, and would take away the
stony heart out of their flesh, and give them a fleshy heart. This promise I
challenge, o Lord, and this heart I desire, mine old heart hitherto was by
sin foul and unclean, give me a clean heart, It was by sin become as
hard as a stone, not apt to receive thy good inspirations, nor pliable to any
good, give me for hereafter a fleshie heart, a soft heart, mollified by thy
blood, and by the waters of contrition, an heart as soft as wax, easy to be
formed and figured by thy Divine hand, and to be framed to what thou will, apt
to receive thy Divine inspirations, apt to melte in thy love, apt to be moved
passionatlie for mine own sins and compassionatlie for the sins and
miseries of others. Give me a new heart, a clean heart, clean washed from the
abominable filth of sin, by the water of grace, which flows from thy holy
passio through the channelles of the Sacraments.

5. Demand thou also with, David, o penitent sinner, a clean and a new heart.
Say unto thy God; Thou command me o merciful God, by the wise Solomon,
Prou. 4
with all guard to keep my heart, because life proceeds from it: but because
I have not well looked to it, nor have set a watch, or guard over it by
continual vigilancie, I desire thee to take it to thy care, Psalm. 126.
(for unless thou keep this City, he watches in vain that keeps it)
and not to permit any unclean thing to enter into it. It has hitherto lodged
the world, the flesh, and the Devil, by inordinate affection: expelle them I
beseech thee out of it; It is, or ought to be, thy mansion place, thy cabinet,
thy Temple, let none else enter into it. Give me grace to adorn this Temple,
with chaste and holy cogitations, that thou only in it may be loved, thou
only worshipped, thy praises only may be daily sung in it, and to thee
only the sacrifice of a contrite heart, of praise, and thanksgiving may be
offered: And seeing my old and unclean heart is not fit for this, create in me
a clean and a new heart.

6. Thou command me to give my heart unto thee, and thou beggest it of me in
those enchanting words; Praebe, fil^mi, Prou. 23.
cortuum mihi: my son give me thy heart. And if thou please to create it new,
(for else it is not worth the giving, nor vvorthie the acceptance) I give it
thee frankelie, and freely, and in so doing, I shall but give thee that
which is thine own by creation, redemption (for to redeem this heart thou
dyedst) and sanctification; I do not only lend it thee for a time, as I did
heretefore, when I lived well for a time, but after by sin wrested this my
heart out of thy possession, and gave the Devil the keys of this City: but I
give it thee for ever, never intending (by thy grace) to take it from thee
again.

7. O Eternal Father: thou gave unto me by Incarnation thy little one, Isaie
9.
so styled by the Prophet Esaie, little in his temporal birth, and as little as
a sucking babe, but great in his eternal nativity; little in his humane
nature, great and immense in his Divinity; vveake as a child in his little
body, but omnipotent and of infinite power in his Divinity; contained and
restrained in a narrovv crib, in respect of his body, but filling Heaven and
earth, containing all things, contained of nothing, in regard of his Divine
nature. I give also unto thee, my little one, my heart, one of the least members
of my body in quantity, greatest in vigor, force, and virtue: as which is
the fountain of life, imparting motion, life, ad vital spirits to the rest
of the members; Thou gave unto me, by Incarnation, thy son, the middle
person in Trinity, I give unto thee my heart, which is my middle, because
it is placed in the midst of my body, that it may the better imparte heat
and life to all the other parts thereof. Thou gave unto me, by Incarnation,
thy first and only begotten son; I give unto thee my first borne, that is
my heart, which is the first living, and last dying in me. And this I hope
will be pleasing unto thee, thou, like the Eagle, desiring to feed on the
heart, by a complacence which thou take in it, and thou esteeming the heart,
if it be clean and Sanctified, above all the mansion places in earth, and
desiring rather to dvvell in it by charity, 1. Joan. 4.
(for God is charity and he that abides in charity abides in God, and God
in him) then in the richest Palace on earth, yea then in Salomons Temple.

8. And having given this my heart unto thee, henceforth it shall not be mine
but thine: thou shall possess it, thou shall govern it, thou only shall
rule it: I will not meddle with the government of it, but under thee and
according to thy commandments, counsel and direction: And although this
heart heretofore has been the rendeuous and Receptacle of the Devil, the
world, and flesh, thy svvorn enemies, yet if thou please by thy grace to
cleanse it, and adorn it, they shall be sent packing, thou only shall be
entertained, and it shall be at thy disposition, ready to believe in thee, to
hope in thee, and to love thee above all things, and to do thy will, and
pleasure in all things. For all this, my old heart was altogether unapt,
create then in me a new heart by the nevvnes of grace.

9. To this new heart, says David, give for hereafter a new spirit, renew a
right spirit in my bowelles. After the earth and world was drowned, and
ouerflovved with that Deluge and general inundation of Noes fludde, Genesis 2.
thou broughtst a Spirit or wind upon the earth to dry it; Give to the little
world, and land of my soul and heart, a spirit of grace, which may dry it
from all concupiscence and from the Deluge of sin, for that, Osea 4. and 5.
this is a right Spirit. Rid me of the vvrong spirit of fornication, and of
all carnal delights, free me from the unclean spirit of lust, from the
spirit of lying and dissembling; from the Spirit of pride and envy, for that
these are not right spirits, and renew in me the right spirit, of charity,
chastity, humility, poverty; renew in me and create a new, those seven
graces and spirits of the Holy Ghost, the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of counsel and strengh, Isa. 11.
the spirit of knowledge and piety, the spirit of the fear of our Lord: of
which, every one is a right Spirit, is thy good spirit, Psalm. 142.
which will conduct me into the right way to salvation. The former spirit
wherewith I was lead heretofore, was not a right spirit, because it led me
out of the way, it was a crooked spirit, because, though my body be made to
look up to heaven, yet the evil spirit, which before ruled me, did crooken
my soul and made it look down to the earthly pleasurs, not upward to thee
and to the bliss of Heaven. Give me therefore, o Lord, the former seven
Spirits, and guiftes of the Holy Ghost, which are right Spirits, and which
do put my soul in a right posture toward thee and Heaven, and do make my
soul in all her actions to aim principally at thee and thy honor, and do
eleuate her to Heaven by contemplation, by which she conuerseth in Heaven with
thee, and thy-Angelles, and Saints. Engraft this Spirit in me, o Lord, and then
as the graft of a pear tree grafted on a thorn tree, bears not thorns but
pears: so this spirit grafted on the thorn of my carnal and corrupt nature,
will make me henceforth to bear, not the fruits of the flesh, but of the
spirit. This is the right spirit I desire to have for my guide and conductour,
and directour in all my actions. In this thy spirit now is all my delight, not
in the spirit of the word, or flesh; and how good and sweet is this thy
spirit, Sap. 12.
o Lord in all?

10. And I beseech thee, sweet Lord, to renew and innouate this spirit, this
right spirit, in my bowels. Permit not the spirit of Hypocrisy to dominere in
me, because that spirit does all to the outward show, and has a fair
outside, but a foul and filthy inside: That spirit moves to fast, to seem
holy, to pray, to seem devout, to give alms, to seem charitable; but I
desire a spirit which may work inwardly, what it shows outwardly, and
therefore I desire it maybe innouated in my entralls, in my heart, that when I
pray, it may not be with lips only, but with heart also, when I give
alms, it may not be out of a desire to please men, but out of charity and
compassion, to please God. O Lord give me this right heart this right and
inward spirit, for if the spirit of my heart be right, all my actions will be
upright, not crooked, nor be^ding to the world, If my heart be clean all my
cogitations, purposes, and even my outvvard actions will be clean: but if the
heart be crooked, or unclean, all my actions will be crooked and unclean,
because if the fountain be muddie, the river can not run clear, if the
root be poisoned, the bows and fruits will be infected, and will infect; If
my heart be dead, all my actions, even the best, will be dead, and not
meritorious of life everlasting; but if my heart be living by the life of
grace, all my good works will be living and meritorious. And seeing my
former heart, o Lord, was unclean by sin, and crooked by a crooked spirit
tending to earthly things, yea was dead by mortal sin, which deprived it
of the life of grace, give me a clean heart, fit for thee to dvvell in, give
me a right heart, which may always aim at thy glory, give me a living
heart, which, living here by grace, may live in Heaven by glory, the fruit
and harvest of the seed of grace.

Ne proijcias me a facie tua, and Spiritum Sanctum tuum ne auferas a me.

Cast me not away from thy face, and thy holy Spirit take not from me.


Aug. l. 1. de libero ar. cap. 16. and lib. 2. c. 19. and lib. contra
Socundinum Manich. c. 15.
1. Sin, if it be mortal, is an auersion of our will from God the Creator,
and an inordnate conversion of the same to the Creature, it is a scornful
turning of the back to God, and a loving turning of the face to the creature,
it is a disdainful farewell to the creator, and a freindlie vvellcome to the
creature; And this were enough to cause God to turn his face from us, because
we by sin do turn our faces from him, and our backs to him. I, o Lord,
says David, in a former verse desired thee to turn thy face from my sins,
that is, so, as not to be displeased with them; now I desire thee not to turn
thy face from my self, and my person. My sins are no creatures of thine, but
ugly monsters of my perverse will, and therefore thou have cause to turn thy
face from them, and not to daine these viperous broods, thy good look, or
favorable countenance: but I my self, though I be a sinner by mine own
malice, yet I am thy creature by thy goodness, and seeing Thou love all
things that are, Sap. 11.
and hate nothing of those things, which thou have made, yea thou sparest
all, because they are thine, And especially thou love souls and reasonable
creatures; I hope thou vvilt not turn thy face from me, but look on me with
a louinge aspect. Thou hate not the Devil but for his sin, and were it
not for that, thou would love him; Hate then, o Lord, my sins, for I also
do hate and detest them with thee, auert thy favorable countenance from them,
for I also, through thy grace, can not afford them a good look. But hate not
me, I am thy handworke, and thy masterpeece after the Angels: hate not me, I
bear thy lively image, which thou can not hate, it so lively representing
thy self, Hate then my creature, my sin, but not thy creature, auert thy
face from my sins; but cast me not from thy face, convert thy self to me,
that I may be converted to thee. I could of my self, auert my self from thee,
but I can not convert my self to thee, unless thou by thy grace convert me.

2. Heretofore it was a pleasure to me (but o the now displeasing pleasure)
to be auerted from thee, and converted to thy creatures, which I loved in
ordinatlie, because above thee, and above thee, because against thy
commandments: but now thy grace has made a great mutatio^ in me, Psa. 76
and this is mutatio dexterae excelsi, the change of the right hand of the
Highest; now it is the greatest corrosiue to my heart to be auerted from thy
face, in which the Angels take delight, and it will be my greatest comfort,
if thou vouchsafe to turn thy benign countenance to me, and not to cast me
away from thy face. The aspect of thy countenance, the very turning and
conversion of thy glorious face to me, is a torch and light, which
illuminateth my way, and keeps me from stumbling and falling; it is the sea
star which directs my navigations; it is the pillar of fire which leads
me by night, and the cloud which guides me by day through the deserts of
this life, Genesis 13
to Heaven the land of promise.

3. I heretofore (which now I rue) took a fall by sin from thee (o God)
from thy grace and favor, from Heaven, into the depth of sin, and if thy
merciful hand had not holden me, into the pit of Hell: but now that by thy
grace, the effect of thy benign countenance, I am risen, let me not fall
again; now, that by the light of thy face, which is thy grace, I am directed
in the right way, let me not range out of it any more; now that by the same
grace I am vvashed from my sins, let me not defile my self again; now that
I am by this grace cured of my disease of sin, let me not fall into it
again, now that my mortal wou^des are healed by this grace, let me not renew
them. For what would it avail to be risen up, if I fall again the after
fall would make my rising more difficult: What to have vvalked in the vvayes
of thy commandments, if I loose this way again? I shall the more hardly
find it. What to have been vvashed clean in the lauer of penance, and by thy
grace, if like a swine, I vvallovv my self again in the puddle of sin? the
stayne will more hardly be gotten out; better it is for me to say with the
Spouse, Cant. 5
I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? What will it avail to have
been cured of the ague of sin, if I admit an other access of it?
Recidiuation is more dangerous then the former sickness. What, to have been
healed of so many mortal wounds as mortal sins, if I renew them again?
the renewing makes them harder to be cured then before. Wherefore turn not
thy face from me by vvithdrawing thy grace, for then I shall fall again into
all those miseries: to have well begun is a small thing, how many good
beginners are now in Hell? perseverance is that which makes us go on to the
end, and the end crowns the work. And therefore, o Lord, take not thy holy
spirit from me. Take not from me the create spirit of grace, by virtue of
which I may persevere to the end: yea, o Eternal Father, o Eternal Son,
give me your increate spirit, the holy Ghost who proceeds from you both, and
who is equal, coequall, and consubstantiall to you both, and who is your
mutual love and eternal knotte of freindship; take not from me this your
increate Spirit. So long as this Spirit supporteth me, I can not fall; Heaven
will sooner fall, then I so supported can fall.

4. And thou, o penitent Christian, desire almighty God to turn his face from
thy sin, but not from thee, it being thy only comfort in this life, to have
its benign aspect, and the light of grace which proceeds from it, and which
illuminateth thy way, which thou art to walk. Desire him also not to take
away his holy Spirit from thee, without which, living thou art dead, living
in body, dead in soul, which, if thou fall, will raise thee, if thou stand,
will so direct thy steps, as thou shall never fall again. Joan. 1.
This Spirit houered over the waters in the first creation, and gave them
fecunditie to bring forth fish and foul. The same spirit houered over the
waters of Baptism, when thou vvast regenerated of water and the holy Ghost,
Joan. 3.
and gave it force to this day to bring forth Spiritual fishes, to wit
Christ^ans, who are spawnes and young fishes of the great fish CHRIST JESUS,
Tertul. lib. de Baptismo. Aug li de Ciuit. ca. 18.
styled by the Sybille in the first letters of her Greek verses (...) (which
signifies a fish) because in the river of Jordan, where he was Baptized by S.
John Baptist, he like a fish, did, as it were, swim, and thereby gave virtue
to the water of baptism to regenerat Christians, whereas Christians have their
origin from the water, as fishes have. This Spirit again houered over the
waters of contritio^ and the Sacrament also of penance, when it inspired into
me the Spirit of co^punction, and contrition, by which from my sins committed
after Baptism, I was again vvashed, and rose again from sin to justifying
grace. Let it give me also, o most merciful Lord, the grace and gift of
perseverance, which is all in all, and without which all is nothing. Do not
take this Holy Spirit from me, and I shall persevere to the end against all
tentations, maugre all the Devils in Hell.

5. S. Peter before he was fortified by this Spirit, was so frail, fearful,
and cowardly, that he denied his Master at the voice of a Maide-seruaunt; a
woeman dashed him out of countenance; but after he was armed and fortified by
this Holy Spirit, he feared not the Tyrants of the world, nor all the
torments that cruel hearts could devise: but like a rock withstood the
boisterous winds of their persecutions, which did but break and wast
themselves, moved not him. And he, and the rest of the Apostles, who fled
when their Master was taken, and who eue^ after his death and resurrection,
assembled themselves together, and shut the doors: Propter metum Iudaeorum,
for fear of the Jews, Joan. 20.
after they had received this Holy Spirit, they feared not the Tyrants of
earth, nor all the Devils in Hell: Yea they but twelve set upon all the
world, and not jointly neither, but singlie, and made a conquest of a greater
world then ever Alexander the Great did, and subdued not only their bodies,
as he did, but their vvilles and understanding, and subjected the Empire to the
Church, the Scepter to the cross, made philosophy stoop to Christ's
doctrine, Matthew. 10.
and Idolatry to Christian religion. And whereas they were sent as sheep
amongst wolves, yet these sheep, strengthened by this Holy Spirit, were to
hard for the wolves, and as fire co^uerteth all into it, so they inflamed with
this Heaue^lie fire, consumed sin and Idolatry, and like so many walking
fires, set all the world on fire, converted all to Christ, and made all like
themselves, that is Christians.

6. I, o Lord request at thy bountiful hands with David, a gift of this Holy
Spirit, Act. 20
and this Heavenly fire, which descended on the first Christians in the form
of fiery tongues, corroborate and encourage me by this Holy Spirit, inflame me
with this heavenly fire, and harden me with it, that no assaults of the
Devil, world, or flesh may be able to overthrow me, that for fear of
persecution I may not deny thee; but as now (as I hope) I am risen by thy Holy
Spirit, and grace of justification, so by thy guifte and grace of perseverance,
the proper effect of it, I may never fall again by mortal sin from thy
grace, favor, face, and eternal vision, the bliss of the blessed, which is
only granted to them, who persevere to the end.

Read mihi letitiam salutaris tui, Et spiritu principali confirma me.

Render unto me the joy of thy Salvation: and confirm me with thy principal
Spirit.


1. I Remember, o Lord, says David (say the same, o penitent soul, with him)
what joy, peace of conscience, and comfort I enjoyed in thee and in thy
service, before my sin, and when I was enriched with thy grace, the fountain
of true peace and joy: Then I tasted and saw how sweet thou art, then I
experienced, Psalm. 33
how great is the multitude of thy sweetness, o Lord, which thou have hidd for
them, that fear thee; and have hidden from the worldlings, who fear thee
not: Sap. 12.
O how good and sweet is thy spirit, o Lord, in all. Math. 11.
Thy service is a yoke, but sweet, it is a burden, but light. And, o my
infelicitie, who when I sinned, left thee, and all this true joy and
consolation. When by Justifying grace I lived in thy house, I abou^ded with
this bread of consolation; but when by my sin I left the house of thee my
eternal father, and followed the service of the world, with the Prodigal
son, Luc. 15
then instead of this bread of true consolation, I was fedd as he was, after
he left his fathers house, with the husks of worldly consolation, and with
carnal and brutish pleasures, the hoggish fare of sinners, which never
quenches thirst, never slaketh or assuageth hunger, never gives contentement:

2. When I served thee, o Lord, J drank of the fountain of living waters and
true pleasures, Ioh. 4.
and whilst I drank those waters, I never thirsted after any other; but when I
forsook thee the Creator and fountain of living water, Hierem 24.
and dug to my self cisternes, broken cisternes, which are not able to hold
water: that is when I thought to extinguish my thirst by my love of creatures
or create riches or pleasures, I found the^ to be broken cisternes, which do
not contain the water of solid comfort, pleasure, or conte^tement. When I
served thee, I was fedd with Manna, Number. 21.
the bread of Angels, which contains in it self all delight; but when by
sin I loathed and left this food of Angels, and sought to satisfy mine
appetite with worldly, and carnal pleasures (o what an ill exchange I made) I
then sold with Esau my spiritual first birthright, Genesis 25
which grace gave unto me, for a mess of potage: Exodus 25.
I exchanged Manna for the flesh pottes, yea onions and garlic of Egypt I left
thee, o Lord, the Creator in whom I had true contentement, for thy creatures,
which by reason of their insufficiency, can not content.

3. Thou have created us, o Lord, to thy self and for thy self, and have made
us capable of thy self, by thy clear vision and fruition, and thou being
rich, emine^t in excellency above all, beautiful, most good, yea a sea of
goodness; have made us capable of all these thy Divine attributes and
perfections: But because we seek for these things not in thee, where they
are, and where only they content, but in thy creatures, where is but a shadow
of them, and where they do not content; we by abuse have made this our
capacity of fruition of thee, and thy Divine perfections, which only can
satisfy and fill us, the cause of all our discontentement, yea our vices and
disorders. For whereas thou have made us capable of thy Divine excellency, to
which supreme honor is due, we by abuse seek for this excellency, and
honor, not in thee, but in our selves, desiring too much to excel others, and
to be esteemed above them, and this is pride and ambition, which is never
satisfied. Others give this excellency and supreme honor to creatures, as to
the sun, moon, stars, and this is Idolatry; whereas thou have made us
capable of thy beauty, which is the cause and fountain of of all beauty, we
leaving thee, do seek for it in thy creatures, where is but a shadow of that
thy beauty, and this is carnal concupiscence, which is never filled. Whereas
thou have made us capable of thy riches and abundance, which comprehends
all the riches, and varieties of Sea and Land, and that also most eminentlie;
we by abuse seek this abundance, and variety of all things in thy
creatures, and trouble Sea and Land to procure it, and this is riotte and
avarice, which is never contented: whereas thou have created us capable of thy
bounty and liberality, by which thou shinest and raynest by thy guiftes, and
favors on the good, and badde, and castest a largess of thy infinite guiftes,
and benefits on all thy creatures, eue^ to the young ravens and crawling
worms, we by abuse seek for this bounty out of thee, and would be liberal,
not out of thy abundance, but out of our own store, and this is lauishing
prodigality, which spends till it has ruined the spender and his family,
and afterward steals to spend more and more, and so finds no end nor
content in spending.

4. And the reason why these creatures and create perfections can not content
our will or appetite, is, because thou, o Lord, have given to our will an
infinite capacity, capable of thy self, who art an infinite sea of all
goodness and perfection, whereas thy creatures are finite and limited in
perfection, an so can not fill a vessel (as our will is) of infinite
capacity: and thy creatures are also imperfect, and so do not only not
satisfy and fill us, but do also, by reason of this imperfection and
disproportion, cause in us a spiritual thirst and hungre which vexes and
torme^teth us. One world was not great enough to content Alexander the Great,
nor would many worlds have satisfied him, though thy had been as many as
Democritus imagined. what rich man was ever satisfied with riches? what
ambitious man with honors? what luxurious man with carnal pleasures? And no
maruayle: no create thing is proportionat to man's infinite capacity. All create
perfections are defective, insufficient and vain, like to painted grapes, and
so can give no solid satietie or consolation.

5. For what are the gold and silver, lands and liuinges, and all the riches
of the world (which are gotten with labor, kept with care, and lost with
sorrow) but pelf and trash and fruits of the earth, and so earthly, and
consequently improportionate to our souls appetite which is spiritual? what
are the pleasures of the body, but gay stinking flowers, thornie roses, sweet
poisons, delights of brute beasts, in which we agree with them; which so
are the pleasures of the body, that they are the greatest displeasures of the
soul? what are the honors and estimations of the world, which so daste
wordlings eyes, but blastes of men's mouths, or the transitory conceits of
men's minds, which often are erroneous, always inconstant, and more changable
the^ the vvinde, passing more swiftly them the waves of the running water? And
as yet the man was never found which was satisfied with these painted
gugawes.

6. Thou only, o my Lord, and God, who art infinite in all perfection and
goodness, can fill the infinite capacity of our soul: Thou only art the
center of our desires in whom only they rest: The stone will sooner rest in
the air, before it come to the center, then the soul of man in creatures,
before it come to thee her creator, her first efficient, and last end. Fecisti
nos Domine ad te (says S. Austin) and inquietum est cor nostrum, Aug. lib. 1.
Confess. cap. 1.
donec requiescat in te. Thou have made us, o Lord, to thee, and our heart is
never quiet till it rest in thee. Seek then, o my soul, for true riches, true
beauty, true pleasure, true contentement, but seek for them in God, where
they are, not in creatures where they are not; seek for what thou seek,
but not where thou seek. If thou seek still for the^ in the creatures, thou
shall alvvaies seek and never find, if thou seek for the^ in God, there thou
shall find them, for that there they are in their prime cause and fountain,
there they are in their prime perfection.

7. Return then, o my soul to thy Lord God, and remember what joy and
solid consolation thou enioyedst, when thou louedst and seruedst him. The^
thou spakest not but of him, thoughtst not but of him, dreamedst not but of
him, louedst nothing but him, or for him, reioicedst in nothing but in him, or
for him, and this brought thee such joy and consolation, that thou enioyedst a
kind of Heaven in earth, and had a taste and feeling of the joys of Heaven,
which there are laid up in store for them, that fear God, love him, and serve
him.

8. This a wordling will not easelie conceive, for he having or esteeming no
other Heaven but this world, and proposing to him self no beauty but
corporal beauty, no riches but vvordlie riches, no pleasure but carnal
pleasure, is a sensual man, 1. Cor. 2.
which perceaueth not those things that are of the spirit of God. But a
spiritual man understands what I say, and knows by experience that it is
true; For if the body, as it is animated by the sensual part of the soul,
has its delights, if corporal beauty please the eyes of the body, if music
of men's voices or instruments please thr ears, if worldly riches content in
some sort for a time, what delight has the soul according to her reasonable
and superior part, which is more noble, and has more pure and noble
obiectes? what delight takes the devout soul in the contemplation of
Heavenly things, and in the exercise of moral and supernatural virtues? If
virtue could be seen, says one, as to the spiritual man's eye it is seen,
mirabiles excitaret amores, it would strau^glie enamour us, If a beautiful
creature draws, and as it were enchanteth our affections, what delight
takes the devout, and contemplative man in the love and co^templation of God
the creator and fountain of all beauty, riches pleasure, perfection? if the
good we find in creatures, though finit and imperfect, not pure but mixed with
something that is displeasing in it, does so allure us, how does the goodness
of God (in whom God and good is all one) whose goodness is the fountain of
all that is good in creatures, ravish and transport the devout and spiritual
man?

9. O sweet Lord render me this joy of thy salvation, so called because it is
the effect of justifying grace, caused by the merit of thy sacred passion, our
redemption and salvation. If thou now render it to me again, it will be after
my disgust and discontentement taken in sin, and in the service of the
world, as a great benefit, so far more grateful and pleasing then it was
before my sin. For even as the good cheer the Prodigal son made after his
return to his Father, and after the husks he had eaten, Lucae 15.
seemed more delicious, then ever it did before: Or as peace is more vvellcome
after war, sweet more pleasing after sower, and heat after cold, light
after darkness, sight after blindness, health after sickness, liberty after
servitude, rest after labor, is more gratlull: so the manna of spiritual
consolations, wherewith now I shall be feasted, will seem more delicious,
after my hoggish fare in sin; and the peace of conscience after war vvaged
against God by sin, the sweetness of virtue after the sower taste of sin, the
heat of grace and charity after the nipping cold of sin, the light of grace
after the darkness and blindness I endured in sin, my spiritual health
received by grace after the mortal sickness of sin, my liberty of spirit and
grace, after the slavery of sin, the rest and quietness of mind, after my
drudgerie in sin, will be more pleasing grateful, and delightful, then ever
they were before my sin.

10. Render me then, o Lord, this joy of thy salvation; and do not only
render it, but conserve it to my dying day, that I may carry it with me to
the eternal joys of Heaven; and, that it may be thus conserved in me, I
beseech thee to confirm me with thy principal Spirit, the holy Ghost the
principal Spirit, and fountain from which all create spirits of grace do
flow, let this Spirit conserve this joy of my salvation so constantly, that I
may never loose it, so pure that it may never be mixed with any joy of thy
creatures, which is not pleasing to thee, let this Spirit be my guide, my
directour, my conductour, my protector in all my vvayes, actions, and
proceedinges, that I may never loose again by sin thy justifying grace
purchassed by penance, and consequently may ever conserve this joy of thy
salvation, this joy of conscience, the effect of this grace:

11. The Apostles and Martyrs, by this principal Spirit, and the spirit of
grace which it gives, were so confirmed and hartned, that all the torments,
which they suffered of the cruel Tyrants and persecutors, could not daunt
them, but they so ioyed in their persecutions and torments, that either they
felt them not, or they ioyed in feeling them for thy sake. Their persecutions
were of themselves the bitter waters of Mara, Exodus 15
but by the vvood of the Cross dipped in them, that is by consideration of thy
passion suffered on it, they became sweet. They were of themselves bitter
pills, but being wrapped in the sugar of this joy of salvation, they seemed
not bitter, but pleasing to the taste of the soul; this thy principal Spirit
did so fill their hearts with joy, that there was no place for grief or
sorrow, but when they were scourged and persecuted, they went from the sight
of the Council reioicing, because they were accounted worthy to suffer
reproach for the name of JESUS. Act. 5.
And if thou vouchsafe, o Lord, to confirm me with this principal Spirit,
and by the grace it gives, I shall never be separated again from thee by
sin, I shall never forsake so good a God, as thou have been unto me, either
for fear of persecution, or death it self, or for love of whatsoever the
world ca^ afford, but rather shall so joy in all temporal sufferances and
losses for thee here on earth, that I shall be made worthy to joy and rejoice
with thy Angels and saints, by thy clear vision and fruition for all
eternity.

Docebo iniquos vias tuas, and impij ad te conuertentur:

I will teach the unjust thy ways, and the impious shall be converted.


1. A Scarr, spott, or blott in the face or forepart of the head can not be
hidden, but is exposed to the sight of all, though in the inferior members of
the body it be seldom marked. Even so the faults or evil examples of Princes
or Superiors, who are the heads of their subjects, are by and by noted,
when their subjects faults are not regarded; and therefore it is said that
Princes faults are written in their foreheades. I, says David, am the Head
of my People and King of my Kingdom, and so my faults of murder against
Vrias, and adultery with his wife, are so well known to all my subjects,
that they have not only offended thee, o Lord, but have also scandalized
them, from whom they could not be hidden, and have given them the evil
example to follovv me in my evil vvayes, because the People follovveth the
example of the King, and thinks they may do that securely, which they see
the Prince do before them.

2. Yea I have not only by these my great sins scandalized the Jews my
subjects, but also the Gentiles, 2. Reg. 12.
and have caused the enemies of thee my Lord to blaspheme thy name, wherefore
hereafter for satisfaction of thee, o Lord, and of the world, I will teach
the unjust thy vvayes and the impious, by my means shall be converted to thee.
For as I have heretofore accompanied the Ark, which was thy ma^nour house, with
nables, harpes, cymbals, trumpets, and all musical instruments, Yea and have
daunced before it to honor and praise thy name, 1. Par. 15.
which now by my sins I have caused to be blasphemed of thy enemies* so I
will again resume this my devotion: and although thou have forbidden me to
build thy Temple, because I have been a warrior, and so having defiled my
hands with blood, am not fit to build it; 2. Reg. 7.1. Paral. 28.
yet I will give the charges of it, and of gold I will give a hundred
thousand talentes, and of silver a thousand thousand talentes. 1. Par. 22.
But of brass and iron there is no weight, for the number is surpassed with
the greatness; timber and stones I have prepared to all the charges. I will
dispose of the offices of the Temple, and Musicians, and their instruments, and
psalms, and songs. 1. Par. 23.24. and 25. 2. Par. 28.
I will give to my son Solomon a description of the porche and of the
Temple, and of the cellers and of the upper loft, and of the chambers in the
inner rooms, and of the house of the proposition etc. And this, says David, I
will do for satisfaction of my sins, and for the glory and praise of thy
name, which shall be praised, and honored in this Temple till the Messiah
shall come. And whereas I have sca^dalized the Gentiles, they, when they shall
be converted to Christian Religion, shall in their churches sing day and night,
(and I in them, and by the psalms which I have composed) praises and lauds
unto thee, even to the end of the world: Ps. 56.
I will confess to thee amongst peoples, o Lord, and I will say a psalm to
thee among the Gentiles. And I shall teach the unjust amongst Jews and Gentiles
thy vvayes, which if they follovv, they shall attain to life everlasting; and
the impious amongst them, shall be converted unto thee. And this I will do,
partly by my psalms in which I teach the^ to know thee, to love thee, to
fear thee, to serve thee, In which I shall teach both Jew and Gentill
Christian Religion (for I shall treat in them of thy power, Majesty,
Justice, mercy, and of all thy Divine attributes; yea in them I shall discover
unto them the Incarnation of the Son of God, his Conception, Esa. 11. Esa. 9.
Nativity, life and death, Resurrection and Ascension) and partly also I
shall do this by the examples of my good life, which hereafter I will lead.
For as Job was an example of patience, and will be to the end of the world,
to all that are in affliction, So will I be an example of penance to all
sinners, I will by my example make them to hope in thy mercy, never to
despair of it: For if I, after so great sins and so many, have found mercy
at God his hands, what sinner may not hope to find the like mercy, if he be
sorry for the^, as I have been. If I a King would detracte so much time from
the public affairs of my Kingdom, as seven times in the day to pray and
sing lauds unto God. Ps. 118
If I would rise at middnight to Confess to God, what shall other sinners
do who have no such encumbrances? If I a King have labored in much sighing,
If I every night have vvashed my bed and have watered my couch with tears:
Psalm. 6.
If my eyes have gushed forth issues of tears; will other sinners, think
without tears and sorrow, to get remission of their sins? I David, cry then
unto you all, who are sinners you, who have followed David in his sins,
follovv him in his repentance, and you will find mercy, as he has done.

3. O David, I must needs confess that as thou have sinned greeuouslie, so thy
sorrovv, and satisfaction for thy sin has been great, as thou have by thy
evil works dishonored God his name, so by thy good works alleged, thou
have glorified God, and by thy example have caused also others to glorify his
name; as by thy evil example thou have perverted many, so by thy Heavenly
psalms and wholesome documents in the^, thou have converted thousands, and
shall by them convert sinners to the end of the world. O great King and
Prophet, thy sins indeed have been great, but thy repentance also, and
satisfaction, through Gods grace, has been great, and so great, that J can
not easelie say whether thou vvast more unhappy in sinning, then thou have
been happy in repenting; yea thy repentance has been so great, so
honorable to God, so beneficial and exemplare to all the world, that I can
scarce hold my self from saying; o happy sin of David, See the like speech
in the benediction of the paschall candle: O foelix culpa, que talem at tantum
meruit habere Redemptorem.
which was seconded by so rare and so exemplare a repentance, and satisfaction.

4. Grant unto me, o Lord, (say so, o repentant sinner) that as I have
imitated David in his sins, so I may follovv him in his repentance and
satisfaction; I have by my evil examples, yea persuasions allured others to
sin, but grant me, o Lord, thy grace, and in virtue of it, I shall endeavor
with David to teach by word of mouth, or by books, or example, the unjust
thy ways, and the impious thereby shall be converted to thee; To sollicitate
others by persuasion or evil example, unto sin is the office of the Devil,
who in all his tentations intends nothing else but to draw us to sin, and
not only to spiritual sins, as pride, envy and hatred, which he
commits him self, but also to carnal sins, which he can not co^mitt,
though he be guilty of them in enticing us. And I, o Lord, do ingeniouslie
confess, that I have been the Devils Agent in provoking others to sin,
either by persuasion, or evil example, by which I have offended thee, ruined
them, and by the same sin, have run mine own soul through, to vvound
them. In this Kind preachers of false doctrine, and Princes, and superiors
who command or persuade their subjects to sin, do offend, and who not by
evil example?

5. Wherefore I, o Lord, as heretofore I have cooperated with thy professed
enemy the Devil to pervert others, and thereby to ruin their souls; so
hereafter I will serve no such master, I will be no instrument, nor Age^t, nor
factour for him, but as I am sorry for the sins past, by which I have
offended thee, and cooperated with him to the spiritual ruin of my neighbors
soul: so hereafter, if it may please thee to give me the grace, I will be thy
instrument, thy factour and coadiutour, and will labor with thee and under
thee for the conversion of souls: 1. Cor. 3


6. It is a great sin by persuasion or ill example to pervert others, it is
to cooperate with the Devil, it is worse then David's murder of Vrias, because
that killed the body, this the soul: And contrariewise to cooperate with God,
as his instrument, and Minister, to the conversion of sinners, is the noblest
office and imploiment that can be. It is the very office of CHRIST JESUS the
son of God, who came not to call the Just but sinners to penance, Mat. 9.
Luc. 5. 1. Tim. 1.
and, as S Paul says, came into this world to save sinners, and therefore he
was Incarnate, borne, lived 33. years amongst us, taught us, exhorted us by
words and deeds, wrought miracles to confirm what he said, and at length
suffered and dyed for sinners, and had not been man, S. Tho. 3 p^^ 4.1. art. 3.
nor had descended from Heaven to earth, but to save sinners. For as S.
Augustine says, nulla fuit causa veniendi Christo Domino Aug. (...) 9. de
verbis Apost.
nisi peccatores saluos facere, toll morbos, toll vulnera and nulla est causa
medicinae: There was no cause of Christ his coming, but to save sinners, take
away diseases, take away wounds (of sin) and there will be no cause of a
medicine. In this we do Gods will and pleasure, who, of him self, will all
men to be saved, 1. Tim. 2.
and to come to the knowledge of the truth: For says he by his Prophet
Ezechiel, why, is the death of a sinner my will, Ezech. 18.
and not that he convert from his ways and live?

7. This work of the conversion and Justification of a sinner, Aug. tract. 72.
in Joan. to. 9. S. Th. 1. 2. q. 113 art. 9.
is greater then the creation of the world; because creation had for its effect
this world, which is a thing natural; Justification of a Sinner, has for its
effect grace, which is a thing supernatural, that is nature, this above
nature; that is temporal for Heaven and Earth shall pass, in respect of their
state and quality, Matthew. 24.
this of it self eternal, because it is the seed of glory which is
eternal; that is a participatio^ of God as he is Author of nature, this as he
is Author of grace; that ordains us to God as he is our natural end, this
as he is our supernatural end; and as creation is of nothing, so the
justification of a sinner is of no merit of his. And although glory and
glorification be absolutely greater the^ the Justification of a sinner, because
glory is greater then grace, yet glory is given to the just, vho deserve it
by their merits; the grace of justification of a sinner, is given to him that
deserves it not, and so is a greater guifte and favor, because not deserved.
And although creation, justification and glorification, be all great works,
and do argue Gods infinite power, yet the Justification of a sinner, is a
work of greater, yea greatest mercy. It is a greater work to convert a
sinner the^ to raise a dead man to life, because by that miracle a dead body is
raised to a te^porall life only; by the conversion of a sinner the soul is
raised from the death of sin to the life of grace, which causes life
everlasting, if by our fault we do not loose it.

8. Seeing then, o God, thou have wrought so great a work, as is the
conversion of a sinner, not only in David, but, as I hope in me also, I will
hereafter (say so o penitent sinner) to show my self grateful for so great a
benefit, teach with David, the unjust thy ways, and I will endeavor to
convert the impious unto thee: They that have lived in captivity do most
co^miserat captives and prisoners, they that have lived long in banishement,
take greatest compassion on the banished; they that have been greeueouslie
sick do take most pity on the sick. And I, who have been a great sinner,
and who have experie^ced the misery and danger sin brings with it, will
hereafter take compassion on sinners. I will inflame my self with David's zeal
of souls. Ps. 68. 3. Reg. 19.
This zeal of souls did eat David, and consumed Elias, it shall consume me;
for I will employ my self, my tale^tes, my labors, my endeauours, and all I
am and have, for the conversion of sinners.

9. This zeal of souls, Greg. Hom. 12. super Ezech.
as S. Gregory says, is a most pleasing sacrifice to God, it is an holocaust,
because it consumes all we are and have, to gain souls: It is, Dionys. lib.
de Eccles. Hier.
as S. Dionysius the Areopagite says, Diuinorum operum diuinissimum, of all
the Divine works the most Divine. The conversion of souls was the office of
the son of God, of his Apostles, and all Apostolical men, who have
consecrated themselves to the conversion of Countries: and it shall be my
office whilst I live, for if I can not cooperate to the conversion of sinners,
with CHRIST JESUS the principal Savior and conuertour of them, by preaching,
teaching, or writing of books, as the Apostles did, and as Doctors, Pastors,
and the learned ought to do, I will at least do my endeavor herein, by my
counsel and good examples, knovving that he which makes a sinner to be
converted from the error of his way, Iacobi. 5.
shall save his soul from death, and covers a multitude ofo his own sins;
Dan. 12.
Knowing that they who instruct others to justice shall shine as stars unto
perpetual eternities. This is now my mind, and this mind, by Gods grace, I
will carry to my dying day.

Libera me de sanguinibus Deus, Deus salutis meae and exultabit lingua mea
iustitiam tuam.

Deliver me from bloodes o God, the God of my salvation, and my tongue shall
exulte (for) thy Justice.


1. THe afflicted person, whose heart is seized with grief and sorrow for any
great loss, sickness, or adversity, thinks it not sufficient to cry once or
twice for aid, help, or succor, but often reiterateth the same cry,
complaint or petition, and never rests crying for help, till he find help;
And the reason is, because the misery it self still prompteth and suggesteth,
and puts him in mind to cry and call for help, till he be rid of it. By
which we may easily gather how great the grief and sorrow of our penitent
David was for his sins, since it made him so often to cry for mercy, so
often to demand to be ridd of his misery of sin. He had cried Have mercy on
me, o God, according to thy great mercy, for my sin is great, and
according to the multitude of thy commiserations take away mine iniquity, for
my sins are many. He had cried, Wash me more amply from mine iniquity, and
cleanse me from my sin; And not content with this: he again sings the same
doleful song, saying, Turn away thy face from my sins, and wipe away all
mine iniquties: and as though he had never cried enough, he cries now again
for the same remission of his sins saying, Deliver me from bloods, o God, the
God of my salvation. He imitateth herein the young sparrowes, or swallows,
which being destitute of meat, when their damme is abse^t, do fill the air
with their cries: for so David left of God, because by sin he had left him,
and now by sin spoiled of God his grace and favor, and of the birthright of
life everlasting, plunged also in the misery of sin, and by it exposed to
danger of Hell, what should he do but cry to God, who only can help? what
should he do but fill Heaven and earth with his cries, thereby to move God to
take compassion?

2. And what means he by bloods, but the bloody murder of Vrias, and many
other Soldiers with him? and his adultery with Bersabee his wife, which was a
sin of blood, proceeding from the ardour of blood, which inflamed his
concupiscence and made it break forth into that adultery? O David, what
do thou mean now in crying to be delivered from bloodes? Did thou not
even in the first words of this psalm make the same petition, when thou
cryedst, Have mercy on me, o God, according to thy great mercy? were not
these the sins for which thou cryedst God mercy? have thou then never done
crying for mercy for these thy two sins? Ps. 68.
No (says he) I have labored crying, my jaws are made hoarse with crying;
and although I hope those two sins are forgiven me, yet of sin forgiven I
will not be without fear, Eccl. 5.
and therefore so long as I live, and can cry, I will cry for forgiveness of
them. Deliver then me, o Lord, from all sin and especially from the bloods
of murder and adultery. And although thy Prophet Nathan has told me that my
sins are forgiven, 2. Reg. 12.
yet I fear the pain due to them, knowing that thou use to punish those
sins even in this life most severely.

3. And as for murder, Genesis 4.
I know that Abels blood, unnaturally shed by Cain his brother, had a voice
to cry for vengeance upon him, for so God told Cain, saying; the voice of thy
brothers blood cries to me out of the earth. Wherefore fearing the cry of
Vrias his blood which I caused to be shed, I desire thee, o God, the God of
salvation, to deliure me from the hidious cry of Vrias his blood, and to
defend me from it by the shield of thy mercy. Mat. 23
The blood of the just shed by the Jews and their predecessors, whom they
imitated, from Abel to Zachary fell upon them. S. Ihon Baptiste blood which
Herod shed cried more terriblie against him before God, then the voice of his
mouth did, when he told him that it was not lawful for him to have the wife
of his brother. Mar. 6.
And with what a lovvde voice did the Innocents and most holy blood of
CHRIST JESUS cry against the Jews? it is true it cried for our redemption,
Heb. 12
by a sprinkling of it which spoke better then Abel, but it cried for such
vengeance against the Jews, who unjustly shedd it, that to this day they
feel it in the destruction of their temple and City, in the abrogation of
their law and Preesthood, and in their wandering about the world; which if
they had foreknowne, they would never have cried, as they did, His blood be
upon us and upon our children. ^h.
The martyrs of the primitive church are brought in by S. Ihon crying, after
death, Apoc. 6.
to God to revenge their blood, And their blood also cried and obtained the
ruin of the Roman Empire, as then it was, the extirpation of Idolatry, and
the planting of Christ his church and the propagation of Christian faith and
religion. 2. Macab. 8.
Wherefore Judas Machabeus knowing that blood unjustly shed cried vengea^ee
against the shedder, desired God to hear the voice of the blood of the then
innocent Jews, shed by the infidells crying to him. And it is noted that when
the murderer is brought near to him whom he killed, the blood flows from
the dead body, as crying for revenge.

4. David then fearing the cry of the blood of Vrias, which he had shed,
cries to God to deliver him from bloods. And indeed he had already in part
felt the revenge of Vrias blood, for after he had caused Vrias to be slain,
that he might enjoy his wife, the child, which was the unfortunate brood of his
murder and adultery, dyed, and David could not with all his praying, 2. Reg.
12.
fasting, and lying on the ground, impetrate his life. And this was not enough
to silence Vrias his blood, nor to cause it to leave crying; for after this, it
cried for revenge against David and his family, 2. Reg. 13.15.16.18. 3. Reg. 2.
in the death of his son Ammon, and after in the rebellion and death of his
son Absalom, whom he loved so dearly; as also in the violating of his
concubines by his said son Absalom, and in the death of his son Adonias
killed by Solomon, and in the miserable ending of many Kings of his blood and
race.

5. And because David knevv that God uses to punish adultery also very
severely, he desires also to be delivered from this blood, or sin, which
proceeds from the heat of blood and concupisce^ce In the old law (much more
in the new) this sin was ever counted most grievous before God and man, and
and therefore by that law it was punished with death, and even with stoning
to death. And when the Husband was jealous of his wife, Deuteronomy. 22. Leuit. 20.
Joan. 8 Number. 5
she was brought before the Priest, and after some ceremonies used, if she
proved guilty of adultery, her thighe rotted, and her womb swelling
burst, as we read in the books of numbers. And good reason; because, besides
the offense committed against God, and the vvrong done to her Husband, this
sin makes issues and successions to inheritance uncertain, and disturbeth
families. And therefore David fearing least this sin of blood should also
cry vengeance against him, he desires to be deliured from it, saying in the
plural number, Deliver me from bloods, that is not only from the bloody
murder of Vrias, and his soldiers, but also from the adultery with Bersabee,
this sin also proceeding originallie from the heat of blood. And (says
David) Jf thou, vvilt, o Lord, deliver me from these bloods (as I hope thou
vvilt) thou being the God of my salvation, my tongue shall exalte thy justice,
that is, shall rejoice in this justice and praise thee for it; For although the
remission of my sin, in respect of my unworthiness, be mercy, yet it is
justice in respect of CHRIST'S passion (which I foresee and behold) because
that did merit in rigor of justice this remission, and this justice I shall
praise for ever.

6. Say thou also with David, o penitent sinner; I, o Lord, am also guilty of
bloods, and therefore I desire thee to deliver me from bloods, for if I be not
guilty of murder and adultery, at least I am guilty of many other sins,
which all may be called bloods, or sins proceeding from flesh and blood,
which nourish and pamper concupiscence, the fountain of all our sins: for
as S. John tells us, 1. Joan. 2.
all that is in the world, is the concupiscence of the flesh, and the
concupiscence of the eyes, and the pride of life: These be the sources, roots,
and fountains from which all our sins do proceed. and so all our sins
are bloods, because they flow from concupiscence which is inflamed by the
heat of blood: Deliver me therefore from these roots, and I shall be free
from the branches, deliver me from the fountains, and and I shall be free from
the rivers, deliver me from concupiscence of the flesh and make that chaste, 1.
Cor. 9.
or give me grace to chastise it with S. Paul, that it may be chaste; take from
me concupisce^ce of eyes and huddwincke the^ with thy grace, that by them no
sin enter into my soul, as a glance only of the eye caused David's
adultery; Take from me pride of life, give me an humble heart, repress
aspiring thoughts, so shall I be free from pride, ambition, envy, and all
other spiritual sins, which are bloods, because they proceed from
concupiscence, which is kindled by the heat of blood, 2. Cor. 2
and are the works of a sensual man who perceives not the things, which
are of the Spirit of God. Deliver me then from bloods (that is from all sins)
O God the God of salvation, because it is beseeming the God of salvation to
save and to have mercy on sinners. Which if thou do, o Lord, I promise,
with David, that my tongue shall exult in the praise of thy justice; for
although in respect of us sinners it be a great grace and mercy to deliver us
from sin, we having nothing to deserve it, yet in respect of CHRIST JESUS,
our God of salvation and Savior, it is great justice, because he by his death
and passion did merit this for us; and if for this his sacred death and
passion, the more then just price of our Redemption, thou please to deliver me
from bloods, and sins, I shall praise and exalt this thy justice for ever,
and my tongue shall never be silent in the comme^dation of it.

Domine labia mea aperies, and os meum annunciabit laudem tuam.

Lord thou will open my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.


1. Sin, o Lord, says David, (and say so with him, o penitent sinner) had
stopped my mouth, and made me dumme in thy praises; for vvh^lst I was in
sin, I praised this world, but cared not for Heaven, I praised the beauty
of thy creatures, but cared not for the beauty of thee their Creator, who art
the fountain of all beauty, and beauty by essence, they only by
participatio^; I commended the pleasures of the body as the only pleasure,
as though there had been no pleasure but in eating and drinking and such like;
but cared not for the pleasures, which the godly take in contemplating thy
goodness, in loving and serving thee. I praised the Kings, Princes, and
Potentats of the earth, and I admired their greatness, power, sple^dour, and
riches, but in thy praises I was altogether mute, though thou be the King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Apo^^ 19.
to whom the greatest Monarchs are but Vice-Royes, Lieutenantes, and tenantes
at will. And so, Psalm. 11 ^
I who before my sin did singe praise to thee seven times a day, was by
sin become dumme, mute and tongue-tyed in thy praises. But if thou deliver me
from bloods, that is from sin, the^ sin the cover of my mouth, and tie of
my tongue, being taken away, thou will open my lips, and loose my tongue, by
thy grace, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise. Psalm. 33
Then I will bless thee our Lord at all times thy praise shall be always in
my mouth.

2. And thou, o penitent sinner, desire God as David did, to open thy lips,
which now are shutt by sin; and confessing the truth, say thus unto him:
Sin, o Lord, has made me like an Infant in a spiritual life, not able to
form any words in thy praise. So that I may say with Hieremie. Hier. c. 1.
A, a, a, o Lord, behold I can not speak, because I am a child. Wherefore, o
Lord, do me the like favor thou did to this Prophet, though I much less
deserve it then he did: Hier. c. 1.
put forth thy hand and touch my mouth, and thereby put the words into my
mouth which I shall speak, for then assuredly, my mouth shall show forth thy
praise. Nay confess unto thy God and say unto him: Sin, o Lord, has not
only stopped my mouth, but has also so polluted my lips, Isa. c. 6.
that I may say with the Prophet Isaie: I am a man of polluted lips. And
greater cause have I to say so then he had: for he esteemed his lips
polluted, because he was silent when he should have spoken, and therefore
cried: Woe is me, Isa. c. ^
because I have held my peace: But I have spoken in detracting, lying,
callumniating, swearing, and the like, when I should have been silent, and so
I have offended not only in omission, as he did, but also in commission, and
so have much more polluted my lips. Send therefore, o Lord, unto me, as thou
did to thy Prophet Isaie (pardon me, sweet Lord, if I far vnworthier then
he, presume to beg the same favor at thy hands which he did, because it is
not any mine own merit, but thy only mercy which thus imboldeneth me) one
of thy Seraphins, so called because, as he is inflamed with charity, so he
inflameth, that he with an hot cole taken from the Altar, may touch my mouth,
Isa. c. 6
and purge my lips from all filth of sin: See S. Thom. Lyra. Hector Pintus
and Sa^ctius on the sixth chap. of Isai^.
that is, that he with the burning cole of charity taken from the Altar of
the cross, or CHRIST his passion endured on the cross (for that is the source
of all grace and charity) may purge my heart and lips as gold in the furnace,
from all dross of sin, that my heart may think nothing, my mouth and lips
may speak nothing, which is not pure, chaste, and holy: For then my mouth
will be apt to show forth thy praise. Or else, send, o Lord, one of thy
Priests who by office is a Seraphin, instituted and ordained to illuminate and
inflame the hearts of the people by preaching and administration of the
Sacraments: And let him either by the burning cole of thy word (for thy word
is fired exceedingly) or by that sacred and burning cole of CHRIST'S holy
body in the Eucharist (burning continually with the Divinity, Ps. 118.
yet not consumed) taken from the holy Altar, where it is offered daily in
the Church of God, may inflame my heart and purge, first it, and then my
lips, which are the interpreters of the heart, from all filth of sin. Or
else, o my svveet God, send unto me one of thy Seraphins, one of thy Priests
who ministeriallie by means of the Sacraments which he ministers, gives
the Holy Ghost, that he by the hot cole of this holy Spirit (proceeding as
ardent love from God the father and God the son, coequall and consubstantiall
unto them, and who in the day of Pentecoste descending fom heaven in the form
of fiery tongues, inflamed and purged the Apostles and first Christians) may
inflame and purge my heart and lips from all filth of sin, and so may make
me fit to show forth thy praise, for until I be purged from sin, Ps. 49.
I am a sinner, and to the sinner thou say: why do thou declare my
justices and takst my Testament by thy mouth? And Ecclesiasticus tells me,
Eccleisastici 15.
that praise is not comely in the mouth of a sinner.

3. But open my mouth, o Lord, stopped by sin, and purge my lips polluted
by sin, and then not only my mouth shall be the trumpet to sound forth thy
praises (which thou o penitent sinner must say after him) but my soul shall
say to her self: Ps. 102.
My soul bless thou our Lord, and all the things that are within me; my
understanding, my will, my memory, my heart and all that is in me shall
bless and praise God; yea my body and all the senses and parts of it, as mine
eyes, mine ears, and the rest of my senses, my head, my hands, my feet, in
employing themselves in thy service, shall be so many trumpets to sound forth
thy praise.

4. And not only with body and soul I will praise thee, but I will
conjure all people and nations to join with me in thy praise, for I will
cry unto them: Ps. 1^6
Praise our Lord all the Gentiles, praise him all the peoples yea I will
conjure all thy creatures asvvell reasonable as unreasonable; sensible as
insensible to praise thee, and confess thee to be their Creator, and to say,
as they do say every day to those that have intelligence, He made us, Psa. 99.
and not we our selves: I vvil with Sidrach, Dan. 3.
Misach, and Abdenago call upon all creatures, to praise thee and I will sing
daily their Canticle and Benedicite. All works of our Lord bless our Lord:
ye Angels of our Lord praise and superexalt him for ever: ye Heavens bless our
Lord, praise and superexalt him for ever; All waters that are above the
heavens, bless ye our Lord, praise and superexalt him for ever; Sun and
Moon bless ye our Lord, praise and superexalt him for ever. In the like
manner I will inuit the stars and planets; the showers and dewes, the
vvindes and tempests, fire, and heat, frost, and cold, ice and snow, and the
rest, which are invited to the praise of God in this Canticle; for that all
those creatures, though many of them be deuoide of reason, many also of sense,
do praise God in exciting men by consideration and contemplation of these
admirable works of God, to the praise of him.

5. For as when we see a picture well drawn, or a statue cunningly
carved, we by and by commend not only the picture and statue, but also, and
especially, the painter and Caruer; so when we look upon the Heavens and
those ever shining lights (which may be ouershadovved, but never are put out)
and the goodly order and disposition of the Heavens, eleme^tes, and creatures
in the^, we praise not only them, but much more the Creator. And in this
fence the Heavens (though they have neither reason nor sense) are said to show
forth the glory of God; Ps. 18.
wherefore hence forth with thy grace, o Lord, all my actions shall be
directed to thy honor and glory, every morning so soon as I rise or awake,
both they and all I am and have shall be offered and designed for thy honor;
and so by word and work I will ever show forth thy praise, and I will never
cease from singing praises unto thee, till I come to sing Sanctus, Sanctus,
Sanctus, Holy, Holy, Holy, with the quire of thy Heavenly musicians, thy
Saints and Angels.

Quoniam si voluisses sacrificium, dedissem vtique: Holocaustis non
delectaberis.

Because if thou would have had sacrifice, I had verily given it: with
holocaustes thou will not be pleased.


1. I Promised thee, o Lord, (says David) that my mouth should show forth thy
praise, Ps. 4^.
because I take the sacrifice of praise to be more pleasing unto thee,
otherwise if thou would have had sacrifice, to wit the material and
corporal sacrifice of brute beasts, I would verily have given it. And thou
know, o Lord, that in such sacrifices I have not been vvanting but I know
they are not pleasing to thee; nay with Holocaustes, (which were the best
kind of external sacrifices, as being wholly burnt and consumed to thy honor)
thou art not delighted, as they are taken in themselves without the internal
sacrifice of the mind. Solomon in the dedication of the Temple, 3. Reg. 2.
offered of oxen two and twenty thousand, and of sheep an hundred twenty
thousand; and yet all these sacrifices taken nakedlie in themselves, without
the inward sacrifices of the mind, were not pleasing to God. Mich. 6.
For as Micheas says Nunquid placaripotest Dominus in millibus arietum? can
our Lord be pacified with thousa^ds of Rams? Or as thou, o Lord, thy self
say, will I eat the flesh of oxe^, Ps. 49. ibid.
or will I drink the blood of buckgoats? Immolate to God the sacrifice of
praise, and pay thy vow to the highest.

2. And what need, o Lord, have thou of these external sacrifices of brute
beasts? All the vvilde beasts of the world be thine, the cattle in the
mountains and oxen, Ps. 49.
the fowls of the air, and the beauty of the field is with thee. And
therefore, thou, o Lord, exprobatest unto me^, saying, that if thou be
hu^grie, that is if thou could be hungry, I will not tell thee, I will
not ask an alms or a peace of bread of thee, ibid.
for the round earth is mine and the fulness thereof. So that thou, o Lord,
stand not in need of any thing we can offer unto thee: if we offer an
Hecato^be of oxen unto thee, thou art never the richer, if we offer thee
nothing, thou art not a iott the poorer. Before thou createdst the world,
there was nothing but thy self, and yet thou wast then as rich as now; for
even then thou containedst in thee most compendiouslie all things, which now
are in heaven and earth, or which hereafter shall be, or which are possible to
be; for thou, o Lord, art the first and general cause of all things, and so
containest in thy self all things, even as the cause contains its effects
before it causes the^; And so all things are in thee, and in a more eminent
manner in thee then in themselves, for in themselves some be living, some not
living, but in thee all things are living, yea as S. John says, Joan. 1. Vide
Augu. Tract. 1. in Ioa^. and l. 11. de ciui. Dei. c. 29. and S. Tho. 1. part
q. 4. a. 1.
life it self. In themselves some be corruptible, some incorruptible, in thee
they are all incorruptible. In themselves some be great, some little, in thee
all great, yea infinite, as thou art, because in thee they are thy self. In
themselves some be perfect, some imperfect, in thee they are all perfect. In
themselves they are all created, in thee they are increated, in themselves they
are all diverse and distinct one from an other, in thee they are all one,
because they are all one with thee. In themselves they are creatures, in thee
they are the Creator, yea in thee they are God, because whatsoever is in God
is God. For as the sun with other second causes is cause of all things in
this sublunarie world, and so all things are in the sun as in their cause,
without division; and as the piece of work, be it a statue or Image, is cast
or drawn in the Artificers mental platform, before it be fashioned in it
self, and in the Artificers mind, idea, or co^ceite, has a more noble being
then in it self, for in it self it is corporal, massy, and material, in
his idea, it is intellectual and spiritual: So all creatures which are Gods
works, are contained in God, and in his divine essence, as in their first
cause, and Idea, or mental platform, and in him they have a more emine^t
being, that is Divine, without all division and imperfection, as is already
said.

3. What then, o Lord, can we contribute to thee by sacrifices of oxen, sheep,
and the like? If we should offer unto thee all the Angels of Heaven, all the
Heavens, stars, planets, all the four elements, to wit, fire, air, water,
and earth, and all the metals of gold, silver etc. within the earth, all the
trees, plants and beasts upon it, and all creatures living and not living in
one sacrifice; thou should be never the better or richer, because all these
things are thine already, by Title and right of creation, and thou did
possess the^ all in thy Divine essence, and in a more noble manner then they
are in themselves, from all eternity. So that as we can take nothing from
thee, so we can give thee nothing. Thou mast say. Quis dedit mihi ve reddam
ei? Job. 41.
omnia quae sub Coelo sunt mea sunt. Who has given me before, that I may
render unto him? all things that are under the Heaven, yea and in Heaven, are
mine, And therefore says David, if thou, o Lord, would have had sacrifice
(of bruit beasts) I would verily have given it, but even with holocaustes,
the principal sacrifices, thou will not be delighted, because by them thou art
not the richer, they being already thine by title of creation, and possessed by
thee, in that thou art their prime and general cause.

Sacrificium Deo spiritus contribulatus: cor contritum, and humiliatum Deus non
despicies.

A sacrifice to God is an afflicted spirit: a contrit, and humbled heart, o
Lord, thou will not despise.


1. ALthough it be true that the external sacrifice of oxen, sheep, and the
like, are not profitable to God, as in the explication of the former verse is
showed, yet before the coming of CHRIST, and before they with the old law by
CHRIST were abrogated, they were not absolutely displeasing to God, they
being commanded by God, and the manner of offering them being by God
prescribed in the book of Leuiticus. Yea if they proceeded from the internal
sacrifice of faith, submission of the mind to God, and devotion, they were
holy acts of Religion, by which God was highly honored, pleased, yea and
pacified toward sinners. Why then did David say in the former verse that God
would not have sacrifice, and would not be delighted in holocaustes, the best
kind of sacrifice? Why did Micheas question the matter saying. Mich. 6
Why? can our Lord be pacified with thousands of rams? Why did God himself
say, To what purpose do you offer me the multitude of your victimes? Isa. 1.
I am full. etc. And again says he: Offer sacrifice no more in vain; Incence
is abomination to me.

2. To this answer may be made, first that some Jews thought that the only
external sacrifice without the internal of the mind did please and pacify
God. And such sacrifice God rejects as not pleasing. Isa. 29.
So God said this people approaches with their mouth, and with their lips
glorifieth me, but their heart is far from me. Secondly these sacrifices, as
they proceeded from wicked persons, or were procured by wicked me^, whose
hearts were full of malice, and whose hands were full of blood, and
injustice, were not pleasing but displeasing to God, not for the sacrifices
themselves, but for the sins of them that offered them. Isa. 1.
And so God said that incense (though by him commanded) was abomination to
him. Thirdly Scripture diverse times when it seems to reject external
sacrifice, rejects them not absolutely, because God did institute them, but
comparatiuelie, that is, in comparison of the in world sacrifice of the mind,
which it prefers. In this sense God says by the Prophet Osee, Oseae. 6.
I would mercy and not sacrifice: That is I prefer mercy and charity
toward your neighbor before sacrifice to me, Aug. lib. 10. de Ciuit. Dei cap.
5. 1. Reg. 15.
and so Augustine says, Sacrificium sacrificio praefertur, one sacrifice is
preferred before an other. In the same sense Samuel says to Saul, who had
disobeyed God: and yet had offered an holocaust of the first of the preyes,
which he had brought from Amalec: Why will our Lord have holocaustes and
victimes, and not rather that the voice of our Lord be obeyed? for better is
obedience then victimes, and to harken rather then to offer the fatt of rams.
So that the external sacrifice taken nakedlie by it self, or as it proceeds
from sinful men is not pleasing to God. The inward sacrifice is pleasing to
God by it self and without the external sacrifice, but this, without that, is
not pleasing.

3. The sacrifices then, which especially please God, are the inward
sacrifices of the mind, such a sacrifice is the praise of God which is called
the sacrifice of praise in diverse places of Scripture, Tob. 2. Psalm. 4.49.115
which David in his 49. Psalm prefers before the sacrifice of oxen, and
other beasts; for having rejected those sacrifices he says: Immolate to God
the sacrifice of praise: By this sacrifice of praise, we humble our selves and
make a kind of sacrifice of our selves to God, in acknowledging our selves to
be nothing, to have nothing, which we have not from him, and so taking away all
matter and motive of praise from our selves, we give all thanks and praise to
God only for all his benefits and graces, and we say with David, not to us
o Lord, Psalm. 113. 1. Tim. 1.
not to us, but to thy name give the glory. And with S. Paul, To the King of
the worlds, immortal, invisible only God, honor and glory for ever and
ever. of which sacrifice S. Paul speaking says, Heb. 13.
by him therefore let us offer this host of praise always to God that is to
say the fruit of lips, confessing to his name:

4. Such a sacrifice is obedience, by which we sacrifice not the bodies of
brute beasts, but our own wills, affections, and judgments, which are the
things most dear unto us. Genesis 22
Such a sacrifice Abraham offered to God, when after God had commanded him to
immolate and sacrifice his only and dearly beloved Isaac, he took the vvood
and laid it on Isaac his sons shoulders, to prefigurat thereby CHRIST JESUS,
who carried the vvood of the cross, on which he was sacrificed for our
Redemption, and Abraham himself carried the fire with which he thought to
have burned Isaac into an holocauste, he built an Altar, he bound Isaac, and
laid him on the pile of wood, which was on the Altar, and taking his sword and
stretching forth his hand, he was ready to kill his own son Isaac. O
obedience better then an holocauste or hecato^be of all the oxen and sheep in
the world. O noble sacrifice by which he sacrificed his paternall affection to
so dear a son. But God almighty was so pleased with this inward sacrifice
of his obedience, by which he sacrificed his will, and all natural affection
toward his only son, that he sent an Angel to command him to hold his
hands, saying, by this, o Abraham, I see thou fear God, by this I have
tried thy love and obedience toward me, who wast ready to kill thy only and
thy so dear son to obey me: Enough Abraham, enough, this internal sacrifice
so pleases me, that now I care not for the external, hold thy hands, Oration
de diuinitate Filij and Spiritus S.
kill not thy son. S. Gregory Nissen affirms of himself, that when on a
time he saw the picture of Abraham ready to sacrifice his own son, he
could not pass by the picture without shedding tears, as indeed the picture
and the example would move any tender or generous heart.

5. Such a sacrifice is Beneficence or Almesgiuing, which S. Paul bids us
not to forget: Heb. 13.
because with such hosts God is promerited: this sacrifice is on Alms which
proceeding from the love of God and co^passio^ toward our neighbor, is first
offered to God, because it is given principally for his sake, and then is
given to our neighbor or the poor: and so is a sacrifice resembling those
sacrifices of the old law, of which not only the Priest, but the people
also, was partaker.

5. Such a sacrifice is prayer made to God with feruencie and devotion; the
Priest who offers this sacrifice is the devout Christian, his Altar is his
soul or heart, his sacrifice is his prayer, the fire which burns this
sacrifice is Charity, out of which prayer ascending mounteth up to Heaven,
yea penetrateth it as a sweet perfume, and sauoureth sweetly to the divine
senses, and perfumeth all the court of Heaven, like a most sweet incense,
Psalm. 140.
according to that of David: Let my prayer be directed as incense in thy sight:
And as by sacrifice we acknovvledge our own baseness, and vilitie, God his
souuerainitie and majesty, our selves his creatures, him our Creator and Lord
of our lives, who could destroy and annihilat us, as by sacrifice beasts were
wont to be killed and consumed, that we hold out being of him as te^nants at
will, and are of our selves nothing; so by the spiritual sacrifices of prayer
we acknowledge our selves beggars, God the rich King of Heaven and earth, our
selves so poor, that we have nothing, and are nothing of our selves, him so
rich, that he is the fountain and source of all goodness, perfection, yea and
being; on whom we depend more then the river of the fountain, or the sun
beams of the sun; and so by prayer we saccrifice all we have, and are to
God, acknovvledging that of our selves we have nothing, are nothing, but have
all of God, and so do live precario by begging, and at his will.

6. Such a sacrifice is a contrit heart, and this is the principal of all
spiritual and inward sacrifices, and is of all the most pleasing to God,
because, as David says in this verse, a sacrifice to God (and that more
pleasing then holocaustes in which he will not be delighted) is an afflicted
spirit, and a contrit and humbled heart, which God will not despise. The
external and corporal sacrifices taken alone are neither profitable to God,
nor pleasing, as in the former verse is declared; the inward sacrifices alone
are not profitable to God, but yet they are pleasing to him. They are not
profitable, for what is he the better for our praise? what the worse for our
dispraise? what is he the better if we honor him? what the worse is we
dishonor him? what the better is he for our good works, prayers and
devotion? what the worse for all the sins we committ? For as Eliphaz
Themanites said to Job. Job. 22.
What does it profit God if thou be just? or what do thou advantage him, if
thy way be unspotted? And as, Eliu said to the same Job; Job. 35.
If thou sin what shall thou hurt him? and if thy iniquity be multiplied,
what shall thou do against him? More over if thou do justly what shall thou
give him, or what shall he re^eaue of thy hand? yet the spiritual and inward
sacrifice is more pleasing to God then are external sacrifices, yea in respect
and comparisons of the inward sacrifice, God, as it were, dispiseth the
external sacrifices, as we have seen above.

7. And hence it is, that in the new law, which is of Christ, all those
external sacrifices of the Jews are abrogated with their law, and now there
is no proper external sacrifice, but the bloody sacrifice of christ offered
on the cross for our Redemption, and the unbloody sacrifice of the same
christ, which he offered at his last supper for application of that; Matthew. 26.
and which is repeated daily in the office of the church, and at the Altar,
of which also Malachie prophesied when he says that instead of the sacrifice
of the Jews a clean oblation should be offered in all places: Malac. 1.
which prophecy can not be understood of the sacrifice of the Cross, that
being offered but once, and in one place; nor of any external sacrifice of
the Jews, such sacrifices being in that place of Malachie rejected, nor of
improper sacrifices of prayer, good works, etc. they being many, this
sacrifice mentioned by Malachie being one, and they being improper sacrifices,
this of which Malachie speaks, being proper, as which is by him opposed to
the Jews proper sacrifices; but of the sacrifice unbloody offered at the
Altar, which is a clean oblation, and unbloody, whether we regard the
external signs, the accidents of bread and wine, or that which they
co^taine, which is the body and blood of Christ offered in them by the Priest
in an unbloody manner, and which by ancient fathers and councelles is called a
sacrifice, and ever in the church has been esteemed and offered on an Altar
as a sacrifice.

8. Wherefore now we are not to sacrifice oxen and calves or lambs as the
Jews did; now we are said to immolat the calfe when we sacrifice by
austeritie our own flesh; now we sacrifice the lamb when we suppress our
own fury and anger, and show our selves meek and gentle to those, who have
wronged or offended us; now we sacrifice the goat when we repress
lasciuiousnes; now the turtle when we keep our chastity undefiled; now the
young pigeon when we live in charity with all. God now will not have us
sacrifice brute beasts, but our brutish passions and sensualities, not other
living creatures, but our selves; so that God now takes no pleasure in the
external and carnal Jewish sacrifice, but in the inward and spiritual
sacrifices of Christians, and as I said in the external sacrifice of his
sons sacred body and blood on the Altar.

9. And amongst all the inward and spiritual sacrifices, the afflicted
spirit, a contrit and humbled heart, is that, which especially pleases God?
When David considered his sins against God, his heart was contrit, that is
rent and broken with sorrow, and when he considered that his sin was not
only an offense of God, but also a misery to himself, which made him more
odious to God and his Angels, then the vilest toade or serpent, then it
humbled his heart, and at the same time made it, Cor contritum and humiliatum,
a contrit, or broken, and humbled heart: His heart was broken with sorrow,
when he considered how good a God, how clement a Prince, how tender a Father,
how great a benefactour, how loving a friend, he had offended: it humbled his
heart, when by his sin he experienced his own frayltie, and savv into
what danger of eternal damnation he was fallen; it brake his heart, when he
considered that sin is the greatest disease that is, greater then any ague,
palsy, or leprosy, for that these are but diseases of the body, sin of the
soul: And it humiliated his heart to see himself become by sin a Lazar and
a foul leper; it brake his heart when he considered that sin is the greatest
wound that is, greater then a stabb through the bovvelles of the body, for that
only wounds and kills the body, sin stobbeth, vvoundeth, yea and
kills the soul, by depriving it of the life of grace, and therefore the
wise man bids us to fly from sin as from the face of a serpent, Eccl. 21.
because says he, the teeth of a Lion are his teeth, killing the souls of
me^: It humiliated him to see himself thus vvounded, and by so base a thing as
his sin was, a filthy and brutish pleasure, and a traitorous murder; It
brake his heart with sorrovv, when he considered that sin, especially if
it be mortal, is a greater evil then Hell it self, for that hell is only
malum paenae the evil of pain, sin is malum culpae, the evil of fault and
offense of God, which is the greatest evil: Hell is but malum poenae an evil
of pain, and it is an effect of God his justice, inflicted by God: sin is no
effect of God, nor creature of God, but only a bastardly Impe of the sinners
perverse will: It humiliated him when he considered that he was oppressed
with the greatest evil that is, and that God could not lay so great an evil
on him, though he should heap upon him all the pains in Hell, as he laid on
himself by his sin; It brake his heart to consider that he had sinned: it
humbled his heart in that he was sure he had sinned and had wept for his
sins, and yet, without revelation he could not tell whether his sin was
forgiven or no, Eccl. 9.
whether he was worthy hatred or love; and though it was revealed to him that
his sin was forgiven, 2. Reg. 12.
by Nathan the Prophet, yet it was sufficient matter of humility to have
sinned, and therefore S. Paul, though he was sure his sin of persecuting
the first Christians was forgiven him, 1. Tim. 1.
and that he had obtained the mercy of God, because he did it being ignorant
in incredulity, yet because he had persecuted the church of God, he thought it
a sufficient matter of humility, 1. Co. 15
and a motive ever after to think himself an Abortiue and the least of the
Apostles not worthy to be called an Apostle, only because he had heretofore
persecuted the church of God. And therefore David not content that the Prophet
Nathan told him, 2. Reg. 12.
that God had taken away his sin, weepeth still, bevvayleth and lame^teth
that he did sin, and breaks his heart with sorrovv and humbles it, knowing
that a contrite and humbled heart, God will not despise.

10. O David, who art thou, who thus fills the air with cries throbbes,
sobbes and lame^tations? who art thou, who fetchest from thy heart so deep
and so doleful sighs, vvherevvith thy heart is broken, rent, and humbled? I
am a criminal, says he, and a guilty person condemned by God, and by his
Prophet Nathan, yea and by mine own conscience (which, forces me to cry
peccaui) of no less sins then murder and adultery: what marvel then if
my heart break with sorrovv, my mouth sound it out in cries, and my eyes
witness it with flouddes of tears? O David who art thou, who now art so
humble even in heart? vvast not thou elected by God, and anointed by Samuel the
Prophet King of the Jews? was it not thou, 2. Reg. 10.
who killedst a lion and a bear, 1. Reg. 17.
foyledst at thy feet the great Giant Golias, who braued the hosts of God,
and made them all to quake? Art not thou he of whom the young maids and
virgins sange, 1. Reg. 18.
Saul stroke a thousand, and David ten thousand? It is true, I am he that did
all this, but I, who killed the lion, 1. Reg. 17.
the bear and the Giant Golias, am now slain by an homebred, yet more cruel
beast concupiscence, which pretending to do me a pleasure, has given me my
deadly vvound, and like a traiterous Ioab seeming to offer me a kiss, 2. Reg.
20. 1. Reg. 18. Psa. 88
gave me the stabb. O David, art not thou he, to whom God promised the Kingdom
of Israel to continue in thy race for ever, of which race the Messiah was to
descend? why then art thou so dejected, and humbled in heart? I am he, but I
am now a grievous sinner, and those great titles, prerogatives, and privileges
vvherevvith God heretofore honored me, do now but aggrauat my sins, and
therefore not vvithstanding the aforesaid titles, I am afflicted in spirit my
heart is contrite, broken with sorrovv and humbled.

11. And yet, o Lord, says he, I will not despair, knowing thee to be
merciful and mercy it self. Psa. 21. Ps. 70 ibid.
Thou art my hope from the breasts of my mother; thou art my hope from my
youth. In thee, Lord, I have hoped, let me not be confounded for ever: Ps. 131.
Remember David, o Lord, and all his meeknes. Remember what I was,
heretofore, Act. 13.
a man according to thy heart; consider not what I am, but pardon what I am,
and restore me to what I was, to my former virtue, grace, and fauout; and for
my sins past, I will offer thee a sacrifice, not of oxen or sheep, but of
my self, of an afflicted spirit, of a co^trite, and humbled heart, which is
more agreeable to thee the^ hecatombes of brute beasts: I, o Lord, will be my
self the Priest, my Altar shall be my soul, my sacrifice my heart, which by
contrition I shall break, and bruise; by charity I will burn unto thy
honor, as a most grateful holocauste, knowing that a contrite heart and
humbled thou will not despise.

13. O the noble sacrifice of a contrite heart! This sacrifice in all laws be
it the law of Nature before Moses, or the law written before CHRIST, or the
new law since the coming of Christ, is auaylable, always grateful, never
abrogated, as the old sacrifices are: I need not seek far countries for it,
it is within me, I need not lay out money to buy it, it is mine; CHRIST JESUS
by his passion bought it, and gave it to me, if I will, I need not beg it
of any but CHRIST JESUS, it is in my power with his grace, it is a sacrifice,
which every one may offer, as well the poor, as the rich, as well the subject,
as the King, as well the servant, as the Master, it maybe offered asvvell in the
night as the day, as well in the field as the Church: no time, no place, no
person, no hour, no moment unfit for this sacrifice.

14. I, o Lod, remembering with David my many and grievous sins am desirous
with him to offer a sacrifice to appease thy anger conceived against me for
them: and because the sacrifices of brute beasts, which were offered in the
old law, are not now pleasing unto thee, nor never were for themselves,
unless they proceeded from the inward sacrifice of the heart, I offer unto
thee the inward sacrifice, which David offered thee, to wit a contrite and
humbled heart, beaten to powder with contrition, burned to ashes by love of
thee and charity: The zealous Moses when he saw that the Jews had adored
the golden calfe instead of God, Exodus 32.
was transported with such an holy rage and fury, that in this zeal he slew
the Idolaters, and caused the golden calfe their Idol to be beaten to powder,
and mingling the powder with water, caused the children of Israel to drink it.
If Moses was so angry with that Idol, which committed no Idolatry, but
was only the object of the Jews Idolatry, to which also it could not
consent, How should I detest my heart, in what a rage should I be against it?
why should I not beat it to powder, by contritio^, it having committed a
kind of Idolatry, so often as it sinned mortallie, in preferring the creature
before the Creator and his commandments? and why should not I mingle this
powder with the tears of contrition, and drink, daily this potion, and make
it my meat and drink, Psa. 41.
as he did, who said: Fuerunt mihi lachrymae meae panes die ac nocte. My
tears have been breads unto me day and night?

15. O sweet Jesus, our true Moses the verity of the Jews Moses, a tipe
and figure of thee, who gave us the law written in hearts, not in tables, as
he did, who deliueredst us not from a temporal captivity of Pharao, as he
did, Exodus 17.
but from an eternal thraldom of the Devil; strike with the rodd of thy
cross, and consideration of thy passion, suffered for our sins on it, the
rock of my stony heart, that the tears of contrition, may gushe forth and
flow from it by my eyes, as they did from David's, S. Peter's, and S. Marie
Magdalenes eyes. O sweet Jesus resolve by the blood of thy passion my hard
heart into the rivers of tears, in which David, Manasses S. Peter S. Marie
Magdalene vvashed their souls from the filth of sin. In this Iorda^ of
tears vvash me, o Lord, 4. Reg. 5. Luc. 4.
from my leprosy of sin with Naaman Syrus: In this poole of Siloe vvash
mine eyes with the blind-borne: Joan. 9
Joan. 5.
In this Probatica heal me, and cure me of all my infirmities. Joan. 4.
Wash me in this fountain of living water which springs up to life
everlasting. In this second baptism called Baptismus flaminis, regenerat me a
new creature. 2. Par. 33. Ionae. 3. 4. Reg. 20. 1. Reg. 2 Psa. 50. Luc. 7.
Math. 26.
These tears restored Manasses to his kingdom, deliuerd Niniue from
destruction, prolonged Ezechias life fifteen years, procured to Anna a Samuel,
to David, S. Peter, S. Marie Magdalene, and thousand other sinners, remission
of their sins; And if in Noe his time, the world had been vvashed in this
water, it had never been drowned in the Deluge. In this water the ship of my
soul shall sail to the haven of heaven securely, because in this sea of
tears there is no storm to shake it, no surging waves to toss it, no rock
to shiuer it in pieces, or on which it running it self, may suffer shipvvrack,
nor Pirates to board it and spoil it. And to this port and haven of Heaven, and
eternal bliss and felicity, bring me, o Lord, through the waters of
contrition, and if it shall so please thee, through the waters also of
tribulation, and adversity vvhatsouer.

Benign fac Domine in bona voluntate tua Sion, vt aedificentur muri Jerusalem.

Deal favorably, o Lord, in thy good will with Sion, that the walls of
Jerusalem may be built up.

Tunc acceptabis sacrificium iustitiae, oblationes and holocausta, tunc
imponent super altar tuum vitulos.

Then shall thou accept sacrifice of justice, oblations and holocaustes: then
shall they lay calves upon thine Altars.


These two verses are explicated to gether by reason of their connection, the
second yielding a reason of the first.
1. THe first thing that a sinner must ask of God Almighty, is pardon for his
sins committed, and by it, God his grace and favor; for till that be
obtained, the sinner is an enemy to God, and odious to his sight, and so not
like to be heard; but pardon for his sins, and consequently grace and favor
being once purchased, then he may be bold to be a suter and a beggar for other
benefits. David, as we have seen in the former verses of this Psalm, has
often prayed for mercy and forgiveness for his sins, and now hoping (yea
knowing by revelation from the Prophet Nathan) that by his penance remission
of his sins is obtained, and he now in grace and favor, he takes the heart
to pray to God for other benefits; and because the common good is to be
preferred before ones private commodity, he asks God, neither health, nor
wealth, nor long life, nor any such private benefit, but being zealous of the
common good, and especially of the public worship and honor of God, which
brings with it many blessings to a country, he desires God, to deal
favorably with Sion that the walls of Jerusalem may be built up.

2. He always showed a great zeal for Jerusalem, because it was the
Metropolitan and head City, as also because there God was religiously served,
and was afterward, when the Temple should be built, much more to be honored
by the many sacrifices which there were to be offered; and especially because
the Messiah, CHRIST JESUS, was to teach, preach and work miracles in that
City and Temple, and was to sanctify and honor both, by his sacred presence;
all which he forsaw in spirit by faith and the gift of Prophecy.

Psalm. 136.
3. And therefore says he, If I shall forgeth thee, o Jerusalem, let my right
hand be forgotten, let my tongue cleave to my jaws, if I do not remember
thee, if I shall not set Hierusalsm in the beginning of my joy: The like or
greater zeal shevved toward the Arc and temple, though this as then was
not bult: Behold, 1. Par. 17.
says he I dwell in an house of Cedar, and the arc of the covenant of our
Lord is under skins: that is under a tabernacle or pauillon. And again: If I
shall enter into the tabernacle of my house, If I shall ascend into the bed of
my couch, Psalm. 131.
If I shall give sleep to mine eyes, and slumbring to mine eye liddes, and
rest to my temples, until I find a place for our Lord, a tabernacle for the
God of Jacob. O the zeal of David. He would not, he could not sleep nor rest,
till an house and temple for God was built, and he had rather to have lain out
of the doors, then that God should want his temple, and house of prayer and
sacrifice wherein to dwell, and therefore he would have built the temple in his
own days if that God had not told him by Nathan the Prophet that not he, 2.
Reg. 7.
but his son Solomon should build it:

4. But although he built not the Temple, yet such was his zeal, that he
provided the materialles, and almost all that was necessary for the building
of it, and besides, stones, timber, brass, iron, and such like, 2. Paral. 29.
he gave three thousand talentes of Gold of Ophir, and seven thousand talentes
of Silver, toward the building of it; and besides all this he gave unto
Solomon a description of the temple, and told him the order of the Musicians
and Levites which were to sing and serve in the temple, and he composed the
psalms and sonnettes, and provided the musical instrumente^s which were to be
used in it, as above we have seen, and so it maybe called in a manner asvvell
David's, as Salomons temple.

5. He desires then that Jerusalem may be builded, that is accomplished, for
although he speaks only of the walls of Jerusalem, yet he takes the
part for the whole, and by the wales of Jerusalem he understands
Jerusalem: And although the city of Jerusalem, for the greatest part, was
then built, yet he desires that it may be augmented, and perfected,
especially with the addition of the Temple, the greatest strength and
ornament of the City, being the house of God, in which he dwelling, the
City could not be without defense or guard.

6. And although he knevv by revelation from God that this temple would
infalliblie be builded by Solomon, yet partly to show his zeal and desire,
partly because he foresavve that this temple was to be one of the chief
wonders and miracles of the world, and therefore could not be brought to pass
without God his cooperation, nor succeed prosperously unless God, as it
were, did lay the first stone, and second this stately building and
Masterpiece of masonrie, he prays to God for the building and hastening of
it:

7. And why, o Royal Prophet, do thou so earnestly desire that Jerusalem
should be built? That it may be an honor to thee and thy son Solomon the
principal Authors of it? or that it may be a perpetual monument of thy
riches or magnificence? or that it may be an ornament to the City, and a
vvonder to the world? No, no, thy thoughts were leuelled to an higher mark.
Thou desiredst, that God thereby might be glorified, that his name might
thereby be honored and praised, for thou foresavvest by the gift of
Prophecy, and the light of faith, that the holy Arc with great pomp and
sole^nitie, and to the great glory of God, should be transported and
translated in to the temple. Thou knew that in that temple God should be
highly praised, by Hymns, Psalms, Canticles, and all manner of musical
instruments: Thou did foresee the great and goodly sacrifices, which by
lively faith and devotion of the Priests, should be offered to God his
honor: thou did foresee that after this temple should be sacked by
Nabuchodonosor, and raised, and reared up again, Nehe^. 3. Agg. 2.
as it was in the time of Nehemias, and after by Herod, the Messiah should
honor it by his sacred presence, preaching, teaching, and miracles: Whereby as
Aggeus prophesied, Agg. 2.
Great should be the glory of this last house, more then of the first. This
was that at which David did aim, this was the butt of his desire, to wit,
God his honor and glory, not any his own interest, as appears by these
his words which begin the next verse, Tunc acceptabis sacrificium iustitiae,
etc. Thou shall then accept sacrifice of justice, oblations and Holocaustes,
then shall they lay calves upon thine Altar: For although the sacrifices of the
old law did not justify of themselves, yet when they proceeded from a lively
faith, they did justify, as other good works do, and so might be called in
this sense sacrifices of justice.

7. By this, o my soul, thou may learn a godly lesson, that is, to be
zealous with David for God his glory, and to prefer that before all private
interestes, to spare no cost nor labor, that God may be honored; And if thou
have not the means, to build a spiritual temple to his honor, that is either
to convert a soul, or thy country to true faith and holy life, by teaching,
preaching, or vvriting of books: then to set others on, that can, to encourage
them, to aid and assist them by thy means, as David encouraged and assisted
Solomon to build that material temple; for so though thou thy self do not
build this temple, yet thou shall with David prepare the materialles and give
the means, as he did to Solomon his son, and so shall be partaker with
them, who convert souls, and so build to God a spiritual temple in which he
may be honored with the spiritual sacrifices of thanksgiving, prayer,
praises of his name and the like. England is English men's Jerusalem, which
they must never forget in their prayers, Psalm. 136.
but they must say as David did, If I forget thee, o Jerusalem, o England, let
my right hand be forgotten. And the true church of England, heretofore great
and glorious, now little and obscure in the eyes of men, by reason of the
change of state and former persecution, must be their temple, to the restoring
where of, some must cooperat by preaching, teaching, writing and good examples,
others by encouraging their preachers and teachers, and by ministering means
unto them; and both must, with David, prefer this common good, and flourishing
estate of the Church and Country of England, before all private respects, and
commodities.

8. But David, no doubt in an Allegorical sense had a farther aim, to wit,
at the Church and temple of CHRIST, the second Solomon, and the verity of that
figurative temple; for David having a more explicit faith then the ordinary
Jews had, believed explicitelie that the Messiah CHRIST JESUS, God and man,
was to come to save mankind, and to that end was to build a far more Auguste
temple then he and his son Solomon could build, and out of this zeal he
prays to God to build the walls of this Jerusalem and to plant this temple
of his church, knovving that this Jerusalem and temple far excels that.

9. The founder and Author of the first temple was the first Solomon; the
founder and architect of the temple of the Church was Christ Jesus who feared
not to say of himself, behold more then Solomon here, Luc. 11.
because he knevv himself not only to be wise, but also wisdom it self;
that temple was confined in Jerusalem; this is greater then Jerusalem and
all Ievvrie, yea has no other limits then the limits of the world; that
temple and Synagogue comprehended only the Jews, the issue of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and therefore God was only known in Iewrie, Psalm. 75
and in Israel his name was great; this temple of Christ's Church contains Jew
and Gentile, and all the world, and therefore few were saved by that temple,
thousands and millio^s by this; that temple was built of material and
inanimate stones, this of living stones, 1. Pet. 2
according to that of S. Peter: be ye also your selves, superedifyed as it were
living stones. That temple was not built by David the warrior, but by
peaceable Solomon, this not by Alexander the great or Julius Caesar, nor any
such warlike prince, but by the peaceable Messiah Christ Jesus, the Prince of
peace; Isa: 9.
3. Reg. 5.
there were many workmen who travailed in the building of Salomons Temple,
seventy thousand who carried burdens: 3. Reg.
eighty thousand hewers of stone in the mountain: besides the overseers which
were over every work, in number three thousand three hundred: The workmen
which concur to the building of Christ his Church are some Apostles, and
some Prophets, and other-some Evangelists and other-some Pastors and
Doctors, and those, Ephesians. 4
millions in number, by preaching and ministering sacraments shall work in
the temple to the worlds end, to the consommation of the Saints, unto the
work of the ministry, unto the edifying of the body (Mystical) of christ,
which is his Church: There was heard no noise of hammer or hachet and tools
of iron, 3. Reg. 6.
when that temple was built, because the stones were hevved before they
were brought to the building And in the foundation and building of the Church,
there was no noise of arms, or engines or instruments of war, by which
the Empires of the Chaldea^s, Medes, Persians and Romans were built, only the
preaching of a fevv unarmed fishermen was heard, and by virtue of that, this
goodly temple was raised and daily augmented, notvvitstanding that Jews
and Gentiles, Philosophers, Tyrants and all the world stood in arms against
the builders, and did all they could to hinder the building: 3. Reg. 6
That temple was vested with gold, this with a more precious gold, charity;
In that was a great lauer, in this Baptism, 2. Par. 3. and. 4
which washes the soul; In that was the Altar of holocaustes and of incense,
in this, as S. Paul says, Heb. 13.
we have an Altar whereof they can not eat, which serve the tabernacle; In
that temple, were places separate, 2. Par. 3
one called Holy an other Holy of Holies, others called courts: In this
there are diverse orders, and degrees of Primates, Archbishops, Bishops,
inferior Pastors, and many Religious orders; 2. Par. 4.
In that were ten golden ca^dlestsicks, on which were lights to illuminate
the Temple; In this are the Apostles and their successors, who are called the
light of the world, Mat. 5^
and they are candlesticks also, which show the light of the faith to others:
In that was a cloud called the glory of God, 2. Par. 7.
because it was a sign and figure of his Divinity; In this the son of God,
Christ Jesus, God and man, was offered once bloodilie on the Cross, and every
day vnbloodilie on the Altar, Optatus Mileuitanus l. 6. contra Donatistas. Agg.
2.
which Optatus calls Sedem corporis Domini, the seat of the body of our
Lord; by which it is manifest, that, as Aggeus long since prophesied, Great is
the glory of this last house temple, and Church of Christ) more then of the
first.

10. David therefore, foreseeing by faith the glory of this temple,
Jerusalem, and Church of Christ, desires almighty God that it may be built,
And why David? o says he, then and not before, thou shall accept the sacrifice
of justice; And what is that? the sacrifice of the Cross, to wit, of Christ
Jesus offered by death on the cross. This sacrifice is the fountain of all
grace received ever since Adams fall; this sacrifice appeaseth God his wrath
and satisfies his justice, in paying the great price of our Redemption; by
this sacrifice God was more honored then by all the sacrifices that ever
before were offered; by this sacrifice we were reconciled to God, and his
Angels; By this, sin was cancelled, the Devil vanquished, Hell, that is
limhus Patrum, was ransacked, and all those prisonners enjoyed a iayle
delivery; death was despoiled of his sting, yea was put to death; finally
by which only host, once only offered, our redemption was consummated,
Hebr. 9 and 10.
for as S. Paul says, by one oblation has he consummated for ever them that
are sanctified.

11. And peradventure David being a Prophet and having a more explicit faith
then the other Jews had, Matthew. 26.
alludeth also to the sacrifice, which Christ instituted and offered at his
last supper; and which is repeated by the Priest daily in the Church; And this
in respect, of the thing offered, which is Christ, differs not from the
sacrifice of the cross, because in both sacrifices the same Christ, and the
same body and blood of his, is offered; though in other respects they differ,
because that of the cross was a bloody sacrifice, this unbloody, that was
offered in it is own form, this in the likeness of bread and wine; that was a
real mactation and killing of Christ, this mystical only, that was our
Redemption, this an application only of it; that was an universal cause of
all grace and remission of sins, this is a particular cause (as Baptism is)
which determines the universal cause to determinate effects; that
impetrated grace by its own virtue, this by virtue from that; that, because
it was a bloody sacrifice, and contained the full price of our Redemption,
was offered but once, because a bloody sacrifice is but once killed, a
ransom or Redemption, is but once paid; this, because it is a mystical
mactation, and an application only of that price of our Redemption, is
oftentimes offered; That was offered immediately by Christ, this now
immediately by his Priest at the holy Altar.

12. This verity of the unbloody sacrifice, Catholic vvriters do prove by
all those kind of arguments (as I my self have in some books of mine) by
which the greatest mysteries and articles of our faith are proved, as by
Scriptures, Councels, fathers, and practice of the Church; but because I intend
in this my Paraphrase to abstain from controversies, and only to stir up
sinners to repentance, I will omit all such arguments, and will return to
our penitent king and Prophet. And why David do thou so much desire that
the wales of this Jerusalem, and the temple of the Church of Christ should
be built? out of my zeal, says he, of God his greater glory, and salvation
of others, for then, says he, shall thou accept sacrifice of justice, then,
and not before shall thou accept the bloody and unbloody sacrifices of the
son of God the true sacrifices of justice, because the bloody sacrifice
satisfied thy justice in paying the price of our redemption, and the unbloody
applies the price: and then by these sacrifices thou shall be infinitlie more
honored then by all the sacrifices of the old law; then thousands more both
of Jews and Ge^tils shall be saved, then were in the old law; then shall be
laid on thy Altar not calves, and oxen, but the sacrifices of thy sacred body
and blood, the verities of those figures.

13. In a tropicall or moral sense, Jerusalem and the temple do signify the
soul of man, and in this sense, David desires that the walls of his
Jerusalem, the forces of his soul, lost by sin, may by grace be repaired.
Desire thou also, o penitent sinner, with this penitent king and Prophet, that
the forces of thy ruinous Jerusalem, of thy soul, cast down by sin, may be
repaired, that faith the foundation of this spiritual temple may be renewed,
if it be lost, or strengthened, if it be not lost; that the walls of thy hopes
by which this Jerusalem and temple rises and is raised, may be erected and
fortified, that Charity the top and roof, may cover it, that this temple
may be cleansed from all sin, and that by all Christian virtues it may be
adorned and by God his grace and guiftes of the holy Ghost, embellished; and
that in it daily spiritual sacrifices of prayer, praise, thanksgiving of a
contrite heart, and of all good works may be offered to God his honor and
glory.

14. Lastly, in the Anagogicall sense, David desires that the walls of the
celestial Jerusalem may be built, that is, that the Heaue^lie Jerusalem
ruined in part by the fall of Lucifer and his rebellious followers, may be
repaired, and their seats filled. For he knew by faith that there was a
Jerusalem in Heaven far more glorious then that in earth, Apoc. 21.
and which by S John his description is built of no worse materials then
pearls, gold, and precious stones, thereby signifying the splendor, riches,
and majesty of it. S. Paul calls it a mount Sion, Heb. 12.
and the City of the living God, Heavenly Jerusalem, and the assembly of
many thousand Angels, the Church of the first borne, which are written in the
Heavens. This is the true Jerusalem, that is, the true vision of peace, where
all seeing God face to face, do all peaceably aggre, in loving, praising,
honoring, and serving him.

15. In this Jerusalem every Saint and Angel is a living stone, which
co^poseth and builds up this City, every Saint and Angel is a courtier of
this Court, every Saint and Angel is a minio^, and fauorit of the Heavenly
king, every Saint and Angel is a Quirester of God his Chapel, every Saint
and Angel is a king of a kingdom of no less extent, then the Kingdom of
Heaven.

16. In this Heavenly Jerusalem there is peace without war, security
without fear, contentement without disgust, satietie without glutting, joy
without sorrow, rest with without labor, light without darkness, morning
without evening, day without night, spring without the fall of the leaf,
summer without vvinter, youth without old age, health without sickness, life
without death, happiness without misery, and one happier then an other
without all envy, because every one rejoices in an others happiness, as if it
were his own, no sin against God, all jointly loving him, no falling out
with one an other, because all in God do love one another, and no end of this
felicity, but a perseverance in all this, for all eternity. O world, how
vile seem thou, when I contemplate this Heaven? All thy pleasures, honors,
and riches, are but sweepings of this house, lees of this wine, dregs of this
drink, dross of this gold, chafe of this corn, fragments, crustes and
cru^mes of this ba^quet; all the world is but a poor cottage in respect of
this Palace, a village in respect of this kingdom, a little hillock in respect
of this high and holy mountain, a point in respect of this circumference. O
how great is the house of God, Baruc. 3.
and how great is the place of his possession? o How beloved are thy
tabernacles, o Lord, of hosts? my soul coueteth and faints unto the courts
of our Lord: Psalm. 83
Blessed are they that dvvell in thy house, o Lord, for ever and ever they
shall praise thee: If I shall forget thee o (Heavenly Jerusalem, Ps. 136.
) let my right hand be forgotten; let my tongue cleave to my jaws, if I do
not remember thee: the cogitation of thee shall make me endure with all
alacrity, all affliction, the cogitation of thee shall make me contemn all
that the world can promise or threaten.

17. O Lord, says David, deal favorably in thy good will with Sion that
the wales of Jerusalem (of this Heavenly Jerusalem) may be built up, that
sinners may with me be daily converted, and made fit to be of the living and
precious stones, of which that Cit^e is built, that the empty rooms in
Heaven, made vaca^t by the fall of Lucifer and his adherentes, may be filled
by holy souls, daily thither asce^ding, that the number of the elect and
predestinate may be accomplished, and that the Church militant may be assumed
to that Church triumphant, and consequently that then there may be no more any
Church militant, but of both may be made one Church triumphant, where the
blessed may for all eternity offer spiritual sacrifices unto thee, of
themselves and all their actions; where they may render unto thee, not the
material calves which the Jews laid upon thine Altar, but the spiritual
calves of the lips, Osee. 4. Heb. 13.
as Osee the Prophet styles them, or the fruit of the lips, as S. Paul
terms them, that is praise, and thanksgiving, for ever and ever.

18. And, o my soul, pray thou also that this Heavenly Jerusalem may be
built up, that thou may be one of the stones of which it is to be built,
though thou be the least stone in the building, yea though thou should suffer
much knocking and hammering of adversities, before thou can be made a fit
stone to be placed in that building. Nothing attaineth to perfection but by
suffering. The gold ca^ not be pure unless it pass the fire, nor can it
prove a golden goblet, fit for a Princes cupboord, before it suffer the
knockes of the gold smiths hammer; The corn is not purged from the chafe but
by threshing, and it can not make bread till it be grinded; The grapes are
pressed before they prove good wine, frankencense perfumeth not till it be
burned, nor do spices smell till they be bruised in the mortar: The stones of
the material Jerusalem and temple, could have no place in those sumptuous
buildings, till they were hewed, knocked, smoothed, and carved; and shall any
christian think ever to be placed in the celestial Jerusalem without
suffering, ha^mering, and knockes of adversity? Our blessed Savior the
cornerstone, yea the fou^datio^ both of the Jerusalem militant and
triumpha^t, his virgin mother who was the next precious stone of that City,
the Apostles which were next to her, and all the martyrs and Saints, what
knockes of torments, yea and deaths did they suffer, before they found place
in this Celestial Jerusalem?

Tunsionibus, pressuris,
Expoliti lapides,
Suis coaptantur locis
Per manus artificis
Disponuntur permansuri
Sacris aedificijs.
Those stones the workmen press and beat
Before they thoroughly polisht are;
Then each is in his proper seat
Established by the builders care;
In this fair frame to stand for ever,
So joined, that them, no force can scuer.
19. O Sweet JESUS the Prince, chief builder, and Architect of this Heavenly
Jerusalem, grant me a place in that glorious building, and if by reason of my
many sins, I be so unapt for that place and building, that I need much
hammering, and knocking, spare me not, but hammer me, and break me here, so I
may be one of those living precious and glorious stones, of which that
Jerusalem is composed, spare me not here, so thou place me there Hic ure, hic
seca, vt in aeternum parcas; here burn me, here cut and lance me, that thou
may spare me for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

