A breife recantacion of maystres Missa, And how she accuses the
flouthfuinesse of her Chapleyns, with her lamentable departing unto her Father
the Pope. 1.5 4.8.

Every tree that my heavenly Father has not planted shall be plucked up by the
rotes. Matthew the.xv.
The preface to the reader.
A.S.I.M.S.D.F.
BE thou not moved genryll Reader because that I have not observed ye due order
of a Recantacion, for it is not only a recantacion, but also an accusacion or
complaynte of the flouthfulnes of her Chaplaynes that have so long time
orsceyued her, and borne her in hand that she had al her power of the
scripture, and now in time of need never one of them will stand to the proof
of it, but let it pass as though they hat never ben co^sentynge to the same
as thou may more plainly perce yue in reading the book.

Fare well the.i. of June. By me. I. M.

BE it known unto all men, that I maistres Missa a woman of notable fame,
haueregned above.iii.C.years. And have been esteemed all that time as a gods,
which could deliver souls from hell and purgatory. The which being now
truly tried and duly approved by the scripture to be contrary, I am
constrained and also inforsed, to resort hither at this present time for to
Becante, revoke, and utterly to deny all the foresaid power and authoryte. To
thentente that the people may leave all such vain hope, and blind trusle as
they have had in me. It is not unknown gentle audyence that it has been
thought, yea and faithfully beleaued that I descended from christ and his
discyples, and is thought so still unto many. But I shall (god willing) or I
make an end, so opyn the matter, that they shall know from Whe^s I came and
for what cause I was created. And because ye my chapleyns would needs have me
to be ye supper of the lord, and now will not stand to the proof of it. I
shall also show how far I dyffer from the true supper of the lord and will
plainly prove that I have none affynite at all therewith. Notwithstanding, I
have both taught and faithfully believed the same myself by the false
parswasion of my crafty chaleyns, which continually kept me blind with Hoc
est enim corpus meum. And for the more suraunce anorned and decked me with
parthes and p^^es of the Gospel and Hystell, Wherewith they might also blind
the people, inso much that I thought my self chackmate with god almighty, and
even as good as the second parson in trinate. Which false and hlynd^ exrour I
utterly forsake and deny here before you all. Cornfessyug that I have none such
power nor aurthoryte neither from God nor his disciples. Nor had no begynyuge
of them. For truly I had my begyunyng of my father the pope who the begat me
of dame Auaritia. And I had also many goodlye Children by him and his
cardinals, as missa y^^ de^uneris, missa propluuia, mass denomine Jesus,
missa desancta trimtate and also one called mass of Scala celt which was of
more power and virtue then all the rest, for as my Chapleyns said she would not
stycke to Scale the walls of heaven, that they were not takyn inquirlye whom
she brought, neither was there any condemned in to hell ye she could not
fetch out of their friends were able to purchase her, the which I canfesse is
but a tantesye and dreme of their own inue^tio^. For yfany such power had been
granted bu^ to me or to my daughter, then had the blood of Christ ben shed in
vain. And moreover they would make Christ a very fuit to come down from the
heye throne of god his father, ^^r to be whypped scourged, yea and suffer
most: uell death, to save man's soul from hell: and if it might be bought
for a little money. But truly neither I, nor my daughters, have any such pour
to fetch any soul from hell. Yea I fear me rather lest we have sent the
usandes thither. But if we have, they belyke to be there a good while or ever
we fetch them out. Nether did my father beget me for any such purpose, for
this cause only was I created that by me they might maynteyne their honor.
And that by the means of me they might increase their riches, and fyiltheyr
cofers, and by me sir Ihon^ lacklatyne that could do nothing but mumble up
matens, sing a mass was had in asmoche reputacion as a right honest and
wellerned man. And hear I do confess that I have been a very pyckpurse yea and
worse then a pickpurse, for I have been even a strong thief and a robber of all
nations. I spared nether king ne prince tyche ne poor, but I and my
daughters, with my brother dirige would have a saying with them and in this
point only I followed the Scripture, in that I had no respect of parsons so
that they brought money, but if they brought none they were like to go
vniustyfyed home, For the ^^^^che thing I repent me now. But (as I have
promised) I will ^owe in few words declare how far I oyffer from the true
supper of the Lord in so much that you shall well perceive that I have none
affinite therewith we read in the scripture. Luke xxij. That christ the night
he was betrayed as he sat at supper with the.xij. Took bread and gave thanks
gave it to his eiscypies saying, take, eat, this is my body which is given
for you, but we do not read in all the scripture that ever he or any of his
disciples put on any such masking gear and went up to an alter and lyfted it
over his head. It follows in the text after they had supped lykwyse he took
the cup and gave thanks and gave it to his disciples, saying drink et this
all you, this is the cup of the new Testamente in my blood which shall be
shet for you, but were not t^^e that be drunk of all, and (...) them with the
empty cup Mark well row gentle au^^ence I own this gears does a^^e. Christ
gaven to his disciples as he sat at supper with the^, but my chap ^ey^s get
them a good wave of to an after, and eat it up alone Christ took the cup and
gave it to his disciples, but my thapleyns will let no body touch the cup, but
them selves. Neither will they give any man drink with them. Christ gave it
at supper, but my chapleyus take it to their breakfast. Thus may you se good
audience ye Christ's institution and their ordinance, do not only disagre,
but also the one does plainly repoungne ag^^^^ the other, nether can it be any
other wise, seeing that the one came of god, and the other but of man. Wherefore
the one must needs have anende, the other mustindure for ever, according to
this saying of christ. Heaven and earth shall peryshe but my word shall
endure for ever. But now my chapleyus percepuynge that they can nod longer
maintain me with stout and steborne words. They begin to be ashamed of my
name and call me a sacrifyse, which ought to be offered up for ye people, alas
good foles, do you yet thynbe to blind men as ye have done. No no it is
perceived well enough ye Christ offered him ones for all. And you shall not need
to be ashamed of me for I will depart unto my father the Pope from whense I
came. Wherefore I give you warnyng every one to provide for himself as well as
he can, you may read that S. Paul wroughte for his living and yet preathed
the wordesyncerely, and gave all men warning to be the folowers of him as he
was the follower of Christ, be not you ashamed therefore to work for your
living which cannot preach nor will take no pains therein. And thank your
own pride and slou^hfulnes thereof for I asure you there is very few which
will be sorry for your myschaunce.

But yet by my truth it greueth me for old aquaintans to here my^haplayns go
up and down weeping, and waylynge and bytterly lamentyng this my departing.
Alas lay they all will to the dyuell, our confession is almost gone, and our
mass will away, it was never other like sens it was laufull for every Jack
scrapscall to read the Bible and testamente. Then we might besure that all
would to naught and that our craft wol^e be perceived. Au^ngence of them
allsaye they for now we that can not preach, must he feign to work for our
living, alas sir sarth one will it not be a strange sight to se a priest
handell a spade, mat^ke, shouyll, dung forke, or any such vile things: which
was wont to handell a gylten chalys a fair mass book a pair of silver
senses and such pratye things. Well I can not remedy it: There is no fault
that they can layein me for I gave the^ warning long ago and told them that
I must begone. Wherefore now I take my leave at you all. Fare well gentle
audyence: and I pray you bear me wytnee that I have here ernestlye reucket and
utterly denied all my power and aucthoryte. Confessing that it was but a false
iuencion of my father, and his successors for lukets sake Fare well my
chaplaynes all. I pray you let me not escape out of your memory. Fare well
old friend friday, and have me commendyd unto your brother saterdaye. Fare
well gentle Jack of lent, for I think you be not ready to go with me. Adue
good ymber days and commend me to your cosyn (...) she ^^^dans day for I
think I shall over take our friend ^^gation days. Fare well golden copes and
go^gious vesteme^tes, for Iean carye none of you with me, because I go on foot,
commends me I pray you, to my trusty servants the exesse, the cruer, the
santus bell, the great belles in the stepyll with their ropes, also have me
commended to ye mass b^ke the manuell, with ye procesioners Commend me also
to my trusty servants, the chales the corprace, which never dysceaued me.
And have me commended to all the rest as well as though I rehearsed them by
name.

Finis.
The.i. day of June by me maistres Missa the oldest daughter unto the Pope

God save the King.

