The true report of the prosperous success which God gave unto our English
Soldiers against the foreign bands of our Roman enemies, lately arrived,
(but soon enough to their cost) in Ireland, in the year, 1580. Gathered out
of the Letters of most credit and circumstaunce, that have been sent over,
and more at large set forth then in the former printed Copy. For a singular
comfort to all godly Christians, and true hearted subjects, and an exceeding
encouragement to them to persist valiantly in their true Religion and faith
toward God, their due obedience and love to their Prince, and to repose their
whole assured confidence in the strength of the Almighty, as most safe under
the Shield of his protection.

Seen and allowed.



Imprinted at London for Edward White, dwelling at the little North door of
Paul's Church, at the sign of the Gunne.

WHo wayeth well each point of this discourse,
How crooked hap encounters canckred mind:
How rightful cause subdueth wrongful force,
How he is caught that lays the snare: shall find,
Naught boots it then to trust to any ods,
Who Giantlike do fight against the Gods.
To rob all Princes of their rule and right,
God of the glory due to him alone:
Man of his soul, and Satan of his might,
To boulster Rebels, against their Princes throne:
To seek Gods truth and Gospel to suppress.
Let all men judge if this be holiness.
O Room, the room, where all outrage is wrought,
The Sea of sin, the beast with seuenfold head:
The Shop wherein all shame is sold and bought,
The Cup whence poison through the world is spread.
Well may thou draw the simple with a Dream,
And ween to win, yet strive against the stream.
Who favors; fears, or follows with desire,
Thy state, thy strength, thy vain and wicked reed:
Deserves, dislikes, and justly does acquire,
The sword, thy swaye, destruction for his meed.
Let Pope, let Turk, let Satan rage their fill:
God keeps us, if we do keep his will.
Esto Honor and gloria Domini.

To the Reader.
BEcause there go many and diverse reports of the late conflict in Ireland,
proceeding of sundry Letters sent over, which, although they agree in effect
and substance of the matter, yet have not every one the same, nor any one the
whole circumstaunce of the manner thereof: And having considered how that it is
not only usual among the people, to be desirous to know news, but also
necessary that this happy news should be known unto all (as well to the true
religious and obedient subject, for his comfort, as to the supersticious
disloyal recusant, for his utter dismaying and confusion): I have thought it
not amiss to bestow some light pains of my little leisure, in gathering one
sound discourse out of those sundry fragments which have come to my hands, some
presented unto me in writing out of Ireland, and some imparted unto me (by the
aduertisements of men of good credit) out of those letters which were sent unto
her Majesty, the true collection whereof I present unto the well affected
Reader, in such order as the time would serve me to dispose them.

News out of Irelande.
THe enemies lying (as it seemed) very surely entrenched in the Forte which
they had made, which they called, Il Castle del Oro, and sufficiently manned
with Soldiers, to withstand a far greater force then our English men were,
they being in number six hundredth within the Forte, and our men but eight
hundredth abroad: which is a very unequal match (as they know well, which
are skylfull, and have been exercised in those affairs) considering the ods of
place, the one being under covert, well fortified, and having their
Ordinance, placed at all advantage, the other naked, utterly without
Municion, or opportunity of placing any Ordinance, whereby to avoid their
enemies, being them selves continually subject to their annoyaunce. The Lord
Deputy, being (in so great disaduauntage) almost in despair of doing any
good, was soon recomforted with the happy arrival of the Queens Ships, The
Swift sure, one of the Queens Maiestis ships, arrived at Smitherick xvii. days
before the rest of her fellows in which time, the enemy shot 30. shot a day,
and neither could hit Ship nor man.
which it is to be thought that the very great and wonderful providence of
God (quite beside their expectation) sent thither so luckely for their succor.
They being arrived, there were certain great Pieces brought out of the
Ships, and a Trench made, and that great Ordinance planted about four
hundredth paces from the enemies Forte, to batter it: which Ordinance was so
well plied all that day (being the ninth of November) that they galled the
enemy greeuouslie, and beat them away from plying their Ordinance.

On the tenth day in the morning, they cast an other Trench for small shot,
within an hundredth, and three score paces of the Forte, and began a fresh
battery, and espying certain Pieces within the Forte, that were like to annoy
the Camp, planted their Ordinance against them, and dismounting two of their
Demicanons, brake and defeated the rest, to the number of fourteen or
fifteen great Pieces. And the same night made a third Trench for small shot;
within a hundredth and twenty foot of the Fort. Afterward perceiving that the
Spanish Musket shot was the hottest, and espying a house of ^oordes, where they
were bestowed: they beat that down with the Ordinance, and scattered the
Muskets. Which done, the enemies finding them selves thus dismembered, and
utterly dispoyled of their chief force, whereto they trusted: began to
change their countenance, and hung out their banners of Truce, quietly
calling for Parle. Then issued out a brave Italian, who being demanded by my
Lord Deputy, who sent him thither? answered. The holy Father? Will you (said
my Lord) adventure in the service of a shaueling, an Antichrist, a murderer
both of soul and body, against such a Prince as my Mistress is? You shall
have the just reward of your service. And requiring him to bring forth the
chief of the Spaniardes, he asked the said Spaniarde, who sent him thither? He
said he could not tell. Whether the King of Spain? He said no: Whether with
the Kings knowledge? He answered no: But (said he) at Porto in Portugal, the
Governor there commanded me, to go to such a place, where I should receive
my chardge, which I did, but whether I should go, or against whom I knew not,
and so brought to this place as blindf^^ld, and (as I see now) utterly betrayed.

Then (quoth my Lord) if you be not sent by the King, you come as a runnagate,
and must receive the like hyer.

They desiring to depart with the honor of Soldiers, it was denied them. Then
resolved they to surrender up the Fort, to yield their money and Jewels, and
other things of price, into the Lord Deputies hands, and them selves to his
mercy: Whereof he accepting, received three of them pledges until the next
morning, when according to that conclusion, they returned, and the chief of
them (whom it is needless to name, they only remaining a live) to the number
of twenty were saved. The rest to the number of five hundredth and six were
slain, and seventeen hanged. The poor English Soldiors that lacked hose and
shoes, and were barely clothed, by means of this medley, found to apparel
them, Al modo Italiano. Wine and Biscuit they met with good store, and other
victuals for a good space: four thousand Armors, with many good Pieces, and
(as they say) some reasonable share of Ecclesiastical Italian Master John
Cheek my Lady Cheeks son.
money. In all this conflict there were only two hurt of our men, whereof the
one was Master John Cheek, who is thought unlikely to recover. Thus may we
see how God fights for us, and subdueth our enemies, who by all man's reason
and likelihood were not to be overthrown by ten times the number that our men
were, in that unreasonable inequality of defense and Furniture. For our men
were in that opinion, that if they had been within the Forte so well appointed
of great and small shot as the enemies were, it would have cost 10000, lives
before it would have been won. But by the good providence and assistaunce of
God (notwithstanding their great advantage) the Lord Deputy with his worthy
endeavor by land, and our ships (through their fortunate ariuall) by water did
so coupe them up on every side, that they could no way escape. They said that
if our Ships had stayed but two days longer, out of that Harboroughe, they
would have been gone. For at their first ariuall, there came six sail of
them, being of men in number about 800. who so soon as they beheld the
barrenness of the Country, and the brutishnes of the people, two of the
greatest Ships departed home again, with about 300. men in them, and left
the rest to taste of the good entertainment that they looked for there: which
(thanks be to God) they found not so satisfiable to their wicked expectacion,
as agreeable to their just deserts, which would be incited by a blasphemous
Antichristian Prelate, against a true zealous Christian Prince, wrongfully to
invade her rightful inheritance and possessions, and to assist her
disobedient and rebellious Subjects, against their most gracious renowned
Sovereign. Wherein, although the Popes holiness forsoothe followed the
footesteps and example of his Predecessors, which have been ever sowers of
sedition, raisers of Rebellion, maineteyners of disobedience, Authors of
infinite bloudshedding, which is even grown to be the Badge of their Catholic
(or rather Cacolike) profession, and the true Cognizance of their holiness:
yet these Gallants should have had more wit, to have looked or they had l^apt,
and sounded the depth, ere they had entered the shore of a foreign Princes
dominion. But as their greedynes of gain, or superstitious devotion toward
an infamous Idol, has brought them to the Shipwreck of their lives (at the
least) so has their unadvised rashness utterly sunck, all excuse of their
guiltines, and pity of their miscarying. They confessed unto my Lord Deputy,
that the Pope their paymaister, whose Ensigns they spread on their Fort, with
his Crowns, Miters, Croskeyes, and other like trumperie, promised to send them
a greater power, for which cause they brought much Treasure with them, being
appointed to stay for that supply, for which our Englishmen were not greatly
sorry. It is reported that either they or other, were already coming at that
time: for the fowreteenth of November, there was escried a Pynnis, toward the
coast of Irelande: but I take it to be rather an opinion or imagination of some
coming, conceived through that former report: then any true apparaunce of the
very persons approaching. Howsoever it be, it is no great matter, for our
Soldiers stay there, and certain of our Ships this winter, to welcome them.

The Earl of Desmond, and his brother John, were coming toward the reskew of
the Spaniards and Italians: but hearing how the Forte was taken, and what was
become of their assistaunts, they thought it wisdom to beware by their example
and to keep them selves out of such sharp claws, and so retired them back,
and are fled into the Mountains. Our good cou^tryma^ of the Devils own
dubbing, Doctor Saunders (an Apostata toward his Savior, an Archtraytor to
his Sovereign) is there in the country, but where, it is unknown. One of his
me^ was taken in the Fort, and a Priest of that order, who were hanged and
quartered in the Forte. Thus much has been certified out of Ireland, of what
was done there before the fifteen day of November last past. For which
joyful and happy news, let us render hearty thanks unto our almighty
protector, attributing the whole praise thereof unto his omnipotency,
beseeching him to preserve our most gracious Princes, under whose prosperous
government we have received both this and other infinite blessings at his
hands: to strengthen our good Captains and Soldiors, with force and power to
overcome our bodily foes, and us al with his grace, to withstand the assaults
of the Devil, and the tyranny of Antichrist his dearling (our spiritual
enemy) and to serve our Redeemer in true fear and holiness, and his true
Ministers with due love and reverence, to be faithful unto him, loyal to her
Majesty, like minded and charitable one to an other, to the glory of his
name: unto whom all glory, power, and dominion belongs.

FINIS.

