LOVES METAMORPHOSIS. A Witty and Courtly Pastoral, WRITTEN BY Mr. John
Lyllie.

First played by the Children of Paul's, and now by the Children of the Chapel.

LONDON Printed for William Wood, dwelling at the West end of Paul's, at the
sign of Time. 1601.

Loves Metamorphosis.
Ramis, Montanus, Siluestris. I Cannot see, Montanus, why it is feigned by the
Poets, that Love sat upon the Chaos and created the world; since in the world
there is so little love.

Mm. Ramos, thou can not see that which cannot with reason be imagined; for
it the divine virtues of Love, had dispersed themselves through the powers of
the world, so forcibly as to make them take by his influence, the forms and
qualities impressed within them, no doubt they could not c^se, but favor more of
his Divinity.


Sil. I do not think Love has any spark of Divinity in him; since the end
or his being is earthly. In the blood is he begot by the frail fires of the
eye, and quench by the frayler shadows of thought. What reason have we then
to soothe his humor with such zeal, and follow his fading delights with such
passion.


Ram. We have bodies, Siluestris, and humane bodies; which in their (...)
natures being much more wretched then beasts, (...) (...) more miserably then
beasts pursue their own (...): And since it will ask longer labor and study
to subdue the powers of our blood, to the rule of the soul, then to satisfy
them with the fruition of our loves, let us be constant in the worlds errors,
and seek our own torments.


Mont. As good yield indeed submissiuely, and satisfy part of our affections;
as be stubburne without ability to resist, and enjoy none of them: I am in
worst plight, since I love a Nymph that mockes love.


Ram. And I one that hates love.


Sil. I, one that thinks her self above love.


Ram. Let us not dispute whose mistress is most bad, since they be all cruel;
nor which of our fortunes be most froward, since they be all desperate. I will
hang my Skutchin on this tree in honor of Ceres, and write this verse on the
tree in hope of my success, Penelopen ipsam perstes, mode tempore vinces.
Penelope will yield at last: continue and conquer.


Mont. I this: Fructus abest facies cum bona test caret. Fair faces lose
their favors, if they admit no lovers.


Ram. But why studiest thou? What will thou write for thy Lady to read?


Sil. That which necessity makes me to endure, love reverence, wisdom wonder
at. Riualem patienter h^^e.


Mont. Come, let us every one to our walks, it may be we shall meet them
walking. Exeunt.


ACTVS PRIMVS. SCENA SECVNDA.
Nisa, Celia, Niobe, Fidelia, Erisicthon. Nisa. It is time to hang up our
Garlands, this is our harvest holyday, we must both sing and dance in the
honor of Ceres: of what colors or flowers is thine made of, Niobe?


Niob. Or Salamints, which in the morning are white, (...) at noone, and in the
Evening purple, for in my affections shall there be no staidness but in
vnstaiedues: bue what is yours of, Nisa?


Nisa. Of Hollie, because it is most holy, which lovely green neither the
Suns beams, nor the winds blasts can alter or diminish. But Celia, what
Garland have you?


Celia. Mine all of Cypres leaves, which are broadest and beautifullest, yet
bears the least fruit; for beauty makes the brightest show, being the
slightest substance; and I am content to wither before I be worn, and deprive
my self of that which so many desire.


Niob. Come, let us make an end, lest Ceres come and find us slack in
performing that which we owe: But soft, some have been here this Morning
before us.


Nis. The amorous Foresters, or none, for in the woods they have eaten so much
wake-Robin, that they cannot sleep for love.


Celia. Alas poor souls, how ill love founds in their lips, who telling a
long tale of hunting, think they have bewrayed a sad passion of love!


Niob. Give them leave to love, since we have liberty to choose, for as great
sport do I take in coursing their tame hearts, as they do pains in hunting
their wild Hearts.


Celia. Niobe, your affection is but pinned to your tongue, which when you lift
you can unloose* But let us read what they have written: Penelope^ ipsam
perstes mode tempore vinces. That is for you Nisa, whom nothing will move,
yet hope makes him houer.


Nisa. A fond Hobbie to houer over an Eagle.


Niob. But Forresters think all Birds to be Buntings. What Is the next Fructus
abest facies cum bona test care^, Celia, the Forrester gives you good counsel,
take your pen^^worth whiles the market serves.


Celia. I hope it will be market day till my deaths day.


Nisa. Let me read to Ri^^tem patienter babe, Heetoucheth you, Niobe, on the
quick, yet you see how patient he is in your constancy.


Niob. Inconstancy is a vice, which I will not swap for all the virtues;
though I throw one off with my whole hand, I can pull him again with my
little finger; let us encourage them and write something; if they censure in
favorably, we know them fools; if angerly, we will say they are fro^ard.


Nisa. I will begin. Cedit amor rebus, res age, tutus eris.


Celia. Indeed better to tell stars then be idle, yet better idle then ill
employed; Mine this, Sat ^ihi sifacies, sit been nota mihi.


Niob. You care for nothing but a Glass, that is a flatterer.


Nisa. Then all men are Glasses.


Celia. Some Glasses are true.


Niob. No men are; but this is mine: Victoriatecum stabit.


Nisa. Thou give hope.


Niob. He is worthy o^^e, that is patient.


Celia. Let us sing, and so attend on Ceres; for this day, although into her
heart never entered any motion of love, yet usually to the Temple of Cupid, he
offereth^ vo white Doves, as entreating his favor, and one Eagle, as
commanding his power. Praecibusque minaes regaliter addet.


Cantant and Saltant. Erisict. What noise is this, what assembly, what
Idolatry Is the modesty of virgins turned to wantonness? The honor of Ceres
accounted immortal? And Erisicthon ruler of this Forest, esteemed of no force?
Impudent giglots, that you are, to disturb my game, or dare do honor to any
but Erisicthon. It is not your fair faces as smooth as lea^e, nor your
entysing eyes, though they drew vron like Adamai^ts, nor your filed speeches,
were they as forcible, as Thessalides, that shall make me any way flexible.


Niob. Erisicthon, thy stern looks joined with thy stout speeches; thy words
as vnkembd as thy locks, were able to affright men of bold courage, and to
make us silly girls frantic, that are full of fear; but know thou,
Erisicthon, that were thy hands so vnstated as thy tongue, and the one as ready
to execute mischief, as the other to threaten it; it should neither move our
hearts to ask pity, or remove our bodies from this place; we are the
handmaides of divine Ceres, to fair Ceres is this holy tree dedicated, to
Ceres, by whose favor thy self live, that are worthy to perish.


Erisict. Are you addicted to Ceres, that in spite of Erisicthon you will use
these sacrifices? No, immodest girls, you shall see that I have neither regard
of your sex which men should tender, nor of your beauty which foolish love
would dote on, nor of your goddess, which none but pieuish girls reverence: I
will destroy this tree in ^^spite of all, and that you may see my hand execute,
(...) my heart intends; and that no mean may appea^e my malice, my last word
shall be the beginning of the first blow.


Celia. Our alas, what has he done?


Niob. Our selves, I fear, must also minister matter to his fury.


Nisa. Let him alone: but see, the tree powers our blood, and I hear a voice.


Erisict. What voice? If in the tree there be any body, speak quickly, left
the next blow hit the tale out of thy mouth.


Fidel. Monster of men, hate of the heavens, and to the earth a burden, what
has chaste Fidelia committed? It is thy spite, Cupid, that having no power to
wound my vnsported mind, procurest means to mangle my tender body, and by
violence to gash those sides, that enclose a heart dedicate to virtue: or is it
that savage satire, that feeding his sensual appetite upon lust, seeks now
to quench it with blood, that being without hope to attain my love, he may
with cruelty end my life? Or does Ceres, whose nymph I have been many years,
in recompense of my inviolable says, reward me with unspeakable torments?
Divine Phoebus that pursued Daphne till she was turned to a Bay tree, ceased
then to trouble her. I, the gods are pitiful; and Cineras, that with fury
followed his daughter Miretia, till she was changed to a Mirretree, left then
to prosecute her; yea parents are natural: Phoebus lamented the loss of his
friend, Cineras of his child: but both gods, and men either forget or neglect
the change of Fidelia; nay follow her after her change, to make her more
miserable: so that there is nothing more hateful then to be chaste, whole
bodies are followed in the world with lust, and prosecuted in the graves with
tyranny. Whose minds the freer they are from vice, their bodies are in the
more danger of mischief; so that they are not safe when they live, because of
men's love; nor being changed, because of their hates; nor being dead, because
of their defaming. What is that chastity which so few women study to keep, and
both gods and men seek to violate? If only a naked name, why are we so
supersticious of a hollow found? If a rare virtue, why are men so careless of
such an exceeding rareness: Go, Ladies, tell Ceres I am that Fidelia, that so
long knit Garlands in her honor, and chased with a Satyr, by prayer to the
gods became turned to a tree, whole body now is grown over with rough bark,
and whose golden locks are covered with green leaves; yet where ^^nd nothing
can alter, neither the fear of death, nor the torments. If Ceres seek no
revenge, then let virginity be not only the scorn of Savage people, but the
spoil. But alas, I feel my last blood to come, and therefore must end my last
breath. Farewell Ladies, whose lives are subject to many mischieues; for if you
be fair, it is hard to be chaste; if chaste, impossible to be safe; if you be
young, you will quickly bend; if bend, you are suddenly broken. If you be
soul, you shall seldom be flattered: if you be not flattered, you will ever
be sorrowful. Beauty is a firm sicklenes, youth a feeble staidness,
deformity a continual sadness.


Ni^b. Thou monster, can thou hear this without grief?


Erisict. Yea, and double your griefs with my blows.


Nisa. Ah poor Fidelia, the express pattern of chastity, and example of
misfortune.


Celia. Ah cruel Erisicthon, that not only defacest these holy trees, but
murtherest also this chaste nymph.


Erisict. Nymph or goddess it skilleth not, for there is none that Erisicthon
cares for, but Erisicthon: let Ceres the Lady of your harvest revenge when
she will, nay when she dares, and tell her this, that I am Erisicthon.


N^^b. Thou art none of the gods.


Erisict. No, a contemner of the gods.


Nisa. And hopest thou to escape revenge being but a man?


Erisict. Yea, I care not for revenge being a man and Erisicthon.


Nisa. Come, let us to Ceres and complain of this unacquainted and incredible
villain; if there be power in her deity, in her mind pity, or virtue in
virginity, this monster cannot escape. Exeunt.


ACTVS SECVNDVS.
SCENA PRIMA.
Ceres, Niobe, Nisa, Cupid, Tirtena. Ceres. Does Erisicthon offer force to my
Nymphs, and to my deity disgrace? Have I stuffed his barnes with fruitful
grain, and does he stretch his hand against me with intolerable pride? So it
is, Ceres, thine eyes may witness what thy Nymphs have told, here lies the
tree hackt in pieces, and the blood scarce cold of the fairest virgin. If this
be thy cruelty, Cupid, I will no more hallow thy temple with sacred vowes^^t
thy cankred nature, Erisicthon, thou shall find as great misery, as thou
show malice: I am resolved of thy punishment, and as speedy shall be my
revenge, as thy rigor barbarous. Tirtenae, on yonder lull where never grew
grain nor lease, where nothing is but barrenesse and coldness, fear and
palenesse, lies famine, go to her, and say that Ceres commands her to gnaw
on the bowels of Erisicthon, that his hunger may be as unquenchable as his
fury.


Tart. I obey, but how should I know her from others?


Cer. Thou can not miss of her, if thou remember but her name; and that
can thou not forget, for that coming near to the place, thou shall find
gnawing in thy stomach. She lies gaping, and swalloweth noughe but air; her
face pale and so lean, that as easily thou may, through the very skin
behold the bone, as in a glass thy shadow; her hair long, black and shaggie;
her eyes sunk so far into her head, that she looks out of the nape of her
neck; her lips white and rough; her teeth hollow and red with rustinesse; her
skin so thin, that thou may as lively make an Anatomy of her body, as she
were cut up with Chirurgio^s; her maw like a dry bladder, her heart swo^ne
big with wind, and all her bowels like snakes working in her body. This
monster when thou shalthehold, tell her my mind, and return with speed.


Tart. I go, fearing more the sight of famine, then the force.


Cer. Take thou these few cares of corn, but let not (...) so much as smell to
them; and let her go aloose from thee: Now shall Erisicthon see that Ceres is
a great goddess, as full of power as himself of pride; and as pitiless, as
he presumptuous; how think you Ladies, is not this revenge apt for ^o great
injury?


Niob. Yes Madam: To let men see, they that contend with the gods, do but
confound themselves.


Cer. But let us to the Temple of Cupid, and offer sacrifice; they that think
it strange for chastime to humble it self to Cupid, know neither the power
of love, nor the nature of virginity: the one having absolute authority to
command, the other difficulty to resist: and where such continual war is
between love and virtue, there must be some parties, and continual perils:
Cupid was never conquered, and therefore must be flattered; Virginity has,
and therefore must be humble.


Nisa. Into my heart, Madam, there did never enter any motion of love.


Cer. Those that often say, they cannot love, or will not love, certainly they
love. Did thou never see Cupid?


Nisa. No, but I have heard him described at the full, and as I imagined,
foolishly. First that he should be a god blind and naked, with wings, with
bow, with arrows, with free-brands; swimming sometimes in the Sea, and
playing sometimes on the shore; with many other devices, which the Painters
being the Poets Apes, have taken as great pains to shadow, as they to lie.
Can I think that gods that command all things, would go naked? What should
he do with wings that knows not where to slice? Or what with arrows, that
sees not how to aim? The heart is a narrow marks go hit, and rather requires
Angus eyes to take leuel, there a blind boy to shoot at random: If he were
fire, the Sea would quench those coals, or the flame turn him into cinders.


Cer. Well Nisa, thou shall see him.


Nisa. I fear Niobe has felt him.


Niob. Not I, Madam, yet must I confess, that oftentimes I have had sweet
thoughts, sometimes hard conceits, betwixt both a kind of yielding; I know not
what. But certainly I think it is not love: sigh I can, and (...) ease in
melancholy: smile I do and take pleasure in imagination, I feel in my self
a pleasing pain, a chill heat, a delicate bitterness, how to term it I know
not; without doubt it may be love, sure I am it is not hate.


Nisa. Niobe is tender hearted, whose thoughts are (...) water, yielding to
every thing, and nothing to be seen.


Cer. Well, let us to Cupid, and tak^^ ^eede (...) your stubbernesse yo'i
offend him not, whom by entreaties you ought to follow Dianas Nymphs were as
cha^t as Ceres virgins, as fair, as wife: how Cupid tormented them, I had
rather you should hear then feel, but this is truth, they all yielded to
love: look not scornefully, my Nymphs, I say they are yielded to love. This
is the temple, thou great god Cupid, whom the gods regard and men reverence,
let it be lawful for Ceres to offer her sacrifice.


Cup. Divine Ceres, Cupid accepts any thing, that comes from Ceres, which
feeds my Sparrowes with ripe corn, my Pigeons with wholesome seeds; and
honor my Temple with chaste virgins.


Cer. Then Love, to thee I bring these white and spotless Doves, in token that
my heart is as free from any thought of love, as these from any blemish, and as
clear in virginity, as these perfect in whiteness. But that my Nymphs may
know both thy power and thy laws, and neither err in ignorance nor pride; let
me ask some questions to instruct them that they offend not th^^, who^e resist
they cannot. In virgins what do thou (...) desire?


Cup. In those that are not in love, reverent thoughts of love, in those that
be, faithful vows.


Cer. What do thou most hate in virgins?


Cup. Pride in the beautiful, bitter taunts in the witty, (...) in all.


Cer. What may protect my virgins that they (...) ne^^r love?


Cup. That they be never idle.


Cer. Why did thou so cruelly torment all Dianas Nymphe^ wit^ ^oue?


Cup. Because they thought it impossible to love.


Cer. What is the substance of love?


Cup. Constancy and secrecy.


Cer. What the signs?


Cup. Sighs and tears.


Cer. What the causes?


Cup. Wit and idleness.


Cer. What the means?


Cup. Opportunity and Importunity.


Cer. What the end?


Cup. Happiness without end.


Cer. What require^^ thou of men?


Cup. That only shall be known to men.


Cer. What (...) for those that will not love?


Cup. To be deceived when they do.


Cer. Well, Cupid, entreat my Nymphs with favor and though to love it be no
vice, yet spotless virginity is the only virtue: let me keep their
thoughts as chaste as their bodies, than Ceres may be happy, and they praised.


Cup. Why, Ceres, do you think that lust follows love? Ceres, lovers are
chaste: for what is love, divine love, but the quintescens of chastity, and
affections binding by heavenly motions, thou cannot be undone by earthly
means, (...) by any man?


Cer. (...) continual sacrifice, warm us with mild (...) we seem immodest
(...) ^ble like stocks.


Cup. Ceres, (...) be light nor obstina^^^, (...) and faithful; so shall your
flames warm, but not burn, delight and never discomfort.


Cer. How say you, my Nymphs, does not Cupid speak like a ^o^* Counsel you I
will not to love, but conjure you I ^u^t that you be not disdainefull, let us
in, and see how Er^sictson speedeth; famine f^eth swiftly, and has already
seyzed on his stomach.


Exeunt. ACTVS TERTIVS.
SCENA PRIMA.
Ramis, Nisa, Montanus, Celia, Siluestris, Niobe. Ram. Stay, cruel Nisa, thou
know not from whom thou fliest, and therefore fliest; I come not to offer
violence, but that which is inviolable, my thoughts are as holy ^s thy vows,
and I as constant in love as thou in cruelty: lust follows not my love as
shadows do bodies, but truth is wouen into my love, as veins into bodies;
let me touch this tender arm, and say my love is endless.


Nisa. And to no end.


Ram. It is without spot.


Nisa. And shall be without hope.


Ram. Do thou disdain Love and his laws?


Nisa. I do not disdain that which I think is not, yet laugh at those that
honor it if it be.


Ram. Time shall bring to pass, that Nisa shall confess there is love.


Nisa. Then also will love make me confess, that Nisa (...) a fool.


Ram. Is it folly to love, which the gods account honorable, and men esteem
holy?


Nisa. The gods make any thing lawful, because they be gods, and men honor
shadows for substance, because they are men.


Ram. Both gods and men agree that love is a consuming of the heart, and
restoring a bitter death in a sweet life.


Nisa. Gods do know, and men should, that love is a consuming of wit, and
restoring of folly, a staring blindness, and a blind gazing.


Ram. Would thou allot me death?


Nisa. No, but discretion.


Ram. Yield some hope.


Nisa. Hope to despair.


Ram. Not so long as Nisa is a woman.


Nisa. Therein, Ramis, you show your self a man.


Ram. Why?


Nisa. In flattering your self, that all women will yield.


Ram. All may.


Nisa. Thou shall swear that we cannot.


Ram. I will follow thee, and practice by denials to be patient, or by
disdaining die, and so be happy.


Exeunt. Mont. Though thou have ouer-taken me in love, yet have I ouer-taken
thee in running: fair Celia, yield to love, to sweet love.


Celia. Montanus, thou art mad, that having no breath almost in running so
fast, thou will yet spend more in speaking so foolishly: yield to love! cannot,
or if I do, to thy love I will not.


Mont. The fairest Wolf chooses the foulest, if he be faithfullest, and he
that indureth most grief, nor he that has most beauty.


Celia. If my thoughts were woluish, thy hopes might be as thy comparison is,
beastly.


Mon. I would thy words were, as thy looks are, lovely.


Celia. I would thy looks were, as thy affection is, blind.


Mont. Fair faces should have smoothe hearts.


Celia. Fresh flowers have crooked roots.


Mont. Women's beauties will waine, and then no art can make them fair?


Celia. Men's follies will ever wax, and then what reason can make them wise?


Mont. To be amiable and not to love, is like a painted Lady, to have colors,
and no life.


Celia. To be amorous, and not lovely, is like a pleasant fool full of words,
and no deserts.


Mont. What call you deserts, what lovely*


Celia. No louelier thing then wit, no greater desert then patience.


Mont. Have not I an excellent wit?


Celia. If thou think sothy self, thou art an excellent fool.


Mont. Fool? No, Celia, thou shall find me as wise, as I do thee proud, and
as little to digest thy taunts, as thou to brook my love.


Celia. I thought, Montanus, that you could not deserve, when I told you what
it was, Patience.


Mont. Sweet Celia, I will be patient and forget this.


Celia. Then want you wit, that you can be content to be patient.


Mont. A hard choice, if I take all well, to be a fool, if find fault, then to
want patience.


Celia. The fortune of love, and the virtue is neither to have success, nor
mean. Farewell.


Mont. Farewell, nay I will follow, and I know not how it comes to pass;
disdain increases desire, and the farther possibility stands, the nearer
approaches hope.


Sil. Polypus, Niobe, is ever of the color of the stone it slicketh to, and
thou ever of his humor thou talkest with.


Niob. Find you fault that I love?


Sil. So many.


Niob. Would you have me like none?


Sil. Yes one.


Niob. Who shall make choice but my self?


Sil. My self.


Niob. For another to put thoughts into my head, were to pull the brains out
of my head; take not measure of my affections, but weigh your own: the Oak
finds no fault with the dew, because it also falls on the bramble. Believe
me, Sil^^str^^, the only way to be mad, is to be constant. Poets make their
wreathes of Laurel, Ladies of sundry flowers.


Sil. Sweet Niobe, a river running into diverse brooks becomes shallow, and
a mind divided into sundry affections, in the end will have none: what ^oy can
I take in the fortune of my love, when I shall know many to have the like
favors? Turtles slocke by couples, and breed both joy and young ones.


Niob. But Bees in swarms, and bring forth wax and honey.


Sil. Why do you covet many, that may find sweetness in one?


Niob. Why had Argus an hundred eyes, and might have seen with one?


Sil. Because whilst he slept with some, he might wake with other some.


Niob. And I love many, because being deceived by the inconstancy of diverse, I
might yet have one.


Sil. That was but a device of Inno, that knew I^p^^ors love.


Nio. And this a rule of Venus, that knew (...) light^es.


Sil. The whole heaven has but one Sun^^^.


Niob. But stars ins^^^^.


Sil. The Rainebow is ever in one compass.


Niob. But of sundry colors.


Sil. A woman has but one heart.


Niob. But a thousand thoughts.


Sil. My Lute, though it have many strings, makes a sweet consent, and a
Ladies heart, though it harbor many fancies, should embrace but one love.


Niob. The strings of my heart are tuned in a contrary keye to your Lute, and
make as sweet harmony in discords, as yours in concord.


Sil. Why, what strings are in Ladies hearts? Not the base.


Niob. There is no base string in a woman's heart.


Sil. The mean?


Niob. There was never mean in woman's heart.


Sil. The treble*


Niob. Yea, the treble double and treble, and so are all my heart strings.
Farewell.


Sil. Sweet Niobe, let us sing, that I may die with the Swanne.


Niob. It will make you sigh the more, and live wi^^ the Salamich.


Sil. Are thy tunes fire?


Niob. Are yours death?


Sil. No, but when I have heard thy voice, I am content to die.


Niob. I will sing to content thee.


Cantant. Sil. Inconstant Niobe! unhappy Siluestris! yet had I rather she
should rather love all then none: for now though I have no certainty, yet do
I find a kind of sweetness.


Ram. Cruel Nisa, borne to slaughter men!


Mont. Coy Celia, bred up in skoftes!


Sil. Wavering, yet witty Niobe, but are we all mo^^


Ram. Yea, and met withal, if your fortunes be answerable to mine, for I find
my M^stris immovable, and the hope I have is to despair.


Mont. Mine in pride intolerable, who bids me look for no other comfort
then contempt.


Sil. Mine is best of all, and worst, this is my hope, that either she will
have many or none.


Ram. I fear our fortunes cannot thrive, for Erisicthon has felled down the
holy tree of Ceres, which will increase in her choler, and in her Nymphs
cruelty: let us see whether our Garlands be there which we hanged on that
tree, and let us hang our selves upon another.


Sil. A remedy for love irremoueable, but I will first see whether all those
that love Niobe, do like in the mean season I will content my self with my
share.


Mont. Here is the tree. O mischief scarce to be believed, in possible to be
pardoned!


Ram. Pardoned it is not, for Erisicthon perishes with famine, and is able to
starve those that look on him. Here hang our Garlands, something is written,
read mine.


Sil. Cedit amor rebus, res age, tutus eris.


Mont. And mine.


Sil. Sat mihi si facies, sit been nota mihi.

Now for my self,

Victoriatecum stabit scilicet.


Mont. You see their posies is as their hearts; and their hearts as their
speeches, cruel, proud and wavering: let us all to the Temple of Cupid, and
entreat his favor, if not to obtain their loves, yet to revenge their hates,
Cupid is a kind god, who knowing our vnsported thoughts, will punish them, or
release us. We will study what revenge to have, that our pains proceeding of
our own minds, then plagues may also proceed from theirs. Are you all agreed*


Sil. I consent; but what if Cupid deny help?


Mont. Then he is no god.


Sil. But if he yield, what shall we ask?


Ram. Revenge.


Mon. Then let us prepare our selves for Cupids sacrifice.


Exeunt. ACTVS TERTIVS. SCENA SECVNDA.
Erisicthon, Protea, Merchant. Erisict. Come, Protea, dear daughter, that name
must thou buy too dear, necessity causes thee to be sold, nature must frame
thee to be contented. Thou see in how short a space I have turned all my
goods into my guts, where I feel a continual fire, which nothing can quench,
my famine increases by eating, resembling the Sea which receives all things,
and cannot be filled: life is sweet, hunger sharp, between them the
contention must be short, unless thou, Protea, prolong it. I have
acknowledged my offense against Ceres, make amends, I cannot, for the gods
holding the balance in their hands, what recompense can equally weigh with
their punishments? Or what is he that having but one ill thought of Ceres,
that can race it with a thousand dutiful actions? such is the difference, that
none can find defense: this is the ods, we miserable, and men, they immortal,
and gods.


Prot. Dear father, I will obey both to sale and slaughter, accompting it the
only happiness of my life, should I live an hundred years, to prolong yours
but one my^^te: I yield father, chop and change me, I am ready, but first let
me make my prayers to Neptune, and withdraw your self till I have done, long
it shall not be, now it must be.


Erisict. Stay, sweet Protea, and that great god hear thy prayer, though
Ceres stop her ears to mine.


Prot. Sacred Neptune, whose godhead conquered my maidenhead, be as ready to
hear my passions, as I was to believe thine, and perform that now I entreat,
which thou did promise when thy self did love. Let not me be a pray to
this Merchant, who knows no other god then Gold, unless it be falsely
swearing by a god to get gold; let me, as often as I be bought for money, or
pawnd for meat, be turned into a Bird, Hare, or Lamb, or any shape, wherein I
may be safe, ^o shall I preserve mine own honor, my fathers life, and never
repent me of thy love, and now bestirre thee, for of all men, I hate that
Merchant, who, if he find my beauty worth one penny, will put it to use to
gain ten, having no Religion in his mind, nor word in his mouth but money.
Neptune, hear now or never. Father, I have done.


Erisict. In good time, Protea, thou have done, for lo, the Merchant keeps
not only day, but hour.


Prot. If I had not been here, had I been forfeited^


Erisict. No; Protea, but thy father famished. Here, Gentleman, I am ready with
my daughter.


Prot. Gentleman?


Mar. Yea, Gentleman, fair maid, my conditions make me no less.


Prot. Your conditions in deed brought in your obligations, your obligations,
your Usury, your Usury, your Gentry.


Mar. Why, do you judge no Merchants Gentlemen?


Prot. Yes, many, and some no men.


Mar. You shall be well entreated at my hands.


Prot. It may. Commmaunded I will not be.


Mar. If you be mine by bargain, you shall.


Prot. Father, has this Merchant also bought my mind?


Erisict. He cannot buy that, which cannot be sold.


Mar. Here is the money.


Erisict. Here the maid: farewell, my sweet daughter, I commit thee to the
gods, and this man's courtesy, who I hope will deal no worse with thee, then
he would have the gods with him, I must be gone, left I do starve as I stand.


Exit. Prot. Farewell, dear Father, I will not cease continually to pray to
Ceres, for thy recovery.


Mar. You are now mine, Protea.


Prot. And mine own.


Mar. In will, not power.


Prot. In power if I will.


Mar. I perceive, Nettles gently touched, sting, but roughly handled, make no
smart.


Prot. Yet roughly handled, Nettles are Nettles, and a Waspe is a Waspe, though
^hee lose her sting.


Mar. But then they do no harm.


Prot. Nor good.


Mar. Come with me, and you shall see, that Marchaunts know their good, as well
as Gentlemen.


Prot. Sure I am, they have Gentlemen's goods.


Exeunt. ACTVS QVARTVS.
SCENA PRIMA.
Ramis, Montanus, Siluestris, Cupid. Ram. This is the Temple of our great god,
let us offer our sacrifice.


Mont. I am ready.


Sil. And I. Cupid, thou god of love, whose arrows have pierced our hearts,
give ear to our plaints.


Cup. If you come to Cupid, speak boldly, so must lovers, speak faithfully,
so must speeders.


Ram. These ever burning Lamps, are signs of my never to be quenched flames;
this bleeding heart, in which yet sticks the head of the golden shaft, is the
lively picture of inward torments: mine eyes shall bedewe thine Altars with
tears, and my sighs cover thy Temple with a dark smoke, pity poor Ramis.


Mont. With this distaffe have I spun, that my exercises may be as womanish as
my affections, and so did Hercules: and with this halter will I hang my self,
if my fortunes answer not my deserts, and so did Iphis. Yo thee, divine Cupid,
I present not a bleeding, but a bloudlesse heart, dried only with sorrow, and
worn with faithful service.

This picture Toffer, carved with no other instrument then Love; pity poor
Montanus.


Sil. This fan of Swans and Turtles feathers, is token of my truth and
jealousy: jealousy, without which love is dotage, and with which love is
madness, without the which love is lust, and with which love is folly. This
heart, neither bleeding nor bloudlesse, but ^wolne with sighs, I offer to thy
godhead, protesting, that all my thoughts are as my words without lust; and all
my love, as my fortune without sweetness. This Garland of flowers, which has
all colors of the Rainebowe, witnesses that my heart has all torments of the
world: pity poor Silvestris.


Cup. I accept your offers not without cause, and wonder at your loves, not
without pleasure: but be your thoughts as true as your words?


Ram. Thou Cupid, that give the wound, know the heart, for as impossible
it is to conceal our affections, as to resist thy force.


Cup. I know, that where mine arrowe lights, there breeds love, but
shooting every minute a thousand shafts, I know not on whose heart they light,
though they fall on no place but hearts. What are your mistresses?


Ram. Ceres maidens: mine most cruel, which she calls constancy.


Mont. Mine most fair, but most proud.


Sil. Mine most witty, but most wavering.


Cup. Is the one cruel, the other coye, the third inconstant?


Ram. Too cruel.


Mont. Too coye.


Sil. Too fickle.


Cup. What do they think of Cupid?


Ram. One says he has no eyes, because he hits he knows not whom.


Mont. The Other, that he has no ears, to hear those that call.


Sil. The third, that he has no nose, for savors are not found of lovers.


Ram. All, that he has no taste, because sweet and sower is all one.


Mont. All, that he has no sense, because pains are pleasures, and pleasures
pains,


Sil. All, that he is a foolish god, working without reason, and suffering the
repulse without regard.


Cup. Dare they blaspheme my godhead, which Jove does worship, Neptune
reverence, and all the gods tremble at? To make them love, were a revenge too
gentle for Cupid: to make you hate, a recompense too small for lovers. But of
that anon: what have you used in love?


Ram. All things that may procure love, gifts, words, oaths, sighs, and
swounings.


Cup. What said they of gifts?


Mont. That affection could not be bought with gold,


Cup. What of words?


Ram. That they were golden blastes, out of Leaden bellows.


Cup. What of oaths?


Sil. That Jupiter never swear true to Iu^^.


Cup. What of sighs?


Sil. That deceit kept a forge in the hearts of fools.


Cup. What of swounings?


Mont. Nothing, but th^^ they wished them deaths.


Cup. What reasons gave they, not to love?


Sil. Women's reasons, they would not, because they would not.


Cup. Well, then shall you see Cupid requite their reasons with his rigor.
What punishment do you desire, that Cupid will deny?


Ram. Mine being so hard as stone, would I have turned to stone, that being to
lovers pitt^lesse, she may to all the world be senseless.


Mont. Mine being so fair and so proud, would I have turned into some flower,
that she may know beauty is as fading as grass, which being fresh in the
morning, is withered before night.


Sil. Mine divine, Cupid, whose affection nothing can make stayed, let her be
turned to that Bird, that ^ueth only by air, and dies if she touch the
earth, because it is constant. The bird of Paradise, Cupid, that drawing in her
bowels nothing but air, she may know her heart fed on nothing but fickleness.


Cup. Your reuenges are reasonable, and shall be granted. Thou Nisae, whose
heart no tears could pearce, shall with continual waves be wasted: in stead
of thy fair hair, shall thou have green mos^e, thy face of fl^^t, because
thy heart is of marble, thine ears shall be holes for fishes, whose ears
were more deaf then fishes. Thou Celia whom beauty made proud, shall have
the fruit of beauty, that is, to fade whiles it is flourishing, and to blast
before it is blown. Thy face, as fair as the Damask rose, shall perish like
the Damask rose, the canker shall eat thee in the bud, and every little wind
blow thee from the stalk, and then shall men in the morning wear thee in
their Hats, and at night cast thee at their heels. Thou Niobe, whom nothing
can please (but that which most displeases Cupid, inconstancy) shall only
breathe and suck air for food, and wear feathers for silk, being more
wavering then air, and lighter then feathers. This will Cupid do. Therefore,
when next you shall behold your Ladies, do but send a faithful sigh to Cupid,
and there shall arise a thick mist which Proserpine shall send, and in the
moment you shall be revenged, and they changed, Cupid prove himself a great
god, and they peevish girls.


Ram. With what sacrifice shall we show our selves thankful, or how may we
requite this benefit?


Cup. You shall yer^ly at my Temple offer true hearts, and howerly bestow all
your wits in loving devices, think all the time lost, that is not spent in
love, let your oaths be without number, but not without truth, your words full
of alluring sweetness, but not of broad flattery, your attires neat, but not
womanish, your gifts of more price for the fine device, then the great valewe,
and yet of such value, that the device seem not beggarly, nor your selves
blockish, be secret that works miracles, be constant that bring^th
secrecy; this is all Cupid does command. Away.


Ram. And to this we all willingly consent.

Now what r^steth, but revenge on them, that have practiced malice on us, let
mine be any thing, seeing she will not be only mine.


Mont. Let us not now stand wishing, but presently seek them out, using as
great speed in following revenge, as we did in pursuing our love: certainly
we shall find them about Ceres tree, singing or sacrifizing.


Sil. But shall we not go visit Erisicthon?


Mont. Not I, left he eat us, that deuoureth all things; his looks are of
force to famish: let vsin, and let all Ladies beware to offend those in spite,
that love them in honor, for when the Crow shall ^et his foot in their eye,
and the black Ox tread on their foot, they shall find their misfortunes to
be equal with their deformities, and men both to loath, and laugh at them.


Exeunt. ACTVS QVARTVS. SCENA PRIMA.
Erisicthon, Protea, Petulius, Siren. Erisict. Come, Protea, tell me, how did
thou escape from the Merchant?


Prot. Neptune, that great god, when I was ready to go with the Merchant into
the ship, turned me to a Fisherman on the shore, with an Angle in my hand, and
on my shoulder a net; the Merchant missing me, and yet finding me, asked me who
I was, and whether I saw not a fair maiden? I answered no? He marue^ling and
raging, was forced either to lose his passage, or secke for me among the
Pebbles? To make short, a good wind caused him to go I know not whither, and
me (thanks be to Neptune) to return home.


Erisict. Thou art happy, Protea, though thy Father be mi^erable: and Neptune
gracious, though Ceres cruell^thy escape from the Merchant, breeds in me
life, joy, and fullness.


Prot. My father cannot be miserable, if Protea be happy, for by selling me
every day, he shall never want meat, nor I (...) to escape. And now, Father,
give me leave to enjoy my Petulius, that on this unfortunate shore still seeks
me sorrowing.


Erisict. Seek ^^m, dear Protea; find and enjoy him; and live ever hereafter
to th^ne own comforts, that have ^^ther^o been the preserver of mine.


Exit. Prot. Aye me, behold, a Siren haunts this shore, the gods forbid she
should entangle my Petulius.


Siren. Sir. Accursed men, whose loves have no other mean then extremities,
nor hates end but mischief.


Prot. Unnatural monster, no maid that accuses men, whose loves are built on
truth, and whose hearts are removed by courtesy: I will hear the depth of her
malice.


Sir. Of all creatures most unkind, most cunning, by whose subtilties I am
half fish, half flesh, themselves being neither fish nor flesh, in love luke
warm, in cruelty red hot, if they praise, they flatter; if flatter, deceive;
if deceive, destroy.


Prot. She rayles at men, but seeks to entangle them, this slight is prepared
for my sweet Petulius, I will withdraw my self close, for Petulius follows,
he will without doubt be enamored of her, enchaunted he shall not be, my
charms shall counteruaile hers, it is he has saved my Fathers life with
money, and must prolong mine with love.


Pet. I marvel, Protea is so far before me, if she run, i will fly: sweet
Protea, where art thou^ it is Petulius calls Protea.


Sir. Here comes a brave youth, Now Siren, leave out nothing that may allure,
thy golden locks, thy entising looks, thy tuned voice, thy subtle speech,
thy fair promises, which never misled the heart of any but Ulysses.


Sing with a Glass in her hand and a Comb. Pet. What divine goddess is this?
What sweet harmony? My heart is ra^ished with such tickling thoughts, and
mine eyes stayed with such a bewitching beauty, that I can neither find the
means to remove my affection, nor to turn aside my looks. Sing again Siren.

I yield to death, but with such delight, that I would not wish to live,
unless it were to hear thy sweet lays.


Sir. Live still so thou love me: why stand thou amazed at the word Love?


Prot. It is high time to prevent this mischief: Now Neptune, stand to thy
promise, and let me take suddenly the shape of an old man; so shall I mar
what she makes.


Pet. Not yet come to my self, or if I be, I dare not credit mine ears. Love
thee divine goddess? Vouchsafe I may honor thee, and live by the imagination
I have of thy words and worthiness.


Sir. I am a goddess, but a Lady and a virgin, whose love if thou embrace,
thou shall live no less happy, then the gods in heaven.


Prot. Believe not this Inchauntresse (sweet youth) who retains the face of
a Virgin, but the heart of a F^end, whose sweet tongue sheadeth more drops of
blood, then it utters sillables.


Pet. Out dottrell, whose dim eyes cannot discern beauty, nor doting age
judge of love.


Prot. If thou listen to her words, thou shall not live to repent: for her
malice is as sudden, as her joys are sweet.


Pet. Thy silver hairs are not so precious, as her golden locks, nor thy
crooked age of that estimation, as her flowring youth.


Sir. That old man measures the hot assault of love, with the cold skir^^hes
of age.


Prot. That young cruel resembles old Apes, who kill by culling; from the top
of this Rock whereon she sits, will she throw thee headlong into the Sea,
whose song is the instrument of her witchcraft, never smiling but when she
means to smite, and under the flattery of love, practices the sheading of
blood.


Pet. What are thou, which so blasphemest this divine creature?


Prot. I am the Ghost of Ulysses, who continually houer about these places,
where this Siren haunteth, to save those which otherwise should be spoiled:
stop thine ears, as I did mine, and succor the fair, but by thy folly, the
most unfortunate Protea.


Pet. Protea? What do thou hear, Petulius? Where is Protea?


Prot. In this thicket, ready to hang her self, because thou carest not for
her, that did swear to follow: curse this hag^ who only has the voice and
face of a Virgin, the rest all fish and feathers, and filth; follow me, and
strongly stop thine ears, left the second encounter make the wound incurable.


Pet. Is this a Siren, and thou Ulysses? cursed be that hellish carkas, and
blessed be thy heavenly spirit.


Sir. I shrink my head for shame. O Ulysses, is it not enough for thee to
escape, but also to teach others? Sing and die, nay ^ie, and never sing more.


Prot. Follow me at this door, and out at the other.


Pet. How am I delivered! the old man is vanished, and here for him stands
Protea.


Prot. Here stands Protea, that has saved thy life, thou must also prolong
hers: but let us into the woods, and there I will tell thee how I came to
Ulysses, and the sum of all my fortunes, which happily will breed in thee
both love and wonder.


Pet. I will, and only love Protea, and never cease to wonder at Protea.


Exeunt. ACTVS QVINTVS.
SCENA PRIMA.
Ceres, Cupid, Tirtena. Cer. Cupid, thou have transformed my Nymphs and
incensed me, them to shapes unreasonable, me to anger immortal, for at one
time I am both robbed of mine honor and my Nymphs.


Cup. Ceres, thy Nymphs were stubborn, and thy self speaking so imperiously
to Cupid, somewhat stately. If you ask the cause in choler, Sic volo, sic
iubeo: if in courtesy, Quae venu ex merito poena dolenda venit. They were
disdainefull, and have their deserts; thou Ceres, do but govern the guts of
men, I the hearts: thou seek to starve Erisicthon with thy ministered famine,
whom his daughter shall preserve by my virtue love.


Cer. Thou art but a god Cupid.


Cup. No Ceres, but such a god as makes thunder fall out of Jove's hand, by
throwing thoughts into his heart, and to be more terrified with the sparkling
of a Ladies eye, then men with the flashes of his lightning: such a god that
has kindled more fire in Neptunes bosom, then the whole Sea which he is king
of can quench: such power have I, that Plutoes never dying fire, does but
scorch in respect of my flames. Diana has felt some motions of love, Vesta
does, Ceres shall.


Cer. Art thou so cruel?


Cup. To those that resist, a Lion, to those that submit, a Lamb.


Cer. Can thou make such difference in affection, and yet shall it all be
love?


Cup. Yea, as much as between sickness and health, though in both be life:
those that yield and honor Cupid, shall possess sweet thoughts, and enjoy
pleasing wishes: the other shall be tormented with vain imaginations and
impossible hopes.


Cer. How may my Nymphs be restored?


Cu. If thou restore Erisicthon, they embrace their loves, and all offer
sacrifice to me.


Cer. Erisicthon did in contempt hew down my sacred tree.


Cup. Thy Nymphs did in disdain, scorn my constant love.


Cer. He slew most cruelly my chaste Fidelia, whose blood lies yet on the
ground.


Cup. But Diana has changed her blood to fresh flowers, which are to be
seen on the ground.


Cer. What honor shall he do to Ceres? What amends can he make to Fidelia?


Cup. All Ceres grove shall he deck with Garlands, and account every tree
holy; a stately monument shall he erect, in remembrance of Fidelia, and offer
yearly sacrifice.


Cer. What sacrifice shall I and my Nymphs offer thee? For I will do any
thing to restore my Nymphs, and honor thee.


Cup. You shall present in honor of my mother Venus, Grapes and Wheat, for
Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus. You shall suffer your Nymphs to play,
sometimes to be idle, in the favor of Cupid, for Otiasitollas, periere
Cupidinis arcus. So much for Ceres. Thy Nymphs shall make no vows to continue
Virgins, nor use words to disgrace love, nor fly from oportunities that kindle
affections: if they be chaste, let them not be cruel; if fair, not proud; if
loving not inconstant. Cruelty is for Tigers, pride for Peacockes,
inconstancy for fools.


Cer. Cupid, I yield, and they shall: but sweet Cupid, let them not be
deceived by flattery, which takes the shape of affection, nor by lust, which
is clothed in the habit of love; for men have as many slights to delude, as
they have words to speak.


Cup. Those that practice deceit, shall perish: Cupid favors none but the
faithful.


Cer. Well, I will go to Erisicthon, and bring him before thee.


Cup. Then shall thy Nymphs recover their fames, so as they yield to love.


Cer. They shall.


Exeunt. ACTVS QVINTVS. SCENA PRIMA.
Petulius, Protea. Pet. A strange discourse, Protea, by which I find the gods
amorous, and Virgins immortal goddesses, full of cruelty, and men of
unhappiness.


Prot. I have told both my Fathers misfortunes, grown by stoutnesse, and mine
by weakness, his thwarting of Ceres, my yielding to Neptune.


Pet. I know, Protea, that hard iron falling into fire, waxes soft, and then
the tender heart of a Virgin being in love, must needs melt: for what should
a fair young and witty Lady answer, to the sweet inticements of love, but,


Molle meum leuibus cor est violabile telis. Prot. I have heard too, that
hearts of men stiffer then steel, have by love been made softer then wool,
and then they cry,


Omnia vincit amor, and ^os cedamus amori. Pet. Men have often fained sighs.


Prot. And women forged tears.


Pet. Suppose I love not.


Prot. Suppose I care not.


Pet. If men swear and lie, how will you try their loves?


Prot. If women swear they love, how will you try their dissembling?


Pet. The gods put wit into women.


Prot. And nature deceit into men.


Pet. I did this but to try your patience.


Prot. Nor I, but to prove your faith. But see, Petulius, what miraculous
punishments here are for deserts in love; this Rock was a Nymph to Ceres, so
was this Rose, so that Bird.


Pet. All chaung'd from their shapes?


Prot. All chaung'd by Cupid, because they disdained love, or dissembled in it.


Pet. A fair warning to Protea; I hope she will love without dissembling.


Prot. An Item for Petulius, that he delude not those that love him; for Cupid
can also change men. Let (...).


Exeunt. ACTVS QVINTVS. SCENA QVARTA.
Ramis, Siluestris, Montanus. Ram. This goes luckily, that Cupid has promised
to restore our mistresses, and Ceres, that they shall accept our loves.


Mont. I did ever imagine, that true love would end with sweet joys, though
^o was begun with deep sighs.


Sil. But how shall we look on them when we shall see them smile? We must, and
perchance they will frown.


Ram. Push, let us endure the bending of their fair brows, and the scorching
of their sparkling eyes, so that we may possess at last the depth of their
affections.


Mont. Possess? Never doubt it, for Ceres has restored Erisicthon, and
therefore will persuade with them, nay, command them.


Sil. If it come by commandment of Ceres, not their own motions, I rather
they should hate: for what joy can there be in our lives, or in our loves
sweetness, when every kiss shall be sealed with a curse, and every kind
word proceed of fear, not affection? enforcement is worse then enchantment.


Ram. Art thou so superstitious in love, that wast wont to be most careless?
Let them curse all day, so I may have but one kiss at night.


Mont. Thou art worse then Siluestris, he not content without absolute love,
thou with indifferent.


Sil. But here comes Ceres with Erisicthon: let us look demurely, for in her
heart she hates us deeply.


ACTVS QVINTVS. SCENA VLTIMA.
Cupid, Ceres, Nymphs, Erisicthon, Petulius, Protea. Erisict. I will hallow
thy woods with solemn feasts, and honor all thy Nymphs with due regard.


Cer. Well, do so, and thank Cupid that commands, nay, thank my foolish
Nymphs, that know not how to obey; here be the lovers ready at receipt: How
now Gentlemen, what seek you?


Ram. Nothing but what Ceres would find.


Cer. Ceres has found those, that I would she had lost, vain lovers.


Ram. Ceres may lose that, that Cupid would save, true lovers.


Cer. You think so one of another.


Sil. Cupid knows so of us all.


Cer. You might have made me a counsel of your loves.


Mont. I madame, if love would admit counsel.


Cer. Cupid, here is Erisicthon in his former state, restore my N^mphs to
theirs, then shall they embrace these lovers, who wither out their youth.


Erisict. Honored be mighty Cupid, that makes me live.


Pet. Honored be mighty Cupid, that makes me love.


Prot. And me.


Cer. What, more lovers yet? I think it be impossible for Ceres to have any
follow her in one hour, that is not in love in the next.


Cup. Erisicthon, be thou careful to honor Ceres, and forget not to please
her Nymphs. The faithful love of thy daughter Protea, has wrought both pity
in me to grant her desires, and to release thy pu^ish^ents. Thou Petuliu^
shall enjoy thy love, becaused know thee loyal.


Pet. Then shall Petulius be most happy.


Prot. And Protea most fortunate.


Cup. But do you, Ramis, continue your constant love, and you, Montanus, and
you, Siluestris.


Ram. Nothing can alter our affections which increase, while the means
decrease, and wax stronger in being weakened.


Cup. Then Venus, send down that shower, wherewith thou were wont to wath
those that do thee worship, and let love by thy beams, be honored in all
the world and feared, wished for, and wondered at: here are thy Nymphs, Ceres.


Ram. Whom do I see? Nisa?


Mont. Divine Celia, fairer then ever she was!


Sil. My sweet Niobe.


Cer. Why stare you, my Nymphs, as amazed triumph rather because you have your
shapes: this great god Cupid, that for your prides and follies changed, has by
my prayer and promise restored you.


Cup. You see, Ladies, what it is to make a mock of love, or a scorn of
Cupid; see where your lovers stand, you must now take them for your husbands;
this is my judgment, this is Ceres promise.


Ram. Happy Ramis.


Mont. Happy Montanus.


Sil. Happy Siluestris.


Cer. Why speak you not, Nymphs? This must be done, and you must yield.


Nisa. Not I.


Niob. Nor I.


Cel. Nor I.


Cer. Not yield? Then shall Cupid in his fury turn you again to senseless,
and shameful shapes.


Cup. Will you not yield? How say you Ramis? Do your loves continue? Are your
thoughts constant? and yours Montanus? And yours Siluestris?


Ram. Mine most unspotted.


Mont. And mine.


Sil. And mine, Cupid, which nothing can alter.


Cup. And will you not yield, Virgins?


Nisa. Not I, Cupid, neither do I thank thee that I am restored to life, nor
fear again to be changed to stone: for rather had I been worn with the
continual beating of waves, then dulled with the importunities of men, whose
open flatteries make way to their secret lusts, retaining as little truth in
their hearts, as modesty in their words; how happy was Nisa, which felt
nothing, pined yet, not felt the consumption! unfortunate wench, that now have
ears to hear their cunning lies, and eyes to behold their dissembling looks!
turn me, Cupid, again; for love I will not.


Ram. Miserable Ramis, unhappy to love, to change the Lady, accursed, and now
lose her, desperate!


Cel. Nor I Cupid: well could I content my self to bud in the Summer, and to
die in the Winter: for more good comes of the Rose, then can by love: when it
is fresh, it has a sweet favor, love a sour taste: the Rose when it is old,
loses not his virtue; love when it is state waxes loathsome. The Rose
distilled with fire yields sweere water: love in extremities kindles
iealousies: in the Rose how ever it be, there is sweetness; in love nothing but
bitterness. If men look pale, and swear, and sigh, then forsooth women must
yield, because men say they love, as though our hearts were tied to their
tongues, and we must choose them by appointment, our selves feeling no
affection, and so have our thoughts bound prentises to their words: turn me
again. Yield I will not.


Mont. Which way shall thou turn thy self, since nothing will turn her
heart? Die, Montanus, with shame and grief, and both infinite.


Niob. Nor I Cupid: let me hang always in the air, which I found more
constant then men's words: happy Niobe, that touched not the ground where they
go, but always holding thy beak in the air, did never turn back to
behold the earth. In the heavens I saw an orderly course, in the earth nothing
but disorderly love, and preuishnesse: turn me again, Cupid, for yield I will
not.


Sil. I would my self were stone, flower, or foul, seeing that Nisa has a
heart harder then stone, a face fairer then the Rose, and a mind lighter then
feathers.


Cup. What have we here? Has punishment made you perverse? Ceres, I vow here
by my sweet mother Venus, that if they yield not, I will turn them again,
not to flowers, or stones, or birds, but to monsters, no less filthy to be
seen, then to be named hateful: they shall creep that now stand, and be to
all men odious, and be to themselves (for the mind they shall retain)
loathsome.


Cer. My sweet Nymphs, for the honor of your sex, for the love of Ceres, for
regard of your own country, yield to love, yield, my sweet Nymphs, to sweet
love.


Nisa. Shall I yield to him that practiced my destruction, and when his love
was hotest, caused me to be changed to a rock?


Ram. Nisa, the extremity of love is madness, and to be mad is to be
senseless, upon that Rock did I resolve to end my life: fair Nisa, forgive
him thy change, that for himself provided a harder chance.


Cel. Shall I yield to him, that made so small account of my beauty, that he
studied how he might never behold it again?


Mont. Fair Lady, in the Rose did I always behold thy color, and resolved
by continual gazing to perish, which I could not do when thou wast in thine
own shape, thou wast so coy and swift in flying from me.


Niob. Shall I yield to him that caused me have wings, that I might fly
farther from him.


Sil. Sweet Niobe, the farther you did seem to be from me, the nearer I was
to my death, which to make it more speedy, wished thee wings to she into the
air, and my self lead on my heels to sink into the Sea.


Cer. Well, my good Nymphs, yield let Ceres entreat you yield.


Nisa. I am content, so as Ramis, when he finds me cold in love, or hard in
belief, he attribute it to his own folly; in that I retain some nature of
the Rock, he changed me into.


Ram. O my sweet Nisa, be what thou will, and let all thy imperfections be
excused by me, so thou but say thou love me.


Nisa. I do.


Ram. Happy Ramis.


Celia. I consent, so as Montanus, when in the midst of his sweet delight,
shall find some bitter ouerthwarts, impute it to his folly, in that he suffered
me to be a Rose, that has prickles with her pleasantnes, as he is like to
have with my love shrewdnes.


Mont. Let me bleed every minute with the prickles of the Rose, so I may enjoy
but one hour the savor: love, fair Celia, and at thy pleasure comfort, and
confound.


Celia. I do.


Mont. Fortunate Montanus.


Niob. I yielded first in mind, though it be my course last to speak: but if
Siluestris find me not ever at home, let him curse himself that gave me wings
to fly abroad, whose feathers if his jealousy shall break, my policy shall
nip.


Nou custodiri, ni velit vlla potest. Sil. My sweet Niobe, fly whither thou will all day, so I may find thee in my nest at night, I will love thee, and
beloue thee.


Sit modo non feci, dicere lingua me^^or. Cup. I am glad you are all agreed,
enjoy your loves, and every one his delight. Thou Erisicthon art restored of
Ceres, all the lovers pleased by Cupid, she joyful, I honored. Now, Ladies,
I will make such unspotted love among you, that there shall be no suspicion
nor jar, no unkindness nor jealousy: but let all Ladies hereafter take
heed, that they resist not love, which works wonders.


Cer. I will charm my Nymphs, as they shall neither be so stately, as not to
stoop to love, nor so light as presently to yield.


Cup. Here is none but is happy: but do not as Hippomanes did, when by Venus
ay^ he won Atlanta, defile her Temple with unchaste desire^ and forgot to
sacrifice vows. I will soar up into heaven, to settle the loves of the gods,
that in earth have disposed the affections of men.


Cer. I to my harvest, whose corn is now come out of the blade, into the ear,
and let all this amorous troop to the temple of Venus, there to consummate what
Cupid has commanded.


Erisict. Im the honor of Cupid, and Ceres, will solemnize this feast within
my house, and learn, if it be not too late, again to love. But you Forresters
were unkind, that in all my maladies would not visit me.


Mont. Thou know, Erisicthon, that lovers visit none but their mistresses.


Erisict. Well, I will not take it unkindly, since all ends in kindness.


Cer. Let it be so; these lovers mind nothing what we say.


Ram. Yes, we attend on Ceres.


Cer. Well, do.


Exeunt. FINIS.

