MEDITATIONS, AND DEVOVT DISCOURSES UPON THE B. SACRAMENT COMPOSED BY Chapter M.

Caro mea vere est cibus,
and sanguis meus vere est potus.
My Flesh is meat indeed,
and my blood is drink indeed.
JOAN 6. Printed at DOWAY by L. KELLAM, Anno 1639.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS LADY THE LADY CECILIE, COUNTESS AND
DOWAGER OF THE LATE EARL OF RVTLAND.
WRITERS of books (most noble Lady) are spiritual parents, and their books
are their broods, and young-ones. And therefore, as carnal parents have no
sooner a child borne to the world, but they look about them for a secondarie
Father or Mother (whom they style Godfather and Godmother) by whose name the
child may be graced, and by whose authority it may be protected: So writers of
books are no sooner delivered of these their youngones, the broods of their
brains, and fruitful understandings, but they by and by think of a Patron or
Patroness, to whom they may commend them: whose examples, because they are
common, I being not unwilling to follow, had no sooner finished this little
Pamphlet of meditations on the B. Sacrament (my young Benjamin borne to me in
my old age) but I bethought myself to whose Patronage, and tuition, I might
best commend it. And my cogitation did presently light, and hitt upon your
Honor, who by your great nobility (as being dowager to the Illustrious Earl
of Rutland, Sister to the Lord Nicholas Tufton can grace it, by your credit by
your credit (as being of our prime nobility) can protect it, by your piety
will embrace it, and by your many noble favors may challenge it. Let others
dedicate their Annals and Histories of wars and Martial feats to Kings and
Emperors: I will presume to offer a book of Piety to a Lady most noble and
pious, and yet so pious that her piety graceth her nobility. Your Honor
since the death of your noble Husband, the Illustrious Earl of Rutland, has
embraced the state of a widow, the most noble state and most pleasing to God
after Virginity, in which you have carried your self so like your self, that
you deserve Honor of all, according to that of the Apostle Honor widows,
which are widows indeed. You imitate by your retired life that famous widow
Judith, who in the Higher parts of her house, made herself a secret chamber,
in which she lived retiredlie with her maids, serving God by prayer and
fasting: yea you follow the example of the widow and Prophetess Anna, whom the
Evangelist commends for that she departed not from the Temple, but by fasting
and prayer served God. For although your Honor wants not goodly Houses,
Parkes, and Gardens, wherein you may recreate your self, yet to show your self
a widow indeed, you have made choice of your Oratorie for your Palace and
chief place of aboade, and from thence you hardly depart, because there you
co^uerse with God, and he with you, and when there you read your Spiritual
books, he talks with you, and when you pray, you talk with him. And although
you keep an Honorable Table, suting with your nobility, yet the fare which
most pleases you, is Judithes and Annaes fare, to wit, fasting, which is the
food of the Soul, and the Physic of the body, which so weakeneth the body,
as it strengthens the soul. And although your Honor wants neither lands
nor livings, nor revenues, which the world calls Riches, yet you esteem
Almesdeeds your greatest treasures, as indeed they are. For as Merchants when
they have laid out all their moneys, do then esteem themselves richest,
because they expect greater and richer marchandises; so your Honor is the
richer by your Almesdeeds, because by this laying out, you purchase greater
treasures in heaven. So that, although you be a widow, in respect of your late
most noble Husband, yet you are no widow in respect of Christ, to whom you are
espoused, not only by faith, hope, and charity, as all good christians are,
but in a more perfect manner, by renouncing all marriage with man on Earth, to
marry and unite your self more neerlie to your Spouse God and man in Heaven:
Not thinking now (to use the Apostles words) on things that pertain to the
world, as the married woeman does, how to please an husband, but thinking on
the things that pertain to our lord how to please him. And therefore he now is
your spouse, who^ you love above all, on whom your love is settled, on whom your
thoughts are fixed, to whom all your actions are directed: he is ever in your
mind, ever in your thought, ever in your memory: and that time which other
Ladies spend in adorning themselves, so to please their Husbands, you spend, in
adorning your soul, by prayer, meditation, fasting, Almsdeeds, and other
virtues, so to please your Spouse Christ Jesus. He therefore, who has espoused
you to him in Earth, by his grace, espouse you also unto him in heaven, by his
glory, and in the mean time heap many benedictions upon you. So desires, so
prays.

YOUR HONORS Humble servant CHAPTER M.

FAVLT'S ESCAPED IN THE PRINTINGE.
In the praeface to the Reader n. 11. Sacraments. Cor. Sacrament. Page 8. lin.
16. tuee. Cor. thee. Page 15. li. 17. truobled. Cor. troubled. Page 20. lin. 9.
Ioseth. Cor. Joseph. Page 21. lin. vlt. tall. Cor. tell. Page 27. lin. vlt.
head. Cor. shed. Page 45. lin. 21. sayinst. Cor. saying. Page 53. in margin lib
61. Correct hom. 61. Page 170. lin. 6. and 17. Manha. Correct Manhu. Page 189.
lin. 10, fare. Cor. Far.
The Contents of the MEDITATIONS
THE FIRST MEDITATION. What love Christ showed at his last supper. THE SECOND
MEDITATIONS. What charity and humility Christ showed before he satte down to
his last supper. THE THIRD MEDITATION How bountiful a Feast-maker and Host
Christ showed him self, and how great a feast he exhibited to his disciples, in
the B. Sacrament. THE FOVRTH MEDITATION. How provident a paterfamilias and Good
man of the House of our soul and the Church, Christ is by this B Sacrament.
THE FIFTH MEDITATION. How Christ showed himself in this B. Sacrament a Father,
and more then a Father unto us. THE SIXTH MEDITATION. How Christ showed himself
in the B. Sacrament a Mother, and more then a Mother. THE SEVENTH MEDITATION.
What a Friend Christ has showed himself in the B. Sacrament. THE EIGHT
MEDITATION. How Christ has showed himself in this B. Sacrament, a most loving
spouse. THE NINTH MEDITATION. What a Physician Christ has showed himself in
this B. Sacrament. THE TENTH MEDITATION. How good a shepherd and Pastor
Christ has showed himself in this B. Sacrament. THE II. MEDITATION. With what
fear, and reverence, and acknowledgment of unworthiness, the devout receiver is
to come to this B. Sacrament. THE XII. MEDITATION With what love to our Savior
We should receive this B. Sacrament. THE XIII. MEDITATION. To be made
immediately after communion: How thankful the Receiver should be. THE XIV.
MEDITATION How the Communicant or Receiver is enriched by this B. Sacrament,
and so should little esteem all worldly losses. THE XV. MEDITATION. How by
the receiving of this B. Sacrament the Receiver is made the Temple of God. THE
XVI. MEDITATION. Of the good purposes which after Communion are to be made.
APPROBATIO.
HAE meditationes Eucharisticae Chapter M. piae sunt and deuotae, nihil fidei
catholicae and bonis moribus contrarium continentes, ideoque vtiliter
excudentur and perlegentur. Actum Duaci 4. Iulij 1639.

Georgius Coluenerius S. Theol. Doctor, and Regius, ordinariusque ac primarius
Professor Duacen sis Vniuersitatis Cancellarius, and librorum Censor.

To the Reader.
THE nature of man is desirous of Novelty, change,

The reason of this is the sufficiency of God his goodness and the
insufficie^cie of that which is good in his creatures. Su^mum bonum, cheifest
and infinite Good in which is no defect, and so being seen clearlie, and
perfectli^ possessed, as he is of the Blessed in heaven, who see him face to
face, 1. Cor. 15.
does always delight, never glutte the Blessed, or make them desirous of
change. But all creatures, and create Goods, as they content and delight for a
time, by reason that they are good in their kind, so in time they discontent,
and make us weary of them, because in that they are finite, they are also
deficient. Whence it is that as sick men cannot lie long on one side or in one
posture, but do turn and change often, so we are never long content with any
one create thing, seem it at first never so pleasing, but after we have had a
taste of it, we are weary of it, and desire to change, though sometimes for
worse.

many spiritual books set out heretofore by others, I have not feared to set
out mine, though they be of the same subject that other former books were,
seeing that, though mine treat of the same matter, yet they do it in a diverse
manner, and so for variety may please. I knew well that many had written
paraphrases upon the Psalm Miserere and upon all the Psalms: and yet in the
year 1635 ladue^tured to set out mine also, hoping that when devout persons
are weary of still reading others Paraphrases, they would for variety be
content to read mine also, and I was not deceived.

And although I was not ignorant that many Authors have written meditations
upon the B. upon the same subjects, hoping that after often reading of those
former books, some out of desire of change will be content to read mine though
inferior.

And therefore to accommodate my self to humain infirmity, a spouse, a Father,
and the like, that this variety may delight and cause the Receiver to come to
this Holy Sacrament without any tediousnes, yea with greater spiritual
appetite.

And so I hope my meditations will not be ungrateful, because in them there is
variety, matters, and subjects.

Otherwise, if because that some have written of a subject, others who succeed
the^, must not touch that matter, all modern Authors must abstain from
writing, because nothing can be now said, which was not in substance said
before. For as Ecclesiastes said in his time, so much more may we now say in
our time: Eccles. 1
nothing under the Sun is new, neither is any man able to say: behold this
is new; for that it has already gone before in the ages that were before. And
so we See that there are diverse commentaries upon the same book of scripture,
diverse sermons on the same holy day and text, diverse books of the same part of
Philosophy and divinity.

This being premised for my excuse, whatsoever speculation or discourse upon
God or his divine perfections, or the mysteries of our faith, for, this
speculation being only to discover the truth, is not worthy the name of
meditation, which is a kind of mental prayer: but meditation does speculate the
aforesaid obiectes, and discourses on them to move some affection, as love,
joy, fear, sorrow, according to the natures of the mysteries or obiectes, on
which we meditate.

In this exercise of meditation (as the contemplatiues do well observe) there
are three ways to perfection. The one is Purgative, when by meditation we
stir up in us a fear of God and his Judgments, and sorrow for our sins or
hatred of them, by which our souls are purged from all filth of sin. The
second way is illuminatiue, when by meditation our understanding is so
illuminated, as it sees the excellency of virtue, as of obedience, humility,
poverty of spirit, chastity and the like, and seeing the beauty of it,
induces the will to love it, and loving it, to practice and to get it. The
third way is Unitive, when by meditation of God his Divine perfections we
stir up in our hearts a love of God, a complacence in his Goodness or mercy,
or other his perfectio^s, and divine attributes and by this way our souls are
united to God. The first way is of beginners, the second of those that profit
in the way of virtue, the third of them that are perfect.

In my Paraphrasis and meditation of the Psalm Miserere, Purgative way,
inducing the sinner to penance and sorrow for his sins, by which sorrow the
soul is purged from sin. In my meditations upon the Passion, I propose the
illuminatiue way, because Christ in his Passion has set us examples of all
virtues. In my meditatio^s upon the B. Sacrament I teach the unitive way, that
Sacrament by it self uniting us reallie to Christ, and the consideration of it
stirring up love toward God for such a benefit,

But because Christ instituted this B. Sacrament before his Passion, and was
immolated mystically before he was sacrificed on the Cross reallie: I first
present thee (Gentle Reader) with my Meditations on the B. Sacraments, and
after them I will make thee partaker of those of the Passion which shall follow
these former. God grant that both thou and I, in them may find out and follow
the aforesaid three ways to perfection; that we may attain to the perfection
of virtue and grace in this life, and so to the perfection of glory (which is
our last and greatest perfection) in the next.

THE FIRST MEDITATION What love Christ showed at his last supper.
THE Son of God Christ Jesus God and man in the whole decourse of his life,
never ceased to give us signs and tokens of his love toward mankind. For
besides that he was incarnat, and became man, only for man, not for Angels,
he was borne for man in time of a Virgin Mother without a Father, who was borne
of his Father, and of the womb of his divine substance without a Mother from
all eternity, Psalm. 2. and 109.
and he who feeds all living creatures was fedd and nourished by the same
Virgin Mother, Psalm. 135.
was swadled by her in poor clowts, who was invested with his Fathers glory,
was rocked by her a sleep, whose divine eyes are ever open, was circumcised
and woare the badge of a sinner, who could not sin, fasted, prayed, preached,
and all for the love of man: he never breathed, never walked, never talked,
never wrought miracles or other good works, but for man's example and
redemption. But as S. Ep. Io 3.
John testifies (and his testimony is true) unto the end, and in the end of
his life, Joan. 13.
he loved us, and gave the greatest signs of love that ever he gave.

Love is showed in twoe things especially, to wit in giving and suffering.
For if you present one with some rich diamant or other precious thing, you
shall thereby show your great love unto him, love showing it self by gifts,
as fire does by sparcles, and if you give him nothing yet do suffer much for
him, either in your goods or body, you do no less show your love to him, yea
so much the more, by how much it is harder to suffer then to give.

Our Blessed Savior the true lover of man kind at his last supper, which was
the twyelight of his da^e, and the evening of his life, gave unto man the
greatest gift which heaven and earth could show, and which was more worth
then a thousand heavens and earthes, to wit his sacred body and blood and even
himself God and man in the Blessed Sacrament. And although he then suffered not
death reallie for us, yet he did soon after, and even then, in that in the
Blessed Sacrament he represented his body only under the shapes of bread, and
his blood only under the forms of wine, and so apart, he was immolated and
sacrificed for us mystically, and dyed for us in representation before he died
in verity: and so as some Saints to show their desire to dye, and to prepare
themselves the better to death, have put on a winding sheet, or have entered
into their Tomb or monument before their death, So Christ Jesus in the
Blessed Sacrament, and at his last supper, to show the great desire he had to
dye reallie for us, did as it were put on the winding sheet of the shapes of
bread and wine and wrapped himself in them, and so died in figure and mystery
for us, before he died in verity, and by this figurative and mystical death
prepared himself to a real death which soon after, that is the next day, he
suffered for us, and so in the end of his life he showed his great love unto
us both by giving and suffering. But as he first showed his love by giving
himself in the Blessed Sacrament, and by immolating himself in it mystically
only, and in representation; so let us first employ our best thoughts and
meditations upon the Blessed Sacrament, and Christ his last supper, in which
for a loving farewell he bestowed upon his disciples the most precious banquet
that ever was seen on earth, consisting of no less then his sacred body and
blood, seasoned and sauced with the divinity it self: And here after, in an
other little treatise we shall contemplate what he suffered for us in his sacred
Passion.

This Son of God and lover of mankind showed great love unto us, Joan. 3.
John expresses this his love with a Sic or so, saying: So God loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son; and yet thus he bestowed not his
divine person on every one in particular, but only on that nature
particularly which he took of the Virgin-Mothers womb, and by it on mankind
in general: But in the Blessed Sacrament he imparteth himself to every one
of us in particular by communion, by which he gives us his body, blood,
soul, and divinity and so at the end of his life, Joan. 13.
and at his last supper he especially loved us.

O my soul seeing that thy God and loving spouse Christ Jesus has given
himself, soul, Psalm. 143.
O thou thrice happy and infinitlie rich, cuius Dominus Deus tuus, whose God
is thy Lord: O my soul thy spouse seems to content himself with thee,
content thy self with him: If he can not content thee, in whom be all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.
in whom is all perfection, beauty and goodness, nothing will content thee.
Noe, say unto him. Quid mihi est in coelo, Psalm. 72.
and a te quid volui super terram? what is to me in heaven? and besides thee
what would I upon the earth? my heart is so ample and capable, that as it can
not, so neither desires it to be enriched but by tuee? If I have thee, as in
the B. Sacrament I have, I am rich enough, and without thee I am poor and
miserable, though I had all but thee: If I have thee I have all, and if I have
not thee, though I had all else which is in heaven and earth I esteem myself
to have nothing. Thou o my Lord art my part, my All, let me desire nothing but
thee, Psalm. 75.
let me love nothing but thee, or for thee, and as thou have loved me all thy
life time, but especially at the end, Io. 13.
and period of thy life, in bestowing this B. Sacrament on me: so give me the
grace by which I may love thee all the time of my life, and especially at the
end of it, that then especially I may quite withdraw my love from the world,
and all it can afford, and then give it only to thee, who at the end of thy
life, in this B. Sacrament have so kindly loved me, that I may dye loving
thee, and so ceasing to live, may never cease to love, because although faith
and Hope dye with us (saiths obscurity yielding to the light of glory, and
Hope not consisting with the possession of that we hoped for) yet Charity
never falls away, 1 Cor. 12.
or fails, and therefore if I die with it, I shall live with it eternally.

THE II. MEDITATION What Charity and humility Christ showed before he satte
down to his last supper.
OUR B. Savior having eaten with his disciples the Paschall lamb, and used
also the ceremonies prescribed for the eating of it, so to show himself an
obedient obseruer and full filler of the old law: he rises from that Typical
Feast of the Paschall Lamb, and murteth them to the eating of the true lamb
of God (to wit himself) who takes a way the sins of the world: Io. 1^
who was the verity of that figure, a feast as far surpassing that feast of
the jews, as the verity excels the figure, the body the shadow. And
before he sits down to this Heavenly Feast, behold what preparation he
makes, what ceremonies he uses, to show his disciples with what reverence and
humility, with what love and charity, they and all Christians should approach
unto this feast.

Thus S. John describes it: And when supper was done etc. Io. 13.
he rises from supper (to wit of the Paschal Lamb) and lays aside his
garments, and having taken a Towell, girded himself, after that he putt water
into a basin, and begane to wash the feet of the disciples, and to wipe them
with the towel, wherewith he was girded. He laid aside his upper garment, that
he may with more conuenience wash his disciples feet, as also to signify
that in this humble act he lays aside in outward appearance his vestments of
glory, to wit the majesty, splendor and light of his divinity, and guirdeth
himself with a towell, to signify that he invested himself in the towel of our
human nature, that by it he might wipe aware all the filth and ordure of our
sins, and thus prepared he kneeleth down to wash his disciples feet.

Behold, o my soul, consider it well thou caust not but stand amazed at it.
Behold God kneeling at his creatures feet, washing and wiping them. Behold
what preparation to this sacred Feast he makes, what a ceremony he uses, to
show to his disciples with what reverence and humility, with what love and
charity, with what purity they and all christians should approach to this
dread Sacrifice, to this Holy Sacrament, which then he was to institute, to
distribute unto them, and to offer to his father for them. O sweet Jesus, how
do thou humiliate, and even debase thy self, to control our pride, and to
set us an example of humility ever to be used, and especially when we come to
this holy Sacrament and dread Sacrifice.

Abraham washed the feet of three Pilgrims, Genesis 18.
or at least fetched water for them to wash, whom after, he found to be Angels,
but they were but Angels and he but a Patriarch; Christ is the God of
Patriarchs whom Abraham served, and he washed not Angels feet but poor
fishermens feet, whose Lord and Master, whose God and Creator he was. Luc. 7.
Marie Magdalen washed Christ's feet with her tears and wiped them with her
hairs: but Christ was her God, and she a sinner who had offended, and so there
was more humility in Christ in permitting her to wash and wipe his feet, then
in her in washing and wiping them: But thou O Savior of the world, God and man
washedst the feet of thy creatures and even of fishermen which are commonly
foul, and even of Judas who had betrayed thee, Math. 26.
and even then had sold thee to the Jews.

But O Peeter, for to thee he offers first this service, will thou permit thy
so loving master, thy God and Creator to wash thy feet? will thou accept this
honor to be done to thee, with so much dishonor redounding unto him? No says
he: Io. 13.
thou shall not wash my feet for ever, yet Christ threatens Peeter, that,
unless he wash him he shall have noe part with him Here Peeter was troubled
with contrary and repugnant thoughts. To permit Christ to wash his feet,
was much repugnant to the humble conceit he made of himself and to the high
esteem he had of Christ, not to permite him was now after a commandment
disobedience, and after a threatening was loss of the heavenly glory, for
which he had left all, and of which he had seen a glimse in the
Transfiguration of his master. I am loath (says Peeter to himself) to suffer
my Lord God so to debase himself as to wash my feet, I am loath also to
disobey him who has sovereign authority, but rather then I will be
disobedient to such a Lord and master, or loose my part with him, that is the
bliss of heaven, for which I have left my nets and hooks, and al I hadd,
wash O Lord (says he) since thou will have it so, not only my feet, but my
hands also and head: A contemplative soul will here take delight to behold
the holy contention betuixt the masters and the servants humility. But the
humility of the Master, as being the greater, in the end overcomes, and so
the master and God and man, kneeling at Peeters feet, washes them and wipeth
them, and peraduentur kisseth them. And having done this humble office to
Peeter, he does the same to the rest of the disciples, and even to the traitor
Judas.

O ye Angels who serve this your God, Esa. 4^. Philip. 2.
to whom every knee of the celestials terrestrials, and Infernals boweth:
kneeling at the feet of fishermen, girded with a towel, washing and wiping
their foul feet, o humility, and washing and wiping Judas his feet, who had
traiterouslie sold him for thirty pence, o Charity. O ye heavenly Spirits,
you descended at this your Masters nativity, admiring to see the Son of
glory borne in a stable, laid in a manger: but then he was worshipped by the
shepheardes: then great troops of you did sing your Christmas Carolle of Gloria
in Altissimis Deo, Luc. 2.
glory in the highest to God: and then an unwonted star shined at this
solemnity, and soon after that, three Kings came from the East to adore him
and present him on their knees with kingly gifts: but if you descend now,
you shall see him honored of none, but honoring his own vassals, and
debasing himself so far, as to wash and to wipe their feet. O ye courtiers
of the King and court of Heaven, show your selves courteours, and permit not
your King thus to be vilified: but rather do you (who in that you are
Courteours know well what ceremonies are most convenient) perform this humble
office for your Master, do you wash his disciples feet, and his in the first
place, he being your and their king: O ye Heavens and celestial globes and
star^s, who have the highest place in this world, with what manners can you
keep your so high and ^minent places, seeing your Creator kneeling to his
creatures, God, to man. O thou Sun and Prince of the Planets, the lamp and
eye of the world, who illuminatest the celestial and terrestrial world, can
thou endure to see thy Sun of whom thou borrowest thy light, in this
posture? Descend rather and humiliat thy self with thy Creator, or else
withdraw thy light and thy sight from such a spectacle. Joseph the Patriarch
saw the sun and moon and stars adoring him, Genesis 34.
but this he saw done only in a dream and vision, but behold now, not the
Sun and moon adoring our true Ioseth Jesus Christ, but himself adoring, that
is kneeling to his creatures and disciples.

O humble God, sine modo, Math. 3.
sic enim decet nos implere omnem iustitiam: suffer me, thus to humble myself
for this time, for so it becomes us to fulfill all justice. It is convenient
that the creator should thus humble himself even to the earth, that his
creatures may be exalted, to heaven: It is convenient that he thus should
humble himself to teach his disciples, and in them all christians to humble
themselves, not only to their betters and superiors, but also to their
subjects and Inferiors; to give them to understand by this humble washing and
wiping his disciples foul feet, that it is he who by his blood washes all
sinful souls from the filth and ordure of their sins.

Who is able to explicate, the Saints and Angels, who see clearlie the hight
of his divinity, and so none but they can see the lownes of this humility Nor
can they see it perfectly: only God himself can, who only can comprehend his
own hight and tallnes, which is infinite. To know how lowea vallie is, you
must know how high the mountain is, and so to know the vallie of this our
Saviors humility, you must know how high the mountain of his divinity is,
which none but God can perfectly know, because he only comprehends himself
and his own hight and tallnes. But as there was never humility so low as
this, so was there humility never so exalted as this. The higher in dignity
the person is who humbles himself, the lower is his humility because his
fall and descent is so, much the lower, by howmuch his dignity is higher, and
the higher the person is who humbles himself, the more his humllitie is
exalted and inobled, as the lower in dignity and baser the person is, the
less grace has his humility, and so humility is graced by the dignity of
the person, and graceth also the person, and humility is the honor of
honor, and honor is the honor of humility. And consequently this humility
of Christ, God and man, was the lowest that ever was, and yet the highest.

O my soul, thou think much to stoop to him the Creator? He so noble and so
high in dignity humbled himself, and thou (who though thou were a King) art
base in respect of him, will thou disdain humility? he humbled himself to his
subjects and Inferiors, will thou think scorn to humiliate thy self to thy
equales, yea to thy superiors? He vouchsafed to wash his disciples foul
feet, thou think scorn to do any base office, though none is base which
humility graceth, and yet thou art a creature, he thy Creator. O my soul by
this thy Saviors humble ceremony of washing the disciples feet before he
admitted them to the B. Sacrament, learn to rinse and wash thy self clean
from all filth of sin in the Sacrament and lauatorie of Penance, before thou
approach to the holy of holies, and the Immaculate lamb of God contained in
this blessed Sacrament, learn by this humility of Christ which he used
immediately before the institution and distribution of this Sacred Sacrament,
with what reverence and fear thou should approach unto it considering thy
Indignity, and with what humility also considering thy baseness and it is
dignity.

THE III. MEDITATION How bountiful a feast maker and Oste Christ showed
himself and how great a feast he exhibited to his disciples in the B.
Sacrament.
THIS sweet Savior after the feast of the Paschall Lamb, having washed and
wiped his disciples feet, to prepare them to the feast of his sacred body
and blood, the verity of that figure, he sits down and inuiteth his
disciples and even Judas to sit down with him, and every one being placed,
and expecting what feast he would bestow on them at his farewell, which was
then at hand, he takes bread into his hands, saying unto them, Mar. 14. Luc.
22.1. Cor. 11.
take ye and eat, this is my body, and least they should think that he gave
the^ but a figure of his body as he did when he gave the^ the Paschall Lamb,
he not only calls it in plain terms but adds as S. Luke relates his
body which is given for you, as S. Paul tells us, which shall be delivered
for you: to wit on the Cross. And least they might ^magin that he gave them
only (...) figure of his blood, he not on^ie styles it in plain terms is
blood, but adds as S. Matthew and S. Marck relate which shall be shed sor
many; as (...). Luke writes, which shall be ^dd for you: And seeing that
bread, or a bare figure of Christ's body (such as was Manna, and the Paschall
lamb) was not delivered, or crucified for us, but only Christ his true
body, nor wine, or a bare figure of Christ's blood was shed for us, but only
his true blood, it follows that Christ at his last supper gave to his
disciples his true body and blood, because h gave that body which was
deliured for us on the Cross, and he gave them to drink of that blood which
was shed for them on the Cross; And forasmuch as his divinity was so
inseparably united both to his body and soul, that death which separated
them one from the other, could not separate them from the divinity, it
follows also that Christ then gave to his disciples his body, soul, blood
and divinity, all being united in him.

o bountiful feastmaker, Psalm. 8.
o Lord what is man that thou sh^udst so much esteem of him as to bestow on
him thy sacred body and blood sanctified by the divinity, yea thy own self
no less then God and man? o liberal Oste who entertainest thy guests with so
precious a banquet, and yet demaundest nothing for their ordinary. Hester^. 1.
No Assueru^ ever made such a feast as this, whether we respect the Oste yea
and king that has made it, to wit Christ Jesus, God and man King of Heaven
and earth, or the guests who are invited, to wit his Appostles, and their
succestours, yea all Christians even Kings and Emperors: or the feast it self
which is the holy flesh and blood of Christ seasoned with the divinity, more
worth then heaven and earth, yea then a thousand worlds, or the cost at which
the feast maker was in preparing this feast, for it cost him his death and
passion, which was the price of our Redemption, and was suffieient to have
redeemed a thousand worlds; or the continuance of the feast which began at
Christ his last supper, continues to this day, and shall continue to the
worlds end: for as Manna rained continually from Heaven to feed the Jews in
the desert and never was wanting till they came to the land of promise, so as
long as we live in the desert of this life, this our Manna, of which that was
but a shadow and figure, shall rain upon Catholic Christians, by the
consecration of the Priest til we come to Heaven our true land of Promise,
where in steed of Christ's body and blood, which now we eat and drink by
communion, we shall feed of the divinity it self by clear vision and
fruition. O my soul, how hard hearted art thou, if this great benefit, this
Royal and costly feast, do not melt thee into love, and resolve thee into
gratitude.

O feast of feasts, Eccl. 1.
Laudaui igitur letitiam, quod non esset bonum hominisub sole, nisi quod
comederet and biberet: I therefore have praised mirth, that there was no good
thing for a man under the sun, but that he should eat and drink and be
glad: to wit in this feast of the B. Sacrament.

o happy we, Genesis 49.
Pinguis est panis Christ^ and praebebit delicias Regibus: The bread of Christ
is fatte^ and shall give dainties to kings: Either because in that it is eaten
by us, it makes us Kings, or because it is meat only for Kings, and is not
to be given to any but those who are Kings and Lords, domineering over their
own se^sualities, and passions, yea over the world, flesh and devil. O happy
we who eating in this holy Sacrament Christ's sacred body and drinking his
blood, are made generous and noble, as he is, yea, in a proportion, divine as
he is, Gods by participation, as he is God by essence, yea of his blood, kindred
and lineage. Happy we who eating Christ's body and drinking his blood are not
only Christiani Christians, but also Christiferi bearers of Christ, Cyril'us
H^eros. Catech. 4. mist.
yea Deiferi, bearers of God, and lodge^s of him within us.

THE FOVRTH MEDITATION How provident a Paterfamilias and good man of the house
of our soul and the Church, Christ is by this B. Sacrament.
Almighty God out of his infinite goodness and bounty, has showed himself in
this B. Sacrament, to be a most wise and provident, and liberal Paterfamilias
or howsekeeper, having laid up in store such provision for the House of his
Church, and for every one of us in particular. He is a howsekceper most
provident in respect of all living creatures. The whole world is his house,
all living Creatures his family, for every one of which he provides meat
and drink according to every ones nature. Plants and herbs he feeds with
moisture, which by their roots as by mouths, they draw from the earth,
beasts with plants, herbs, corn, and grass: Fishes with water and other
food which they findc in the water, and men's bodies he fedeth with flesh,
fish. herbs and fruits of the earth, and therefore David says that it is
God: Ps. 146.
Qui dat iumentis escam ipsorum, and pullis coruorum inuocantibus eum, who
gives to beasts their food, and to the young ravens that call upon him. He
specifieth young ravens, partly to signify that God has care of all his
creatures even the vilest, partly because, as S. Sermon. de. Helia.
Chrysostom auerreth the old crows do often times neglect their young ones
(as when they suspect them not to be their own brood) and then God is the
nurse of the young ones, feeding them with flies, or the thick air or such
like.

But more bountifully, of the law, which brought nothing to perfection, Heb.
4.
and could not give them full-groughe, nor make them men, they were to be fed
like children with the light meats of the figurative Sacrificies and
Sacraments of the old law: Heb. 5.
And therefore S. Paul says that they had need of milk, and not of strong
meat, but strong meat is for the perfect, that is Christians, who because they
are perfect men in a spiritual life, are not to be fed with light figures, but
with the solid verities of those figures. They were fed with Manna and the
Paschall lamb, we who are Christians, are fed with the sacred body and blood
of Christ which are solid verities of those figures, and meat for the strong
and perfect, not for weakelings and children, as the Jews were.

Joseph the Patriarch, Paterfamilias of Pharao his house yea and of all Egypt,
Genesis 43.
and who in a dearth of seven years, provided them of corn abundantly;
when his brethren resorted also unto him for corn, he invited them to a feast,
and gave to every one of them his portion, but to Benjamin his youngest
brother, he gave a portion five times bigger then was the portion which he gave
to his elder brethren. Even so our Joseph Christ Jesus; who furnished not
Egypt with corn, as Joseph did, but the whole Church of God with the sacred
Euchariste, Io. 6.
which the Prophet calls, Zach. 9.
frumentum electorum, the wheat of the elect: and wine spinging virgins: gave
thereby to the Christinns the younger brother in regard of time, a portion of
the B. Sacrament, which is greater and more precious, not by five times only,
but by five thousand times then was the portion of Manna, or the Paschall
lamb, or all those Sacrifices and Sacraments which he gave to the Jew the
elder brother.

O liberal and magnificent housekeeper, wheat of the Elect, Zach. 9.10.6.
and of the bread of life, of which whoesoeuer eats lives for ever, Which
our B. Savior God and man, has provided for us in this B. Sacrament, I cease
to admire there, and can never cease to admire here, and I say unto my self:
Out of what granarie comes this wheat of the Elect, Zaca. 8.10.6.
out of what pa^terie comes this bread of life, which feeds our souls and
gives them spiritual nourishment, and life of grace? of which we feed
daily, and yet the bread is never consumed, never diminished. When I consider
the variety of fountains, springes, wells, and rivers, which our Blessed God
has provided for men and beasts to drink on, I stand amazed, and I say to
my self: out of what brewhowse comes all this drink? who is the Butler that
continually draws it (...) but when I Behold the wine which springs
Virgins, Zac. 9.
and which is drunk daily and by many thousands in this B. Sacrament: I stand
amazed here and I cease to admire there, and say to my self, out of what
celler comes this wine? who draws it? who fills it out? And which makes
me more to admire, I see many thousands do drink daily of this wine, and yet
the Celler is never emptied, the wine never diminished. O bountiful and
provident howsekeeper (sweet Jesus) who prouidest such meat and drink as
never consumes: for I see that: Sumit vnus, sumunt mill
Quantum isti tantum ille
Nec sumptus consumitur.
One takes it and a thousand may
As much as he so much do they
Nor is it consumed at all.


When I call to mind, desert, the Israelits with Quails and Manna from
Heaven and ganest them water to drink out of a hard rock, Excodi. 16. and 17.
I am astonished: But when I consider with what an heavenly Manna, made not
in the air by the fingers, of Angels, as that Manna was, but by the fingars of
the Holy Ghost in the Heaven of the B. Virgins womb, thou feedest us in the
Blessed Sacrament, during our aboade in the desert of this life, and wilt feed
us till we come to our land of promise; I cease to wonder there, and I only
wonder here.

When I call to mind how thou, Math. 14.
o Blessed Savior, the worker of all those former miracles, did feed with
five barlie loaves and two fishes, five thousand men, besides women and
children, and ganest to every one his fille, and yet after that all the
guetsts had eaten as much as satisfied them, the leauings and fragments filled
twelve boskets, and so was greater then the feast was at the beginning; I
wonder: But when I consider how in this B. Sacrament, thou, o Lord, feedest
with a far lesser quantity, so many millious of Christians since thy last
supper, and shall feed them to the end of the world, and yet the feast never
diminishes, but is as great now as it was at the beginning, I cease to wonder
there, and I stand altogether amazed here.

Behold my soul what a provident and bountiful howsekeeper thy Lord Jesus is.
I^ac. 15.
like the Prodigal son, left the Church, his heavenly fathers house, is fed
only with the husks and chafe of figures, but has not the solid corn to
feed on. Let him return to the Church his Fathers house, let him return
again and cry with the Prodigal son. How many of my Fathers hirelings have
abundance of bread, Luc. 15.
and I here perish for famine? I will arise, and go to my Father, and say to
him, father I have sinned against heaven and before thee: I am not worthy to
be called thy son, make me one of thy hirelings. Which if the Heretic
does, God will admit him to the heavenly provision in the B. Sacrament: he
will make him partaker, Io 6. Zac. 9.
of the bread of life, and wine that springs Virgins, of which who eats and
drinks shall never be hungry or thirsty again.

This sacred bread which our Paterfamilias has prepared for his howsehold,
Psalm. 22.
A chalice inebriating: which inebriateth spirituallie, and makes us sleep to
the world: The vine from which this sacred wine originallie proceeds, is
Christ Jesus, who called himself a vine, Io. 15.
sayinst to his disciples I am the vine: you the branches, which vine was
planted in the vinyard of the B. Virgins womb, when God the son took flesh
of her, the grape of this vine was Christ's bobie pressed on the cross, the
wine was his sacred blood given to the Apostles at the last supper before the
pressing on the Cross, but is given in the B. Saerament to their successors
aftet the pressing. By the force which this bread of life gives, we walk with
Helias, 3. Reg. 19.
not to the mount Horeb but to the mount of heaven, and by this sacred fare we
overcome all difficulties, which either the devil or the world, or our own
flesh do lay in our wa^e. By this wine the Apostles, disciples and martyrs of
the primitive Church being spirituallie drunk, encouraged, and inflamed, could
not be daunted with all the instruments of cruelty, with all the torments and
death^ which the Tyrants could devise, but were ready to suffer all torments
for him, who suffered for them, yea to give their lives for him, who offered
his for them on the Cross, and in the B. Sacrament gave his body and blood to
them.

O my soul, Quid retribuam Domino pro omnibus que retribuit mihi? what shall I
give to God (to this my Jesus God and man) for all things, which he has given
to me? I am less then the least of them, what then shall I render thee for
this benefit of the B. Sacrament, in which thou so often gi^est thyselfe, thy
body, blood and soul, and divinity? I can not give thee enough for the least
^rumme of this living bread of thy sacred body, for the least drop of this
sacred wine of thy sacred blood, though I should give all I am and have, and
though what I am were as perfect as the most perfect Angel, and though what I
have were as much as Heaven and Earth. O Lord be content that I confess
myself to be overcome by thee a thousand times in courtesies and favors, be
content that I give thee my All, for I know thou art noe little contented, when
we give our All, be it never so little.

THE FIFTH MEDITATION How Christ has showed himself in this B. Sacrament a
Father and more them a Father unto us.
GOd Almighty is our Father by Creation, Phil. lide decal. Magister Confor
lib. 1. con. 12.
and by the same Creation he is a Common Father to all Creatures, especially
man, and they are (as Philosaith) in respect of God who created them brethren
amongst themselves and children of one Father, for which cause the devout Saint
Francis called them his brethren and Sisters. Yet there is in this a difference
betwix man and other creatures, because man is not only a participation of God
his substance as other creatures are, but is also an Image of God, in regard
of his intellectual nature, and his understanding, will and memory, by which
he represents God and resembles him, as the Son does the Father: And
therefore God when he was to create man, he said not only be man made, as he
said, be light made, Genesis 1.
Be a Firmament made, be there lights made, but he said, let us make man to our
Image and likeness. And so God even by creation is in a more perfect manner a
Father of man, and man is in a more perfect manner his Son, resembling him as
the child does the Father.

Secondly God is Man's Father, 2. Pet 1.
is Consors diuinae naturae, partaker of the divine nature by which he is the
adopted child of God, and he is his adoptiue Father. Romans 5.
We were borne of our natural Parents dead spirituallie in soul by original
sin: but we are regenereted and borne again spirituallie to a supernatural
life by the Grace which we receive in, and by Baptism, Ion. 3. Ion. 3.4. and
5. Ion. 1. Romans 8. Gal. 3. and 4.
by which God is our Father, the grace of Baptism is our regeneration and
second nativity, by which we are said to be borne to God and to be his
children, he our Father.

But although this be true, yet by and in the B. Sacrament of the Altar,
Christ the Son of God, God and Man, shows himself a perfect Father, and
more then a Father. A man is said to be Father of his Son, because he
imparteth unto him his own nature flesh and blood, not the same individual,
but another of the same Kind. But our B. Savior in this Holy Sacrament
imparteth unto us his own nature, substance, flesh, and blood, of which he
himself consists. And so if the Son be called flesh of his Fathers flesh,
blood of his blood though he reccaue not from him the same flesh and blood
which he has, but other flesh and blood of the same Kind: much more may
Christians by receiving this Blessed Sacrament, be called flesh of Christ his
flesh, and blood of his blood they receiving the self same flesh and blood of
which he consists. And so not only by Baptism but also by this B. Sacrament
Christ is our Father, and more substantiallie by this Sacrament then, by that
because by that we receive only grace, which is only a supernatural, and
accidental participatio^ of God, by this we receive reallie Christ's own body
and blood, yea soul and divinity, and by his and our burning love, meeting
together, our substancies are (as S. Cyrill of Alexandria says) as it were
melted, and united as wax is to wax. Lib. 4. in Joan. ca. 17. Chris. lib. 61.
ad Pop. Antioc.
We are as S. Chrysostom says, vnum corpus and membra, ex carne cius and ex
ossibus eius, one body and members of his flesh and of his bones: we are not
only by charity but reipsa in very deed mingled with his flesh for he
semetipsum nobis immiscuis and corpus suum in nos contemperauit vt vnum quid
efficiamur tanquam corpus capiti coaptatum, ardenter enim amantium hoc est: he
has mingled himself to us, and has contempered his body into us that we may
be one thing, and as one body linked to the head, for this is the property of
those that love ardentlie.

O my soul how grateful should thou be to such a Father who has bestowed
on thee his own substance in so admirable a manner? disdain all baseness. Do
not thou then o my soul debase thy self, do not degenerate from this dignity
to thy former vilitie and baseness of life, who art made partaker of Christ's
body and blood, and nourished therewith.

Let sinners who think of noe other heaven then earth, Manna, which has
all delight, in eating of this bread of life which brings eternal life with
it, and in drinking of this wine of Christ's ^loud which springs Virgins,
^ebriateth the spirit and reioi ^eth the heart; Let worldlings ^ragge of their
noble blood, ex^action and noble descent, thou art more nobly descended, to
wit from Christ the Son of God, who in this B. Sacrament is thy Father and
more then a Father: thou art of a more noble blood, because by this B.
Sacrament thou art flesh and blood of Christ's flesh and blood; who was
conceived and born of a Virgin Mother and by no other seed then the Holy Ghost.

THE SIXTH MEDITATION How Christ has showed himself in the B. Sacrament a
Mother and more then a Mother.
THe love of a Mother toward her child is so great, that none can imagine it
but mothers themselves: It is greater then the love of the Father, because the
Mother suffers more for it then the Father does, she bearing it in her womb
nine months with great pain, bringing it to light with far greater, she
giving it her milk, swaddling it, rocking it, carrying it in her arms. And so
as we love that best which we get with most difficulty, so she loves the
child most because she most endures for it in performing the former officies;
and her most familiarity with it from i'ts birth, engenders the greatest love
and affection: Hence it is that when holy Scripture would express great love,
it compares it to the love of a mother, 2. Reg. 1.
As the mother says David) loves her only son so did I love thee,
Ionathas: yea God himself explicateth his love to us by the love of a Mother,
as by the greatest love, Why (says he) can a woeman forget her Infant etc.
and if she should forget yet will not I forget thee. Isa. 49. Isa. 66.
And again: As if the mother should speak one fair, so will I comfort thee.
And yet again: Io. 16.
A woeman when she trauaileth has sorrow, but when she has brought forth the
child, now she remembers not the anguish for joy that a man is borne into the
world: and this the great joy of the mother is grounded on her great love, and
this her great love on her great sorrow and pains which she suffered, and on
her great familiarity with her child from its birth, If the love of a mother
be so tender toward her child, how great must we think was the love of Christ
toward us in the B. Sacrament, where he has showed himself a mother and more
then a mother?

The mother by her pappes gives her child her milk, Chryl. sermon. admon. de
Euchar in Encenijs etc hom. 24 in 1. ad Cor. 11. hom. ^1 in cap. Io. 19.
Chrysostom affirms) issued out of his sacred fide, and with his blood the
milk also of his sanctifying grace, and therewith nourishes our souls.
Mothers use to chew the meat which they give to their little Infants, so to
make it fit for their eating, and our B. Savior in the First in stitution of
this B. Sacrament, did eat and as it were, chew his own flesh, and did drink
to us all, in a draft of his own blood, to make it fit for our eating and
drinking: and as nature in the mother conuerteth her blood into milk, and so
covers it with the white color of milk least the child should abhor to
take it in the color of blood, so our B. Savior has covered his Sacred flesh
and blood, which he gives us to eat and drink, under the usual color of
bread, and wine, knowing that we would abhor to eat his flesh and drink his
blood in their own shape and form.

And to show himself not only as a mother,

mother, for as S. Chrysostom says, mothers do often times give over their
children, to be nursed by others; but our B. Savior to make us generous as he
is, to make us suck with his blood his divine conditions, would not, out of
his love, permite this, but he nourishes us (which no mother will do) with
his own flesh and blood. Chrysostom. hom. 60. ad pop. An t^och.
O love above the love of Mothers, o love above the love of all creatures,
proper only to God and the lover of mankind.

With what spiritual greedines then, and hunger, Nonne videtis (says S. Hom.
60. ad pop. An tioch.
Chrysostom) quanta promptitudine paruuli papillas capiunt, and quanto impetu
labia vberibus insigunt, accedamus ^nm tanta nos quoque alacritate ad hanc
meusam: quiuimo cum long maiori trahamus tanquam infantes lactanei Spiritus
gratiam, and vnus sit nobis dolor hac escapriuari: Do you not see with what
promptitude and greedines little Infants take their Mothers pappes, with what a
violence they fasten their lips on the pappes? let us also come with the
like alacrity, yea with a far greater, let us like sucking Infants suckr the
spirit of grace, and let it be our only grief to be deprived of this food.

O my fweet savior,

O my dear Father and Mother, Father also, loves his Elected children for all
eternity, even before they were, as he, loved Jacob before he was borne and
(as Hieremie says) in an everlasting charity he loved his chosen people: Ro^.
9. Hierm. 22.
he loves them here by grace, and in heaven, and that eternally, by eternal
glory.

Wherefore O my sweet Savior, me, for if thou by thy love stand for me, who
can stand against me? And because by this Holy Sacrament thou art my Father and
Mother give me grace always to love thee also because children do naturally
love their parents, and grant me grace to love thee above Father and Mother,
for that in this B. Sacrament thou art become unto me more then any Father and
Mother. And if thou love me how can I miscarrie, thou protecting whom thou
love? And if I love thee, nothing can come amiss unto me, be it prosperity
or adversity, health or siknes, riches or poverty, because to them that love
thee all things cooperate unto good, To. ms.
and so even my sincnes (o Lord) though they dishonor thee, and hurt me for a
time, yet if I love thee, they will turn to thy greater honor, and my greater
spiritual profit, because through thy grace they will turn, as were the
sins of Marie Magdalen to her, motives to a greater penance, and spurrs to a
better life then otherwise I should have ledd.

Thou comawndest us (o Lord) to honor our Father and mother, Exodus 20
that we may be long livers upon the Earth. Every effect if it had reason
would honor it is cause, of which it has it is being, and by which it
subsisteth, and so the light would honor and love the Sun, the rivers their
fountains, the fruits their trees, the young birds their oldones, the young
beasts those that did generate them, if they had reason; Man then who is
endued with reason, must honor his Father and Mother, who begot him and
brought him to light, and after God gave him his life and being, and to this he
is obliged by the Law of God and nature. How much then, o swear Jesus, should
I honor thee who in this B. Sacrament art a Supernatural Father and Mother
unto me, and more then any Father and Mother?

Thou commaundest us o Lord to acknowlge no other Father the^ God, saying:
Matt. 23
call none Father to yourself upon earth for one is your Father, he that is in
heaven. Because although our Carnal Fathers be our true Fathers, yet in
comparison of thee, o Lord, they are no Fathers, thou by creation being more
our Father then they, and by sanctification, and this B. Sacrament, being our
Supernatural Father and more then our carnal Father and mother. Our carnal
parents are but half Fathers and Mothers generating only our body, whereas
thou art our total Father, that is of soul as well as body; Give me grace
then o heavenly Father to love and honor thee above my carnal Father and
Mother, to forsake them rather then offend and foresake thee by sin, that so
honoring and loving thee, I may be a long liver, Exodus 20.
not upon earth, but in heaven where my life shall be eternity.

And because children do willingly follow their Fathers and Mothers stepps,
Phil. 2.
patience, charity and obedience even unto death.

Thou saydst once to the Jews, Io. 8.
If you be the children of Abraham, do the works of Abraham: wherefore seeing
that by this Holy Sacrament, thou o Lord, art my Father and Mother, and they
who receive it worthily, are thy children, give me grace to imitate thy
virtues and holy actions, let them be patterns and examples for me to follow,
let them be always before my eyes that I may ever behold them, let them be
always in my heart, that I may ever love them, let them be always in my
hands, that I may ever practice them, so I shall be to thee as an obedient
child doing in all things thy holy will, and thou will be to me a loving
Father, furnishing me not with a temporal estate, as carnal parents only can
do, but providing for me here grace, and an inheritance in heaven of glory,
which thou have laid up in store for all eternity, for those that are thy
true and obedient children, fullfilling in all things thy holy will and
commandment.

THE SEVENTH MEDITATION What a friend Christ has showed himself in the B.
Sacrament.
ARistotle the Prince of Philosophers who diued as far almost into the
secrets of nature as natural reason could permit, Eib 2. Lth^c.
thought there could be no perfect and proper freindship betuixt God and man,
because there could be no equality or paritie betwixt them, God being infinite
in Majesty, and sovereign and supreme in authority and dignity, man
infinitlie beneath him in degree, base also of condition (though he be an
Emperor) in comparison of God, with which disparitie he thought familiarity
would not consist, which yet he thought was belonging to friends and freindship.

Wherein all though he erred yet his error was excusable, consortes diuinae
naturae, 2. Pet.
partakers of the divine nature. And by Incarnation God became man and man God,
and so man was consubstantiall to God, and equal to him, though not as man,
but as God. And so God and man by these means were made friends: to which
honor God out of his goodness has exalted us and has made us equal to him by
his desce^ding, and as it were debaling himself so low, as to be man with us.
O the goodness of God that would not only be content but also desirous to
contract freindship with us his creatures, worthy o Lord to be thy vassal,
and slave, how then do thou take me for thy friend? What Emeprour will
stoop so low as to be a friend to his vassals, and yet man though an Emperor
is but thy vassal? It is honor o Lord, to much for me to be servant to such a
Prince, how much more then to much, to be thy friend? Speak David what
think thou of this honor which God does to men in accounting them his
friends? To me (says he) thy friends are become honorable exceedingly,
nimis honorati, Psa. 38.
to much honored.

Nay God is not content only to be our friend, their freindship, which was so
great that the one esteemed the other another himself, and therefore the one
was ready to dye for the other: but this freindship, o Lord is, not comparable
to thy freindship which thou have contracted with man.

Thou first have contracted freindship betwixt thy self and man by Incarnation,
was lonathas and David, 1. Reg. 1^.
whose soul is said to have been g^^ed to Ionathas his soul, but by this
freindship of Incarnation God and man were united in one person reallie and
substantiallie. O Lord what is man that thou should so grace and favor him,
as to Vouchsafe to be so neerlie linked in freindship to him, as to be one
person with him.

Secondly thou have linked thyselfe in freindship with man by grace and
charity, Iac. 2.
Abrahamindewed with this grace, is called by S. James. Amicus Dei, the friend
of God. And Christ speaks to his Apostles in those freindlie and comfurtable
words: Ioa. 15.
You are my friends if you do the things that I command you, now I call you
not servants, for the servant knows not what his Lord does, but you I have
called friends, because all things whatsoever I heard of my Father I have
notified unto you. And all the Just, by this freindship are friends to him, and
he to them. This freindship once made, on God his part, is never dissolved, for
he never cease to be our friend till we turn his enemies by mortal sin.
And although by sin this freindship be to often broken on our part by
particular men, yet it is generally so firm, that there was never so firm a
freindship betwixt man and man, as there is by grace and charity betwixt God
and man.

There is no greater freindship or charity says our B. Savior, then that a
man yeald his life for his friends (which few friends have done for one
another) and yet our Io. 15.
B. Savior has died not only for his friends, but even for his foes, to make
them friends, and those his friends have been so loving and so constant to him,
that many millions of Christians have died for him, as appears in our so many
Martyrs, whom no threatening of Tyrants could so daunt, no promises so allure,
no torments so terrify, no deaths so scarre, as to make them deny Christ or
his religion, but strengthened with grace and chatitie, they triumphed over
all, and for his love they forsook all, (as lands, livings, life) rather then
they would forsake him: and as he first died for them, so did they dye for him.
O Lord tie me by this link of freindship unto thee, that I may prefer thy
love before the love of all but thee, or for thee, confirm me so in this
freindship, that by no mortal Sin it may be dissolved, but that I may
remain thy fast friend even to death, and may never again shake hands with
the world, flesh, and devil, thy sworn enemies, or any creature whose love is
offensive to thee, that I may not only live but also dye loving, and so love
thee for ever.

The third f^eindship, son of God, whereas by the freindship of grace and
charity, he is only the adopted son of God, and the friendship of Incarnation
is altogether indissoluble, in so much that death, which separated Christ's
soul from his body, could not separate his human nature from his divinity,
the freindship of grace and charity in this life, is often broken by mortal
sin. The freindship also of Incarnation in some respects exceeds the
freindship made by the B. Sacrament, because by Incarnation man became God and
God man, whereas by the B. Sacrament man is not Deus, but deifer, not God, but
a bearer of God, in soul and substance, yet in one respect the freindship made
by the Blessed Sacrament is greater then that of the Incarnation, because by
Incarnation preciselie taken, that freindship was contracted only with that
particular humain nature which God assumed unto him in the unity of person;
but by the B. Sacrament, Christ unites himself in substance to all those who
receive him in it. By Incarnation none but Christ's human nature was formallie
deified and sanctified, by the B. Sacrament all are sanctified who worthily
receive it.

Yet in this B. substance with the substance of Christ and of our flesh and
blood with his. And by human freindship external goods of fortune, as riches,
lands, monyes are common betwixt friends, according to the common saying. Inter
amecos omnia sunt communia, amongst friends al things are common. But the goods
of their bodies as health, strength, beauty etc. are not common, nor can they:
but by this freindship made in and by this B. Sacrament, Christ's body blood
soul yea and divinity are imparted to us, and made common to us, and our
substance is reallie united to his. o the admirable freindship.

Friends although they be sepated in bodies and places, therefore of the first
Christians though separated in bodies and place, Act 4.
S. Luke gives this testimony: the multitude of believers had one heart and
soul. And Ionathas his soul by freinship and love was said to be conglutinata
joined fast and as it were glued to the soul of David; 1. Reg. 18.
Lib. 4. Confess. c. 6.
And S. Austin speaking of a great friend of his who was dead says. I thought
my soul and his soul to have been one soul in two bodies, and therefore my
life to me was an horror, because I would not live half, and therefore
perchance I feared to die least he shoud dye wholly whom I much loved. But this
union betwixt these friends was only metaphorical and in affection, whereas
by the freindship made in and by the B. Sacrament there is a realle union not
only of Christ's substance with those that receive him by communion but also of
the receauers and communicants amongst themselves, because they all receiving
the same individual body of Christ, are al reallie united in it and by it to
one another.

O admirable freinship and no less admirable union, and blood which he has,
and so are united to him and amongst themselves in one and the selfsame flesh
and blood. By this freindship we live not only together in one house, as other
friends do, but as Christ says Joan 6. Joan. 6.
he that eats his flesh, and drinks his blood, abides in him, and Christ
in him, and so they live not only together in one house, but also one with in
another.

O freindship excelling all human freindship and even carnal consanguinitie
and the nearest kindred. should we love one another, and even more then we do
our brethren and sisters, because we are linked not only in flesh and blood of
the same kind taken from the same parents as they are, but in one individual
flesh, and blood of Christ which we all receive in this B. Sacrament.

Friends at their departure by death or by a long journey do leave only their
friends an Image or a ringe or some other guif^ for a remembrance, with us to
the worlds end. How should we embrace and love this our so great friend? What
shall we give him for this gift? he is more worth ten thousand times then we
are or have, yet let us give him ourselves, as he has given himself to us,
and though there be infinite disparitie betwixt him and us, yet he will accept
of our gift, because it is as much as we can give.

Some friends and Confederates who have made a firm league or freindship, this
league, and to make it inviolable. O let us not on our part break this
freindship, but let us rather sign it with our blood, if the occasion be
offered, as Christ has signed it with his, which also he gives us to drink,
that we may never forget this league and freindship.

True friends are ready to dye for one another, Pylades and Orestes and others
were, thinking themselves to live (though dead) so long as their friend lives,
and to dye (though living) when their friend dies. Our B. Savior has
sacrificed himself once on the Cross by a real death, and he daily
sacrifices himself mysticalie in the B. Sacrament for us, let us be then
always ready in preparation of mind to dye for him who first died for us,
let us not think it much to give our life for him who gave his life for us,
which being the life of God and man, infinitlie surpassed the lives of all men,
though never so great and many; yea and of Angels also if they could dye, as
they may be annihilated.

O my soul do thou resolve thyselfe into love, so thou may live with him in
the Church militant, that thou may ever live with him in the Chuch
triumphant, so thou may live with him here by grace that thou may reign
with him in heaven by glory.

THE EIGHT MEDITATION How Christ has showed himself in this B. Sacrament, a
most loving spouse.
O My B. Savior, o lover of souls, thou confoundest me with thy love showed
to me in this B. Sacrament, by so many ways. I have found thee in it and by it
a bountiful feastmaker, and provident howse-holder, a Father, a Mother, a
Friend; and now I find thee to be in it and by it a most amorous spouse of
our souls, that so by one Title or other or altogether, thou may wrest out a
reciprocal love of ours toward thee. As thou have contracted three
freindships with us, as we have seen in the former chapter, so have thou
contracted three Marriages with us: the first by Incarnation, the Second by
grace, the third by this B. Sacrament.

By Incarnation thou art so fast wedded unto us, Incarnation betwixt God and
man is absolulie indissoluble, insomuch that death which separated Christ his
soul from his body, could separate neither soul nor body from the
divinity, to which they were united: and so, so long as God shall be God, he
shall be man, and man shall be God, and the marriage shall be eternal, and
whereas by marriage all things are common betwixt man and wife, by Incarnation
God imparted to our human nature all his Goods, and divine attributes, for
that after Incarnation, man became God, and consequently eternal, omnipotent,
immense etc. by a certain communication which divines call communicatio
idiomatum, and man gave to God all his riches, or rather pouerties, for that
after Incarnation God became man and consequently was borne in time of a
Virgin Mother, who was borne of a Virgin Father before all worlds, and so
became hungry and thirsty, hot and cold, passible and mortal as other men
are: and as by carnal marriage man and wife are vna caro one flesh, Ephesians. 5.
so by this marriage God and man is one flesh, yea one person. The Church in
which this marriage was made was the sacred womb of the Virgin; the Brides God
and man: the Priest that married them the Holy Ghost, the words by the which the
marriage was contracted were. Ecce Ancilla Domini siat mihi secundum verbum
tuum: Luc. 1.
Behold the handmaid of our Lord be it done to me according to thy word: the
paranimphe was S. John Baptiste. But this marriage was made immediately only
betwixt the second person in Trinity God the Son and that humain nature
which he took of the B. Virgins womb; yet this marriage is the ground of the
two ensuing marriages.

The second marriage betwixt God and man, Osee cap. 2.
in the name of God: I will despouse thee to me for ever, and I will despouse
thee to me in Justice etc. and of this the Apostle also speaking says, I have
despoused you to one man, 1. Cor. 11.
to present you a chaste Virgin unto Christ. By this marriage we are so despoused
and linked to God, that as man and wife are one flesh, so we and God are one
spirit, because as S. 1. Cor. 6.
Paul says. Qui adhaeret Domino vnus spiritus est, he that cleaneth to our
Lord, (by charity) is one spirit with him.

Man and wife by their bond of marriage are to live, in one house: but by this
marriage, God dwells in us and we in him, according to those our saviors
words: Io. 14
If any love me he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will
come to him, and will make abode with him: and that this dwelling and abiding
is not only with us, but in us, it appears by other his words: Io. 14.
In that day you shall know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in
you: and his disciple S. John says: 1. Io. 4.
God is charity, and he that abides in charity abides in God and God in
him. So that by this marriage God dwell^th in us as in his Temple and mansion
place, and we in him: yea by this marriage we are as S. S^pra 1. Cor. 6.10.17.
Paul says one spirit with God: And Christ himself prays that his Apostles
and they that believed their preaching may be one in spirit of Charity, as he
and his Father are one in substance.

VVhereupon the devout S. Bern. ser. 17. in cant.
Beanard says. Quid ergo dicit Fi lius? etc. What does the Son (of God)
say? I am in the Father and the Father in me and we are one. Man says, I am
in God, and God is in me, and we are one spirit. And in the same place: none
but a mad man will usurp that voice of the only begotten: I and the Father
are one: Bern. ibid.
yet I, though I be but duste, will not be afraid to say this: I am one spirit
with God. He adds that man was in God from all eternity, because God loved
man from al eternity; but God began in time to be in man when man began to
love him. O how should we love this Spouse of our souls, who is by Charity so
wedded unto us, as he is not only with us but also in us? because as man and
wife are vna caro, one flesh, so is he one Spirit with us. who would forsake
the love of such a Spouse, as God is, who is our Creator and Savior, for the
love of any creature though never so dear?

The third marriage betwixt Christ and us, 1. Cor. 7.
Paul says the woman has not power of her own body, but her husband, and the
man also has not power of his body but the woman. So by this Sacrament Christ
communicates more abundantly his grace^ then by any other, and his
substance, that is his body and blood, soul, divinity, are ours by
communion, and he as it were takes possession of our body and soul when by
communion he dwells in us. And as by carnal marriage the man and wife are vna
caro, one flesh, Hom. 61 Cyrill Alex li. 4. in Ioa. c. 17.
so does he in a manner by our receiving of him mingle his substance (as S.
Chrysostom says) with ours, and of two makes one: and as S. Cyrill says our
substance is made one with his, as wax united to wax. And so as carnal
marriage betwixt man and wife is contracted by mutual consent expressed by
their words, but is consummated by union of their bodies, so a spiritual
marriage is contracted betwixt us and Christ by charity, but is not consummated
but by union of our substance with his by means of this B. Sacr.

O my soul what an honor is it to be married to such a spouse; a bloody
spouse unto her, Exodus 4
because she was enforced to circumcise her son to save Moises his life, so
much more o my soul may thou say to thy spouse Christ Jesus. Thou a^t a
bloody spouse unto me, who sheddedst thy blood and sufferdst thy bitter
passion to marry me by thy grace and by this B. Sacrament, give me grace to be
always ready in mi^de to shed my blood for thee, if occasion shall present it
self, that I may also be a bloody spouse to thee. To this I am invited by thy
blood which I so often drink in the B. Sacrament.

It is commanded in Genesis that man should leave Father and Mother toad here
to his wife, and, Genesis 2.
the same commandment is given to the wife in regard of her husband: much
more should thou (my soul) rather leave carnal parents and wordlie riches
and pleasures; then to leave by sin this thy so louinge spouse; Ephesians. 5.
Thou command also o dear Spouse that men should love their wives, do thou
observe this law which thou have made, and do thou love me thy Spouse,
betrothed to thee by charity and this B. Sacrament, and give me grace always
to love thee, never to offend thee. O how happy art thou my soul, who art
espoused to so noble and so chaste a Spouse as Christ, In officio S. Agnetis.
whose Father knew no woman, whose Mother knew no man, who is a Spouse more
beautiful then the Sun, more rich then heaven and earth, more noble then all
the Emperors that ever were: Whom if thou love thou art chaste, Ibid.
if thou touchest thou art clean, and undefiled, if thou marriest thou
remainest a Virgin. O my sweet Savior love me, I am thy Spouse, o my soul
love thy Savior, he is thy Spouse: And as man and wife do so love that they
are never well but when they are together; so o sweet Jesus my dear Spouse let
me never think my self well but when I am with thee, and thou with me, by
frequent communion and receiving of this B. Sacrament, that living with thee in
this B. Sacrament, and consequently in the Church militant, where only it is
lawfully ministered and received, I may live and dwell with thee for ever in
the Church Triumphant.

THE NINTH MEDITATION What a Physicia^ Christ has showed himself in this B.
Sacrament.
GOD Almighty created man in good health, sound and whole both in body and
soul, bestowinge on him the tree of life which would have preserved his body
from distemperatures, diseases and death, and endewing him with original
Justice, which so subjected his body to his soul, and sensuality to reason,
the inferior part of his soul to the superior, and that to God, that in his
soul there was no inordinate passion, no sin, nor spiritual infirmity, But
he not knowinge how to use this his felicity, by a wilful surfette taken by
eating the forbidden fruit, distempered his body with mortality, from whence
all diseases of the body and death it self proceed, and by his disobedience
cast his soul at one time into as many diseases as inordinate passions, which
diverse have reduced to four, which they call, vulnera animae, wounds of the
soul, residing in four principal powers and faculties of the soul. The
understanding, whose object is truth, and whose perfection is knowledge, was
obscured and darkened by ignorance. The will, whose mark, at which she aims,
is good, and whose perfection is love, was infected with malice, The irascible
part, whose object is difficulty, and whose glory is victory over
difficulty, was weakened with infirmity. The concupiscible part, whose object
was moderat delight, and whose felicity was contentment, was galled with the
itching and ill pleasing sore of concupiscence.

And thus this Samaritan descending from Herusalem that is Paradise, Luc. 10.
yet semiuiu^ relicto. Leaving him half alive because though he was dispoiled
of all supernatural graces, yet he lost no natural perfection, though he was
also weakened in that. By this miserable and woeful wight thus miserably
spoiled and wounded the Preiste and Leuite passed, Luc. 10.
but could not cure him, or help him, because the old law could only tell the
disease, but could not cure it by grace, because though their law was given by
Moses, yet grace by Jesus Christ.

Thou therefore o sweet savior,

Thy Sacraments o Lord, which thou institutedst, are so many salues, and
remedies against the sores, wounds, and diseases of our soul. Baptism cures
the wound of original sin: the Sacrament of Penance is a remedy against
the sins that are committed after Baptism: Matrimony is a salve ordained
against the wound of concupiscence, which galleth the concupiscible part:
Confirmation against infirmity in the Irascible part: The B. Sacrament after
we are cured, nourishes us in a spiritual life: Extreme unction takes away
the relics of sin: Order makes under Physicians, who under Christ, and by
virtue and authority from him do minister the aforesaid Sacraments and remitte
sins. Io. 20.
o Sovereign and saving Physician.

By thy holy word also, scripture is a simple, every sentence a salve against
sin, and therefore by reading holy scripture or hearing of it read and
rightly interpreted, many thousa^des have been converted, many thousands have
been saved: O sweet Jesus in whose name dwells salvation: O heavenly
Physician who have provided so many remedies against sin, so many helps to
salvation.

Nay all Christ his life was a shop full of drugges, salues, thorns, every
pearcing of the nails in his hands and feet, the hunger and thirst he
endured, every pain and pange he sustained on the cross, were a salve and
remedy against sin. So that if now the prophet Hieremie should ask of us
Christians, as he did heretofore of the Jews, Hier. 8.
is there no rosen in Galaad, in the Church of God? is there no Physician
there? we might answer, yes Hieremie in the Church of Christ there is rosen and
all manner of salues and remedies, against all our spiritual wounds and
diseases. And in this Church there is a head Physician Christ Jesus, and
thousands of vnder-Physitians, even as many as there are lawful Priests, who
can absolve from sins, and minister Sacraments, and preach the word of God,
and thereby remitte all sins and cure all our spiritual diseases.

Physicians do company more with the sick then the whole, Publicanes and
sinners and by that familiarity gainedst them, Math. 9. Mat. 2.
and by thy wholesome exhortatio^s curedst them of their sins. And when the
Scribes and Pharisees found fault with this, Luc. 5.
thou answerdst them. The whole have no need of a Physician, but they that are
ill at ease, for I came not to call the lust but Sinners.

But especially o my good God thou have showed thy self a most loving and
merciful Physician in this B. Sacrament, virtue went forth from thee and
healed all of their corporal diseases, Luc. 6.
so in this B. Sacrament, where thou art reallie, virtue issues from thy
sacred body and blood, and heals and cures all spiritual diseases, and
whereas corporal medecines and potions do restore us only to health of body,
and so conserve life for a time. This medecin of thy flesh and blood gives
life everlasting both to soul and body, and therefore thou thy self say,
he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, Io. 6.
has life everlasting and I will raise him up in the last day; and he gives
the reason hereof, for my flesh (says he) is meat indeed and my blood is
drink indeed.

Other Physicians to cure diverse diseases must prescribe diverse medecines and
potions, last supper dranckst a health to us of thy blood, which was bitter to
thee in thy passion, when it was shed, but pleasant to us, and so pleasant that
it takes away the bitterness from all the suffrances and adversities which we
endure, as it appears in the Apostles and our martyrs who with ^o^e suffered
for thee. Act. 5.


Other Physicians to cure their patiens of their ague will let them blood,

Other Physicians will prescribe to their patients abstinence and fasting,
heat of their ague, by diminishing the humors which nourished it, but will
not fast themselves, but thou fastedst forty days and for^ie nights for us.
Other Physicians will endeavor to take the ague and disease from the sick
person, Math. 4.
but will not take it to themselves to ridd him of it, but thou have taken our
spiritual ague of sin on thy self to free us f^o^ it, according as thy
Apostle S. Peeter testifies, saying, 1. Pet. 2.
who himself bare our sins in his body upon the tree. Not that thou tookst
the malice of sin (of which thy sacred humanity was incapable) but that
thou enduredst in thy body, and on the Cross the pain due to sin, in
satisf^ing for it by thy death and bitter passion, and by suffering the pain,
thou have cured the ague, and this thy passion is represented and applied by
this Holy Sacrament.

O most charitable Physician: o my soul what thanks should thou give to
this thy Physician for this B. Sacrament, so sovereign against all our
spiritual diseases? O with what disposition should thou come to receive
this so wholesome Physic, which cures all venial sins, yea and mortal
also, if thou have no knowledge nor conscience of the^?

O my soul when by this B. Sacrament thou art cured of thy spiritual diseases,
remember those words spoken by this thy Physician to the lame man at the
Probatica Piscina. Joan 5.
I am sanus es noli amplius peccare, now thou art made whole sin no more: now
that thou art cured by such sovereign Physic, do thou take heed of
recidiuation and falling into sickness again, for that this thy ingratitude will
be greater, and thy sin and sickness more hardly cured: But do thou frequent
often this B. Sacrament, by devout communion and receiving, and then by it thou will be more and more nourished in grace, and fo^tified against sin; then by
virtue of this Spiritual food thou shall one day come to sit at table with
the Angels and Saints; and then thou shall feed not of Christ his body and
blood, as now thou do in this B. Sacrament, but of the divinity of God, by
clear vision and fruition of him; then thou shall taste how sweet God is in his
Godhead, then thou shall ever feed of the divinity, yet never loath it, then
thou shall always drink of that fountane of pleasure, and yet be ever more
and more desirous to drink: Then all bliss, happiness and pleasure shall ever
fill thee, and yet thou shall never be satisfied, Aug^trac 3. ^n Euang. Io. in
fine.
yea (to use S. Austines words) thou shall ever be satisfied, and yet never
satisfied, for if I say thou shall not be satisfied, hunger shall be there; if
I say that thou shall be satisfied I fear loathing There shall nether be
hunger nor loathing I know not what to say.

THE TENTH MEDITATION How good a Shepherd and Pastor Christ has showed
himself in this B. Sacrament.
ALthough (o my sweet Savior) thou art not only man but also God, yet thou
stilest not thyself so willingly by names taken from thy Godhead, as Creator
of heaven and Earth Omnipotent, Immense, King of Kings, 2. Reg.
Lord of Lords, God and Lord of hosts, (which are names of Majesty and
terror, and by which thou wast most often called in the old law) as by names
taken from thy humain nature, to wit, Jesus and Savior, Redeemer, light of the
world, bread of life, and the like, which are names sounding and importing
love, mercy and benignity; but above all the name of Pastor pleases thee,
that implying greatest love and charity; and therefore thou professest thyself
to be a Good Pastor, and such an one, as is ready to give his life for his
sheep, Io. 10.
then which there can be no greater charity.

Other shepheardes in some Countries, their sheep, and to familiarize
themselves the better with them, do inuest themselves with sheep-skinnes, with
the wool outward; and thou (o loving Pastor) that thou mights be the less
terrible, and more amiable to us thy sheep, would not appear in thy
glorious habit and weed of thy divinity, Exodus 19. and 20.
nor in fire, nor lightning, nor thunder, nor in dark and terrible clouds, as
thou did in the old law, which was a law of terror; but would put on the
habit and fleese of our humain nature, and so appear and be man with men:
that so men might converse with thee with less fear, more love, and
familiarity: Phil. 2.
for thou exinanitedst thyself, taking the form of a Servant, made into the
similitude of men, and in shape found as man: that being man thou might the
better converse with thy sheep, who are men. In this shape of man, thou wast
so grateful to the Jews, that whereas before that thou putst on this alluring
habit, they durst not approach to the mountain, where thou exhibitedst thy
presence, nor could endure to hear thy voice, Ex^. 20.
but cried to have Moses, not thee to speak unto them; since that thou
appearedst in the form of man, Tit. 3.
and that the benignity and kindness toward man of our Savior God, appeared,
Thousands of the Jews, followed thee to hear thy preaching, and to see thy
miracles, and good examples: and since that like a good shepherd in this form
of man (for in the form of God thou could not) thou diedst for mankind, all
nations have flocked unto thee, and will do till the worlds end. O happy we,
who are governed by a Pastor of our own Kind, in our own shape, and him so
benign, mild, and charitable.

Pastors and shepherds do govern their sheep by their Pastoral staff or
hook, scripture, thou preachest inwardly by thy grace and inspirations;
whilst they minister the external signs of the Sacraments, thou feedest us
inwardly by the grace, which thou give, as the principal Agent; and they
give, as ministers, the Sacraments, as instruments instituted by thee for our
sanctification; and in these pastures, by this fodder most fatting and
nourishing, thou feedest thy sheep. And if whilst thy sheep are grazing and
feeding in the meadows of holy Scripture (of which every sentence is as grass
to feed them) if whilst they are feeding on the sodder of the holy Sacraments,
the Infernal wolf, the devil, or the world and flesh seek to molest them
by their tentations; if the Heretic by his false call, and whistle, seek to
deceive them, then the under Pastors do lay about them with their Pastoral
staff, yea and as Christ his dogs they bark at them, and chase them away,
being not, as the Jewish pastors were, Esai. 36.
dumme dogs not able to bark.

In the old law (o loving Pastor) thou fedst thy sheep with figurative
Sacraments, egena elementa, Gal 4.
poor elements; but in the new law thou feedest us with Sacraments, which are
not only signs, but also causes of grace; and which do sanctify, nourish,
and feed our souls; and therefore thy prophet Ezechiel forseeing these our
happy times, in which thou feedest us so abundantly, Ezech. 34.
says in thy name: In the most plentiful Pastures will I feed them, and in
the high mountains of Israel shall be their pastures: there shall they rest on
the green grass, and in fat pastures they shall be fed upon the mountains
of Israel: O the love thou have showed to thy Christian sheep, in providing
them so fat pastures!

And in this thy love has showed it self the greater, Mat. 12.
that is in heaven, which before thy coming into this world by Incarnation,
was a desert place, and inaccessible to men, because thou wast not Incarnat for
Angels, much less did thou suffer for them, but leaving them, thou came to
us by Incarnation in our form and shape; and thou came to seek mankind thy
lost sheep, and having found him, thou carriedst him upon thy shoulders, when
thou sufferedst on the cross for him, and broughtst this strayd sheep to the
fold of the Church, where he is fed in plentiful and fat pastures:
Tertul. lib. de pudi. cap. 7.
And therefore in the primitive Church (as Tertullian witnesses) thou wast
pourtraited upon the holy chalices, like a shepherd carrying his lost sheep on
his shoulders.

Jacob the Patriarch a shepherd and figure of thee our good Pastor, Genesis 31.
said to Laban, that he had kept his sheep twenty years, and that none of
his sheep or goats perished, but he restored the damage. Day and night
(says he) was I parched with heat, and with frest, and sleep did fly from
mine eyes. But thou, (o my Savior, o my careful Pastor) playedst the Pastor
amongst us above thirty years (for even by the merits of thy Infancy thou
feddst us dare and n^ght) thou trauelledst for us, by night by prayer, by day
by preaching, teaching, and working of miracles; thou suffredst heat and
cold, hunger and thirst; thou fastedst forty days, and forty nights to feed
us; thou wast circumcised, thou wast whipped at a pillar, crowned with thorns,
nailed on a Cross, where like a good shepherd thou diedst for us, least the
Infernal wolf should devour us. O how great must thy love to thy sheep be,
which made thee suffer so much for them? Jacobs love was so great to Rachel
that he served Laban twice seven years for her; Genesis 29.
but thy love was so great that it caused thee to suffer a most painful life
of more then, 3 years for thy sheep; and this thy painful life thou also
concludedst with a most painful and shameful death for them. O my soul never
do thou so much as think of leaving so loving a Pastor; never do thou straic
from his fold, nor from his so plentiful pastures, as sinners, and especially
Heretics do.

But especially, a good Pastor, Io. 10.
in this B. Sacrament: A good Pastor will die for his sheep, so did thou
dye reallie on the Cross for us; and mystically in this B. Sacrament; where
thy death and passion is represented, and applied to thy sheep, and whereas
other shepherds do only feed their sheep with hay, grass and such like
fodder, thou, o most loving Pastor, give us thy own flesh to eat and thy
own blood to drink, which by their union with the divinity are the most
nourishing food that can be, next unto the divinity it self, on which thy
glorious sheep, the Saints and Angels in Heaven, do feed by clear vision
and fruition of it. O wonderful love of a Pastor! o love and charity above
all other loves and charities. O love above all loves not only of Pastors,
but even of Fathers and Mothers. Quis Pastor (says S. Chrysostom. hom. 60. ad pop.
Antioc.
Chrysostom) oues pascit proprio cruore? and quid dico Pastor? Matres multae
sunt quae post partus dolores silios alijs tradunt nutricibus; hoc autem ipse
non est passus, sed ipse nos proprio sanguine pascit, and per omnia nos sibi
coagmentat; what Pastor does feed his sheep with his own blood? And what do
I say, pastor? many mothers there are who give their children to other nurces;
but he would not suffer this, but he himself does feed us with his own blood,
and altogether does join us unto him.

O my soul how can thou be cruel like a wolf,

good Pastor, to me, and to us all, so I may show my self a good and
grateful sheep. The sheep is obedient to the shepherds whistle, and
follows none other; make me obedient to thy vocations, and divine
inspirations; and let me not harken to the false whistle of false Prophets, nor
to the enchanting voices of the devil, world, and flesh. A sheep is a most
fearful creature, who when he runs with the rest of the flock, is afraid
of the noise of his own and his fellows feet; and if he epsy the wolf,
though a far of, he flees from him sudain lie and repaireth to his flock,
fold, and shepherd. Give me grace to fear, as Job did, all my own actions,
and as soon as either world, flesh, or devil do begin to tempte me, to fly
from them, and to avoid presently all occasions of sin, and to have present
recourse to thee, my careful shepherd, and to thy Sacraments and other means
thou have provided us against sin.

Sheep are simple, Ba; that only is their cry in prosperity and
adversity; grant me, o my dear Pastor, and sweet savior, to imitate this
m^^de patience and in adversity and prosperity, in sickness and health, in
riches and poverty, to be ever the same and to use the same sheepish Ba, which
Job used: Job. 1.
Our Lord gave, and our Lord has taken away, as it has pleased our Lord, so
is it done, the name of our Lord be blessed, as well for the one, as for the
other; as well for taking away, as giving; as well for sickness, as health; as well
for poverty, as riches; as well for adversity, as prosperity; yea more for
this, then that; because adversity borne patiently is a greater benefit then
whatsoever prosperity. O sweet Jesus! make me simple and meek, as a sheep,
as thou thyself wast, who therefore biddest us to learn of thee; Mat. 11. 2.
Pe^. 2.
for that thou art meek and humble of heart: make me innocent as a lamb, yea
as an infant newly borne.

The shepherd knows his sheep, Io. 10.
and they him, and as he has his eye always on them, so they have always
their eyes open to him. O loving Pastor and Savior, let thy careful eye be
ever on me, and then I can not perish; and let my eye be always on thee, let
me always think on thee, and thy commandments, and the benefits thou have
bestowed on me. It is a great honor to be known of thee, to have but thy
good look, and gracious regard; and it is as great a misery not to be known
thus of thee, and to hear that doleful voice, Mat 25.
nescio vos, I know you not. O let me never hear that voice. And for me to
know thee always, to have mine eyes so settled on thee, as to have thee always
in my sight, is a great comfort, a great security, a great bridle, and
restraint from sin; and as great a spur to all virtue: for who can do ill,
who can do otherwise then well, who has thee always in his sight? who knows
that thy eyes are upon him, that he is never out of thy kenning.

O sweet Jesus, with thy flesh and blood; it is thy sheep, govern it, rule
it, direct it, protect it, guide it in the paths of Salvation, that it may one
day graze and feed with thy Angels and Saints in the mountain of Heaven,
and on thy sacred divinity, which only can make it happy: Grant this o my
loving Pastor, o grant it.

These former 10. Meditations may be read more, or fewer according to the
devotion of him who intends to receive this B. Sacrament; and either
immediately, or some day or days before communion; But these which follow are
to be read either immediately before, or immediately after communion.

THE 11. MEDITATION With what fear and reverence, and acknowledgment of
unworthiness, the devout receauer is to come to this Blessed Sacrament.
NOw therefore, o my soul! seeing thou perceiuest what a Good man of the
house, what an Host, what a Father, Mother, friend, spouse, Physician, and
Pastor thy B. Savior has showed himself to thee in this B. Sacrament, and
what he bestows on thee by it, and in it, to wit, his own flesh and blood,
himself, God and man, infinite in all perfection, and the fountain of all
grace; endeavor as much as thou can, by his grace, to dispose thyself to come
unto him, and to receive him in this Holy Sacrament, as worthily, as humain
frailty and poverty will permit.

And first thou must come to him with a great filial fear, memoriam fecit
mirabilium suorum, Psa. 110.
misericors and miserator dominus, escam dedit timentibus se: He has made a
memory of his marvelous works, a merciful and pitiful Lord: he has given
meat to them, that fear him. This memory of his marvelous works is this
feast of the B. Sacrament, where is nothing but marueills and wonders, which
also consist not in folding up of napkins in many fashions, but in the cookerie
and art showed in this feast; in which, bread by the force of Christ's own
words, is converted into his body, wine into his blood; in which the accidents
and external forines of bread and wine stand alone without bread and wine,
which were their subjects; in which Christ's body extended in it self, is
wholly contained in a little host, and in every part of it, in which one body
is on diverse Altars, and in diverse places; in which Christ's body is daily
eaten his blood daily drunk, yet never consumed; in which the same Christ is
conuiua and conuinium, the feast maker, guest, and feast, in which the same
Christ is the Priest, the sacrifice, and the God to whom this sacrifice is
offered: and therefore David explicating what the memory of these marueils is,
says: Escam dedit timentibusse: Psa. 110.
he has given meat to them that fear him, as if he had said, he has made a
memory of marueilles in the meat which he has given; and this meat he gives
to them, that fear him: who only can frutefullie receive it.

O my soul thou beleeuest, that Christ God and man, is as truly in this B.
Sacrament, which thou intendest to receive, as he was in his Virgin Mothers
womb, as he was here on earth, and as he is now in Heaven, though in an other
manner; and thou beleeuest that there is no more betwixt him and thee, when
thou approachest tereceaue him, then the thin courtaines of the accidents and
forms of bread and wine drawn betwixt him and thy sight. And if thou would
stand with great reverence in the presence of a mortal Emperor or King,
though a man as thou art; and though there were a thin courtaine drawn
betwixt him and thee, especially if the courtaine were so thin, as he might
see thee through it: with what reverence should thou stand or kneel in the
presence of Christ Jesus, God and man, and King and Emperor of heaven and
earth; there being no more betwixt him and thee, then the courtaines of the
forms of bread and wine, which are thinner then the thinnest taffeta or
cypres, because in those, though never so thin, there is matter and
substance, whereas in the accidents of bread and wine there is no substance at
all of bread and wine; and through the which Christ, God and Man, sees thee
and all thy actions both interior and exterior? With what reverence (I say)
should thou come to this B. Sacrament, in which thou beleeuest to be the King
of glory, though with corporal sight thou can not see him?

O consider (my soul) that when thou receiuest this dreadful sacrifice and
Sacrament, Exodus 29.
and shall thou think thyselfe worthy to touch the Altar, where the law giver
is resident, yea to touch himself, and to receive him into thy mouth and
stomach? If the Bethsamites to the number of seauentie men of the people, 1
Reg. 6.
and fifty thousand of the common people, for curious he gazing at the Ark,
which was but a figure of this B Sacrament; 2 Reg. 6.
if Oza for touching it irreuerentlie, were stricken with sudden death; shall
thou, o my soul! if irreuerentlie or unworthily thou receive this B.
Sacrament, the Ark of the new law, think to go scotfree? Noe, Noe. S. Paul
assures thee, 1. Cor. 11.
that he that eats and drinks unworthily (the body and blood of Christ)
eats and drinks judgment to himself, not discerning the body of our Lord.
Yea, says he, because you eat and drink this B. Sacrament unworthily, there
are among you weak and feeble, and many sleep, that is dye. How then oughtst
thou to prepare thy self? Knowing that this B. Sacrament, as it gives
spiritual health, life, and nourriture to them that receive it worthily, so
it always brings death of the soul to them, that receive it unworthily,
and sometimes death of the body also, yea and eternal death of soul and
body, unless they repent in time.

O my soul! 1 Cor. 11.
not discerning the body of our Lord: not putting a difference betwixt it and
other meats? O Lord when I think of these things, to wit, of mine own
unworthiness, and thy worth and Majesty, I am afraid to approach so near unto
thee; and if thou did not inuit me to come, I should never dare to come in
thy presence, much less to receive thee into my breast; I should say with S.
Luc. 5.
Peeter, Go forth from me, because I am a sinful man, o Lord. 2. Cor. 6.
I should say with S. Paul, what participation has Justice with iniquity.
Or what society is there betwixt light and darkness? what proportion betwixt
thy light and my darkness, my baseness and thy Majesty, thy sanctity and my
sins? But what shall I do, o Lord? If I approach not to this Holy
Sacrament, I shall show my self vnmanerlie, thou having so courteously invited
me, yea disobedient, thou not only inuiting, but also commanding me. Io. 6.
If I come not to this feast I shall st^rue for hunger; If I drink not of this
fountain of grace I shall dye for thirst; If I come not to this sun I shall
live in darkness; If I come not to this fire I shall sh^uer for cold; If I eat
not of this bread of life, Io. 6.
I amea dead man, and yet considering my unworthiness, I dare not approach to
this worthy of worthies, considering my impuritie I dare not come to this,
speculum sine macula, Sap. 7.
this glass without spotte.] Considering my prophanes, I dare not touch this
Holy of Holies, considering my bafenes, I dare not appear before such
majesty.

O my sweet Savior, yea the Church and all to be hallowed, for the reference
and respect they have to this B. Sacrament: Consecrate, I beseech thee, and
sanctify me by thy grace, this Sacrament being instituted for me, not for
those other things, and I being to receive it sacramentallie, and spirituallie,
as those other things can not receive it. And seeing that thou commau^dest me
to receive it, give me grace to receive it worthily. Thou who command the
end, give the means.

Thy Blessed Virgin Mother was to receive thee but once into her sacred womb,
and yet, me from all, even venial sins, seeing I am not to receive thee once
only, but often and many times.

Thou would after thy death, body.

O do not cast such Margarites before hoggs. Thou shall, Matthew 7
if thou do not wash me from sin; O do not permit me to sit down to this
feast without my nuptial garment of charity; I shall, unless thou restore it,
and put it on again.

None but the high Priest in the old law might enter into Sancta Sanctorum,
the Holies of Holies, Exodus 30. Hebr. 9.
and he also but once a year, and this by reason of the Ark of the old law,
where thou wast present in figure; and shall I not so much enter into thee the
Sancta Sanctorum, and the Ark of the new law, as to let thee enter into me,
thou being the verity of that figure? Exodus 30.
Moses though a chose^ servant of thine, was forbidden to approach to the bush
that burned, but consumed nor, until he had put of his shoes; and shall I
presume to come to this B. Sacrament, and thy sacred body in it, the verity
of that figure, and which burns with the Divinity, yet is never consumed,
unless I first lay aside the shoes of all carnal affections? The Priests of
the old law were forbidden to ascend to the Altar to offer their carnal
Sacrifices before they had washed themselves in the brazen lauer. Exodus 30
And shall I dare to approach to the Altar, and to this so holy a Sacrifice and
Sacrament, before I be rinsed in the lauer of penance, with the waters of
contrition? S. John Baptiste, of whom thou thy self, o Lord, pronounced, that,
Luc. 7.
a greater Prophet among the children of woeme^ then John Baptist there was
none; thought himself not worthy to unloose the latcher of thy shoes; Mat 8.
The Centurion deemed him self not worthy to receive thee into his house,
which yet, as it is likely was cleanly swept and richly adorned, and shall I
think my self so worthy, as to touch not thy shoe stri^gs, but thy sacred
body, and to receive thee into me who am defiled both in body and soul. Job.
25.
The stars are not clean in thy sight, and how shall I dare to appear
before thy divine eyes more bright then the Sun it self, I being no star,
but rather a candle put out and smoakie?

Solomon, 2 Paral. 6.
Ergone credibile est vt habitet Deus cum hominibus super terram? Si coelum and
coeli coelornm, non te capiunt, quanto magis domus ista quam aedificaui; Is it
cred^bile then that God should dwell with men upon the earth? If heaven and the
heavens of heavens, do not take thee, how much more this house, which I have
built? And shall I whose body is made but of mudde, and whose soul is defiled
with sin, think my self a fit palace for thy majesty? O Lord I am not
worthy the air I breath, the ground I stand on, the bread I eat, the wine or
water I drink, how then can I be worthy of this B. Sacrament, which I am to
receive, and which is the greatest benefit thou ever bestowedst on man,
because this gift is as good as thy self, who art the gift, and the giver.

And yet thou will have me to receive it at thy Priests hands; and receive it I
may, seeing thou have so ordained, but unless thou, who give it, give me also
worthiness, I can not receive it worthily. Thou therefore who inuitest me to
this holy Sacrament, and forbiddest men to receive it unworthily, vouchsafe
to give me that grace, that reverence, that devotion, which may make me
worthy. It is thy desire that I should come worthily, and it is also my
desire; and seeing that I can neither fulfill thy desire, nor my desire, but by
thy grace, I beseech thee grant me the grace to fulfill thy desire, and the^ I
shall fulfill my desire, which is to receive this Holy Sacrament worthily; and
although by thy grace I receive thee worthily, yet give me the humility,
always to think my self, of my self, unworthy: for the more I esteem my
self unworthy, the more by thee I shall be esteemed worthy.

THE 12. MEDITATION With what love to our Savior we should receive this B.
Sacrament?
WHEN thou have, an Host, what a Father, what a Mother, what a Friend,
Spouse, Physician and Pastor (all which are titles of love) Christ has showed
himself unto the in this B. Sacrament.

Say then unto him:

to me then in this B. Sacrament, by which, out of a great love, thou give
to me, and after so admirable a manner (as love is ingenious) thy body, blood,
soul and divinity. By Incarnation; thou impartedst thy self only to that
nature which thou tookest of the B. Virgin; But by this Sacrament, thou
bestowest thyself on all in particular, who receive it. With what love shall I
pay this love? Thou give thy All unto me, and can I give less then my All
to thee? and yet so shall I not render like for like, because my All is nothing
to thy All, nothing so much as if a beggar should give his rags for the Kings
purple robe, crown, scepter, and kingdom.

I use to take kindly all which a friend gives, he gives his love in his
gift, yea and himself also in his gift, though not in person; with what love
then should I answer to thy love, who give thy self unto me not only in
thy gifts and effects, as thou give by creation justification, and
glorification, but also by this B. Sacrament in thine own person? Children
love their parents and nurces, because they feed and nourish them: brute beasts
love them, who give them meat, be it but crustes and bones, hay or straw: how
then should I love thee, O Lord, who feedest me with thy own flesh and blood;
seasoned and sauced with the Divinity. O my heart to show thy self that thou
art not made of flint, marble, or steel, but of soft flesh, resolve thy self
into love for thy Saviors love showed in this B. Sacrament, and being so
resolved, and transformed, employ thy self and all thou are for his love and
honor.

If thou thus prepare thy self by a great reverence and love to this B.
Sacrament, If any love me he will keep my word, Ioa. 14.
and my Father will love him, and we will come to him, and will make abode with
him: And because thou art notable of thyself to furnish thy house so, as it may
be fit for the entertainment of so great personages, they will bring with
the^ their tapistrie and ornaments of grace and virtues, by which thou shall be
adorned to their liking; And because thou can not prepare a feast worthy
such guests, though thou should seek sea and Land for it, they will bring
their feast with them, to wit this Blessed Sacrament, the Manna which
contains all that can delight thy spirit, and with it they will bring
abounda^ce of all grace, by which they will feast thee, and will be feasted of
thee.

THE 13. MEDITATION To be made immediately after Communion: How than^kefull the
Receauer should be.
When thou have received this B. Sacrament, pause awhile, and think what thou
have received, Thou have received more then the worth of Heaven and earth, the
Son of God, in whom be all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge hidden:
Coloss. 2.
in whom dwell the fullness of the God head corporally, who is the head of
all principality and power, thou have received him, who is worth so much that
he is inestimable, no price ca^ be set on him. Antonius and Cleopatra did on a
time vainlie strive, who should make the greatest feast; And Antonius prepared
all that Sea and Land could affoard: Cleopatra not sollicitous for any such
fare, took an union which hung at her ear, and resolving it drank it at a
draft; and putting her finger to the other ear, to take another union, he, who
was elected arbiter and Judge betwixt them, bad Cleopatra hold her hand for
that she had already surpassed Antonius his feast, having drunk already the
price of all Egypt. But thou O my soul, by receiving this B. Sacrament eatest
and drinkest at once, the body and blood of Christ (for with his body, his
blood always is by concomitance and inseparable vnio^) which is more then the
price of Egypt, yea the^ a thousand worlds, And therefore if thou should
resolve thy heart into gratitude and thanks giving, thou coulds not show
sufficient gratitude for this so great benefit.

Say then to thy bountiful Jesus with grateful David; Psa. 115.
Quid retribuam Domino pro omnibus quae retribuit mihi? what shall I render to
our Lord for all things that he has rendered to me? nay what shall I render to
my Lord for this only thing which he has bestowed on me? thou have o Lord,
not only bestowed on me great benefits, and this the greatiest of all^ but
thou have also rendered good for evil, mercy and grace for my sins, what can
I render thee for this? Psa. 115.
I will follow King David's counsel: I will take the chalice of salvation and I
will invoke the name of our Lord: I will take the chalice of thy Passion,
which thou did drink on the Cross, and I will offer that sacrifice for this,
and both for all thy benefits, and by them I will invoke and praise thy name
for ever.

If I could speak at once with all the tongues of men and Angels, I could not,
o Lord,

But although I can not give thee, O Lord, were mine own) which can have any
proportion with this thy so great gift, yet I can pay thee with thine own
sufficiently. O eternal Father, thou have given me a gift equivalent to this
great benefit, and with this I can pay thee, though I pay thee with thy own.
And what is that? It is thine own Son Christ Jesus, God and man, whom thou
bestowest on me in this B. Sacrament, and him I render again unto thee for
this and all thy benefits. He is thine, I know, by eternal generation,
because by that he was borne consubstantiall to thee, but he is mine also by
te^porall generation, because by that he is borne consubstantiall to me, and he
is mine again by this holy communion, and in a manner as much mine, Io. 6.
as the meat I eat and the drink I drink: because his flesh is truly meat,
and his blood is truly drink. I therefore render unto thee, o Eternal Father,
thy own son, whom thou have given to me, and I render him not only for thy
other benefits, but also and especially for this, which by communion of this
B. Sacrament I have received at thy bountiful hands.

And although in so doing I give thee but thine own, Matthew 3 and 17.
because it is thy well beloved Son, in whom thou art well pleased.

And if thou will have also of mine, I offer thee all I can and have; I offer
thee my heart, and that also inflamed with love, and in a manner (as I desire it
should be) resolved into love of thee, and all I am and have by thy grace,
shall be hereafter for thee and thy service.

If my tongue speak hereafter, viuo ego, iam non ego, viuit vero in me
Christus: Gal. 2.
I live now, not I, but Christ lives in me. If I love any thing hereafter, it
shall be thee or for thee, for thou have first loved me, 1. Joan. 4.
and best loved me, and by this B. Sacrament thou have showed thy self my
greatest benefactour, my greatest friend and lover, Thou therefore here after
shall have me for thy servant.

Thou hereafter shall have my love, Summum bonum, cheifest good; good by
essence, and not good only in thy self, but good to me by creation, by which
thou give me my natural being; by justification, by which thou give me a
supernatural being; and by this B. Sacrament, by which thou give thy own
being, to wit thy body, blood, soul and divinity, of which thou consistest.

THE 14. MEDITATION How the Communicant or Receiver is enriched by this B.
Sacrament, and so should little esteem all worldly losses.
COnsider how much thou art enriched by this precious Sacrament, thou receauest
is the Son of God, consubstantiall and equal to his Father, and his body
and blood which he bestows on thee in this Holy Sacrament by reason of their
union with the divinity, are more precious then all that is in heaven and
earth. If every prayer or good work of Christ was more worth then a worlds
redemption, if every drop of his blood is of that value, that it could have
redeemed a thousand worlds, of what worth and value is whole Christ, whom thou
wholly receiuest?

O my God, o my Savior, my soul how happy were thou, if thou knew, or
could conceive thy riches and happiness: As therefore an Emperor of the
whole world would not care if some little cottage should be burnt or taken from
him, because it is nothing to the whole world, which he possesses; so
hereafter if God should permit as much to be taken from thee, as was taken from
Job; if thou loose lands and goods, kinsfolks, friends, and all; if thou
suffer damage in thy fame, honor, or liberty; if thou be never so poor for
worldly wealth; If thou be never so crossed with adversities, say with Job:
Our Lord, Job. 3.
has given, and our Lord has taken away, as it has pleased our Lord, so is
it done; the name of our Lord be blessed.

Say unto thy God though thou make me as poor as Job, shall take nothing from
me but that which thou gave me, and besides in this B. Sacrament thou have
given me that which is more worth then all thou caust take from me, to wit thy
self, body blood, soul and divinity: which whilst I possess, I can not be
poor, loose I never so much, because I possess thee, who art all riches;
which whilst I possess I can not be miserable, I can not be but happy,
though all the miseries of the world should fall at once upon me; because, I
possess thee who art the bliss of men and Angels. If then I want temporal
goods, if I want health of body, if adversities cross me, give me o Lord
grace to bear all patiently, and not to think what I have lost, but what I
have gotten by receiving thee in this B. Sacrament, to which all I can loose is
nothing.

Thou rainedst o Lord, Manna upon the Jews which was like the seed of a
Coriander, Exodus 16.
and yet the Jews were so grateful for it that they cried, Manha, what is
this what largess, what riches does God rain on us? and yet that was but as a
crumme which fell from thy Table. But now thou raynest on me by means of this
B Sacrament, not a crumme of bread, but the whole bread of life, Ioa. 6.
the whole feast, thy only begotten Son, and with him the riches of his
divinity and humanity, which are inestimable. Manha, what is this? what a
precious gift is this? what bounty is this? That manna was so precious, so
delicious, that it made the Jews for a time to contemn their flesh pots of
Eg^pt. This Manna of the B Sacrament, the verity of that figure, has all
delights that the spiritual appetite can desire.

I therefore will hereafter contemn all worldly and carnal pleasures, Manna
only, which contains all spiritual delight, and which in a little room
contains more then the price of heaven and earth. O my soul if thou will
play the wise merchant, sell all, give all, loose all for this precious
Margarite, this Holy and most rich Sacrament, and when thou have it, as thou
have it so often as thou receiuest it, desire no more, it is enough to content
an infinite appetite, because it is infinite in all goodness.

THE 15. MEDITATION How by the Receiving of this B. Sacrament the receiver is
made the Temple of God.
THe Foundation of thy Temple, covers the multitude of thy sins, 1. Pet 4.
and hides them from the sight of God, because it quite effaceth them, The
Bishop who consecrateth this thy Temple, is Christ Jesus, the high Priest and
Bishop of the new law, and his presence is the consecration, the Altar is thy
heart, the Sacrifice is the sacred body and blood of Christ.

The Temple of Solomon was esteemed so holy, propitiation for our sins: 1
Ioa 2.
in that were two pictures or statues of two Cherubins, in thee is the Lord of
Cherubins, and Seraphins, and of all the Angels, who as S. Chrysostom
affirms do wait and attend in troops with all reverence on their Lord when
the Priest consecrateth, and he and thou receauest this Sacrament; for where
the King is, there are his courtiours; In that Temple was the glory of God
which was but a cloud which filled the Temple, 2. Paral. 17.
and was only a figure and representation of God his divinity, in thee is
Christ Jesus God and man the splendor of his Fashers glory and verity of
that figure; Hebr. 1.
in that were golden candlesticks on which were lights to illuminate the
Temple, 2. Par. 4.
in this is Christ's humanity, which was the candlestick that bare the light of
the Divinity, and showed it to the world. In that Temple were the figurative
Priests who offered the figurative Sacrifices of the old Law, in thee is the
high Priest of the new law Christ Jesus, who offered himself in a bloody
manner on the Cross, and in an unbloody manner in the Sacrament which is in
thee: That Temple was vested and limmed with pure gold, thou art adorned with a
richer gold, Charity, without which thou can not be the Temple of God.

O my Soul seeing that by this B. thy self by a perfect resignation, and
denial of thy self: offer in this thy Temple, Mar. 11
daily prayer, for his house and Temple is the house of prayer, offer unto him
this Sacrifice of his sacred body and blood which thou have received. Temples
and Churches are swept cleanly, and adorned richly; let then no unclean
thing be in thee, no mortal sin, yea (as much as humain frailty will
permit) noe venial sin, noe carnal, no worldly cogitatio^s or affections.
Sweep the Temple of thy Soul from all such fylth and dust, nay wash it with
the tears of contrition, Mar. 11
from all such ordure. VVhippe out (as Christ did out of the Jews Temple) all
buyers and sellers, all mortal sins, by which thou buyest at a dear rate
the world and its pleasures, and sellest thy self to the devil for a vain
pleasure, or a little trashe; Let thy Temple rather be adorned with faith, hope,
charity, and all manner of virtues, with chaste, pure, and holy cogitations,
with the seven gifts of the holy Ghost, Esa 11.
and especially let it be gilded with the Gold of Charity; That God only,
whose Temple now thou art, may be honored, praised, and loved by thee.

If thou thus sweep, Prou. 8.
whose delights are to be with the children of men. But as he desires to lodge
and dwell in thee, so must thou also desire his company, for he will not be an
vnwellcome guest. thou must take heed, least by any sin thou expel or
disgust him, for he is light and cannot consort with such darkness, thou must
therefore enter taine him by chaste and holy cogitations, and meditations and
especially by love and charity, for he has showed thee great love in making
thee by this B. Sacrament his Temple, and therefore expects love for love.

And now that thou have him dwelling with thee and in thee, lay hold on him,
link him to thee by the golden chain of Charity, leave him not, and he will
not leave thee. Say unto him, as Jacob said unto the Angel, who represented
the person of God non dimittam te nisi benedixeris mihi: Genesis 32.
I will not let thee go, unless thou bless me: and because I will never
want thy blessing, I will never let thee go. 2. Reg. 6
Obededon, and all his house was blessed with many a benediction for receiving
into it the Ark of the old law, and shall not I, o Lord, receive many blessings
by receiving thy Son Christ Jesus the Ark of the new law, and the verity of
that figure? O let not this Arc bring fewer blessings with it, then that did.

I desire not the temporal blessing which Isaac gave to his son Jacob, to
wit, the dew of heaven, Genesis 27
the fatnes of the earth, and abundance of corn and wine. Ephesians 1
But I desire the benediction, by which thou have blessed us in all spiritual
blessing in celestials. Luc. 2.
And seeing that I now have thee in my arms with Simeon, I desire his
benediction, that I may depart and dye in peace, with thee, and all thy Saints
and Angels; Matthew. 5
I desire those eight beatitudes and blessings of poverty in spirit, of
meeknes, of mourning for my sins, of hunger after Justice, of mercifulnes, of
cleanes of heart, of peace making, of patient suffering persecution for justice
sake. And lastly I desire thy eternal benediction which consists in the
clear vision and fruition of thee, by which all the Angels and Saints are
blessed, and this I most humbly crave and in a manner claim by virtue of that
thy promise made to all worthy receauers of this B. Sacrament, Io. 6.
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has life everlasting, and I
will raise him up at the last day. Bestow on me then, o Lord, a benediction of
thy grace now, and after my death a benediction of thy glory in the next life,
where I ma^e live in bliss with thee and thy Saints for ever.

THE 16. MEDITATION Of the good purposes which after Communion are to be made.
AFter that thou have received this B.

Say therefore unto him: This gate hereafter shall be shut (as was the Eastern
gate of which Ezechiel speaks) It shall not be opened and men shall not pass
through it, Ezech. 44.
it shall be shut for the Prince. This gate, o Lord, shall be shut to all but
thee the Prince, thou only shall have the command for the opening or shutting
of it. The world, flesh, or devil shall never enter by it, none but thou, or
for thy sake.

And therefore hereafter my mouth shall never speak but of thee, Psalm. 70.
Repleatur os meum laud vt ca^tet gloriam tuam: let my mouth be filled with
praise that I may sing thy glory. Ephesians. 4
All naughty speech let it not proceed from it. It is the gate of thy Temple,
let no unclean thing have entrance by it. It is the gate of the City, keep
it shut, and fortify it by thy grace that it may keep out thy enemies and
withstand all the battery and assaults of their tentations: It has been
filled with thy sacred body and blood, let it here after be filled with
praises of thy name and tha^kesgiuing.

And because my tongue has been the bridge by which thou have passed, exercise
it hereafter in praising thy holy name, in praying to thee, in talking of thee,
of thy life and death, of thy great benefits, and in particular of this B.
Sacrament, which so often I have received, of heaven and heavenly things. And
therefore hereafter I will not adventure without thee to govern this voluble,
variable and inconstant creature, moved with every wind like a reed: I could
never govern it, and no marvel because Linguam nullus hominum domare potest.
Ia^obi 3
No man can tame the tongue; thou only can because Domini est gubernare
linguam, Proverb 16.
it apperteineth to our Lord to govern the tongue, and so to thee I yield up
the rule of it, to thy direction I commend it, that it may be silent when thou
would have it be silent, and that it may speak only, when thou would
have it speak, and what thou would have it speak.

And because thou, o Lord, See the med. 12.
I will never shake hands with thy enemies the world, flesh and devil, nor
shall I love any thing which is offensive to thee. See above med 12. Se medit
12.
Thou by this holy Sacrament art my Father and Mother, I shall therefore honor
thee, fear thee, love thee, obey thee. Thou art the loving Spouse of my soul,
and the marriage betwixt it and thee is co^summated by this B. Sacrament. I will
therefore wed my self to noe creature by inordinate affection; that were to
play the Adulteress, and to break the bond of this sacred wedlock, nor will I
love any but thee, or for thee. And being married to so great an Emperor as
thou art, and thereby made also of high and noble condition, who by sin
before was base. I will putt on the Imperial robes of holy conversation fit
for thy spouse; my old habit of my old base behavior and conditions, I will
lay aside; I will become a new creature, and in thoughts, words, and deeds I
will carry myself nobly as becomes thy chaste spouse.

Thou have feasted me with the royal fare of thy sacred flesh and blood, Luc 14.
not as assaue to my passions, and sensualities, but as a Lord and commander
over them; And as the Prodigal son after that his Father received hi^ into
grace, and had feasted him, never returned again to his hoggish fare, so I
being now fed with heavenly fare, will scorn hereafter to taste any more of
any worldly or carnal delights, the hoggish fare of sinners. I am by
receiving this Holy of Holies thy sacred body and blood, sanctified,
consecrated, and dedicated to thee only, and to thy service, I will therefore
never profane myself again, I will never employ my self to the service of the
world, or flesh, or devil or to any but thee, or for thee.

The holy Chalice though it be but of earthly metal, be it silver or gold,
yet it is oeuer employed to any other use then to receive thy sacred blood. The
Church after Consecration is never used but for thy service. And shall I who am
better consecrated and sanctified then they, because I am more capable of
Sanctity then they, permit my self to be put to profane uses: I am by this
Sacrament made the Temple of God, which is the house of prayer; thou then o
Lord shall be only served in this temple, thou only shall be honored and
praised in it.

Thy entrance into me has sanctified my body and all the parts of it, Ps 102
Benedicanima mea Domino, and omnia quae intra me sunt nomint sancto e^us. My
soul bless thou our Lord, and all things that are within me his holy name. My
understanding do thou think and meditate always of him; my will do thou ever
love him; my memory do thou ever remember his benefits, and this B. Sacrament
in particular, which he has bestowed on me; my eyes look on heaven and this
Blessed Sacrament, where he is; my hands lift up your selves in thanks giving;
my feet follow his steps, and traces, and examples, which he has given,
because I and you all are consecrated and dedicated to him by receiving this B.
Sacrament.

And if it be an unworthy thing to cast a consecrated Chalice into the dirt,
will, and to my force thy grace this is now my mind and purpose^ and I desire
to die in this mind, (...) with it, that at my death being thus prepared, I may
feed on the sacred body and blood in the B^ Sacrament by a worthy Communion,
and by virtue of it, after m^ death may be admitted to feed (...) on thy
Divinity with their B^ Saints in Heaven by a clear vision and fruition of
thee, the Father, and the Holy Ghost thre^ persons, and one God to whom be all
Honor, and glory for ever.

FINIS.

