A brefe confutacion of this most detestable, and Anabaptistical opinion, that
Christ did not take his flesh of the blessed Vyrgyn Mary nor any corporal
substance of her body. For the main tenaunce whereof Ihone Bucher otherwise
called Ihone of Ke^t most obstinately suffered and was burned in Smythfyelde,
the.ii. day of May.

Anno domini* M. D. L.

Cum privilegio ad Imprimendum solum.

SO subtle is satan, our Enemy Immortal,
When he is transformed into an angel of light
He captiuates our senses, so fond and fantastical
That we doubt not to deem the day to be night. Histori. Ecclesi. Lib. iiii.
ca. xiiii

By Such lieng spirits seduced is the sight.
And with pernicious opinions amassed in a miste
Ace al they that believe not, the incarnation of Christ.
In the primative church, within forty years,
After Christ's asencion, this darnell begone,
To spring up by Marcion, his accomplices and feers
Whom Policarpus called, the deuyls eldest son.
The Anabaptists hold herein, an erronius opinion
So did the wayward Virago, that would not repent
The devils Eldest daughter, which lately was brent.
Beware of such errors, and reuerentlye read
Gods word with humility, and modesty* of mind,
Give faith to the same, and stick to thy Creed
For the devil now bestirs him, and does but his kind
To hinder the Gospel, many means does he find.
He rages and raunges, the wyld world over
He makes many lose with short, and some with over.
This the scripture is wrested, and all to be Rackte
Of Such as with spirits of error are led
Thassistance of God, and his meke spirit is lacte
To teach them the true sense, when his word is read
It serves not to maintain fond toys in their head. iii. (...) xix.

And where the proud spirit is halt, and void of gods fear.
Non ibidem dominus. The Lord is not There.
God promised to Eve, that the sead of a womanne Genesis (...)

Should tread down the head of the subtle serpente,
This Promise was fully accomplyshed than
When Christ became man and made the attonemente.
This seade was of his mother* and not from heaven sent ^at^. ^.

How can it be called the sede of a woman truly
Which takes no substance, nor part of her body?
To Abraham and Jacob, the same sead was promised
The book of Genesys, is plain and manifest:
In thy sede, shall all the people of the world be blessed
Not brought from above, but borne to perform the behest
Was Christ of his mother, and not from heaven sent
To this sense and meaning thy wits thou enclyne,
And mark well what is meant by this pronoune thine
How could it be their sead, which take not their substance
But came down from heaven, and was not of their kind?
The scripture. Contains no such repugnaunce
Who shall be able by the same, to prove or to find
To warrant Christ's humanyty, or believe it in his mind?
If ye make it uncertain, of whom he did take it
It appears by this opinion the devil is awaked.
God promised to raise up the same sede to Dauyd
Of the fruit of his belly to sit on his seat.
In the second of Samuel and the seventh ye may have it
God is full Just and did not forgette
To conquer the dyuel and his devise to difeate,
To vanquish his judgment and putt away sin,
Christ was this sede borne of his mother the virgyn.
Esaye the prophet confirmed the same
A virgyn shall conceive and bring forth a child,
With this the Gospel of Mathewe does frame
The fruit did grow in the womb vndefilde
And the mother waxt great, nature was begild
This came not by fortune or casual chance
That Christ took of his mother his corporal substance.
From the rote of Iesse proceed shall a bud,
And a flower of this rote, for so the prophet says.
This bud was Marye, of whose flesh and blood,
Came Christ the flower, my faith shall be always
The fruit of her womb which never decays,
And not as water which runs to a Condit,
And passes through a pipe, as the Devil now has found it.
To conceive and bear a child what other thing is mente,
Than the mother to her child to give and participate,
As the tree to the fruit? for even so did this parent,
Of her body with this child communicate.
Nourished him in her womb where he was incorporate.
And not as tayne comes from heaven as Martian spoke.
Which is as true as an oringe springes of an oak.
Mathewe discribing the Lineall dessente
In his genealogye, thus he writtes of Marye
Of whom is borne Christ, learn what he meant
By this term of, for he does not say by
Whom, or through whom: the holy ghost cannot lie.
Believe than gods word though the deuel be neuerso loath
And let thy will and thy wit gave place to the troth
As touching the flesh Christ was borne of David's sede,
And when the time was performed, God than did send
His son borne of a woman, let this be the Creed,
And forget not the Aue, with what words it does end
Blessed is the fruit of thy womb, pray to god he may defend
The, from this error, and so from al other,
That thou may believe, Christ took flesh of his mother.
But if froward fondnes, have so wedded the to thy will,
Both piuyshe and perverse, that these will not persuade
The fourth of the Galathians I will write in my bille
The place is pithy, to turn the from that trade.
But when the full time was come, God sent his son made
Of a woman, the greek has it made, written by Poulle,
And not bourne: believe this scripture, and dampne not thy soul.
Time will not serve to utter the store
Of sundry textes, which scripture contaynes
Against this opinion, and most dyuelish error,
Lately maintained by a sort of Idle brains.
And all to seem singular but mark well their gaynes
They are so sturdy and stout, they will be take for no starters
They had rather goo to the Dyuel, like stinking marters.
Scripture disdaynes not, to call Christ the son ^^he. i (...). ii.

Of Marye his mother, in Luke and in Mathewe,
But their hearts are so hardened they will not be won
They make a tush at a text, be it never so true.
They will believe Paul no more, than a turcke or a Jew,
To aledge them scriptures, it greatly skylleth not
There is none so blind as they that can se, and will not.
This doubt were discussed if they understood
And would read and believe, the second to the Ebrues,
Forasmuch as the children were pertakers of flesh and blood,
He also him self likewise did not Refuse
But took part with them, whereby he subduse
Through death the devil, our mortal adversary
Where had Christ his flesh, but of his mother Mary?
Christ took the sede of Abraham, he took it not of Aungelles
So that be became like to his brethren in all things
Sin only except, thus plainly Paul tells,
Where came he by this flesh, which amongst us he brings?
Had he feathers as well as flesh, and came down with wings?
Christ came to be a mediatoure, it was requisite that he
Should be partaker of the godhede, and of our humanitye.
Christ preached the word, and sowed forth good seeds,
The Apostles trauayled, and took great pains,
But Belsebub besturred him, and up came the wedes
Which shortly sprung up in fantastical brains.
Such Deuilishe deceyuers the Devil intertaynes.
Many entered in John's time which would not confess:
That our Savior Jesus Christ was come in the flesh.
It seemed most mete to gods high providence
And also most necessary for our redemcion,
That where the first man in our nature committed disobedience.
The second Man Christ should make satisfaccion.
Repair and recompense in the same nature and parson
And pay the pain of sin this was not omitted
In the flesh of man wherein it was committed.
How stands to the Corinthyans Paul's dysputacion
If Christ had not his nature common with us?
In whom now risen Paul proves an universal resurreccion
It were easy to reply against the same thus:
If it might: be alleged (as it cannot) that Jesus
Brought down from heaven an heavenly body
In to the womb of the Vyrgyn Mary.
What marvel is it, if an heavenly substance,
Be utterly void and exempte from corrupcion
It cannot well follow there must be variaunce,
That our bodies subject to putrefaccion,
Should rise up again without corrpucion
That we doubt not hereof let us believe sure
That Christ took part with us in our nature.
Esaias the Prophet said he was made Emanuell,
The word soundes and signifies God is with us,
How it should be other wise, I cannot tell.
But I am assured that Dauyd in the parson of Jesus ^^alme

Read the.xxii. Psalm. where he this doubt does dyscus
Thou took me from my mothers womb to perform the behestes
Thou wast my hope when I hnaged upon my mothers breasts.
Let us pray unto god long to maintain and defend
The state of this realm and gods true religion,
Let us also give thanks to god which has send
Us a king to al princes a president and patron, (...)

A counsel most catholic for a christian congregation.
To surceasse al sedicion to punyshe false teachers
And to stablishe true doctrine god send us good preachers.
By me Edmon Beck.
(?) Imprinted at London by John day dwelling over Aldersgate, and Wylliam
Setes dwelling in Peter College.


