The Acts of Christ and of Antichriste, concerning both their life and
doctrine: diligently gathered and now taken out of his works, by Thomas Becon.

2. Corin. 6. What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? Or
what company has light with darkness? Or what concord has Christ with
Beliall? Or what part has he that believes with an Infidel. The Acts of
Christ and Antichriste, concerning both their life and doctrine.
Of their life.
First. Psalm. 110.
Christ as touching his deity, Math. iiii.
is the true and natural Son of the living and immortal God: Luke. i.
and as concerning his humainitie, Roma. i.
he is the true and natural Soonne of Marie the Uirgine.

Antichrist both body and soul is the child of wrath, Joan. iii.
and the Son of perdition, yea, Ephesians. ii.
and that sinful man. which is an adversary to God and all godliness, ii.
Thessal. ii.
to Christ and to all christianity.

2 Christ being borne, brought into the world great joy, high peace, and
everlasting salvation as the Angel said to the Shepheardes: Luke. ii.
Behold, I bring you tidings of great joy, which shall come to all people:
For unto you is borne this day in the City of David, a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord.

Again, Glory be to God on hie, and peace on the earth: and unto God a good
will.

Antichrist being borne, brings with him not joy, but greef of mind, not
peace but trouble of body, not Salvation, but plain distructio^ both of
body and soul to so many as embrace him.

3 Christ, Luke. ii.
when he should be borne, could have no room in the June, and therefore was
borne in a Stable: and being wrapped in poor and homely swadlyng cloutes, he
was laid in a maunger.

Antichrist, before he be borne, has a gorgious and richely apparelled house
prepared for him, with all such furniture, as becomes such a wicked
worldlyng.

4 Christ, Ihon. 1.
when he was borne, was not joyfully received of the world, Math. ii.
no, not of the^ to whom he was promised and sent, but rather hated and
persecuted most cruelly.

Antichrist being borne, is most tenderly embraced, loved, kissed, and
coulled: and in all points warely kept, and circumspectly atte^ded, that no
greef or misfortune chance unto him, so dear is he to the children of this
world.

5 Christ, Math. ii.
when according to his age, he ought to have been both tenderly and quietly
norished, was compelled through the cruelty of Tyrauntes, to be carried from
country to country, and yet hardly found he rest at any time, so in all
points did the Cross follow him, even from the very cradle, as they use to
say.

Antichrist is both delicately and tenderly fostered, and brought up without
al noise and disquietnesse. All Epicures and worldlynges delight in him. They
seek to pleasure him. He is free at all times from all Cross.

6 Christ, Luke. ii.
when he was borne, had little resort unto him, Math. ii.
for to relieve his poor and miserable state, beside the Shepheardes, and the
wise men of the East, with a very few other.

Antichrist has the whole world flockyng to him, which cease not to give, and
offer unto him great and precions gifts, although otherwise ouerflowyng with
the abundance of all things.

7 Christ being but twelve years of age was studious of Gods word, Luke. ii.
and so desirous of the knowledge thereof, that forgettyng his carnal
friends, and their company, he remained in the Temple of Solomon at
Jerusalem, sittyng in the mids of the Doctors, hearing them and posyng them.

Antichriste hates the knowledge of Gods word, and so many as favor it,
forasmuch as it is contrary to his filthy will, and beastly pleasure, and
deliteth only in that doctrine, which serves his voluptuous appetite.

8 Christ was obediente to Marie his mother, Luke. ii.
and to Joseph her houseband, showing hereby a good example of submission, and
obedience to all children.

Antichrist will obey no man, but rule over all men, giuyng hereby an example
of pride, and disobedience to all men.

9 Christ (as some affirm) from the time of twelve years of age, till he was
thirty year old, accompanied Joseph his Mothers housebande, which was a
Carpenter by his occupation, No man ought to be idle in a christen common
weal.
and labored diligently in that art, by this means gettyng his living with
the travail of his hands, and with the sweat of his brows, according to the
commandment of his heavenly Father, i. These. iiii.
giuyng a good example in this behalf, ii. These. iii,
to all that profess his name, Genes. iii.
that none in a Christian Common weal ought to live idly, Psalm. 128.
but every manne work some good thing that he may have not only whereof to
live him self, Mark. vi.
but also to give unto the needy. And hereof comes it, that Christ is
called a Carpenter in the Scripture.

Antichrist is altogether otherwise affected. For he uses no exercise, that
godly and profitable is, but lives altogether idly, of the labor of other
men's hands, and of the sweat of other men's brows, contrary to the
commandment of God, being in deed a very unprofitable clod of the earth.
And as he him self is estraunged from all Godly and virtuous exercises: The
idleness of the popish spirituality,
So likewise does he enfraunchise, and make free from all work and labor,
all his spiritual smered shauelynges, appointyng the^, not to preach the
word of God, nor to administer the Sacrament of Christ purely and
sincerely, according to Christ's Institution, but to say Mattens, Mass, and
Euensong, and to set forth his ordinances and decrees, etc. that they may
seem at the least to do somewhat, although that somewhat in deed be nothing.

10 Christ as he prospered in age, Luke. ii.
so likewise did he in wisdom and favor, with God and men.

Antichriste the older he waxes, the worse he is, hated both of God and of all
Godly men.

11 Christ disdained not to be Baptized of John Baptiste, Math. iii.
a poor man and a priests son. Mark. i.


Antichrist will have nothing ministered unto him, Antichrist cannot abide the
Marriage of Priests.
but of great princes, mighty prelates, and such as be famous honorable and
of great glory in the world. As for poor men he regards not, and as
touching the lawful children of priests, he can by no means abide them as a
matter condemned in his deuilishe decrees and Luciferlike laws.

12 Christ although sent down for that purpose, Math. iii.
took not on him the office of preaching, Mark. i.
till he was openly called of his heavenly father having his vocation confirmed
by a visible sign of the holy ghost, Luke. iiii.
Ihon. i.
which came down from heaven upon him in the likeness of a Dove.

Antichrist thrusts himself in the ministry without any certain calling,
yea and that not to do good, which is contrary to his nature, but to do
evil, even to corrupt the congregation of God with his pestilente doctrine,
and corrupt manners, and unfruitfully to eat the Milk of the sheep, and to
be apparelled with their wolle, by this means defraudyng both the true
Ministers and also the pore members of Christ of their living: being of the
number of them, of whom God by the Prophet speaks on this manner: Ieremi.
xxiii.
I spoke not unto them, and they prophesied I sent them not, and they ran.

13 Christ, although called of God unto the office of preaching, and anointed
with the Oil of gladness, that is to say, the holy ghost, above his fellows,
fell not straight ways unto preaching, but sequestyng himself from the company
of all men, gave himself by the space of forty days and forty nights to
fasting and prayer, that he might be the more able to fulfill that work,
whereunto God had called him, Psalm. xlv.
unto the glory of gods most glorious name, and unto the profit of his holy
congregation.

Antichrist after he has thruste himself into the ministry, Math. iiii.
rashly and without any aduisement, Mark. i.
unworthily and without any due preparation unto so worthy mysteries, Luke.
iiii.
as a filthy Sow and vomityng dog, takes in hand the divine offices, geuyng
himself neither to prayer, nor yet to fasting, but rather to carnal pleasure
and beastly belly chere, nothing caryng for the glory of God, nor for the
profit of his people, so that he may live wealthily and according to the lusts
of the flesh.

41 Christ in the time of his fasting and prayer, Math. iiii.
was grievously tempted of Satan, and of the infernal army, Luke. iiii.
whom all, he mightily and valeauntlie overcame with the most mighty and
valeaunt armoures of Gods word.

Antichrist as he never fasteth and prays a right: so is he never tempted of
satan for the probation and trial of his faith and constancy, as one that is
already in Satan's nets, and in his possession as a most miserable slave and
vile paysaunt. And if at any time he will defend himself against Satan, and
such like wicked spirits, he flees not unto the word of God, but unto holy
water, holy Bread, holy palms, holy candels, holy fire, etc.

15 Christ when he began to preach, Math. iiii.
preached repentance and faith. Mark. i.


Antichrist preaches penance and faith in his Pardons and bulls for the
remission of sins.

16 Christ by his preaching brought the people out of darkness into light.
Math. iiii.
Esaias. xix.
Luke. ii.


Antichrist through his sermons brings his hearers out of the light of gods
word, into the damnable darkness of men's trifelyng tradicions.

17 Christ confirmed his doctrine with true and most certain miracles. Math.
xi.
Luke. vii.


Antichrist ascertaineth his teaching with false signs and fained wonders*
Math. xxiiii.
Luke. iiii.
Joan. iiii


18 Christ painefully travailed into many and diverse countries to preach
Gods word, sekyng the salvation of all men.

Antichrist sits at home in his palace upon his fine Cushins and Carpets
both gorgiously and gloriously, not seeking other men's salvation, but his
own ease and promotion.

19 Christ, Math. x.
that the more with the more expedition might be converted and turned unto the
faith of GOD and unto his holy Religion, Mark. vi.
did chose unto him twelve Disciples. Luke. vi.


Antichrist to enlarge his kingdom takes unto him innumerable swarms of
Hipocrites, A swarm of Hipocrites.
as Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archebishops, Bishops, Priests, Deacons,
Subdeacons, Monks, Friars, Chanons, Heremites, Anckers, Archedeacons,
Commissaries, Officials, Pardoners, Proctours, Doctors, Scribes, Lawyers,
Sonmners, Apparitours, Inquisitours, Accusatours, Persecutours, Traitors,
Condemners, false Prophets, liyng preachers, relic sellers, soul cariers,
purgatory rakers, Massemongers, saint worshippers, workselles, pilgrimage
goers, Idolatours, Transubstantiatours, Breadhonorers, Traditionaries,
Papists, etc.

20 Christ did choose such to be his Disciples and Preachers of his heavenly
fathers will, Math. viii.
as were married and had wives ^ Cor. ix.
Philip. iiii.
Acts. xxi.
and children.

Antichriste admits none unto his priestishe orders, but such ars are
wiuelesse, and profess for ever after to lead a single and unmarried life.

21 Christ chosed Disciples to this end, Math. x. xviii.
that they should be Preachers. Ihon. xx.


Antichrist chooses his shauelynges to be Massemongers, Sacrificers, Purgatory
rakers, charmers, and Coniurers of unclean spirits, of Devils, of Salt, of
water, of bread, of wax, of palms. etc.

22 Christ would have his disciples known by the fruits of the holy Ghost.
Mark. xvi.
Ihon. xv.


Antichrist has his Chaplens known by docking and douking, by smering and
shauyng, by massyng and mattensyng, by tippetyng and gownyng, etc.

23 Christ commanded his Disciples to preach repentance and remission of
sins in his name to all nations. Luke. (...)


Antichrist commands his Shauelinges to say Mattens, Mass and euensong: to
sing for souls in purgatory: to hear confessions, to enjoin penance, Math.
x.
to give absolutions, Mark. xvi.
to halow the font, etc. Acts. iii. iiii.


24 Christ confirmed the doctrine of his disciples with workyng of miracles.

Antichrist stablisheth the teaching of his Chaplens, with the terrible and
grievous thunderbolt of excommunication, with imprisonmente, with persecution,
with sword, faggot, fire, halter, etc.

25 Christ sendyng forth his disciples to preach, Math. x.
commanded them to do their office freely, that is to say, to preach and to
heal the sick for nothing, saying unto them: Freely ye have received: freely
give.

Antichrist and his birds are like unto Judas. For they all do so well love
the purse, All for money.
that without money a man can get nothing of them. They bless, they curse,
they sing, they say, they patter, they pray, they mumble, they rumble, they
tumble, they iumble, they talk, they walk, they bleare, they bleat, they
fast, they eat, they talk, they walk, and what not? And all for money
according to the common proverb: no penny, no Pater noster.

26 Christ, Math. x.
when he sent forth his Disciples to preach, Joan. xvi.
said unto them: Behold, I send you forth as sheep among wolves, For in the
world ye shall have trouble.

Antichrist sends forth his Trumpet blowers as wolves among sheep, ready to
kill, flea and murder, if any withstand their Antichristian doctrine. Joan. xv.
The world, hates them not, but loves them derely, because they are of the
world, and speak of the world.

27 Christ pronounced them blessed that are poor, Math. v.
and he himself was so poor, that he had not where to rest his head, Luke. vi.
being in this behalf much inferior to the birds of the air, Math. viii.
which have their nestes, and to the foxes of the earth, which have their
holes.

Antichrist which calls himself christ's vicare and Peter's successor,
agreyng with them in doctrine and manners, as Beliall with Christ, and Satan
with God, hates and abhors such as are poor and without money, as people
nothing meet to bye his merchandise, Antichrist himself is so rich, and has
such abundance, that he is able to compare in substance with worldly Princes
and earthly potestates. He shameth not to say: Rome is mine, Cecilia is mine,
Corcia is mine. The whole empire is mine. And in his lousy laws and deuelishe
decrees, he commands that if any man either of low or high degree presume
to take any of the Church goods,
he should be withstanded, not only with the spiritual, but also with the
temporal sword. And if any chance to dye for the defense of mother holy
Church goods, he affirms plainly, that they dye a blessed death, and shall
obtain life everlasting. O Antichrist. This Antichriste had rather have the
blood of many thousands both most cruelly and unjustly shed, than he would
loose one of his worldly pelf, so sweet unto him is the savor of lucre.

28 Christ, Ihon. vi.
when they would have chosen him to be their king, fled away aloue from them
into the Mountains, and gave him self to prayer and spiritual meditations,
utterly eschewing al worldly pomp, glory, and dignity: which thing he showed
openly in ridyng simply and plainly upon a borrowed Ass, according to the
prophecy of Zachary, Math xxi.
which says: Marc. xi.
Behold the king comes unto thee, Luke. xix.
meek, Ihon. xii.
simple, Zachar. ix.
lowly, ii. Cor. viii.
or of pore degree. Ihon. xviii.
He became pore, says the Apostle that we through his poverty should wax
rich. And he said to Pilate: My kingdom is not of this world.

Antichrist aduaunceth and lyfteth up him self above all Kings, Princes,
Rulers and Emperors, chalengyng unto him aucthority and power, both to exalte
and depose Kings, Princes, and Emperors at his pleasure, which thing, as we
read, he has in times most cruelly and tyrantlike practiced in diverse and
many noble Princes. He aduanceth himself not only to excelle all power and
authority, but also to be lord of both realms, heavenly and earthly, and
that the Emperor is his Subject, Did. 96. Cap. Si Imperator.
as it is mentioned in his own decrees and laws: again, that if the Empire
at any time be void, he is right heir to the same. And in token that he is
lord and king over three realms, one more then GOD himself has, that is to
say, Heaven, Earth, and Purgatory, he wears a triple crown upon his pylde
pate. This authority, The Popes triple crown, what it signifies.
, this Antichrist received of the devil, Math. iiii.
for the service that he has done him, which Christ utterly refused, when he
said unto him: All these things all the kingdoms of the world and the glory
of them, will I give thee: if thou will fall down and worship me. This
Antichrist and his adherentes, that so vilely devise the higher powers, ^^.
Peter. ii.
are spoken of in the Epistle of saint Peter, which says: They walk after
the flesh, in the lust of uncleanness, and despise authorie. Presumpteous are
they and stubborn, which fear not to speak evil of them, which excel in
worship. etc.

29 Christ came not to be served, Luke. xxii.
but to scrue, Philip. ii.
taking upon him the similitude of a servant, and making himself of no
reputation to serve and advance us.

Antichrist will be served, Did. 86. Cap. Quando.
and suffer kings to give him water, yea and says, it were a shame if he
should otherwise humble him self, as it appears in his own laws and
decrees.

30 Christ full lowly and mekely washed his Disciples feet, Joan. xiii.
and taught them so likewise, saying: I have given you an example, that as I
have done to you, so ye should do one to an other.

Antichrist says: Cap. Cu^olim
Emperors and Kings shall knele unto me, and kiss my feet, and is not
ashamed to express it in his law.

31 Christ went on his feet with his disciples both in wette and dry, heat
and cold, Joan. iiii.
to teach and instruct the people, Math. iiii.
as it is evident throughout all the gospel.

Antichrist keeps his feet full clean with shoes of gold and silver, The
Pope is no preaching Prelate.
set with precious stones, and will not preach the word of God, but says, it
is sufficient to cause other to preach, as it appears by his law: Uerely
after this manner might the Turk be Pope also.

32 Christ sat at meat among his Disciples full lowly and poorly: Math. xx.
and he did not require the highest seat. Luke. xxii.


Antichrist sits full high in a curious throne and will be served gloriously
with great Princes and Potestates: and he will have men with iagged cotes to
carue his morselles, blasphemyng GOD with oaths, and committing many other
vices as ye may daiely see.

33 Christ fasted, and sought for the fruit on the tree to eat, Luke. xxi.
when he was hungry, and found none thereupon.

Antichrist has great provision made in cities and towns to get him of the
best that may be found: and that must be well dressed and deintily to make
good digestion, with Spices and Sauces, and sirops colored out of kind.

34 Christ lay and slepte in a boat on the hard bourdes, Math. viii.
and had to his chamberlaines but poor fishers. Mark. iiii.
Luke. xiii.


Antichrist lies full soft and easly in beds of down, where he slepeth
swetely, and no man may wake him, until he have slepte enough. His
Chamberlaynes are men of honor, which are full ready with marshals and vshers
to keep his chambers from noise, and the Porter at the gate to keep out the
poor.

35 Christ was in hills weping and praiyng, Luke. vi.
and walked in deserte, Math. xiiii.
feedyng many thousands both with meat and preaching. Ihon. vi.


Antichrist sits in his Castelles and Towers with minstrelsie, laughter, and
all kind of melody. As for the hungrye and poor, they shall die and starve:
for food get they none of him. He thinks it great shame for him, to follow
Christ's example. As touching preaching, he does not so much as once dream of
it.

36 Christ rode poorly and simply on an Ass, Math. xxi.
and had xii. poor men that followed him one foot. Marc. xi.


Antichrist rides royally on a moyle, or on a white palfrey, and has more
than.xii. followyng him on horesebacke to attend and wait upon him, with
Sweardes, bylles, and halberds, as it were men ready to battle.

37 Christ as de passed through cities and towns, Math. iiii. viii. x. xii. xv.
hunted fiendes out of men, that they dwelled in, with the words of his mouth.

Antichrist hunteth the wild dear, the fox and the hare in his cloased
Parkes, with great cries and horns blowyng, with Hounds and Rachettes
runnyng, besides a great swarm of Sym Shakebucklers.

38 Christ praiyng to almighty God his heavenly Father, Ihon. xvii.
in his prayer called him holy Father.

Antichrist is called, the most holy Father of satan's children, and like
Lucifer takes that name on him. Ephe. iiii.
His Disciples say, i. Timoth. ii.
that he is God on earth: where as we are taught by Christ's law, i. Timoth. ii.
that there is but one God.

39 Christ sat in the mids of the Doctors, Luke. ii.
not thinkyng scorn to enquire and to hear them in the law of his heavenly
father.

Antichrist sits in his glorious throne and ministers his own laws and
traditions to all men, and holds a small matter long in pleatyng, which
might sone be determined by the law of God, if he would use it. But then his
winnyng should be the less, his law without profit, and his consistory cold.

40 Christ sent the holy ghost in fervent love and charity, Joan. 14. 15. 16.
to teach them, which were the elect and chosen of God, al truth necessary
unto salvation.

Antichrist sends out his commissions all about to curse and ask vegeaunce
on them, that resist his tyranny: and will for money absolve them clean
again. A paena and culpa toties quoties. All his doctrines have golden tails.
For money is ever the end. The vetue of money.
Give him money, and ye have fulfilled all his laws.

41 Christ fulfilled and kept both the old Math. iii. v.
law and the new, and al righteousness.

Antichrist will have his own traditions and laws kept. But as for the law
of God, it is clean out of his mind.

42 Christ said, Joan. x^^.
that men should know his Disciples by their charity, if they loved one an
other, as he had loved them.

Antichrist causes his chaplens to be known by their habites and vestures,
by their long gounes and shaven crowns, How Antichrists chaplens are known.
and punishes them, if they use not their habites. But for their
covetousness, ambition pride, whoredom, and such other wickedness, he never
punishes them.

43 Christ promises forgiveness of sin and the kingdom of heaven unto
them that will repent and amend their lives. Math. xli.
Mark. i.
Luke. xxiiii.
Cap. Omnes.


Antichrist says, that no man can be saved, except he be first shriuen of his
Priests and Friars. For they bring in money.

44 Christ would not suffer, Matthew. xxi.
that doves, Mark. x^.
sheep, Luke. xix.
and oxen for the offering, Ihon. ii.
should be sold in the temple of God, but drove out the buyers and sellers with
whippes.

Antichrist suffers his Chapmen in the Church to sell the Sacraments, Omnia
venalia Romae.
that they should freely minister to the Christen people. In his court also
there is sellyng of Bishorikes, prebendes, free chapels, benefices, dignities,
Abbotshippes, offices, etc. And all for money.

45 Christ lay in a stable with few cloates, Luke. ii.
betwixt an ox and an ass. For there was no place in the Innes for his
parents, because they were poor.

Antichrist lies in rich chambers with quiltes, curtains, carpettes, and
cushins spread all about, with sweet smelles, pleasant odours, painted
walls, with hanginges of clothe of gold.

46 Christ would have men to visit the poor prisoners, to comfort them, and
to deliver them.

Antichrist has no pity on the poor: yea he persecuteth the poor
Christians, puts them in prison for y^ truths sake, and in fine, most
cruelly murthereth them.

47 Christ did never imprison or persecute any man, Math. v.
but he commanded his disciples, that they should love their enemies, Luke. vi.
and do well to them, yea and pray for them that did pesecute them.

Antichrist that takes on him to stand in christ's stead, and to follow his
example, persecuteth, punishes, prisoneth, and puts to death them that are
disobedient to his voluptuous pleasures. See ye not, how fast he follows
Christ's steps.

48 Christ healyng the sick, Math. viii.
and doing miracles, Luke. viii.
did for the more part ever command, that they should tell no man, who had
healed them.

Antichrist altogether desirous of vain glory, worldely praise, and mortal
renome, gives great gifts, and large benefices to Pardoners, to Proctours,
to Lawiers, to Liers, to Minstrels, to Msasengers, to Friars, to Flatterers,
and to such like Parasites, to blase his name abroad, his holiness and
godliness, that he may have honor and worship in this wicked world.

49 Christ had no Courts, Math. v.
to pleate the matters of his Disciples in: for he commanded them, that they
should not resist evil.

Antichrist has his Courts, and many rich men of Law to oppress the
poor, and to call unto judgment whom he lusts. For whatsoever cause he
will, he vexes all manner people without mercy. For forgive he will not.

50 Christ bad them that he healed, Ihon. v. viii.
to go their way, and to sin no more.

Antichrist gives license to the people, to continue in sin, and gives them
license also to keep, and maintain Stews and baudy houses, and receives
money therefore.

51 Christ refused to be Judge between the two brethren, Luke. xii.
in diuidyng their inheritance, as a matter not incidente to his office,
which was to preach the will of his heaue^lie Father, but appertaining unto
worldly Judges, and temporal magistrates.

Antichriste takes upon him to be Judge in all manner of matters, Spiritual
or Temporal, Ghostly or Worldly. There is no cause, which he will not take
upon him to determine, namely, if they bring money. He will all men, in
matters from all men, Non. q. 3. Conquestus.
to appeal unto him, and unto his Court for sentence, Math. xxvi.
without any resistance or against saying. Ihon. xviii.


52 Christ would not be defended in a righteous matter, with martial
armoures, but he commanded Peter to put up his swearde into his sheath. For he
that strikes with the swearde, says he, shall perish with the swearde.

Antichriste commanded Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Lords with their
Subjects, to take Sweardes, Spears, Halberdes, and Gunnes, and to help him
to slay all such, as will not obey his tyranny. And this must the Emperor
do, or else he must be perjured, yea, and also deposed, because he is no meet
manne to reign, forasmuch as he stoutly defends not the liberties of holy
Church. After this manner came it to pass, that Julius secundus bishop of
Rome caused to be slain sixtene thousand men in one day. Was not that well
pastured? Was not this a worthy Uicar of Christ, and a noble successor of
Peter?

53 Christ gave free liberty to all men, Math. xv.
to eat all meats at all times, Titus. ^.
for as much as that, 1. Timoth. (...).
which enters into the mouth, defiles not manne, but that comes out of
the mouth. For all things are pure to them that are pure: and nothing is to
be cast away, if it be received with giuyng of thanks. For it is
sanctified by the word of God, and by prayer. Yea, it is the doctrine of
Deuilles, to forbid that to be eaten, which God has made to be received
with thanks giuyng.

Antichrist plainly condemns al such as presume to eat Eggs, Milk, Did.
4. Cap. statuimus.
butter or Cheese, but specially Flesh, on those days yt he has commanded
to be fasted, and denounces them heretics. This agrees with Christ, as
light with darkness. And yet have we been so blinded, these many years
paste, through the iuglyng of our Spiritual Sorcerers, that we could never
perceive this Antichrist, till now in the latter days, when that manne of
sin must be reveled and uttered, ii. These. ii.
according to the Prophecy of the Apostle.

54 Christ gave authority unto his disciples, to bind and to loose, Math. xvi.
saiynge: Whatsoever ye bind in earth, shall be bound in heaven. Ind
whatsoever ye lose in earth shall be loosed in heaven. But Christ spoke
nothing of binding and loosing in purgatory for money concerning the souls
departed.

Antichrist chalengeth greater power, and larger authority. For he will loose
souls out of purgatory, and command the Angels to fetch them out: and all
for money. For without money ye can get nothing of him.

55 Christ is head of the Church, Ephesians. i.
as the holy Apostle Paul does testify: Coloss. iii.
and also he is the stone, i. Cor. ii.
whereon the Church is builded. And this Church is the congregation of
faithful Christen people, and the very body of Christ.

Antichrist says, that he is head of that Church: Did. xix. Cap.
and that the Sea of Rome is the stone, Enimuero.
whereon that Church is builded. Did. xix. Cap.
Can any thing be more contrary unto the honor and glory of GOD, Ita dominus.
than thus to despoile him of his kingdom which he so derely has bought,
shedyng his precious blood for it?

56 Christ gave us a law, ii. Tim. iii.
which is the holy Scripture. ii. Peter. i.
This holy Scripture as it was given by the inspiration of the holy ghost: so
did the same spiritie infuse it aboundauntly into the hearts of the Apostles,
and likewise does at this present, with the faithful: and of the same spirit
has this holy Scripture his endurance and true interpretation.

Antichrist is not ashamed too brag, that he is Lord over the Scripture to
allow or disalowe it. For of me, Ca. Si omnes.
says he, O Antichriste.
it takes his full authority. And for a token of this, the Scripture of
Christ is laid under his fete, when he is at Mass.

57 Christ commanded by his Apostle saint Paul, i. Timoth. ii.
that a bishop should be apt to teach, Titus. i.
and that he ought to be well learned, that he may be able by his wholesome
doctrine both to exhort and to overcome all them that resist and be against
the faith.

Antichrist will neither teach nor dispute with any man in the holy scripture
for the maintainaunce of the Christen faith, but only for to augment his own
kingdom, and to stablish his own laws. And if any dispute with him, they
shall be cast first into prison: where he and his ministers have devised and
invented proper engines too wring their fingers so sore, The cruelty of ^he
Papists.
that the blood shall braste out of their fingers ends. Moreover he will peine
them and scourge them, and with infinite other torments punish them, to make
them forsake the truth: and afterward make them swear on a book, that they
shall tell no man of it. Thus cruelly does Antichrist entreat man for the
truths sake against all justice. And if he can not subdue them to his will,
then either he murdereth them privily in Prison, or else he commits them
unto the seculer power as unto his Hangmen or Butchers to be burned. And thus
is the disputation ended, and Antichrist has gotten the victory. Sed viuit
dominus, qui custodit veritatem in seculum seculi, Psalm. 148.
and facit iudicium iniuriam patientibus.

58 Christ cursed the Fig tree, upon which he found no fruit, Math. xxix.
and forthwith the Fig tree wethered, and never bare fruit after.

Antichrist has cursed, and enterdited Lands and Realms, and yet did not the
people dye: but they prospered well: and the earth brought forth her fruit and
increase no less then before, yea, much more aboundauntly, thanks be unto
God, that this saying may be found true, Maledicent illi, Psalm. 108.
tu autem benedices. They shall curse, but thou shall bless.

59 Christ calls himself the good shepherd, Ihon. x.
saying: I am the good shepherd. The good shepeheard gives his life for his
sheep.

Antichrist says, that he is a good sheepeheard, and yet he pollet and
pilleth, he sheareth and scrapeth the sheep so near, that he leaves not one
lock of wolle on their backs. And think ye not, that he is in all points
the self same shepeheard, of whom Zacharias prophesied? which says in the
person of God: Zachar. xi.
Behold* I will raise up a Shepherd in the Land, which shall yot seek after
the things that be lost, nor care for such as go astray. He shall not heal
the wounded. He shall not nourishe the thing that is whole, but he shall eat
the flesh of such as be fat, and tear their claws in pieces, etc. He
shall nourishe himself, and not the sheep. And this Prophet criyng out on
him, says: O thou shepherd and Idol, forsakyng the flock. As though he
should say: thou bear the name of a shepherd, but thou art an Idol, and
counterfaite. Thou art called a Shephearde, but thou art a plain murderer.
Thou art named a feeder, but thou art a destroyer. Is it to be thought that
this Shephearde will give his life for his Sheep?

60 Christ charge Peter three times, to keep well and nourishe his Sheep.

Antichrist charge his Officers, Ihon. xxi.
to keep well his money. And as for the Sheep, he himself takes pains to
shere them, and to keep them low with iufinite exactions.

61 Christ gave a commandment, Math. v. xix.
that a man should forsake his wife, or put her away for no cause, but
only for adultery.

Antichrist if he be well monied, will make divorces for what soever cause a man will have him: yea, and for money he will join them together, whom the
Law of GOD by no means suffers to marry.

62 Christ beside the twelve Disciples, sent forth to Preach seventy and
two other Disciples, Luke. x.
which freely promised heaven to them, that would believe in the name of
Christ.

Antichriste sends out his Preachers and Pardoners, which teach the people
to believe his power, and to trust to his Pardons for their salvation, addyng,
that they can not otherwise be assoiled, nor come to heaven. And all for money.

63 Christ took away from his Disciples all temporal jurisdiction, Luke.
xxii.
and worldly power, saying unto them: The kings and Princes of the Gentiles
have rule and power over them: but ye shall not so have.

Antichriste lifts up him self above al power, and says: Emperors, Kings,
and Lords be my Subjects. This is daiely read in his Bulls, wherein he
commands the Nobility, like as a Master does command his servant.

64 Christ gave commandment to his Disciples, Math. xxiii.
saying: Look which among you will be greatest, Mark. viii.
let him be the lowest of all.

Antichrist says: The Emperor must swear unto me, Cap. tibi. domino. did.
63.
as unto his Lord, that he will be my subject, and exalt and worship me with
honor, as his own Law testifies.

65 Christ in all places of the holy Scripture rejects, Math. xv.
and casts away men's Traditions and Decrees. Mark. vii.
They worshipp me in vain, says he, teaching doctrines, that are the
commandments of men.

Antichriste magnifieth the Traditions and Decrees of his Canon Law, Cap. Si
omnes. did. 63.
and says, that they ought to be kept as duly, as if GOD himself had
commanded them: Or as if saint Peter had preached them him self.

66 Christ wishyng no man to err, Joan. xiiii.
no man to be deceived, no man to perish, or to be damned, called him
self in his Sermons the way, the truth, and the life. I am says he, the
way, the truth, and the life. Believe in me and follow me in my learning, and
rule you by the scripture: For that shall be your Judge.

Antichrist says, Did. 11. cap.
ye shall in all things follow the Church of Rome, Quis nesciat. Cap. Si
Romanorum.
meaning thereby, him self and his Cardinals, as appears in his own Law.
And as for the Scripture, says he, it stands in my power and authority:
For I may make of it, whatsoever pleases me.

67 Christ loved them that were his ennemies, Luke. xxii.
blessed them that cursed, i. Peter. ii.
and did good to them, that hated him.

Antichrist can not find in his heart, to love and bless his ennemies, nor to
do good to his adversaries: but such as in any point be against him, he
curses with the great curse, and will not absolve them, till they have made
perfect submission, and paid great sommes of money.

68 Christ commanded his Disciples that they should not resist evil, Math.
v.
but if a man strike them upon the one cheek, that they should offer him the
other also.

Antichriste will suffer nothing, yea, he teaches, that he may avenge, and
drive away force with force.

69 Christ by open voice from Heaven, was pronounced of God the Father, Math.
xvii.
to be his dearly beloved Soonne: Marc. xi.
and so many as purpose to be saved, and to be made enheritours of eternal
life, are commanded to hear him.

Antichriste gives straight commandment, Did. 93. Cap. Si cuius.
that under pain of everlasting damnation, we hear him, obey, and observe
his Decrees and Laws.

70 Christ laid light burdeines, Math. xi.
and sweet yokes upon his Disciples necks.

Antichrist says intolerable burthe^s, Did. xix. Cap. memoriam*
and most grievous yokes upon men's shoulders: and notwithstanding he says:
If any commandment or burden be so heavy, that it can not be sustained
and borne, Math. xxiii.
yet shall ye obey me. In this behalf Antichrist, is like the old Hypocrites
among the Jews, of whom our Savior Christ speaks on this manner: They bind
together heavy burdens, Luke. xi.
and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders: But they them
selves will not heave at them with one of their fingers. Again, woe unto you,
ye Lawiers: For ye lade men with burdens, which they be not able to bear:
and ye your selves touch not the packes with one of your fingers.

71 Christ paid Tribute to Caesar: Math. xviii.
and gave commandment to all his, Math. xxii.
that they should give to the Temporal Magistrate, Roma* xiii*
whatsoever is due unto him, as the Apostle says: Give to every manne his
duty: Tribute to whom Tribute belongs: Custom to whom Custom is due. etc.

Antichriste despises both this example and doctrine of Christ, Did. i.
Cap. Si quis.
and excommunicateth all them, that ask any Toll or Tribute, either of him or
of his. For he has made them all free by his Law, from all such charges and
paimentes.

77 Christ, when he lived in this world, was beneficial, Math. 6. and 23.
Osee. vi.
liberal, and plentiful in doing the works of mercy to the poor, and
exhorted other to do the like, ever commendyng mercy, above Offerynges and
Sacrifices.

Antichrist has no pleasure at all in the works of mercy, neither cares he
for the poor: But his desire is, that men should give their money for
Pardons, for Masses, for Dirges. etc. and bestow their gooddes upon Images
gildyng, Tabernacles pointyng, chau^tries building, etc. so that he will no
mercy, but all offerynges. And he that says: It is better to give our
charity to the poor, (as Christ says) is counted half an Heretic, because
he goes about to mar Antichrists market.

73 Christ the Mirror of meekness, and example of humility, charged his
disciples, that they should not desire to be called masters, Math. xxiii.
nor yet fathers on earth.

Antichriste will not only be called the Lord and Master of all
Christendom, but also the most holy Father in earth, Gods Uicar in
earth, Peter's Successor in earth, and Head of the Church in earth. etc.

74 Christ disdained not to go unto the Marriage, Ihon. ii.
when he was called: and sanctified the same with the first fruits of his
miracles.

Antichrist despises marriage, and commands his Shauelynges, by no means to
be at them, as a kind of life, imperfect, and unworthy their high
perfection, and pure state of their vocation or calling.

75 Chirste refuses not to go, Math. viii. Joan. iiii.
whersoeuer he was desired, so he might do good to other.

Antichriste is so delicate and fine, and impatient of labor, that he refuses
to go any where, except it be to profit, and to do good to him self,

76 Christ thought no scorn (such was Math. viii.
his good will toward all men) even with his hand to touch the Leper, when he
healed him.

Antichriste disdaineth once to look upon the poor, so far it is of that he
will handle, and touch the miserable diseased and loathsome people with his
holy hands. His delight is to have to do with the great God Mammon, and
with the nise nymphs of Lady Uenus court.

77 Christ had great pleasure, and singular delight, Math. iiii.
to be among the^ that were sick and diseased.

Antichrist has al his delight and pleasure, to be among the minions of the
world, and the lusty galauntes, Dicers, Carders, Minstrelles, Gameplaiers,
and all such as may provoke him unto pleasure, mirthe, and joy.

78 Christ kept company with sinners: whores, Math. ix.
and Publicanes, to the end, that he might allure them from wickedness,
Luke. xv.
unto Godliness, saying: They that are whole, have no need of a Physician,
but they that are sick. For I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners
to repentance.

Antichriste delights to accompany the Princes, and Rulers of this world,
that he may enlarge, and increase saint Peter's patrimony, and enriche Mother
holy Church, which begins now to wax old, and has great need of
help. As touching them that are run astraie from God, he knows none other
way unto salvation, but to exhort them to buy his Pardons, Masses, etc.

79 Christ in his Sermons had no respect of persons, Math. xxii.
but rebuked al degrees a like, that were rebukeable.

Antichrist preaches never, prateth often, great and noble personages he
flattereth although never so wicked and ungodly, namely when he hops and
looks for gain. As touching the poor and miserable, he thundereth at them
with the sentence of the great curse.

80 Christ, Luke. ix. iiii. Reg. i.
when his Disciples James and Ihon, would have had fire come down from heaven,
as in the days of Elias upon the Samaritanes, for their ingratitude and
unthankfulness, and so to have destroyed them, rebuked them, and said: ye
wot not, what manner spirit ye are of For the Son of man is not come to
destroy men's lives, but to save them.

Antichriste, when any, although never so little displeasure is done against
him. so fumeth and fometh, so braieth and brauleth, so roareth and rages, that
straight ways, out of his fiery place, he casts out his most grievous
thunderbolte, of that terrible great excommunication. If that will do no good,
then provoke he princes unto wars out of hand, and to murder for his sake,
many thousand of innocent souls, never ceasyng from his furious madness, and
mad fury, until he be avenged to the vttermoste, forgettyng this
commandment of GOD: vengeance is mine, and I will reward says the Lord.

81 Christ alwaie defended his disciples against the Scribes and Phariseis,
Deuteronomy. 32.
with the aucthorities of Gods word. Romans xii.
Math. ix.
Math. xii.


Antichriste defends his adherentes with bannyng and cursing, with Sweard and
Spear, with Bows and Arowes, with Gonne and Pollaxe, and such like martial
armoures,

82 Christ took patiently the opprobrious words that were spoken against his
own person: Joan. viii.
but the railyng blasphemies uttered of the blasphemous enemies of the truth
against the glory of GOD, he could by no means abide, but mightily defended
it.

Antichriste regards not the blasphemies spoken or written against the glory
of God and the manifest truth of his blessed word: but if any thing be spoken
against him and his deuilishe decrees, then rages he like a mad man, and never
cease until he be revenged, except his fury be apeaced with good sommes of
money.

83 Christ proved and defended his Doctrine against the enemies thereof, Math.
21. 2^^*
with the testimonies of Moses, Ihon* i^.
of the Psalms and of the Prophets.

Antichriste proves and defends his Decrees and Traditions with general
Councels, with constitutions prouincial, with the authorities of forefathers,
with the prescriptes of old customs, with the Sophistical and Carnal
reasons of the Scholemen: and if al these will not serve, with Fire and Fagotte,
with Swearde and halter.

84 Christ so travailed in going about from countreye to countreye, Ihon. iiii.
preaching the will of his heavenly Father, that he was many times weary of
his journey.

Antichrist takes his ease, sittyng at home in his rich Chaires, upon his
golden Cushins and precious Carpettes. If at any time he will take the air
abroad, either he is carried upon men's shoulders as a GOD of the Earth, or else
he rides upon his Moyle gorgiously trapped and harnessed.

85 Christ beholding the lamentable tears of the Widow, Luke. vii.
whose Son was dead and carried forth to be buried, had pity and compassion
on her, and said unto her: Weep not, and immediately he delivered her Son
alive again unto her, that tofore was dead.

Antichrist evidently seeing great enormities and manifold, The Papists can
not abide any reformation.
most grievous abuses in the Church of Christ, whereof he braggeth himself to
be the head, although moved and provoked with the humble supplications, fervent
desires, and earnest prayers of many good and godly men both by writing and
otherwise, neither takes away the enormities, nor corrects the abuses, but
rather as a sworn adversary against God and all godliness, he goes forth
daily more and more to stablishe and confirm those abominations seeking no
redress, as the experience of this our time does most manifestly declare.

86 Christ disdained not to come unto Lazarus grave, Joan. xi.
nothing being dismaide with the evil savor of the dead corpse, although
tofore thereof warned, and to raise him up from death unto life.

Antichrist abhors nothing more tha^ evil savors, having his great delight
in sweet perfumes and pleasant odours, being of the number of those which on
this wise speak in the book of Wisdom: Come on, Sap. iii.
let us enjoy the pleasures that there are, and let us sone use the creature
like as in youth. Let us fill our selves with good Wine and Ointment, and let
there no flower of the time go by us. Let us crown our selves with Roses,
before they be withered. Let there be no fair Medowe, but our lust go through
it. Let every one of you be partaker of our voluptuousness. Let us leave
some token of our pleasure in every place. For that is our portion, else get we
nothing.

87 Christ wept when he came to raise up Lazarus, Joan. xi.
considering with him self, that sin is the cause, not only of the death of
the body, but also of the death of the soul, and of all other evils and
plages.

Antichrist reioiseth in evil doing, and is glad, when sin reigns,
florisheth and triumphs. For then is his Marchaundise well bought, as Pardons,
Masses of Scala caeli, Absolution, etc.

88 Christ is that loving and gentle shepherd, Luke. xv.
which when one of his sheep was gone astraie, left the residue, and never
ceased till he had found her out. Being found he sweetly laid her upon
his shoulder, and tenderly brought her home again with great joy and much
gladness: and calling together his lovers and neighbors, he said unto them: Oh
rejoice with me: for I have found my sheep, which was lost.

Antichrist is of an other disposition, and contrary minded. For if any run
astray never so little from his lousy laws, trifeling traditions, diuelishe
decrees, and crooked constitutions, canckered customs, etc. straightwaies he
is excommunicate, and cursed as black as a Crow, with book, bell, and
Candell even boune to the deep dongeon of Hell fire without redemption, except
he will be reconciled to Mother holy Church, and make such satisfaction as
shall be thought meet of the most holy Father, and of his devout Chaplens.
If he will not obey, down with him, accite him, suspend him, apprehend him,
accuse him, condemn him, to the fort with him, away with him.

89 Christ is that most loving Samaritane, Luke. x.
which had pity on the wounded man, bound up his wounds, poured oil and
Wine, set him on his own Beast, brought him into a common Inn, and made
provision for him.

Antichrist is that abominable thief, and cruel murderer, which without all
pity and compassion robs, wounds, and slaeth both the bodies and souls
of men: the bodies, with his exactions, oppressions, pollinges, pillinges,
tyranny, murder, death: the souls, with false doctrine, unwritten verities,
decrees, constitutions, infidelity, misbeliefe, superstition, etc.

90 Christ is appointed of God the Father to be the Physician and Savior of
Math. ix.
the world. Luke. i.


Antichrist is appointed of the Devil the Father of liars, Ihon. viii.
to be the corruptour and destroyer of the world.

91 Christ is the light of the world. Who soever follows him and his
doctrine, Joan. i. viii.
shall never stumble, nor err.

Antichrist is the darkness of the world. He that follows him and his decrees,
shall never walk the right way unto heaven, but cast himself hedlong into
utter darkness, Math. xxii.
where weepyng and gnashyng of teeth shall be.

92 Christ is that bread of life, Joan. vi.
which came down from heaven. He that eats of that bread, shall never
hunger, but have life everlasting.

Antichrist is that bread of death, which came up from Hell. Whosoever tastes
of that bread, he shall dye the death everlasting.

93 Christ is our peace maker. Ephe. ii.


Antichrist is our dissension maker.

94 Christ is our wisdom, i. Cor. i.
righteousness, sanctifiyng and redemption.

Antichrist is our folly, wickedness, corruption, and destruction.

95 Christ is that lamb of God without spot, Exodus xii.
which takes away the sin of the world. Ihon. i.


Antichrist is that wolf of Satan, full of all sin and wickedness, which
daily increases the sin of the world.

96 Christ is the head of Gods Church. Ephesians. i.


Antichrist is the head of Satan's Sinagoge. Coloss. iii.


97 Christ is our mediator, i. Cor. ii.
advocate and intercessour. i. Timoth. ii.


Antichrist is our disturber, i. Joan. ii.
bate maker, Romans viii.
and destroyer. Joan. iii.
i. Cor. x.


98 Christ is that Rock, out of which issues and flows forth the water of
life. Whosoever shall drink thereof, shall never thurst more.

Antichrist is that vile and stinkynge puddle: He that drinks thereof, shall
dye everlastingly.

99 Christ is yt seed of the woman, Genesis ii.
which has trodden down the Serpents head. Gala. 3.


Antichrist is that seed of the Serpent, which like a roaryng Lion,
continually seeks whom he may devour.

100 Christ is that blessed seed of Abraham, Gen^. xv.
in whom all nations of the earth are blessed and saved.

Antichrist is that cursed seed of Satan, in whom and through whom so many as
lean to his wicked and damnable doctrine, perish and are damned.

101 Christ is Alpha and O Mega, that is to say, Apoc. i*
the beginning and endyng of all our salvation.

Antichrist is the aucthour of all mischief and abomination, so that
whatsoever follows him and his Antichristian doctrine, may be sure to come
unto damnation.

102 Christ prayed to his heavenly father, Luke. xxii.
that Peter's faith might not fail.

Antichrist prays that Peter's patrimony (as they call it) may never fail.

103 Christ refuses no pain to do good Esaias. v.
to his congregation. Math. xxiii.


Antichrist refuses no pain, so that he may have lucre and gain.

104 Christ went up willingly to Jerusalem Mark. x.
Joan. x.
to suffer death for the elect people of God.

Antichrist hates nothing more then the cross. As for Gods people, he
regards them not, except they bring money.

105 Christ, Joan. xviii.
when he might have escaped, and gone away from his enemies, freely gave
himself into their hands to be crucified for the salvation of other.

Antichriste resists his enemies with tothe and nail, with hand and Sword,
and with all that ever he is able to make: neither suffers he gladly any
adversity, except it be for the maintainaunce of his own pomp and glory, and
for the enrichement of Saint Peter's patrimony.

106 Christ was striped out of his clothes, and was all to beaten and scourged,
Math. 26. 27.
and false witness brought in against him.

Antichrist is well clothed with precious garments, and has change for every
day, and commands other to be beaten and sore puished, and false witness to
be brought in to testify, whatsoever he will have against the poor innocent
christen people.

107 Christ being most unjustly and wrongfully accused, Esaias. 53.
and having many untruths objected against him, Acts. iii, i. Peter. ii.
as a Lamb dum before his shearer, opened not his mouth. When he was reviled,
he reviled not again: when he suffered* he threatened not, but committed the
vengeance to him that judges righteously.

Antichrist being justly accused both of false doctrine and corrupt manners,
and admonished to amend, will by no means give ear, but seeks al mea^es
possible to be revenged. He will be judge of all men, but judged of none.
He will condemn whom he lust, and he will not once be touched. His doctrine
although never so vnpure, he defends with fire and faggot, with sword and
halter. Whosoever disdain to embrace and maintain it, all them he
excommunicateth, cut of from the body of Christ, appoints them unto
everlasting damnation, interditeth their Lands, Realms and countries,
wheresoever they dwell, as experience in these our days teaches abundantly.
As concerning his life and manners, although never so wicked and detestable, no
man may once reprove, except he will feel the bitter boltes of the most bitter
curse.

108 Christ had a crown of sharp thorns set upon his head, Math. xxvii.
with so great violence that the blood run down over all his amiable face:
Mark. xv.
and boystrous nails driven through his precious hands. Ihon. xix.


Antichrist wears upon his head three crowns of gold, richly set with
precious stones: and has his hands and finger all royally decked with owches
and ringes. He passes poor Christ far far.

109 Christ took the cross of painful affliction upon himself, Math. x.
and commanded his Disciples likewise to follow him saying: He that will not
take his Cross and follow me, is not meet for me.

Antichrist takes the Cross of pride, and has it borne before him, well
gilte and ameled: to set forth his pride and pomp before the world like
unto Lucifer. As for other cross, he knows none.

110 Christ prayed his Father to forgive them that trespassed against him:
Luke. xxiii.
yea he prayed for them that put him to death.

Antichrist commands both kings and princes, and Emperors to avenge his
quarrel, and to slay all them that resist his mind, promisyng the^ that if
they die in his quarrel, they shall die glorious martyrs in the sight of God,
and straight ways come unto heaven, yea, before their blood be cold. As
touching forgiveness, he has none acquaintance therewith.

111 Christ aproued his Law, Heb. ix.
and confirmed it with his own death.

Antichrist is full busy to destroy the law of Christ, and to maintain his
own decrees, and that with the death of all them that will say the contrary.

112 Christ was buried in a poor monument, Sepulcher, Math. xxvii.
or grave, without any funeral pomp.

Antichrist is buried in a glorious to^be well gilt, and very gorgious set out,
with many torches and great solemnity, and with Angels gloriously portured,
that bear his soul to heaven, when, notwithstanding it is to be feared, that
he goes to suppe with the Devil, whom he has so diligently served all the
days of his life.

113 Christ suffered death for our sins, Romans iiii.
and rose again for our justification: i. Cor. xv.
or else al we should have perished and been damned. Joan. xii.


Antichrist for the forgiveness of our sins and of our justification,
sends us to his Pardons and Bulls, to his years of Iubile, and Masses of
Scala celi, yea he sends us to a Grayefryers Coule, and wills us to be
buried in that, promising us by that means both remission of sins and
everlasting life. Is not this too tread under foot the son of God, and to
count the blood of the Testament, as an unholy thing, yea and to do dishonor
to the Spirit of grace? Is not this that beast, which opened his mouth to
speak blasphemies against the most highest God, and against his most
glorious name? Is not this that sinful man, that son of perdition, that
adversary, which exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped, Heb. x.
so that he does sit in the Temple of God, Apoc. xiii.
boastyng himself to be God? ii. These. ii.
O Antichrist.

114 Christ after his resurrection appeared to his Disciples and brought unto
Joan. xx.
them peace and great joy. Luke. xxiiii.


Antichriste when he comes abroad and shows himself unto men, comes
like a game player in his Papalibus, full gloriously and gorgiously, and
brings to the beholders blessings, that is, crossinges, and wagginges of
fingers, with such other vain and triflyng toys.

115 Christ reproved in his Disciples unfaithfulness, Luke. xxiiii.
and hardness of heart. Mark. vi.


Antichrist finds fault with his captives, if they be unfaithful and
disobedient to his decrees, and slack in paiyng of money.

116 Christ sought all means possible to confirm the faith of his disciples
in the article of his resurrection. i. Cor. xv.


Antichrist seeks all manner of ways to plant, confirm and stablishe in the
hearts of men his authority and primacie above, not only all Bishops, but also
all kings, Princes and Emperors.

117 Christ so talked with certain of his Disciples by the way that their
hearts burned within them: Luke. xxiiii.
so swetely and lovingly did he open unto them the true and right
understanding of the Scriptures.

Antichrist does so talk, and utters such doctrine, that it enflameth not,
but apalleth the hearts of the hearers: it quickens not, but rather
dismaieth. For it is not the word of the spirit but of the flesh: not of
light, but of darkness, not of life but of death, and in fine, not of
conversion and salvation, but of desperation and eternal damnation.

118 Christ breathed upon his disciples, Ihon. xx.
and gave them the holy ghost, saying: Take ye the holy ghost, that they
being endued with his Spirit, might bring forth the fruits of the same, and
be thereby, known to his Apostles.

Antichrist does breath the spirit of Satan into his shauelinges, and will
that they shall be known to be his chaplains by their long gowns, shaven
crowns, horned cappes, flaryng tippets, etc.

119 Christ sent forth his disciples for to Math. xxviii.
preach unto all nations. Mark. vxi.


Antichrist sends forth his chaplains to be Massemongers, Luke. xxiiii.
soul cariers, Purgatory rakers, Godmakers, Ihon. xx.
coniurers of salt water, bread, fire, etc.

120 Christ commanded his disciples to preach, Luke. xxiii.
not men's traditions, but the Gospel, that is to say, repentance and
remission of sins in his name, to all creatures.

Antichrist commands his praters to set forth to the people his laws, and
decrees, and to entermedle them with tales out of Legenda aurea, and narrations
out of Festival Martyrologe, etc. He sends forth also his Pardoners to
public fables and lies unto the people, and thereto grants he Letters and
Seals, and many days of Pardon, and all for money.

121 Christ willed his disciples to say unto their hearers, Marc. xvi.
that whosoever believes and is Baptized, he shall be saved. But he that
believes not, shall be damned.

Antichrist commands his Trompetters, too blow abroad into the ears of the
people, that whosoever will buy his pardons, shall be absolved a paena and
culpa toties quoties and then must he needs be saved. And he that teaches
otherwise, is an heretic. This his Bulls and Pardons do plainly testify.

122 Christ charged his Disciples diligently to teach the people, Math. xxviii.
to observe and keep those things, that he commanded them: and so doing he
promised to be with the^ unto the very end of the world, meaning not bodily,
but ghostly.

Antichrist gives a great charge to his Chapelaines to inculcke, and beat
into the peoples heads, under pain of deadly sin, and everlasting
damnation, the keepyng of his Canons and Laws: and in so dooyng, he promises
to assiste them continually with the Spirit of Error and falshode.

123 Christ a little before his Ascension into the Kingdom of his Father,
Joan. xxi.
gave a great charge to Peter and his fellow Apostles, that they with all
diligence should feed his Lambs and Sheep, with the most wholesome pasture
of his most sweet word, saying: Pasce, pasce, pasce, Feed, feed, feed.

Antichriste gives straight commandment to his Captives, that they shall
poison the people with the Pharisaicall Leaven of his Law, and by no means
teach them the truth of Gods word, least they should spy out his falsehod,
and above all things play Toll, Toll, Toll: Poll,
Poll, Poll, pill, pill.

124 Christ commanded his Apostles, Acts. ^.
not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise of the Father.

Antichrist thrusts forth into the ministry, his Greaslynges and
Shauelinges, without any consideration or motion of Gods Spirit. If they can
Mass it, or Mattens it, he cares for no more.

125 Christ, Luke. xxiiii.
when he should depart, and go up into Heaven, lifted up his hand, and
blessed his Apostes, that is to say, wished well unto them.

Antichrist lifts also up his hand, and blesses the people, that is to
say, waggeth his fingers over them. But whether he curses or blesses, that
is uncertain.

126 Christ by the power of his Deity, Marc. xvi.
Ascenden into heaven, Luke. xxiiii.
perfect God, and perfect man. Acts. i.


Antichrist through the multitude of his most detestable sins, and vile
wickedness, descends into hell both body and soul, and has his portion
with Idolatours, Witches, Theefes, Adulterers, Whoremongers, cursed speakers.
etc. in that Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone: Apoc. xxii.
where he and all his shall be tormented with most intolerable pains,
worlds without end.

Hitherto of the life of Christ, and of Antichriste.
Of the doctrine of Christ, and of Antichrist.
First. Christ Joan. xviii.
says, that he Ihon. xvii.
came for this Joan. 14. 15. 16.
purpose into ye world, even to testify and bear witness of the truth, and
that his word is the Truth: Again, that the holy Ghost shall lead us
into all Truth: hereby manifestly declaryng, that in his holy word, is
contained sufficient doctrine for our salvation, ii. Timoth. ii.
as saint Paul says: All Scripture given by inspiration of GOD, is
profitable to teach, to improve, to amend, and to instruct in
righteousness, that the manne of GOD may be perfect, and prepared unto all
good works. Likewise said the woman of Samarie to Christ: I know that
Messiah shall come, which is called Christ: When he is come, he shall tell us
all things. Joan. iiii.
And the Apostle in his exhortation to the Elders of Ephesus, said: I have
kept nothing back, Acts. xx.
that was profitable unto you, etc. Again, I have showed you all things.

Antichriste says, that though it be truth, that is contained in the Bible,
yet all truth necessary to salvation, is not there to be found, but there
are other truths as necessary to be believed, Unwriten vereties.
under pain of damnation, as those that be contained in the holy scripture,
and they be called unwritten verities. He says moreover, that his Decrees
and Laws, are necessarily to be kept, as the Commandments of God, and
adds moreover, that they be of equal authority with the word of God.

2 Christ says, Joan. vi.
that no man can come unto him, Esaias. liiii.
except his Father draw him: Again, that all shall be taught of God:
Signifiyng hereby, that no man can understand, and perceive the mysteries
contained in the word of God, except they be reveled, and opened unto him
by the Spirit of God, which alone is the aucthour thereof: i. Cor. ii.
for as much as a natural manne, can not come unto the understanding of those
things, that belong unto the Spirit of God. ii. Peter. i
And as saint Peter says, that the Scripture is not a private interpretation,
that is to say, not to be expounded after the judgment of reason, and as
every man of his own brain fantaketh, but as GOD is the alone aucthour of the
word, so is the true understanding thereof to be begged of God alone, by
fervent prayer, and by diligente conference of the scriptures. David
considering this, prayed to God on this manner: Open thou mine eyes, Psalm. 119.
that I may see the wondrous things of thy law. Make me to understand the
way of thy Commandments, and so shall I talk of thy wondrous works. O
learn me true understanding and knowledge. O give me understanding, that I may
learn thy commandments. etc. And Saint Paul writing to Timothe, ii.
Timoth. i.
says: God give thee understanding in all things.

Antichriste says, that the interpretation of the Scripture, hangs of the
judgment of the Fathers, and old ancient writers, and of the authority, and
consent of the Church of Rome, which is the true Church, and mother of all
churches, and can by no means err, without the approbation of the which, no
interpretation of the Scripture can be good and catholic.

3 Christ will all men to search the Scriptures, Ihon. v.
and to lean unto them, Psalm. 19.
in all matters of controversy, Esaias. viii.
as faithful witnesses of the Lords truth.

Antichriste commands, that when any question arise, about matters of
Religion, men should have recourse unto the Canons, and general Councels,
but spicially unto the Sea of Room, where all doubtful matters are to be
decided. As for the Scripture, it has no more authority, then it pleases
the Church, that is to faie, the Pope and his adherentes, to give unto it.

4 Christ teaches, that all men's traditions, ought to give place unto the
word of God: and that whatsoever is decreed of men, although of never so
great ancthoritie and wisdom, contrary to the word of God, is utterly to
be neglected, rejected, and cast away.

Antichriste teaches plainly, that all such constitutions, and ordinances
of men, as be decreed, and set forth by the authority of Counselles, and
holy Fathers) which are always gathered together by the instincte, and
consent of the holy ghost) although they are not, nor can not be grounded on
Gods word, are notwithstanding good and profitable: and men are bound
under pain of deadly sin, to obtain and keep them. For the Church can not
err.

5 Christ teaches, Luke. iiii.
that there is but one only, Luke. iiii.
true living and everlasting God which alone is to be honored, worship ped,
and called upon: by whose name also alone we ought to swear.

Antichriste also after a certain sort, confessed also one God with us, and
that he is to be honored and called upon, but not alone. For he teaches, that
the saints in heaven, both may and ought to be honored and called upon,
yea, and that we may also swear by their names.

6 Christ in his holy Law, Exodus xx.
both by Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles, forbids to make, set forth,
or keep any Image to be worshipped. But above all things, he forbids us to
make any Image of God.

Antichrist says, it is lawful not only to have images and to set them up
in Temples, Images.
Chapels, Oratories. etc. but also to worship them, to kneel before them,
to kiss them, to pray before them, yea, and to them, to knele before them, to
set candels before them, to deck and trim them, to offer unto them, to sense
them, to put of our cappes unto them, and at the last, Beliques.
what not? Antichriste also diggeth out of the ground the old rotten bones or
relics of saints, translateth them, encloseth them in Gold, keeps them
in precious shrynes and costly Clausures, and sets them forth to the people
to be kissed, The Image of the Trinity described.
and worshipped. Moreover he is not ashamed contrary too the manifest word
of God, to make the Image of the blessed Trinity. He forms and frames God
the father like an old broken backed man, with a white head, winckled forehed,
holow eied, slender cheeked, sharp nosed, tothlesse, wide mouthed, hangyng
down lipped, crook chinned, graye bearded, small necked, lean handed, and in
fine, altogether monstrous. GOD the Son Antichrist sets forth as a lusty
young younker with his yelow locks: and God the holy Ghost he makes like a
young lusty White flickeryng Dove. But this blasphemous image causes he to be
set in Churches and in all other places, not only to be considered, but also
to be worshipped unto the great dishonor of god, the slander of the Christen
religion, the offense of all good men, and unto the glory of all Gods
ennemies. But what dares not Antichrist do?

7 Christ teaches, Joan. iiii.
that the true worshippers must worship God in spirit and Math. xv.
truth: again, that they worship God in vain, which honor him after the
traditions of men.

Antichrist affirms, that it is lawful to worship God any manner of way, so
it comes of a good intent, good mind, good zeal, good devotion, etc. For
God casts away the good intent of no man. Antichrist therefore teaches us
to worship God with Gold, Silver, precious stones, sumpteous vestures,
candels, palms, Ashes, bread, water, Salt, etc. With long patteryng, curious
singyng, pleasant pipyng, loud ringyng, etc. With Surplesses, Copes,
Uestimentes, Caps, Coules, etc. with Massyng, with Pilgrimage going, with
Pardons biyng, with Beads saying, etc. And all these things he taught to be
more precious and acceptable in the sight of GOD, than to help the poor, or
to do any work of mercy. For that is done but to manne, the other unto God.

8 Christ in his sweet Sermon that he made, Math. v.
in the mount says, that he came to fulfill the Law, that is to say, to
accomplish, whatsoever was prefigured of him in the ceremonies of the old
Testament, so that by his coming he has put away and utterly abolished all
Ceremonies, even as the shadow is removed by the entrance of the light. For as
the Apostle says. Heb. x.
The law he means the ceremonial law was nothing else than a shadow of good
things to come. The good things are come and given, therefore the shadow
cease: whereby we evidently learn that the Christians are now free from
such cloudy laws and dark ceremonies.

Antichrist teaches, that although the Ceremonies Ceremonies
of the old law be abolished by the coming of Christ, yet that hinders
nothing but that the Church, which is the spouse of Christ, may appoint what
Ceremonies she will, without any offense of her husband Christ, which
delights in her and in her doings, as in himself, yea and that so much the
more because among the christians there are many rude gross, and they must be
rudely and grossly handled, and brought by little and little unto perfection
through such Ceremonies, and outward obseruaunces: which Ceremonies and
Ordinances of Christ's spouse the Church, are with no less reuerences to be
observed, than if they had been commanded of Christ her husband.

9 Christ Jesus in his doctrine teaches, that he alone is our Savior, our
Redeemer, our Bishop, or Pastor, our head, our reconciliatour, our peacemaker,
and in fine, all our hope and comfort, in so much that whosoever believes in
him, shall not perish, but have everlasting life.

Antichriste in his doctrine teaches, that salvation and remission of sins,
is to be obtained also at his hands, at his Pardons, Indulgences, years of
Iubile, Masses, Coules, Pilgrimages, etc. Again, that he is head of the
universal Church of Christendom, Christ's Uicare, Peter's Successor, the
higheste Bishop, the greatest Priest, the most holy, and most blessed
Father, to whom above all other, the keys of the kingdom of heaven are
committed, fo that whatsoever he binds in earth, is also bound in heaven:
and whatsoever he loses in earth, is in like manner loosed in heaven, so that
whosoever cleaves unto him, can not perish, but have life everlasting.

10 Christ taught us, Joan. xiiii.
that whenever we will desire any thing of God the Father, Joan. xvi.
we should ask it in his name. i. Timoth. ii.
For no man comes to the Father, i. Ihon. ii.
but by him. Romans viii.
And in the writings of the Apostles we read, Roma. v.
that Christ alone is our Mediator, Advocate, and Intercessour, by whom alone
we have free, and gracious access unto God the Father, and easily obtain of
him all good things.

Antichriste sets forth unto us, Invocation of Saints.
other Mediators, Advocates, and Intercessours, even the souls and spirits
of them that are departed: and commands us to call upon them, to make
intercession unto them, that they for us may call upon God, pray unto him,
and make Intercession unto him, that by this means, our prayers may be the
sooner heard, and our petitions the more easily granted. Thus Antichrist goth
about to make Christ, Jack out of office.

11 Christ hangyng on the Cross, and ready to give up his Spirit, into the
hands of his heavenly Father, Ihon. xix.
said: It is finished: signifiyng hereby, that by the one and alone Sacrifice
of his Passion and death, al thing is wrought, and perfectly done, whatsoever
appertains unto the salvation of mankind, so that now there remains no
more any Sacrifice, or oblation for sin, as the Apostle says: With one
only Oblation has Christ made perfect for ever,
them that are sanctified. Again: We are sanctified by the offering up of
Christ's body, Heb. x.
done once for all.

Antichriste has set up diverse Sacrifices for sins, The Sacrifice of the
Mass.
but namely the vile and abominable sacrifice of the Mass, which he calls
a propiciatorie, expiatorie, and satisfactorie Sacrifice for the sins of the
quick and the dead, necessary Ad salutem. This Sacrifice he braggeth to be
of like dignity, and of equal price with that Sacrifice, which Christ the
high and everlasting Bishop, offered on the Altar of the Cross, yea, to be
the very same: again, that he and his Chaplens in that Sacrifice of the
Idolatrous Mass, do daiely offer up the Soonne of God to the Father of
heaven, for the daily sins of the people. Antichrist moreover is not ashamed
to say, that Christ by the Sacrifice of his death, done on the Altar of the
Cross, did only put away original sin: but he and his shauelynges, by the
Sacrifice of their Mass, puts away all other sins at all times, both
actual, venial, mortal, etc.

12 Christ in his blessed Testament teaches, i. Ihon. ii.
that we are purged, Heb. ix.
cleansed, and made pure from all sin by his blood. Apoc. i.


Antichriste for the mainteinaunce of his idle Clergy, that they might live
of the labor and sweat of other men's hands and brows, has devised an
other Purgatory after this life, Purgatory.
wherein the souls of them, that have not done due satisfaction for their
sins in this world, must be most miserably tormented, until either they
by sufferyng most grievous pains, have satisfied the justice of God, or else
they be delivered by the Sacrifice of the Mass offered for them, or by some
other charitable deeds of mercy. Is not this to count the blood of the
Testamente, Hebre. x.
as an unholy thing, and to do dishonor to the Spirit of grace.

13 Christ teaches, Ephesians. ii.
that the Church, which is the fellowship of Saints, Joan. x.
and company of faithful people, is built upon him self, which is the true
rock, is governed by his Spirit, hears his voice, and is ruled by the same.

Antichrist says, that the Church is not builte on Christ alone, but also
on Peter and his successors: again, that it is not only governed by the
word of GOD, but also by the Decrees of the Church of Rome.

14 Christ says, Ihon. x.
that they, which are his Sheep, and belong unto his Shepefold, that is, unto
his holy congregation, hear not the voice of strangers, but flee from them,
giuyng ear only to the voice of their own Shepehearde.

Antichrist says, that they which are of the Church, may not only hear
the voice of Christ, but also the words of the Bishop of Rome, which is
Christ's Uicare: and knowledge him to be the universal Bishop, whose voice
to hear, and whose decrees to obey, we are bound under pain of everlasting
damnation.

15 Christ ordained in his Church, Ephe. iiii.
to set forth the Gospel of our salvation, i. Cor. xii.
and to govern his flock, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastoures,
teachers. etc.

Antichrist appointed in his Church, Monks, Friars, Chanons, Nonnes, Ankers,
Ankresses, Recluses, Priests, Sacrificers, Soulecariers, Purgatory rakers,
Pardonners, Proctours, Somners, Apparitours, Commissaries, Officialles. etc.

16 Christ in his holy Law, Math. xix.
freely per: mitteth all spiritual Ministers, i. Timoth. ii.
Bishops Deacons, Titus. i.
etc. to marry.

Antichriste in his Deuilishe decrees The Marriage of Priests.
forbids, and condemns the marriage of spiritual Ministers.

17 Christ by his holy Apostle, Heb. xiii.
calls Marriage honorable, and the bed undefiled, yea, and that amongst
all men, none excepted.

Antichrist shameth not to call the marriage of the Spiritual Ministers, an
unclean, filthy, and fleshly kind of living.

18 Christ gave equal power to all the Ministers of his Church. Joan. xx.


Antichriste denies that, and says, that the Bishop has more authority
then the Priest, and the Archebishoppe more then Bishop, and the Pope, more
then they all.

19 Christ in his blessed New Testamente, Acts. vi.
appoints Deacons to be Ministers unto the poor, Deacons.
and to see that they lack no good thing: Bishops.
And the Bishops or Spiritual Ouersears, he ordained them to preach the
word, to enstruct the people, to minister the Sacraments, etc.

Antichrist ordains Deacons to say mattens of the day, to read the Gospel
at Mass, to stand on the Priests right hand, to help him in all things, to
have a shaven crown, to live unmarried, etc. Archdeacons he has also appointed
certain times in the year to visit the churches, Archdeaco^s.
to see if the church and churchyard be in good state: if the Uestmentes,
Alter clothes, Copes, Banner clothes, Cross clothes, Curteines, Towels, Boxes,
Pyxes, Chrismatories, Fontes, holy water bucket, holy bread basket, Bells,
Candelstickes, Sensers, Crosses, Cruettes, and such like ornaments of the
Church be well and sufficiently repared: again, if the Hosts be well kept of
the Curate, that they be not moulde, fustie, evil sauoured, cankered, worm
eaten, etc. As for provision making for poor and needy people, there is no
mention. That ought to be collected of the Archdeacons among the merciful
Christians,
for the aid and relief of the poor members of Christ in their visitation,
is now vnfrutefully devoured, spent, and consumed of the Archdeacons
themselves and of their Officers, so that the office of an Archedeacon at this
time in the kingdom of the Pope is now come altogether unprofitable, and to
much chargeable to the Church of God.

20 Christ appointed his Apostles to be the ministers and servants of his
holy i. Cor. iiii.
Church. i. Peter. v.


Antichrist ordains his Priests and Prelates to be Lords and Masters over
Gods people: yea, he makes them to be of greater authority and power tha^
Emperors, Kings, Princes, etc. of higher dignity, than all the Angels in
heaven, or than the blessed Uirgin Mary. Moreover he does so greatly advance
the dignity of his smered shauelynges, Sacraments.
that he calls them the maker of their maker. And to set forth their royal
and kingly priesthode, he makes them ever to wear a shaven crown.

21 Christ instituted in his holy testament two Mysteries, Math. xxviii.
or Sacraments, that is to say, Mark. xvi.
Baptism and the Lords Supper, Ihon. iii.
which he added to his word, Math. xxvi.
as Signs and Seals of his good will unto us, Marc. xiiii.
that they might be the same to the eye, Luke. xxii.
that the word is to the ear: i. Cor. xi.
and so joined together through the operation of the holy ghost, bring
salvation too the faithful beleuers.

Antichrist not content with so small a number, has added five more, so that
now they be seven in number, which are more openly known, than they need here
to be rehearsed.

22 Christ, Math. xxviii.
as concerning the outward Ministry, Marc. xvi.
ordained the Sacrament of Baptism to consiste of the world, and of the
water.

Antichriste not content with so slender furniture, has added many things, as
the Exorcismes or Coniurations of the devil out of the child, salt, spittle,
crossing, halowyng of the Font, candleburnyng, with diverse other toys.

23 Christ at the institution of the sacrament of his body and blood used only
the word, Math. xxvi.
bread and wine.

Antichrist mingleth Wine and water together in his ministration, and miserably
handles the words of the institution.

24 Christ appointed his holy Supper to be a Sacrament, Luke. xxii.
that is to say, an holy sign of his body and blood. i. Cor. xi.


Antichriste says plainly, that the Lords Supper is not only a Sacrament,
and holy sign of Christ's body and blood, but it is also the thing it self,
that is Christ's natural body and blood with as good reason,
as though a man should say, that the Iuiebushe, which hangs before the
Tavern, is not only a sign, that there is Wine to sell, but also that it is
the Wine it self. Notwithstanding, whosoever denies this his Doctrine, must
needs be counted an Heretic, and judged to be burned at a stake.

25 Christ making the bread and wine Sacraments, Math. xxvi.
and holy signs of his body and blood, i. Cor. x. xi.
altered not the substaunces of that holy bread, and holy wine, but they
remained in their old nature, substance, and property, as tofore.

Antichriste teaches in his dotyng and Deuilishe Decree, that after the
words of consecration, This is my body, This is my blood: Transubstantiation.
there remains no substance of bread and wine, but the substance of bread
is turned miraculously, by the virtue of co^secratyng words, into the
substance of Christ's natural body: and the substance of the wine, into the
substance of Christ's natural blood, the accidents of bread and wine only
remainyng, without their proper substaunces. O prodigious and monsterous
doctrine.

26 Christ ordained his holy Supper, to be a remembrance of the sacrifice,
Luke. xxii.
which he offered on the alter of the Cross for the redemption of the world,
that when we behold the Sacramental bread and wine broken and shed, we should
call to remembrance that Christ's body was broken, and his blood shead, for
the remission of our sins, i. Cor. xi.
as he himself says: Do this in remembrance of me. Item the Apostle: So
often as ye shall eat of this Bread, or drink of this Cup, ye shall remember
the Lords death till he come.

Antichrist teaches, that it is not only a remembrance of the Sacrifice, but
also the Sacrifice it self, Receiving of the Sacrament.
of the same dignity, might, and power.

27 Christ ordained that all that be partakers of his holy Supper, should not
only eat of the Mystery of his body, but also drink of the mystery of his
blood.

Antichrist takes away from the Communion of the Laity, yea and of the
Spiritualty also (except they Mass it themselves, and make Gods body) the Cup
of the mystery of Christ's blood, contrary to the commandment of Christ,
Math. xxvi.
and contrary too the practice of the Primative Churhe.

28 Christ, Acts. iii.
because he would take away his natural body from the earth, and place it
until the day of judgment in the glorious kingdom of his heavenly Father,
ordained the Sacrament of thankesgiuyng to be a memorial of the same.

Antichrist teaches plainly, that whersoeuer the consecrate hoaste is, though
it be in infinite places, The vbiquitie of Christ's natural body.
there is also the body of Christ, even the ^^ry same body of Christ, that
was borne of Mary the Uirgin, and hanged on the altar of the Cross. He says
moreover, that the sacred host being whole, is but the body of Christ: and
the same hoaste being broken in an hundred pieces, every parcel thereof
although never so little, is but the body of Christ, even as he hanged on the
Cross. O doctrine more than twice monstrous.

29 Christ in his holy word teaches, that the Sacramental Bread and wine
should be eaten and dronken, Luke. xx.
in the remembrance of his body breakyng and bloudshedyng. i. Cor. xi.


Antichrist commands, that the Sacrament should be heaued and lifted up
above the priests head, that it may be worshipped of the people, hanged up in
the Pixe, carried about in solemn Procession in pompes and vain pastymes.

30 Christ teaches that the next way to Math. iiii.
heaven is to repent us of our former life, Marc. i.
and to believe the Gospel. Luke. xxiiii.


Antichrist says, that the rediest way unto salvation, is to bye his
Pardons, to put on a Grayfryers Coule, to purchase certain Masses of Scala
celi, to trust in the prayers and intercessions of saints, to bye the
Suffrages of the Church, to provide to be partaker of the Monks prayers,
watchinges, fastinges vows, devotions, etc.

31 Christ declares in his heavenly doctrine, i. Ihon. i.
that there is no satisfaction too God the father for our sins, Galat. vi.
but only Ephesians. ii.
Coloss. i.
his helthfull and most precious death.

Antichrist says, that the works of penance do satisfy the divine justice,
and appeace his wrath kindled against us for sin.

32 Christ declares in his doctrine, Luke. xv.
that when we have offended our heavenly Father, Joan. xvi.
and gone astraye from the paths of his holy commandments: Math. xvii.
we should convert and turn unto him, i. Ihon. i.
and make our humble confession unto him, and crave forgiveness of our sins
at his hand, for his son Christ Jesus sake.

Antichrist sends us unto his Priests, commanding us to publish and
confess our sins unto him, and take penance and absolution at his hand,
with this faith, that so doing we are forgiven and delivered from all sin.

33 Christ says, Joan. xi.
that whosoever believes on him, Romans iii.
although he were dead, yet shall he live, ascribyng our justification and
righteous making to faith alone.

Antichrist teaches that not by faith alone, but by faith, hope, charity, and
works together, we are justified, Roma. iii. v.
when notwithstanding the Apostle says, Galat. ii.
that we are justified by faith without the works of the law. And the
greatest part of the ancient writers ascribe justification to faith alone
without works.

34 Christ by the Apostle says, Galath. v.
that faith works by love, signifiyng here by, that faith is the mother of
charity, and that charity issues and flows out of faith, as the small
rivers, out of the great and main fountains.

Antichrist says, that faith is wrought by Charity, and also that charity is
the Parent or Mother of faith, so that in the matter of justification charity
goes before faith. Is not this that Antichriste, that should turn the
roots of Trees upwarde?

35 Christ says, either make the Tree good, Math. xii.
and his fruit good also, or else make the Tree naught, and his fruit naught
also: meaning that the Tree should be (...) good, and tha^ bring forth good
fruit. The fruit makes not the Tree good, but the Tree does make the fruit
good, although we can not know that the Tree is good, but by his fruits. For
we can judge nothing but by his outward operation, yet God sees the
quickenesse that is in the root, lindx;
which in the time that GOD has appointed him, shall bring forth his fruit:
and approves the Tree to be good, although it seems dead unto us. The Tree
is faith, Note well.
which is the mother of al good works, and ever works by charity,
whenever occasion is offered. And for this cause is a faithful man in the
Psalms compared to a Tree planted by the rivers side, Psalm. i.
which yeldeth and brings forth her fruit in her time.

36 Christ comaundeth that the poor should be bid too dinner, Luke. xiiii.
and that we should give to the needy, Math. vi.
and so lay up treasure for our selves in heaven.

Antichrist sommoneth and cites them be they never so poor, not regardyng
their let and adversity, but he curses them, if they come not at the time
appointed: and if they come, they go away sorier and sicker both in Soul and
Purse, then they came.

37 Christ teaches that we should not swear at al, Math. v.
but that we should use in our communication to affirm, Iac. v.
yea, and to deny, nay. For whatsoever is more comes of evil.

Antichrist says: Cap. Significasti de elect.
if any man will receive any Office under us, he shall be sworn before, that
he will be true, faithful and just unto us. If any manne also have any thing
to do in his Courts, he must first of all swear by God and by the holy
Gospel, that this or that is true: again, that he shall truly and
faithfully answer to all such things as shall be required of him.

38 Christ commanded his Disciples to know his Law: Joan. v.
and badde the Jews search the Scriptures. And Moses exhorted the Israelites
to teach the Law of God to their young children, Deuteronomy. vi.
and that they should have it bound as a sign in their hands, that it might
be ever before their eyes: he caused them also to write it on the posts and
doors of their houses.

Antichrist says, it is not meet for the lewd people to know the Mysteries
of Gods word, but to believe as Mother holy church teaches them without any
further inquisition: yea he makes it Heresy and Treason against Kings and
Princes to know Christ or his Laws. He has dug Cesternes of his own
traditions, and has stopped up the pure fountaynes of Christ's doctrine. He
can not abide, that the Laity should read the Scripture, least they should
perceive his iuglyng: neither can he suffer that the Scriptures should be
painted either in public Temples, or in private houses. The blinder the
people be, the warmer is his Kitchen.

39 Christ taught his disciples on this wise: Math. xviii.
if thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault, between
him and thee alone. If he hear thee: thou have won thy brother. But if he
hear thee not, then take yet with thee one or two, that in the mouth of two
or three witnesses, every matter may be stablished. If he hear not them,
tell it unto the congregation. If he hear not the congregation, let him be
unto thee as an Heathen man, and as a Publicane.

Antichriste uses an other kind of doctrine. For if any offend and displease
him, he will straight ways (such is his burning charity) cast them into
prison, there to remain in hard and cold yrons, to make them to revoke the
truth, contrary to the truth, and contrary to their own conscience, and so
at the last too grant to his will. But if he be strong through the Spirit
of GOD (without whom, no man is able to stand in such a case) and will not
forsake the truth: then after long and many most grievous torments, secretly
ministered to those constant, and faithful Martyrs of Christ, at the last he
brings forth, accuses, judges, condemns, and in fine, delivers to the
temporal officers, as to their Butchers and hangmen, to be burnte at a stake
unto ashes. As for that charitable reconciliation, that our Savior Christ gave
in commandment, unto as many as take upon them to be his Ministers, he
utterly refuses, and will none of it.

40 Christ says: If thou will be perfect, go and sell all that thou
haste, Math. xix.
and give it to the poor: and thou shalt have treasure in heaven.

Antichriste says: If thou will be perfect, give me thy money, and I will
give thee a Pardon, by the virtue whereof thou shalt be absolved a paena and
culpa, and make thee as clean, as that day thou were borne: Yea, I will for
thy money, give thee the keys of heaven gates, so yt thou shall enter in,
without any stop.

41 Christ says: Ihon. xv.
Ye are my friends, if ye do those things, that I co^mande you?

Antichriste says: 25. quest. Cap. Sut quidam.
Ye shall do as I command you. For I have power and authority to make
laws, and after them shall ye live.

42 Christ says: When ye have done al things that I have commanded you:
Luke. xvii.
yet say, that ye are unprofitable servants.

Antichrist says: Do those things that I command you, and take a sure
conscience unto you, that ye are righteous in the sight of God, and have
deserved heaven: yea, if you do all that I command you, ye shall not only
have good works enough, wherewith to save your selves, but also to save other.
And these works are called Opera supererogationis, Did. 40.
As for myself, Si Papa.
though I do never so wickedly, so that through my wicked and leude behavior,
I bring many thousands with me into damnation: yet may no man rebuke me, but
call me the most holieste Father.

43 Christ says: Math. v.
Whosoever breaks one of the least of my commandments: he shall be called
the least in the kingdom of heaven.

Antichriste roareth out and says: What have I to do with Christ's law? I
am subject to no laws, but all laws are obedient to me, and to my power. By
this means Antichrist does but seldom right, but is alwaie against the right,
yea and against his own law also, as often as men bring him money. For that
loves he above all things.

44 Christ says: Math. v.
Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the sons of God.

Antichriste says: Blessed are they that fight, and go together by the
ears, for the defense of saint Peter's patrimony: for they shall be called
the children of our Mother holy Church.

45 Christ says: Luke. vi.
Woe be to you that laugh now: for ye shall weep and lament.

Antichrist says: Blessed are they, that make merry, and take no thought: for
they are sure to have a good, and joyful portion in this world.

46 Christ says: Joan. viii.
My kingdom is not of this world.

Antichriste says: My kingdom is of this world. The Emperor with his
Empire, the King with his kingdom, the Duke with his Ducherie, and all other
with all that ever they have, are mine, and at my commandment: Yea, my
kingdom is, not only in this world, but also in Heaven, and in Purgatory,
yea, and in Hell also. For even out of Hell do I deliver damned souls, by the
virtue of my Masses: and the pains of diverse there also do I mitigate, by
things done at mine appointemente. Thus am I lord of Heaven, of Hell, of
Earth, of Purgatory.

47 Christ says, Ihon. ^
that no man can come to him, that is to say, believe in him, except his
heavenly Father, by his holy Spirit draw him.

Antichrist says: If any will not believe: Fire, Fagotte, Sword, and Halter
shall make him to believe.

48 Christ by his holy Apostle teaches that a Bishop, ii. Timoth. ii.
which ought to be the servant of the Lord Christ, must be quiet and
gentle, no fighter, nor tyraunte, but such one as is ready to enfourme such
as do err, and with wholesome doctrine, to reduce them unto the way of
truth.

Antichriste commands, The cruelty of the Popish bishops.
that such as are Bishops, should be stout and sturdie, and courageous in
the defense of his doctrine. If any be stubborn, and will not relente: his
will is, not that they should refourme him by the word of GOD, whereof the
greatest part of them has no knowledge at al, but handle them according to the
Decree of his Law, which is to burn them. It may not be considered, whether
the matter be right, or not. Nos habemus legem, Joan. xix.
and secundum legem nostram debet mori.

49 Christ commanded in his doctrine, that the Tares which grow among the
Wheat, Math. xiii.
should not be plucked up, but suffered to grow until the Harvest come, when
the Wheat shall be gathered of the Reapers into the barn, and the Tares
shall be burnte with unquenchable fire.

Antichriste clean contrary behaueth himself. For the good Wheat he plucketh
up and burns, and the Tares he suffers still to grow. Note.
By the good wheat, I understand the true and faithful Preachers of Gods
word, and so many as unfeignedly embrace, and profess the sincere and pure
religion of Christ. These as his most extreme enemies, Antichrist
persecuteth, apprehends, accuses, judges, condemns, and gives over to
the Seculare power, with fire to be consumed unto ashes. By the Tares, I mean
Tyrauntes, Persecutours of Gods truth, commonly called Inquisitours,
Canonistes, Scotistes, Hypocrites, Monks, Friars, Chanons, Nonnes Arkers,
Ankresses, Uotories, Uowesses, Pardonners, Proctours, Promotours, Purgatory
rakers, Massemongers, Pilgrimage gadders, and all other supersticious and
ungodly people. These as his most dear and tender fre^des, he kisseth and
culleth: he promoteth, and auaunceth unto high dignities, promotions,
Bishoprics, Cardinalshippes, Archedeaconries, Prebendes, Parsonages. etc. and
diligentely watches, as a most diligente watcher, and Pastor over his flock,
that no cross, no adversity, no misfortune, no trouble chance unto them, but
all game and glee, all sport and comfort, all joy and solace. etc.

50 Christ taught not his own, Joan. vii.
but his Fathers doctrine: and what he received of his heavenly Father, that
taught he to the people.

Antichriste sets naught by the word of GOD, except it be to color his
wicked tyranny withal. He teaches his own deuilishe Decrees, and triflyng
Traditions, and enforces the people, even with violence to follow them.

51 Christ would have his doctrine no further believed, Ihon. v.
then it did consent, and agree with Moses, the Psalms, and the Prophets.

Antichrist will have his Traditions and Constitutions, believed and obeyed,
though Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles should say naie. For
they be of no further authority, then it shall please him to limite, and
appointe.

52 Christ says: Math. xi.
Learn of me* For I am humble and meek.

Antichrist says: ye that belong unto me; must be stout and lusty. For I
your Lord am lusty, and stout in all quarters round about, neither will I
loute or stoop, either to King or Kesar. Yea, whom it pleases me I will
exalte and advance, and at my pleasure will I him again depose. All without
exception, yea, the very Angels also in heaven shall obey me, and
accomplish my commandment.

53 Christ entreatyng of Fasting, appoints no certain days or times, Math.
vi.
but leaves it free to all that profess his holy Law that they may fast,
when occasion is offered, and when the Spirit of God moves them, yea, and
that after such sort, The end of fasting.
as they be taught in the word of God, that is to say, to mortify their
carnal affectes, to subdue the body to the spirit, and to spare out of our
own beallies, that we may have the more liberally, to give unto the poor,
according to this commandment of GOD by the Prophet: Break thy bread to
the hungry: and lead the needy waifaryng man into thy house. When thou see
a naked man, cover him, ^say. lviii.
and despise not thy flesh.

Antichriste prescribes certain days to be fasted, yea, and that under pain
of everlasting damnation, as the time of Aduent, Lent, Embryng days, Saints
euens, etc. All these days must be fasted, of all manner of people, that be
twelve year old and upward.

54 Christ says: Math. xxi.
My house is the house of Prayer.

Antichriste says: My house is the house of money. He that brings not
money, comes not in there, neither is there any place for him.

55 Christ says: Luke. xvii.
The Kingdom of God comes not with waityng for, that is to say, with
outward obseruaunces, and external ordinances at the appointment of men, For
behold, the kyng^^me of God is within you.

Antichrist says: Wear this cappe, or that Caul, this graie habit, or that
white habit. Profess this rule, or that rule, Fast this day or that day.
Bye this Pardon or that Pardon, etc. and thou shall be saved.

56 Christ says: If any man say unto you: Math. xxiiii.
Lo here is Christ, or there: believe it not. For there shall arise false
Christ's and false Prophets, and shall show great wonders and miracles,
insomuche that if it were possible, the very elect should be deceived.
Behold, I have told you before. Wherefore if they say unto you: Behold, he
is in the deserte, go not ye forth: Behold, he is in the secret places,
believe it not.

Antichrist says: Lo here is Christ at this Altar, and at that Altar: in
this Priests hand, and that Priests hand: in this Pixe and that Pixe, in
this Box and that Box. Come, and see thy Maker. Worship him, meekely
kneelyng upon thy knees. Hold up thy hands unto him. This is he that killed
thy father. This is the Aplemaker of Kente. If thou will not believe that this
is thy Maker, thou shall burn for it without redemption.

57 Christ says: Math. xxiiii.
The Gospel of the kingdom shall be Preached in all the world, for a
witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come.

Antichrist says: I and my Accomplices, the Cardinals, Bishops, Priests,
Monks, Friars, Lawyers, etc. will to the uttermost of our power suppress the
preaching of the Gospel, and so many as either preach it or profess it, that
the end of this world may not come. And so shall we still continue in
pleasure, joy and myrthe. For that is our portion.

58 Christ says: Math. x.
Whosoever shall give unto one of these little ones to drink, a cup of cold
water only (in the name of a Disciple (verily I say unto you, he shall not
loose his reward.

Antichrist says: What have I to do with the poor? Every man for himself,
and the Devil for us all. Whosoever gives any thing to this fraternity or
that fraternity, to this Guilde or that Guilde, to this Cloisture or that
Cloisture, to this Chauntry or that Chauntry, to this pardon or that pardon, to
this altar and that altar, to this morrow Priest and that morrow Priest,
etc. He shall not loose his reward. And the more he gives, the greater shall
be his reward.

59 Christ says: Math. x.
Beware of men: for they shall deliver you up too the counsels, and shall
scourge you in their Sinagoges. And ye shall be brought to headrulers and kings
for my sake, etc.

Antichrist says: Ye my Shauelinges with the reast of mine Adherentes, fear
no man living. For they shall not once touch you. Psalm. 105.
Is it not written. Nolite tangere Christos meos, and in Prophetis meis ne
malignemini? Are ye not my greased, my sineared, and mine holy anointed. Are
not ye my Prophettes and Preachers? Do not ye execute my will and pleasure? Who
then may be bold to touch you? I have made a decree to curse all them that
lay violente hand either of Priest or Clerk, and that they shall not be
assoiled, but only at my hand, and where I appoint. Therefore fear ye not,
neither be he dismaide. And as for any bringing of you before ye head rulers,
take no thought. I have enfraunchised you and made you free from all their
power and aucthority, so that they have nothing to do with you in any matter. I
have made you a pecular kingdom by your selves. You may convent all men
before you, and summone them to appear before you in your spiritual courts,
to lay to their charge whatsoever shall please you: but with you they shall
have nothing to do. No, they shall reverence you, they shall crouch and knele
unto you. They shall Master you, They shall Lord you. They shall Grace you.
Yea, the basest among you all they shall salute with Domine, that is to say,
Lord, or Sir.

60 Christ says: Luke. xi.
Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.

Antichrist says: Blessed are they that hear my decrees, and observe them.

61 Christ says: Beware of the Scribes, Luke. xx.
which will go in long clothing, Math. xxiii.
and love greetinges in the markets and highest seats in the Sinagoges, and
the chief roumes at Feasts, which devour Widows houses, by fainyng long
prayers: the same shall receive the greater damnation.

Antichrist says: Though my Choploches Chaplens, and chapmen be in this
behalf like unto the sausy Scribes, fine Pharesies, lustye Lawyers, patterynge
priests, braggyng Bishops, liyng Levites, satanicall Saduces and such other,
which lived among the Jews in the days of Christ, so that they also go in
long gowns, love gretinges in the markets, and the hiest seats in the
Sinagoges, and the chief roumes at feasts, and devour widows houses under
the pretense of long prayer, etc: yet see, that ye neither contemn nor
condemn them, but make much of them, reverence them, worship them, and honor
them: for they are in dignity more excellent than Angels, in honor far
passing Kings, Princes, Emperors, or any other mortal creature, although
never so noble. For they are the makers of him, that made them and the whole
world.

62 Christ in his Sermons cried wreck, Math. xxiii.
woe, and damnation upon those Scribes, Pharesies, and Hipocrites, which
tithed Mynte, and Anyse, and Common, and left the weighty matters of the Law:
judgment, mercy, and faith.

Antichrist says: What have I to do with judgment, mercy, and faith. Bring
in your Tithes. Pay your Offeringes. Give your Dirige groates, your Mass
pence, and your Confessional pence, with all your other good and godly
devotions. Bye my Pardons Give ten shillings for a trentall, forty pence to
the hye Altar, twelve pence to the Sepulcher light, six pence too Lamps.
Ever be geuyng of somewhat, though it be but a Cheese, or a piece os Bacon to
the holy order of sweet Saint Fraunces, or to any other of my Friars, Monks,
Chanons, etc. Holy Church refuses nothing, but gladly takes whatsoever
comes.

63 Christ by the parable of the ten Uirgines, Math. xxv.
whereof five were wise, and five foolish, declares two things manifestly.
One is, that no man has good deeds sufficient for him self. The second is,
that after this life no good deeds done can profit unto salvation.

Antichrist teaches the contrary, and says: Some men in this world grow up
unto such perfection in doing good works, that they have not only plenty
and enough for their own salvation, but they have also sufficient for other:
where as we be taught in the word of God, that no man living can justify
himself in the sight of GOD. He teaches also, that the good deeds done of
other for them that are departed, profit them greatly, either unto the
diminishyng of their pain, if they be in hell, or unto the advancement of
their glory if they be in heaven, or unto the dispatchyng of their torments if
they be in purgatory.

64 Christ in his doctrine teaches, Joan. iii.
that whosoever believes in him may be sure to have everlasting life, as it is
written: He that believes on the Son of God, Esaias. xxvii.
has everlasting life. Romans x.
But he that believes not on the Son of God, Ihon. xi.
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides upon him. Again, every on
that puts his trust in him, that is to say, Christ, shall not be
confounded. And our Savior Christ himself says: I am the resurrection and
the life: He that believes on me, yea though he were dead yet shall he live.
And whosoever lives and believes in me, he shall never dye. Saint Paul
being certain of his salvation through faith in Christ, says: I am now
ready to be offered, and the time of my departing is at hand. I have fought
a good fight. ii. Timo. iiii.
I have fulfilled my course. I have kept the faith. From henceforthe there is
laid up for me a croune of righteousness, which the Lord, which is a
righteous Judge, shall give me at that day, not to me only, but unto all
them also that love his coming. ii. Tim. i.
Again, I know and am sure, that he (in whom I have put my trust) is able to
keep that, which I have committed to his keepyng against that day.

Antichriste says: No man in this world, can be certain and sure of his
salvation, and therefore he ought to doubt, and to stand in fear, whether he
shall be saved, or not, according to that which is writter: Nemo nouit, an
amore, vel odio sit dignus, Eccle. ix.
sed omnia in futurnm seruantur in certa. Antichrist wreasteth these textes.
No man knows, whether he be worthy love or hate: i. Cor. iiii.
but all things are kept uncertain for the time to come. Again, Nihil mihi
conscius sum: at non in hoc iustificatus sum: I know nothing by my self: yet
am I not thereby justified.

65 Christ in the Parable of the men, Math. xx.
that were hired to work in the Uineyarde, some at one time of the day, some
at an other, some betymes, some late, and yet notwithstanding, all received
like reward at night, seems evidently to teach, that all the Saints of God
have one, and the same full glory in Heaven, and that one has not a greater
reward then an other, but the same joy, the same glory, and the same honor
is given, without any difference to all the soonnes of GOD a like, forasmuch
as it comes not of works, but of grace: Again, that there is no respect of
persons with God. By grace are ye saved, says S. Paul, Ephesians. ii.
through faith, and that not of our selves. It is the gift of God, and
comes not of works, least any manne should boast him self. Again, Roma. vi.
Everlasting life is the gift of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Antichriste teaches, Joan. xiiii.
that as there be many mansions in the kingdom of Heaven, so are there many
diversities, and differences of glories and joys in the same, for the
inhabitauntes thereof. As there is one manner glory of the Sun, and an other
glory of the Moon, and an other glory of the Stars, i. Cor. xv.
(for one star differs one from an other in glory) so is the state of the
Saints in Heaven. One has an higher place then an other, one more glory
then an other, every man according to his degree, every manne according to his
works, merits, and deserts. Hereof it should then follow, that there is
respect of persons with God, and that the heavenly glory is ours, not of
mercy, but of merit, not through Christ, but through our own works.

66 Christ says: Whosoever puts away his wife (except it be for
fornication) and marieth an other, Math. xix.
breaks wedlock: giuyng here liberty to the giltlesse and innocent manne,
having an harlot to his wife, and such one as has broken her weddyng vow and
promise, and has joined her self to an other man, by this means cuttyng of
her self, from the body of her housebande, and making her self one flesh with
an whoremonger, not only to be divorced from that harlotte, sometime his
wife, but also to marry again, and take an other woman to his wife, in the
fear of God. It is a common saying, Iere. ii.
says Jeremy: If a man put away his wife, and she going away from him,
marries an other manne, shall he resort any more unto her after that? Shall
not that woman be defiled and unclean?

Antichriste in his law says: If a man have an whore to his wife, it shall
be lawful for him to be deuorced from her, both from bed and board, but
he may by no means marry again, live as he may.

67 Christ also by his holy Apostle gives liberty, i. Cor. vii.
to the faithful man or woman, being coupled in marriage to such an Idolatour
or Infidel, as will by no means forsake his Idolatry or Infidelity, but
rather goes about not only to defend it, but also to bring his faithful
yokefellowe unto it, so that the faithful can not live with the unfaithful
with a good conscience, and according to the word of God, to marry again.
These be the words: If the unbelieving depart, let him depart. A Brother
or a Sister is not in subjection to such. But God has called us in peace.

Antichriste will by no means suffer any diuorcement so to be made, that
marriage shall follow, although the giltlesse person burn never so greatly,
and be never so much combered, both in body and conscience. Take the whore
again if ye will, other wife get ye none.

68 Christ says: Math. xix.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother: In the which commandment is required of
children, that they give not them selves to Marriage, without the consent of
their godly parents. Therefore read we that among the people of God, none
were coupled in Matrimony, but with the consent of the parents. What the
Civil Law determines also in this matter, the learned know.

Antichriste in the bestowyng of children in Marriage, requires not the
consent, and good will of the Parents: but if they them selves Marry,
without the knowledge, or consent of their Parents or Tutours, he allows it
to be well done, and the Marriage to be lawful. By this means is a great
part of that honor taken away from Fathers and Mothers, that is due unto
them by their children.

69 Christ being present at a marriage, Ihon. ii.
with his Mother, and with his disciples, teaches euidentely, that Matrimony
ought to be solemnly, and openly proclaimed and celebrated, and that it ought
not to be done in corners.

Antichriste for money grants dispe^sations to all men, for to Marie where
they will, when they will, and with whom they will. All things are decent and
law full, if money come. All things obey money.

70 Christ in his doctrine did never forbid marriage to be contracted between
any persons, except those degrees only, which his Heavenly Father had
tofore forbidden by his servant Moses.

Antichriste in his Law prohibiteth many and diverse degrees to Marry
together, whom God has set at liberty. He has decreed also that Christen
Gossippes, that is to say, those men and women that have been Godfathers, and
Godmothers together of one child at Baptism, may not Marry together, nor
yet their children. If they do, he praclaimeth their Marriage to be
incestuous, and that diuorcemente must be made out of hand. This is to be
understood, except they purchase a license of him for money, for money
makes all things lawful in the Court: Neither are his Laws any other
thing, then Nets for money.

71 Christ freely permits Marriage to all degrees, none excepted, if they
have not the gift of continency: neither does he appoincte any time, when it
shall not be lawful to solemnise Matrimony, but gives liberty to all men,
at all times freely to Marry.

Antichriste as we have tofore heard, denies Marriage to all his clatteryng
Clergy, rather sufferyng them to burn, and to run a Whoryng, then he will
suffer them to have wives of their own, that this Prophecy of saint Paul
may i. Timoth. iiii.
be fulfilled. The Spirit speaks evidently, says he, that in the latter
times, some shall depart from the Faith, and shall give heed unto the
Spirities of error, and Deuilishe doctrines of them, which speak falsely
through Hypocrisy, and have their consciences marked with an hot iron,
forbiddyng to Marry, etc. And as he forbids certain degrees of men to
Marry, so does he forbid at certain times of the year, to celebrate
Matrimony, in somuche that whosoever presumes in those forbidden times to
Marry, is not only accursed, but his Marriage also is not lawful.
Notwithstanding, if any man will bring money, and purchase a license to Marry.
he shall easily obtain it, though it were on good Fridaie, so dear and
tenderly beloved is that great God Mammon, in Antichrists courts. But if it
be lawful at these times to Marry for money: Is it not lawful to marry
without money? Does money make a thing either lawful, or unlawful? God
destroy thy kingdom, O Antichriste. Thy money perish with thee. For thy
heart is not right in the sight of God.

72 Christ in his holy Gospel commands Acts. viii.
us to pray, Math. vi.
but he prescribes no certain time of Prayer.

Antichriste appoincteth certain times to Pray, which times whosoever does
not observe, he is coumpted grecuosly to offend.

73 Christ by his blessed Apostle saint Paul, i. Timoth. ii.
gives us liberty to pray in every place, liftyng up pure hands without
wrath, or doubtyng. And he him self in the Gospel, said to the woman of
Samaria. Woman, believe me, the hour comes, and now is, when the true
worshippers, shall worship the Father in Spirit, Ihon. iiii.
and in the truth. For such also the Father requires to worship him. God
is a Spirit: and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in
the truth.

Antichrist teaches, that though we may pray to GOD in all places, yet
ought we most chiefly to pray in such places, as his Bishops and Prelates
have consecrated, and hallowed for money, as Oratories worthy for their virtue
and holiness, wherein our Prayers may the sooner be heard, and the better
accepted. And yet in these places appointed of him for Prayer, one is counted
more holy then an other, and more meritorious to pray in, as the Church is
holier then the Chapel, and the Chancell holier then them both: and yet the
Chauncell holier then them both: and yet the Cathedral Church, otherwise
called the mother Church more holy than them all three. But to pray at the
Shrynes of his canoniced Saints, or in places of Pilgrimage, where the Devil
works stiracles. I would say, miracles, but namely at Rome, at Compostella,
at Jerusalem, etc. this passes all. Prayers made in those places with this
confidence, that they be the sooner heard, and the better accepted by the
reason of the places, fly to heaven, as it were a polde hen.

74 Christ appointed a certain form of Math. vi.
prayer, after the which we should direct Luke. xi.
our Prayers unto our Heavenly Father: wherein also he declares, what things
we should specially ask of GOD the Father.

Antichrist appoints diverse and many forms of praiyng, not to God, but to
this he Saint, and to that she Saint, yea and that for many and sundry
causes, to every saint for a contrary thing. And thus are men taught to
worship the creature in steed of the creator, robbing God of his glory, and
committyng most wicked and damnable idolatry.

75 Christ says: Math. vi.
when thou praiest, thou shalt not be as the Hipocrites are, For they use to
stand praiyng in the Sinagoges, and in the corners of the streets, that they
may be seen of men.

Antichrist says: I will that my Chaplains and my quire men shall pray, sing
and say in none other places, then in the Sinagoges, that is to say, in
Churches and Chappelles and such other Oratories, yea and specially, when the
people are most of all gathered together, although they understand not one
word, what is either song or said, or on the Organs played. And because they
may be seen of men, and have the greater assembly of people at their prayers,
he commands that now one Bell shall be rong, now two, now three, now all the
belles in the steple, by the which diversity of ringing men may the better
know not only when Antichrists Chaplains and their accomplices may be seen to
pray, but also when it is Festum simplex, or Festum duplex, or Festum
principale, that is to say, single feast, or double feast, or principal feast.

76 Christ says: when ye pray, Math. vi.
babble not much, as the heathen do. For they think it will come to pass,
that they shall be heard for their much babbling. Be ye not therefore like
unto them.

Antichrist does so lade and burden his The long prayers of the Papists.
captives with innumerable multitudes of prayers, that they have almost no time
to breath. They have Mattens of the day, and Mattens of our Lady with Prime
and hours. They have long Nocturns. They have long Letanies, long Seven
Psalms, long fiftene Psalms with many and diverse Orisons. They have long
Masses and long commemoration. They have long Diriges and long commendations.
They have Euensong of the day, with Euensong of our Lady, and Complin to them
both. And all these things must be said or song under pain of deadly sin.
But how they be mumbled and iumbled up, all the world may see: Uerely without
all godly affection of the mind. The heart goes one way, and the voice an
other way, so that they agree together as Harp and Harow, and come one to an
other as just as Iermyns lips, Of such kind of beadmen speaks our Savior
Christ on this manner: Math. xv.
This people draws nighe, Esaias. xxix.
and honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me, Uerely
they worship me in vain, teaching doctrines, even the commandments of men.

77 Christ would have such love among us that be his Disciples, that we
should gladly, willingly, and freely without money pray one for an other.

Antichrist wills his Chaplains to pray for none, except they have money,
according to the common proverb: No penny no Pater noster. If money come, they
will be ready at all times to sing and say: If there be no money, then here is
the door and there is the way: Farewell gentle Geffray: and as the Porters
cry in Sturbridge Fair: a new Master a new, and hang up the old. They
will no longer sing or say, than ye have Money for to pay. Bring money and ye
shall have Mass of Scala celi, Mass of Requiem, Mass of Recordare, Mass of
Si iniquitates, with an hundred kind of Masses besides for whatsoever purpose
ye will. For our Massemongers have Masses in store for all kind of things
good or badde. Only bring Money, and ye shall want nothing, so desirous are
Antichrists men of money, O Mammonistes.

78 Christ by his Apostles commands i. Timo. i.
that every congregation should have his pastor or preacher, to feed the
Christen flock with the most wholesome fode of Gods word, so that every
spiritual Minister should attend upon his own cure, and not be distracte
with the care of diverse congregations.

Antichrist can not away with this, Pluralities of Benefices
that one man should have but one benefice, and one living, therefore he
dispenses with his Chaplains for money, to have as many Benefices as they can
get, never taking thought for the discharge of the cures. He grants them
dualities, trialities, pluralities, and tot quots, to snatche as many as they
can catch. Though God would have one Pastor to have but one flock, and one
Beneficed man to enjoy but one benefice: yet Antichrist contrary to this
most righteous will of GOD, grants to one man for money through
dispensation to have multitudes of Benefices both against all right and
conscience, and against the ancient practice and usage of Christ's church. It
is more tolerable and praise worthy, that two or three pastoures should have
the oversight of one Congregation being large and great in multitude of people
(as we read, that in the City of Philippos, Philip. i.
there were diverse bishops and diverse Deacons that did attend upon the flock
of Christ) than one man to have the charge of many Parishes. How can one manne
be in diverse places? can one man do that which is denied to Angels? I mean
to be in many and diverse places at once. Will they commit the charge of them to
other? and hire other to satisfy their office? But our Savior Christ says:
Joan. x.
A good shepherd gives his life for his Sheep. An hired servant, and he that
is not the shepherd, neither are the sheep his own, sees the Wolf coming
and leaves the sheep, and flies, and the Wolf catches and scatters the
Sheep. If Antichrists Chaplains be not able to serve so many Cures (as they
are not able in deed) as they place other in their stead, so let them resign
and give over, to their Curates and Ministers those benefices, where they
serve, and they themselves serve not, that they may be the more able to do
their duty. And would God such order might be taken,
that one Benefice might be made of such valor, that it might abundantly
suffice on man and such as necessarily appertain unto him, that these
pluralities of Benefices may once be taken away, which without doubt has
been the occasion and yet is, of the destruction of many men's souls.

79 Christ by his blessed Apostle commands i. Timoth. iii.
that such should be chosen to Titus. i.
be Bishops and Pastors of Gods flock, as be apt to teach, that is to say,
to exhort by wholesome doctrine, and to improve them that say against it.

Antichrist repelleth and puts back none from taking cure of souls, if he
can read his Portasse and his Missall, and be weli seen in the Pie. As for
preaching and teaching, except it be four times in the year to read to the
people a general curse, or to tell them some narrations out of the Festiuale,
or Saints lies, lives I should say, out of Legenda Aurea, he cares not for
it, yea, he abhors it. Moreover Antichrist is grown up unto such favor
and madness, that he is not ashamed for Money to dispense with Boys, and to
license them to have cure of Souls, and to enjoy spiritual promotions,
which ought to be the livings of the true and faithful Pastors, and of
such as labor and travail in the Lords harvest, where as the boys are not
able too have cure of their own Souls, being more meet to be taught, then
to teach. O thou Antichriste which burnest with an unquenchable thirst of
worldly goods, what an whorishe forehead haste thou put on, that thou dare
commit the cure of Souls, and the liuinges appointed for the same, to
children, to boys, to such as be like Moyles and Horses, that have no
understanding? Is it sitting, meet and convenient, that those souls, which
were so derely bought with the precious blood of Gods own Son, should be
committed to the cure, charge, and oversight of boys and children? Is not this
to offer the flock of Christ, a spoil to the wolf? Is not this to throw
men's souls headlong down into the deep dungeon of hell fire for lack of
knowledge? Is not this utterly to deface the ministry, and cruelly to spoil
the worthy pastors of their liuinges, and the Christen people of doctrine and
true administration of the Sacraments? woe worth thee, O Antichrist with thy
God that wicked Mammon.

80 Christ by his holy Apostle, i. Peter. v.
charge all Postours to feed their flock diligently, and to be residente
upon their Benefices, and not like an hirelyng or thief, to forsake the flock,
and to have no care thereof.

Antichriste contrary to this charge, and commandment of Christ, grants
for money: non Residences to so many as come, not caryng for the flock, so he
may have the money, nor yet regardyng the will of God, so that his pouche may
be filled with gold and silver. Let the Sheep of Christ run a straie where
they will, hang on every Brier, fall into every ditche, be devoured of every
wolf yea, sincke down into Hell: he forces not. For money he licenceth the
Shepeheard to go whether he will, to be where he list, and to do, what him
most delights. The Pastor having a good opinion of his Dispensation, and
non residence, is led with no care toward his flock, but does what he will,
and yet gorgiouslie and deliciouslie, although absent, lives of the Wolle and
Milk of the flock, like a Thief, which as our Savior Christ says,
Comes not but for to steal, to kille, and to destroy. Against these non
Residenciaries, Ihon. xi.
GOD cries out by the Prophet, and says: O Pastor and Idol, that
forsakes his flock. By an other Prophet GOD cries out also against Ezech.
xiii.
those Shepeheardes, that feed them selves, and not the flock, saying: Woe
be unto those Shepeheardes that feed them selves. Should not the Shepheardes
feed the flock? Ye have eaten up the fat. Ye have clothed you with the
Wolle. The best fed have ye slain, but the Flock have ye not nourished. The
weak have ye not holden up: The sick have ye not healed: The broken have ye
not bound together: The outcastes have have ye not brought again: The lost
have ye not sought, but churlishely and cruelly have ye ruled the^. Thus are
they scattred here and there without a Shephearde, yea, all the beasts of the
field devour them, and they go a straie.

81 Christ says, Mark. x.
the workman is worthy of his meat. i. Cor. ix.
And the Apostle says. The Lord has ordained, that they that Preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Again he says: i. Timo. iii.
The Elders that rule well, are worthy of double honor, most specially they
that labor in the word and teaching. For the Scripture says: Thou shalt
not moosell the mouth of the Ox, that treads out the corn. And the
labourer is worthy of his reward.

Antichriste suffers monstures, Against the impropriations of Benefices.
and unprofitable cloddes of the earth, to live and to wax fat of the
gooddes of the Church. Moreover, in diverse and innumerable places of
Christendom. Antichrist takes away the corn, and the best fruits of
Benefices, from the true and faithful Pastors, wherewith they should live, and
such as belong to them, and be the more able to maintain hospitality, to
releue the poor, to comfort the waiefaryng man, and to succor the poor
afflicted Christians, and he gives it to mo^struous Monks, to flatteryng
Friars, to chatteryng Chanons, to patteryng Pristes, and to such like
unprofitable members of the christen common weal, whereby it is come to pass,
that the true Shepheardes, which watch over those flocks of the Lord, are
most miserably handeled, unjustly and against all right and conscience
deprived of their duty, and thrown (alas for pity) into extreme poverty:
hospitality decaieth, the poor are not succored, the needy are not reliued,
yea nothing is done in those Parishes by the Pastors, whereby the comfortless
may be comforted. No marvel when the Papists themselves, have not wherewith to
relieve their own necessity, but are compelled daily, as we may see before
our eyes (such is their misery) to leave their flocks, which as Sheep
destitute of shepheardes, wander here and there, and too seek other places,
where they may have whereof to live, whereas if they had that which is due
unto them, but otherwise unjustly taken away from them by Antichrists
decree, they should not only be able to live themselves, but also abundantly
to relieve the poor. O Antichrist, what devil breathed this wicked affection
into thy heart, that thou should take away from the painful Pastors
their right, and give it to idle and sluggishe Monstrous, whose God their
belly is. Phillip. iii.
The Idolatrous Princes in times paste gave great abundance of worldly
possession to their idolatrous priests. And art thou nothing ashamed to take
that away from the priests of Christ, which both the law of God, and the
law of man has given them. To rob and spoil a private man of his goods,
has always been counted an heinous fault and sin worthy of death: and shall
it be lawful for thee (O thou Antichriste) to take away from the Ministers of
Christ their duty and their right, and to give it where it pleases thee, O
thou Godrobber. Is not this to commit sacrilege, and also to deny the workman
his meat, the laborer his reward, the Shepherd his Milk, the vinekeper his
wine, the warrior his wages, and to moosell the oxes mouth, that treads out
the Corn. And that wicked Spirit occupies their minds also in these our
days, which against all right, and against their own conscience, unto
their great damnation, except they shortly repent and amend, go forth to
keep, hold, and possess these liuyngs and gooddes of the poor Pastors?
Antichriste as they them selves confess, neither can they deny it, by his
Deuilishe Decree most unjustly, and most tyrauntlike, took away, the best
portion of the Tithes from the true owners, and gave them to a sort of
monstrous Hypocrites: why then are they now retained of them, that seem to
be enemies to Antichriste, to condemn his Antichristian acts, and to wish
that all abuses might be taken away, and that a perfect reformation might be
made, according to the word of GOD? Can there be any greater abuse, then
according to Antichrists Law, wrongfullie and unjustly to withholde from the
true Pastoure, and Preacher of the Lords word, that which is properly his
due? The wise man says: Eccle. xxxiiii.
the bread of the nedy is the life of the poor: he that defraudeth him of it,
is a murderer and a manslaier. What then is to be thought of the^, which take
away from the Ministers of the Lords word, the Tithe corn, whereof they
should have bread to eat, and to give unto the nedie? Is not this to play the
part of a murderer? The nedie Pastor and his family, would gladly eat
bread, and the corn, whereof it should be made, is taken away from the^, and
unfruitfully consumed and devoured of those, which do no good at al to the
parishes. Is not this to pluck the meat out of ye mouths of the pastor, and
his family? Which thing what other is it, then to play the murderer? I
deserve damnation, if I feed not the nedy: shall it the^ be lawful for me to
take away the right of ye nedy? If I give not of mine own to the hungry, I
sin: and shall I be counted to do well, when I will not suffer other me^ to
enjoy their own, but through the pretense of an Antichristian decree, violently
withhold it from the^? Uerely it were better for such, as thus unjustly by ye
virtue of Antichrists law, to possess ye lawful duty, of the lawful
Pastors, to render those duties to the owners, though their delicate fare
should somewhat be abated thereby, then to go forth thus wickedly to retain,
that is not their own. What does it profit a man, says our Savior
Christ, to win the whole world, and to lose his soul. it is truly said
of the Wiseman: Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, then great
treasure, Math. xvi.
with sorrow. Prouer. xv. xvi. and xvii.
Again: Better is a dry morsel with quietness (of conscience:) i. Timoth.
iii.
then an house full of fat offerenges with strife, Titus. i.
that is to say, with greef of mind. Once again he says: Better it is to
have a little thing with righteousness, then greater treasures with sorrow.
Moreover, the blessed Apostle S. Paul in the description of a bishop, or
spiritual Pastor, shows, that he ought to be a maintainer of hospitality.
Now what hospitality can there be maintained, where those things are taken
away, that chiefly uphold, and maintain hospitality, yea, without which no
hospitality can be had? Take away corn, whereof bread and drink is made,
which is the best portion, that delongeth unto the maintenance of
hospitality, and what remains behind, wherewith the Pastor may be able to
keep open his doors, and to relieve either him self, or any other? Take away
his Corn, as it is at this day come to pass, through Antichrists decree, and
the vpholders of the same: may not then the Spiritual minister be called
Pastor a pascendo, sicut mons a mouendo? God have mercy on us, and send us
once a redress of this great abuse, yea, of this theft, sacrilege, and
tirannie.

Furthermore, Malach. iii.
God by his Prophet commands, that all manner of Tithes should be brought
into his Barn, that there may be meat in his house? Is not the Pastors
Barn, his Barn? And is not the Pastors house, his house? Now God commands
that all tithes should be brought into the Pastors barn, that there may be
meat in the Pastors house. But how can there be meat in the Pastors house,
which God calls his own house, because his poore-me^bers are, and ought to
be, refreshed in the same, when as the cheef and principal tithes, can not be
suffered through Antichrists decree, to be brought into the Pastors Barn,
which GOD calls his own Barn? God cammaundeth one thing, and Antichriste
wills the contrary, and yet the wicked worldlynges, and voluptuous Epicures,
whose GOD the beallie is, go forth to maintain the same, and unjustly to
possess the gooddes of the true, and faithful Pastoures, so greatly has the
God of this world blinded their eyes, I mean the Devil, and that wicked
Idol Mammon, that this saying of the Apostle may be found true in them all:
All seek their own, and not the things, which are Jesus Christ's. Philip.
ii.
By this wicked Decree of Antichrist, is the law of God broken, the true
pastors deprived of their living the poor people robbed of their belief,
hospitality decayed, parishes left desolate the Pastoral houses fall into
ruin, the people are untaught, schools are not maintained, the youth is
neglected, both old and young ru^ clean out of order, no degree does his
office, the ministers is despised, the word of God neglected, ye preachers of
God nothing regarded, and in fine, an whole sea of evils brasteth into the
bounds of the Christian common weal, and would God with the same, there were
not made a Shipwreck of all goodness and godliness. Notwithstanding, who
lame^teth these things, and earnestly seeks a redress thereof? God amend
all that is amiss: and send corn where none is.

82 Christ in all his doctrine teaching Math. xix*
humility, when a certain manne called him good, answered, that no man is
good, but God alone.

Antichriste being most wicked, and most sinful, will be called the best,
and the most holy.

83 Christ continually studied to do good, both to the bodies and souls of
men.

Antichrist does his whole endeavor how he may hurt, both the bodies and
souls of men: the bodies by bringyng them, and their gooddes into
captinitie, the souls by drounyng them in superstition, and Idolatry.

84 Christ in all his doings, Ihon. viii.
sought the glory of God his Father.

Antichrist in all his acts, seeks his own glory, and wishes to be taken
of all men as a God, calling him self Gods Uicare in earth, and supreme head
of the universal Church of Christ, throughout the whole world.

85 Christ promised to the thief hanging Luke. xxiii.
by him on the Cross, Paradise freely.

Antichriste for money promises remission of sins, deliverance out of
Purgatory, and everlasting life.

86 Christ had no great regard of them Math. xii.
that were his kinsefolke, after the flesh.

Antichrist has a special regard unto them, and exalts them unto most
high dignities and promotio^s, although most unworthy.

87 Christ when his Disciples at any Math. xx.
time were at contention, Luke. xxii.
brought them again straighte ways unto unity and concord.

Antichrist sets them together by the ears, that are at peace, and never
cease to set Kings, and Princes at variaunce. For then goes it best with
his Kingdom.

88 Christ did chose such to attend upon him, as were homely, simple, and
plain.

Antichriste admits none unto his service, Acts. iiii.
but such as be full of gile, i. Cor i.
craft, and subtlety. Jacob. ii.


89 Christ compels no man against his will, to believe his Gospel.

Antichriste with suspension, and Excommunication, with apprehension, and
persecution, with Fire and Faggot, with Sweard and Halter, enforces men to
receive his Deuilish Decrees, and trifelyng Traditions.

90 Chirste in all his adversity, fled unto Prayer.

Antichriste in his trouble, flies unto armor.

91 Christ fought against Satan with Gods word. Math. iiii.


Antichriste fights against his adversaries, with the Temporal Sweard.

92 Christ made him self subject to the Law: Galat. iiii.
when notwithstanding he was Lord of the Law.

Antichriste himself will be obedient to no Law, and gives license for money
to other also to break laws.

93 Christ by fulfillyng the Law, Galat. iii.
delivered us from the curse of the Law.

Antichrist through his disobedience unto Laws, opens a window unto al
wickedness, and through his evil example, provoke other to fall unto
lewdness, and so to run into the curse, and displeasure of God, unto their
great damnation.

94 Christ in his doctrine taught none other, but the law of his heavenly
father.

Antichriste teaches Laws of his own making, not only not agreeable, but
also contrary to the word of God, and with violence, enforces men to keep
the same.

95 Christ by no means could abide, Luke. xxii.
that his Disciples should strive for the Math. xx.
supremacy.

Antichriste chalengeth supremacy, not only over the Clergy, but also over
Kings, and Emperors, yea, and over the whole world.

96 Christ by his doctrine and death, Ephesians. ii.
made the Jews and Gentiles, Ihon. x.
which to fore were at variaunce, one Spiritual Kingdom.

Antichriste through his wicked traditions, and Deuilishe Laws, has made the
Greek and Latin Churches, which before were at great unity and concord,
concerning matters of Christen Religion, to be at variance, one affirmyng this,
an other deniyng the same.

97 Christ in his last Sermon, Joan. xiii. xv.
gave a special commandment to his Disciples, that they should love one an
other.

Antichriste straightly charge his Champions, that they strive and fight
valiantly, for the liberties of holy Church, and that they by no means love,
and favor such as hate his decrees and Laws.

98 Christ in the aforesaied Sermon, Ihon. xv.
making mention of his corporal departure out of this world, promised to
send to his Disciples the holy Ghost, which should lead them into all
truth.

Antichriste instead of the holy Ghost sends Pardoners, Friars, Canonistes,
and Scotistes, to teach us not the way of truth and salvation, but the way
of falsehode and damnation.

99 Christ in his holy Gospel teaches, Math. xxviii.
that although he be absent, concerning his corporal presence, yet is he
alwaie present with his holy congregation, as touching his Divine Majesty,
grace, might, virtue, and power.

Antichriste says, that Christ is not only spiritually, but also corporally
with us, so that the Priest makes him daiely, handles him daiely, breaks
him daiely eats him daiely, offreth him daiely, etc.

100 Christ with his doctrine, Ihon. viii.
brings to all them that receive it with sure faith remission of sins, and
everlasting life.

Antichriste with his Decrees, brings to all his Captives death, and
everlasting damnation.

Give the glory to God alone.
Imprinted at London, by Ihon Day.

Cum gratia and priuilegio Regiae Magistatis per decennium. 1577.


