THE STRANGE FORTUNE OF Alerane: OR, My Ladies Toy. By H. M. of the middle
Temple in London.

Tantieris alijs, quanti tibi fueris. Printed at London by V. S. for M. L. 1605.

To the Reader.
GIve not rash judgment, on my rudest Toy,
For it is my first: Say well although I swarve,
Dispraise is evil, but for to praise it is joy:
Help him with praise, that does no praise deserve:
Unworthiness deserves laud always,
For that which selles it self does need no praise.
I give no leave to men, to read my Book,
My Toy is made to please the women kind:
I give it them, see that you do not look
Upon their Toy, which here you written find:
Some things there are, of which things this is one,
That none but women may them look upon.
If they will let you, I will let you too:
If they give leave, it is nothing unto me:
If they deny it, I say also no:
In all things I with Ladies do agree:
O would it were worthy of that name of Joy,
For to be called, Her pretty little Toy.
Yours as you like to take him, H. M.

To his singular good Ladies, F. R. H. R. H. M. wishes all good increase.
ADmired Ladies, as well for your excellent virtues; as your rare beauties; I
humbly entreat your pardons before I crave your Patronage, deem not I beseech
you, that this presumption of mine, (namely) the resemblance of a Poet, has
taken his original from any defect of your Ladyships ingenies, or want of
discretion to judge between the piping of Pan, and the music of Apollo;
bettweene that which is rude, and that which is exquisite, in whom, there is no
defect or want of acute and discreet judgment: But only that it has
proceeded from the abundance of your patiences and courteous promises, to all
such as are endued with any spark of good literature, or have a desire to
attain to knowledge. For my part (sweet Ladies) I always affected Scholars,
but every man cannot be learned, every Poet cannot be Virgil. I present
therefore unto you this my Pamphlet (kind favorites) not as the picture of
Minerva, wrought by Fideas, was presented; that is, as a thing worthy to be
respected, but at your vacancie and fit opportunity to be perused. As a trifle
therefore to spend the time withal, I have entitled it (My Ladies Toy,) which
I hope shall not be offensive either in Title or Tittle, in composing whereof,
I have more aimed at the fulfilling of your pleasures, then any ways deserved
popular applauses. Thus wishing to your Ladyships, the comfort of heaven, the
contentment of heart, and the continuance of happiness; in hope whereof, and
prayer for which, I rest

Your servant, H: M.

My Ladies Toy.
APollo that most wise and learned god,
Did give this poesy, Second thoughts are best,
Which since it is so, like Owl in Ivy tod
I hid my Muse, for it is the first I pressed,
For had not I commanded been to wright,
My Toy had slept, and none had seen her sight.
For it was my chance, oh happy chance of late,
To meet my Mistress at a royal feast,
Where dainties were in most abundant rate,
Yet of them all (alas) I fed the least:
For I did surfeit on a dainty dish,
Which was more dainty, then my heart could wish.
And after dinner, when the feast was done,
Against all Reason and the rules of Ryme,
As I did gaze against this glorious Sun,
She used me as a Toy to pass the time:
Commanding me insteede of Cards and Dice,
To tell some story of some stately price.
Even as the Schoole-boy which is set his task,
And showed the manner of his Masters will:
The matter must be of some Monarks mask,
In verse (forsooth) to try my slender skill.
God knows (alas) before this time I scrafe
In English tongue composed an idle verse.
Full glad I was to please my Mistress care,
And yet full loath for to displease my self;
For many curious women's wits were there,
That much I feared to prove my Muse an elfe:
For on a sudden women's wits are best;
Men's wits are dull, except they give them rest.
I craved their pardon ere I did begin,
For sure I was that I should speak amiss,
As all men are, so apt am I to sin,
Therefore (sweet Ladies) pardon him that is
Vowed and devoted for to please your kind,
Were but his skill concording to his mind.
They promised pardon when I spoke not well,
And with fair words they made it fair weathet:
My Ladies smiles did me entreat to tell
Some Ryme with Reason rashly joined together:
My trembling tongue gave thanks for my good cheer,
And on a fuddaine spoke this sequel here.
Fair Ladies, since your pleasure is to pass
Away the time with Stories grave and fit,
I am not grave nor wise, my Silver's brass,
My wit is willing, but my will wants wit:
Virgils verse, and one of Tullies imps,
Agrees better with Dianaes Nimphs.
To speak divinely, it is above my reach,
To speak of duty, you know more then I,
To speak of dainties, here you stay my speech,
To speak of doting, I never knew it, I:
But for to speak of things now most in fashion,
Are lovely Ladies of most mild condition.
Pan counts her lovely which does make men love;
I say, She is lovely which does love again;
For if no plaints nor prayers her can moove,
She is not lovely, but a lowering Swain:
Needs must I think she springs of savage kind,
Whom no desires, love, or deserts, can bind.
We read (Avisa) as reports the Writer,
We read that Lucrece was pursude after;
It Is read in prose, but never yet in miter,
The Saxons story of King Othoes daughter:
Daine with patience, if you please to reed,
It Is very strange, but yet it is true indeed.
In antique time there was a Saxon King
Of famous memory, named Charles the Great,
Who was a Prince complete in every thing,
All sorts of men he rightly did entreat:
His power, plenty, and his peace and praise,
This Prince to pride, no worldly pomp could raise.
This noble King was matched forty years,
To one Matild daughter of Duke de Maine,
Forty years past, her belly princely pears,
And brings a child unto old Charlemaine:
As soon as he had seen his sweet facde boy,
As Pirrhus did, he fell down dead for joy.
This learnes us (Ladies) that who wants an heir,
Yea, be she young, or be she in the wane,
What e're she be, she ought not to despair,
A time may come to touch her master vein:
As here Matilda brings forth a son,
When all men thought her finest thread was spunne.
Yea, it is a thing for to be marked of all
Those latter children which are borne so late,
How Jove infuses in those Infants small,
A kind of height, or else a kind of hate:
That all the world should highly them esteem,
Or that the world of them should hardly deem.
But that the Father for the Son should die,
The ancient Father like the aged Tree,
Which when he sees young branches springing by,
He says, Adue, and grow good trees for me:
My time is gone, and yours is to come,
Rend up my roots, and plant yours in the rowme.
Were I a Twigge to see my fathers harms,
His dying kindness would increase my rage:
But out (alas) young trees, thinks older arms
Will top their twigs, and press their tender age:
Some youth like twigs would fain their frinds forgo,
Yet I, and Otho, never wished so.
Well to go on, and tell my Story out,
The Father's dead, the Son is growing up,
Who as in stature, so in State grows stowt,
He scorns Synetes, but takes Xerxes Cup:
So warrelike given, that if he stirred his eye,
The Saxon soldiers would like Saxa lie.
He was a man much feared and loved of All,
He would speak truly and uprightly both,
That when he spoke, then was it said of all,
If Otho speaks it, then it needs no oath:
His valor, venture, and his virtue shown,
Made him beloved where he was never known.
Thus when his prowess and perfections
Divulged his long and everliving fame:
All Europe, Asia, and the worlds affections,
Did bow in honor of King Othoes name:
Through all the world his praise so rare did ring,
That Saba like they came to see this King.
As did his Credit, so his Court increasde,
As did his Crown, so did his Comfort than,
He had no fault, his Fame for to decrease,
Pray mark the matter, and conceive the man:
There were three Othoes, but the third is he,
Which makes my tongue, it will not contained be.
But see how Fortune turns up and down,
To make man famous in a world of fraud,
Upon his head she ioynes a triple Crown,
Saying, Hail King, to thy eternal laud:
If half a world set Othoes praise on wing,
What may whole worlds then of our sov'raigne K?
Otho was noble, but not like to our
James, more commended, and of more command;
He joined three kingdoms, but our king joined four,
Which shall be spoke of while the world does stand:
Henry joined Roses, and king Otho Reames,
But four great kingdoms were conioyn'd by James
He Is present with us, what should I discuss?
His gallant virtues shall for ever live,
He gives us honor, which suffices us;
Otho gave gifts, but did no glory give:
Though from my Tale I have awhile digrest,
Forgive me (Ladies) you shall hear the rest.
This noble Otho had not long been matched
To one Ferrara, which was fair and rare,
But had a daughter that did want no watch,
Till she discharged them of their painful care:
The Sun at noone day did her light deny,
Shaming to show it, when this girl was by.
Even as the sunshine in the summer bright,
Casts her reflection on the pale-faced wall;
Or as a Diamond by the candlelight,
Does dim the candle which gives light to all:
So at her presence all lights seemed to die,
That all night long thou needst no candle by.
(Adelasia,) so they call her name,
Oh too too happy that her name was so;
She had such fortune, and she had such fame,
Thrice happy he, could Adelasia woo:
If Art together had agreed with Nature,
They could not make one of more fair feature.
What should I stand for to define her parts,
I should defile them in defining them,
Refined words so often from me departs,
That I want skill for to describe this Stem:
I think that Venus (if so say I may,)
Did strive with Fortune who should have the day.
Pray mark (fair Ladies) this same tale begun,
How cruel Fortune crosst a guiltless Lamb,
Poor young Alerane, Duke of Saxons son,
To Othoes Court, to be brought up he came:
Who had not long been there, but soared above,
And did conciliate every man's good love.
For as it chanced that the King did hunt,
On foot (alas) to try his bodies force,
Out comes a Bear, from whence no beast was wont,
Which on the King, would have had no remorce:
Had not stowt Alerane then have killed the Bear,
The Bear had killed his King and Master there.
You see how fortune has allotted so,
That some man shall have mean enough to rise,
Had not Alerane chanced then to go,
The King had never loved him in such wise:
When he did this, the story plain appears,
He was of age, no more then seaventeene ears.
As to (Alerane) his love did increase,
So Aleranes love, to Adelasia grew,
And Adelasia had the same disease,
For his report did make her love renew:
Whose virtue so enflamed her tender heart,
Yet durst not this between themselves impart.
For well she wot, if that her father did
Perceive the least appearance of their love,
He should be headed for his love that is hid,
Or from his place should have a wrong remove:
For he might think it were against all right,
Yet am not worthy of so brave a wight.
But see how Cupid like a cruel (Caine,)
Does change fair days, and makes it frowning weather:
These Princes joys, he over-cast with pain,
For it was not likely they should match together:
By this we see, that Cupid sees not,
For he is blind which gives so blind a lot.
Who hides fire to extinguish it,
It seeks (we see) to show it self the more;
Who hides his love within his bosoms pit,
It Will break the walls, or make him open the door:
It Is like a surfeit, which ift break not out,
It kills the Patient, be he never so stowt.
What may it do then to a tender Prince,
Whom love made loyable to his lustful laws?
If one might judge before, or ever since,
It did consume her like Calipson strawes:
Which straws did pine as holy Delphon pleased,
So pined this Princess, till her mind was eased.
In haste therefore she opes her chamber door,
And calls Radeegon to come to her strait,
For I in straits, and never so straight before,
Am caught (quoth she) oh hear a thing of weight;
But keep it secret as thy heart within,
Teach me to end, or learn me to begin.
Then like a leaf, at blasts of western wind,
Her tongue did tremble, and her body quak't,
As though her soul, her inward place resigned,
She could not speak, but still she stood and shook:
Which then perceiving, she began to weep,
Speak Prince (quoth she) I will thy secrets keep.
Radegon, I have always found thee just,
Now be not false to her which means too true,
My doleful state to thee declare I must,
Be just (sweet maid) my heart too much does rue:
I was a Queen which yet did never crave,
But now no Princess, but am Cupids slave.
His sable suit, and his arrest I feel,
Distracts my senses, and disturbes my soul;
That Ixion like, in hell I turn the wheel,
Or Sisiphs stone from steepie mountain roll:
Thou feltst his force, let thy experience teach,
To free me captive, caught by Cupids reach.
Then (quoth Radegon) hear sweet Lady mine,
When I was wounded with his golden Dart,
No salve could save me from the Psiches sign,
Till he which hurt me helped and heald my heart:
So must your Grace receive some grace from him,
Or else you peril both your life and limb.
Alas (quoth she) it is young Aleran,
Who (as I think) does love me not at all,
And I too young as yet to love a man:
Oh, why did Cupid make me love so small?
Besides all this, we women dare not speak,
Although for love our hearts are like to break.
I am sorry Lady (quoth Radegon then)
That from your self you seem so much to swerve:
Must you choose him above all other men,
To have that place which none but Kings deserve?
Oh peace (quoth she) for Cupids sight is dim,
I Will have him (Lady) though I beg with him.
Well (quoth Radegon) this too far is spent,
My poor persuasion comes all too late;
Yet this I know, your Fathers Scepters rent
Will raise a beggar to a Kings estate:
What pleases you, does also make me smile,
He shall come to you, and confer a while.
And if you find his speech comes from his heart,
And with salt tears does manifest his love,
Then vow you will not from his love depart,
But from the Court in haste your selves remove:
For ift be known to Queen or King,
The Court shall rue it, and the Country ring.
In haste Radegon went to seek her boy,
Whose fancy also was with frenzy fed,
Whom when she found him, and did tell this joy,
His face put on an Elementall red:
Let Us go (quoth he) for till I see my dear,
Every hour I do think a year.
And when he came to the ascending stairs,
Which leads the way unto his Paradise;
He falls prostrate, and there makes his prayers,
And the cold steps he kisseth twice or thrice:
Beseeching there those seely senseless powers,
To pray for him, and for his happy hours.
When he approached to her presence nie,
He kneeleth down, and did her favor crave:
Kneel not to me: then quoth the Princess by,
My knees are made for thee, I am thy slave:
Thou have my heart, none shall have me, but thee,
Let Us leave the Court before this noted be.
They plight'd their troth, and to Radego swore,
She should be his, and he her own would be,
And did address them like to Pilgrymes pore,
To spend the time, till Otho pleased they see:
I will (quoth she) for thee all pains approve,
I Will loose my life, before I Will loose thy love.
Thus these two Princes in a moone-shine night,
Did leave the King and all his royal Court,
And wandered long until their purse was light,
Then were they left in very greevous sort:
Poor little Princes were constrained to crave,
Those things, before which they did scorn to have.
Oh see how love does dulcerate all grief,
Their doleful travel in the drowsy night,
They were contented with their loves relief:
But in the morning when they misst this wight,
The Court lamented and the King did frown,
Saying that Alerane had destroyed his Crown.
Otho proclaimed in all his market towns,
That what he was of them could tidings bring,
He should have given him fifteen hundred crowns,
But yet of them no news was brought the King:
For in the deserts on Lyguria side,
In darkesome forests there themselves did hide.
Necessity, the Mistress of all Arts,
Did learn them there to use a Colliars trade,
And Nature also taught those little hearts,
To dress their pittes, and how the coals were made:
Thus made he coals, and trudged about for pelf,
And yet was forced to content himself.
This Saxon Courtier carried sackes of coales]
Upon his neck, about from town to town,
And in their ground they dressed up certain holes,
And there they dwelt till Fortune ceasde to frown:
As he to market on a time was gone,
She was deliv'red of a goodly son.
Whom they named William; as this child did grow,
They brought him up to be a Colliar too,
For seav'nteene years he there such seed did sow,
That every year she brought him one or two.
These fair Colliars had so foul a trade,
That their white skins were clean contrary made.
Thus to the son, it chauncde the father spoke,
And sent his son to sell some coals hard by,
Who with his money strait did buy a hawke,
And brought it home: which when his father spy,
He did rebuke him, and told him, such things
Became no Colliars, but were fit for Kings.
And afterward, when years did witafford,
Again he sent him for to sell his ware,
Who as before, so now he bought a sword,
And home he brings it to his father there:
Which when he sees, his eyes like springs did run,
Saying, Hard fortune had much wronged his son.
Here mark, I pray, Dame Natures deep instinct,
His birth could not conceal his noble blood,
His parents poorenes, nor the place distinct,
But shine it would, for no oblivious flood
Could him obscure, or make him leave to be
A Prince of Kingdoms more then two or three.
Oh who would think, unless one see it so,
That Nature works thus in the heart of man,
His blood did make him his black Art forgo,
He scorned the Moore-bird, but did love the Swanne:
He left his Dad, and had such happy doles,
Which made his heart he could not carry coals.
About this time there was a true report,
That th'Hungarians had besieged a Town,
Thither comes Otho, from his royal Court,
And brings great aid, for he did owe the Town:
William no sooner heard their warlike drums,
But takes his sword, and to the Town he comes.
There showed he valor of a worthy man,
For when the king had overcome their fort,
There was an Almaine challenged any man
To fight with him, to show the King some sport:
Then forth steps William with his sword and shield,
And there before them made him fly the field.
Eternal credit was this Williams fee,
The King did call him to come near his sight,
Me thinks (quoth he) this soldier looks like me,
For in my youth I had his favor right:
From whence come you that you such fame have won?
I am (quoth he) a sorry Colliars son.
Where dwells your Father, says this noble King?
Tell me his name, and where he uses most,
I will prefer him to some better thing,
And make thee captain of some mighty host:
Go bid thy parents unto me resort,
Even for thy sake I Will place them near the Court.
I have heard (great King) my parents fled their parts,
And ran to dwell among those lightlesse trees,
Where Fauni museth, and Sylvani martes,
There do they work like to the weary Bees:
Which brings home honey to their hollow hive,
And yet (poor souls) they cannot learn to thrive.
But I (may't please your Grace to hear)
Their wicked child, and haughty hearted son,
Did scorn their Spade, and did delight the Spear,
I left them strait, when I did hear the gunne:
And came to you; in wars is my delight,
My heart me thinks would have my hands to fight.
The King did view him, and did much suspect
He was the son of his poor daughter gone:
He calls lord Gunford unto this effect,
To go with him, and bring his parents on:
By his report, they are those little elves,
Which fled for fear, and there did hide themselves.
When Gunford and his son came near his Cell,
They saw this Colliar Prince a loading wood,
His son lamenting, on his knees he fell,
Craving his blessing, Oh pardon father good:
Thy wicked son forgetting God and thee,
Forsook his father in extreamitie.
Welcome (quoth he) I pardon thy offense,
And if thy coming be as good as glad:
For Gunfordes sight does much disturb my sense,
I fear the King does know of me my Lad.
With that comes Gunford, and salutes this Moore,
Saying, He never saw Prince cry coals before.
I am glad (my Lord) I swear by heavens oath,
To see you safe: where is my Princess trim?
The King is pleased, and appeased both,
And has sent me to bring you both to him:
He bid me tell you, if I found you out,
He means your good, he would not have you doubt.
They left their cottage, and their coals and caves,
And like no Colliars, but like Princes brave,
They took their journey: As they went she craves,
That she of Gunford there the truth might have:
It Is true (says he) for unto you I vow,
I will not feign, nor fail my Lord and you.
No sooner were they come, but even as soon,
The King did meet them with exceeding joy,
Swearing by heavens, the stars, the sun, and moon,
Welcome my son, my daughter, and my boy:
Who has my Image, and for your sons sake,
I will you both unto my favor take.
Then down they kneeled, and out these words did weep,
We thank your Grace, that you such mercy show,
For we deserve not once to come, or creep,
To have your blessing like the morning dew:
But if our lives will get your love again,
Kind King, command one for to kill us twain.
No no, my children, if my life will serve,
To die for you when you for me should die,
From you I will not, though from me you swarve,
But keep you as the apple of my eye:
Nothing more greeves me, when on you I look,
Than your hard fortunes, which you kindly took.
Ill luck and chance needs must that man endure,
Which strives with Fortune, and would her restrain,
He spurns against pricks, and can no good procure,
Unless his patience make her practice vain:
To grudge thereat, it booteth not at all,
To seek to shun her way ward whurling ball.
How many Princes Fortune turns to shame,
Hellena, Creta, yea great Jove above,
Medea also that same furious Dame,
Did humble homage to the force of love:
These fled their Countries as you Princes did,
Jove fled from heaven, and left his Iunoes bed.
No marvel then if you, weak flesh and blood,
Did leave your countries for to live with love,
When the immortal gods which knows what is good,
Do yield to love, and leaves their thrones above:
Muse not (sweet wench) if Cupids force be such,
Why men and women daily love so much.
It is no marvel (sweet daughter dear)
If love did pierce your young and tender heart,
The smallest touch does crack the cristall clear,
The sweetest wine turns taste at length to tarte:
Yet take no care, for thou shall live in state,
Do not as Troyans, which repent too late.
Thus did he summon all his chiefest Peers,
To celebrate his daughters nuptial day:
Their eldest son he made him Duke of Cleeres,
Their second son was Marquess of Salay:
The third of Bosco, which still bears the name,
Those which have travelld can report the same.
Well, when the King had set them both in state,
And all their children placed in their degree,
Old Otho dies, having lived out his date,
And as next heir, and by the heavens decree,
Those mighty kingdoms and imperial crowns,
Possessed these Princes to their high renownes.
Thus have I (Ladies) finished your request,
Yet not so fully pleased your curious ears,
Though most unworthy, yet among the rest,
Receive this Pamphlet which looks pale with fears:
For your tuition will defend my Muse,
From Esops Dog, and from all Momus crewes.
It Is hard to please the world, it is grown so coy,
How many men, so many minds there be:
Rebuke him Madam, who deludes your Toy,
It Is made for Ladies, not for Lords to see:
For these same Zoyles are like Zeuxes Grapes,
Which make fair shows, and are but painted shapes.
Carpere, velnoli nostra, vel ede tua. Finis.

