MOTHER BOMBIE. As it was sundry times played by the Children of Powles.

LONDON, Imprinted by Thomas Scarlet for Cuthbert Burby. 1594.

A pleasant conceited Comoedie, called Mother Bombie.
Actus primus. Scena prima.
Memphio. Dromio. Memphio. BOY, there are three things that make my life
miserable, a thread bare purse, a cursed wife, and a fool to my heir. Dromio.
Why then sir, there are three medicines for these three malaladies: a
pike-staffe to take a purse on the high way, a holy wand to brush cholar from
my mistres tongue, and a young wench for my young master: so that as your Worship
being wise begot a fool, so he being a fool may tread out a wise man.


Memp. I but Dromio, these medicines bite hot on great mischiefs, for so might
I have a rope about my neck, horns upon my head, and in my house a litter of
fools.


Dro. Then sir you had best let some wise man sit on your son, to hatch him a
good wit: they say, if ravens sit on hens eggs the chickens will be black, and
so forth.


Memp. Why boy, my son is out of the shell, and is grown a pretty cock.


Drom. Carue him master, and make him a capon, else all your breed will prove
cockescombes.


Memph. I marvel he is such an ass, he takes it not of his father.


Dro. He may for any thing you know.


Mem. Why villain do thou think me a fool?


Dro. O no sir, neither are you sure that you are his father.


Memp. Rascal, do thou imagine thy mistres naught of her body?


Dro. No, but fantastical of her mind, and it may be, when this boy was
begotten she thought of a fool, and so conceived a fool, your self being
very wise, and she surpassing honest.


Mem. It may be, for I have heard of an Ethiopian, that thinking of a fair
picture, brought forth a fair lady, and yet no bastard.


Drom. You are well read sir, your son may be a bastard and yet legitimate,
your self a cuckold, and yet my mistres virtuous, all this in conceit.


Mem. Come Dromio, it is my grief to have such a son that must inherit my
lands.


Dro. He needs not sir, I Will beg him for a fool.


Mem. Vile boy, thy young master?


Dro. Let me have in a device.


Mem. I Will have thy advice, and if it fadge, thou shall eat, thou shall sweat,
play till thou sleep, and sleep till thy bones ache.


Dro. I marie, now you tickle me, I am both hungry, gamesome, and sleepie, and
all at once, I Will break this head against the wall but I Will make it bleed good
matter.


Mem. Then this it is, thou know I have but one son, and he is a fool.


Dro. A monstrous fool.


Memp. A wife and she an arrand scold.


Dro. Ah master I smell your device, it will be excellent.


Mem. Thou can not know it till I tell it.


Dro. I see it through your brains, your hair is so thin, and your scull so
transparant, I may sooner see it than hear it.


Mem. Then boy have thou a quick wit, and I a slow tongue, but what is it?


Dro. Marie either you would have your wives tongue in your sons head, that he
might be a prating fool, or his brains in her brain pan, that she might be a
foolish scold.


Mem. Thou dreamst Dromio, there is no such matter, thou know I have kept
him close, so that my neighbors think him to be wise, and her to be temperate,
because they never heard them speak.


Dro. Well.


Mem. Thou know that Stellio has a good farm and a fair daughter, yea so
fair, that she is mewed up, and only looks out at the windows, least she
should by some roisting courtier be stolen away.


Dro. So sir.


Mem. Now if I could compass a match between my son and Stellios daughter by
conference of us parents, and without theirs, I should be blessed* he coosned,
and thou for ever set at liberty.


Dro. A singular conceit.


Mem. Thus much for my son. Now for my wife, I would have this kept from
her, else shall I not be able to keep my house from smoke, for let it come to
one of her ears, and then woe to both mine: I would have her go to my house
into the Country whilst we conclude this, and this once done, I care not if
her tongue never have done: these if thou can effect, thou shall make thy
master happy.


Dro. Think it done, this noddle shall coin such new device as you shall have
your son married py to morrow.


Mem. But take heed, that neither the father nor the maid speak to my son,
for then his folly will mar all.


Dro. Lay all the ear on me, Subleuabo te onere, I will rid you of a fool.


Mem. Will thou rid me for a fool?


Dro. Tush, quarrel not.


Mem. Then for the dowry, let it be at least two hundredth ducats, and after
his death the farm.


Dro. What else?


Mem. Then let us in, that I may furnish thee with some better counsel, and my
son with better apparel.


Dro. Let me alone, I lack but a wagge more to make of my counsel, and then
you shall see an exquisite coosnage, and the father more fool than the son.
But hear you sir, I forgot one thing.


Mem. What Is that?


Dro. Nay, Expellas furca licet vsque recurret.


Mem. What Is the meaning?


Dro. Why though your sons folly be thrust up with a pair of horns on a
forke, yet being natural it will have his course.


Mem. I pray thee no more, but about it.


Exeunt. Act. 2. Sce. 2.
Stellio. Riscio. Stel. Risio, my daughter is passing amiable, but very simple.


Ri. You mean a fool sir.


Stel. Faith I implie so much.


Ri. Then I apply it fit: the one she takes of her father, the other of her
mother, now you may be sure she is your own.


Stel. I have penned her up in a chamber, having only a window to look out,
that youths seeing her fair cheeks, may be enamoured before they hear her
fond speech. How likest thou this head?


Ri. There is very good workmanship in it, but the matter is but base, if the
stuff had been as good as the mold, your daughter had been as wise as she is
beautiful


Stel. Do thou think she took her foolishnes of me?


Ri. I, and so cunningly, that she took it not from you.


Stel. Well, Quod natura dedit tollere nemo potest.


Ri. A good evidence to prove the fee-simple of your daughters folly.


Stel. Why?


Ri. It came by nature, and if none can take it away, it is perpetual.


Stel. Nay Riscio, she is no natural fool, but in this consists her
simplicity, that she thinks herself self subtle in this her rudeness,
that she imagines she is courtly, in this the ouershooting of her self, that
she ouerweeneth of her self.


Ri. Well, what follows?


Stel. Risio this is my plot, Memphio has a pretty stripling to his son,
whom with cockring he has made wanton, his girdle must be warmde, the air
must not breath on him, he must lie a bed til noon, and yet in his bed break
his fast, that which I do to conceal the folly of my daughter, that does he
in too much cockering of his son. Now Risio how shall I compass a match
between my girl and his boy?


Ri. Why with a pair of compasses, and bring them both into the circle, He
warrant the'il match themselves.


Stel. Tush, plot it for me, that never speaking one to another, they be in
love one with another, I like not solemn woing, it is for courtiers, let
country folks believe others reports as much as their own opinions.


Ri. O then, so it be a match you care not.


Stel. Not I, nor for a match neither, were it not I thirst after my neighbors
farm.


Ri. A very good nature. Well, if by flat wit I bring this to pass, what is my
rewerd?


Stel. Whatsoever thou will ask.


Ri. I Will ask no more than by my wit I can get in the bargain.


Stel. Then about it.


Exit. Ri. If I come not about you never trust me, I Will seek out Dromio, the
counselor of my conceit.


Act. 1. Sce. 3.
Prisius. Sperantus. Pris. It is vnneighbourly done to suffer your son since
he came from school to spend his time in love, and unwisely done to let him
houer over my daughter, who has nothing to her dowry but her needle, and must
prove a Sempster, nor he any thing to take to but a Grammar, and cannot at the
best be but a schoolmaster.


Spe. Prisius, you bite and whine, wring me on the withers, and yet winch your
self, it is you that go about to match my girl with my boy, she being more
fit for seames than for marriage, and he for a rod than a wife.


Pri. Her birth requires a better bridegroom than such a groom.


Spe. And his bringing up another gate marriage than such a minion.


Pri. Marie gup, I am sure he has no better bread than is made of wheat, nor
worn siner cloth than is made of woll, nor learned better manners than are
taught in schools.


Spe. Nor your minxe had no better grandfather than a Tailer, who (as I have
heard) was poor and proud: nor a better father than your self, unless your
wife borrowed a better to make her daughter a Gentlewoman.


Pri. Twit not me with my ancestors, nor my wives honesty, if thou do.


Spe. Hold thy hands still thou had best, and yet it is impossible now I
remember, for thou have the palsy


Pri. My hands shake so, that were thou in place where, I would teach thee to
cog.


Spe. Nay, if thou shake thy hands, I warrant thou can not teach any to cog.
But neighbor, let not two old fools fall out for two young wantons.


Pri. Indeed it becomes men of our experience to reason, not rail: to debate
the matter, not to combat it.


Spe. Well, then this I Will tell thee friendly, I have almost these two years cast
in my head, how I might match my princockes with Stellios daughter, whom I have
heard to be very fair, and know shall be very rich, she is his heir, he
doats, he is stooping old, and shortly must die, yet by no means, either by
blessing or cursing can I win my son to be a woer, which I know proceeds not
of bashfulnesse but stubbornness, for he knows his good though I say it, he
has wit at will: as for his personage, I care not who sees him, I can tell you
he is able to make a Ladies mouth water if she wink not.


Pri. Stay Sperantus, this is like my case, for I have been tampering as long
to have a marriage committed between my wench and Memphios only son, they say
he is as goodly a youth as one shall see in a Summers day, and as neat a
stripling as ever went on neats leather, his father will not let him be forth
of his sight, he is so tender over him, he yet lies with his mother for
catching cold. Now my pretty else, as proud as the day is long, she will none of
him, she forsooth will choose her own husband, made marriages prove mad
marriages, she will choose with her eye and like with her heart before she
consent with her tongue, neither father nor mother, kith nor kin shall be her
caruer in a husband, she will fall too where she likes best, and thus the
chicke scarce out of the shell cackles as though she had been trodden with an
hundredth cocks, and mother of a thousand eggs.


Spe. Well then this is our best, seeing we know each others mind, to devise
to govern our own children, for my boy, I Will keep him to his books, and
study shall make him leave to love, I Will break him of his will or his bones
with a cudgel.


Pri. And I Will no more dandle my daughter, she shall prick on a clout till her
fingers ache, or I Will cause her leave to make my heart ache. But in good time,
though with ill luck, behold if they be not both together, let us stand close
and hear all, so shall we prevent all.


Enter Candius and Liuia. Spe. This happens pat, take heed you cough not
Prisius.


Pri. Tush spit not you, and I Will warrant I my beard is as good as a
handkerchiefe.


Liuia. Sweet Candius, if thy father should see us alone, would be not fret?
The old man me thinks should be full of (...).


Cand. Tush, let him fone heart string against another, he shall never trouble
the least vain of my little finger, the old churl thinks none wise, unless he
have a beard hang da^gling to his wast, when my face is bedaubed with hair as
his, then perchance my conceit may stumble on his staiednes.


Pri. I, in what book read you that lesson.


Spe. I know not in what book he read it, but I am sure he was a knave to
learn it.


Can. I believe fair Liuia, if your sour fire should see you with your sweet
heart, he would not be very patient.


Liu. The care is taken, I Will ask him blessing as a father, but never take
counsel for an husband, there is as much odds between my golden thoughts, and
his leaden advice, as between his silver hairs and my amber locks, I know
he will cough for anger that I yield not, but he shall cough me a fool for
his labor.


Spe. Where picked your daughter that work, out of broad-stitch?


Pri. Out of a flirts sampler, but let us stay the end, this is but the
beginning, you shall hear two children well brought up.


Cand. Parents in these days are grown pieuish, they rock their children in
their cradles till they sleep, and cross them about their bridals till their
hearts ache. Marriage among them is become a market, what will you give with
your daughter? What Ioynter will you make for your son? And many a match is
broken off for a penie more or less, as though they could not afford their
children at such a price, when none should cheapen such ware, but affection,
and none buy it but love.


Spe. Learnedly and scholerlike.


Liu. In deed our parents take great care to make us ask blessing and say
grace when as we are little ones, and growing to years of judgment they
deprive us of the greatest blessing, and the most gracius things to our minds,
the liberty of our minds: they give us pap with a spoon before we can speak,
and when we speak for that we love, pap with a hatchet: because their
fancies being grown musty with hoarie age, therefore nothing can relish in
their thoughts that savors of sweet youth: they study twenty years
together to make us grow as straight as a wande, and in the end by bowing us
make us as crooked as a cammocke. For mine own part (sweet Candius) they shall
pardon me, for I will measure my love by min own judgment, not my fathers
purse or peeuishnes. Nature has made me his child, not his slave, I hare
Memphio and his son deadly, if I wist he would place his affection by his
fathers appointment.


Pri. Wittily but vnciuily.


Can. Be of that mind still my fair Liuia, let our fathers lay their purses
together, we our hearts, I will never woo where I cannot love, let Stellio enjoy
his daughter. But what have you wrought here?


Liu. Flowers, fowls, beasts, fishes, trees, plants, stones, and what not.
Among flowers, cowslops and lillyes for our names Candius and Liuia. Among
fowls, Turtles and Sparrowes, for our truth and desires. Among beasts, the
fox and the Ermin for beauty and policy, and among fishes the cockle and the
Tortuse, because of Venus among trees, the vine wreathing about the elm for
our embracings. Among stones Abestor, which being hot will never be cold, for
our constancies. Among plants, Time and harts-ease, to note that if we take
time we shall ease our hearts.


Pri. There Is a girl that knows her lerripoope.


Spe. Listen and you shall hear my sons learning.


Liu. What book is that?


Can. A fine pleasant poet, who entreats of the art of Love, and of the
remedy.


Liu. Is there art in love?


Can. A short art and a certain, three rules in 3. lines.


Liu. I pray thee repeat them.


Can. Principio quod amare velis reperire labora, Proximus huic labor est
placidam euor are puellam, Tertius vt longo tempore ducet amor.


Liu. I am no Latinist Cand. you must conster it.


Can. So I will and pace it too: thou shall be acquainted with case, gender,
and number. First one must find out a mistres, whom before all others he
voweth to serve. Secondly, that he use all the means that he may to obtain her.
And the last with deserts, faith and secrecy to study to keep her.


Liu: What Is the remedy?


Can: Death.


Liu: What of all the book is the conclusion?


Can: This one verse, Non caret essertu quod voluere duo.


Liu: What Is that?


Can: Where two are agreed, it is impossible but they must speed.


Liu: Then cannot we miss, therefore give me thy hand Candius.


Pri. Soft Liuia, take me with you, it is not good in law without witness.


Spe. And as I remember there must be two witnesses, God give you joy Candius,
I was worth the bidding to dinner, though not worthy to be of the counsel.


Pri. I think this hot love has provided but cold cheer.


Spe. Tush, in love is no lack, but blush not Candius, you need not be
ashamed of your cunning, you have made love a book case, and spent your time
well at school, learning to love by art, and hate against nature, but I
perceive, the worser child the better lover.


Pri. And my minion has wrought well, where every stitch in her sampler is a
pricking stitch at my heart: you take your pleasure on parents, they are
peevish, fools, churles, ouergrowen with ignorance, because ouerworne with
age, little shall thou know the case of a father before thy self be a mother,
when thou shall breed thy child with continual pains, and bringing it forth
with deadly pangs, nurse it with thine own paps, and nourish it up with
motherly tenderness, and then find them to curse thee with their hearts, when
they should ask blessing on their knees, and the collop of thine own bowels
to be the torture of thine own soul, with tears trickling down thy checkes,
and drops of blood falling from thy heart, thou will in uttering of thy mind
wish them rather unborn than unnatural, and to have had their cradles their
graves rather than thy death their bridals. But I will not dispute what thou
should have done, but correct what thou have done, I perceive sowing is an
idle exercise, and that every day there come more thoughts into thine head,
than stitches into thy work, I Will see whether you can spin a better mind than
you have stitched, and if I coope you not up, then let me be the capon.


Spe. As for you sir boy, in stead of poaring on a book, you shall hold the
plough, I Will make repentance reap what wantonness has sown, but we are both
well served, the sons must be masters, the fathers gaffers, what we get
together with a rake, they cast abroad with a forke, and we must weary our
legs to purchase our children arms. Well, seeing that booking is but
idleness, I Will see whether threshing be any occupation, thy mind shall stoop
to my fortune, or mine shall break the laws of nature. How like a micher he
stands, as though he had trewanted from honesty, get thee in, and for the
rest let me alone. In villain.


Pri. And you pretty minx, that must be fed with love upon sops* I Will take an
order to cram you with sorrows, get you in without look or reply.


Exeunt Candius, Liuia. Spe. Let us follow, and deal as rigorously with yours
as I will with mine, and you shall see that hot love will wax soon cold, I Will
tame the proud boy, and send him as far from his love as he is from his duty.


Pri. Let us about it, and also go on with matching them to our minds, it was
happy that we prevented that by chance, which we could never yet suspect by
circumstance.


Exeunt. Act. 2. Sce. 1.
Dromio. Risio. Dro. Now if I could meet with Risio, it were a world of
waggery.


Ri. Oh that it were my chance Obuiam dare Dromio, to stumble upon Dromio, on
whom I do nothing but dream.


Dro. His knauerie and my wit should make our masters that are wise fools,
their children that are fools beggars, and us two that are bond free.


Ri. He to cousin, and I to conjure, would make such alterations, that our
masters should serve themselves, the idiots their children serve us, and we to
wake our wits between them all.


Dr. Hem quam opportune, look if he drop not full in my dish.


Risio. Lupus in fabula, Dromio embrace me, hug me, kiss my hand, I must
make thee fortunate.


Dro. Risio, honor me, kneel down to me, kiss my feet, I must make thee
blessed.


Ri. My master old Stellio has a fool to his daughter.


Dro. Nay my master old Memphio has a fool to his son.


Ri. I must convey a controct.


Dro. And I must convey a contract.


Ri. Between her and Memphios son, without speaking one to another.


Dro. Between him and Stellios daughter without one speaking to the other.


Ri. Do thou mock me Dromio?


Dro. Thou do me else.


Ri. Not I for all this is true.


Dro. And all this.


Ri. Then are we both driven to our wits ends, for if either of them had bin
wise, we might have tempered, if no marriage, yet a close marriage.


Dro. Well, let us sharpen our accounts, there is no better grindstone for a
young man's head; than to have it whet upon an old man's purse. Oh thou shall
see my knauerie shave like a rasor!


Ris. Thou for the edge, and I the point will make the fool bestride our
mistres backs, and then have at the bag with the dudgin hafte, that i^, at
the dudgen dagger, by which hanges his tantonie pouch.


Drom. These old buddles have such strong purses with locks, when they shut
them they go off like a snaphance.


Ris. The old fashion is best, a purse with a ring round about it, as a circle
to course a knaves hand from it: but Dromio, two they say may keep counsel
is one be away: but to convey knauerie, two are too few, and four too many.


Dro. And in good time, look where Halfepenie Sperantus boy comes, though
bound up in decimo sexto for carriage, yet a wit in folio for coosnage: Single
Halfepenie, what news are now current?


Enter Halfepenie. Halfepenie. Nothing but that such double coystrels as you be
are counterfeit?


Ris. Are you so dapper, we will send you for an Halfepenie loaf.


Halfepen. I shall go for silver though, when you you shall be nailed up for
slips.


Dro. Thou art a slipstring I Will warrant.


Half. I hope you shall never slip string, but hang steddie.


Ri. Dromio look here, now is my hand on my halfepenie.


Half. Thou lie, thou have not a farthing to lay thy hands on, I am none of
thine: but let me be wagging, my head is full of hammers, and they have so
maletted my wit, that I am almost a malcontent.


Dro. Why, what is the matter?


Half. My master has a fine scholar to his son, Prisius a fair less to his
daughter.


Dro. Well.


Half They two love one another deadly.


Ris. In good time.


Half. The feathers have put them up, utterly disliking the match, and have
appointed the one shall have Memphios son, the other Stellios daughter, this
works like wax, but how it will fadge in the end, the hen that sits next the
cock cannot tell.


Ris. If thou have but any spice of knavery well make thee happy.


Half. Tush, doubt not of mine, I am as full for my pitch as you are for
yours, a wrens egg is as full of meat as a goose eg, though there be not so
much in it: you shall find this head well stuffed, though there went little stuff
to it.


Dro. Laudo ingenium, I like thy sconce, then harken: Memphio made me of his
counsel about marriage of his son to Stellios daughter, Stellio made Riscio
acquainted to plot a match with Memphios son. To be short, they be both
fools.


Half. But they are not fools that be short, if I thought thou meantst so,
Senties qui vir sim, Thou should have a crow to pull.


Ri. Be not angry Halfepenie, for fellowship we will be all fools, and for
gain all knaves. But why do thou laugh?


Half. At mine own conceit and quick censure.


Ri. What Is the matter?


Half. Suddenly me thought you two were asses, and that the least ass was the
more ass.


Ri. Thou art a fool, that cannot be.


Half. Yea, my young master taught me to prove it by learning, and so I can out
of Ovid by a verse.


Ri. Prithee how?


Half. You must first for fashion sake confess your selves to be asses.


Dro. Well.


Half. Then stand you here and you there.


Ri. Go to.


Half. Then this is the verse as I point it, Cum mala per longas inualuere
moras. So you see the least ass is the more ass.


Ris. We Will bite thee for an ape if thou bob us like asses. But to end all, if
thou will join with us, we will make a match between the two fools, for that
must be our tasks, and thou shall devise to couple Candius and Liuia, by
ouer-reaching their fathers.


Half. Let me alone, Non enim mea pigra iuuentus, there is matter in this noddle.

Enter Lucio. But look where Prisius boy comes, as fit as a pudding for a dogs
mouth.


Liu. Pop three knaves in a sheath, I Will make it a right Tunbridge case, and be
the bodkin.


Ri. Nay the bodkin is here already, you must be the knife.


Half. I am the bodkin, look well to your ears, I must boar them.


Dro. Mew thy tongue or we will cut it out, this I speak representing the person
of a knife, as thou did that in shadow of a bodkin.


Liu. I must begone, Taedet, it irketh, Oportet, it behooves my wits work like
barme, alias yest, alias sizing, alias rising, alias Gods good.


Hal. The new wine is in thine head, yet was he feign to take this metaphor
from ale, and now you talk of ale, let us all to the wine.


Dro. Four makes a mess, and we have a mess of masters that must be cosned,
let us lay our heads together, they are married and cannot.


Half. Let us consult at the Tavern, where after to the health of Memphio,
drink we to the life of Stellio, I carouse to Prisius, and brinch you mas
Sperantus, we shall cast us our accounts and discharge our stomachs, like men
that can digest any thing.


Lu. I see not yet what you go about.


Dro. Lucio that can pearce a mud wall of twenty foot thick, would make us
believe he cannot see a candle through a paper lantern, his knauerie is
beyond Ela, and yet he says he knows not Gam vt.


Lu. I am ready, if any cosnage be ripe, I Will shake the tree.


Half. Nay, I hope to see thee so strong, to shake three trees at once.


Dro. We burn time, for I must give a reckning of my days work, let us close
to the bush ad deliberandum.


Half. In deed Inter pocula philosophundum, it is good to plea among pots.


Ri. Thine will be the worst, I fear we shall leave a halfepenie in hand.


Half. Why, say thou that thou have left a print deeper in thy hand already
than a halfpenie can leave, unless it should sing worse than an hot iron.


Lu. All friends, and so let us sing it is a pleasant thing to go into the
tavern, clearing the throat.


Song.
Omnes. IO Bacchus! To thy Table.
Thou call'st every drunken
Rabble,
We already are stiff Drinkers,
Then seal us for thy jolly Skinckers.

Dro. Wine, O Wine!
O Juice Divine!
How do thou the Nowle refine!

Ris. Plump thou make men's Rubie faces,
And from Girls can fetch embraces;

Half. By thee our Noses swell,
With sparkling Carbuncle.

Luc. O the dear blood of Grapes,
Turns us to Anticke shapes,
Now to show tricks like Apes.

Dro. Now Lion-like to rore,

Ris. Now Goatishly to whore,

Half. Now Hoggishly in the mire,

Luc. Now flinging Hats in the fire,

Omnes. Io Bacchus! at thy Table,
Make us of thy Reeling Rabble.

Exeunt. Act. 2. Sce. 2.
Enter Memphio alone. Mem. I marvel I hear no news of Dromio, either he
slackes the matter, or betrays his master, I dare not motion any thing to
Stellio till I know what my boy has don; I Will hunt him out; if the loitersacke
be gone springing into a tavern, I Will fetch him reeling out.


Exit. Enter Stellio alone. Stel. Without doubt Risio has gone beyond
himself, in casting beyond the Moon, I fear the boy be run mad with
studying, for I know he loved me so well, that for my favor he will venture
to run out of his wits, and it may be, to quicken his invention, he is gone
into this Iuy-bush, a notable neast for a grape owl, I Will firret him out, yet
in the end use him friendly, I cannot be merry till I hear what is done in the
marriages.


Exit. Enter Prisius alone. Pri. I think Lucio be gone a squirelling, but I Will
squirell him for it, I sent him on my arrande, but I must go for an answer
myself, I have tied up the loving worm my daughter, and will see whether
fancy can worm fancy out of her head, this green nosegaie I fear my boy
has smelt to, for if he get but a penny in his purse, he turns it suddenly
into Argentum potabile, I must search every place for him, for I stand on
thorns till I hear what he has done.


Exit. Enter Sperantus alone. Spe. Well, be as be may is no banning, I think
I have charmde my young master, a hungry meal, a ragged coat, and a dry
cudgel, have put him quite beside his love and his logic to, besides his
pigsnie is put up, and therefore now I Will let him take the air, and follow
Stellios daughter with all his learning, if he mean to be my heir, the boy
has wit sance measure, more than needs, cats meat and dogs meat enough for
the vantage. Well, without Halfepenie all my wit is not worth a dodkin, that
mite is miching in this grove, for as long as his name is Halfepenie, he will
be banqueting, for thither Halfepenie.


Exit. Act. 2. Sce. 3.
Candius. Silena. Cand. He must needs go that the devil drives, a father, a
fiend, that seeks to place affection by appointment, and to force love by
compulsion, I have sworn to woo Sylena, but it shall be so coldly, that she
shall take as small delight in my words, as I do contentment in his
commandment, I Will teach him one school trick in love. But behold who is that
that comes out of Stellios house, it should seem to be Silena by her attire,
Enter Silena. by her face I am sure it is she, oh fair face, oh lovely
countenance! How now Candius, if thou begin to slip at beauty on a sudden,
thou will surfeit with carousing it at the last. Remember that Liuia is
faithful, I, and let thine eyes witness Silena is amiable, here shall I
please my father and my self, I will learn to be obedient, and come what
will, I Will make away, if she seem coy, I Will practice all the art of love; if I
her cunning, all the pleasures of love.


Sile. My name is Silena I care not who know it, so I do not: my father keeps
me close, so he does, and now I have stolen out, so I have, to go to old
Mother Bombie to know my fortune, so I will, for I have as fair a face as ever
trod on shoo sole, and as free a foot as ever looked with two eyes.


Cand. What, I think she is lunatike or foolish? Thou art a fool Candius, so
fair a face cannot be the scabbard of a foolish mind, mad she may be, for
commonly in beauty so rare, there falls passions extreme, Love and beauty
disdain a mean, not therefore because beauty is no virtue, but because it is
happiness, and we scholars know that virtue is not to be praised, but honored.
I will put on my best grace, sweet wench thy face is lovely, thy body comely,
and all that the eyes can see enchanting, you see how unacquainted I am bold to
board you.


Sil. My father boordes me already, therefore I care not if your name were
Geoffrey.


Cand. She raues or ouer-reaches. I am one sweet soul that loves you, brought
hither by report of your beauty, and here languisheth with your rareness.


Sil. I thank you that you would call.


Cand. I will always call on such a saint, that has power to release my
sorrows, yield fair creature to love.


Sir. I am none of that sect.


Cand. The loving sect is an ancient sect and an honorable, and therefore
should be in a person so perfect.


Sil. Much.


Cand. I love thee much, give me one word of comfort.


Sil. I faith sir no, and so tell your master.


Cand. I have no master, but come to make choice of a mistres.


Si. Aha, are you there with your bears.


Cand. Doubtless she is an idiot of the newest cut, I Will once more try her. I
have loved thee long Silena.


Si. In your to there hose.


Cand. Too simple to be natural: too senseless to be arteficiall. You said you
went to know your fortune, I am a scholar and am cunning in palmistry.


Sil. The better for you sir, here is my hand, what is a clock.


Can. The line of life is good, Venus mount very perfect, you shall have a
scholar to your first husband.


Si. you are well seen in carnes dirt, your father was a poulter, ha, ha, ha.


Cand. Why laugh you?


Sil. Because you should see my teeth.


Cand. Alas poor wench, I see now also thy folly, a fair fool is like a
fresh weed, pleasing leaves and sour juice. I will not yet leave her, she may
dissemble. I cannot choose but love thee.


Sil. I had thought to ask you.


Cand. Nay then farewell, either to proud to accept, or too simple to
understand.


Sil. You need not be so crustie, you are not so hard backed.


Cand. Now I perceive thy folly, who has rakt together all the odd blind
phrases, that help them that know not how to discourse, but when they cannot
answer wisely, either with gybing cover their rudeness, or by some new
coined buy word bewraie their peevishness, I am glad of this, now shall I
have color to refuse the match, and my father reason to accept of Liuia, I
will home, and repeat to my father our wise encounter, and he shall perceive
there is nothing so fulsome as a she fool.


Exit. Liu. Good God, I think Gentlemen had never less wit in a year. We
maids are mad wenches, we gird them and flout them out of all scotch and
notch, and they cannot see it, I will know of the old woman whether I be a
maid or no, and then if I be not, I must needs be a man, God be here.


Enter Mother Bombie. Bom. Whose there.


Sil. One that would be a maid.


Bom: If thou be not, it is impossible thou shuldst be, and a shame thou art
not.


Sil. They say you are a witch.


Bomb: They lie, I am a cunning woman.


Sil: Then tell me some thing.


Bomb: Hold up thy hand, not so high, thy father knows thee not, thy mother
bare thee not, falsely bred, truly begot, choice of two husbands, but never
tyedin bands, because of love and natural bonds.


Silena: I thank you for nothing, because I understand nothing: though you be
as old as you are, yet am I as young as I am, and because that I am so fair,
therefore are you so foul, and so farewell frost, my fortune naught me cost.


Ex. Bom. Farewell fair fool, little do thou know thy hard fortune, but in
the end thou shall, and that must bewraie what none can discover, in the mean
season I will profess cunning for all comers.


Exit. Act. 2. Sce. 4.
Dromio. Risio. Lucio. Halfepenie. Dro. We were all taken tardie.


Ris. Our masters will be overtaken if they tarry.


Half. Now must every one by wit make an excuse, and every excuse must be
coosnage.


Luc. Let us remember our complot.


Dro. We will all plod on that, oh the wine has turned my wit to vinegar.


Ri. You mean it is sharp.


Half. Sharp? I Will warrant twill serve for as good sauce to knauerie as


Lu. As what?


Half. As thy knauerie meat for his wit.


Dro. We must all give a reckning for our days travel.


Ri. Tush, I am glad we escaped the reckning for our liquor. If you be examined
how we met, swear by chance, for so they met, and therefore will believe it:
if how much we drunk, let them answer them selves, they know best because
they paid it.


Hal. We must not tarry, abeundum est mihi, I must go and cast this matter in a
corner.

I presequar a bowl, and I Will come after with a broom, every one remember his
que.


Ris. I and his k. or else we shall thrive ill.


Half. When shall we meet.


Ri. To morrow fresh and fasting.


Dro. Fast eating our meat, for we have drunk for to morrow, and to morrow we
must eat for to day.


Half. Away, away, if our masters take us here the matter is mard.


Lu. Let us every one to his task.


Exeunt. Act. 2. Sce. 5.
Memphio. Stellio. Prisius. Sperantus. Mem. How luckily we met on a sudden in
a tavern, that drunk not together almost these thirty years.


Stel. A tavern is the Randeuous, the Exchange, the staple for good fellows,
I have heard my great grandfather tell how his great grandfather should say,
that it was an old proverb when his great grandfather was a child, that it
was a good wind that blew a man to the wine.


Pri. The old time was a good time, Ale was an ancient drink, and accounted
of our ancestors autentical, Gascone wine was liquor for a Lord, Sack a
medicine for the sick, and I may tell you, he that had a cup of red wine to
his oysters, was hoysted in the Queens subsidy book.


Spe. I but now you see to what loosenes this age is grown* our boys carouse
sack like double beer, and says that which does an old man good, can do a
young man no harm: old men (say they) eat pap, why should not children drink
sack, their white heads have cosned time out of mind our yo^g years


Memph: Well, the world is wanton since I knew it first, our boys put as much
now in their bellies in an hour, as would cloth their whole bodies in a
year, we have paid sor their tippling eight shillinges, and as I have heard,
it was as much as bought Rufus, sometime king of this land, a pair of hose.


Pri. Is It possible.


Stel. Nay it is true; they say, Ale is out of request, it is hogs porredge,
broth for beggars, a caudle for cunstables, watchmens mouth glue; the better it
is the more like bird lime it is; and never makes one staid but in the stocks.


Memph: I Will teach my wag-halter to know grapes from barley.


Pri. And I mine to discern a spigot from a faucet.


Spe. And I mine, to judge the difference between a black boule and a filuer
goblet.


Stel: And mine shall learn the odds between a stand and a hogs-head, yet I
cannot choose but laugh to see how my wag answered me, when I stroke him for
drinking sack.


Pri. Why what said he?


Stel. Master, it is the soueraigntest drink in the world, and the safest for
all times and weathers, if it thunder, though all the Ale and Beer in the
town turn, it will be constant; if it lighten, and that any fire come to it,
it is the aptest wine to burn and the most wholesomest when it is burnt. So
much for Summer. If it freeze, why it is so hot in operation, that no Ise can
congeale it, if it rain, why then he that cannot abide the heat of it, may
put in water. So much for winter. And so ran his way, but I Will overtake him.


Spe. Who would think that my hoppe on my thumb, Halfpenie, scarce so high
as a pint pot, would reason the matter; but he learnde his leere of my son,
his young master, whom I have brought up at Oxford, and I think must learn
here in Kent at Ashford.


Memph. Why what said he*


Spe. He boldly rapt it out, Sine Cere and Baccho friget Venus, without wine
and sugar his veins would wax cold.


Memph. They were all in a pleasant vain, but I must be gone, and take account
of my boys business, farewell neighbors, God knows when we shall meet
again, yet I have discovered nothing, my wine has been my wits friend, I
long to hear what Dromio has done.


Exit. Stel. I cannot stay, but this good fellowshippe shall cost me the
setting on at our next meeting, I am glad I blabd nothing of the marriage,
now I hope to compass it, I know my boy has bin bungling about it.


Exit. Pri. Let us all go, for I must to my clothes that hang on the tenters,
my boy shall hang with them, if he answer me not his days work.


Exit. Spe. If all be gone I Will not stay, Halfepenie I am sure has done me a
penny worth of good, else I Will spend his body in buying a rod.


Exit. Act. 3. Sce. 1.
Maestius. Serena. Maest. Sweet sister, I know not how it comes to pass, but
I find in my self passions more than brotherly.


Ser. And I dear brother find my thoughts entangled with affections beyond
nature, which so flame into my distempered head, that I can neither without
danger smother the fire, nor without modesty disclose my fury.


Maest. Our parents are pore, our love unnatural, what can then happen to make
us happy?


Ser. Only to be content with our fathers mean estate, to comhat against our
own intemperate desires, and yield to the succes of fortune, who though she has
framd us miserable, cannot make us monstrous.


Maest. It is good counsel fair sister, if the necessity of love could be
relieved by counsel, yet this is our comfort, that these unnatural heates
have stretched themselves no further than thoughts, unhappy me that they
should stretch so.


Ser. That which nature warranteth laws forbid, strange it seems in sense,
that because thou art mine, therefore thou must not be mine.


Maest. So it is Serena, the nearer we are in blood, the further we must be
from love, and the greater the kindred is, the less the kindness must be, so
that between brothers and sisters superstition has made affection cold,
between strangers custom has bred love exquisite.


Ser. They say there is hard by an old cunning woman, who can tell fortunes,
expound dreams, tell of things that be lost, and divine of accidents to come,
she is called the good woman, who yet never did hurt.


Maest. Nor any good I think Serena, yet to satisfy thy mind we will see
what she can say.


Ser. Good brother let us.


Maest. who is within?


Enter Mother Bombie. Bom. The dame of the house?


Maest. She might have said the beldam, for her face and years, and attire.


Ser. Good mother tell us, if by your cunning you can, what shall become of my
brother and me.


Bom. Let me see your hands, and look on me steadfastly with your eyes. You
shall be married to morrow hand in hand, by the laws of good nature and the
land, your parents shall be glad, and give you their land, you shall each of
you displace a fool, and both together must relieve a fool. If this be not
true call me old fool.


Maest. This is my sister, marry we cannot: our parents are poor and have no
land to give us, each of us is a fool to come for counsel to such an old
fool.


Ser. These doggrell rimes and obscure words, coming out of the mouth of such
a weather-beate^ witch, are thought diuinations of some holy spirit, being but
dreams of decayed brains* for mine own part, I would thou might sit on
that stool till he and I martie by law.


Bom. I say Mother Bombie never speaks but once, and yet never spoke untruth
once.


Ser. Come brother, let us to our poor home, this is our comfort, to bewraie
our passions, since we cannot enjoy our love.


Maest. Content sweet sister, and learn of me hereafter, that these old sawes
of such old hags, are but false fires to lead one out of a plain path into a
deep pit.


Exeunt Act, 3. Sce. 2.
Dromio. Risio. Halfepenie. Luceo. Dro. Ingenium quondam fuerat pretiotius
auro, the time was wherein wit would work like wax, and crock up gold like
honnie.


Ri. At nunc barbary est grandis habere nihil, but now wit and honesty buy
nothing in the market.


Dro. What Risio, how spedst thou after thy potting?


Ri. Nay, my master rong all in the tavern, and thrust all out in the house.
But how spedst thou?


Dro. I, it were a days work to discourse it, he spoke nothing but sentences,
but they were vengible long ones, for when one word was out, he made pause of
a quarter long till he spoke another.


Ri. Why what did he in all that time?


Dro. Break interiections like wind, as eho, ho, to.


Ri. And what thou?


Dro. Answer him in his own language, as euax, vah, hui.


Ri. These were conjunctions rather than interiections. But what of the plot?


Dro. As we concluded I told him that I understood that Silena was very wise,
and could sing exceedingly, that my devise was, seeing Accius his son a
proper youth, and could also sing sweetly, that he should come in the nicke
when she was singing and answer her.


Ri. Excellent.


Dro. Then he asked how it should be devised that she might come abroad, I
told that was cast already by my means, then the song being ended, and they
seeing one another, noting the apparel, and marking the personages, he should
call in his son for fear he should ouer-reach his speech.


Ri. Very good.


Dro. Then that I had gotten a young Gentleman that resembled his son in
years and favor, that having Accius apparel should court Silena, whom she
finding wise, would after that by small entreaty be won without mo words, and
so the marriage clapped up by this cosnage, and his son never speak word for
himself.


Ri. Thou boy, so have I done in every point, for the song, the calling her
in, and the hoping that another shall woo Accius, and his daughter wed him, I
told him this wooing should be to night, and they early married in the morning,
without any words saving to say after the Priest.


Dro. All this fodges well; now if Halfpenie and Luceo have playde their
parts, we shall have exccellent sport, and here they come. How wrought the
wine my lads?


Enter Halfpenie, Luceo. Half. How? like wine, for my body being the rundlet,
and my mouth the vent, it wrought two days over, till I had thought the hoopes
of my head would have flowen asunder.


Lu. The best was, our masters were as well whitled as we, for yet they lie by
it.


Ri. The better for us, we did but a little parboile our livers, they have sod
theyrs in sack these forty years.


Hal. That makes them spit white broth as they do. But to the purpose. Candius
and Liuia will send their attires, you must send the apparel of Accius and
Silena, they wonder wherefore, but commit the matter to our quadrapertit wit.


Luc. If you keep promise to marry them by your device, and their parents
consent, you shall have ten pounds a piece for your pains.


Dro. If we do it not we are undone, for we have broacht a cosnage already,
and my master has the tap in his hand, that it must needs run out, let the^
he ruld and bring hither their apparel, and we will determine, the rest commit
to our intricate considerations, depart.


Exeunt Halfepenie, Luceo. Enter Accius and Silena. Dro. Here comes Accius
tuning his pipes, I perceive my master keeps touch.


Ri. And here comes Silena with her wit of proof* marie it will scarce hold
out question shot, let us in to instruct our masters in the que.


Dro. Come let us be iogging, but were not a world to hear them woe one
another.


Ri. That shall be hereafter to make us sport, but our masters shall never know
it.


Exeunt. Memphio and Stellio singing. Song.
Memp. O Cupid! Monarch over Kings,
Wherefore have thou feet and wings?
It is to show how swift thou art,
When thou wound'st a tender heart,
Thy wings being clipped, and freete hel'd still,
Thy Bow so many could not kill.

Stel. It is all one in Venus wanton school,
Who highest sits, the wiseman or the fool:
Fools in loves college
Hane far more knowledge,
To Read a woman over,
Than a neat prating lover.
Nay, it is confessed,
That fools please women best.

Act. 3. Sce. 3.
Memphio and Stellio. Mem. Accius come in and that quickly* what walking
without leave?


Stel. Silena, I pray you look homeward, it is a cold air, and you want
your mufler.


Exunt Accius and Silena. Mem. This is pat, if the rest proceed Stellio is like
to marry his daughter to a fool, but a bargen is a bargen.


Stel This frames to my wish; Memphio is like to marry a fool to his son;
Accius tongue shall tie all Memphios land to Silenas dowry, let his fathers
teeth undo them if he can; but here I see Memphio, I must seem kind, for in
kindness lies cosnage.


Me. Well, here is Stellio, I Will talk of other matters, and fly from the mark
I shoot at, lapwing-like flying far from the place where I nestle. Stellio what
make you abroad, I heard you were sick since our last drinking.


Stel. You see reports are no truths, I heard the like of you, and we are both
well. I perceive sober men tell most lies, for in vino veritas, If they had
drunk wine, they would have told the truth.


Mem. Our boys will be sure then never to lie, for they are ever swilling of
wine* but Stellio I must strain cursie with you, I have business* I cannot stay.


Stel. In good time Memphio, for I was about to crave your patience to depart,
it stands me upon. Perhaps move his patience ere it be long.


Mem. Good silly Stel. we must buckle shortly,


Exeunt. Act. 3. Sce. 4.
Halfepenie. Luceo. Rixula. Dromio. Risio. Lu. Come Rixula we have made thee
privy to the whole pack, there lay down the pack.


Rix. I believe unless it be better handled, we shall out of doors.


Half. I care not, Omnem solum forti patria, I can live in christendom as well
as in Kent.


Lu. And I Will sing Patria vbicunque been, every house is my home* where I may
stanch hunger.


Rix. Nay, if you set all on hazard, though I be a pore wench I am as hardy as
you both* I cannot speak Latin, but in plain English if any thing fall out
cross I Will run away,


Half. He loves thee well that would run after.


Rix. Why Halfpenie, there is no goose so gray in the lake, that cannot find a
gander for her make.


Lu. I love a nutbrowne less, it is good to recreate.


Half. Thou meanest, a brown nut is good to crack.


Lu. Why would it not do thee good to crack such a nut?


Hal: I fear she is worm-eaten within, she is so moth-eaten without.


Rix. If you take your pleasure of me, I Will in and tell your practices against
your masters.


Half. In faith sour heart, he that takes his pleasure on thee is very
pleasurable.


Rix. You mean knauishly, and yet I hope foul water will quench hot fire as
soon as fair.


Half. Well then let fair words cool that cholar, which foul speeches has
kindled, and because we are all in this case, and hope all to have good
fortune, sing a roundelay, and we will help, such as thou wast wont when thou
beatest hemp.


Lu. It was crabbs she stamped, and stole away one to make her a face.


Rix. I agree in hope that the hemp shall come to your wearing, a halfepenie
halter may hang you both, that is, Halfepeny and you may hang in a halter.


Half. Well brought about.


Rix. Twill when it is about your neck.


Lu. Nay* now she is in* she will never out.


Rix. Nor when your heads are in, as it is lykely, they should not come out.
But harken to my song, Cantant.


Song.
Rix. FVll hard I did sweat,
When hemp I did beat.
Then thought I of nothing but hanging,
The hemp being spun,
My beating was done,
Then I wished for a noise
Of crack-halter Boys,
On Those hempen strings to be twanging.
Long looked I about.
The City throughout,

4 Page And fownd no such fidling varlets.

Rix. Yes, at last coming hither,
I saw four together.

4. Page May thy hemp choke such singing harlots.

Rix. To whit to whoo, the Owl does cry,
Phip, phip, the sparrowes as they fly,
The goose does hiss, the duck cries quack.
A Rope the Parrot, that holds tack.

4. Pa. The parrat and the rope be thine.

Rix. The hanging yours, but the hemp mine.

Enter Dromio, Risio. Dr. Yonder stands the wags, I am come in good time.


Ri. All here before me, you make have.


Rix. I believe to hanging, for I think you have all robbed your masters, here is
every man his baggage.


Hal. That is, we are all with thee, for thou art a very baggage.


Rix. Hold thy peace, or of mine honesty I Will buy an halfpenie purse with thee.


Dro. In deed that's big enough to put thy honesty in, but come shall we go
about the matter?


Lu. Now it is come to the pinch my heart pants.


Half. I for my part am resolute, in vtranque paratus, ready to die or to run
away.


Lu. But hear me, I was troubled with a vile dream, and therefore it is little
time spent to let Mother Bomby expound it, she is cunning in all things.


Dro. Then will I know my fortune.


Rix. And I Will ask for a silver spoone which was lost last day, which I must
pay for.


Ri. And I Will know what will become of our devices.


Half. And I.


Dro. Then let us all go quickly, we must not sleep in this business, our
masters are so watchful about it.


Bom. Why do you rap so hard at the door?


Dro. Because we would come in.


Bomb. Nay my house is no Inn.


Half. Cross your selves, look how she looks.


Dro. Mark her not, she will turn us all to Apes.


Bom: What would you with me?


Ri. They say you are cunning, and are called the good woman of Rochester.


Bom. If never to do harm be to do good, I dare say I am not ill. But what is
the matter?


Lu. I had a ill dream, and desire to know the signification.


Bom. Dreams my son have their weight, though they be of a troubled mind,
yet are they signs of fortune. Say on.


Lu. In the dawning of the day, for about that time by my starting out of my
sleep I found it to be, me thought I saw a stately piece of beef, with a
cape cloak of cabidge, imbrodered with pepper, having two honorable pages with
hats of mustard on their heads, himself in great pomp sitting upon a
cushion of white Brewish, linde with brown Bread, me thought being poudred he
was much trobled with the salt rume, and therefore there stood by him two great
flagons of sack and beer, the one to dry up his rume, the other to quench
his cholar, I as one envying his ambition, hungring and thirsting after his
honor, began to pull his cushio^ from under him, hoping by that means to give
him a fall, and with putting out my hand awakt, and found nothing in all this
dream about me but the salt rume.


Dro. A dream for a butcher.


Lu. Soft let me end it, then I slumbred again, and me thought there came in a
leg of mutton.


Dro. What all gross meat, a rack had been dainty.


Lu. Thou fool how could it come in, unless it had bin a leg, me thought his
hose were cut and drawn out with parsley, I thrust my hand into my pocket for a
knife thinking to hoxe him, and so awakt.


Bomb. Belyke thou wentst supperlesse to bed.


Lu. So I do every night but sundaies, Prisius has a weak stomach, and
therefore we must starve.


Bom. Well, take this for answer, though the dream be fantastical, they that
in the morning sleep dream of eating, are in danger of sickness, or of
beating, or shall hear of a wedding fresh a beating.


Lu. This may be true.


Half. Nay then let me come in with a dream, short but sweet, that my mouth
waters ever since I wakt: Me thought there sat upon a shelfe three damask
prunes in velvet caps and pressed satin gowns like indges, and that there were
a whole handful of curants to be araigned of a riot, because they clu^ged
together in such clusters, twelve raisons of the sun were impannelled in a
Iewry, and as a leaf of whole mase which was bailief was carrying the quest to
consult, me thought there came an angry cook, and gelded the Iewry of their
stones, and swept both judges, iurers, rebels and bailiefe into a porredge pot,
whereat I being melancholy, fetched a deep sigh, that wakt my self and my bed
fellow.


Dro. This was deuisd not dreamt, and the more foolish being no dream, for
that dreams excuse the fantasticalnesse.


Half. Then ask my bed-felow, you know him, who dreamt that night that the
king of diamonds was sick.


Bom. But thy years and humors pretty child, are subject to such fancies,
which the more insensible they seem, the more fantastical they are, therefore
this dream is easy. To children this is given from the Gods to dream of milk,
fruit, babies and rods, they betoken nothing but that wantons must have rods.


Dro. Ten to one thy dream is true, thou will be swinged.


Rix. Nay gammer, I pray you tell me who stole my spoone out of the buttrie.


Bom. Thy spoone is not stolen but mislaide, thou art an ill huswife though a
good maid, look for thy spoon where thou had like to be no maid.


Rix. Body of me let me fetch the spoone, I remember the place.


Lu. Soft swift, the place if it be there now, it will be there to morrow.


Rix. I but perchance the spoone will not.


Half. Were thou once put to it?


Rix. No sir boy, it was put to me.


Lu. How was it must?


Dro. I Will warrant for want of a mist. But what is my fortune* mother?


Bom. Thy father does live because he does die, thou have spent all thy thrist
with a die, and so like a beggar thou shall die.


Ri. I would have lik^e well if all the gerundes had been there, di, do, and
dum, but all in die, that's too deadly.


Dro. My father in deed is a diar, but I have been a dicer, but to die a beggar,
give me leave not to believe Mother Bombie, and yet it may be, I have nothing
to live by but knavery, and if the world grow honest welcome beggerie. But what
have thou to say Risio?


Ri. Nothing till I see whether all this be true that she has said.


Half. I Risio would feign see thee beg.


Ri. Nay mother tell us this, What is all our fortunes, we are about a matter
of legerdemaine, how will it fodge?


Bom. You shall all thrive like coosners, that is, to be coosned by coosners:
all shall end well, and you be found coosners.


Dro. Gramercie Mother Bombie, we are all pleased, if you were for your pains.


Bom. I take no money, but good words, rail not if I tell true, if I do not
revenge. Farewell. Exit Bom.


Dro. Now have we nothing to do but to go about this business, Accius apparel
let Candius put on, and I will array Accius with Candius clothes.


Ri. Here is Silenas attire, Linceo put it upon Liuia, and give me Liuias for
Silena, this done, ler Candius and Liuia come forth, and let Dromio and me
alone for the rest.


Half. What shall become of Accius and Silena?


Dro. Tush, their turn shall be next, all must be done orderly, lets to it,
for now it works.


Exeunt. Act. 4. Sce. 1.
Candius, Liuia, Dromio, Risio, Sperantus, Prisius. Liu. This attire is very
fit. But how if this make me a fool and Silena wise, you will then woo me and
wedde her.


Cand. Thou know that Accius is also a fool, and his rament fits me, so
that if apparel be infectious, I am also like to be a fool, and he wist what
would be the conclusion, I marvel


Enter Dromio, Risio. Li. Here comes our counselors.


Dro. Well said, I perceive turtles fly in couples.


Ri. Else how should they couple?


Liu. So do knaves go double; else how should they be so cunning in doubling.


Cand. Bona verba Liuia.


Dro. I understand Latin, that is, Liuia is a good word.


Can. No, I bid her use good words.


Ri. And what deeds?


Can. None but a deed of gift.


Ri. What gift?


Can. Her heart.


Dro. Give me leave to pose you though you be a graduate, for I tell you we
in Rochester spur so many hackneys, that we must needs spuire scholars, for
we take them for hackneys.


Liu. Why so sir boy?


Dro. Because I knew two hired for ten grotes a piece to say service on sunday,
and that's no more than a post horse from hence to Canterbury.


Ri. He knows what he says, for he once served the postmaster.


Cand. In deed I think he served some poast to his master, but come Dromio
post me.


Dro. You say you would have her heart for a deed.


Cand. Well.


Dro. If you take her heart for cor, that heart in her body, then know this,
Molle eiusleuibus, Cor enim inuiolabile telis, A woman's heart is thrust through
with a feather: if you mean she should give a heart named Ceruus, then are you
worse, for cornua ceruus habet, that is, to have ones heart grow out at his
head, which will make one ache at the heart in their body.


Enter Prisius, Sperantus. Liu. I beshrew your hearts, I hear one coming, I
know it is my father by his coming.


Cand. What must we do?


Dro. Why as I told you, and let me alone with the old men, fall you to your
bridal.


Pri. Come neighbor, I perceive the love of our children waxes key cold.


Spe. I think it was never but luke warm.


Pri. Bauins will have their flashes, and youth their fancies, the one as soon
quenched as the other burnt, but who be these?


Cand. Here I do plight my faith, taking thee for the staff of my age, and of
my youth my solace.


Liu. And I vow to thee affection which nothing can dissolve, neither the
length of time, nor malice of fortune, not distance of place.


Cand. But when shall we be married?


Liu. A good question, for that one delay in wedding brings an hundred dangers
in the Church, we will not be asked, and a lisence is to chargeable, and to
tarry til to morrow too tedious.


Dro There Is a girl stands on pricks till she be married.


Cand. To avoid danger, charge, and tediousness, let us now conclude it in the
next Church.


Liu. Agreed.


Pri. What be these that hasten so to marry?


Dro. Marry sir, Accius son to Memphio, and Silena Stellios daughter.


Spe. I am sorry neighbor, for our purposes are disappointed.


Pri. You see marriage is destiny, made in heaven, though consumated on earth.


Ri. How like you them, be they not a pretty couple?


Pri. Yes God give them joy, seeing in spite of our hearts they must join.


Dro. I am sure you are not angry, seeing things past cannot be recald, and
being witnesses to their contract, will be also welwillers to the match.


Spe. For my part I wish them well.


Pri. And I, and since there is no remedy, that I am glad of it.


Ri. But will you never hereafter take it in dugeon, but use them as well as
though your selves had made the marriage.


Pri. Not, I.


Spe. Nor I.


Dro. Sir, here is two old men are glad that your loves so long continued, is so
happily concluded.


Cand. We thank them, and if they will come to Memphios house they shall take
part of a bad dinner. This cottons, and works like wax in a sowes ear.


Exeunt Candius, Liuia. Pri. Well, seeing our purposes are prevented, we must
lay other plots, for Liuia shall not have Canaius.


Spe. Fear not, for I have sworn that Canaius shall not have Liuia. But let
not us fall out because our children fall in.


Pri. Will thou go soon to Memphios house?


Spe. I and if you will let us, that we may see how the young couple bride it,
and so we may teach our own.


Exeunt. Act. 4. Sce. 2.
Accius, Silena, Lineeo, Halfepenie. Lin. By this time I am sure, the wagges
have playde their parts, there rests nothing now for us but to match Accius and
Silena


Half. It was too good to be true, for we should laugh heartily, and without
laughing my spleen would split, but whist here comes the man, Enter Accius.
and yonder the maid, let us stand aside.


Enter Silena. Acc. What means my father to thrust me forth in another boys
coat? I Will warrant it is to as much purpose as a hem in the forehead.


Half. There was an ancient proverb knocked in the head.


Acc. I am almost come into mine nonage, and yet I never was so far as the
proverbs of this city.


Lin. There Is a quip for the suburbs of Rochester.


Half. Excellently applied.


Sil. Well, though this furniture make me a sullen dame, yet I hope in mine
own I am no saint.


Half. A brave fight is like to be between a cock with a long comb, and a
hen with a long leg.


Lin. Nay her wits are shorter than her legs.


Half. And his comb longer than his wit.


Acc. I have yonder uncovered a fair girl, I Will be so bold as spur her,
what might a body call her name?


Sil. I cannot help you at this time, I pray you come again to morrow.


Half. I marie sir.


Acc. You need not be so lustye, you are not so honest.


Silena. I cry you mercy I took you for a joined stool.


Linceo. Heeres courting for a conduit or a bakehouse.


Sil. But what are you for a man? me thinks you look as pleases God.


Acc. What do you give me the boots?


Half. Whether will they, here be right cobblers cuts.


Acc. I am taken with a fit of love: Have you any mind of marriage?


Sil: I had thought to have asked you.


Acc: Upon what acquaintance?


Sil: Who would have thought it?


Acc: Much in my gascoins, more in my round hose, all my fathers are as white
as daisies, as an egg full of meat.


Sil. And all my fathers plate is made of Crimosin velvet.


Acc: That brave with bread.


Halfepenie: These three had wise men to their Fathers.


Lin: Why?


Half. Because when their bodies were at work about household stuff, their
minds were busied about commonwealth matters.


Acc. This is pure lawne: What call you this, a preface to your hair?


Sil. Wisely you have picked a raison out of a frail of figs.


Ac. Take it as you list, you are in your own clothes.


Sil. Saving a reverence that's a lie, my clothes are better, my father borrowed
these.


Acc. Long may he so do. I could tell that these are not mine if I would blab
it like a woman.


Si. I had as liefe you should tell them it snowd.


Lu. Come let us take them off, for we have had the cream of them.


Half. I Will warrant if this be the cream, the milk is very flat, let us
join issue with them.


Lu. To have such issues of our bodies, is worse than have an issue in the
body. God save you pretty mouse.


Sil. You may command and go without.


Half. There Is a glieke for you, let me have my girde, on thy conscience tell me
what it is a clock?


Sil. I cry you mercy I have killed your cushion.


Half. I am paid stroke dead in the neast, I am sure this soft youth who is not
half so wise as you are fair, nor you altogether so fair as he is foolish,
will not be so captious.


Ac. Your eloquence pass my recognoscence.


Enter Memphio, Stellio. Lu. I never heard that before, but shall we two make a
match between you?


Si. I Will know first who was his father.


Ac. My father, what need you to care, I hope he was none of yours.


Half. A hard question, for it is odds but one begat them both, he that cut
out the upper leather, cut out the inner, and so with one awl stitcht two soles
together.


Mem. What is she?


Half. It Is Prisius daughter.


Mem. In good time it fodges.


Stel. What is he?


Lin. Sperantus son.


Stel. So twill cotton.


Acc. Damsel, I pray you how old are you?


Mem. My son would scarce have asked such a foolish question.


Sil. I shall be eighteen next beare-baiting.


Stel. My daughter would have made a wiser answer.


Half. O how fitly this comes of!


Acc. My father is a scolde, what is yours?


Mem. My heart throbs, I look him in the face, and yonder I espi Stellio.


Stel. My mind misgiues me, but whist, yonder is Memphio.


Acc. In faith I perceive an old saw and a rustie, no fool to the old
fool. I pray you wherefore was I thrust out like a scar crow in this
similitude.


Mem. My son and I ashamd, Dromio shall die.


Sil. Father are you sneaking behind, I pray you what must I do next?


Stel. My daughter, Risio thou have cosned me.


Lin. Now begins the game.


Mem. How came you hither?


Acc. Marie by the way from your house hither*


Mem. How chance in this attire?


Acc How chance Dromio bid me?


Memph. Ah thy son will be begd for a concealde fool.


Acc. Will I, I faith sir no.


Stel. Wherefore came you hither Silena without leave?


Si. Because I did, and I am here because I am.


Stel. Poor wench, thy wit is improued to the uttermost.


Half. I, it is an hard matter to have a wit of the old rent, every one rackes
his commons so high.


Memo. Dromio told me that one should meet Stellios daughter, and court her
in person of my son.


Stel. Risio told me one should meet Memphios son, and plead in place of
my daughter.


Mem. But alas I see that my son has met with Silena himself, and bewraid
his folly.


Stel. But I see my daughter has pratled with Accius, and discovered her
simplicity.


Lin. A brave cry to hear the two old mules weep over the young fools.


Mem. Accius how lykest thou Silena.


Acc. I take her to be pregnant.


Sil. Truly his talk is very personable.


Stel. Come in girl, this gear must be fetched about.


Mem. Come Accius, let us go in.


Lin. Nay sir there is no harm done, they have neither bought nor sold, they
may be twins for their wits and years.


Mem. But why did thou tell me it was Prisius son?


Hal. Because I thought thee a fool, to ask who thine own son was.


Lin. And so sir for your daughter, education has done much, otherwise they
are by nature soft wytted enough.


Mem. Alas their joints are not yet tied, they are not yet come to years and
discretion.


Acc. Father, if my hands be tied shall I grow wise?


Half. I and Silena to, if you tie them fast to your tongues.


Sil. You may take your pleasure of my tongue, for it is no man's wife.


Mem. Come in Accius.


Ste. Come in Silena, I will talk with Memphios son, but as for Risio.


Memp As for Dromio.


Exeunt Memphio, Accius, Stellio, Silena. Half. Ass for you all four,


Enter Dromio, Risio. Dro. How goes the world, now we have made all sure,
Candius and Liuia are married, their fathers consenting, yet not knowing.


Lin. We have flat mard all, Accius and Silena courted one another, their
fathers took them napping, both are ashamd, and you both shall be swingd.


Ri. Tush, let us alone, we will persuade them that all falls out for the best,
for if vnderhande this match had been concluded, they both had been coosned, and
now seeing they find both to be fools, they may be both better advised. But
why is Halfepenle so sad?


Enter Hackneyman, Sergeant. Halfepenie. Because I am sure I shall never be a
penny.


Ri. Rather pray there be no fall of money, for thou will then go for a que.


Dro. But did not the two fools currantly court one another.


Lin. Very good words fitly applied, brought in in the nicke.


Serg. I arest you.


Dro. Me sir, why then did not bring a stool with thee, that I might sit
down?


Hack. He arests you at my suite for a horse.


Ri. The more Ass he, if he had arested a mare in stead of an horse, it had
bin but a slight oversight, but to arest a man that has no likeness of a
horse, is flat lunasie or alecie.


Hack* Tush, I hired him a horse.


Dro. I swear then he was well ridden.


Hack. I think in two days he was never baited.


Half. Why was it a bear thou ridst on?


Hack* I mean he never gave him bait.


Lin. Why he took him for no fish.


Hack. I mistake none of you when I take you for fools, I say thou never
gave my horse meat.


Dro. Yes, in four and forty hours I am sure he had a bottle of hay as big
as his belly.


Serg. Nothing else, thou should have given him prouender.


Ri. Why he never asked for any.


Hack. Why, do thou think an horse can speak?


Dro. No, for I spurd him till my heels akt, and he said never a word.


Hack. Well, thou shall pay sweetly for spoiling him, it was as lusty a nag
as any in Rochester, and one that would stand upon no ground.


Dro. Then is he as good as ever he was, I Will warrant, heel do nothing but lie
down.


Hack. I lent him thee gently.


Dro. And I restored him so gently, that he neither would cry wyhie nor wag
the tail.


Hack. But why did thou boar him thorough the ears?


Lin. It may be he was set on the pillorie, because he had not a true pace.


Half. No, it was for tyring.


Hack. He would never tire, it may be he would be so weary he would go no
further, or so.


Dro. Yes he was a notable horse for service, he would tire and retire.


Hack. Do you think I Will be iested out of my horse, Sergeant wreake thy office
on him.


Ri. Nay stay, let him be baild.


Hack. So he shall when I make him a bargen.


Dro. It was a very good horse I must needs confess, and now hearken to his
qualities, and have patience to hear them since I must pay for him: He would
stumble three hours in one mile, I had thought I had rode upon addeces
between this and Canterbury: if one gave him water, why he would lie down
and bath himself like a hawk: if one ran him, he would simper and mump, as
though he had gone a wooing to a malt mare at Rochester: he trotted before and
ambled behind, and was so obedient, that he would do duty every minute on
his knees, as though every stone had bin his father.


Hack I am sure he had no diseases.


Dro. A little rume or pose, he lackt nothing but an handkercher.


Serg. Come, what a tale of a horse have we here, I can not stay, thou must
with me to prison.


Ri. If thou be a good fellow Hacknyman, take all our four bonds for the
payment, thou know we are town borne children, and will not shrink the
city for a pelting jade.


Half. I Will enter into a statute Merchant to see it answered. But if thou will
have bonds, thou shall have a bushel full.


Hack. Alas poort Ant, thou bound in a statute merchant: a brown thread will
bind thee fast enough: but if you will be content all four jointly to enter
into a bond, I will withdraw the action.


Dro. Yes I Will warrant they will, How say you?


Half. I yield.


Ri. And I.


Lin. And I.


Hack. Well call the Scriuener.


Ser. Heeres one hard by, I Will call him.


Ri. A scriueners shop hangs to Sergeants mase, like a burre to a freese coat.


Scri. What Is the matter?


Hack. You must take a note of a bond.


Dro. Nay a pint of courtesy pulls on a pot of wine, in this Tavern we will
dispatch.


Hack. Agreed.


Exeunt. Ri. Now if our wits be not in the waine, our knavery shall be at the
full, they will ride them worse than Dromio rid his horse, for if the wine
master their wits, you shall see them bleed their follyes.


Exit. Act. 5. Sce. 1.
Dro, Risio, Linceo, Halspenie. Dro. Every fox to his hole, the hounds are,
at hand.


Ri. The Sergeants mase lies at pawn for the reckning, and he under the board
to cast it up.


Lin. The Scriuener cannot keep his pen out of the pot, every goblet is an
inkhorne.


Hal. The hackneyman he whiskes with his wande, as if the Tavern were his
stable, and all the servants his horses, Iost there up bay Richard, and white
loaves are horsebread in his eyes.


Dro. It is well I have my acquitance, and he such a bond as shall do him no
more good than the bond of a faggot, our knaueries are now come to the push,
and we must cunningly dispatch all, we two will go see how we may appease
our masters, you two how you may conceal the late marriage, if all fall out
amiss, the worst is beating, if to the best, the worst is liberty.


Ri. Then lettes about it speedely, for so many yrons in the together require a
diligent Plummer.


Exeunt. Act. 5. Sce. 2.
Vicinia. Bombie. Vic. My heart throbbes, my ears tingle, my mind misgiues
me, since I hear such muttering of marry-ages in Rochester, my conscience
which these eighteen years has been frosen with coniealed guiltynesse,
begins now to thawe in open grief, but I will not accuse my self til I see
more danger, the good old woman Mother Bombie shall try her cunning upon me,
and if I perceive my case is desperate by her then will I rather prevent,
although with shame, then report too late, and be inexcusable. God speed good
mother.


Bom. Welcome sister.


Vin. I am troubled in the night with dreams, and in the day with fears,
mine estate bare, which I cannot well bear, but my practices deuillish, which
I cannot recall, if therefore in these same years there be any deep skill,
tell what my fortune shall be, and what my fault is.


Bom. In studying to be ouernaturall thou art like to be unnatural, and all
about a natural: thou shall be eased of a charge if thou thy conscience
discharge, and this I commit to thy charge.


Vic. Thou have touched me to the quick mother, I understand thy meaning, and
thou w^ll know my practice, I will follow thy counsel. But what will be
the end?


Bom. Thou shall know before this day end, farewell.


Exit Bom. Vic. Now I perceive I must either bewraie a mischief, or suffer a
continual inconvenience, I must have homewardes, and resolve to make all whole,
better a little shame than an infinite grief, the strangenes will abate the
fault, and the bewraying wipe it clean away.


Exit. Act. 5. Sce. 3.
Three Fiddlers. Synis, Nasutus, Beduneus. Syn. Come fellows, it is almost day,
let us have a fit of mirth at Sperantus door, and give a song to the bride.


Nas. I believe they are asleep, it were pity to awake them.


Bed. Twere a shame they should sleep the first night.


Syn. But who can tell at which house they lie, at Prisius it may be, we will
try both.


Na. Come lets draw like men.


Syn. Now, tune, tune I say, that boy I think will never profit in his
faculty, he looses his rosen, that his fiddle goes cush, cush, like as one
should go wetshod, and his mouth so dry, that he has not spittle for his
pin as I have.


Bed. Mary sir you see I go wetshod and dry mouthd, for yet could I never get
new shoes or good drink, rather than I Will lead this life, I throw my fiddle
into the leads for a ^obler.


Syn. Boy, no more words, there is a time for all things though I say it that
should not, I have been a minstrell these thirty years, and tickled more
strings than thou have hairs, but yet was never so misused.


Nas. Let us not brabble but play, to morrow is a new day.


Bed. I am sorry I speak in your cast, what shall we sing?


Syn. The love knot, for that's best for a bridal. Sing. God morrow fair bride,
and send you joy of your bridal.


Sperantus looks out. Spe. What a mischief make the twanglers here? we have
no trenchers to scrape, it makes my teeth on edge to hear such grating. Get
you packing, or I Will make you wear double stocks, and yet you shall be never
the warmer.


Syn. We come for good will, to bidd the bride and bride groom, God give them
joy.


Spe. Hers no wedding.


Syn. Yes your son and Prisius daughter were married, though you seem
strange, yet they repent it not I am sure.


Spe. My son villain, I had rather he were fairly hanged.


Nas. So he is sir, you have your wish.


Enter Candius. Can. Here fiddlers take this and not a word, here is no
wedding, it was at Memphios house, yet gramercy, your music though it mist
the house hit the mind, we were a preparing our wedding gear.


Syn. I cry you mercy sir, I think it was Memphios son that was married.


Spe. O ho the case is altered, go thither then and be haltered for me.


Nas. What Is the alms?


Syn. An Angel.


Bed. I Will warrant there is some work toward, ten shillings is money in master
Majors purse.


Syn. Let us to Memphios and share equally, when we have done all thou shall
have new shoes.


Bed. I such as they cry at the Sizes, a mark in issues, and mark in issues,
and yet I never saw so much leather as would piece ones shoes.


Syn. No more, there is the money.


Bed. A good handfell, and I think the maidenhead of your liberality.


Nas. Come here is the house, what shall we sing?


Syn. You know Memphio is very rich and wise, and therefore let us strike the
gentle stroke, and sing a catch.


Sing. Song.
All 3. THe Bride this Night can catch no cold,
No cold, the Bridegroome's young, not old,
Like Iuie he her fast does hold,

1. Fid. And clips her.

2. And lips her.

3. And flips her too.

All 3. Then let them alone, They know what they do.

1. At laugh and lie down, if they play,

2. What Ass against the sport can bray?

3. Such Tick-tacke has held many a day,

1. And longer.

2. And stronger.

3. It still holds too.

All 3. Then let them alone, They know what they do,
This Night,
In delight
Does thump away sorrow.
Of billing
Take your filling,
So good morrow, good morrow.

Nas. God morrow mistres bride and send you a huddle.


Mem. What crouding knaves have we there, case up your fiddles, or the
cunstable shall cage you up. What bride talk you of?


Syn. Here Is a wedding in Rochester, and it was told me first that Sperantus son
had married Prisius daughter, we were there, and they sent us to your
worship, saying your son was matched with Stellios daughter.


Mem. Has Sperantus that churl nothing to do but mock his neighbors, I Will
be even with him, and get you gone, or I swear by the roodes body I Will lay
you by the heels.


Nas. Sing a catch, here is a fair catch in deed, sing til we catch cold on our
feet, and be called knave till our ears glowe on our heads, your worship is
wise sir.


Mem. Dromio shake off a whole kennel of officers, to punish these iarring
rogues, I Will teach them to stretch their dried sheep guts at my door, and to
mock one that stands to be mayor.


Dro. I had thought they had been sticking of pigs, I heard such a squeaking,
I go sir.


Syn. Let us be packing.


Nas. Where is my scabbarde, every one sheath his science.


Bed. A bots on the shoemaker that made this boot for my ^iddle, it is too
straight.


Syn. No more words, twill be thought they were the four wai^es, and let
them wring, as or the wagges that set us on work, well talk with them.


Exeunt. Memphio, Dromio. Dro. They be gone sir.


Mem. If they had stayed, the stocks should have stayed them. But sir, what
shall we now do?


Dro. As I advised you make a match, for better one house be cumbered with two
fools than two.


Mem. It Is true, for it being bruted that each of us have a fool, who will
tender marriage to any of them that is wise, besides fools are fortunate,
fools are fair, fools are honest.


Dro. I sir, and more than that, fools are not wise: a wise man is melancholy
for moone-shine in the water, careful building castles in the air, and
commonly has a fool to his heir.


Mem. But what say thou to thy dames chasing?


Dro. Nothing but all her dishes are chasing dishes.


Mem. I would her tongue were in thy belly.


Dro, I had as liefe have a raw neates tongue in my stomach.


Mem. Why?


Dro. Marie if the clapper hang within an inch of my heart, that makes mine
ears burn a quarter of a mile off. Do you not think it would beat my heart
black and blew?


Memp. Well patience is a virtue, but pinching is worse than any vice, I will
break this matter to Stellio, and if he be willing, this day shall be their
wedding.


Dro. Then this day shall be my liberty.


Mem. I if Stellios daughter had been wise, and by my means cosned of a fool.


Dro. Then sir I Will revolt, and dash out the brains of your devises.


Memph. Rather thou shall be free.


Exeunt. Sperantus, Halfepenie, Prisius, Linceo. Spe. Boy, this smoke is a
token of some fire, I like not the luck of it. Wherefore should these
minstrelles dream of a marryage?


Hal. Alas sir they rustle into every place, give credit to no such words.


Spe. I will to Prisius, I cannot be quiet, and in good time I meet him, God
morrow neighbor.


Pri. I cast the morrow in thy fate, and bid good night to all neighborhood.


Spe. This is your old trick, to pick ones purse and then to pick quarrels,
I tell thee, I had rather thou should rob my chest than imbesell my son.


Pri. Thy son, my daughter is seduced, for I hear say she is married, and
our boys can tell. How say thou, tell the truth or I Will grind thee to
powder in my mill, Be they married?


Lin. True it is they were both in a church.


Pri. That no fault, the place is holy.


Half. And there was with them a priest.


Sp. Why what place fitter for a priest than a church?


Lin. And they took one another by the hand.


Pri. Trush, that's but common courtesy.


Half. And the priest spoke many kind words.


Spe. That showed he was no dumb minister. But what said they, did thou
hear any words between them?


Lin. Faith there was a bargain during life, and the clock cried, God give
them joy.


Pri. Villain they be married.


Half. Nay I think not so.


Spe. Yes, yes, God give you joy is a binder, I Will qui^^ly be resolud, Candius
come forth.


Enter Candius. Pri. And I Will be put out of doubt. Liuia come forth.


Liuia. Spe: The micher hangs down his head.


Pri. The baggage begins to blush.


Half: Now begins the game.


Lin: I believe it will be no game for us.


Spe: Are you married young master?


Can: I cannot deny it, it was done so lately.


Spe: But thou shall repent, it was done so soon.


Pri. Then it is bootlesse to ask you Liuia.


Liu: I, and needless to be angry.


Pri: It shall pass anger, thou shall find it rage.


Liu: You gave your consent.


Pri: Impudent giglot, was it not enough to abuse me but also to belie me?


Can: You sir agreed to this match.


Spe: Thou brazen face boy, think thou by learning to persuade me to that
which thou speak. Where did I consent, when, what witness?


Can: In this place yesterday before Dromio and Risio.


Pri. I remember we heard a contract between Memphios son and Stellios
daughter, and that our good wills being asked which needed not, we gave them,
which booted not.


Can: It Was but the apparel of Accius and Silena, we were the persons.


Pri: O villainy not to be borne, Wast thou privy to this practice?


Lin: In a manner.


Pri. I Will pay thee after a manner.


Spe: And you oatemeale groate, you were acquainted with this plot.


Half. Accessarie as it were.


Spe: Thou shall be punished as principal: here comes Memphio and Stellio, they
belike were privy, and all their heads were laid together to grieve our
hearts.


Enter Memphio, Stellio. Mem. Come Stellio, the assurance may be made to
morrow, and our children assured to day.


Stel. Let the conueyance run as we agreed.


Pri. You convey cleanely in deed, if coosnage be clean dealing, for in the
apparel of your children you have conuaide a match between ours, which
grieves us not a little.


Mem: Nay in the apparel of your children you have discouerd the folly of ours,
which shames us overmuch


Stel: But it is no matter, though they be fools they are no beggars.


Spe: And though ours be disobedient, they be no fools.


Dro. So now they tune their pipes.


Ri. You shall hear sweet music between a hoarse raven and a schritch owl.


Mem. Neighbors, let us not vary, our boys have played their cheating parts,
I suspected no less at the Tavern, where four four knaves met together.


Ri. If it were knavery for four to meet in a Tavern, your worcester. wot well
there were other four.


Stel. This villain calls us knaves by craft.


Lin: Nay truly I dare swear he used no craft, but means plainly.


Spe. This is worse, come Half. tell truth and escape the rod.


Half. As good honfesse here being trust, as at home with my hose about my
heels.


Dro. Nay I Will tell thee, for twill never become the to utter it.


Mem. Well out with it.


Dro. Memphio had a fool to his son which Stellio knew not, Stellio a fool
to his daughter unknown to Memphio; to coosen each other they dealte with
their boys for a match; we met with Lincio and Halfepenie, who told the love
between their masters children, the youth deeply In love, the fathers
unwitting to consent.


Ri. I Will take the tale by the end; then we four met, which argued we were no
mountains, and in a tauern we met, which argued we were mortal, and every one
in his wine told his days work, which was a sign we forgot not our business,
and seeing all our masters troubled with devises, we determined a little to
trouble the water before they drunk, so that in the attire of your children
our masters wise children bewrayed their good natures, and in the garments of
our masters children yours made a marriage; this all stood upon us poor
children and your young children, to show that old folks may be overtaken by
children.


Pri. Here Is a children in deed, I Will never forget it.


Mem. I will, Accius come forth.


Stel. I forgive all, Silena come forth.


Spe. Neighbor, these things cannot be recald, therefore as good consent,
seeing in all our purposes also we mist the mark, for they two will match
their children.


Pri. Well of that more anon, not so suddenly least our ungracious youths
think we dare do no other, but in truth their loves stirs up nature in me.


Mem. Come Accius thou must be married to Silenena. How art thou minded?


Acc. What for ever and Mem. ^ Accius, what else?


Acc. I shall never be able to abide it, it will be so tedious.


Stel. Silena thou must be betrothed to Accius, and love him for thy husband.


Sil. I had as liefe have one of clouts.


Stel. Why Silena?


Si. Why look how he looks.


Acc. If you will not another will.


Sil. I thank you for mine old cap.


Acc. And if you be so lusty lend me two shillings.


Pri. We are happy, we mist the foolish match.


Mem. Come you shall presently be contracted.


Dro. Contract their wits no more, they be shronke close already.


Acc. Well father heeres my hand, strike the bargain.


Si. Must he lie with me?


Stel. No Silena, lie by thee.


Acc. I shall give her the humble bees kiss.


Enter Vicinia. Vic. I forbid the banes.


Ri. What do thou think them rattes, and fear they shall be poisoned?


Mem. You Vicinia, wherefore?


Vic. Hearken, about eighteen years ago I must thee a son Memphio, and
thee a daughter Stellio.


Stel. True.


Mem. True.


Vic. I had at that time two children of mine own, and being poor, thought it
better to change them than kill them, I imagined if by device I could thrust
my children into your houses, they should be well brought up in their youth, and
wisely provided for in their age, nature wrought with me, and when they were
weaned I sent home mine in sted of yours, which hitherto you have kept tenderly
as yours: growing in years I found the children I kept at home to love
dearly, at first like brother and sister, which I rejoiced at, but at length
too forward in affection, which although inwardly I could not mislike, yet
openly I seemed to disallowe: they increased in their loving humors, I ceased
not to chastise them for their loose demeanors, at last it came to my ears,
that my son that was out with Memphio was a fool, that my daughter with
Stellio was also unwise, and yet being brother and sister, there was a match
in hammering betwixt them.


Mem. What monstrous tale is this?


Stel. And I am sure incredible.


Spe. Let her end her discourse.


Acc. I Will never believe it.


Mem. Hold thy peace.


Vic. My very bowels earned within me, that I should be author of such vilde
incest, an hinderance to lawful love, I went to the good old woman Mother
Bombie to know the event of this practice, who told me this day I might
prevent the danger, and upon submission escape the punishment, hither I am come
to claim my children, though both sooles, and to deliver you^ both loving.


Mem. Is this possible, how shall we believe it?


Stel. I cannot sink into my head.


Vic. This trial cannot fail, your son Memphio had a moale under his care,
I framed one under my childs care by art, you shall see it taken away with
the juice of mandrage, behold now for your sons, no herb can undo that
nature has done. Your daughter Stellio has on her wrist a moale, which I
counterfeted on my daughters arm, and that shall you see taken away as the
other. Thus you see I do not dissemble, hoping you will pardon me, as I have
pitied them.


Memp. This is my son, O fortunate Memphio!


Stel. This is my daughter, more than thrice happy Stellio?


Maest. How happy is Maestius thou blessed Serena, that being neither children
to poor parents, nor brother and sister by nature, may inioye their love by
consent of parents and nature.


Acc. Solt, I Will not swap my father for all this.


Si. What do you think I Will be cosned of my father, me thinks I should not,
Mother Bombie told me my father knew me not, my mother bore me not, falsely
bred, truly begot, a bots on Mother Bomby.


Dro. Mother Bombie told us we should be found coosners, and in the end be
cosned by cosners, welfare Mother Bomby.


Ri. I heard Mother Bomby say that thou shall die a beggar, beware of Mother
Bomby.


Pri. Why have you all been with Mother Bomby?


Lin. All, and as far as I can see foretold all.


Mem. In deed she is cunning and wise, never doing harm, but still practicing
good, seeing these things fall out thus, are you content Stellio the match go
forward.


Stel. I, with double joy, having found for a fool a wise maid, and finding
between them both exceeding love.


Pri. Then to end alliars, our childrens matches shall stand with our good
liking, Liuia enjoy Candius.


Spe. Candius enjoy Liuia.


Can. How shall we recompense fortune, that to our loves has added our parents
good wills?


Maest. How shall we requite fortune, that to our loves has added
lawfulness, and to our poor estate competent living?


Mem. Vicinia thy fact is pardoned, though the law would see it punished, we be
content to keep Silena in the house with the new married couple.


Stel. And I do maintain Accius in our house.


Vic. Come my children, though fortune has not provided you lands, yet you
see you are not destitute of friends, I shall be eased of a charge both in
purse and conscience, in conscience, have revealed my lewd practice, in purse,
having you kept of alms.


Acc. Come if you be my sister its the better for you.


Sil. Come brother, me thinks its better than it was, I should have been but
a balde bride, I Will eat as much pie as if I had been married.


Memp. Lets also forgive the knauerie of our boys since all turns to our good
haps.


Stel. Agreed, all are pleased now the boys are unpunished*


Enter Hackneyman, Sergeant, Scriuener. Hack. Nay soft, take us with you, and
seek redress for our wrongs, or we will complain to the Mayor.


Pri. What Is the matter?


Hack. I arested Memphios boy for an horse after much mocking, at the request
of his fellow wagges, I was content to take a bond ioyntlye of them all, they
had me into a tavern, there they made me, the Scriuener, and the Sergeant
drunk, paunde his mase for the wine, and sealed me an obligation nothing to
the purpose, I pray you read it.


Memp. What wags be these? Why by this bond you can demand nothing, and things
done in drink, may be repented in sobernes, but not remedyed.


Dro. Sir, I have his acquittaunce, let him sue his bond.


Hack. I Will cry quittance with thee.


Ser. And I, or it shall cost me the laying on freely of my mase.


Scri. And I Will give thee such a dash with a pen as shall cost thee many a
pound, wi^h such a Nouerimt as cheap side can show none such.


Half. Do your worst, our knaueries will renenge it upon your childrens
children.


Memp. Thou boy, we will pay the hire of the horse, be not angry, the boys
have been in a merry cosning vain, for they have served their masters of the
same sort, but all must be forgotten, now all are content but the poor
fiddlers, they shall be sent for to the marriage and have double fees.


Dro. You need no more send for a fiddler to a feast, than a beggar to a fair.


Stel. This day we will feast at my house.


Mem. To morrow at mine.


Pri. The next day at mine.


Spe. Then at mine the last day, and even so spend this week in good cheer.


Dro. Then we were best be going whilst every one is pleased, and yet these
couples are not fully pleased, till the priest have done his worst.


Ri. Come Sergeant we will toss it this week, and make thy mase arest a boild
capon.


Ser. No more words at the wedding, if the mayor should know it, I were in
danger of mine office.


Ri. Then take heed how on such as we are, you show a cast of your office.


Half. If you mace us, we will pepper you.


Ac. Come sister, the best is, we shall have good che^^ these four days.


Lin. And be fools for ever.


Si. That's none of our vpseckings.


FINIS.

