A New Ballade.
O Dear Lady Elysabeth, which art our right and vertous Queen
God has endued the with mercy and faith, as by thy works it may be seen
Wherefore good Queen I counsel thee, Lady Lady.
For to beware of the spirituality most dear Lady.
Have you not read of your progenitors, which was before you many a year
How they endured many sharp showers, as by the cronicles it does appear
And many of them came to evil hap, lady lady,
And all was through the forked cap most dear Lady.
Have you not read of Wyllyam Rufus the second king hereof that name
How he was slain most marvelous, all through the curssed seed of caine.
Tyrell kyllede him with an arrowe, Lady lady
Yet some men said he shot at a sparow most dear Lady.
Have you not read of good King John, how by them he was undone
The Bishop of Canterbury ye wicked man, accused him to the court of Rome
They enterdyted his land as the cronicle says, Lady Lady.
A monk poisoned him to his death, most dear Lady.
Have you not read of the second Richard, who was the black princes son
How they handled him full hard, and famished him til life was done
In Powles they made him a funeral Lady Lady,
To blind the peoples eyes withal, most dear Lady.
Have you not read of the sixth Henry which was a good and a simple man
The Cardinal of Wynchester truly, made him lose, that his father wanne
The good Protector his uncle dear, Lady Lady,
The priests kept war with him a long year most dear Lady.
Then came your father, King Henry ye.viii. which was a prince of victory
And he deposed them all straight, when he had spyed their Idolatry
If this be true as true it was, Lady, Lady,
God grant your grace may do no less most dear Lady.
The^ came your brother king Edward, which was a good and virtuous child
And to gods word he had regard, but the wicked priests has him begilde
And raised up trentalles in every place, Lady Lady,
And some of them preached against his grace most dear Lady,
Then came your sister queen Mary, and for five years that she did rain,
All that was done Edward and Hary, her wicked priests made it but vain
They brought in again the Romyshe lore, Lady Lady,
Which was banished long before, most dear Lady.
Then God sent us your noble grace, as in deed it was high time
Which does all popery clean deface, and set us forth Gods true divine
For whom we are all bound to pray Lady Lady,
Long life to reign both night and day, most dear Lady.
FINIS.
quod. R.M.


