KING CHARLES HIS BIRTHRIGHT.

ECCLESIASTES X.XVII. Blessed art thou O Land, when thy KING is the Son of
Nobles.

By P. M. Gentleman.

royal English blazon or coat of arms

EDINBVRGH, Printed by John Wreittoun. 1633.

KING CHARLES HIS BIRTHRIGHT.
ECCLESIASTES X.XVII. Blessed art thou O Land, when thy KING is the Son of
Nobles.


IS any Land or any clyme,
More blessed then Britane at this time?
What Monarch or what Sovereign,
That dwells upon this earthly maine,
May with our matchless CHARLES compare,
Britane, France, and Irelands heir?
By HENRY, LIZA, peaceful JAMES,
Borne heir to four fair Diadames:
First to the Roses white and red,
Next to the Lilly sprung and spread,
Then to the Lion fierce and sharp,
And to Apollo's golden Harp:
The true borne Son of Kings before,
Above an hundredth seven and more:
The blessed effects which his reign brings,
Prompts him to be the Son of Kings:
A mortal God, a Prince divyne,
By line, law, lot, the Heavens propyne:
A peirlesse Prince, who from his youth,
Has ever lovde the sacred truth.
What gifts belongs to those that is crownde,
But in his Majesty is found,
He faith defends by his great might,
He represents GODS Image right:
He favors peace with friend and foe,
He can all veterate wrath forgo:
If need require he can prepare,
Most prudently for lawful War:
Or foes envyes our blessed estate,
To have a King chaste temperat,
Who being young we joy to tell,
Proves father to the Common-well,
Who wisely but all friends respect,
Can search out sins and sins correct:
Who lives a life of good report,
Example to the common sort,
Who is a terror to the Thief,
And to the good a strong relief,
Who has a heart stout and compleet,
Prepared all dangers for to meet:
Who has reformde the civil Laws,
For equity and justice cause,
No idle mumbling Papists prayers,
Nor yet no bloody Jesuit ayers,
No false Arminian, Brunist breath,
Dare echoed be within His earth.
To public offices and charges,
He only prefers and inlarges:
The honest, virtuous, and the good,
Not respecting wealth or blood:
He has a princely prudent care,
Over Orphans poor, and Widows bare:
But here are gifts which far exceeds,
And far surpasses vulgar heads:
He can securely in effect,
Walk wisely on the Dragons neck,
Most safely he can see and hear,
A Crocodile to spend a tear,
The Basilicks enchanting eye,
Can no more harm him than a fly,
He makes the Lamb (simpathie rare)
Hard by the Wolf to sleep but fear:
The subtle Fox if he forbid,
Dare not approach the harmless kid.
These gifts superlatiue and more,
His Princely wisdom does decore,
And seek him extra, you shall see,
A Paragone but paritie.
For why his life defyance throes
At envyes face, and all his foes:
Can any Naboth plain he wants,
His Vine-yeard for his fruitful plants:
Or can Vriah say he dies,
Because the King his wife espyes:
Or can the people or CHRIST'S flock,
Complain of Sal'mons heavy yocke:
Can any curre-mouthd Mastiue say,
(That barks upon the world this day)
Say but his Soul does still commence,
Peace and Religions defense,
And if subsidies be concluded,
Its for those holy ends obtruded:
Since Kings are Gods how dare ye then,
Like Rabshaka's, Senacheribs men:
Presume to rail, reproach, or breath,
Against the Godhead of their earth:
Dare any in a thought abhord,
Curse this Anointed of the LORD.
Or blame this King whom reallie,
The Bards and Sybils prophecy:
To be that Prince whose happy stars,
Presages to appease all wars:
That true borne King, of whom of old,
The Ancient Prophets have foretold,
Of whom the Rymers in their verses,
Most happy events thus reherses:
That howsoever fortune fall,
The Lion shall be Lord of all,
This Princely Lion and this Lord,
Shall with this Lilly make concord:
That Syce shall up and Sink shall under,
The dead shall rise and work great wonder:
This Lion shall be King and Prince,
Of uncouth coasts far, far from hence.
And of a waste and desert ground,
A continent not fully found:
Where hudge great wilderness does lie,
Thither his Colonies must hye:
To banish Zoroastes hence,
Wirh Molech, Circe, and her Prince:
And when Appollyon and his Aries,
Are skipped over Carons Ferries:
Then shall he build to the true GOD,
Temples to praise his Name abroad,
And bring sweet Shiloh to that shore,
Where Abbadon did dwell before.
O Royal King thou art that He
Whom these predictions specify:
Thou art that King and true borne Caesar,
Our greatest hap and highest pleasure,
Britanes bless, and Europs jewel,
Our Palladium, food, and fuel:
GODS minion, and our only love,
Next to the King of Kings above:
Our guard, our watch, which still awakes
In toil and travel for our sakes.
Then come (Blessed KING) with great renown,
Receive your great grand Fathers Crown:
Your birthright Crown that did suppress,
The roaring Romans hardiness:
That Virgin Scepter singularie,
Never as yet made tributarie:
Your own true Crown (Great Sir) I mean,
Your old Fergusian diadame:
Except this Crown that Crown was never,
That did remain vnconquerd ever:
The Monarchs four so much renownde,
Were all most odiously decrownde:
The Lion with the Eagles wings,
(I mean the stout Assirian Kings)
Was by the barbarous Boar beat down,
Which signifies the Persian Crown:
The Leopard, the Grecian swey,
Did beat the mighty Boar away:
And then this Meteor Grecian might,
But lasted like a lightning bright:
The fearful Beast with many teath,
Which does point out the Romans wrath,
Though this Empire continued longest,
Yet it was broke even at the strongest:
Proud Spain were all but slaves of late*
Unto the great Cesarean state,
And Caesar was a slave beside,
To Gregory for all his pride:
France has thryse exchangde the line,
Within nine hundredth years and nine:
The Popes head ay an heirelesse crown,
A birthright for some bastard clown:
The faithless, graceless, Ottoman,
Was tributar to Tamerlan,
To Scanderbeg, and Godfrey stout,
And to the Christian Kings about:
And let me speak this but offense,
(With all submissiue reverence)
The Crown of Judah did remain,
A captive long in base disdain:
But your brave Caledonian Crown,
Bears this cognizance of renown,
An hundredth and seven Princes fair,
Leaves this vnconquish to their heir:
And of this flock, four score and ten,
Were Christian Kings and holy men:
Let any Nation in the World,
Vaunt in this manner uncontrolled:
For let the Scythian Crown contend,
Or Egypt for her age defend,
Compard with our antiquity,
They both are but a noveltie.
Great King this Crown and we are yours,
And you alone art only ours:
Your Princely Parents were our Kings,
And we their faithful underlings:
What night watches, and days travells,
What foreign feed, and homebred quarrels,
What wars, what dangers, toil and pain,
They had for us and we for them,
It is admirable to hear,
As our antiquities can clear:
And as they were, so shall we be,
Yours in superlatiue degree.
FINIS.

