A FUNERAL SERMON, Preached at the burial of the Lady Jane Maitlane, daughter
to the Right Noble Earl, John Earl of Lauderdail, at Hadington, the 19. of
December. 1631.

BY M. I. M.

Together with diverse Epitaphs, as well Latin, as English, written by sundry
Authors.

royal blazon as printer's device IN MY DEFENSE GOD ME DEFEND



EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Printers to the KINGS most excellent Majesty. 1633.

A FUNERAL SERMON PREACHED AT THE BURIAL of the Lady Jane MAITLANE.
JOB. 14.14. All the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change
come.


IT is said, that it is better to be in the house of mourning, than mirth; if
ever, I trust now, you are in a house of mourning, and mourners; mourners, not
so much with their doole, and mourning clothes; as with mourning hearts and
weeping eyes. I pray God this mourning caused by this more than mournful
object, may draw us to a mourning for our selves, and for our sins. And that
this change may lead us to the practice of Job his resolution here, All the
days of my appointed time will I wait till my change come: I make it the
ground of my speech; since of a mourner I must be a speaker. Loath was I to it;
But how should I, how could I detrect it? this being the least duty I can; the
last I ever shall perform to the never-to-be-forgotten memory of this
Honorable young Lady; Repressing therefore and smothering my own grief for a
time; I will proceed having first called upon God, who only can direct me, how
to speak, you how to hear, and both to his glory.

THis change, to her als joyful, as to us sorrowful, calls upon us with Job,
all the days of our appointed time to wait till our change come. Few words,
yet large matter; which at this time, is rather a trouble, than an ease to the
speaker: of whom you cannot expect Scholastic speculations, flowers of
Fathers, broken sentences of Poets; such elaborate and painted discourses as
they, are more for show than profit, so to this time altogether unsuitable. It
shall suffice me, if tempering my speech with brevity and perspicuity, I can
enforce upon you, the practice of what Job resolved, All the days of your
appointed time to wait till your change come. And thus I enter upon my text by
way of, 1. explication. 2. application. 3. exhortation. For explication, as I
will not detain you with the dependence and deduction of the text; so I will
not be curious in cutting and dividing the words: only, in general, I take
them as running on three points, 1. Life, 2. Death, 3. Preparation in life for
death. Of life you have two things; one expressed; That the time thereof is
appointed; the other implied; That it is short, rather to be measured by days
than years. Death and the preparation thereto, are set down in two words of
large extent; death is a change, and our preparation a waiting for this change.

Our time is appointed, not by our selves, not by man, not by any other
creature; but by the creator of all. His we are in our coming, staying, leaving
this world: from him is our time here, and change hence: what ever besides,
within us, without us, gets the name of prolonging our time, or hasting our
change, it is subordinate to his appointment.

2. Our time is appointed: Some have years; some months; some days; some
hours; all appointed, and measured forth by God. One comes to his change by a
burning fever; another by a lingering consumption; one meets it in his bed,
another in the street; thousands at once in the field, and all by appointment.
If the sparrows falling or flying, one hair of thy head it is growing or
falling be appointed; how not our time and change by appointment?

3. Our time is appointed by him who knows what is best for him, what for us;
our time is from him, and should be for him: As our coming is not by chance, so
neither our going. We are all set here for some business, which being done; then
our appointed time leads to our change. Thus for the appointment of our time.

All the days of my appointed time: Here the next, the brevitie of this time;
a point so clear by the light of Scripture, reason, and daily experience; that
it might seem a vain expense of our appointed time to insist upon it. And
surely if men's inward conceits, and outward practices did comply with their
verbal profession, I should wrong both you and my self, to make a pause here.
But alas, what ever be the confession of the days of our appointed time, yet
I am sure our carriage speaks, that we dream not of days but of years, yea
many years of our appointed time. Whence I entreat you is the casting away of
so much of our appointed time, in doing nothing, in doing evil? whence the
tyring of our wits to find out new ways to the spending thereof? whence the
too-long spun-web of our ambitious, avaritious thoughts? whence those many
delays, whereby we shift knowledge, repentance, faith? All grace and
goodness, and this waiting for our approaching change? whence all those? but
from our conceit not of days, but of years, not of short, but long life? Yet
the truth is, howsoever we may deceive and are deceived, Jobs words must stand
(All the days of my appointed time) spoken by a man of truth, and inspired by
the spirit of truth.

Scripture is so copious in this argument, that hardly can you turn over many
pages, but you will meet with one or other passage or word sounding this way.
Neither only will you find positive speeches, but great variety of
resemblances, whereby Gods Spirit would set forth these days, or shortness of
our appointed time. Hence these comparisons, of a flower, a shadow, a vapor
appearing for a while, and then vanishing, a dream, an Eagles flight in the
air, a cloud blown away with the wind, or else dissolved; a span measured in
an instant, with many such like: David calls it vanity, which is nothing; yea
not only his time and days, but him self, because of them; Every man in his
best estate is altogether vanity, Psalm. 39.5. where each word is emphaticke,
man, every man, every man in his best estate, is vanity, is altogether
vanity: And Psalm. 62.9. The children of men are vanity, the chief men are
lies; to lay them upon a balance they are altogether lighter than vanity: And
how I pray you can we count that long, which is in continual consumption; the
more time we have, the nearer we are to our change; yea our change begins in a
manner with our time; no sooner living than beginning to die: Yesterday is not
to be recalled, what is past is perished; the shadow of our time is still in
motion; this glass still running; this ship still sailing; while we are
eating, drinking, sleeping, walking, talking, we are still carried to this
change; and to close this point; there is nothing makes our time seem long,
but the expectation of hope of long time; and the longest time, once passed, is
but a dream, but vanity.

Thus of life, as appointed by God; as measured by days; The other two points
of our change, and waiting for this change, is matter for many sermons, and a
task for our whole life; But within this short scantling of time, wherewith I
am straightened, I shall absolve them in two words. The change we must wait for,
is that which is begun by death, and is accomplished at our resurrection; O how
joyful, how glorious a change to the godly; whose corruption puts on
incorruption, whose mortality puts on immortality; who are changed and
transchanged into the glory of God. This happy change we must wait for; First,
by practice, living so as we may attain to it. Secondly, by meditation,
thinking on it ere it come. Thirdly, by resolution embracing it when it comes;
I hasten to the application.

Works move more than words, teaching by exemple is more effectual than by
discourse. If the ardent, and affectionat desires of her Honorable parents,
the hearty wishes of her many worthy friends; the many salt tears, sobs,
sighs, groans, of all her acquaintance, the prayers and supplications of us
all; if gifts of body and mind surpassing ordinary, and stirring almost
admiration in the beholders; if all those could have delayed this change,
neither should your eyes have seen, nor my tongue this day spoken of it; but
it was appointed by God, blessed be his name; his will, not ours, be done.

Maximilian, the first of that name, commanded that his dead body should be
exposed to public view; adding this reason, ut vel meo discant exemplo.
Behold we have this day proposed our Maxima, the choycest jewel we had, once
the delight of our eyes, and the joy of our hearts; her we proposed a
spectacle, not to be gazed upon, but that in this change ye might read a
lecture of your own coming change; It is I know expected I should speak
somewhat of her; and why should I frustrat your expectation? for though these
speeches should not be Panegyricks, only for the praises of the dead; but
rather instructions for the living; yet I see not why their due commandations,
because of their excellent virtues, should be suppressed; since God, in them,
by them, is glorified, others edified. And has not the holy Spirit told us,
that, As the memory of the wicked shall rot, so the memory of the just shall
be blessed. Prove. 10.7. The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance,
Psalm. 112.6. If with God, why not with man?

Having upon those grounds resolved to speak of her, yet so, as the truth of
my love, should not prejudge my love of truth; still for a time I remained
irresolved what to speak, where to begin, when to end; inopem me copia fecit.
In end I found that, as to speak nothing were intolerable, so to speak all
were impossible: So that my course must be of many things to make choice of
some few; and that by confining my speech to my text, 1. of her days; 2. of
her appointed time; 3. her change; 4. her waiting for her change. All the days
of her appointed time did she wait till her change came.

All the days. Sometimes days are taken for years, and years for days; when
I speak of her time, I doubt whether to say days, or years: Let me join them
both; all the days, all the years: Her appointed time was days, her appointed
time was years; it was short, it was long. Will we take time and days as they
are ordinarily; alas then I must say she had days, and but few days that
was worthy of years, of many years; thousands who abuse their time to the
dishonor of God, themselves, the world, have many days; while she, who knew
both what time was, and how to use time, had but few. Ah what pity to behold
such a blossom blasted in the spring? such a flower withered in the morning?
such a bright and glancing star overclouded with a gloomie and tempestuous
night. But if we shall call those only days that are spent honorably,
virtuously, religiously, then I may boldly turn days into years, and say, all
the years of her appointed time. Her time was not short, but long. Diu vixit,
licet non diu fuit, She lived long in a short time; is one day of a man's life
governed with knowledge and reason, to be prized above the many years of the
unreasonable creature? why not her few days full of knowledge and grace to be
valued beyond the longest time of too too many, who at four times twenty come
to their change empty of both? if her few days breed sorrow, let her many
years bring us comfort.

Her time was Appointed by God; here a ground of patience. Since this change,
the affections and passions of many have shown themselves, and still does; The
eyes of all who knew her, the tongues of all who heard of her do abundantly
testify, not a private but a public sorrow: and shall we condemn that, which
God and Nature commands? Christ and his Saints practiced it. We find the
Patriarchs and holy men mourning over their dead: our blessed Savior shedding
tears over Lazarus; and shall it then be strange if we behold her worthy
parents lifting up their voices with cries, being deprived of such a divided
piece of themselves? Her honorable friends to bedeaw their cheeks, being
robbed of such a choice flower of their garland? all her acquaintance,
familiars, and followers, to fill heaven and earth with their lamentations?
wanting her, whose enjoying was a great part of their earthly joy? yea, and it
is strange to see all those bounds where she was known by eye or ear, to mourn;
each family, as if they were mourning for their own first born, being frustrat
of those great hopes, and common benefits, her few days did promise to all?
Surely it is not strange, nor can be blamed. And to increase it by patheticke
speeches, I neither can, being already at such a hight; neither will, least we
give too large reins to it. Not to mourn, is not only graceless, but
unnatural; to be immoderate in our mourning is not Christian, but Heathenish.
When Jacob came to his change, Joseph mourned; so did the Egytians; he but 7.
days, they 70. Genesis 50.3.10. He knew his time was appointed by God, they
looked to fate, and necessity: he knew his death was but a change, they took
it for a final dissolution and destruction. Mourn then we may, we should, but
to exceed in our mourning as those who have no hope, we may not, we should not.
And here among many, one ground for the moderation of our sorrow, and
persuading of patience, Her time was appointed of God: if it had been possible
that another should have wrought this change; would we, think ye, have taken it
patiently? no, rather would we have parted with our own eyes. But now, O Lord,
thou have done it, and therefore with thy servant David we must close our
mouth, yea reverence, obey, glorify thy appointment, just are all thy
ordinances, upright are all thy ways: Though before with David we did weep,
and would not be comforted, yet now seeing the evidence of thy appointment, we
must rise up and praise thee.

Ye see her appointed time: I come now to her waiting. Job says, he would wait
for his change, and why may not I say, All her days she did wait till her
change came. For if the waiting for our change be; first, the leading of such a
life as does show, we know there will be a change; secondly, if it be in the
confluence of worldly blessings, to mind more our change than them; thirdly,
if it be, at the approaching thereof, to desire it, embrace it, welcome it, joy
in it, then I may truly say, she did wait for her change. God is my witness,
what I speak, it is not from partial affection, so it is not for particular
ends. I follow not doubtful rumors, uncertain and flying reports; but what I
know to be truth from her birth to this her change, from her cradle to her
grave; I speak and that for truths sake; setting her waiting for a pattern to
our waiting.

First then, I say, her life was such as did testify she knew there would be a
change. Religion, piety, devotion is that, which gives, as it were, another
life to all moral virtues, and makes them Christian, without it they may be
profitable to others, but little to our selves. It is true, only God knows
the heart in it self, and by himself: but if pregnant presumptions, and well
nigh infallible signs may be a firm ground for passing censure; I may
confidently affirm and assevere, that the fear of God was placed, yea deeply
rooted in her heart: and from this fountain did flow those streams of the
exercise of religion; Her hunger, and burning desire to hear Gods word, her
attention in hearing, her knowledge by hearing, her sweet devout communication
and practice after hearing; What? shall I name to you her frequent praying;
daily reading; her writing almost the whole New Testament with her own hand:
and was all only in hypocrisy, and for show? No, I am assured her religion
was not so much in her ears and tongue (as it is with many) as in her heart
and life. Who knew her, knows she was more in substance than in show. From
this same fountain flowed also that rare, and scarce to be matched obedience,
love, honor, and all due respect to her parents; which as her whole life did
witness, so her change: nothing more grieving her for her change, as that her
change would bring grief to them. If I should enlarge her observance to her
superiors in regard of age and state of life, her dutiful respect to her
equals, her modest and moderat carriage to her inferiors; her love to all, and
love of all; I might easily weary my self in relating, and you in hearing. The
mouths of many will speak what now I may not, only two words: It is rare to
find so few years so full of nature, so full of grace: And next whereas such
eminent parts and virtues, especially in young years, are usually accompanied,
yea and darkened with more than conspicuous faults: I know many will bear
witness with me, that not only she was free of such as might any ways
obscure her more noble parts; but even of such as might bring upon her the
least stain before man, being blameless (far be it from me to say before God)
I am sure before the world. Now judge ye if such a life was not a waiting for
her change?

For the second, The confluence of worldly blessings; I confess my ignorance
in Herauldry, to describe her pedigree and descent, derived by many generations
from her well deserving ancestors. Only this I can say (and let me say it to
provoke their posterity to imitation and emulation) they were truly honorable,
since both blood and virtue joined to make them noble: noble not only by
inheritance, but by purchase: Their greatness from their blood, their goodness
was from their virtue. Such her birth. But what availes names, titles, arms,
honors, if there be no more? her birth did not so much honor her, as she it;
having in a beautiful body a more beautiful soul; such knowledge, wisdom,
skill in all things befitting her sex, and far above her age^ that scarce her
equal, let be her superior could be found. Why should I speak to you of her
many noble friends, her means and worldly estate, and hopes, and such like.
And those also are Gods blessings, not to be neglected, and by many too much
respected: Now what could have been expected, but that this concurrence of
earthly blessings of all sorts, within, without, of birth, body, soul, estate,
friends, would have tied her heart to the world, and raised her thoughts to an
applauding of her self, and contemning of others? But ah! who ever did see
pride shine in those eyes? when did ever neglect and contempt show it self, in
that meek, loving, and lovly countenance? I have often wondered to behold such
excellent parts followed with such admirable humility, humanity, modesty,
curtisie: and that not only toward the great (which may, and oftentimes dwells
with pride) but even to those of the lower sort. Now what did all this show?
but that her heart was not in this world; that those worm-eaten and fading
pleasures did not bewitch her; that she did think on her change; and that
trampling under foot all the pomp and glory of this world, she did aspire to
that glory, the eye never saw, the ear never heard?

Thirdly, when her weakness did threaten her change; with what spiritual
courage did she welcome it? Thousands dare not so much as once think on their
change: The Athiest, the Epicure, the worldling are confounded with the
apprehension thereof: Only the child of God dares encounter it. Her strength
was from God, whom she did ply, and importune with ardent prayers to strengthen
and confirm her in her last conflict. Her inward friends, a good conscience,
and faith in Christ did sustain her; and made that as she was not ashamed to
live, so not afraid to die.

The last word of my text, and of her, is her change; O bitter-sweet change!
bitter to us, sweet to her. To us bitter, who shall see no more that face, nor
hear that voice, we never saw nor heard, but with pleasure, and joy! bitter to
us, who by this change have our joy changed into sorrow, our laughter into
mourning! but o sweet, o joyful change to her! who hereby has changed earth
for heaven, the place of her exile for her fathers house; where there be many
mansions: the company of mortal men, with the happy fellowship of the
immortal God, of Christ her Savior, of the glorious Angels, and blessed
spirits of the just! Her change like the furnace of fire to the three children,
at the worst has but loosed her bands; like Ionah's whale carried her through
the storms of this tempestuous world to the port of her eternal rest; like the
red Sea has opened her a passage from this Egypt to that heavenly Caanan. Her
then we neither do, nor can bewail, whose change has changed her to joy
without change: but we may, we do bewail our selves; we bewail our own lose;
the doleful memory whereof some of us I hope will ever carry about, aye until
our own change come.

I have done with my application, wherein if any shall think I have spoken too
much, yet I will think too little; and I hope there is none, to whom she was
known, but knows that I have kept within bounds, and will blame perhaps my
defect rather than excess.

I come to the last thing I purposed: The exhortation. Right honorable, right
worthy, and dearly beloved; you have heard of Job his change; and now see
this: Let me tell you that ere long, there is not any of us, who are here, but
he shall come to his own change. Here indeed we have distinctions of states,
callings, persons, and that justly; but Pallida mors, this change does equal
all; you know the comparison of the chesse-men, while the play lasts, there
is distinction of them; being esteemed as they may best serve our purpose; but
the play ended, and chekmete given, all promiscuously are hurled in the box;
and often the least lies above the greatest: So here, though men be more or
less regarded in respect of the foresaid differences; yet when this change
comes, whereby the play of this life is ended, then we are equally hurled in
the grave, and often the poor man's dust lies above the rich. When ye behold a
heap of bones, who can say, here are the rich man's, there the poor's? Oh! if we
could obtain so much liberty and leisure of our too too many restless and
unprofitable thoughts, as to make this change a great part of our daily
meditation! We need not Philip's monitor, nor a dead man's skull used by the
Egyptians, to be our memento; each place, day, person will do it. And yet
alas, though nothing be more seen, and better known, nothing is less
thought upon: such a change as this, may possibly enforce us to reflect our
thoughts upon our selves, and our own approaching change; but ah! how short,
how evanishing, how ineffectuall are those thoughts! one moment often giving
them both life and death? But I may not trespass too far upon your patience in
pressing this argument. Let me with some brief collections resume my text and
leave.

Is our time but days? First, how may we not bewail the bygone, that so much
of so short time should have been so evil employed? And secondly, why are we
not careful to manage that which is remaining. Thirdly, you have tasted of all
those fading pleasures, the world does either promise, or can give; experience
has made you see their vanity, being but like yester-nights dream. Why then
should our few days be taken up any longer with that, which we know in the end
will bring us nothing, but late repentance? Fourthly, our time is short, and
yet upon this day, this hour, this moment of our life, depends an eternity
either of pleasure or pain. What madness to purchase eternal pain for a
moments seeming pleasure? Fifthly, Methushalem his days were too few either to
express our sorrow for sin, or thankfulness for Gods mercies: How then
should we not be circumspect so to govern those few days of our appointed
time, that not one day, not one hour may pass, without doing that we never
can do sufficiently?

The days of our appointed time are uncertain? Job says, all the days, but
he tells not how many; he professes, he will wait till his change come; but knew
not, when it would come: And is not his case herein, ours also? Yes certainly.
Who knows but this day may end his days; and your change may meet you ere you
meet with your houses; how should this hasten our repentance? our amendment? We
are always resolving and still unresolved; what projects, what purposes
tending to reformation of our lives have vanished in the air? O when shall we
begin to do that, the not doing whereof will make us undone? Your time is
uncertain here; and what if this change of your bodies preveen the change of
your souls? Oh beloved, delay not longer; How many are in hell who had those
fleeting and flying motions of repentance and reformation, that some of you now
have? but postponing them, this change interveened, and brought a doleful
change upon them. Let not, I entreat you, a matter of such consequence, as the
eternal salvation of your souls be casten off to future time which is so
uncertain.

Our change is certain and common. If with Abel we had no precedent examples
thereof, our not waiting were in some sort tolerable; but now in this general
condition of all mankind, whereby they are liable to this change, what can we
pretend for our egregious slacknesse and remissness that will not thus change
in our thoughts, before it seize on our bodies. Does the earth-worme take his
change to heart? no: then he would not waste his body, mind, conscience, so
excessively, for the heaping together the trash of this earth; since by this
change he will be stripped of all? Does the thought hereof bereave the aspiring
spirit of its rest? no: then he would not so beat his brains, spend his wits,
that he may raise himself though upon the ruin of his betters: since by this
change he must once be trodden under foot, and have all his earthly glory laid
in the dust. But I must end. I pray God this change may teach us, all the days
of our appointed time to wait, till our change come. (*)

FINIS.
IN OBITUM NOBILISSIMAE Virginis JANAE METELLANAE, filiae Comitis Lauderi.
QVarta Metellanam subtraxit olympias orbi,
Spem procerum, patrii deliciasque soli.
Ante Deae quam Juno suos accenderet ignes,
Barbara Lethaeis Atropos hausit aquis.
Quid querar? urticis fas est sperare senectam,
Lappa nec hybernas deperit ante nives;
Sed violas, tenerasque rosas, and candida prati
Lilia, vere vides surgere, vere mori.
Aliud,
CVitria debuerat largiri secla, puellam
Parca Metellanam post tria lustra rapit.
Virtutes numer at Lachesis, non supputat annos;
Fructus erat praecox, carptus and ante diem.
Arturus Jonstonus.
Coelestes animi dotes producere possent
Si vitam, procul and mortis depellere tela;
Omnes, Diva, tibi vidisses funere Nymphas
Praereptas, maestae quae nunc tua funera deflent:
Verum aliter visum superis: properantia fata
Coelestes rapiunt regnae ad coelestia mentes:
Nec patitur Coeli clementia, prima lutosis
Ornamenta poli terrarum haerere lacunis.
Joannes Adamsonus.
PAlladium Vestaeflagrante ex aede Metellus
Sustulit, e medjis eripuitque focis.
Vesta memor facti, servatorisque Minervae,
Jure Metellanis semper amica fuit.
Hanc igitur castam rapuit de gente Metelli,
Aeterna ut possit virginitate frui.
Et sibi quod data sit fatis tutela Decembris,
Mortalis vitae terminus ille fuit.
G. Jonstonus. M. D.
Hac voti mensura hominum componitur urna,
Et desiderij meta supremajacet.
Si generis series placet, haec millesima claros
Censebat longo sanguine gentis avos:
Si decor, and niveo delectat gratia vultu,
Aemula certabant Cypridos ora Deae:
Si dos ampla juvat, superabant munera matri
Et patri, Attaticae quas numeraret opes,
Dulcius argutas pulsabat Apolline chordas,
Doctius and Phrygia Pallade pinxit acu.
Dextera non aliter signavit arundine voces,
Quam quae chalchographis charta notata typis.
Virtute aequales superavit, Cynthia quantum
Exiguas, pleno cum nitet orb, faces.
Vnde licet matura viro, quia lege marita
Nullus erat tantos dignus inire toros,
Connubio Deus ipse sibi sociavit in aevum,
Et fruitur sponso, nunc super astrae, Deo.
Defuncta matrem consolatur.
DEsine chara parens, mordaci pectora luctu
Etgemitu manes sollicitare meos.
Immaturatibi videor cecidisse juventa,
Alba velut primo flore ligustra cadunt:
Sed cita mors citius patrio quia reddit Olympo,
Mitte queri vitae de brevitate meae.
Exilium breve, vita brevis, cui longior aetas,
Longius exilij taedia lenta tulit.
M. Andr. Ramsaeus.
ECce Metellanae tumulum, quo condita virgo,
Vix vicena cui bruma peracta, jacet,
Si proavos spectes memorandaque stemmata, vixit
Illa Metellanae stirpsque decusque domus;
Si dotes, superum demissam sedibus, ipsis
A superis arts addidicisse reor.
Terpsichore docuit citharae percurrere nerves
Pectine, and ad dulces verbareferre modos:
Ardentes auro vestes ostroque superbo
Ipsa dedit Phrygia pingere Pallas acu,
Quin inter stellas ut Cynthia fulget, ut inter
Nimpharum virides Deiopeia choros;
Omnes huic decus eximium speciemque decoram
Aequales supra contulit alma Venus.
Certat at egregiae virtus dum vivida formae,
Vlterius nec quo progrediatur habet.
Huc propera, huc virgo propera, Deus inquit, ad astrae
Inclyta te revocat sortis origo tuae.
Da. Wedderburnus
REge Metellano (scriptorum ut consona vox est)
Natus erat nostri fons and origo boni;
Natus erat Christus, quo ductum stemmate nomen
Cernimus in nostros invaluisse dies.
Jamque cluit veteris flos, and nova gloria gentis,
Testis ades patrii gemma, Ladere, soli;
Testis Joanna es: tibi gratum ut gratia nomen,
Remque dedit, tanto nomini and esse parem.
Sique queam proprie communia dicere, sique
In re tanta animi promere sensa mei:
Jure Metellanae pariter cognomine gaudes:
Rite quadrat donis vox ita facta tuis,
(...) tenes: Deus est cognominis author;
(...) animae tot dedit alma tuae.
Virgoque virginibus jam regnas insita divis:
Fallitur interitum mors meditata tuum.
Vita tibi est Christus, cujus tot sancta supersunt
Dogmata, Daedalia quae tibi picta manu.
Sit tibi, sit certet quae stemmate, rarior aequa
Ornabit morum nobilitate genus.
M. Patricius Sandeus.
RApta jacet primis hic Metellana sub annis
Flebilis, and maestis virgo cienda modis:
Carpere qui tenerum Parcae potuistis amomum?
Non puduit tantum conviolasse decus?
Nectare virgineam Nymphae lachrimisque favillam
Spargite; perpetuo floreat urna croc^,
Vos cineri date justa pio, conferte corollas;
Haec redeat vestris annua cura choris.
Patr. Panterus.
FLete Metellanae cineres qui cernitis urnam,
Flete puellares, funereasque faces.
Herois soboles, and tanto digna parente,
Cuique pari genitrix auxit honor genus:
Vt generis clari, sic clarum exemplar honesti,
Virgo in virgineo gloria prima choro;
Dotibus ingenij dives, decoravit easdem
Artibus ingenuis, excoluitque labor.
Ast eadem quae lima animum terit, atterit annos,
Cura coquit teneras and philomusa dies.
Ante annos scivisse nocet, completaque virtus
Fecerat, ut Clotho crederet esse senem.
Prima sui secli, coeloque futura secunda,
Virginis Erigones virgo recepta sinu.
Virginis and lauds ductas meliore metallo,
Publica perpetuo fama tenore sonat.
Fama virtutum, tuba sempiterna.
Aliud.
MArmoreus nisi sit, quae marmore conditur iste,
Lectori lachrimas lecta movere potest.
Scilicet una, cui melos and myrothecion omne,
Sais and Aonidum sacra caterva dedit:
Vna bonis animi, fortunae, corporis aucta,
Quae data sunt alijs singula, cuncta tulit.
Altera, sed melior, merito Pandora Deorum,
Versibus Ascraeis altera digna novis.
Vtque suo similem, genuit vix Roma Metello,
Nostra Metellanae nec tulit ora parem.
Eximiae eximio tot in uno corpore dotes,
Secula Cumaeae promeruere senis.
Sed brevis immodicis aetas, and rara senectus,
Et cito saepe solent optima quaeque rapi.
Hoc decus, aetatis decas altera vexit ad astra,
Foelix quae coelo tam cito digna fuit.
Ad defunctam.
PRima puellarum quas prisca aut nostra tulerunt,
Quasque Caledonijs secla futura dabunt;
Parce, nec ista tibi veluti data justa putato,
Sed tanquam moestas manibus inferias.
Memoriae and amoris ergo
Moerens moestusque parentavit
Galt. Bellendinus.
QVae Venus huc taedas debebas far jugales,
Funereas quid das, heu Libitina, faces?
Vsque adeo Idaeae remanent vestigia rixae,
Pallada nec causa est hac cecidisse satis.
Palladium medio rapuit si ex igne Metellus,
Lumine non fuerat captus utroque pius.
Illa Metellanam tanto post tempore neptem
Invidia, and te nunc opprimis atra Venus.
(Is decor oris erat, roseisque affusa labellis
Gratia; non occulos unus obibat amor.)
Sed doluit Cytheraea suas in corpore dotes
Infra Cecropiae dona jacere Deae.
Quippe parem priscae nostram studuere tribuli
Fingere Caeciliam nata soroque Jovis.
Pronuba quod deerat, quaerebat Juno maritum
Jungere quem merita est Tarquinioque parem.
Invidit non casta Venus, quia Palladis arts
Et genium edidicit; pro face faxque data est.
Faxque Metellanae gratissima, quippe maritum
Perpetua accepit sic ea virgo Deum.
Aliud.
FRustra qui Numidas, frustra qui regna Philippi
Cognatus domuit, marmor eburque paret.
Non Lybicum quaero tumulum, non saxa Laconum,
Nec quae huc Dalmaticus flavametalla vehat.
Vsque sequor Judae coelestem virgo leonem,
Et me viventum circulus unus habet.
R. Magillus Juris et aequi studiosus,
QVae cantu Euterpe, quae juncta sororibus ipsa
Terpsichore, and plectro magnus Apollo potest:
Aut quas faemineis animis impendere dotes
Vel natura, vel ars ingeniosa solet;
His majora habuit, cujus modo stamina vitae
Abrupit Lachesis; tam cito rara cadunt!
Heu pietas coelum petyt, pudicitia, forma,
Nobilitas, virtus, Palladis ingenium.
Sed veluti bruma pereuntia, vere resurgunt;
Sic ea perpetuo flore renata viget.
L. J. M.
QVod coelum tenuit pulchri, quod terra bonique,
Metlana in gremium transijt omne tuum.
Quae poterat, major concesserat omnia mundus,
Nec potuit mundus plura tenere minor.
Religio veram te ostenderat Heroinam,
Tradiderat virtus and diadema suum.
Divinae varias decorasti Palladis arts,
Et musae gazas jure dedere suas.
Stemma vetus, comitas, castique modestia vultus,
Cogebant hominum lumina, corda sequi.
Sed mors humanas non curas ferrea curas;
Nil coeli aut terrae dona stupenda movent.
At quantum nostros contemnis, saeva dolores,
Tantum Nympha minas negligit ista tuas.
Avolat in patriam (te spreta) nobilis aulam;
Dilacerat nobis tristia corda abitus.
Hou nimium mors te fecerunt fata potentem,
Quid! pessum tantae virginis ora dari?
Colla jugo juvenis, dat colla and eburnea virgo,
Ergo te contra nullus asylus erit.
Evasere ungues, Pietas, virtusque rapaces,
Quaeque bonas animas gloria tuta manet.
Laeta dies veniet, qua tu moriere vicissim,
Tum genus in nostrum vana tyrannis erit.
Sed quid ego lauds aut vota effundere coner?
Te Deus auricomus carmina digna canat.
Sat misero vatijustum narrasse dolorem,
Flebile sat miseno sit cecinisse melos.
Plura vetat vulnus, moerentique obstruit ora,
Garrit cura levis, cura cruenta stupet.
Aliud.
WHat goodness, beauty, heaven and earth embowr'd
(Sweet Lady) upon Thee it all was powered
All which it could, the greater world thee gave,
And more no little world did e're receive,
Thee above all, religion did adorn,
And virtues crown was duly by thee born;
Divine Minerva's arts by thee were graced;
The Muses in their throne thee justly placed.
Birth, courtesy, sweet modesty and grace
Of eyes and hearts made thee the resting place.
But iron death contemning all our pleasures,
Of heaven and earth regarded not the treasures:
Yet if thou little did our groans respect,
(Grim ghost) this Nymphe too did thy threats neglect:
To heaven her longed-for soil (thoughtlesse of thee)
She flees, and leaves us in sad misery.
Alas? the Fates to thee have given hudge might;
That such a vergin lies bereft of light.
Maids iv'rie necks, and young men's all do yield
Unto thy yoke, against thee serves no sheeld.
Yet, virtue, glory, (though thou all devour)
And piety are not thralled to thy power.
That day hastes on, when of thy tyranny
Over man, the binding cords shall broken be:
Till then, you fragrant noble flowers attend
This monument, and here your powers extend.
And gems (heavens tears) bewailing stars, distill
Both day and night upon these ashes still.
I will not touch thy praises (noble dame)
The prince of poets should proclaim the same:
My just and bleeding grief I only show,
And some faint elegy thereon bestow.
Soreness of wound binds up a willing vain,
Brooks shallow murmr, deep floods noise disdain.
Sr D. L.
THe flower of virgins in her prime of years,
By ruthelesse destinies is taken away,
And raped from earth, poor earth, before this day
Which never was rightly named a vale of tears,
Beauty to heaven is fled, sweet modesty
No more appears; she whose harmonious sounds
Did ravish sense, and charm minds deepest wounds,
Embalmed with many a tear now low does lie.
Fair hopes evanish'd are; she should have graced
A princes marriage bed; but (lo!) in heaven
Blessed paramours to her were to be given!
She lived an angel, now is with them placed.
Virtue was but a name abstractly trimmed,
Interpreting what she was in effect,
A shadow from her frame, which did reflect,
A portrait by her excellencies lim'd.
Thou whom free will or chance has hither brought,
And readst; here lies a branch of Metlands stem,
And Seatons offspring; know that either name
Designs all worth, yet reached by humane thought.
Tombs (elsewhere) rise, life to their guests to give;
Those ashes can frail monuments make live.
M. W. Drumond.
Lo here within this coffin sad does lie
Religion, virtue, true nobility.
Ah that a silent urne should thus inshrine
What once not mortal seemed, but all divine.
More beauty Sparta never did contein,
Nor Paphos, famous for her lovely Queen,
A beauty chaste, and chaste, not to anoy,
As was the homicide of Cadmus oye:
But bashful beauty, harmless chastity
Such as decor'd that sometime nymphe, now tree;
Hey me my muse your sisters death bemoan,
And weep that sweet Calliope is gone:
Those sounds harmonious strains which to admire,
Amazed Orpheus did his lute forbear,
Shut up in silence, shall be heard no more,
Which every tripping Dryade shall deplore.
But most of all that sp'rit sublimely wise
Like hers, who from the brain of Jove did rise,
Shinde as that orient lamp, which scarce when born
Is swallowed in the hudge beams of the morn.
Had this sweet nymphe lived in that age of gold,
She amongst the Deities had been enrol'd:
Or lived Naso now to see her hearse,
She, not Astraea had adorned his verse.
But what? can heavenly creatures be enjaylde?
Or from their native country long exiled?
No: All things to their proper center celeave;
Nor can immortals from immortals live.
Her name the fates to fames report has given,
Her body to the earth, her soul to heaven.
W. Douglas.
LEt virtuous virgins all with tears behold
The fairest cabin stored with choicest gems
That grace or nature ever did unfold
To human knowledge under diadems:
Of faultlesse body (here) and guiltless mind
The femail sex perfection confinde.
In blood she might have claimed unto the best,
In honor too of none she did come short,
In dowry equal with those nobly blessed,
For personage of a most lowly port:
Such blessings blooming makes most ladies proud,
But fully ripe with her, she still was good.
These forced but fair prerogatives of birth
By inward virtue were most highly graced,
Stayed gravitie mixed with modest mirth,
Humility in stately palace placed
Her chastity not staind with any thought,
Of heavenly substance proved her to be wrought.
No industry which curious hands afford
Did hirs surpass, all sciences, all arts
Her sex beseeming, richly her decord,
She rather them by full adorning parts:
Yet her alas ere lusters four were told,
A winding sheet for hymen's robes enrold.
Her fear of God respect to parents show,
Who never yet could challenge the offense
She gave, nor did desire of youth persew
Beside their pleasure, reavisd thus from hence
To the third heaven, she parting with a smile
Told man's abode on earth was but exile.
LUte, viol, organ, sautral, pandal be,
Silent, as when in forest wild ye grew,
Since cruel death, but pity overthrew
Her, whose dear hands made sweet your harmony.
And if ye sound bewailing to all ears
That stroks may sighs, and sounds bring forth salt tears.
A snow-like white pure innocence bewrayes,
On it black tears, for virgins grief, betrays:
This at her funeral was clearly found,
Where all eyes objects black was but the ground:
NAtures rich gem, by art most orient bright,
Of both the honor, parents sole content.
Ladies, yea, sexes glory, virgins light,
Her times delight, than them more excellent,
Endew'd with all those gifts which ever' wight
Obtained on earth: death in the prime has rent.
This lesser worlds fall (virtues universe)
Turns hearts, eyes, Verse, sad mourners over her hearse.
MEn, matrones, maids, come mourn to see
This matchless match, so soon to dye.
Ours is the loss, hers is the gain,
When leaving life, she leaves all pain;
And does enjoy these endless joys
For worldly transitory toys.
The change is good, great is the gain,
When she with Christ does now remain.
He now her head, and husband is,
She in her life desired but this:
And to none other was betrothed,
Beloved of all, of none was loathed.
Her wit, her virtues wanne her this,
Which may be told when she is in bliss:
Yet being dead, she lives by fame,
Her worth does grace her noble steme.
But none can fly death's cruel hand,
No, not this Phoenix of our Land.
Maerens posuit M. R. M.
QVid natura potis, quantumve licere venustas,
Cuncta, METELLANAM dum facit, exhibuit
Quid genius genio, quid praestet virgin virgo,
Ista Metellanae praebuit ingenium.
Cunctorum frustra hac sperata opulentia votis,
Illibata poli gaudet honor frui.
M. R. Gord.
Laetandum non lugendum parentibus defunctae.
ONimium dilecta Deo, quam flore juventae
Ante diem extinctam, deflet uterque parens!
Spes sibi praerept as, and inania vota queruntur,
Plurima quae nimius cord coquebat amor;
Invida quod nigro clauserunt fata sepulchro
Excultum ingenium, nobile stemma, decus.
Expectes thalami, rarasque in virgin dotes,
Dulciloquam linguam, suavisonos digitos;
Ingemat his vulgus, vos exultate receptam
Coelestem in patriam, sydereasque domos.
Cernite palmigeram victricem, atque inter ovantem
Coelicolum niveis agmina amicta stolis;
Sponsam agni, and comites laetum paeana canentes,
Cingentes Domini nocte dieque thronum.
Invidia haec, non est pietas deflere beatam,
Cui datur aethaereo clara corona polo.
Gu. Gordonus. M.D.
Mill fuere proci Metlanae, mill neglectis
Maluit in casto sola jacere thoro;
Expers connubii sine conjuge ducere vitam,
Vincta maritali quam dare colla jugo.
Innuba Virgo solo, te junxit pronuba coelo
Mors Christo, haec thalamis fax mage digna tuis.
Joh. Gordon.
PArva procelloso casa cum quassatur ab austro
Corruit, at levis est, levis illa ruina minuti
Cespitis, and junci levis est jactura palustris:
Splendida marmoreis sed si suffulta columnis
Regia corruerit, quam sumtu prodigus amplo
Dives agri dominus, nummorum and foenore dives
Rite instaurandam fecit, quam docta periti
Condidit artificis manus and men's daedala, magna
Non sine strage ruent molis radiantia tantae
Maenia; fornicibus pulchra, and pendentia ruptis
Culmina; deliciis laquearea tota superbis
Fulgida; and immensae splendour nitidissimus aulae.
Haud aliter si fata rudem de plebe puellam
Interiisse sinent, cui nec solertis acumen
Ingenii, doctae nec blandimenta loquelae,
Dextra nec in dulcem citharae sat nobilis usu^,
Nec calamo varias verborum ducere formas;
Cui nihil incultae superest, nisi rustica mentis
Barbaries, raucique ruens ex ore boatus
Gutturis indocto; perit hem perit obsita probris,
Et lachrimis indigna piis, indigna piorum
Fletibus and celebri nunquam dignanda sepulchro.
Si tamen augustae mors forsitan ora puellae
Solverit in cineres, formam and spoliaverit omnem
Virginis intactae, Lyricam cui Cynthius artem,
Et Jovis ex cerebro Dea mentem indulsit acutam,
Cui linguam Maia genitus; proh tota piorum
Ingeminans gemitus rumpetur turba querelis.
Ergo tuae (pia Nympha) animae dum claudere cipp^
Nitimur exuvias gelido, rictuque furenti
Terra tui dulcem nimium dum corporis offam
Rodit, inoptatam merito lugemus ad urnam.
Postulat hoc pietas, quis enim tua funera praeceps
Non ruet in lachrimas dum viderit? ipsa dolendo
Pallida fit Pallas, Musarum moesta corona
Tristo gemit; tristem matri tua fata minantur
Interitum, mortemque patri tua fata minantur:
Et fratres tua fata tuos, (bona germina casti
Bina thori) and Sophiam perimunt tua fata sororem.
Nobilis heu fulcro domus haec tremebunda remoto
Tota quatit. Tanti fuerat tua vita; parentum
Gaudia tu, tu dextra manus, tu dexter ocellus.
O quam te memorem virgo? tibi multa supellex
Divitis ingenii, mentis tibi multa pudicae
Signa fuere; habili resonantia pollice fila
Sollicitare Lyrae poteras, and mollibus auris
Chordarum illiciens animos mulcere: tuaque
Vermiculata manu thalamorum vela supersunt,
(Bezaleelis opus docti). quid singula narrem?
Men's pia, docta manus, facies formosa, pudicum
Pectus, in exiguo sunt contumulanda sepulchro.
For the Mothers moderation in tears.
WIth grief-torn sp'rite the worlds redeemer wept,
When Lazarus his loved kinsman slept
In deaths black bosom, though he could restore
Him to the life he had enjoyed before.
Why is it then? I wonder greatly why,
The world to thee (dear Lady) should deny
Abounding tears, great grief, sad sobbing, since
Pale death has pulled thy darling daughter hence
More than a thousand kinsmen; whom from death
No earthly power can repossesse with breath.
Mourn then (sweet Lady) mourn: but which is chief,
Learn, learn of Christ to moderate your grief.
Alexander Hamilton,
Adieu my Dear, since highest heavens decree,
That I, the harvest of my hopes in thee,
Should not enjoy: Death uncontrolled gives
Me endless sorrow, and the World just grieves
For thy untimely death. In thy young years
Had thou been reft, my mourning, grief and tears,
Youth might asswag'd: But when time made thee grow
To height, what earth could wish, or heavens bestow,
In whom was closed, wit, worth and virtues treasure,
This makes my grief in mourning pass all measure.
Grave by thy age, but wise above thy years,
This makes my sobbing sighs burst forth in tears,
In having the earths happiness I knew;
But oh! heavens soon that happiness withdrew!
And cold December which first gave thee breath,
After twice ten years turned, reports thy death.
Strange turn of time, the last month of the year
Should rob me of my firstborn dearest Dear:
Whose qualities were rare, so were they many,
And good: none equaled thee, thou passed any.
For all that is rare, they are but rare in one;
But thou wast rare in every thing alone.
Envy and fame are needless to the dead,
Because unknown to them: yet let us plead
What Is ours, even mourning for her sacred change;
Whose fame in spite of envy lives, though strange
Divorce black death has made: Her noble parts
Craves tears from eyes, and sorrow from sad hearts.
Who as she lived beloved, now dies with moan,
Of kin, of country: nor of these alone,
But all who worth, or virtue did adore.
None saw her like succeed, few past before.
Thy worth so great, our sorrow must be such,
Mourn as we can, we cannot mourn too much.
Aliud.
RAra fides, virtus, prudentia, and entheus ardor,
Si poterint poterant te moriente mori.
Indulsit cuiquam nunquam natura, quod in te
Non rarum and majus laud vel invidia:
Hoc, citius proerepta licet tua funere flere,
Vt resonet famam vix satis orbis erit.
Aliud.
With sanctified1, unspotted2, true3, This one
Wit1, worth2 and virtue3, To the grave is gone.
Moeroris and amoris ergo posuit
M.I. Cockburnus.
FOrma, genus, virtus miranda in flore juventae,
Laudem virginei te statuere chori;
Metellana domus generosa prole beanda
Per te, sic matrum gloria prima fores.
Sed demissa polo pietas in fruge senectam
Maturans, comitem te super astra rapit.
Marmora mitte igitur, fuge lauds dicere versu,
Huic immortali ne moritura struas.
M. To. Balcanquel.
PVlchra Metellana est prima proerepta juventa,
Et secli and sexus gloria prima sui.
Quae teneros opibus mentis praeverterat annos,
Sincera ornarat quae pietate genus.
Tota decens, morum candore, modestia, and alti
Artibus ingenii, laud pudicitiae.
Hanc tantum terris fata ostendere, quod esset
Non hoc digna loco, sed meliore frui.
Nempe sibi propriam sociavit foedere Nympham
Christus, ut aeterna luce beata cluat.
Alex. Setonius.
SI probitas, si forma, and magna modestia, and ingens
Spes hominum quicquam conciliare valent,
Cuncta mihi, thalami nec opes, nec caetera long,
Vult generum matter, vult pater esse socer;
Sed mea mortalem sors dedignata maritum,
Asseruit coelo virgineoque choro.
Quid nunc forma, genus, quid inania caetera vitae?
In sponso and Domino cuncta reperta meo.
M. I. D.
ERgone in illustrem potuisti squalida gentem
Met'lanam hoc mandare nefas? anne invida tanti
Nominis, hunc tantum potuisti infer dolorem?
Ausa nimis funesta. Tuos si flectere sensus
Non potuit generis praeclari gloria, saltem
Plurima tam sacra suadebant parcere Nymphae.
Illa quidem taedas velut aversata jugales,
Qualiter apricis ducebat Delia campis
Virginibus comitata suis, sic lata sorores
Inter honoratas duxit Metlana choraeas:
Illa vel aequales quas sors dedit esse, vel inter
Illa deas luxit, quas sors dedit esse priores:
Casta, pudica, decens, arts quam daedala Pallas
Edocuit, teneram tenerisque refovit in ulnis:
Namque animum fingit studiis nec inanibus aptum;
Et quae foemineum decorant illustria sexum.
Alma Venus Nymphae nec defuit: illa decorum
Contribuit, placidumque simul super omnia vultum,
Et pinxit roseos artus, corpusque decenti
Ordine composuit, quo singula quaeque referrent
Et genus, and tantae sublimia munera mentis.
Cuncta annos aevumque simul suasere; sed eheu
Sola Metellanae renuisti parcere nymphae.
Epicedium.
NYmpha Metellanas inter celeberrima, tantae
Quae fueras nuper lucida gemma domus;
Nympha inter cunctas celeberrima, blanda, venusta
Et quae virginei gloria prima chori;
Vive, vale, decus omne tuis, dulcissima rerum,
Junctaque divinis nune fruere usque choris.
Epitaphium.
STemmate praelustris, virtute illustrior; unum
Id mihi prae cunctis nomen honoris erat;
Vixi chara aliis, and chara parentibus, uni
Quod fueram Christo chara, beatafui.
Patricius Kinalochus.
STay passenger, O go not by
Till thou behold who here dothly,
And help with me to shed some tears
For her; who living had few peers.
A comely Lady truly chaste,
Who in her birth was with the best.
Minerva's stock was her descent,
Which made to virtue her so bent;
As testifies what is to be seen,
And might be presents to a Queen.
In bounty matchless, and so rare,
As few with her now may compare;
But in her life so sanctified,
As in her death she edified.
Well, to be short she nothing wanted,
Which to the noblest Nymphs was granted.
M.T. M.
TE matri similem forma, pietate parenti
Proh dolor! ante diem mors inopina rapit.
Te Deus omnipotens, primis tibi charus ab annis
Artibus ornavit, quas didicisse juvat.
Occidis heu prima prudens in flore juvente,
Atque avi finis ipsa pudicitia est.
Nobilis a proavis, and origin clara parentum
Clara Metellana es; moribus usque bonis.
Moeroris ergo posuit Patricius Metellanus.
WHen thy fair beauty like the blushing morn,
Which Ida's Goddesses did all adorn,
Shined on earths stage, and bare the golden ball,
Of which for excellence thou reft them all.
All that had hearts to wish, or eyes to see,
Became admirers of thy worth. But thee
No eye nor heart had worth enough to aspire
To make his own, till heaven was set on fire
With its own Masterpiece; and took thee home
In thy pure virgin white, as here thou come,
And left us now (alas) with weeping eyes,
To praise thy worth, which best thy want can price.
For why? we truly know it in thy lack,
Since all Earth's treasure cannot buy thee back.
Ah me! when nature thus had played her best,
Or would, or could she not still make thee last?
Pencils and pens may thy worths portrait draw,
Which to presume, the best should stand in awe.
But heaven, that holds thee now a virgin Queen,
Among the sainted souls a leader seen,
Vouchsafes no further good to after days
By want of thee: But if that ought worth praise
Nature produces, henceforth it shall be
Most chiefly praised, for being like to thee.
But thy rich mould has taken such a blow,
That now it cannot such another show.
Yet in despite of nature, death and time,
That thus has reft thee from us in thy prime,
Like the Arabian Bird, thine ash shall give
A rare invention how to make thee live.
Since all that saw, or heard, or knew of thee,
Shall think their best, like thee to live and dye.
So though thy earthly part death has subdued,
All age shall see thy virtuous fame renewed.
JAMES DRUMMOND of Millanab.
HAEc Laderdeli generosa nata
Vt Metellano Patre, sic Setona
Matre, praeclaris oriunda; solo haud
Sanguine avito,
Sed magis vera pietate eadem
Jure cantari meruit Camaenis;
Men's ut in coelis, it a fama terris
Vivat in aevum.
Nobiles ut sic alios parents,
Nobiles ut sic pariterque natos
Provocet, non tam Baphicove cocco aut
Murice tinctis
Vestibus corpus decorare visu,
Nuper en vivax breve sed futurum
Hospitam foedis simul and cibandis
Vermibus escam.
Sed mage aulaeis animam decoris,
Mentis integrae celebrare Jovae
Regiam in terris simul, incolamque
Postea coeli.
Aliud.
FAma refert, Chymicos tx deteriore metallo
Fingere posse auri ceu simulachra boni.
Nulla Metellanae suberat deceptio menti,
Hanc nec fucata finxerat art Deus.
Et licet apparet verum, id (si credere fas est)
In sua post rursum prima elementa redit.
Ast huic aterni penitis insculpta figuris
Vivida imago Dei jam super astra cluit.
DAVID LICHAEUS Mysta Ecclesiae Rerisensis.
Defunctae prosopopaeia.
QVis neget Ascraeis dignam te nympha Camaenis
Quae genus a priscis nobile ducis avis?
Nempe Metellana and clara de stirpe Setona
Nobile stemma dedit divus uterque parens.
Nec virtute genus caruit, reverentia vultum
Finxit, and eximio fulsit in ore decor.
Ingenii mirum tribuit tibi Pallas acumen;
Et dedit ad numerum tangere Apollo lyram.
Vt pulsare manu, bis quinis nablia nervis,
Sic docta es, pavidas voce movere feras.
Te tua nobilitas, pietas, prudentia, forma
Fecerunt regi poene fuisse parem.
Dotibus his animi raris, and corporis aucta,
Praeriperis fatis invidiosa feris.
Alia defunctae prosopopeia.
BIs duo lustra meae fuerant modo tempora vitae,
Nobis vita brevis, sed been culta fuit.
Inspice and invenies nostri pia signa laboris,
Relligionis opus scrinia parva tenent.
Quam been me a cunis clari eduxere parents
Vita fuit testis, mor s mea sancta probat.
Discite nobilium natae been vivere quid sit;
Mors comes est vitam sancta sequuta piam.
Alia prosopopeia.
VIrgo venusta decens, animi generosa, propago
Lauderi comitis nobilis, hic sita sum.
Non prius, ah! teneris, caepi juvenescere ab annis;
Quam me praecipitem mors rapit ante diem.
Pollicita ante obitum Patri dare grata nepotem,
Et genero nostram nobilitare domum:
Praescia propositi, vetuit Libitina futuri,
Obstitit and taedis Juno maligna meis.
Aspernata deas, sum dedignata maritum
Mortalem, Christum diligo laeta virum.
G. E.
SInt aliis sua forma decens, and divitis auri
Copia virginibus, stirpsque vetusta domus,
Oruatam cunctis quis te Metlana negabit
Esse parem divis, virgineumque decus?
Divinae stodio Sophiae men's dedita, curas
Spreverat humanas, ardua summa peteus:
Hoc tua testantur divini oracula verbi,
Sacraque daedalea charta notata manu.
Ergo tuas lauds in secla sequentia didit,
Teque vetat pietas post tua fata mori.
M. To. Smithus.
EHeu quo moritura? non moraris?
Non quae nobilitas sapit capessis?
Hen quorsum didicere tam perite
Splendentes digiti Jubalis arts?
Heu quorsum super as manus Britannas
Scribendo? monumenta quid supersunt
Virtutis, tacit parem abnegantis?
Heu quo Scotigenum jubar sororum
Migras? sic coryphaea virgo squales?
Transisque in tenuem volans favillam.
Paulum ah siste, tuis morare paulum,
Qui vitam si ne te trahunt misellam.
Ah non sistis! abis! obis! relinquis
Sic nos, sic fere mortuos parents!
Sed quid? terra minus reperta digna est
Summi quae sobolem hostiam paratam
Vivam detineat, Deo sacratam;
A cujus pietate, spe, fideque
Mortali ut thalamo carens jugali
Aeternis thalamis Dei fruaris.
David Neishaeus.
HEr Nature best; her most complete
Had virtue made, and youth most sweet:
More years could not make her more wise,
Who here below this marble lies.
VIva fuit; post fata, mihi (quid plura?) manebit
Praecipua in terris virgo, secunda polo.
NOw we not mourn, no, but congratulate
(O happy virgin) thy thrice happy state,
Thou rests in peace, and we in hope to see
That day of Christ and thy felicity:
Whose sacred soul, whilst body once did clothe
The world amazed, and gazed on gifts of both
With great delight: because in all thou did,
The secrets of the golden age thou hid'st.
Yea, blossoms sprang so fair and graces all,
Which deaths untimely frost has now made fall,
But if re'niting breath or heat remains
In swift-wing'd fame, or in the Muses veins;
Thy blossoms shall return, and comely spread,
Though not so fair as first, yet never to fade.
Thomas Maitland.
Moestissima Matter.
THy rest should me of rest deprive;
Thy joys make joylesse mother live;
Did I not rest in hope to stand
In joy with thee at Christ's right hand.
BEhold a noble Virgin here inshrin'd,
Within the bosom of this sacred earth!
Whose beauty in the bloome, for her designed
Approaching Hymen, not encroaching death:
Yet glorious Nymph, what better change can be?
Heavens have prepared a bridal feast for thee.
M. G. Prymrose.
FOrma deam fecit Cypriam, coeloque locavit,
Laud pudicitiae facta Diana dea est:
Juno Jovis consors, morum gravitate celebris;
Pallas ab ingenio nobile nomen habet.
Si meruere suis coelum virtutibus illae,
Nonne Metellana est nomine digna deae?
Quam genus and genius decoravit and inclyta forma,
Promeruitque sua quae pietate polum.
Nostra suas igitur confer prioribus audent
Secula, concedant jamque priora novis.
QVae super egressa est sexus mentemque, modumque,
Heu Metlana perit, si periisse potest.
In sua qui sperant redituras corpora mentes,
Metlanam nor ant non potuisse mori;
Sed novus exuviis ophis ut revirescit ademptis,
Sic manet hanc posito corpore vita nova.
NAturae in pulchra vis ingeniosa puella
Cernitur, artificis grande refulget opus.
Si mentem imbutam quis religione requirit,
Hanc vera excultam si pietate notet,
Non aliam, hunc animum, formam decuisse videbit,
Nec formae huic alium competiisse animum.
Vtque prius sancto capiebat pectore coelum,
Nunc capitur coelo, perfruiturque Deo.
CRescere quis sacras potuit sperare Sorores,
Aut aliquid majus post Helycona dari?
Instituisse novem fert ur Boeotia Musas,
Reddidit at numerum Scotia nostra parem.
Jamque Metellana haec decima est soror addita Musis,
Aut si spectetur gratia, quarta Charis.
O longum, foelixque vale, aequiparanda deabus,
Aeternumque volet fama per ora virum.
Stanza.
THis hopeful maid, made of the Maitland mould,
Where Natur' Art their industry did show;
Timely resolved her graces to uphold,
With care to write the works of sacred troth,
And as her years, so did her virtues grow.
Envious fates untimely crop't them both.
Then let this serve to make complete her praise.
Whom God does love, they dye in tender days.
(...).
QUi modo tot lacrimas, vario tot carmine fletus,
Ante Metellanae jure dedere rogum,
Officium fecere, and non fecere poetae;
Musa suum siquidem misit, omisit opus.
Tanta Metellanae moles erat elogiorum,
Cui nec Apollineus par chorus omnis erat.
Quamque loquendo, satis digne laudaverit un quam
Nemo equidem, nisi qui sic stupet atque silet.
G. Bellendinus.
FINIS.

