Sapho and Phao,

Played before the Queens Majesty on Shroue tewsday, by her Majesty's
Children, and the Boys of Paul's.

Imprinted at London for Thomas Cadman. 1584.

The Prologue at the Black friars.
WHere the Be can suck no honney, she leaves her stinge behind, and where
the Bear cannot find Origanum to heal his grief, he blasteth all other
leaves with his breath. We fear it is like to fare so with us, that seeing
you cannot draw from our labors sweet content, you leave behind you a sour
mislike, and with open reproach blame our good meaninges: because you cannot
reap your wonted mirthes. Our intent was at this time to move inward delight,
not outward lightness, and to breed, (if it might be) soft smiling, not
loud laughing: knowing it to the wise to be as great pleasure to hear
counsel mixed with wit, as to the foolish to have sport mingled with
rudeness. They were banished the Theater at Athens, and from Rome hyssed, that
brought parasites on the stage with apish actions, or fools with uncivil
habites, or Curtisans with immodest words. We have endeavored to be as far
from unseemly speeches, to make your ears glowe, as we hope you will be
from unkind reports to make our cheeks blush. The Griffyon never spreads
her wings in the sun, when she has any sick feathers: yet have we ventured
to present out exercise before your indgements, when we know them full of weak
matter, yielding rather our selves to the courtesy, which we have ever sound,
then to the preciseness, which we ought to fear.

The Prologue at the Court.
THe Arabya^s being stuffed with perfumes, burn Hemblock, a rank poison: and
in Hybla being cloid with ho^ney, they account it dainty to feed on wax.
Your Highness eyes, whom variety has filled with fair shows, and whose
ears pleasure has possessed with rare soundes, will (we trust) at this time
resemble the princely Eagle, who fearing to surfeit on spices, stoupeth to bite
on wormwood. We present no conceits nor wars, but deceites and loves,
wherein the truth may excuse the plainness. The necessity, the length: the
poetry, the bitterness. There is no needelesse point so small, which has not
his compass: nor hair so slender, which has not his shadow: nor sport so
simple, which has not his shadow: nor sport so simple, which has not show.
Whatsoever we present, whether it be tedious (which we fear) or toyishe (which
we doubt) sweet or sour, absolute or imperfect, or whatsoever, in all
humbleness we all, and I on knee for all, entreat, that your Highness
imagine your self to be in a deep dream, that staying the conclusion, in your
rising your Majesty vouchfafe but to say, And so you awakte.

Actus primus. Schaena prima.
Phao, Venus, Cupid. Phao. THou art a Ferriman, Phao, yet a free man,
possessing for riches content, and for honors quiet. Thy thoughts are no higher
the^ thy fortunes, nor thy desires greater then thy calling. Who climeth,
stands on glass, and falls on thorn. Thy hearts thirste is satisfied with
thy hands thrift, and thy gentle labors in the day, turn to sweet slumbers
in the night. As much does it delight thee to rule thine oar in a calm
stream, as it does Sapho to swaye the Scepter in her brave court. Envy never
casts her eye low, ambition points always upward, and revenge barketh
only at stars. Thou farest dilicately, if thou have a fare to buy any thing.
Thine angle is ready, when thine oar is idle, and as sweet is the fish which
thou gettest in the river, as the foul which other buy in the market. Thou
needst not fear poison in thy glass, nor treason in thy guard. The wind is
thy greatest enemy, whose might is withstoode with policy. O sweet life
seldom found under a golden covert, often under a thached cotage. But here
comes one, I will withdraw my self aside, it may be a passenger.


Venus. It is no less unseemly then vnwholsom for Venus, who is most honored
in Princes courts, to soiourne with Vulcan in a smithes forge, where bellows
blow in steed of sighs, dark smokes rise for sweet perfumes, and for the
panting of loving hearts, is only heard the beating of steeled ha^mers. Unhappy
Venus, yt cariing fire in thine own breast, thou should dwell with fire in
his forge. What does Vulcan all day but endeavor to be as crabbed in manners, as
he is crooked in body? driving nails, when he should give kisses, and
hammering hard armours, when he should sing sweet Amors. It came by lot, not
love, that I was lincked with him. He gives thee bolts, Cupid, in steed of
arrows, fearing belike (jealous fool that he is) that if he should give thee
an arrow head he should make himself a broad head. But come, we will to
Syracusa, where thy deity shall be shown, and my disdain. I will yoke the
neck, that yet never bowed, at which, if Jove repine, Jove shall repent. Sapho
shall know, be she never so fair, that there is a Venus, which can co^quer,
were she never so fortunate.


Cupid. If Jove epsy Sapho, he will devise some new shape to entertain her.


Venus. Strike thou Sapho, let Jove devise what shape he can.


Cupid. Mother, they say she has her thoughts in a string, that she conquers
affections, and sends love up and down upon arrandes, I am afraid she will
yerke me, if I hit her.


Venus. Peevish boy, can mortal creatures resist that, which the immortal Gods
cannotredresse?


Cupid. The Gods are amorous and therefore willing to be pearsed.


Venus. And she amiable, and therefore must be pearsed.


Cupid. I dare not.


Venus. Draw thine arrow to the head, else I will make thee repent it at the
heart. Come away and behold the ferry boy ready to conduct us. Pretty youth, de
you keep the ferry that bends to Syracusa?


Phao. The ferrie, fair Lady, that bends to Syracusa.


Venus. I fear if the water should begin to swel thou will want cunning to
guide.


Phao. These waters are commonly as the passengers be, and therefore carrying
one so fair in show, there is no cause to fear a rough sea.


Venus. To pass the time in thy boat, can thou devise any pastime?


Phao. If the wind be with me, I can angle, or tell tales: if against me, it
will be pleasure for you to see me take pains.


Venus. I like not fishing: yet was I borne of the sea.


Phao. But he may bless fishing, that caught such an one in the sea.


Venus. It was not with an angle, my boy, but with a net.


Phao. So was it said, that vulcan caught Mars with Venus.


Venus. Did thou hear so? It was some tale.


Phao. Yea Madame and that in the boat I did mean to make my tale.


Venus. It is not for a ferry man to talk of the Gods loves: but to tell how
thy father could dig, and thy mother spinne. But come, let us away.


Phao. I am ready to wait.


Exeunt. Actus primus, Schaena sccunda.
Trachinus, Pandion, Cryticus, Molus. Trachi. Pandion, since your coming from
the university to the court, from Athens to Syracusa, how do you feel your
self altered either in humor or opinion?


Pandi. Altered Trachinus, I say no more, and shame that any should know so
much.


Trachi. Here you see as great virtue, far greater brave ry, the action of that
which you co^template* Sapho, fair by nature, by birth royal, learned by
education by government politic, rich by peace: insomuch as it is hard to
judge, whether she be more beautiful or wise, virtuous or fortunate. Beesides,
do you not look on fair Ladies in steed of good letters, and behold fair
faces in steed of fine phrases: In universities virtues and vices are but
shadowed in colors white and black, in courts showed to life good and bad.
There, times paste are read of in old books, times present set down by new
devises, times to come coniectured at by aim, by prophecy, or chance here,
are times in perfection, nor by devise, as fables, but in execution, as
trueths. Believe me Pandion, in Athens you have but tombs, we in court the
bodies, you the pictures of Venus and the wise Goddesses, we the persons and
the virtues. What has a seh oller found out by study, that a courtier has not
found out by practice. Simple are you that think to see more at the candle
snuff, then the sun beams, to sail further in a little brook, then in the
maine Ocean, to make a greater harvest by gleaning, then reaping. How say you
Pandion, is not all this true?


Pandi. Trachinus, what would you more, all true.


Trach. Cease then to lead thy life in a study, pinned with a few boardes, and
endeavor to be a courtier to live in emboste rouffes.


Pandi. A labor intolerable for Pandion.


Trach. Why?


Pandi. Because it is harder to shape a life to dissemble, then to go forward
with the liberty of truth.


Trach. Why do you think in court any use to dissemble?


Pandi. Do you know in court any that mean to live?


Trach. You have no reason for it, but an old report.


Pandi. Report has not always a blister on her tongue.


Trach. I, but this is the court of Sapho natures miracle, which resembles the
tree Salurus, whose root is fastened upon knotted steel, and in whose top bud
leaves of pure gold.


Pandi. Yet has Salurus blasts, and water boughs, worms and Caterpillars.


Trach. The virtue of the tree is not the cause: but the Easterly wind, which
is thought commonly to bring cankers and rottenesse.


Pandi. Nor the excellency of Sapho the occasion: but the iniquity of
flatterers, who always whisper in Princes ears suspicion and sowrenesse.


Trach. Why, then you conclude with me, that Sapho for virtue has no copartner.


Pandi. Yea, and with the judgment of the world, that she is without
comparison.


Trach. We will thither straight.


Pandi. I would I might return straight.


Trach. Why, there you may live still.


Pandi. But not still.


Trach. How like you the Ladies, are they not passing fair?


Pandi. Mine eye drinks neither the color of wine nor women.


Trach. Yet am I sure that in judgment you are not so severe, but that you
can be content to allow of beauty by day or by night.


Pandi. When I behold bewty before the sun, his beams dim beauty: when by
candle, bewty obscures toarch light: so as no time I can judge, because at any
time I cannot discern being in the sun a brightness to shadow beauty, and
in beauty a glistering to extinguish light.


Trachi. Schollerlike said, you flatter that, which you seem to mislike, and
to disgrace that, which you most wonder at. But let us away.


Pandi. I follow. And you sir boy go to Syracusa about by land, where you
shall meet my stuff, pay for the carriage, and convey it to my lodging.


Trach. I think all your stuff are bundles of paper: but now must you learn
to turn your library to a war drope, and see whether your rapier hang better
by your side, then the pen did in your ear.


Exeunt. Actus primus, Schaena tertia.
Cryticus, Molus. Criti. Molus, what odds between thy commons in Athens, and
the diet in court? A pages life, and a scollers?


Molus This difference: there of a little I had somewhat, here of a great deal
nothing, there did I wear Pantopheles on my legs, here do I bear them in my
hands.


Cryti. Thou may be skilled in thy Logic, but not in thy Lerypoope: belike
no meat can down with you, unless you have a knife to cut it: but come
among us, and you shall see us once in a morning have a mouse at a bay.


Molus. A mouse? improperly spoken.


Criti. Aptly understood, a mouse of beafe.


Molus I think indeed a piece of beafe as big as a mouse, serves a great
company of such cattes. But what else?


Criti. For other sportes, a square die in a pages pocket, is as decent as a
square cap on a Graduates head.


Molus You courtiers be mad fellows, we silly souls are only plodders at
Ergo, whose wits are claspt up with our books, and so full of learning are
we at home, that wescarce know good manners when we come abroad, Cunning in
nothing but in making small things great by figures, pulling on with the sweat
of our studies a great shoe upon a little foot, burning out one ca^dle in
seeking for an other, raw wordlings in matters of substance passing wranglers
about shadows.


Criti. Then is it time lost to be a scholar. We pages are Politians: for
look what we hear our masters talk of, ve determine of: where we suspect,
we undermine: and where we mislike for some particular grudge, there we pick
quarrels for a general grief. Nothing among us but in steed of good morrow,
what news: we fall from cogging at dice to cogge with states: and so forward
are mean me^ in those matters, that they would be cocks to tread down others,
before they be chicke^s to rise themselves. Youths are very forward to stroke
their chins, though they have no beardes, and to lie as loud as he that has
lived longest.


Molus These be the golden days.


Criti. Then be they very dark days: for I can see no gold.


Molus You are gross witted, master courtier.


Criti. And you master scholar slender witted.


Molus I meant times which were prophesied golden for plenty of all things,
sharpness of wit, excellency in knowledge, policy in government, for,


Criti. Soft Scholaris, I deny your argument.


Molus Why, it is no argument.


Criti. Then I deny it because it is no argument. But let us go and follow our
masters.


Exeunt. Actus primus, Schaena quarta.
Mileta, Lamia, Fauilla, Ismena, Canope, Eugenua. Milet. Is it not straung that
Phao on the sudden should be so fair?


Lamia. It cannot be strange, since Venus was disposed to make him fair. That
cunning had been better bestowed on women, which would have deserved thanks
of nature.


Isme. Haplye she did in spite of women, or scorn of nature.


Cano. Proud else, how squeamish he is be come already, using both
disdaineful looks, and imperious words: insomuch that he galleth with
ingratitude. And then Ladies you know how it cutteth a woman to become a wooer.


Euge. Tush, children and fools, the fairer they are, the sooner they yield,
an apple will catch the one, a baby the other.


Isme. Your loouer I think be a fair fool: for you love nothing but fruit
and puppets.


Milet. I laugh at that you all call love, and judge it only a word called
love. Me thinks lyking, a courtesy, a smile, a beck, and such like, are the
very Quintessence of love.


Fauilla I, Mileta, but were you as wise, as you would be thought fair, or as
fair, as you think your self wise, you would be as ready to please men, as
you are coye to pranke your self, and as careful to be accounted amorous, as
you are willing to be thought discrete.


Milet. No, no, men are good souls (poor souls:) who never enquire but with
their eyes, loving to father the cradle, though they but mother the child.
Give me their gifts, not their virtues, a grain of their gold weighs down
a pound of their wit, a dram of give me, is heavier then an ounce of hear me.
Believe me Ladies, give is a pretty thing.


Isme. I cannot but oftentimes smile to my self, to hear men call us weak
vessels, when they prove themselves broken hearted, us frail, when their
thoughts cannot hang together, studying with words to flatter, and with
bribes to allure, when we commonly wish their tongues in their purses, they
speak so simply, and their offers in their bellies, they do it so peeuishly.


Milet. It is good sport to see them want matter: for then fall they to good
manners, having nothing in their mouths but sweet mistress, wearing our hands
out with courtly kissings, when their wits fail in courtly discourses. Now
rufling their hairs, now setting their ruffes, then gazing with their eyes,
then sighing with a privy wring by the hand, thinking us like to be wowed by
signs and ceremonies.


Euge. Yet we, when we swear with our mouths we are not in love, then we
sigh from the heart and pine in love.


Cano. We are mad wenches, if men mark our words: for when I say, I would
none cared for love more then I, what mean I, but I would none loved but I,
where we cry away, do we not presently say, go too: and when men strive for
kisses, we exclaim, let us alone, as though we would fall to that our selves.


Fauilla Nay, then Canope, it is time to go, and beehold Phao.


Isme. Where?


Fauilla In your head Ismena, no where else: but let us keep on our way.


Isme. Wisely.


Exeunt. Actus secundus, Schaena prima,
Phao, Sybilla. Phao. Phao, thy mean fortune causes thee to use an oar, and
thy sudden beauty a glass: by the one is seen thy need, in the other thy
pride. O Venus, in thinking thou have blessed me, thou have cursed me, adding to a
poor estate, a proud heart: and to a disdained man, a disdaining mind. Thou
do not flatter thy self Phao, thou art fair: fair? I fear me fair, be a
word too foul for a face so passing fayte. But what avails beauty, had
thou all things thou would wish, thou might die to morrow, and did thou
want al things thou desire, thou shall live till thou die. Tushe Phao,
there is grown more pride in thy mind, then favor in thy face. Blush foolish
boy, to think on thine own thoughts: cease complaints, and crave counsel. And
lo, behold Sybilla in the mouth of her cave, I will salute her. Lady, I fear
me I am out of my way, and so benighted withal that I am compelled to ask
your direction.


Syb. Fair youth, if you will be advised by me, you shall for this time seek
none other Inn, then my cave: for that it is no less perilous to travail by
night, then uncomfortable.


Phao Your courtesy offered has prevented what my necessity was to entreat.


Syb. Come near, take a stool, and sit down. Now, for that these winter
nights are long, and that children delight in nothing more then to hear old
wives tales, we will beguile the time with some story. And though you behold
wrinkles and furrows in my tawny face: yet may you happily find wisdom and
counsel in my white hairs.


Phao Lady nothing can content me better the^ a tale, neither is there any
thing more necessary for me then counsel.


Syb. Were you borne so fair by nature?


Phao No, made so fair by Venus.


Syb. For what cause?


Phao I fear me for some curse.


Syb. Why, do you love, and cannot obtain?


Phao No I may obtain but cannot love.


Syb. Take heed of that my child.


Phao I cannot choose good Madame.


Syb. Then hearken to my tale, which I hope shall be as a straight thread to
lead you out of those crooked conceits, and place you in the plain path of
love.


Phao I attend.


Syb. When I was young, as you now are, I speak it without boasting, I was as
bewtifull: for Phoebus in his Godhead sought to get my maiden head: but I,
fond wench, receiving a benefit from above, began to wax sqemishe beneath,
not unlike to Asolis, which being made green by heavenly drops, shrinketh
into the ground when there fall showers: or the Syrian mudde, which being made
white chalk by the sun, never cease rolling, til it lie in the shadow. He
to sweet prayers added great promises, I either desirous to make trial of his
power, or willing to prolong mine own life, caught up my handful of sand,
consenting to his suite, if I might live as many years as there were grains.
Phoebus, (for what cannot Gods do, and what for love will they not do,)
granted my petition. And then I sighe and blushe to tell the rest, I recalled
my promise.


Phao. Was not the God angry to see you unkind?


Syb. Angry my boy, which was the cause that I was unfortunate.


Phao What revenge for such rigor used the Gods?


Syb. None, but suffering us to live, and know we are no Gods.


Sapho. I pray tell on.


Syb. I will Having received long life by Phoebus, and rare beauty by nature, I
thought all the year would have been May, that fresh colors would always
continue, yt time and fortune could not wear out, what Gods and nature had
wrought up: not once imagining that white and read should return to black
and yellow, the Juniper, the longer it grew, the crookedder it waxed, or that
in a face without blemish, there should come wrinkles without number. I did as
you do, go with my glass, ravished with the pride of mine own beauty, and you
shall do as I do, loath to see a glass disdaining deformity. There was none
that heard of my fault, but shunned my favor, insomuch as I stooped for age
before I tasted of youth, sure to be long lived, uncertain to be beloved.
Gentlemen that used to sigh from their hearts for my sweet love, began to
point with their fingers at my withered face, and laughed to see the eyes, out
of which fire seemed to sparkle, to be suckered being old with spectacles. This
causes me to withdraw my self to a solitary cave, where I must lead six
hundred years in no less pensiveness of crabbed age, then grief of remembered
youth. Only this comfort, that being ceased to be fair, I study to be wise,
wishing to be thought a grave matro^, since I cannot return to be a young
maid.


Phao Is it not possible to die before you become so old?


Sybilla No more possible then to return as you are, to be so young.


Phao Could not you settle your fancy upon any, or would not destiny suffer
it?


Sybilla Women willinglye ascribe that to fortune, which wittingly was
committed by frowardness.


Phao What will you have me do?


Sybilla Take heed you do not as I did. Make not too much of fading bewty,
which is fair in the cradle, and foul in the grave, resembling Polyon, whose
leaves are white in the morning, and blew before night, or Anyta, which being a
sweet flower at the rising of the sun, becomes a weed, if it be not plucked
before the setting Fair faces have no fruits, if they have no witnesses. When
you shall behold over this tender flesh a tough skin, your eyes which were
wont to glaunce on others faces to be suncke so hollow, that you can scarce
look out of your own head, and when all your teech shall wagge as fast as
your tongue, the^ will you repent the time which you cannot recall, and be
enforced to bear what most you blame. Loose not the pleasant time of your
youth, then the which there is nothing swifter, nothing sweeter. Beauty is a
slippery good, which decreaseth whilst it is increasing, rese^bling the
Medler, which in the moment of his full ripenes is known to be in a rottennes.
Whiles you look in the glass, it waxes old with time, if on the Sun parcht
with heat, if on the wind, blasted with cold. A great care to keep it, a
short space to enjoy it, a sudden time to loose it. Be not coy, when you are
courted. Fortunes wings are made of times feathers, which stay not whilst one
may measure them. Be affable and courteous in youth, that you may be honored in
age. Roses that lose their colors, keep their savors, and plucked from the
stalk, are put to the still. Cotonea, because it boweth when the sun rises,
is sweetest, when it is oldest: and children, which in their tender years sow
courtesy, shall in their declining states reap pity. Be not proud of bewties
painting whose colors consume themselves, because they are bewties painting.


Phao I am driven by your counsel into diverse conceits, neither knowing how
to stand, or where to fall, but to yield to love is the only thing I hate.


Sybilla I commit you to fortune, who is like to play such prancks with you, as
your tender years can scarce bear, nor your green wits understand. But
repair unto me often, and if I cannot remove the effects, yet I will manifest
the causes.


Phao I go, ready to return for advice, before I am resolved to adventure.


Sybilla Yet hearken two words, thou shall get friendship by dissembling,
love by hatred, unless thou perish, thou shall perish: in digging for a stone,
thou shall reach a star: thou shall be hated most, because thou art loved
most. Thy death shall be feared and wished: so much for prophecy, which nothing
can prevent: and this for counsel, which thou may follow. Keep not company
with Antes, that have wings, nor talk with any, near the hill of a mowle,
where thou smellest the sweetness of serpents breath, beware thou touch no
part of the body. Be not merry among those that put Buglosse in their wine,
and sugar in thine. If any talk of the Eclipse of the sun, say thou never
saw it. Nourishe no conies in thy vaultes, nor swallows in thine eues. Sow
next thy vine Mandrage, and ever keep thine ears open, and thy mouth shut,
thine eyes upward, and thy fingers down: so shall thou do better then
otherwise, though never so well as I wish.


Phao. Alas Madame, your prophecy threatens miseries, and your counsel
warns impossibilities.


Sybilla Farewell, I can answer no more.


Actus secundus, Schae na secunda.
Phao, Sapho, Trachinus, Pandion, Criticus, Molus. Phao Unhappy Phao. But
soft, what gallant troop is this? What Gentlewoman in this?


Criti. Sapho, a Lady here in Sycily.


Sapho. What fair boy is that?


Trach. Phao, the Ferrie man of Syracusa.


Phao I never saw one more brave: be al Ladies of such majesty?


Criti. No, this is she that al wonder at and worship.


Sapho. I have seldom seen a sweeter face. Be all Ferrie men of that
fairness?


Trach. No Madame, this is he that Venus determined among men to make the
fairest.


Sapho. Seeing I am only come forth to take the air, I will cross the
Ferrie, and so the fields, then going in through the park, I think the walk
will be pleasant.


Trach. You will much delight in the flattering green, which now begins to
be in his glory.


Sapho Sir boy, will ye undertake to carry us over the water? Are you dumb, can
you not speak?


Phao Madame, I crave pardon, I am spurblinde, I could scarce see.


Sapho It is pity in so good a face there should be an evil eye.


Phao I would in my face there were never an eye.


Sapho Thou can never be rich in a trade of life of all the basest.


Phao Yet content Madame, which is a kind of life of all the best.


Sapho Will thou forsake the ferrie, and follow the court as a Page?


Phao As it pleases fortune Madame, to whom I am a prentice.


Sapho Come, let us go?


Trachi. Will you go Pandion.


Pandi. Yea.


Exeunt. Actus secundus, Schaena tertia.
Molus, Cryticus, Calypho, Molus Cryticus comes in good time, I shall not be
alone. What news Cryticus?


Cryti. I taught you that lesson, to ask what news, and this is the news: to
morrow there shall be a desperate fray between two, made at all weapons, from the
brown bill to the bodkin.


Molus Now thou talkest of Frayes, I pray thee what is that, whereof they talk
so commonly in court, valor, the stab, the pistol, for the which every man
that dares is so much honored?


Criti. O Molus, beware of valor, he that can look big, and wear his
dagger pomel lower the^ the point, that lies at a good ward, and can hit a
button with a thrust, and will into the field man to man for a boute or two,
he, Molus, is a shrewd fellow, and shall be well followed.


Molus What is the end?


Criti. Danger or death.


Molus If it be but death that brings all this commendation, I account him as
valiant that is killed with a surfeit, as with a sword.


Criti. How so?


Molus If I venture upon a full stomach to eat a rasher on the coals, a
carbonado, drink a carouse, swallow all things that may procure sickness or
death, am not I as valiant to die so in a house, as the other in a field? Me
thinks that Epicures are as desperate as soldiers, and cooks provide as good
weapons as cutlers?


Criti. O valiant kinght.


Molus I will die for it, what greater valor?


Criti. Scholars fight, who rather seek to choke their stomachs, then see
their blood.


Molus I will stand upon this point: if it be valor to dare die, he is
valiant howsoever he dies.


Criti. Well, of this hereafter but here comes Calipho, we will have some
sport.


Caly. My mistress, I think has got a Gadfly, never at home, and yet none can
tell where abroad. My master was a wise man, when he matched with such a
womanne. When she comes in, we must put out the fire, because of the smoke,
hang up our hammers because of the noise, and do no work, but watch, what
she wants. She is fair, but by my troath I doubt of her honesty. I must
seek her, that I fear Mars has found.


Criti. Whom do thou seek?


Caly. I have found those I seek not.


Molus I hope you have found those, which are honest.


Caly. It may be: but I seek no such.


Molus Cryticus, you shall see me by learning to prove Calipho to be the
deiull.


Cryti. Let us see but I pray thee prove it better, then thou did thy self to
be valiant.


Molus Calipho, I will prove thee to be the devil.


Caly. Then will I swear thee to be a God.


Molus The devil is black.


Caly. What care I.


Molus Thou art black.


Caly. What care you.


Molus Therefore thou art the devil.


Caly. I deny that.


Molus It is the conclusion, thou must not deny it.


Caly. In spite of all conclusions, I will deny it.


Criti. Molus, the Smith holds you hard.


Molus Thou see he has no reason.


Criti. Try him again.


Molus I will reason with thee now from a place.


Caly. I mean to answer you in no other place.


Molus Like master, like man.


Caly. Yt may be.


Molus But thy master has horns.


Caly. And so may thou.


Molus Therefore thou have horns, and ergo a devil,


Caly. Be they all diuelles have horns?


Molus All men that have horns, are.


Caly. Then are there more devils on earth the^ in hell.


Molus But what do thou answer?


Caly. I deny that.


Molus What?


Caly. Whatsoever it is, that shall prove me a devil. But hear thou
scholar, I am a plain fellow, and can fashion nothing but with the hammer.
What will thou say, if I prove thee a smith?


Molus Then will I say thou art a scholar.


Cryti. Prove it Calipho, and I will give thee a good Colaphum.


Caly. I will prove it, or else,


Criti. Or else what?


Caly. Or else I will not prove it. Thou art a Smith: therefore thou art a
smith. The conclusion, you say, must not be denied: and therefore it is true,
thou art a smith.


Molus I, but I deny your Antecedent.


Caly. I, but you shall not. Have I not touched him Cryticus?


Criti. You have both done learnedly: for as sure as he is a smith, thou art a
devil.


Caly. And then he a devil, because a smith: for that it was his reason to
make me a devil being a smith.


Molus There is no reasoning with these Mechanical doltes, whose wits are in
their hands, not in their heads.


Criti. Be not choleric, you are wise: but let us take up this matter with a
song.


Caly. I am content, my voice is as good as my reason.


Molus Than shall we have sweet music. But come, I will not break of.


Song. Exeunt. Actus secundus, Schaena quarta.
Phao, Sybilla. Phao What unacquainted thoughts are these Phao, far unfit
for thy thoughts, unmeet for thy birth, thy fortune, thy years, for Phao:
unhappy, can thou not be content to behold the sun, but thou must covet
to build thy nest in the Sun? Does Sapho bewitch thee, whom all the Ladies
in Sicily could not woo: Yea, poor Phao, the greatness of thy mind is far
above the beauty of thy face, and the hardness of thy fortune beyond the
bitterness of thy words. Die Phao, Phao die: for there is no hope if thou be
wise, nor safety, if thou be fortunate. Ah Phao, the more thou seek to
suppress those mounting affections, they soar the loftier, and the more thou
wrastlest with them the stronger they wax, not unlike unto a ball, which the
harder it is thrown against the earth, the higher it boundeth into the air:
or our Sycilyan stone, which grows hardest by hammeringe. O divine love, and
therefore divine, because love, whose deity no conceit can compase, and
therefore no authority can constrain, as miraculous in working as mighty,
and no more to be suppressed then comprehended. How now Phao, whether art
thou carried, committing idolatry with that God, whom thou have cause to
blaspheme. O Sapho, fair Sapho; peace miserable wretch, enjoy thy care in
covert, we are willow in thy hatte, and baies in thy heart. Lead a Lamb in thy
hand, and a Fox in thy head, a dove on the back of thy hand, and a sparow in
the palm. Gold boyleth best, when it bubleth least, water runs smoothest,
where it is deepest. Let thy love hang at thy hearts bottom, not at the
tongues brimme. Things untold, are undone, there can be no greater comfort,
then to know much, nor any less labor, then to say nothing. But ah thy bewty
Sapho, thy bewty. Beginnest thou to blabbe? I blabbe it Phao, as long as thou
blabbest her bewty. Bees that die with honney, are buried with harmony.
Swannes that end their lives with songs, are covered when they are dead, with
flowers: and they that till their latter gasp commend bewty, shall be ever
honored with benefits. In these extreamities I will go to none other Oracle*
then Sybilla, whose old years have not been idle in these young attemptes,
and whose sound advice may mitigate (though the heavens cannot remove) my
miseries. O Sapho, sweet Sapho, Sapho. Sibilla?


Syb. Who is there?


Phao One not worthy to be one.


Syb. Fair Phao?


Phao Unfortunate Phao.


Syb. Come in.


Phao So I will, and quite thy tale of Phoebus, with one whose brightness
darkeneth Phoebus. I love Sapho, Sybilla, Sapho, ah Sapho, Sybilla.


Syb. A short tale Phao, and a sorrowful, it asks pity rather then counsel.


Phao So it is Sybilla: yet in those firm years me thinks there should
harbor such experience, as may defer, though not take away, my destiny.


Syb. It is hard to cure that by words, which cannot be eased by herbs, and
yet if thou will take advice, be attentive.


Phao I have brought mine ears of purpose, and will ha^g at your mouth, til
you have finished your discourse.


Syb. Love, fair child, is to be governed by art, as thy boat by an oar: for
fancy, though it comes by hazard, is ruled by wisdom. If my precepts may
persuade, (and I pray thee let them persuade) I would wish thee first to be
diligent: for that womenne desire nothing more then to have their servants
officious. Be always in sight, but never slothful. Flatter I mean, lie, little
things catch light minds, and fancy is a worm, that feeds first upon
fenell. Imagine with thy self all are to be won, otherwise mine advise were
as unnecessary as thy labor. It is impossible for the brittle metal of women
to withstand the flattering attemptes of men: only this, let them be asked,
their sex requires no less, their modesties are to be allowed so much. Be
prodigal in praises and promises, beauty must have a trumpet, and pride a
gift. Peacocks never spread their feathers, but when they are flattered, and
Gods are seldom pleased, if they be not bribed. There is none so foul, that
thinks not her self fair. In commending thou can loose no labor. for of
every one thou shall be believed. O simple women, that are brought rather to
believe what their ears hear of flattering men, then what their eyes see in
true glasses.


Phao You degresse only to make me believe, that women do so lightly believe.


Sybilla Then to the purpose. Choose such times to break thy suite, as thy Lady
is pleasant. The wooden horse entered Troy, when the soldiers were quaffyng, and
Penelope forsooth, whom fables make so coy, among the pottes wrong her wooers
by the fists, when she lowred on their faces. Grapes are mind glasses. Venus
works in Bacchus press, and blows fire upon his lycour. When thon talkest
with her, let thy speech be pleasant, but not incredible. Choose such words as
may (as many may) melt her mind. Honney ranckleth, when it is eaten for
pleasure and fair words wound, when they are heard for love. Write, and
persist in writing, they read more then is written to them, and write less
then they think. In co^ceite study to be pleasant in attire brave, but not
too curious, when she smileth laugh outright, if rise, stand up, if sit, lie
down. Loose al thy time to keep time with her. Can you sing, show your
cunning, can you dance, use your legs, can you play upon any instrument,
practice your fingers to please her fancy, seek out qualyties. If she seem at
the first cruel, be not discouraged. I tell the a straung thing, womenne
strive, because they would be overcome, force they call it: but such a welcome
force they account it, that continually, they study to be enforced. To fair
words join sweet kisses, which if they gently receive, I say no more, they will
gently receive. But be not pinned always on her sleeves, strangers have
green rushes, when daily guests are not worth a rushe. Look pale, and learn
to be lean, that who so sees thee, may say, the Gentleman is in love. Use no
forcerie to hasten thy success, wit is a witch, Ulysses was not fair, but
wise, not cunning in charms, but sweet in speech, whose filed tongue made
those inamoured that sought to have him inchau^ted. Be not coy, bear, sooth,
swear, die to please thy Lady, these are rules for poor lovers, to others I
am no mistress. He has wit enough, that can give enough. Dumb men are
eloquent, if they be liberal. Believe me great gifts are little Gods. When thy
mistress does bend her brow, do not thou bend thy fiste. Camokes must be bowed
with slight, not strength, water to be trained with pipes, not stopped with
sluses, fire to be quenched with dust, not with swords. If thou have a ryuall,
be pacient, art must wind him out not malice: time, not might, her change,
and thy constancy. Whatsoever she wears: swear it becomes her. In thy louce
be secret. Venus cofers, though they be hollow, never sound, and when they
seem emptiest, they are fullest. Old fool that I am, to do thee good, I
begin to doat, and counsel that, which I would have concealed. Thus Phao
have I given thee certain regardes, no rules, only to set thee in the way, not
to bring thee ho^e.


Phao Ah Sybilla, I pray go on, that I may glutte my self in this science.


Syb. Thou shall not surfette Phao, whilst I diet thee. Flies that die on the
honney suckle become poison to bees. A little in love is a great deal.


Phao But all that can be said not enough.


Syb. White silver draws black lines, and sweet words will breed sharp
torments.


Phao What shall become of me?


Syb. Go dare


Phao I go, Phao, thou can but die, and then as good die with great desires,
as pine in base fortunes.

Exit.
Actus tertius, Schaena prima.
Trachinus, Pandion, Mileta, Ismena, Eugenua. Trach. Sapho is fallen suddenly
sick, I cannot guess the cause.


Milet. Some cold belike, or else a woman's qualme.


Pandi. A strange nature of cold, to drive one into such an heat.


Milet. Your Physic sir I think be of the second sort, else would you not
judge it rare, that whot fevers are engendered by cold causes.


Pandi. Indeed Lady, I have no more Physic then will purge choler, and that
if it please you, I will practice upon you. It is good for women that be
waspish.


Isme. Faith sir no, you are best purge your own melancholy: belike you are a
male content.


Pandi. It is true, and are not you a female content.


Trach. Soft, I am not content, that a male and Female content, should go
together.


Milet. Ismena is disposed to be merry.


Isme. No, it is Pandion would feign seem wise.


Trach. You shall not fall out? for Pigions after biting fall to billing, and
open iarres make the closest iestes.


Euge. Mileta, Ismena, Mileta: Come away, my Lady is in a sown.


Milet. Aye me.


Isme. Come, let us make haste.


Trach. I am sorry for Sapho: because she will take no Physic, like you
Pandion, who being sick of the sullens, will seek no friend.


Pandi. Of men we learn to speak, of Gods to hold our peace. Silence shall
disgeste what follye has swallowed, and wisdom weane what fancy has noursed.


Trach. Is it not love?


Pandi. If it were, what then?


Trach. Nothing, but that I hope it be not.


Pandi. Why, in courts there is nothing more common. And as to be bald among
the Micanyans it was accounted no shame, because they were all balde: so to be
in love among courtiers it is no discredit: for that they are al in love.


Trach. Why, what do you think of our Ladies?


Pandi. As of the Seres wool, which being whitest and softest, fretteth
soonestand deepest.


Trach. I will not tempt you in your deep Mela^choly, least you seem sour to
those, which are so sweet. But come, let us walk a little into the fields, it
may be the open air will disclose your close conceits.


Pandi. I will go with you: but send our pages away.


Exeunt. Actus tertius, Schaena secunda.
Cryticus, Molus, Calyploo. Criti. What brown study ar^ thou in Molus, no
mirth? no life?


Molus I am in the depth of my learning driven to a muse, how this lent I shall
scamble in the court, that was wont to fast so often in the University.


Criti Thy belly is thy God.


Molus Then is he a deaffe God.


Criti. Why?


Molus For venture non habet aures. But thy back is thy God.


Criti. Then is it a blind God.


Molus How prove you that?


Criti. Easy. Nemo videt manticae, quod intergo est.


Molus Then would the sachell that hanges at your God, id est, your back,
were full of meat to stuff my God, hoc est, my belly.


Criti. Excellent. But how can thou study, when thy mind is only in the
kitchen?


Molus Does not the horse travel best, that sleapeth with his head in the
maunger?


Criti. Yes, what then?


Molus Good wits will apply. But what cheer is there here this Lent?


Criti. Fish.


Molus I can eat none, it is wind.


Cryti. Eggs.


Molus I must eat none, they are fire.


Criti. Cheese.


Molus It is against the old verse, Caseus est nequam.


Cryti. Yea, but it disgesteth all things except it self.


Molus Yea, but if a man has nothing else to eat, what shall it digest?


Criti. You are disposed to jest. But if your silke^ throat can swallow no
packthread, you must pick your teeth, and play with your trencher.


Molus So shall I not incur the fulsom and unmannerly sin of surfeiting.
But here comes Calipho.


Criti. What news?


Caly. Since my being here, I have sweat like a dog, to prove my master a
devil, he brought such reasons to refel me, as I promise you, I shall like
the better of his wit, as long as I am with him.


Molus How?


Caly. Thus, I always arguing that he had horns, and therefore a devil, he
said: fool, they are things like horns, but no horns. For once in the
Senate of Gods being hold a solemn sesion, in the midst of their talk I put in
my sentence, which was so indifferent, that they all concluded it might as well
have been left out, as put in, and so placed on each side of my head things
like horns, and called me a Parenthesis, Now my masters, this may be true,
for I have seen it my self about diverse sentences.


Molus It is true, and the same time did Mars make a full point, that Vulcans
head was made a Parenthesis.


Criti. This shall go with me, I trust in Syracusa to give one or other a
Parenthesis.


Molus Is Venus yet come home?


Caly. No, but were I Vulcan, I would by the Gods,


Criti. What would thou?


Caly. Nothing, but as Vulcan halt by the Gods.


Criti. I thought you would have hardly entreated Venus.


Caly. Nay, Venus is easily entreated: but let that go bie.


Criti. What?


Caly. That which makes so many Parenthesis.


Molus I must go by too, or else my master will not go by me: but meet me
full with his fiste. Therefore, if we shall sing, give me my part quickly: for
if I tarry long, I shall cry my part woefully.


Song. Exeunt. Actus tertius, Schaena tertia.
Sapho in her bed, Mileta, Ismena, Kanope, Eugenua, Fauilla, Lamya. Sapho. Hey
ho: I know not which way to turn me Ah, ah, I fainte, I die,


Milet. Madame, I think it good you have more clothes, and sweat it out.


Sapho No, no, the best ease I find is to sigh it out.


Isme. A strange disease, that should breed such a desire.


Sapho A strange desire that has brought such a disease.


Cano. Where, Lady, do you feel your most pain?


Sapho Where no body else can feel it Canope.


Cano. At the heart?


Sapho In the heart.


Cano. Will you have any Mithrydate?


Sapho Yea, if for this disease there were any Mithrydate?


Milet. Why? what disease is it Madam, that physic ca^ not cure?


Sapho Only the disease Mileta that I have.


Milet. Is it a burning ague?


Sapho I think so, or a burning agony.


Euge. Will you have any of this Syrope, to moisture your mouth?


Sapho Would I had some local things to dry my brain.


Fauil. Madame will you see if you can sleep?


Sapho Sleep Fauilla: I shall then dream.


Lami. As good dream sleeping, as sigh waking.


Euge. Phao is cunning in all kind of simples, and it is hard, if there be
none to procure sleep.


Sapho Who?


Euge. Phao.


Sapho Yea Phao, Phao, ah Phao, let him come presently.


Milet. Shall we draw the cutteines, whilst you give your self to slumber?


Sapho Do, but depart not, I have such startes in my sleep, disquieted I
know not how. In a slumber. Phao, Phao.


Isme. What say you Madame?


Sapho Nothing, but if I sleep not now, you send for Phao. Ah Gods.


She falls asleep. The Curtains drawn. Milet. There is a fish called
Garus, that heals al sick nesse, so as whilst it is applied one name not
Garus.


Euge. An evil medicine for us women: for if we should be forbidden to name
Garus, we should chat nothing but Garus.


Cano. Well said Eugenua, you know your self.


Euge. Yea Canope, and that I am one of your sex.


Isme. I have heard of an herb called Lunary, that being bound to the pulses
of the sick, causes nothing but dreams of weddings and daunces.


Fauil. I think Ismena, that herb be at thy pulses now: for thou art ever
talking of matches and merymentes.


Cano. It is an unlucky figne in the chamber of the sick to talk of marriages;
for my mother said, it foresheweth death.


Milet. It is very evil to Canope to sit at the beds feet, and
foretells danger: therefore remove your stool, and sit by me.


Lamy. Sure it is some cold she has taken.


Isme. If one were burnt, I think we women would say, he died of a cold.


Fauil. It may be some conceit.


Milet. Then is there no fear: for yet did I never hear of a woman that died
of a conceit.


Euge. I mistruste her not: for that the owl has not shrikte at the window,
or the night Raven crooked, both being fatal.


Fauil. You are all superstitious: for these be but fancies of doting age: who
by chance observing it in some, have set it down as a religion for all.


Milet. Fauilla, thou art but a Girl, I would not have a Weesel cry, nor
desire to see a Glass, nor an old wife come into my chamber: for then though I
lyngred in my disease, I should never escape it.


Sapho Ah, who is there? what sodeine affrightes be these? Me thought Phao
came with simples to make me sleep. Did no body name Phao before I began to
slumber?


Milet Yes, we told you of him.


Sapho Let him be here too morrow.


Milet. He shall, will you have a little broth to comfort you?


Sahpo I can relish nothing.


Milet. Yet a little you must take to sustain nature.


Sapho I cannot Mileta, I will not. Oh, which way shall I lie? what shall I
do? Heygh ho. O Mileta, help to rear me up, my bed, my head lies too low.
You pester me with too many clothes. Fie, you keep the chamber too hot,
avoid it, it may be I shall steal a nappe when all are gone.


Mileta We will.


Sapho sola. Ah impacient disease of love, and Goddess of love thrice
vnpitifull. The Eagle is never stricken with thunder, nor the Olyue with
lightning and may great Ladies be plagued with love? O Venus, have I not
strawed thine Altars with sweet roses? kept thy swannes in clear rvuers?
sead thy sparrowes with ripe corn, and harbored thy doves in fair houses?
Thy Tortoys have I nourished under my fig tree, my chamber have I ceeled with
thy Cockleshels, and dipped thy spung into the freshest waters. Did thou
nourse me in my swaddling clouts with wholesome herbs, that I might perish in
my flowting years by fancy? I perceive, but to late I perceive, and yet not
too late, because at last, that strains are caught as well by stooping too low,
as reaching to high: that eyes are bleared as soon with vapors that come from
the earth, as with beams that proceed from the sun. Love lodges sometimes
in caves: and thou Phoebus, that in the pride of thy hearre shinest all day in
our Horizon, at night dippest thy head in the Ocean. Resist it Sapho, whilst
it is yet tender. Of Acornes comes Oaks, of drops floudes, of sparks flames
of Atomies Elements. But alas it fares with me as with waspes, who feeding
on serpents, make their stings more venomous: for glutting my self on the face
of Phao, I have made my desire more desperate. Into the neast of an Alcyon no
bird can enter but the Alcyon, and into the heart of so great a Lady can any
creep but a great Lord? There is an herb (not unlike unto my love) which the
further it grows from the sea, the salter it is, and my desires the more they
swerve from reason, the more seem they reasonable. When Phao comes, what
the^? will thou open thy love? Yea. No Sapho: but staring in his face till
thine eyes dasell, and thy spirits fainte, die before his face: then this
shall be written on thy Tomb, that though thy love were greater then wisdom
could endure; yet thine honor was such, as love could not violate, Mileta?


Milet. I come.


Sapho. It will not be, I can take no rest, which way soever I turn.


Milet. A strange malady.


Sapho. Mileta, if thou will, a Martiredom. But give me my lute, and I will see
if in song I can beguile mine own eyes.


Milet. Here Madame.


Sapho. Have you sent for Phao?


Milet. Yea.


Sapho. And to bring simples that will procure sleep?


Milet. No.


Sapho. Foolish wensh, what should the boy do here, if he bring not remedies
with him? you think belike I could sleep if I did but see him, Let him not
come at al, yes, let him come: no, it is no matter: yet will I try, let him
come: do you hear?


Milet. Yea Madame, it shall be done Peace, no noise: she begins to fall
asleep. I will go to Phao.


Isme. Go speedily: for if she wake, and find you not here, she will be
angry. Sick folks are testie, who though they eat nothing yet they feed on
gall.


The song. Actus tertius, Schaena prima.
Mileta, Phao, Ismena, Sapho, Venus. Milet. I would either your cunning, Phao,
or your fortune might by simples provoke my Lady to some slumber.


Phao. My simples are in operation as my simplicity is, which if they do little
good, assuredly they can do no harm.


Milet. Were I sick, the very sight of thy fair face would drive me into a
sound sleep.


Phao. Indeed Gentlewomen are so drowsy in their desires, that they can
scarce hold up their eyes for love.


Milet. I mean the delight of beauty would so blind my senses, as I should
be quickly rocked into a deep rest.


Phao. You women have an excuse for an advantage, which must be allowed:
because only to you women it was allotted.


Milet. Phao, thou art passing fair, and able to draw a chaste eye not only
to glaunce: but to gaze on thee. Thy young years, thy quick wit, thy stayed
desires are of force to control those which should command.


Phao. Lady, I forgot to commend you first, and least I should have
ouerslipped to praise you at all, you have brought in my beauty, which is
simple, that in curtisie I might remember yours, which is singular.


Milet. You mistake of purpose, or misco^ster of malice.


Phao. I am as far from malice, as you from love, and to mistake of purpose,
were to mislike of peeuishnes.


Milet. As far as I from love? Why, think you me so dull I cannot love, or so
spiteful I will not?


Phao. Neither Lady: but how should men imagine women can love, when in their
mouths there is nothing rifer, then in faith I do not love.


Milet. Why, will you have wome^s love in their tongs?


Phao. Yea,else do I think there is none in their hearts.


Milet. Why?


Phao. Because there was never any thing in the botto^ of a woman's heart, that
comes not to her tongs end.


Milet. You are too young to cheapen love.


Sapho. Yet old enough to talk with market folks.


Milet. Well, let us in.


Isme. Phao is come.


Sapho. Who?Phao? Phao, let him come near: but who sent for him?


Milet. You Madame.


Sapho. I am loath to take any medicines: yet must I rather the^ pine in these
maladies. Phao, you may make me sleep, if you will?


Phao. If I can, I must, if you will?


Sapho. What herbs have you brought Phao?


Phao. Such as will make you sleep Madame, though they cannot make me slumber.


Sapho. Why, how can you cure me, when you cannot remedy your self?


Phao. Yes Madame, the causes are contrary. For it is only a dryness in your
brains, that keeps you from rest, But,


Sapho. But what?


Phao. Nothing, but mine is not so.


Sapho. Nay, then I despair of help, if our disease be not all one.


Phao. I would our diseases were all one.


Sapho. It goes hard with the pacient, when the Physician is desperate.


Phao. Yet Medea made the euerwaking Dragon to snorte, when she poor soul
could not wink.


Sapho. Medaea was in love, and nothing could cause her rest but Jason.


Phao. Indeed I know no herb to make lovers sleep but Hearts ease, which
because it grows so high, I cannot reach: for,


Sapho. For whom?


Phao. For such as love.


Sapho. It grows very low, and I can never stoop to it that,


Phao. That what?


Sapho. That I may gather it: but why do you sight so Phao


Phao. It is mine use Madame.


Sapho. It will do you harm, and me too: for I never hear one sighe, but I
must sight also.


Phao. It were best then that your Ladyship give me leave to be gone: for I
can but sigh.


Sapho. Nay stay: for now I begin to sighe, I shall not leave, though you be
gone. But what do you think best for your sighing to take it away.


Phao. Yew Madame.


Sapho. Me?


Phao. No Madame, yewe of the tree.


Sapho. Then will I love yewe the better. And indeed I think it would make me
sleep too, therefore all other simples set aside, I will simply use only yewe.


Phao. Do madame:for I think nothing in the world so good as yewe.


Sapho. Farewell for this time.


Venus. Is not your name Phao?


Phao. Phao, fair Venus, whom you made so fair.


Venus. So passing fair, O fair Phao, O sweet Phao: what will thou do for
Venus?


Phao. Anything that comes in the compass of my poor fortune.


Venus. Cupid shall teach thee to shoot, and I will instruct thee to dissemble.


Phao. I will learn any thing but dissembling.


Venus. Why my boy.


Phao. Because then I must learn to be a woman,


Venus. Thou heardest that of a man.


Phao. Men speak truth.


Venus. But truth is a she, and so always painted.


Phao. I think a painted truth.


Venus. Well, farewell for this time; for I must visit Sapho.


Phao exit. Actus quartus, Schaena prima.
Venus, Sapho, Cupid. Venus. Sapho, I have heard thy complaints, and pitied
thine agonies.


Sapho. O Venus, my cares are only known to thee, and by thee only came the
cause. Cupid, why did thou wound me so deep?


Cupid. My mother bad me draw mine arrow to ye head.


Sapho. Venus, why did thou prove so hateful?


Venus. Cupid took a wrong shafte.


Sapho. O Cupid too unkind, to make me so kind, that almost I transgress the
modesty of my kind.


Cupid. I was blind, and could not see mine arrow.


Sapho. How came it to pass, thou did hit my heart?


Cupid. That came by the nature of the head, which be ing once let out of the
bow, ca^ find none other lighting place but the heart.


Venus. Be not dismaide, Phao shall yield.


Sapho. If he yield, then shall I shame to embrace one so mean if not, die:
because I cannot embrace one so mean. Thus do I find no mean.


Venus. Well, I will work for thee. Farewell.


Sapho. Farewell sweet Venus, and thou Cupid, which art sweetest in thy
sharpness.

Exit Sapho.
Actus quartus, Schaena secunda.
Venus, Cupid. Venus. Cupid, what haste thou done put thine arrows in Phaoes
eyes, and wounded thy mothers heart?


Cupid. You gave him a face to allure, then why should not I give him eyes to
pearce?


Venus. O Venus, un happy Venus, who in bestowinge a benefit upon a man, haste
brought a bane unto a Goddess. What perplexities do thou feel? O fair
Phao, and therefore made fair to breed in me a frenzy? O would that when I
gave thee golden locks to curle thy head, I had shackled thee with iron locks
on thy feet. And when I noursed thee Sapho with lettice, would it had turned
to hemlocke, Have I brought a smooth skin over thy face to make a rough scarre
in my heart? and given thee a fresh color like the damask rose, to make mine
pale like the stained Turkey. O Cupid, thy flames with Psyches were but sparks,
and my desires with Adonis but dreams, in respect of these unacquainted
torments. Laugh Juno, Venus is in love, but Juno shall not see with whom,
least she be in love. Venus belike is become stale. Sapho forsooth because she
has many virtues, therefore she must have all the favors. Venus waxes old:
and then she was a pretty wench, when Juno was a young wife, now crows foot
is on her eye, and the black ox has troad on her foot. But were Sapho never
so virtuous, does she think to contend with Venus to be as amorous? Yield
Phao, but yield to me Phao, I entreat where I may command, command thou,
where thou should entreat. In this case Cupid what is thy counsel, Venus
must both play the lover and the dissembler, and therefore the dissembler,
because the Lover.


Cupid. You will ever be playing with arrows, like children with knives, and
the^ when you bleed, you cry, go to Vulcan, entreat by prayers, threate^ with
blows, wowe with kisses, banne with curses, try al means to rid these
extremities.


Venus. To what end?


Cupid. That he might make me new arrows: for nothing can root out the
desires of Phao, but a new shafte of inconstancy, nor any thing turn
Saphoeshart, but a new arrow of disdain. And then they dislyking one the
other, who shall enjoy Phao but Venus?


Venus. I will follow thy counsel. For Venus, though she be in her latter age
for years: yet is she in her Nonage for affections. When Venus cease to
love, let love cease to rule. But come, let us to Vulcan.


Exeunt. Actus quartus, Schaena tertia.
Sapho, Mileta, Ismena, Eugenna, Lamya, Fauilla, Canope. Sapho. What dreams
are these Mileta? and can there be no truth in dreams? yea, dreams have their
truth. Me thought I saw a Stock dove or woodquist, I know not how to term
it, that brought short strawes to build his neast in a tall Caedar, where,
whiles with his bill he was framing his buylding, he lost as many feathers from
his wings, as he laid strawes in his neast: yet scambling to catch hold to
harbor in the house he had made, he so denly fell from the bough where he
stood. And the^ pitifully casting up his eyes, he cried in such terms (as I
imagined) as might either condemn the nature of such a tree, or the daring of
such a mind. Whilst he lay quaking upon the ground, and I gazing one the
Caeder, I might perceive Antes to breed in the rind coveting only to hoord,
and caterpillars to cleave to the leaves, laboring only to suck, which caused
mo leaves to fall from the tree, the^ there did feathers before from the dove.
Me thought Mileta, I sighed in my sleep, pitying both the fortune of the
bird, and the misfortun of the tree but in this time quils began to bud again
in the bird, which made him look as though he would fly up, and then wished I
that the body of the tree would bow, that he might but creep up the tree,
then and so* Hey, ho.


Milet. And so what?


Sapho. Nothing Mileta: but, and so I waked. But did no body dream but I?


Milet. I dreamed last night, but I hope dreams are contrary, that holding my
head over a sweet smoke, al my hair blazd on a bright flame. Me thought
Ismena cast water to quench it: yet the sparks fell on my bosom, and wiping
them away with my hand, I was all in a gore blood, till one with a few fresh
flowers staunched it. And so stretching my self as stif I started, it was but a
dream.


Isme. It is a sign you shall fall in love with hearing fair words. Water
signifies counsel, flowers death. And nothing can purge your loving humor
but death.


Milet. You are no interpreter: but an interprater, harping always upon love,
till you be as blind as a Harpar.


Isme. I remember last night but one, I dreamed mine eye tooth was lose, and
that I thrust it out with my tongue.


Milet. It foretells the loss of a friend: and I ever thought thee so full
of prattle, that thou would thrust out the best friend with the tatling.


Isme. Yea Mileta: but it was loose before, and if my friend be lose, as good
thrust out with plain words, as kept in with dissembling.


Euge. Dreams are but dotings, which come either by things we see in the day,
or meats that we eat, and so the common sense preferring it to be the
imaginatiue.


Isme. Soft Philosophatrix, well seen in the secrets of art, and not
seduced with the superstitions of nature.


Sapho. Ismenaes tongue never lies still, I think all her teeth will be
loose, they are so often iogged against her tongue. But say on Eugenua.


Euge. There is all.


Sapho. What did you dream, Canope?


Cano. I seldom dream Madame: but sithence your sickness, I cannot tell
whether with over watching but I have had many fantastical visions, for even
now slumbring by your beds side, me thought I was shadowed with a clowd,
where laboring to unwrap my self, I was more entangled. But in the midst of
my striving, it seemed to mysell gold, with fair drops, I filled my lap, and
running to show it my fellows, it turned to duste, I blushed, they laughed;
and then I waked, being glad it was but a dream.


Isme. Take heed Canope, that gold tempt not your lap, and then you blush
for shame.


Cano. It is good luck to dream of gold.


Isme. Yea, if it had continued gold.


Lamya. I dream every night, and the last night this. Me though that walking
in the sun, I was stung with the fly Tarantula, whose venom nothing can
expel but the sweet consent of music. I tried all kind of instruments, but
found no ease, till at the last two Lutes tuned in one key, so glutted my
thirsting ears, that my grief presently seized, for joy whereof as I was
clapping my hands, your Ladyship called.


Milet. It is a sign that nothing shall assuage your love but marriage: for
such is the tying of two in wedlock, as is the tuning of two Lutes, in one
key: for strikinge the stringes of the one, strawes will stir upon the
stringes of the other, and in two minds lincked in love, one cannot be
delighted but the other rejoices.


Fauil. Me thought going by the sea side among Pebels, I saw one playing
with a round stone, ever throwing it into the water, when the sun shined: I
asked the name, he said, it was called Abeston, which being once whotte,
would never be cold, he gave it me, and vanished. I forgetting my self,
delighted with the fair show, would always show it by candle light, pull
it out in the Sun, and see how bright it would look in the fire, where
catching heat, nothing could cool it: for anger I threw it against the wall,
and with the heauing up of mine arm I waked.


Milet. Beware of love, Fauilla: for women hearts are such stones, which warmed
by affection, cannot be coold by wisdom.


Fauil. I warrant you: for I never credit men's words.


Isme. Yet be wary* for women are scorched sometimes with men's eyes, though
they had rather consume then confess.


Sapho. Cease your talking: for I would feign sleep, to see if I can dream,
whether the bird has feathers, or the Antes wings. Draw the curteine.


Actus quartus, Schaena quarta.
Venus, Vulcan, Cupid. Venus. Come Cupid, Vulcans flames must quench Venus
fires. Vulcan?


Vulc. Who?


Venus. Venus.


Vulc. Ho, ho, Venus.


Venus. Come sweet Vulcan, thou know how sweet thou have found Venus, who
being, of all the gooddesses the most fair, has chosen thee of all the Gods
the most foul, thou must needs then confess I was most loving. Enquire not
the cause of my suite by questions: but prevent the effects by curtifie. Make
me six arrowe heads: it is given thee of the Gods by permission to frame them
to any purpose, I shall request them by prayer. Why lowrest thou Vulcan? will thou have a kiss: hold up thy head. Venus has young thoughts, and fresh
affections. Roots have stringes, when boughs have no leaves. But hearken in
thine ear Vulcan: how say thou?


Vulc. Vulcan is a God with you, when you are disposed to flatter. A right
womanne, whose tongue is like a Bees stinge, which pricketh deepest, when it is
fullest of honnye. Because you have made mine eyes dronk with fair looks, you
will set mine ears on edge with sweet words. You were wont to say that the
beating of hammers made your head ache, and the smoke of the forge your eyes
water, and every coal was a block in your way. You weep rose water, when you
ask, and spitte vinegar, when you have obtained. What would you now, with new
arrows? belike Mars has a tougher skin one his heart, or Cupid a weaker arm,
or Venus a better courage. Well Venus, there is never a smile in your face but
has made a wrinkle in my forehead. Ganymedes must fill your cup* and you will
pledge none but Jupiter. But I will not chide Venus: Come Cyclops, my wife must
have her will let us do that in earth, which the Gods cannot undo in heaven.


Venus. Gramercie sweet Vulcan: to your work.


The Song in making of the Arrows. Vulc. Here Venus, I have finished these
arrows by art, bestow them you by wit: for as great advise must he use
that has them, as he cunning that made them.


Venus. Vulcan, now you have done with your forge, let us alone with the
fancye: you are as the Fletcher, not the Archer, to meddle with the arrowe, not
the aim.


Vulc. I thought so: when I have done working, you have done woowing. Where is
now sweet Vulcan? Well, I can say no more, but this which is enoughe, and as
much as any can say: Venus is a woman.


Venus. Be not angrye Vulcan, I will love thee again, when I have either
business, or nothing else to do.


Cupid. My mother will make much of you, when there are no more men then
Vulcan.


Actus quintus, Schaena prima
Venus, Cupid. Venus. Come Cupid, receive with thy fathers instruments, thy
mothers instructions: for thou must be wise in conceit, if thou will be
fortunate in execution. This arrow is feathered with the wings of Aegitus,
which never sleeps for fear of his hen: the head touched with the stone
Perillus, which causes mistruste and jealousy. Shoot this, Cupid, at men that
have fair wives, which will make them rub the brows, when they swell in the
brains. This shaft is headed with Lidian steel, which strikes a deep disdain
of yt which we most desire, ye feathers are of Turtel, but dipped in the blood
of a Tigresse, draw this up close to the head at Sapho, that she may despise,
where now she doates. Good my boy, gall her on the side, that for Phaos love
she may never sighe. This arrow is feathered with the Phoenix winge, and headed
with the Eagles bill, it makes me^ passionate in desires, in love constant,
and wise in conueiaunce, melting as it were their fancies into faith: this
arrowe, sweet child, and with as great aim as thou can, must Phao be
stricken withal, and cry softly to thy self in the very loose, Venus. Sweet
Cupid mistake me not, I will make a quiver for that by it self. The fourth has
feathers of the Peacocke, but glewed with the gum of the Myrtle tree, headed
with fine gold, and fastened with brittle Chrysocoll: this shoot at dainty
and coy Ladies, at amiable and young Nymphs, choose no other white but women:
for this will work lyking in their minds, but not love affability in speech,
but no faith, courtly favors, to be Mistresses over many, but constant to
none: sighs to be fetched from the longes, not the heart, and tears to be
wrong out with their fingers, not their eyes, secret laughing at men's pale
looks and neat attire, open reioycinge at their own comeliness and men's
courtinge. Shoot this arrowe among the thickest of them, whose bosoms lie
open, because they would be stricken with it. And seeing men term women
Jupiters fools, women shall make men Venus fools. This shafte is lead in the
head, and whose feathers are of the night Raven, a deadly and poisoned shafte,
which breeds hate only against those which sue for love. Take heed Cupid
thou hitte not Phao with this shafte: for then shall Venus perish. This last
is an old arrow, but newlye mended, the arrow which hitte both Sapho and Phao,
working only in mean minds an aspiring to superiors, and in high estates a
stooping to inferiors: with this Cupid I am galled my self, till thou have
galled Phao with the other.


Cupid. I warrant you I will cause Phao to languishe in your love and Sapho to
disdain his.


Venus Go, loyter not, nor mistake your shafte. Now Venus, have thou plaide a
cunning part, though not curraunt. But why should Venus dispute of
unlawfulness in love, or faith in affection? being both the Goddess of love
and affection? knowing there is as little truth to be used in love, as there is
reason. No, sweet Phao, Venus will obtain because she is venus. Not thou Jove
with thu^der in thy hand, shall take him out of my hands. I have new arrows
now for my boy, and fresh flames, at which the Gods shall tremble, if they
begin to trouble me. But I will expect the event, and tarry for Cupid at the
forge*


Actus quintus, Schaena secunda.
Sapho, Cupid, Mileta, Venus. Sapho. What have thou done Cupid?


Cupid. That my mother commanded, Sapho.


Sapho. My thinks I feel an alteration in my mind, and as it were a
withstanding in my self of mine own affections.


Cupid. Then has mine arrow his effect.


Sapho. I pray thee tell me the cause?


Cupid. I dare not.


Sapho. Fear nothing: for if Venus fret, Sapho can frown, thou shall be my
son. Mileta* give him some sweet meats, speak good Cupid, and I will give
thee many pretty things.


Cupid. My mother is in love with Phao, she willed me to strike you with
disdain of him, and him with desire of her.


Sapho. O spiteful Venus, Mileta give him some of that. What else Cupid?


Cupid. I could be even with my mother: and so I will, if I shall call you
mother?


Sapho. Yea Cupid, call me any thing, so I may be even with her.


Cupid. I have an arrow, with which if I strike Phao, it will cause him to loath
only Venus.


Sapho. Sweet Cupid, strike Phao with it. Thou shall sit in my lap, I will
rock thee asleep, and feed thee with all these fine knackes.


Cupid. I will about it.

Exit Cupid.
Sapho. But come quickly again. Ah unkind Venus, is this thy promise to
Sapho? But if I get Cuppid from thee, I my self will be the Queen of love.
I will direct these arrows with better aim, and conquer mine own affections,
with greater modesty. Venus heart shall flame, and her love be as common as her
craft. O Mileta, time has disclosed that, which my temperance has kept in:
but since I am rid of the disease, I will not be ashamed to confess the cause.
I loved Phao Mileta, a thing unfit for my degree, but forced by my desire.


Milet. Phao?


Sapho. Phao, Mileta, of whom now Venus is inamoured.


Milet. And do you love him still.


Sapho. No, I feel relenting thoughts, and reason not yielding to appetite.
Let Venus have him, no, she shall not have him. But here coms Cupid. How now
my boy, haste thou done it?


Cupid. Yea, and left Phao railing on Venus, and cursing her name: yet still
sighing for Sapho, and blafing her virtues.


Sapho. Alas poor Phao, thy extreme love should not be requited with so mean
a fortune, thy fair face deserved greater favors: I cannot love, Venus has
hardened my heart.


Venus. I meruale Cupid comes not all this while. How now, in Saphoes lap?


Sapho. Yea Venus, what say you to it, in Saphoes lap.


Venus. Sir boy, come hither?


Cupid. I will not.


Venus. What now? will you not? has Sapho made you so saucy?


Cupid. I will be Saphoes son, I have as you commanded stricken her with a
deep disdain of Phao, and Phao as she entreated me, with a great despite of
you.


Venus. Unhappy wag, what have thou done? I will make thee repent it every
vain in thy heart.


Sapho. Venus be not collerick, Cupid is mine, he has given me his Arrows,
and I will give him a new bow to shoot in. You are not worthy to be the Lady
of love, that yield so often to the impressions of love. Immodest Venus, that
to satisfy the unbridled thoughts of thy heart, transgressest so far from
the stay of thine honor. How say thou Cupid, will thou be with me?


Cupid. Yes.


Sapho. Shall not I be on earth the Goddess of affections?


Cupid. Yes.


Sapho. Shall not I rule the fancies of men, and lead Venus in chains like a
captive?


Cupid. Yes.


Sapho. It is a good boy.


Venus. What have we here? you the Goddess of Love? and you her son, Cupid?
I will tame that proud heart, else shall the Gods say, they are not Venus
friends. And as for you, sit boy, I will teach you how to run away: you shall be
stripped from top to toe, and whipped with nettles, not roses. I will set you to
blow Vulcans coals, not to bear Venus quiver, I will handle you for this
gear: well, I say no more. But as for the new Mistress of love, or Lady, I
cry you mercy, I think you would be called a Goddess, you shall know what it
is to usurp the name of Venus. I will pull those plumes, and cause you to cast
your eyes on your feet, not your feathers: your soft hair will I turn to
hard bristles, your tongue to a stinge, and those alluring eyes to vnluckynes,
in which if the Gods aid me not, I will curse the Gods.


Sapho. Venus, you are in a vain aunswerable to your vanity, whose high
words neither beecome you, nor fear me. But let this suffice, I will
keep Cupid in dispighte of you, and yet with the content of the Gods.


Venus. Will you? why then we shall have pretty Gods in heaven, when you take
Gods prisoners on earth. Before I sleep you shall both repent, and find what
it is but to think irreverently of Venus. Come Cupid, she knows not how to
use thee, come with me, you know what I have for you: will you not?


Cupid. Not I.


Venus. Well, I will be even with you both, and that shortly,

Exit.
Sapho. Cupid, fear not, I will direct thine arrows better. Every rude ass
shall not say he is in love. It is a toye made for Ladies, and I will keep it
only for Ladies.


Cupid. But what will you do for Phao?


Sapho. I will wish him fortunate. This will I do for Phao, because I once loved
Phao: for never shall it be said that Sapho loved to hate, or that out of love
she could not be as courteous, as she was in love passionate. Come Mileta,
shut the door.


Exeunt. Actus quintus, Schaena tertia.
Phao. Sybilla. Phao. Go to Sybilla, tell the beginning of thy love, and the
end of thy fortune. And lo how happilye she sits in her cave. Sybilla?


Syb. Phao, welcome, what news?


Phao. Venus, the Goddess of love I loath, Cupid causd it with a new shafte.
Sapho disdaineth me, Venus causd it for a new spite. O Sybilla, if Venus be
unfaithful in love, where shall one fly for truth? She uses deceit, is it
not then likely she will dispense with subtlety. And being careful to commit
injuries, will she not be careless to revenge them? I must now fall from
love to labor, and endeavor with mine oar to get a fare, not with my pen
to write a fancy. Loves are but smokes, which vanish in the seeing, and yet
hurt whilst they are seen. A Ferrie Phao, no the stars cannot call it a
worser fortune. Raung rather over the world, forswear affections, entreat for
death. O Sapho, thou haste Cupid in thine arms, I in my heart, thou kissest
him for sport, I must curse him for spite: yet will I not curse him Sapho,
whom thou kissest. This shall be my resolution, where ever I wa^der, to be as I
were ever kneeling before Sapho, my loyalty unspotted, though unrewarded. With
as little malice will I go to my grave, as I did lie with all in my cradle. My
life shall be spente in sighing and wishing, the one for my bad fortune, the
other for Saphoes good.


Sybil. Do so Phao: for destiny calls thee as well from Sycily as from love.
Other things hang over thy head, which I must neither tell, nor thou enquire.
And so farewell.


Phao. Farewell Sybilla, and farewell Sycily. Thoughts shall be thy food, and
in thy steps shall be printed beehinde thee, that there was none so loyal
left behind thee. Farewell Syracusa, unworthy to harbor faith, and when I am
gone, unless Sapho be here, unlikely to harbor any.


The Epilogue.
THey that tread in a maze, walk oftentimes in one path, and at the last come
out where they entered in. We fear we have lead you all this while in a
Labyrinth of conceits, diverse times hearing one device, and have now brought
you to an end, where we first began. Which wearisome travail, you must
impute to the necessity of the history, as Theseus did his labor to the art
of the Labyrinth. There is nothing causes such giddines, as going in a wheel,
neither ca^ there any thing breed such tediousness, as hearing many words
uttered in a small compass. But if you accept this dau^ce of a Farie in a
circle, we will herafter at your wills frame our fingers to all forms. And
so we wish every one of you a thread to lead you out of the doubts, wherewith
we leave you entangled: that nothing be mistaken by our rash ouersightes, nor
misconstrued by your deep insights.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Dawson, for Thomas Cadman.


