A Christmas bankette garnyshed with many pleasant and deynty disshes, newely
prepared by Theodore Basille.

Luce. 14. Blessed is he that eatethe bread in the kingdom of God.

To the right honorable Sir Thomas Neuelle Knight, Theodore Basille wyssheth
long life, continual health, and prosperous felicite.
I fear unless some men will accuse me of temerite and rasshnes, seeing ye so
boldly I dare offer to your right honorable maystershyp this little
lucubracion and work, which I made now of late, and entitled a Christmasse
bancket, in as much as I have been so seldo^e in your company, and have not
attempted nor proved at any time perfectly by mutual confabulacion how your
mind is affected toward me. To this I answer, that I sitting at your table
before syx months past where it pleased you very benignely to talk with me,
perceived in your maystershyp at that time, as at all other so great humanite,
comite, ge^tlenes and affabilite toward al men, yt it has syns that time
greatly animated and encouraged me to excogitate and invent somewhat yt I might
dedicate to your name, trustyng by this means that your benevolence toward me
should not only be encresed, but also made consumate and perfect. While I
sought diligently an argume^nt fytte and worthy your benignite, among all
other it came to my remembrance that this time of ye year men use customab^ye
to make feasts and banckettes, and there unto for to call their fre^des, lovers
and neighbors. When I considered this manner and custom, it did so much please
me, seeing that mutual love is mayntained thereby, that hereof I took an occasion
also to make a Christmasse bancket. For I thought although I were poor and not
of habilite to make such a feast or ba^cket, as the custom requires, yet I
would according to that kind of rytches, which God has endued me, prepare
some bancket, and call unto it, not twenty or forty, but even so many as will
come, ye all men might commend Ba^ille having no house of his own, for his
household keeping and large mayntena^ce of hospitalite. And for as much as there
shall not want vniuersal^y, which shall make feasts for the body at this time,
I thought it best, to make my bancket, a bancket for the soul, yt men
having their bodies fed of other, might also have their souls fed at my
hand. I have therefore prepared a Bancket, not such a bancket, Joan. vi.
as the meat whereof perissheth, corruptethe, and commethe to naught, but that
abides into everlasting life. And because it may be a Christmasse bancket in
deed, and worthy whereat Christ should be present I have garnysshed it with many
delicious, pleasant, deynte, yea and heavenly dysshes of the most holy
scriptures. So that whosoever eats of this bancket, shall find in it much
confortable noryshme^t for his soul and be occasioned thereby, I doubt not to
give God hertye thanks, which has vouchedsafe of his deuyne clemency, and
unmeasurable goodness, freely to call him to his celestial ba^cket. Would God
that by this my ba^cket making, I might excyte and move other to use like
co^municacio^ at their table, as they shall find here, or at ye lees^e that
they would enterlase in some part of their repast their talk with such
honest and godly words as they shall here read, and utterly reiecte and cast
away all fylthy and unclean co^municacion, all jesting and raylyng, all
blaspheming and cursing. So should they have Christ more present with them at
their feasts, than many have now a days, at whose table such kind of talk
is used, as may justly seem not to be worthy of God and his son Jesus, but of
Bacchus and Uenus. These be no Christmasse banckettes, but Christlesse and
dyuellysh bankettes. They be no feasts fytte for christen men, but for
Gentiles and Ethuyckes. God banysshe once this great absurdite from ye tables
of the^ that profess Christ. Now in as much as at the beginning of a new
year the vniuersa^^ custom is to give gi^tes one to another, whereby the
proteste their mutual good will, love and favor. I because I will not seem to
be estraunged from this point of humanity, do here hubly offer to your right
honorable maystershyp this my Christmasse ba^cket for a new years gift, most
i^sta^tly desyri^g you favorably to accept it, as ye gift of him, which
wyssheth to you from God ye father, long life, continual ^elth and prosperous
felicite. Hereafter God prosperyng me in my studies, and directyng my pen in
the travail of his word, I trust to co^pyle unto the glory of God, and the
i^mortalite of your name other works no less godly and profitable to the
reders. In ye mean season that god, whose blessed word you must inti^rly
favor and follow, might preserve in safe estate, your good maistershyp to
the anau^ceme^t of his glory, and the great quietness of us all in this country,
by executyng on your behalf, according to your of^yce committed worthelye unto
you by the kings most gracious hyghnes, such justice and equity in your
judgments, as shall may turn to the utter expulsion of all vice, and the
high promocion and furtherau^ce of al virtue. In the travail whereof that LORD
might assist you, by whom king sraygne, and y^ makers of laws ^^scerne
righteous things, by whom also, (...)
as Solomon says: Princes bear rule, and the head officers give judgment
according to justice.

AMEN.
The Christmasse Banckette. Philemon the maker of the Ba^ckette, Theophyle,
Eusebius, and Christopher the gestes. PHILEMON.
I Think it very l^ng until my n^ighbours who^ I have bidde^ to this my
Christmasse Ba^cket do come. For I would be glad, that before we feed our
hungrye bodies, we should sustain and feed also our hungry souls, wh^che do
no less hunger for y^ word of God being the only noryssheme^t thereof* than y^
bodies do for corporal meat as Christ witnesses: De^t. viii Math. iiii
I man, says he, shall not live with bread alone, but with every word yt
proceeds out of the mouth of God. Therefore that it might be a Christmasse
Bancket in deed, that is to say, such a feast, as whereby Christ may be
glorified, and our souls no less refresshed tha^ y^ bodies: I desire very
much to se my neighbors here shortly, that fyr^t we may taste, as it is
coueniente and right, of the celestial table ^f Gods word of the co^solacion
of our souls health, and afterward refresh our mortal bodies, with such
alementes and noryshynges, as we have received this day of Gods great
liberalite. And behold I pray you where they come. Brothers and neighbors
welcome unto me.

THEO. Brother Philemon we thank you hertelye.


EVSE. We are come hither this day to put you both to pain and cofte.


PHIL. I pray you think not so, it is to me neither pain nor cost, but rather
conforte and pleasure, to se you thus fre^dly come and visit your neighbor.
And I thank you right hertely that ye have not disdayened to come at my
request. I beseech you, that ye will take the pains to come hither into my
parlour.


CHRISTO. I am loathe to go so sone out of this your haull, which fedeth mine
eyes with so many godly and goodly spectacles.


PHIL. Why, is here any thing that you think worthy to be looked upon?


CHRI. Every thing is here so pleasant and confortable to the eye of a
christen man, that he being in this haull may justly seem to be in a
delectable Paradyfe, I had allmooste said, in a another heaven. For here is
nothing dumme, all thing speak.


THEO. I pray you what is there written upon your parclose door?


PHIL: The saying of Christ. Joan. x^
I am the door By me if any man enters in, he shall be safe, and shall go in
and out, and shall find pasture. This is done to put me and my household in
remembrance, that Christ is the door, by whom we must enter into the favor
of God, and obtain the glory of heaven, as he himself witnesses, Joan, xiiii
saying, I am y^ way, the truth, and the life. No man comes to the father,
but by me.


EVSE. This is christenly done. What is this, that is written upon your chiney?


PHIL. The saying of the Prophet Esaye. (...). ixvi.
The fire of the^ shall not be quenched.


CHRI. This is a terryble and hard saying.


PHIL. I have painted this sentence in ye place, y^ as the other fyxed upon the
doremaketh me to rejoice and to put my whole affiaunce in Christ, so this in
like manner should abstere and fear me and mine from doing evil, when by
lokyng on this text we consider with our selves ye inextinquible flames of hell
fire, and most grievous pains, which are there prepared for the wicked
transgressors and breakers of Gods law. This does incute and beat into our
hertes the fear of GOD, which expels sin, and is the beginning of wysdom.
Psalm. c^. Pro. ^ ^x. (...). Psa. ^^^
For he that* fereth God, shall do good things, says the Scripture, and shall
have al his pleasures in y^ LORDS commandments.


EVSE. What have ye there written in your wyndow?


PHIL. Christ's saying in the Gospel of. Joan. v^^^.
S. I^o^. I am the light of the world. He that follows me, wa^keth not in
darkness, but shall have the light of life. This techeth us, that as by this
material wyndowe we receive light into our house, so by Christ are our
souls and senses lyghtened with the deuyne intellyge^ce and godly
understanding of his blessed word, which else should continue in darkness and
ignorancy, (...)
in as much as a natural man understands not these things that pertayne to
the spyryte of God. Joan. i.
For Christ is that true light, which does lyghten every man that comes into
this world.


THEO. Your table also, me think speaks.


PHIL. Herein is grown the saying of Christ: Luke. xiiii.
Blessed is he that eat the bread in the kingdom of God. This is to admonyshe
us that we should not have all our pleasure in eating drinking, and
banckettyng after the manner of the Epicures, but rather desire so to live in
this world, that after this life we may be fed in y^ ioyefull kingdom of
God by enioyenge the most glorious sight of the divine majesty.


EVSE. What have ye painted over your table?


PHIL. The saying of the Prophet Esaye, yea rather the commandment of God by
his Prophet. ^sal. ^viii
Break thy bread to the hungry, and led in the nedy and way ^arynge into thy
house. When thou shall se a naked man, cover him, and ^ ^halte not despise thy
flesh.


CHRI. Do ye according to this commandment.


PHIL. I would be loath brother Christo. to profess one thing by mouth, and to
practyse another in my living. Luke. xi^^
For that servant that knows his LORDS will, and does it not* shall be beaten
with many strypes. But i^ as much as we all are to much slouthful in doing our
duetye, and chesely in this one point, therefore I have caused this text to be
here painted, that it may always put me in remembrance of doing my office to
yt poor members of Christ. Mark (...) well.
For I tell you truth, I think him no good christen man, which receyuyng many
benefits at the hand of God, and ca^ not vouchsaufe to imparte and give some
of them to the indigent and nedy. You remember, Luke. xvi.
I am sure, ye story of ye rych man in ye Gospel of Luke, which sared dentely
every day at his table, and yet would have no pity and me^cye upon y^ po^re
Lazar when he came to his door, but suffered hi^ to die for want of succoure, and
therefore was he cast in to hell fire, and there greuous^y punys^hed.


EVSE. I remember it well.


PHIL This one story ought to move us for to have compassion and pity upon the
poor people, except we be minded in this world to fare well, and after this
life with the rytch man to be ^ormented in hell fire. (...). xxxiiii*
For the wise man says: The bread of the nedy is the life of the poor, he
that defraudeth him of it is a ma^ssear.


THEO. Would ^od that all men would remember this, tha^ should y^ poor people
find more gentleness at men's hands, tha^ they do now a days. But what have
ye written just by the foresaid text. (...)



PHIL. The saying of S. Paul^ to the Collos. Be ye tha^kefull. This sentence is
placed there for to put me in remembrance, that I should at all times give
God thanks for all things yt I receive of him, meat, drink, cloth, health,
etc. But chefely when I have dyned or supped, to be thanckeful for his
bou^teous gifts wherewith he has fed both me and my household. ^om. l^xi^. D^
(...)
For Chrysostom says it is convenient that we both when we go to the table,
and com from it, give God thanks. For he that employeth himself to do this,
shall never faul into dro^ke^shyp or lewdnes, he shall not be diseased with
sur^eti^g but having the expectacion of prayer put upon his senses in the stead
of a bridle, he shall eat of al things set on the table with a decent mod^stye
and honest temperaunce, and shall replenysshe both his soul and body with much
blessyng. For that table which begins and ends of prayer, shall never
want, but shall bring to us all good things more plenteouslye than any
fountain. These are the words of Chrysostom.


CHRI. Godly forsooth, and worthy to be followed.


EVSE. Neither is this cup du^ and spechles.


PHIL. Upon this is written Christ's saying: Joan. vii.
If any man thyrsteth, let him come to me and drink. This is not done to
provoke men to super fluous drynckyng, but to put the^ in remembrance that if
they thyrst, that is to say, desire remission of their sins, increase of
virtue, perfeccio^ of a spiritual life, qu^etnes of mind, pureness of heart,
Esa. lv. Ipo. xxii.
or any other good thing, they should haste to Christ, which gives to him
that thyrste the of the water of life freely. For who so ever drynketh of the
water yt Christ gyuethe him, Joan. iiii.
he shall never thyrste more, but the water which is given him, shall be made
in him a well of water, spryngynge up into everlasting life.


THEO. Uerye godly forsoth^. Your dysshes also want not speech.


PHIL. They rehearse ye saying of christ in ye gos. of John^: Verily, verily I
say unto you, Joan. v^*
except ye eat the fles^he of ye son of man, and drink his blood, ye have
no life in you. But he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has
eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. For my flesh is very
meat, and my blood very drink, he that eteth my flesh, and drinks my
blood, he dwells in me, and I in him. This puttethe us in remembrance when
we eat our meat of the breaking of Christ's most blessed body and the
sheddi^g of his most precious blood and by the remembrance of it, and ye
beleuyng of the same, our souls at that very present, are no l^sse fed and
sustained, than our bodies are with the meat yt is brought unto us in these
dysshes. Behold what ^he rem^bra^ce of christ's death does.
And this remembrance of christ's death, makes us to be tha^kfull unto God
the father, and to endeavor our selves to live worthy his inestimable kyndnes,
and in all points to do our diligence y^ God may dwell in us by his spirit,
and we i^ him through that faith, which works by charity.


EVSE. Here is every ^hi^ge so godly and pleasant, yt it ouerco^mech al praise.
But seeing yt we have begun to demand of you these questions concerning ye
scriptures in your house, we will go forth so to do, t^usting y^ ye would not
be grieved with us for so doing.


PHIL. Brother Eusebius I am not only not grieved with you, but also very glad
that these my devices have in any point pleased your mind.


EVSE. I pray you what is it that your chayres and stools have carved on the^.


PHIL. A saying of Christ in the Reuelacion of John: ^po^. i^^.
To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my throne.


CHRI. A very sweet saying. But what mean you by this?


PHIL. It it not ^nknowen to you, I am sure, how confortable a thing it is for
a weary body to sit and to have a restyng place.


CHRI. Truth, what than?


PHIL. Certes it is a thousand times more comfortable to have a place when body
and soul after so many great and dangerous conflictes in this miserable
world, may quietly rest. Therefore have I written this te^t^ on my chayres
and stools, to put me and mine in remembrance, that if we will find rest
after this life, we must seriously not dally, ^. Pet. ^. Ephe. v^.
but fight with Satan our enemy. We may never give place to the world, the dyuel,
nor the flesh, but maynly resyst the^, being clothed with the armature of God
and never leave until we have gotten the victory of them all. So shall we rest
in the kyngedome of God, or else not. For the Scripture says: To hi^ yt
overcomes, will I grant to sit with me ^ my throne.


THEO. What scripture, I pray you, have ye written here over your lauer?


PHIL. The saying of Esaye: Be ye washed, be ye clean, Esai. ^.
take away the evil of your thoughts from my eyes. Here so often as we wasshe
our hands, we are moved to remember with our selves, ^^he. iiii.
if any malice or hate be in our hertes toward our neighbor. If there be any
at all, we suffer not the Son to fall down upon our anger, but according to
Christ's precepte we go straight and reconcyle our selves to such as with who^e
we are at debate or they with us. Math. v.
Moreover if there be any other uncleanness or notable vice in us, we straight
put it aware out of our hertes by true and unfeigned repentance, and not only
banysshe the vice from us, but also embrace ye virtue contrary unto the vice,
Psa. xxxiii i. Pet. iii. ^sa^. i.
as the scripture says. Declyne from evil, and do good. I gain, cease to do
eu^ll, and learn to do good. By this means has sin no dominion in us, but
virtue very much.


EVSE. I would wysshe sooner to come into this house, the^ into any place
either of Emperor or king, I count him to dwell in a fortunate isle, yt
dwells in a house so adourned and garnisshed with the most odiferous,
redolent, and sweet smelling flowers of the holy scriptures.


THEO. It seems unto me also, that your vyrginalles speak, although no man
plays on the^. Esa. xx^^ii^, i. Lor. ii.



PHIL. They say thus: The eye has not seen, nor the ear has not heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man, that God has prepared for the^
that love him: It makes that though the sound of yt instrument which is but
vain and fedeth ye ear for a little while, seems pleasant and ioyefull to
the hearers for the time, yet is that nothing in comparison of the celestial
melodye and heavenly joy, that God has prepared for the^ that love him.
Therefore are we here admonysshed not to delyghte in fantastical instruments
the pleasure where of is more vain, than the smoke, but in that melodye and
joy, which is perpetual and never decays, and so to institute our life yt
we may be partakers of that unspeakable pleasaunce and joy.


CHRI. The longer I behold the parts of your house, the more I am moved to
marvel, seeing so rare spectacles full of all virtue and godlynes. Your posts
also salute your gestes, so far as I can perceive.


PHIL. They express this sentence of S. Paul, ^. Lor. iii. vi. ^i, Lor, vi.
the temple of God is holy, which you are. This puts us in remembrance in
what s^euer part of the house we go, that we should so keep our hertes clean
from the infeccion of mortal sin, that God in them by his holy spirit might
dwell perpetua^ly.


EVSE. I pray you what two great tables have you hanging there openly.


PHIL. This is the table of the. x^commaundementes, which teachethe us what we
ought to do, and what to erchew. The other is a table also which contains
in it the offices of al degrees and estates. It teaches us whatte we owe to
our most noble Prince, to our parents, and to al superioures. In this
table every man from the highest degree to the lowest may learn his office and
duty. Therefore are these two tables read every day openly in my house, my
wife, and children, with al my servants, being called thereunto, and geuynge
atte^da^ce diligently to the readyng of ye same. If any of my household
transgress any percel of gods law, he is brought straight way to these
tables, and by them is his faut declared unto him. So that here by he takes an
occasion to amend his life, and to be ye more circumspecte and ware, that he
falls not again into yt sin afterward. This is ye order of my house. Other
correccion tha^ this use I none. Yet not wtstandyng, I thank my LORD God, all
do their duty so well that I ca^ not wysshe it to be done better.


THEO. O merciful God, what have I herd and seen this day? so christian a
house, so godly an order never saw I in my life. All householders may take an
example of you. Would God yt many seeing this your act, would in like manner
follow it in every condition, garnyshyng their houses with holy scriptures, and
trayning their ly^es according to the same. Oh what a floryshynge realm than
should we have? With how syncer faith should we serve God. With how fervent
charity should we procure ye co^modite of our neighbor? With how ready minds
endued with al humbly submissio^ should we faith fully obey our most christen
Emperor, most redoubted King, and most excellent ruler? With how fervent
heart should we profligate and chase away sin: With how vale aunte courage
should we amplecte and inhaunce virtue? It can not be expressed with how many
and great commodities this most prosperous realm should florysshe to the
glory of God, the a^auncement of y^ kings most excellent majesty, to the
great pleasure and contentacion of all your minds, if this thing were brought
to pass*


PHIL. I am here under God and my Prince a ruler over this my little household,
and I think my self to be so much bound in conscience to bring the^ up
virtuously, that if any of them should perysshe, Eze. xxxi^^
their blood should be required of my hand at the dreadful day of judgment,


CHRI. Would God that all householders, yea all Bysshoppes and Curates would
wait and attent upon their parysshes with no less dilygence than you do on
your flock.


EVSE. The very ^ame would I wysshe.


THEO. Than should christian me^ know Christ and his laws better the^ they do
now a days, and serve their Prince with a more faithful and obedient heart.


PHIL. Well thus have ye seen my simple wit in diuisynge these aforesaid
things for the right institucion of my self and family. And it pleseth me
well, seeing that it does not displease you.


EVSE. The light hereof has so delyghted us, that nothing heretofore has fed
our eyes with so great delectacio^ and pleasure. Neither have we be^ here vain
and idle spectatours but have reposed all these things in our breasts, that
every one of us intend to gyrnysshe his house and order his familye in like
manner, gyuynge you right herty thanks for the calling of us hither this day.


^HIL. Seeing yt ye have now seen the most pri^cipal plesures of my haull, I
pray you vouchesafe to take the pain for to come into my parlou^.


THEO. We follow you gladly.


PHIL. Now are ye welcome hither.


CHRI. I pray you neighbor Philemon, what have we here to do? I am now more
rauysshed then I was before. Here is every thing so godly, pleasant that it
semethe unto me to be a figure of the new and cele^tial Jerusalem, Apoc. xx^.
which is so gorgiou^ly decked and garnysshed with all kind o^ heavenly
treasures. But I pray you, what do ye mean by your table spread with a fair
white and fine cloth? Again what four books have you laid upon the table,
cladde and covered most preciously with cloth of gold.


PHIL. It is not unknown to you neighbors that I did bydde you unto a
Christmasse Bancket, and very frendely ye are come to me. Now that it might be
a Christmasse Bancket indede, I was minded not only to provide meat for your
bodies, as the common fasshyon of the world is, but also for your souls, or
else how could it be a Christmasse Bancket? These ^oure books that lie here,
are thus named. The first is the five books of Moses with certain other volumes
of the old Testament. The second is the Prophets. The third the new
Testament. The fourth, the Doctors of the church. For every one of us here is
a book of like number, and for every one of us, all. These are the masters of
the Christmasse Bancket. These are they which shall feast you. Theyse are they,
that have in store so many godly and goodli dysshes most confortable for our
souls health. When we have once taken our repast of these most delycious
disshes, than by Gods favor will we repare to the feast of the body, which
the common forte only celebrate, neglectyng yt, which is pryncipall and most
precious.


CHRI. We desire very much to taste of these pleasant and deynty dys^hes.


THEO. My heart reioyseth to hear these things.


EVSE. Me think it a hundred year till we begin our bancket.


PHIL. Seeing yt year so desirous to taste of this most godly bancket, come
of, and that it may be done among us with the more fruit, let us al with one
consent knele down and pray to God for the assistance of his spirit.


EVSE. Agreed.


PHIL. If it will please you to give audience, and quietelye to hear, I will
pray in the name of you all.


THEO. Let it be so.


EVSE. Yea I pray you.


CHRI. That is best


PHIL. Hear now.

The prayer.

O Good God and mercyefull father the ^uthor and gyuer of all wisdom, Jacob. ^.
which at the intercession of thy well-beloved son Jesus Christ our LORD and
savior dyddest send down according to thy promise thy holy spyryte to
lyghten the hertes and senses of the apostles before they could syncerly
understand the high mysteries of thy deuyne will: Act. ii*
We most humbly beseech the, that all clouds of ignorancy and darkness
dispelled and put away, we being here gathered together in thy name, may
through that same thy spyrite enjoy the light of thy eternal verite, and so
reuerentlye read and talk of thy most blessed word at this present, yt we
understanding y^ same being enflamed with ye love and redi^g thereof, may in all
points fasshyon our life according unto thy holy word, and seriously
provide, that the light of all our acts and manners may so shine before me^,
Man. ^.
yt they seeing our good works, may gloryfy the our father which art in
heaven, to whom with thy well-beloved son Jesus Christ and the holy ghost three
distinct persons in deite, and yet one very true and perfect God in
essence, be all honor, praise, and glory for evermore


THEO. Amen.


EVSE. So be it.


CHRI. LORD let it so come to pass.


PHIL. Now let us fall in hand with our Christmasse bancket. I beseech God so
to temper our tongue through the influence of the holy Ghost, that we speak
here this day nothing dissonante from the ve^itie of Gods word, but
altogyther to the glory of his most blessed name, and the comfort of al our
souls,


THEO. The very same thing we also wysshe.


PHIL. Now will I bring forth unto you the bancket, and because I will not
onerate and ouercharge your stomachs with to much meat at ones (although th^r
ought not to be any sufficie^cy, much less any nimiete in spiritual things,
so desirous of the^ should we be) I have at this present only prepared
according to the number of us four dysshes, that we tastynge of the^, yea
rather eating, deuouryng and digesting them with gredy stomakes, may have the
more lust and desire to return to the^ shortly, I pray you sit down every
man in a chair. Now will I serve you with your first dysshe, contained in ye
fyrstboke of Moses. Fail not you therefore to whette your stomakes, and gredely
to devour whatsoever I bring forth unto you.


The first dysshe.
G^ne. iii.
CUrsed is ye earth in their work. It shall bring forth unto the thorns and
bra^bles.

THEO. This is a disshe little pleasu^t for the beginning of our bancket.


PHIL. Content your selves. it is necessary that this dysshe has y^ first
place, yt the other that follow may savor y^ more deliciously to your mouths.
The acrimony and tartenes o^ this dysshe shall so pearce your stomachs that
it shall minister to you an appetyte and lust to devour y^ other y^ more
gredely. For I do not i^ this behalf follow the manner of Satan, which
promised first to Eve sweet and delectable things, and afterward paid her
with things most sower and displeasaunt, Esaias. i. Mat. iii.
but rather of the Prophet Esaias and of John^ Baptist, which first of all
grievously rebuked y^ wicked in their sermons, and afterward comforted the^
again most swetelye. Neither differed Christ and his Apostles from this manner
of preaching. Tak^ therefore this dysshe in good worth, and hear me now
patiently. When through y^ suggestion of the old wyly serpent Ada^ and Eve had
tra^gressed Gods commandment, God according to their deserts e^pulsed them
out of Paradyse, and sent them into this vale of misery, saying unto Adam
among all other things this aforesaid text: Cursed is ye earth in thy work.
Genesis ^^
It shall bring for the unto thorns and brymbles. Here do we learn yt for
the sin of Ada^ all the earth, that is to say, all the creatures are cursed
and made subject to vanite. They now bring forth no more goodly and
pleasant fruytes, but thorns and bre^bles, that is, sin, wickedness, vice,
and all other abhominac^on. This one sin of our first father Ada^ has
condemned us all that ever have been borne syns, or shall be here after.


EVSE. Me thinks that though he offended, yet his offense should not turn
to our da^nacion, seeing we were not then borne.


PHIL. Yies in good faith brother Eusebius. For his sin was our sin. His
da^nacion was our damnacion. His death was our death. I will read unto you the
mind of the famous Doctor Origin, In epi^^le. ad Romans lib. ^. ^apit. v.
concerning this matter: If Leuy, says he, which was borne the fourth
generation after Abraham, was than counted to be in the loins of Abraham,
much more all men that are borne or have been borne in this world, were in the
loins of Ad^m, when he was yet in Paradise. And all men with him and in him were
expulsed out of Paradise, when he was put out from thence, and by him death,
which came unto him by the enterpretacion, came also consequently upon the^,
whom he had in his loins.


PHIL. I pray you let us hear what the holy scriptures say in this behalf.


THEO. We read in the fourth book of Es^ras y^ third chap. on this wise. The
first Adam bearyng a wicked heart did sin, and was overcome, and not only
be, but all that were borne of him. ^se^. ^
Also Ose the Prophet says: They even as Adam have tra^sgressed the covenant
and therein have they sinned against me, T^m. ^^.
that is, says S. Jerome, upon this text, in Paradyse all have sinned
against me, eue^ like unto the sin of Ada^ For it is no marvel, says he,
if that which went before in the father, be also condemned in y^ children.
(...). ^x^.
But I will rehearse to you more scriptures: Of a woman came the beginning of
sin, ^oan. iii. Mat. xii.
says the wise man, and by her all w^ die. Christ also says, y^ which is
borne of flesh is ^leshe. Again, how can ye speak good things, ^oan. ^iii.
^hen ye your selves are evil? Also in an other place, every one that does
sin, Romans v. i. Lor. vi. Romans iii. ^s^l. ^.
is ye servant of sin. S. Paul also says: By one man sin entered i^to
this world and by sin death, and so went death tho row all men, in as much
as all we have sinned. Again, in Ada^ all are dead. In another place also he
says all have sinned, and want the glory o^ God. Therefore David confesses
that he was begotten in sin, and borne in sin. And saint Paul affyrmeth
playnelye, yt we are borne by nature the children of wrath. What say ye now
my friends, do ye not now at the last perceive that the sin of Ada^ has
condemned us all, so y^ his sin is our sin.


CHRI. We perceive it well and believe it also.


PHIL. I will rehearse unto you a saying of S. Bernarde. Sermo. in ^ena Domini.
In the faull of ye first man, says he, did we all faull. We fell upon an
heap of stones and in the myer, so that we are not only inquinated, spotted
and defiled, but also wounded and grievously shaken, bruised and broken. Ibidem.
Again he says: Verily we are begotten in synful pleasure, therefore although
it be against our will, yet do we feel certain unlawful and beastlyke mocio^s
of concupiscences in our selves. Hereto agrees S. Austen saying, De ver^i^
apost. S^. iiii.
mark brothers behold that mankind came forth from the first death of the
first man. For sin from the first man entered into the world, and by sin
death, and so went death through all men. Mark this word went through. Roma. v.
Co^sither that ye have herd, look what this is, went through. It went through.
Hereby is ye young child gilty. Syn he has not done, but drawn. For yt syn
did not remain in ye fountain, but went through, not hi^ or hi^ but went
through al me^. The first siner, yt first preuaricatour begat sinners bond to
death. Thus se you yt both the holy scriptures and also y^ ancient Doctors do
conclude that all we are damned righteouslye for Ada^s offense. ^o. xxxvi. ^e
ad^en. Domini. Ephe. ii. G^n^. iii.
So that every man naturally, as S. John and Chrysostom says, is not only a
sinner, but also every whytte sin, as the Apostle says: we were by nature
ye sons of wrath And this is it, that God the father said to Ada^: Cursed is
the earth in thy work, as I rehearsed to you before.


THEO. Than have we learned here, that all we are cursed and damned in Adams
work, that is, for ye sin which he he committed in breaking Gods most holy
commandments.


PHIL. Ye say truth.


EVSE. This is a thing necessary to be known. M^r^r this thing well,



PHIL. Without y^ knowledge of our selves, we ca^ never truly know god nor
understand his holy scriptures. Therefore will I go fo^th to minister unto you
the residue of your first dysshe. It follows: It shall bring forth unto
the thorns and bra^bles, I pray you what other thing does your corrupt
nature bring forth unto us than thorns and brambles, yt is to say, sin,
wickedness, ungodliness, and all that ever is contrary to the will of God? Sin
co^^^red like to ^ thorn.
And in deed sin may well be compared to a thorn or bramble. For as the
thorn and bre^ble prycketh the body and wou^deth it greuouslye, yea and
brings many times destruction upon it, except other wise it be helped, so
likewise sin most grievously prycketh, wou^deth and utterly destroys the
soul, except it be redeemed by Gods mercy through Jesus Christ.


THEO. I think this to be true.


PHIL. It therefore follows yt i^ as much as all we are dead in Adam, we are not
able of our selves to rise again from death unto life. And seeing that we are
sinners all that ever we do, must needs be sin, yea it is sin in deed, and
deserves everlasting death. For as the scripture says. ^ene. viii. ^sa^:
lvii.
The disposicio^ and thought of man's heart is prone to euel from his young
age. ^api. xii. Psa. xiviii Roma. vii Luke. xvii ^saie. liii. ^saie. i^. Psalm.
cxv. ^sai^. liii.
We are wicked children, and a wicked seed. We are that seed, which was cursed
from the beginning. We are like bruyte beasts. We are carnal and flesshely,
sold under sin. We are unprofitable servants. We all have gone astray like
sheep. We all are Hypocrites and wicked. We are all liars. We all are unclean,
and all our ryghteousnesses as a cloth polluted with mensture. All have sinned.
Romans i^i. Psa. xiii. ^o^. xxv. P^o. xx. Hie. xv i.ii.^ or. iii. Genesis iii.
There is not one y^ does good, no not one. There is no man clean from
fylthynes, no not the young child. There is no man able to say, my heart is
clean, and I am pure from sin. For our hearts are wicked and in^crutable. We
are not able to think a good thought. All that ever we bring forth is thorns
and bra^bles, that is to say, sin, ungodliness, and all abhominacion. Note.
What are we now of our selves I pray you tell me.


CHRI. Very sinners.


EVSE. Yea and all that ever we do in Ada^, and of our own strength, is plain
sin and wickedness.


PHIL. I am glad that we have learned what ye are of your selves by Adam. I
pray you what are ye able now to do for to save your selves from this perel,
whereunto ye are fallen by Adam?


THEO. Verily I can not tell.


EVSE. Forsooth I think very little. The capti^ite of man through sy^.



PHIL. Ye might right well have said, nothing at all. For I ensure you that
ye being left unto your selves can do none otherwise but sin, and faull
headlyng into all kind of mischefe Your wit strength, polecy, imaginacion,
reason, and free will avails here nothing, to deliver you from the captivity
of Satan, He leads you as the master does his bond slave, Joan. viii.
whyther soever it pleseth him as Christ witnesses: every one that does sin,
is the servant of sin. Ye remember, I am sure, the storye of the wounded
man, in the Gospel of Luke, Luke. x.
which being dispoyled and robbed of all his clothes and grievously wounded,
^^rk here
lay still half dead.


THEO. I remember it very well.


PHIL. This wounded man signi^ieth every child of Adam. The clothes signify
faith charity, justice, mercy, and such other virtues. The thieves are Satan and
his angels. The wounds are sins. Haulfe dead is to be alive in the
flesh, and slain in the soul through sin. All this are we by Ada^. And as
this wounded man could not be helped of the Priest nor Leuyte, until the
Samarytane came, no more can we be helped by any creature or work, till christ
comes the true Samaritane. We can not certes, we can not help our seues, but
even lie still the stynkynge puddle of sin. Look in what case Satan leaves
us, in the very same do we remain, except God of his mercy through Christ
helps us. Neither canfre e will nor all the wit and polecye that we have,
profit here any thing, Epist. c^i. ad Paul.
till God indueth us with strength from above. For as S. Austen says: The
nature of man all though it did remain and continue in that integryte and
pureness, wherein it was made, yet could it keep it self by no means, if the
creator and maker of it did not help. Therefore seeing that without the grace of
god it could not keep the health that it received, how is it able to repare
and get again that which it has lost, without ye grace of God? ^ib. ^e
voca^t. ^ a. viii (...). ^e cor^^ g^a^^ ii. Phil. ii. Joan. xv.
Again he says free will sufficethe unto evil, but unto good it avails
little, except it be helped of that almighty God. Therefore is it well said of
the Apostle, God works in us ^oth the will and the deed. Hereto agrees the
saye^g of christ. As the vine branch can not bear fruit, except it abide
in the vine, no more can ye except ye abide in me. I am the vine and ye are y^
branches. He that abides in me, and I in him, the same bryngethe for the much
fruit. For without me ye ca^ do no^hyng. If any man abides not in me, he is
cast out as a branch, and is wythered, and men gather the^ and cast the^ into
y^ fire, and there burn. Thus se ye what ^e are of your selves by Adam, and
that no strength ye have ones to aspyre or breath toward any goodness, much
less to do or work any good thing, except ye be helped of God. Ye se also
how full of sins, diseases, wounds, sores, botches, canckers, and al y^
ever naught is ye are. Ye se again, how ye are not able of your selves to
recover your innocency, that ye lost by Ada^.


CHRI. Alas what is now to be done?


THEO The rehersyng of these things makes me very sad.


PHIL. It should rather make you very glad. In di^l. (...)
For as S. Hierome says: This is y^ true wisdom of a man to know him self
to be inperfecte, and as I may so speak, the perfeccio^ of all righteous men
in the flesh is imperfecte. Again he says: (...) ^ag. li^. ^.
Than are ye righteous, when we confess our selves sinners, and our
righteousness consists not of our own merit, but of the mercy of God, as
the holy scripture says, Pr^u. (...)
the righteous man is the accuser of himself in y^ beginning of his spech.
Therefore must ye confess your selves to be that in deed, which ye are, y^ is,
very sinners, if ye will be set free from this miserable captivity, where with ye
are now to much wrapped and ouerwhemled.


EVSE. We confess ye same.


THEO. We now knowledge yt of oureselues by Ada^, we are nothing but sinners,
and all that ever we do without the spiryt^ of god is plain sin, Romans xiiii.
as S. Paul says: What soever is not of faith is sin.


PHIL. Well seeing that ye have so fruytfully digested the first dysshe of your
Banquet, now have I a fyt place, a convenient time, and a good occasion to
bring unto you the second dysshe, as it follows in order.


CHRI. I pray you let us taste of it.


THEO. That thing also do I desire.


The second dysshe.
YOur second dysshe is contained in that same chap. where in the first is
recited. Therefore devour this with no less gredy appetyte than ye have done y^
other. For this dysshe is much delicious and very wholesome forth virtuous
preseruacio^ of the soul. I now bring it for the unto you. Behold here it
is. Gene. iii.
I will set ennemyt^ between the and an woman, between thy seed and her seed,
and that self seed shall tread down thy head. Now does this favor in your
mouth?

THEO. Very pleasau^tly forsooth: but we do not perceive what it meneth.


PHIL. Hear therefore: These were the words of God the father to the serpent
when by his craft and sut^elty he had made Ada^ to offend, and in the^ is
comprehended an whole See of treasures. For they declare both our free
delyueraunce from captivity, and also the victory over Satan and all his army.
When Satan had thought yt he had gotten the ouerhand of man, and brought him
into the same case wherinto he was thrown for his to much arrogance and pride,
thynking by this menes to deceive God of his purpose, which had made man for to
supply ye number of Aungelles, which perysshed when Lucifer fell from heaven: God
wyllyng to show himself of no less puissaunce to save man through his mercy,
than Satan was to condemn him through his craft, pytied straight way the
miserable fall of man, and afterward spoke these confortable words to the
great confusion of Satan, and the excedyng consolacion of man. I will set
enimite between the and an woman, between thy seed and her seed, that self
seed shall tread down thy head. The woman:
This woman is the most blessed and pure virgyn Mary, which was here promised
to bring forth yt seed, which should tread down Satan's head. The see^^
This seed is Jesus christ which took s^e^sh unfeignedly of that most pure
virgyn, and became man for our sake. And he it is, which was promised of God
the father to tread down the head of the Serpent.


THEO. I per^eyue that by the serpente ye mean Satan. The tredi^^ down of y^
Serpents head,
But what is mente by the treadyng down of his head.


PHIL. The destruction of his power. For ye these strength and power of a
serpent co^systeth i^ his head. Though his tail or body be stryken or wounded,
he forces not much. For he will put them both in perrel for the safeguard of his
head, but if his head be once stricken or wosided, tha^ loses he his power,
than dies he shortelye. Therefore is Christ promised here, not to tread down
the tail or body of the serpent, but his head, whereby is sygnified the
destruction of his whole power. So that now Satan shall never more triu^ph
against Gods elect Do ye now perceive this matter?


EVSE. Yea forsooth.


CHRI. I never heard so much before.


PHIL. Well, now behold the great and exceeding mercy of God toward you,
that ye may learn that to be true, which God speaks by his Prophet Ose:
^^e. xiii.
Thy destruction, oh Israel, comes of it self, but thy salvation comes
only of me. Ye have heard that Ada^ sinned, and that through his sin all we
were da^^ed.


THEO. I remember it well. Gen^. iii.



PHIL. The scripture testifies y^ so sone as Adam had offended, he hyd
himself, and fled from the face of god, he was so greatly ashamed of y^ sin
that he had committed. The misery of Ada^.
For after his offense he came not to GOD as he ought to have done, neither
sought he grace and remission of his sin at the goodness of God, by confessing
his sin with a faithful repentaunto heart, but streyghtway after y^
tra^^gressio^ of ye precept he fled from God and hyd himself from y^ face of
god, and as they use to say, put his head in a busshe like a cowarde for
fear? Oh where are the powers of free will, y^ man be once without the spirit
of God? Man has now no power to seek for salvation, but rather continues
still in his old wickedness, and seeks to be far from the face of god,
coveting rather to be damned tha^ he would once approach unto y^ sight of God,
sin has so slain his courage. Satan in him has so great dominion, yea when
he co^sidereth his wickedness, he is angrye with GOD, hates God, and wyssheth
that there were no God, that he might escape unpunished, even as an enemy of
y^ publigue weal wyssheth that there were no king, no Emperor, no ruler, no
governor, no magistrate, but all like himself, that freely and without
punysshement he might deforme, ren^e tear, despoyle y^ publigue we^e at his
own pleasure. The goodness o^ god
Now behold the unspeakable benygnite of God. When Adam had fled from him,
and hyd himself, so that he had no hoope of health, but utterly despayred of
all consolacio^, lokyng for extreme tyranny, to be exercysed upon him at every
hour according to his deserts. God like a merciful father sought hi^ up, and
spoke before hi^ ye sweet words heretofore rehearsed to Satan, yt by this
means he might receive co^solacio^, and so be saved by geuyng earnest faith to
that most confortable promise. O the unmeasurable goodness of this celestial
father: he is that sheep herd, Luke. xv*
which never leaves sekyng until he has found the sheep that was lost. He
is yt father, which ioyefully receives again into his house that son,
which prodigally had spente all his substance. He is y^ Samaritane, Luke. x.
Mat. xxvi. Act. ix.
which heals y^ wounded man. He is that LORD, which makes of a blasphemer
an Apostle, of a prosecutor a preacher. And whence comes this his goodness? of
us: of our good deeds? of our merits? Naverely, but of his bounteous mercy and
great goodness. Freely and with out deserte works he this thing. We are saved
by grace through faith and that not of our selves, Ephe. ii*
for it is the gift of God, and comes not of works, because no man should
bost himself. Tit. iii.
We being justified by his grace are made heirs, according to hope of
everlasting life. Not for the works of ryghteousnes which we have done, but
according to his mercy has he saved us. Romans iii.
We are iustyfyed freely by his grace. By grace are we saved, and not by works.
If by grace the^ not of works, Romans xi.
or else grace were not grace. Joan. xv.
He did chose us by his grace, and not we him by our works, as christ
witnesses, ye have not chose^ me, ^phe. ^.
but I have chose^ you. Paul also says, God did chose us in Christ before the
foundacions of the world were laid. Hereto pertayneth yt saying of the
Psalmograph: Psa. lxiiii.
Blessed is he o Lord, whom thou haste chosen and taken unto the, for he shall
dwell in thy inner courts. That God of his free mercy did chose us without our
deserts, when we were sinful and poor wtoute onye goodness or godlynes, he
himself testifyeth by his Prophet, Esa. x^viii
saying: I have chosen the in the fire of poverty.


EVSE. So far as I can perceive now, God alone is y^ author of our salvation,
and he of his free mercy and abou^dant grace did chose us to be his heirs,
^phe. ^.
before the foundacions of the world were laid.


CHRI. Yea and that before we wrought any goodness, or showed any point of
kyndnes toward him,


PHIL. Ye say truth. And that ye may know that I wraste not the scriptures,
I will read unto you the layeng of S Austen: De ver. ^^^ Sc^. xv.
He was given says he, for our sines, and rose again for our iustificacion.
Thy iustificacion, thy circumsicion is not of thy self. By grace are ye saved
through says, and that not of your selves, but it is the gift of God, not of
works unless peradventure you would say, I have deserved it, and therefore
have I received it. Think not yt you dydest receive it by deserui^g, which
could not have deserved except you had received it. Grace went before thy
merit, grace is not of merit, but me rite of grace For if grace were of
merit so had you boght it, and not received it freely. Thou shall save the^
says he, for nothing: What is this, thou shall have them for nothing? Thou
fyndest in the^ nothing whereby thou may save them, and yet doste thou save
them. Freely thou gyuest freely thou sauest. Thou go before all merytes, that
thy gifts may o^tayne thy merytes. Vtter^ye doeste thou give freely, save
freely, which find nothing, whereof thou mayeste save, and fyndest much
whereby thou may condemn. In p^o. Psa. xxxi.
Again he says, thou haste done no good, and yet is remission of sins
given unto the. Let thy works be looked upon, and they be all found evil, If
god should give the ye which is due to thy works, he should surely condemn
the. But God does not give unto the yt pain which is due, but gives the
grace, which is not due. Also upon this text, ^a ^p. a^ Roma.
to all that are at Rome beloved of God, saynctes by cyllynge: Here also, says
he, he shows that it is the excedyng mercy of God rather then thy merit. For
he says not, to them that love God, but to the^ that are loved of God. For he
loved us first, that we being loved should also love him. In ^ant. ^er. lxvi^*
S. Bernarde also says: Grace makes me justified freely, and likewise
delivered from the bondage of sin. Hereto agrees Fulge^tius, Lib. i. a^
men^mu^.
saying: God gives grace to the unworthy freely wherewt the wicked being
justified may be lyghtened with the gift of good will, and with the power of
good workyng, that mercy preuentyng and going before he may begin to will good,
and mercy subsequent and following, he may be able to do the good that he
wylleth. Thus perceive you, yt whe^ther was nothing in us, wherefore God should
love us, yet he freely loved us * chosed us by his grace to be his children, l.
Joan. i^^^
as S. John says: Behold, what a love the father has given to us, that we
should be called ye sons of God. Again he says: In this is love, not that
we loved God, but that he loved us, l. Joan. (...)
and sent his son to make agreement for our sins. And a little after: We
love him, because he first loved us.


THEO. What moved God to be so beneficial unto us, seeing we had offended so
grievously, and were than by no means able to pacify his wrath with any good work?


EVSE. This would I also gladdely know.


PHIL. His own mere goodness was the occasion of his love toward us for his
son Jesus Christ's sake. In him, by him, and for him, is God the father
mercyful unto us, and freely saves us without any respect of our good works.
Gala. iii.
For as s. Paul says: If righteousness came by the law, tha^ dyed Christ in
vain. And God himself says by the Prophet I am, Esa^e. xliii
I am he, which puts away thine i^^iquittes, yea and that for mine own
sake, and will remember thy sins no more. Put me in remembrance and let us
judged together: Declare if thou haste any thing, that thou may he
justified. ^ene. iii.
And this is it, yt we speak of before, that self seed shall tread down thy
head. Furthermore God said to Abraham: Gene. xxi^.
In thy seed shall all nations of y^ earth be blessed. This seed, Gala. ii^.
says S. Paul is Christ by whom al are we blessed, that is to say, received
into favor, forgiven of our sins, freelye justified and made heirs of
eternal glory?


CHRI. Now comes this to pass by Christ I pray you.


PHIL. Uerely on this wise, when all we were dampened in Ada^, God of his mere
mercy and exceadyng grace promised to Adam and his posterite, that there should
be one borne, which should deliver the^ out of their servitude and restore them
again to grace. G^ne. lii. and. xxii. Deuteronomy. xvii^. Exodus xii. and. xvi. Number
xx^.
This did God the father in the old law not only many times promise, but also
obsibrate and shadow by diverse mysteries, figures, clouds and ceremonies that
by them ye saythfull might receive consolacio^. And at the time appointed of
GOD the father this man Jesus Christ came into the world. Esa^e. vii. Roma. i.
He was conceived by the holy ghost, and ^orne of the virgyn Mary, according
to the holy scriptures: He was begotten of the seed of Dauyd as pertainyng to
the flesh.


THEO. Yea and that without the seed of man.


PHIL. Ye say truth. Luke. ^.
He received very flesh by y^ wonderful operacio^ of g^ds spirit of Mary,
the still remaynyng a pure and clean virgyne. It was necessary that he should
be borne of a virgyn, in as much as the nature of man is full of carnal
concupiscence, and de^yled by Adam, or else could not he have been a pure and
sufficient sacrifice before God for us. For by nature all we are borne the
children of wrath, Ephe. ii.
says S. Paul. Therefore without the seed of any man, ^e^. ii. iiii.
which is corrupted in Ada^, was he borne of ye most pure and undefiled virgyn
Marye, being conformable to us in all things, sin alone except. For our syn
was so great, that it could be put a way neither by any child of Ada^ nor yet
by aungel, but only by such one, as being of our flesh, should be borne
without the seed of man, and without any carnal concupiscence. And for as much
as this could not be brought to pass by any carnal man, therefore was it
necessary that the son of god should come down from the right hand of God
the father, ^olo. ^.
and be made very man for our sake, that he being both God and man might by his
most precious blood pacify god the fathers wrath, and reco^ cycle us again to
him. God so loved the world, Joan. ^^^.
says Christ, that he gave his only begotten son, that every one that
believes in him, may not perysshe, but have everlasting life. For God sent not
his son into the world for to condemn the world, but that the world
should be saved by him. He that believes in him, is not condemned. But he that
believes not, is already condemned, because he has not believed on the name of
the only begotten son of god. Romans viii.
GOD spared not his own son, s^yth S. Paul, but gave him for us all.

Rom ^.
Again, God sets out his love y^ he has to us, seeing that while we were
yet sinners, Christ dyed for us much more than now, seeing we are justified this
blood, shall we be preserue^ from wrath through him. For if when we were
enemies, we were reconcyled ^o God by the death of his son, much more s^ynge
we are reconcyled, we shall be preserved by his life. Not only so, but we also
joy in god by the means of our LORD Jesus Christ, by whom we have received
this attonemente. ^. Joan. i^i. ^. Joan. iiii
Also S. John says: For this purpose appeared the son of God, for to loose
the works of the euel. Again, t^ this appeared y^ love of God to vswar^*
because that God sent his only begotten son into the world, that we might
live through him. Thus se you yt when there was no hope of salvation ^or us in
any creature God of his own free goodness sent d^wne h^s only begotten son
to be a Savior unto us.


EVSE. This do we perceive right well.


PHIL. Now mark^ again, Math. ^.
how that by him alone we are saved. His name is JESUS, that is to say, a
savior, for he it is that saves his people from their sins, neither (...)
there any other name given unto men under heaven, wherein they must be saved,
but only by this name JESUS. Act. ii^. ^c^ ^*
To him gives all the Prophets wit^eg*, that through his name, ^ll shall
receive remission of sins, that believe in hi^. Be it known unto you, Act.
xiii.
ye men and brothers, ye by this Jesus Christ remission of sins is preached
unto you, and from al things, from the which ye could not be justified by
the law of Moses by him is eueri one that believes ^ustified. He is y^ La^be of
God, Ioa^. l.
which takes away the sin of y^ world. Joan. xi.
He is our resurreccion and life. He is the way, Joan. xiiii.
truth and life. No man comes to the father but by him. He is the good
shepeheard, by whom we be saved from the wolf. He is the door, by whom we must
enter into grace. He is the vine, Joan. xv:
in whom we being ingrassed must needs bring forth much fruit. ^. Lor. i^
He is our wisdom, righteousness, sanctificacion and rede^cio^. He is our
peace. Ephe. ii. ^. Timo. ii. ^. Joan. ii. ^^ oca. xxi. Roma. v.
He is our mediator and advocate. He is alpha and omega, that is, both the
beginning and endyng of our salvation. Moreover by him are we at peace with
God. By him have we a way in through says unto this favor, wherein we stond,
and rejoice in hope of the praise that shall be given of God. By him is the
favor of God plenteous toward us. Romans vi^^.
By him and his righteousness are we made righteous By him has the law of the
Spirit of life made us free from the law of ^ynne and death. By him has god
the father blessed us with all spiritual blessyng in heavenly things. Ephe. ^.
By him did God chose us, before the foundacio^s of the world were laid, yt we
should be saints and fautles before him. By him are we made dear to god the
father. Ephe. ^^.
By him have we redemption, by his blood remission of sins. By him are all
things both in heaven and earth gathered together. By him we, which in times
paste were far of, are made nigh through his blood. By him we have and open
way unto the father. By him are all our sins forgyuen us. Lol. ^^. l. The. ^.
By him are we delivered from the wrath to come. By him and by his blood are
we made clean from all sin. ^. Joan. ^^.
By him and by the oblacion of his most blessed body done once for all, Heb. x.
are we sanctified. Yea by that one oblacion has he made perfect for eu^rmore
the^ that are sanctified. To conclude, by him is everlasting life given unto
us. Romans v^*
Thus se you that by Christ all good things chau^se unto us, and that god the
father is well pleased and set at one with us for his sake, as he himself
witnesses. This is my well-beloved son in whom I am well pleased, Mat iii.
or for whose sake I am fully contented with man. Hereto agrees the saying of
S. Austen: In vital. ^p. cv^.
All y^ ever receive everlasting life, receive it not but by Christ. In manu.
^l cap. ^^^^.
Therefore says he in another place: All my hope is in the death of my LORD.
His death is my merit my refuge, succor, health, ^ife, and my resurreccion.
My merit is the compasssio^ of the LORD I am not without merit, so long as yt
LORD of mercies shall not want. And if yt mercies of y^ LORD be many, I am
plenteous in merits. The stronger is to save, the more without iopardy am I,
Lib. l. ^om. xiiil.
let us therefore give thanks, says he, to the LORD and our savior, which
no merits going before, has heled us that were wounded, reconcyled us his
enemies, redeemed us from captivity, brought us again out of darkness into
light, called us again from death to life, and let us humblye confessyng our
fragilite and wekenes desire his mercy, and in as much as he has prevented us,
as the Psalmographe says, with his mercy he may vouch^a^e not only to preserve
and keep in us, but also to augment and encrese his gifts or benefytes, w^iche
he has vouchedsafe to give us.


CHRI. Amen.


THEO. So be it.


EVSE. LORD let it so come to pass.


PHIL. Home does this second service of your Ba^cket please you?


THEO. We never i^ our lives tasted a dysh more pleasant and confortable to
our souls health.


EVSE. We have now learned what we are of oureselues, and where remedy is to be
gotten, but by what means shall we come by it? What thing may be the
occasion whereby we may receive so many and ^o great benefytes at ye hand of
god the father for Jesus Christ's sake? I pray you a good fellowshyppe dec^are
this unto us.


PHIL. I never heard a questio^ared in better time for the answer to it is
your third dysshe, which before you proponed this question, I was fullye
determined to set before you. And now here it is.


The third dysshe. PHILEMON.
REpent, and believe the gospel. These were ye words that our savior christ
as mark testifies, Mark. i.
used when be began to preach. In the which he declares by what means we may
obtain remission of our sins, and the cel^^ial heritage of gods glory. Hom.
lrr^. ^e penitentia
Repent, sateth he, and believe the gospel. Fryrste he exorteth us to
repentance, which is, as Chrysostom says, not only to cease from the
oldewithour euelles, but also to follow better offices, and such things as
ought of duty to be done, as David says: Psalm. xxxiii
Declyne from (...) euel, and do good. S. John^ the Baptys^e in like manner in
the beginning of his preaching said: Math. iii. Luke. xxiiii.
Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Christ also after his
resurreccion commanded his Apostles to preach repe^ta^ce and remission of
sins in his name unto al nations. Likewise we read in the Acts of ye
Apostles then when Peter preached to the Jews much of christ, Act. ^^.
and showed that he was the same LORD Jesus, whom they had crucyfied, they
were prycked in their hertes and said: Ye me^ and bre^^re^ what shall we do?
Peter said unto the^: Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of
Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of
the holy Ghost. Here se you that Christ and his Apostles declared Repentance
to be a mean whereby we may obtain remission of our sins and euerlastying
life. And that you may perceive ye matter yt more plainly. I will lively paynt
in most euydent colors and set it out before your eyes with certain other
histories of both Testamentes yt ye may learn to be true, which Chrysostom
says. I^ Ma^h. (...) xiii.


THEO. I pray you what says he?


PHIL. There is not, says he, there is not, believe me, any sin in y^ world,
that does not give place to the virtue of repentance, yea rather to ye grace of
God, which when we turn to better thiges, does straight ways work with us.


EVSE. This is a confortable saying for sinners.


PHIL. Yea and in all points agreeable to the holy scriptures. Math. ^^.
For Christ came not to call the ryghteous, but sinners unto repentance. Now
mark for your health and consolacion. ^. ^eg. xi^.
David committed both ma^slaughter and adultrye, and therefore was he threatened
many euels of God by his Prophet Natha^. Not withstanding he had not so sone
repented him of his act, and confessed his fault, saying: I have offended the
LORD, but the Prophet said: The LORD has turned away thy syn, thou shall
not dye. iii. Reg. ^^.
King Achab also did slaye his subject Nabotch, yt he might enjoy his
vyneyeard. And God therefore sent his Prophet Heli as unto him for to tell him
that the dogs should lycke his blood olso even there, where they lycked the
blonde of Na^othe, and that every one of the house of Achabbe that makes water
against y^ w^ull, should be slain. etc. Achab streyghte way was ashamed of
his fault, repented, cut his clothes, covered his flesh with garments of
here, fasted slept in sack cloth, and walked with a heavy countenance, and
therefore god seeing his repentaunte heart, said that he would not bring in that
euel in his days, but i^ his sons time. Again king Manasses, i^^^. Reg.
xxi. ^^. Pa^. x^xiii
in as much as he repented, for all the abhominacio^ that he committed against
god and his glory, was forgiven, and afterward no^bred among ye fredes of god.
Jonas. ii^.
The Ninevites were threatened within forty days to be subverted for their
dissolute and wicked living. But they being stricken with repentance in ye
mean season, and mendynge their life, received favor and were saved. As I may
come nerer home, Luke. vi^.
as they say, who was more famous in sin tha^ Mary Magdalene, yet in as much
as she faithfully repented, and bewailed her sinful living, her sins were
forgynen her. Peter denied Christ, Mat. x^^^
yet seeing he repented and wept bytterly for his offense, Luke xv:
he was favorably received to grace: The prodigal son although he had
consumed all his goods, was joyfully received in as much as he repented and
knowledged his offense. Luke xxiii.
The thief called never for grace till ye hour of death, yet seeing, yt he
bewailed than his misery, and axed merci, he was herd, and went with Christ i^ to
Paradyse. Do not these histories besides other, show of what great strength
repentance is.


CHRI. Certes they be very comfortable for poor afflicte sinners.


PHIL. Thus se you that repentance is a great cause of the mitigacion of gods
wrath, Psalm. ^.
yea and an acceptable Sacrifice to God as David says, a sacrifice to God is a
troubled spirit, Behold^ what true repetau^^e wor^eth in man.
a contryte and humble heart god will not despise. Thus repentance makes a man
to dye unto lynne, and to syne to righteousness. It makes us so long as we i^
this world valeantly to enarme our selves, and to enter battle with Satan
and his army, and continually to fight against our enemies. It makes us to
hate all wyckednes, and enbrace all virtue, so y^ daily we proceed more and
more from faith to faith and from virtue to virtue. Romans ^. (...) Mat. v. Ph^l.
^.
It makes us to hunger and thyrst after ryghteousnes. It makethe us to desire
to be dissolved from this mortal body, and to be with Christ. No man is able to
express sufficiently ye excellency and virtue of this true and faithful
repentance. And this is it, which makes Chrisostom to cry out on this manner:
^e^. xxix. De penitetia.
O repentance, which through gods mercy forgyuest sin, and openest Paradise,
which healest a man contryte and broken, and make merye him that is sad,
call again life from death, restorest the state, renuest the honor,
gyuest boldenes, reformest stre^gthes, and powrest i^ again grace more
abounda^t. O repetau^ce, what new thing shall I tell of the? Thou doste lose^
althynges that are bound. All things losened doste thou set at liberty. All
troublous things doste you mit^gate. All things broken doste thou make whole.
All confused things doste thou make clear. Al desperate things doste you
encourage O repentance more rutulante than gold, more bright than the son,
whom sin does not overcome, nor, defeccion suppress, nor desperacio^ put
away. Repentance refuses covetousness, abhorrethe lecherye, excheweth furour
and madness, makes love strong, treadethe down pride, refrayneth the tongue,
fasshyoneth manners, hates malice, excludes envy Perfect repentance
compels a sinner to suffer all things gladly. If a violente person seek
that that he has, he forbyddeth him not. If he takes away his garment, he
stryueth not against him. To him that strikes the one cheke, he profereth ye
other. If any man will compel him to go a mile with him, he will of his own
free will go two. If he be chastised he gives him than^kes. If he be provoked,
he holds his peace. If he be sharpe^ye spoken unto, he speaks gentely
again. To his superior he gives reverence. To his inferior, he is lowlye,
In his heart is contricion, in his mouth confession, in his work all humilite.
This is y^ perfect and fruytful repentance. To him that repents so, God is
at hand, a noryssher to him that is hu^gry, a gyuer of drink to him that is
thyrstye. O repentance the mother of mercy, the maystres of virtues, thy
works are great, where with thou do loosen the gylty, refressheth the^ that
offend, reuelest them that slide, ^ecreatest ye desperate. By ye Christ,
appoynteth us that y^ ki^gdom of heaven is at hand, saying, repent, for the
kingdom of heaven is at han^. Nither to have I rehearsed unto you the mind of
Chrysostom concerning repentance, whereby ye may perceive, as I said
before, that repentance is one of the principal means, whereby we obtain
remission of sins and the kyngedome of heaven.


EVSE. God gives us all grace truly to repent.


THEO. But how shall we know, wha^ we truly repent on such manner, that it
provoke God to be merciful to us.


CHRI. In deed this is a thing necessary to be known.


PHIL. To this your question shall S. Austen answer, Ser. ter. ^e Na^^, do.
which says: When thou do so repent, yt yt thing sauoereth to the bitter i^
thy mind, which before was sweet in thy life: and that, which did delyght the
before in thy body, does trouble the in thy heart, than doste thou repent well,
and say to God, to the alone have I sinned, and evil have I done before the.
So that the whole sum of repentance is this, Mark^ well.
to dye unto sin, and to live unto righteousness, which is signified by our
plonginge in y^ font when we are baptized, and by ^ure ^a^yng out again, as S.
Paul says, we are buried together with him by baptism i^to death, yt as
Christ is raised up from the dead by the glory of his Father, Roma. vi.
so we in like manner should walk in a new life.


THEO. If we repent, be sorry for our sins, confess our wickedness, amend
our life, is this enough?


PHIL. This is much certes, but not all. For repent is not only contained in
your dysh, but also, Repentance a^^ Faith must be iorned together.
Believe the Gospel. This pour repentance must be joined with says, and lyncked
with a sure persuasion, that God the father according to his promise will
undoubtedly for give you your sins for his son Jesus Christ's sake. For
Caym, Esau, Pharao, Saul, Antiochus, Judas and many other repented and granted
their offenses, yet were they not forgyuen. Many also among the very Neithen
and gentiles glystered out wardely with a meruaylous godly conversation, and
sorowed very greatly if at any time they did defyle their innocencye with any
spotte ^^ uncleanness, yet were they not made hey^es of eternal glory. And why?
Uerely they tasted after a certain manner of ye first part of your dysh, b^^
not of the last. They repented, but they believed not ye gospel, that is, they
sought for no help of their wickedness at gods exceadyng mercy through Jesus
Christ. They had not the christen faith in the^, wh^che coming from a
repentaunt and sorrowful heart, makes haste to God, and approaches boldly to
the throne of his grace, ^^bre. ^^^^
that it may obtain ^^uour and remission of sins. Mark this well.
Repentance without faith brings desperacion, but repentance accompanies
faith, brings remission of sins, tranquilite of conscience, and ever
lasting life, as we may easily perceive by two of Christ's Disciples. Judas
sold Christ, Math. xxvi.
and Peter denied and forswore Christ. Here both sinned, both repented, both
confessed their offense. One by manifest it words, and the other by tears.
Yet was Peter saved, and Judas damned. Now so? Because that the repentance of
Peter was joined with faith and hope of forgyuenes, and the repentance of Judas
was not so. Luke. vii.
Mary Magdalene did not only repent of her synfullyuynge, but also believed to
have remission of her sins. And therefore did not Christ only say of her unto
Simon the Pharise, many sins are forgyuen her, because she loved much, but
he also said unto her with a lively voice, thy faith has saue^ the, go^ thy way
in peace. Hear what Chrisostowe says: If thou be wythered and worn away of
sin, renew thy self by repentance. ^om. l^^^. Dep^nit^^i^
Why, may he that repents be saved? yea undoubtedly? Whereof of comes it to
pass? of y^ LORDS favorable mercy. Trust not to thy repentance. For thy
repentance can never put away so great sins. If it were thy repentance
alone, thou myghteste well fear, but seeing that the mercy of God is
accompanied with repentance, be on a good conforte, for it overcomes thy
wickedness, and god is exceadynge merciful, and so full of gentleness, Roma. v^^^
that he did not spare his own son for to redeem the unkind servants. Say
not unto me, I have sinned to much, how can I be saved? Thou canste not in
deed save thy self, but thy LORD can. And he so puts away thy sins, yt
therneth no prynte, syghe or to^e^ of the^. Here ye se also by Chrysostom that
repentance without an earnest faith had and reposed in the mercy of God, can by
no means put away sin. This your dyshe therefore teaches you both to repent
and also to believe. For what so ever is not of faith, is sin says S.
Paul: Romans xiiii
The word of the LORD is right, Psalm. xxxii
says David and all his works are in faith.

In Math. Romans xix.
A work without faith, says Chrysostom, is nothing. Again he says: we
must have faith every where I mean that faith, which is the mother of all good
things, In Ioar. ^om. xxxii
ye medicine of health, without the which a man cannot perceive the doctrine of
great and excellent things, but is like unto them, which taking in hand for
to swymme over ye see without a ship, when they are a little forward, In. i. ^^.
^om. i.
they^ hands and their fete beying once ^ery, are utterly overwhelmed with
the waves of ye see. Also in another place All our elders are reported yt they
pleased God by faith, therefore with out that, all things come to naught.
Hereto agrees S. Austen, saying: The medicyne of the soul and of all
wounds, De ve^. do. Sermo. xl.
and the alone sacrifyce to appea^e Gods wrath for the sins of all men, is to
believe in Christ. Neither can any man at all be made clean, either from
original sin, which he has drawn of Adam, in whom all have sinned, and be
made naturally the children of wrath, or from the sins, which they, by not
resistynge the carnal concupi^ce^ce, but by followynge it and seruyng it by
ungraciousness and wicked living have added and put thereto, except by faith
they be enunied and joined together i^ the body of him, which without any
carnal entysemente and mortiferous delectacion was conceived. Thus se you that
repentance without faith anayleth nothing, but enun^ed and joined with faith
is a singular and high treasure, ^. ^ata. vi. Psalm. ii. Sap. i. Sap. iii.
Eccl. xxxiii. ^s^e. ii. Joan. iii. Gal. iii. Act. xv. Joan. i. Gala. iii. Roma.
v. Gala. iii. iiii. ^ebre. xi. ^. ^oan, v.
For by faith does God hear us. By faith are we blessed. By faith does God
appear unto us. By faith do we understand the truth. By faith do we keep the
commandments of God. By faith are we married to God. By faith have we
eternal life. By faith are we purifyed. By faith are our hertes made clean.
By faith are we made the sons of God. By faith are we justified. By faith we
please God. By faith we be borne of God. By faith we subdue Satan. By faith do
we overcome the world To conclude, by faith all goodness chau^se unto us, and
without faith all evil things fall upon us. No meruiale, for as Chrysostom
says: Faith is the foundacio^ of the most holy religion, the bond of
charity, the subsidy of love. This faith confyrmeth holiness, Ephe. v^^. 1.
Pet. ^. 1. ^oan. ^.
corrob^ratethe and makes strong pure living, garnissheth dig^ities. In
children it shyneth, in young men it storyssheth, in old me^ it is a godly
spectacle, it confirms al kyndnes, De ^ile Ab^^ ^^^. (...). xxxiii.
it exalts degrees, it keeps all offices, in the poor man it is pleasant,
in the mean man merry, in the rytch honest. Faith preserves frendeshyypes,
gathers together assemblies, reports ever well, it despyseth no man, it
contenmeth no man, it fail the no man, except perchau^se he first fails
her. Faith understands the commandments, keeps the precepts, fulfylleth
promises. Repentance and Faith are the only^ mene^, to obtain to remission
of sines.
Faith makes us acquainted with God, and constituteth us fre^des with Christ.
Thus have I declared unto you in this your third service, that the only
means to obtain remission of our sins, and to be made heirs of eternal
glory, is unfeignedly to repent, and faythfullye to believe, that is to say, to
forsake our old living and to become new men, garnisshyng our lives with all
the fruits of the spirit, and to believe earnestly, that through this
repentance and faith, God will undoubtedly for Jesus Christ's sake for give us
all our sins, receive us again into favor, and make us heirs of his
eternal glory.


EVSE. This is the most pleasant dysshe that ever I tasted.


THEO. These things that you have spoken unto us are so confortable ye me
think I am now enflamed and more set on fire tha^ ever I was before. The
pre^hynge of ^od^ ^^n^nes make the me^ ^ (...) to love God. and (...) for to
ful^yl his will



CHRI. As I may vn^ain^dly report unto you the affect of my heart, verily
since that ye declared to us the goodness of God ye father toward v^ through
Jesus christ I have felt in my heart such an earnest faith and burning love
toward God and his word, that me think a thousand fyres could not pluck
me away from the love of him. I be gynne now utterly to contemn, despise,
reiecte, cast away, and set at naught al ye pleasures of this world, ^herein
I have ^o greatly rejoiced in times past. All the thretes of god, all the
displeasures of God, al ye fyres and pains of hell could never before this
day so allure me to the love of God, as you have now done by expressing unto
me the excedyng mercy and unspeakable kyndeses of God toward us wretched
sinners, insomuch that now from the very heart I desire to know what I may
do, that by some means I may show again my heart to be full fyred on the
seeking of his glory. For I now desire nothing more the^ the auau^ce me^t of
his name.


PHIL. It rejoices me to hear these things of you.

Therefore now will I, as due order requires bring forth your fourth yea and
last dyshe, that ye may know what ye ought to do again toward God for his
unmeasurable bounty, and infinite benefits toward you, that yelyuynge in this
world worthy of his kyndnes, may after this life receive the crown of glory.


THEO. I pray you bring it forth streyghte ways, for we much desire to taste
of it.


EVSE. There is nothing that I wysshe more than continually to be fed with
the meat of such an heavenly bancket. Therefore I pray you go forth to
minister unto us the residue of our most delicious feast.


PHIL. Agreed, but mark well, for here it is.


The fourth dysshe.
Ephe. ii.
WE are the workemanshyp of God, created in christ Jesus unto good works,
which God has prepared that we should walk in them. This is y^ say^nge of S.
Paul, which a little before this sentence in his Epistle to ye Ephe,
declares, as I have hitherto taught you, that by nature we are the children
of wrath, and are saved only by grace through faith, and that not of our selves,
for it is ye gift of god, and commethe not of works, because no man should
boste him self. And when he has this done, immediately he exorteth us to good
works, saienge that we are the workmanship of God, created in Christ Jesus
unto good works, which God has prepared ye we should walk in them. Here may
ye learn, what is your duty to do unto God again, seeing that he freely through
says has saved you without any merits, deservings or good deeds on your
behalf. What the duty of y^ faith ^ul^a.
Your duty is to live well, to practyse good works, to exercise al godly
acts, to lead a virtuous conuersacio^, and in all your life through the study
of innocence to seek the glory of God. Now shall your co^uersacion declare and
show by external works whether your repentance be unfeigned or not, whether
your faith and love toward God be sincere, true, and procedyng from a godly
heart or not. In. ^. ^in^. ^om. ii.
For if your repentance, faith and love be christian and unfeigned, than shall
good works ensue and follow agreeable to the same. For faith, says
Chrysostom, shows that, which is true. And out of syncer faith comes
charity, in so much that he, which believes truly in God, ca^ never be with
out it. Be ^o^at^ Genesis ^a. v^. ^.ib.i.
S. Ambrose also says: faith is the mother and brynger for the both of good
will and righteous workyng. Again he says: Ibidem.
A new creature has this property by grace, ye they which are the workemanshyp
of god which are made in Christ by an heavenly natiuite, be no more sluggysh
another given to live dissolutely, D^ vo. ^e. cap. vi^i. ^ib. ii.
but they go forth and profit from virtue to virtue, in walking by the way
of good works. Also i^ another place he says, God gives to the^ whom he
choseth without merits, whereof they may be garnysshed with merits also.
Mark this well.
And it is not truly said, that the intent and determinacion of well workyng
is not in the elect. For the gifts of virtues ca^ not beydle. Thus se you
that lynysh faith whereby ye are ingrassed in Christ, bring the forth good
works. Neither is true repentance, syncer faith, unfeigned love in you, if good
and christen works do not follow your conversion. Yea they that bost of faith
and bring not forth the works of faith, derogate much the glory of faith,
and cause the true and christian faith to be slaundered and ill reported among
the^ which never tasted, nor yet at any time in their hertes felt what a
precious thing, and of how great strength effycacy and power, the sincere
faith is. Therefore if your faith be not accompanied with good works, your
faith is dead, as S. Ia. fayeth, ^ap. ii.
y^ is to say, it is a true and christen faith no more, than a dead corse is
a man. Gala. v.
For that faith, which is approved before God, works by charity, and charity
ca^ not be idle, but brasteth out into good works, wh^ so ever it sees an
occasion given, who can love his neighbor, and suffer him to perysshe for want
of his help?

Therefore is a faithful man compared in y^ first Psalm to a tree, which is
planted by the waters side, and brings forth her fruytes in due time. I am
the true vine, Joan. xv.
says Christ, and ye are the branches. He that abides in me, and I in hi^,
^^yngeth forth much fruit. Again he says: He that believes i^ me, floudes
of lyuish water should flow out of his belly. Here se you that he which
dwells i^ Christ by faith, Joan. vii.
and believes in hi^ bri^geth for the plenty of good works. He therefore that
is an vn^ruytfull tree, and bri^geth forth no good fruit, surely he beleuethe
not arighte in Christ, neither has he the Christen faith, boste and crake he
never so much of it.

EVSE. Methinke than by your words, y^ good works necessarely follow the
christen faith.


PHIL. Yea even as necessarelye as the shadow follows the body, and death the
life. Ma^^e.



THEO. They than which live dissolute, and without doing of good works have
not the christen faith.


PHIL. No verily, no more than a dead cole has in it the virtue and strength
of burning. ^^et. ^.



CHRI. Therefore ought all men not to quench ye spirit, but with all main and
fra^cke courage to apply themselves to y^ dilligent practyse of good works.


PHIL. Ye say truth, Ephe. ii.
for as ye herd before we are the workema^shyp of God created has prepared
that we should walk in the^. But I pray you note a few things, which I will
now declare unto you concerning this our dyshe and last service, First S.
Paul says: We are the workema^shyp of God,. This shows that god made us,
Psalm. xcliii
and not we our selves. He wrought us by his deuyne power. But by this
workemanshyp not we only are made th^^ believe i^ god, A double-^reatio^ one i^
^da^, an^ (...)
but also the unfaithful, yea the very brute beasts, and worms, with all
thiges contained in heaven and earth. Therefore of this making have the
faithful no more cause to rejoice, tha^ the unfaithful have. Therefore it does
follow: Created in christ Ies^s. Behold here is a new creacio^. Here is
another birth. Here is regeneracion, which far differs from the old
natiuite. Here are we made new creatures. In whom, in Moses by the law? Nay
verily, but in christ by faith. By faith are we regenerate, (...) (...) borne a
new, created again in Christ Jesus. Good works declare ^ man to be created
anewe^ christ Jesus.
Whereunto? Unto wicked manners? Nay certes, but unto good works. Note that he
says, unto good works. They that are borne anewe in Christ through faith are
created in him to good works. If any man therefore be not studious of good
works: he is not created in christ, but remains still in ye creacion of
Adam. Good works are not the fantasie^ of man ^ but ^ commandments of God.
But unto what good works is the faythefull created in Christ? unto Rome
runnynge? gad^ynge of pylgrimage? setting up of candels? gyidynge of your
images? payntyng of tabernacles? building of monasteries? purchasing of
pardons? and such other trifelyng fantasies invented of the idle brains of the
Papists for lucres sake? na berely. For these are no good works i^ deed
before god, but only so called to blind the eyes of carnal men with such
goodly and godly tytles, Unto what good works tha^ are they created? In good
faith, to those good works which God has prepared y^ we should walk in
the^. Mark that he says, which God has prepared, and not that man invented.
In them should we walk, yt is to say, labor daily more and more to fu^fyll
the^, and never to cease until we were ancient and perfect in the
accomplysshement of Gods will.


THEO. Me thank you right hertely for the declaracio^ of this terte. For we
perceive now our duty better than ever we did before.


EVSE. But what are those good works, which God has prepared that we should
walk in the^?


PHIL. His commandments. We read that the Jews said to Christ, what shall we
do, that we may work the works of God? Christ answered and said to the^:
Joan. vi.
This is y^ work of God that ye believe in him, whom he has sent. This is the
greatest and most principal work of God, yt ye believe in his only begotten
son Jesus Christ. He that truly fulfylleth this work, True faith in christ
is the mother of all goo^ works.
does very easily acco^plyshe ye residue. For out of this work, as out of y^
head fou^tayne, do all other works of God spryng and proceed. If you can
believe, says Christ, all things are possible to him yt believes. Mat. i^.
He yt believes truly in Christ, abuses not the name of God, prophaneth not ye
Sabbath day, dishonoreth not the magistrates of the publygue weal, conte^neth
not the ministers of gods word, despyseth not his parents and superiors,
kyllethe not, co^mytteth not adultrye, Learn her^ the christ^ and true good
works.
iteleth not, bears no false witness, covers not his neighbors goods, but
rather does ye contrary, hatyng y^ vice, and en^alsyng ye virtue. He mortyfyeth
old Ada^. He makes the body subject to the spirit with the moderate use of
eating and drynkyng. He exercyseth himself in godly meditacions, in reading
the holy scriptures, in offryng up prayers and thanks continually to God. He
socoureth the poor members of christ. He leueth no man confortles. He goes
about to hurt no man, but studieth to profytte all men. He wissheth and
procures no less goodness to other, than he does to him self. To be short
all his whole life time, he does nothing else tha^ dye to sin, and live unto
righteousness. These are the works of God, wherein so many as are created i^
Christ, ought unfeignedly to walk. These are ye works of God, which ledeth to
heaven, which through christ we deserve ye reward of everlasting life. In these
works therefore (most dear brethren) exercise your selves both day and night.
Believe in god, love God, fear God. Confess hi^ from ye very heart to be y^
alone and true God. Knowledge him to be your only and oi^sufficie^t savior. In all aduersite fly unto his most blessed name as unto a strong Bulwark. Have
your hertes at peace with God. Study day and night in the LORDS law. Psalm.
i.
Exercise faithful and continual prayer. Procure in all things the glory of
God. Honor your most victorious Prince, Admonicio^^ for true obedience
toward y^ kings grace.
and redoubted king. Be faithful to him both in heart, word and deed. Do
nothing that may in any point derogate his graces honor. Romans xiii.
Know that he that resists him, resists ye ordinance of God, i. Pet. ii.
and gets to himself da^nacio^. Honor also at the magistrates that are
sent and appointed of him. Your parents and superious have ye in reverence.
Manslaughter, adultrye, theft, false wytnes, carnal concupiscence, and all
the works of ye flesh hate ye, col. iii.
and utterly cast the^ from you. To conclude, look for those things that are
above, and not for those that are upon the earth. Live no more to your self,
Romans iiii.
but to him that dyed for your sins, and rose again for your justification.


CHRI. We will to the vttermoost of our power labor to accomplysshe your
most godly admonicions. This time has great need of good works.



PHIL. Labor and God will help. And to say the truth to you, it was never
more needful for christen men to bring forth good and christen works, than
it is at this time. You se (thanks be to God) yt the deuyne scripture is come
now among us more plenteouslye than ever it was before, insomuch yt now it
is lawefull for all men to read it, hear it, talk of it, so that it be done
reverently. This has God unfeignedly brought to pass by his well-beloved
servant and our king Henrye the eight a Prince of most noble fame and
immortal glory. Ye se again that this word of God has many enemies, which
both labor to suppress that* and also so many syncerly profess it. The enemi
^^ of gods words.
Ye se that theyse adversaries of Gods word have no other pleasure than to
have an occasion both to blaspheme the word, and also the earneste favorers
of it. Behold, say they, are these Gospellers? Are these professors of gods
word? Are theyse they yt maintain Gods truth? Perysshe might they with their
Gospel. For they will not fast nor pray, nor give alms, nor use any kind of
virtue. Theyse, whom they call Pharisees, do much excel the^ in every degree of
godly living. They will show themselves conformable to no poletyke
ordinance. They hunte carnal liberty. They seek to sin freely and without
punysshemente. Their whole religion consists in breaking men's laws and
ancient customs. Farewell they therefore with their gospel. We will follow
our forefathers. This and such like talk is heard daily among the enemies
of Gods word. Therefore ought they yt love Gods truth to walk circu^spectly,
seeing the days are evil, Ephe. v.
as S. Paul says, and to have an honest conuersacio^ among Goddess enemies,
that they which backbyte them as evil doers, may se their good works, and
praise God in the day of visitacion. For so is the will of God, i. Petre. ii.
says S. Peter that with well doing ye should stop the mouths of ygnoraunt
men, as free, and not as though ye took lyberty for a cloak of maliciousnes,
but even as the servants of God. Which thing (most dear brothers) would God
ye would do, that by your virtuous conversation ye might not pluck men from,
but unto the Gospel, not dishonor but honor god, not hinder but provoke the
Euangelical truth, that with one mind, heart, will, tongue and deed we al might
together profess one God and one truth. Than should God be glorified among
us. Tha^ should his most blessed word be enhalsed of all men. Than should we
under one king live i^ an unite, peace and concord of christen religion,
without any scisme, he resy or dissencion. Roma. v. Gala. ii.
Than might we well say, that the true repentance and syncer faith, whereby a
christen man is justified in the sight of God were in us. For so long as we
continue i^ our old wickedness, and amend not our manners, certes neither true
repentance, nor christen faith is in us, and to say the truth, neither have
we any part of Christ or Christ's merytes, but pertayne still to Satan and his
sinful synagoge. For as S. John says: i. Joan. ^.
If we say, that we have fellowshyp with God, and yet walk in darkness, we lie
and perform not the truth. But and if we walk in light, even as he is in
light, than have we fellowship with him, and ye blood of Jesus Christ his son,
makes us clean from all sin. Roma. xiii. ^itum. ii.
Therefore (dearly beloved) let us cast away the works of darkness, walk in
the light of Gods truth, live according to our vocacion, garnysh the
doctrine of christ our savior with godly manners, and so in all points
institute and order our life according to Gods will, that we may be that
same in life and deed, that we desire to be reported, that is to say, perfect
and true christen men both in heart, word, and deed. So may we be certain in
this life to have God a merciful father unto us through Jesus Christ his
son, and after the departing out of this world to enjoy the glorious sight
of the most blessed Godhead, and there to remain in joy and glory, worlds
without end. Ame^. Thus ends your bancket.


EVSE. Praised be the LORD for it.


THEO. Both now and evermore.


CHRI. For he alone is worthy all honor and glory.


PHIL. If it shall please you, I will now gather together in few words that
which hitherto I have dispersed in many, that they may the more easly remain
in your breast. A brefe rehe^sal of al things spoken of before.



THEO. I pray you let it be so.


PHIL. In your first disshe I ministered unto you y^ knowledge of your selves,
and declared what ye are by Ada^, that is to say, children of wrath, all
carnal, and without the spirit of God, In Joan ^rat. ^^^ Cap. xi.
as S. Austen says, let no man stond in his own conceyte. For of his own,
he is very Satan, but of Gods, he is blessed. What is this to say, of his
own, but of his sin? Take away the sin, which is thine, and the
righteouses, sayethe god, i. Cor. ^ii^.
is of mine. Fore what have thou, that thou have not taken? In your second
dysshe ye received the knowledge of Gods favor toward you freely through Jesus
Christ. In your third dysshe, ye perceived by what means ye may obtayn this
favor of God, verily by true repentance and syncer faith. In your fourth dish
I proved unto you that of this your repentance and faith, works must needs
follow, yea and that those works, Ephe. ii.
which God has prepared that we should walk in them. Here is in few words
concluded y^ whole su^me of your banckette. I pray you look that ye both
remember these things well, and also exercise them in your living.


EVSE. We will labor to the vttermooste of our power. Joan. xv.
And because we can do nothing without the help of God, we shall at all
hours with fyrme and sure faith most instantly desire God to work that
things in us his holy spirit, yt he commanndethe us to do, that we may
neither thyncke, breath, speak or do any thing, but that may turn to his
glory.


PHIL. It is godly spoken. This one thing than remains that we give God
thanks for this our bancket.


CHRI. I pray you, let it be so.


The thanks gyuynge. PHILEMON.
Praise, Joan. v^
honor and glory be unto the (O heavenly father) which at this time have fed us
with meat not ye perishes but yt abides into euerlastying life. Grant (O
good God) that we having the knowledge of thy word, may also practyse the
same in our conversation, that we both intierly loving and unfeignedly living
thy holy word, may after this life live with the in that life, which is
immortal.

THEO. Amen.


EVSE. So be it.


CHRI. LORD let it so come to pass.


PHIL. Seeing that according to the commaundeme^te of Christ, Mat. vi.
we have now first sought the kyngedom of god, and the righteousness thereof,
and have fed our souls with this celestial bancket of Gods word, I pray
you now vouchesafe to come with me, and take such poor repast for the
sustenaunce of your body, as it has pleased God to prepare for us.


THEO. We give you right herty thanks.


EVSE. I pray God yt we may once reco^pense your kyndnes.


PHIL. My power is small, but my will is much, follow me I beseech you.


CHRI. Praised be the LORD for this our most comfortable bancket.


THEO. PHIL. AMEN.


Give the glory to God alone.
Imprynted at London in Botulphe lane at the sign of the white Bear, by me
John^ Mayler for John^ Gough. Anno Dn^i. 1542.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


