Diella, Certain Sonnets, adjoined to the amorous Poem of Dom Diego and
Gineura. ()

By R. L. Gentleman.

Ben balla, a chi fortuna suona.

AT LONDON, Printed for Henry Olney, and are to be sold at his shop in
Fleetstreete, near the Middle Temple gate. 1596.

TO THE MOST worthily honored, and virtuous beautified Lady, the Lady Anne
Glemnham, wife to the most noble, magnanimious, and worthy Knight, Sir Henry
Glemnham. etc.
MAdam, your many honorable virtues, having tied me to your eternal service,
to shevve some part of my duty, I present your Ladyship with a few passionate
Sonnets, intermingled with the loves of Dom Diego and Gineura.

Daine (gentle Lady) to accept them, and therein show the greatness of your
benignity, in receiving courteously a gift of so small worth, which though it
cannot any ways equal either the number of your virtues, or the greatness of
that noble house, whence your Ladyship is descended, impute it not (Madam) to
my defect of judgment, but of Fortune, for were I furnished with the greatest
riches that blind Goddess could bestow on a man of my state, both they, and I
would fall prostrate at your feet, and ever rest at your Ladyships devotion:
yet Madam as it is, it is a child of the Muses, and therefore worthy to be
cherrished, conceived in the brain of a gallant Gentleman, and therefore to be
favored: sent into the world by me, who have ever honored your Ladyshyp,
and therefore crave of your Ladyship to be protected, to whom I ever vvishe
long life, lengthened with all honorable happiness.

Your Ladyships in all duty, Henry Olney.

Sonnet. I.
WHen first the feathered God did strike my heart,
with fatal and ymedicable wound,
Leaving behind the head of his fell dart,
my bloodlesse body fell unto the ground;
And, when with shame I reinforced my might,
boldly to gaze on her so heavenly face,
Huge flames of fire she darted from her light,
which since have scorcht me in most pitious case,
To quench which heat, an Ocean of tears
have gushed out from forth my red-swolne eyes,
But deep-fetch'd sighs this raging flame vpreares,
and blows the sparks up to the purple skies.
Whereat, the Gods afraid that heaven should burn,
Entreated Love that I for e're might mourn.
Sonnet II.
Soon as the Azur-color'd Gates of The East,
were set wide open by the watchful Morn,
I walked abroad, (as having took no rest)
(for nights are tedious to a man forlorn,)
And viewing well each pearle-bedewed flower,
then waxing dry by splendor of the sun,
All scarled-hew'd I saw him gin to lower,
and blush, as though some heinous act were don.
At this amazed, I hy'de me home amain,
thinking that I his anger caused had;
And at his set, abroad I walked again,
when (lo) the Moon looked wondrous pale and sad.
Anger the one, and envy moved the other,
To see my love more fair then Loves fair mother.
Sonnet III.
SWift-footed Time, look back and here mark well
those rare-shapt parts my pen shall now declare
My mistres snow-white skin does much excel
the pure-soft woll Arcadyan sheep do bear;
Her hair exceedes gold forced in smallest wyre,
in smaller threads then those Arachne spun;
Her eyes are crystal fountains, yet dart fire,
more glorious to behold then Midday sun;
Her Iuory front, (though soft as purest silk)
looks like the table of Olympic Jove,
Her cheeks are like ripe cherries laid in milk,
her Alablaster neck the throne of Love;
Her other parts so far excel the rest,
That wanting words, they cannot be expressed.
Sonnet IIII.
WHat sugared terms, what all-perswading art,
what sweet mellifluous words, what wou^ding looks
Love vsd for his admittance to my heart?
such eloquence was never read in books;
He promisd pleasure, rest, and endless joy,
fruition of the fairest she alive,
His pleasure pain, rest trouble, joy annoy,
have I since found, which me of bliss deprive;
The Trojan horse thus have I now let in,
wherein inclosd these armed men were placed,
Bright eyes, fair cheeks, sweet lips, and milk-white skin
these foes my life have ouerthrown and razed.
Fair outward shows, prove inwardly the worst,
Love looks fair, but Lovers are accursed.
Sonnet V.
THE little Archer viewing well my love,
stone-still amazed, admired such a sight,
And swore he knew none such to dwell above,
though many fair, none so conspicuous bright:
With that enraged, (flamigerous as he is)
he now began loathe his Psiches lovely face,
And swore great other to rob me of my bliss,
saying that earth for her was too too base;
But Cytherea checked her lordly son,
commanding him to bring no giglet thither,
Fearing indeed, her amorous sports were done
with hote-spur Mars, if he should once but see her.
If then her beauty move the Gods above,
Let all men judge if I have cause to love.
Sonnet VI.
MIrror of beauty, Natures fairest child,
Empress of love, my hearts high-prized Jewel,
Learn of the Dove, to love and to be mild,
be not to him that honors thee so cruel,
But as the Aspe, deaf, angry, nothing meek,
thou will not listen to my doleful plaint,
Nor once wilt look on my discolored cheek,
which wanting blood, causes me often to faint;
Then silent will I be, if that will please thee,
yet so, as in my stead, each Plain, each Hill,
Shall echo forth my grief, and thereby case me,
for I my self of speaking have my fill;
If Plains, and Hills, be silent in my pain,
My death shall speak, and tell what I sustain.
Sonnet VII.
When Love had first besieged my hearts strong wall,
rampaird and countermur'd with chastity,
And had with Ordnance made his tops to fall,
stouping their glory to his surquedry,
I called a parley, and withal did crave
some composition, or some friendly peace;
To this request, he his consent soon gave,
as seeming glad such cruel wars should cease,
I, (naught mistrusting) opened all the gates,
yea, lodged him in the Palace of my heart,
When (lo) in dead of night he seeks his mates,
and shows each Traitor how to play his part;
With that they fir'de my heart, and thence began fly,
Their names, Sweet smiles, Fair face, and piercing Eye
Sonnet VIII.
LIke to a Faulcon watching for a flight,
duly attending his desired game,
Have I often watched and marked to have a sight,
of thy fair face exceeding niggard Fame,
Thine eyes (those Semynaries of my grief)
have been more gladsome to my tired spright,
Then naked sauadges receive relief,
by comfort-bringing warmth of Phoebus light;
But when each part so glorious I had seen,
I trembled more then Autumnes parched leaves,
Mine eyes were greedy whirlepooles sucking in
that heavenly fair which me of rest bereaues;
Then as thy beauty thus has conquered me,
(Fair) let relenting pity conquer thee.
Sonnet IX.
BLot not thy beauty (fairest) yet unkind,
with cruel usage of a yielding heart,
The stoutest Captain scorns such bloody mind,
then mingle mercy where thou causedst smart;
Let him not die in his May-springing days,
that living vows to honor thee for ever,
Shine forth some pity from thy sun-like rays,
that hard froz'd hate may so dissolve and sever;
Oh, were thou not much harder then a flint,
thou had ere this been melted into love,
In firmest stone small rain does make a print,
but seas of tears cannot thy hardness move.
Then wretched I must die before my time,
Blasted and spoiled in my budding prime.
Sonnet X.
WHen Flora vaunts her in her proud array,
clothing fair Tellus in a spangled gown,
When Boreas fury is exild away,
and all the VVelkin cleared from cloudy frown,
At that same time all Natures children joy,
trees leaves, flowers bud, plants spring, and beasts increase,
Only my soul, surcharged with deep annoy,
cannot rejoice, nor sighs nor tears can cease:
Only the grafts of sorrow seem to grow,
set in my heart, no other spring I find,
Delights and pleasures are over grown with woe,
laments and sobs possess my weeping mind;
The frost of grief so nyps Delight at root,
No sun but she can do it any boot.
Sonnet XI.
WHat she can be so cruel as my Love,
or bear a heart so pitiless as she?
VVho^ love, looks, words, tears, prayers do not move,
nor sighs, nor vows prevail to pity me.
She calls my love a Synon to her heart,
my looks (she says) are like the Crocadyles,
My words the Sirens sing with guilefull art,
tears, Cyrces floods, sighs, vows, deceitful guiles,
But my poor heart has no interpreter,
but love, looks, words, tears, prayers, sighs or vows,
Then must it die, since she my Comforter,
what ere I do, nor likes, nor allows.
With Titius, thus the vultur Sorrow eats me,
With steele-twig'd rods thus tyrant Cupid beats me.
Sonnet XII.
THou, (like the faire-fac'd gold-encouerd book,
whose lines are stuffed with damned heresies)
Do in thy face bear a celestial look,
when in thy heart live hell-borne cruelties.
With poysenous Toades ye cleerest spring's infected
and purest Launes naught worth if full of stains,
So is fair beauty when true love's rejected;
when cole-blacke hate within the heart remains,
Then love, (my dear) let that be Methrydate
to overcome the venom of disdain;
Be pitiful, tread down this killing hate,
convert to sugared pleasure, gall-full pain.
O, since Disdain is foe unto thy Fair,
Exile him thence, there let him not repair.
Sonnet XIII.
I Know, within my mouth for bashful fear,
and dread of your disdain, my words will die;
I know, I shall be stricken dumb (my dear)
with doubt of your vnpittifull reply;
I know, when as I shall before you lie
prostrate and humble, craving help of you,
Mistie aspects will cloud your sun-bright eye,
and scornful looks oreshade your beauties hew,
I know, when I shall plead my love so true,
so stainelesse, constant, loyal, and upright,
My truthfull pleadings will not cause you rue
the ne're-heard state of my distressed plight.
I know, when I shall come with face bedight
with streaming tears, fallen from my fountain eyes,
Sonnet XIII.
Breathing forth sighs of most hart-breaking might,
my tears, my sighs, and me, you will despise,
I know, when with the power that in me lies,
and all the prayers and vows that women move,
I shall in humblest mercy-mouing wise
entreat, beseech, desire, and beg your love,
I know, (sweet maiden) all will not remove
flynt-harted rigor from your rocky breast,
But all my means, my suit, and what I prove,
proves bad, and I must live in all unrest.
Dying in life, and living still in death,
And yet nor die, nor draw a life-like breath.
Sonnet XIIII.
When broad-fac'd rivers turn unto their fou^tains
and hungry Wolves devoured are by Sheep,
When Marine Dolphins play on snow-tipt Mountains
and foule-form'd Bears do in ye Ocean keep,
Then shall I leave to love, and cease to burn
in these hot flames wherein I now delight,
But this I know, the Rivers never return,
nor silly Sheep with ravening Wolves dare fight,
Nor Dolphins leave the Seas, nor Bears the woods,
for Nature bids them all to keep their kind,
Then eyes, rain forth your ouer-swelled floods,
till drowned in such Seas may make you blind:
Then (hearts delight) since I must love thee ever,
Love me again, and let thy love persevere.
Sonnet XV.
NO sooner leaves Hyperion Thetis bed,
and mounts his coach to post from thence away,
Richly adorning fair Lencotheas head,
gyuing to mountains tincture from his ray:
But straight I rise, where I could find no rest,
where visions and fantasies appear,
And when with small adoo my body's dressed;
abroad I walk to think upon my dear;
Where under vmbrage of some aged Tree,
with Lute in hand I sit and (sighing) say,
Sweet Groves tell forth with Echo what you see:
good Trees bear witness who is my decay,
And thou my soul, speak, speak, what rest I have,
When each our joys despair does make me rave.
Sonnet XVI.
But thou my dear sweet-sounding Lute be still,
repose thy troubled strings upon this moss,
Thou have full often easd me against my will,
lie down in peace, thy spoil were my great loss,
I Will speak enough of her (too cruel) heart,
enough to move the stony Rocks to ruth,
And cause these trees weep tears to hear my smart
though (cruel she) will not once way my truth,
Her face is of the purest white and red,
her eyes are crystal, and her hair is gold,
The world for shape with garlands crown her head,
And yet a Tygresse heart dwells in this mold:
But I must love her (Tigresse) too too much,
Forced must I love, because I find none such.
Sonnet XVII.
THE sun-scorcht Seaman when he sees the Seas
all in a fury hoise him to the sky,
And throw him down again (as waves do please)
(so chased clouds from Eols mastiues fly)
In such distress provides with great speed
all means to save him from the tempests rage,
He shows his wit in such like time of need,
the big-swolne billows fury to assuage;
But foolish I, although I see my death,
and feel her proud disdain too feelinglie,
Which me of all felicity bereaueth,
yet seek no means t'escape this misery:
So am I charmed with hart-inchaunting beauty,
That still to wail I think it is my duty.
Sonnet XVIII.
Cupid had done some heinous act or other,
that caused Idalea whip him very sore;
The stubborn Boy away runs from his Mother,
protesting stoutly to return no more;
By chance I met him, who desired relief,
and craved that I some lodging would him give,
Pitying his looks which seemed drowned in grief,
I took him home there thinking he should live,
But see the Boy; envying at my life,
which never sorrow, never love had tasted,
He raised within my heart such uncouth strife,
that with the same my body now is wasted:
By thanklesse Love, thus vilely am I used,
By using kindness, I am thus abused.
Sonnet XIX.
WHen night returns back to his ugly mantion,
and cleer-fac'd morning makes her bright vprise,
In sorrows depth, I murmur out his caution,
(salt tears distilling from my dewy eyes)
O thou deceitful Somnus God of Dreams,
cease to afflict my ouer-pained spright
With vain illusions, and idle Theames,
thy spells are false, thou can not charm aright,
For when in bed I think t'imbrace my love,
(inchaunted by thy magique so to think)
Vain are my thoughts, it is empty air I prove,
that still I wail, till watching make me wink:
And when I wink I wish I nere might wake,
But sleeping carried to the Stigian Lake.
Sonnet XX.
THE strongest Pyne that Queen Feronia has,
growing within her woody Emperie,
Is soon thrown down by Boreas windy wrath,
if one root only his supporter be,
The tallest Ship that cuts the angry Wave,
and plowes the Seas of Saturnes second sun;
If but one Anchor for a journey have,
when that is lost against every Rock does run;
I am that Pyne (fair love) that Ship am I,
and thou that Anchor art and root to me,
If then thou fail, (oh fail not) I must die,
and pyne away in endless misery:
But words prevail not, nor can sighs devise,
To move thy heart, if bent to tyrannize.
Sonnet XXI.
AS winters rage young plants unkindly spilleth,
as hail green Corn, and lightning flowers perish,
So man's decay, is love, whose heart it kills,
if in his soul be carefully it cherrish;
O how alluringly he offers grace,,
and breathes new hope of life into our thought,
With cheerful, pleasant, (yet deceitful) face
he creepes, and fawnes, till in his net we are caught,
Then, when he sees us Captives by him led,
and sees us prostrate humbly craving help,
So feirce a Lion Lybia never bred,
nor Adders sting, nor any Tigresse whelpe:
Oh blessed be they that never felt his force,
Love has nor pity, mercy, nor remorse.
Sonnet XXII.
Look as a Bird, through sweetness of the call
does clean forget the fowlers guilefull trap;
Or one that gazing on the stars does fall
in some deep pit bewayling his mishap;
So wretched I, whilst with Lynceus eyes,
I greedily beheld her Angels face,
Was straight entangled with such subtilties,
as ever since I live in woeful case;
Her cheeks were Roses, laid in crystal glass,
her breasts two aples of Hesperides,
Her voice more sweet then famous Thamiras,
reviving death with dorique mellodies:
I harkning so to this attractiue call,
Was caught, and ever since have lived in thrall.
Sonnet XXIII.
MY lives preserver, hope of my hearts bliss,
when shall I know the doom of life or death*
Hells fearful torments easier are then this
souls agony, wherein I now do breath,
If thou would look, this my teare-stayned face,
dreery, and wan, far diffring from it was,
Would well reveal my most tormentfull case
and show thy fair, my grief as in a glass:
Look as a Dear late wounded very sore,
among the Heard full heauely does feed,
So do I live: expecting evermore,
when as my wounded heart should cease to bleed:
How patient then would I endure the smart,
Of pitchy-countnanc'd Deaths dead-doing dart.
Sonnet XXIIII.
WHen leaden-harted sleep had shut mine eyes,
and close o'redrawn their windolets of light,
Whose watrynes the fire of grief so dries,
that weep they could no longer, sleep they might,
Me thought, I sunk down to a poole of grief,
and the^ (me thought) such sinking much did please me
But when I down was plunged past all relief,
with flood-fill'd mouth I called yt some would ease me^
Whereat (me thought) I saw my dearest love,
(fearing my drowning) reach her hand to mine,
Who pulled so hard to get me up above,
that with the pull sleep did forsake mine eyne:
But when awakt I saw it was but a dream,
I wished t'had slept and perrisht in that stream,
Sonnet XXV.
ROugh storms have calmes, lopt boughs do grow again,
the naked winter is recloth'd by spring,
No year so dry, but there does fall some rain,
Nature is kind (save me) to every thing,
Only my griefs do never end nor cease,
no ebb does follow my still-flowing tears,
My sighs, are storms which never can appease
their furious blastes procured by endless cares,
Then sighs and sobs, tell Tantalus he is blessed,
go fly to Titius tell him he has pleasure,
So tell Ixion though his wheel never rest,
their pains are sports imposed with some measure
Bid them be patient, bid them look on me,
And they shall see the Map of misery.
Sonnet XXVI.
THE loue-hurt heart which Tyrant Cupid wounds,
proudly insulting over his conquered pray,
Does bleed a fresh where pleasure most abounds,
for mirth and mourning always make a fray.
Look as a Bird sore bruzed with a blow,
(lately dividing notes most sweetly singing)
To hear her fellows how in tunes they flow,
does droope and pine, as though her knel were ringing,
The heauie-thoughted Prys'ner full of doubt,
dolefully sitting in a close-bar'd cage,
Is half contented, till he looks out,
he sees each free, then storms he in a rage;
The sight of pleasure trebleth every pain,
As small Brooks swell and are enraged with rain.
Sonnet XXVII.
THE heavens Herrald may not make compare
of working words which so abound in thee,
Thy hony-dewed tongue exceedes his far,
in sweet discourse, and tunefull mellodie,
Th'amber-color'd tresse which Berenice
for her true-louing Ptholomeus vowed,
Within Idaleas sacred Aphrodice,
is worth-lesse with thy locks to be allowed,
To thee my thoughts are consecrate (dear love)
my words and phrases bound to please thine ears,
My looks are such as any heart could move,
I still solicit thee with sighs and tears:
O let not hate eclypse thy beauties shine,
Then none would deem thee earthly, but divine.
Sonnet XXVIII
Weary with serving where I naught could get,
I thought to cross great Neptunes greatest Seas,
To live in exile; but my drift was let,
by cruel Fortune spightfull of such ease,
The Ship I had to pass in, was my mind,
greedy desire was topsaile of the same,
My tears were surges, sighs did serve for wind,
of all my Ship despair, was chiefest frame,
Sorrow was Master, care the cable rope,
grief was the maine Mast, Love the Captain of it,
He that did rule the helm, was foolish hope,
but beauty was the Rock that my ship split:
Which since has made such shipwreck of my joy,
That still I swim in The Ocean of annoy.
Sonnet. XXIX.
CEase eyes to cherrish with stil-flowing tears
the almost witherd roots of dying grief,
Dry up your running Brooks, and dam your meares,
and let my body die for moist relief,
But death is deaffe, for well he knows my pain,
my slakelesse pain hells horror does exceed,
There is no hell so black as her disdain
whence cares, sighs, sorrows, and all griefs do breed,
In steed of sleep, (when day incloistred is
in dustie prison of infernal Night)
With broad-wakt eyes I wail my miseries,
and if I wink, I fear some ugly sight;
Such fearful dreams do haunt my troubled mind,
My Love's the cause, cause she is so unkind.
Sonnet XXX.
He that can count the candles of the sky,
reckon the Sands whereon Pactolus flows,
Or number nomberlesse small Attomie,
what strange, and hideous monsters Nilus shows,
What mishapt Beasts vast Africa does yield,
what rare-form'd fishes live in the Ocean,
What colored flowers do grow in Tempes field,
how many hours are since the world began,
Let him, none else, give judgment of my grief,
let him declare the beauties of my Love,
And he will say my pains pass all relief,
and he will judge her for a Saint above;
But as those things there is no man can unfold,
So, nor her fair, nor my grief may be told.
Sonnet XXXIII.
THinking to close my ouer-watched eyes,
and stop the sluice of their incessant flowing,
I laid me down when each one began to rise,
(new-risen Sol his flame like cou^t'nance showing)
But grief, though drowsy ever, yet never sleeps,
but still admits fresh intercourse of thought,
Duly the passage of each hour he keeps,
nor would he suffer me with sleep be caught,
Some broken slumbers Morpheus had lent,
who greatly pitied my want of rest,
Whereat my heart a thousand thanks him sent,
and vowed to serve him he was ready pressed;
Let restless nights, days, hours, do their spite,
I Will love her still, and love for me shall fight.
Sonnet XXXIIII.
WHY should a Maidens heart be of that proof,
as to resist the sharpe-point'd darte of love?
My Mistres eye kills strongest man aloof,
me thinks he is weak that cannot quail a Dove.
A lovely Dove, so fair and so divine,
able to make what Cynick so e're lives,
Upon his knees to beg of her bright eyne
one smiling look, which life from death reuiueth.
The frozen heart of cold Zenocrates,
had been dissolved into hot desire,
Had Phryne cast such sunbeams from her eyes,
(such eyes are cause that my heart flames in fire.)
And yet with patience I must take my woe,
In that my dearest love will have it so.
Sonnet XXXV.
ENd this enchauntment (Love) of my desires,
let me no longer languish for thy love,
Joy not to see me thus consume in fires,
but let my cruel pains thy hard heart move,
And now at last, with pitiful regard,
eye me thy Lover, lorne for lack of thee,
Which dying, lives in hope of sweet reward,
which hate has hitherto withheld from me,
Constant have I been, still in fancy fast,
ordayn'd by heavens to dote upon thy fair,
Nor will I e're, so long as life shall last,
say any's fairer, breathing vital air;
But when the Ocean sands shall lie vnwet,
Then shall my soul to love thee (Dear) forget.
Sonnet XXXVI.
LOng did I wish before I could attain
the looked for sight I so desired to see,
Too soon at last I saw what bred my baine,
and ever since has sore tormented me;
I saw her self, whom had I never seen,
my wealth of bliss had not been turned to bail,
Greedy regard of her, my hearts sole Queen,
has changed my summers sun, to winters hail.
How often have I, since that first fatal hour,
beheld her all-faire shape with begging eye,
Till she (unkind) has killed me with a lowre,
and bad my humble-suing looks, look by.
O pity me (fair Love) and highest fame
Shall blazed be in honor of thy name.
Sonnet XXXVII.
DID I not love her as a Lover ought,
with purest zeal, and faithfulness of heart,
Then she had cause to set my love at naught,
and I had well deserved to feel this smart,
But holding her so dearly as I do,
as a rare Jewel of most high esteem,
She most unkindly wounds and kills me, so
my nere-stain'd troth most causeles to misdeeme,
Never did one account of woman more,
then I of her, nor ever woman yet,
Respected less, or held in lesser store
her Lovers vows, then she by mine does set.
What rests then, but I despair and die,
That so my death may glut her ruthlesse eye.
Sonnet XXXVIII.
HArken awhile (Diella) to a story,
that tells of beauty, love, and great disdain,
The last, causd by suspect; but she was sorry
that took that cause, true love so much to pain,
For when she knew his faith to be unfeigned,
spotles, sincere, most true, and pure unto her,
She joyed as if a kingdom she had gained,
and loved him now as when he first did woo her.
I nere incurd suspicion of my truth,
(fairest Diella) why will thou be cruel?
Impose some end to undeserved ruth,
and learn by others how to quench hates fuel.
Read all, my Dear, but chiefly mark the end,
And be to me, as she to him, a friend.
THE LOVE OF DOM Diego and Gyneura.
IN Catheloygne, o'repeerd by Pyren Mountains,
(a Province seated in the East of Spain,
Famous for hunting sports and cleerest fountains)
a young heroyck gallant did remain;
He, Signior Dom Diego had to name,
Who for his constant faith had got such fame.
Nature had tryde her deepest skill on him,
(for so the heauen-borne powers had her desired)
With such perfection framed she each lim,
that at her own work she herself admired,
Maiestick Jove gave him a Princely grace,
Apollo wit, and Venus gave his face.
This loue-some youth, kind Natures fairest child,
what for his beauteous loue-alluring face,
And for he was so gracious and so mild,
was deemed of all to be of heavenly race;
Men honored him, and Maidens gave him love,
To make him famous Men and Maidens strove.
Hunting he loved, nor did he scorn to love,
(a truer-louing heart was never known)
Which well his Mistres cruelly did prove,
whose causeless rigor Fame abroad has blown.
But now lets tell, how he on hunting went,
And in what sports such pleasant time he spent.
Soon as the sun had left his watery bed,
(blushing for shame that he so long had slept)
Reviving those which duskie Night made dead,
when for his welcome Lambs on mountains lept.
Up starts Diego, and with shrill-voyc'd horn,
Tells hounds and huntsmen of a cleere-fac'd morn.
Clothed all in Green, ( Syluanus lyuery)
he wore a low-crown'd hat of finest silk,
Whose brim turned up, was fastened with a Ruby,
and underneath, a Pearl as white as milk,
A sleeueles coat of Damask, richly laced
With Indian pearl, as thick as could be placed.
A glistring Cutlax pendent by his side,
(he much esteemed ye beast-dismembring blade)
And halfe-leg'd Buskins curiously ytide
with loopes of burnisht gold full finely made,
Thus goes Diego, chiefest of his name,
With siluer-headed spear to find some game.
Long while it was ere any sport began,
at last a Heart his big-growne horns did show,
Which (winding straight the huntsmen) began to run
as fast as arrow from a Parthyan bow:
In whose purfute (by will of powreful Fates)
Diego lost himself, and all his mates.
Left thus alone in midst of unknown place,
he inuocates the favorable aid
Of Ariadne, who with smalest lace,
freed Monster-killing Theseus, so dismayed,
In worser Laborinth did he now remain,
For none save trees or beasts, could hear him plain.
In these Meanders, straggling here and there,
goes fair Diego, listening to each sound,
Musing twixt purple hope, and palish fear,
he thought to rest him (wearied) on the ground,
But see, he hears a far some forced noise,
A horn, a hound, or else some human voice.
With that, Desire, which scorns least tedious let,
directed him unto that very place,
Where lo to hunt the tymerous Hare, were met
as Knights, so Ladies, fittest for that chase:
Among which, there came a Grace of heavenly fair,
Her name Gyneura, with the golden hair.
Her hair of such corruscant glitterous shine,
as are the smallest streams of hottest sun,
Like stars in frostie night, so look her eyne,
within whose Arches Crystal springs do run,
Her cheeks fair show of purest Porphyrie,
Full curiously were typt with roscall die.
Her lips like ripened Cherries seemed to be,
from out whose concaue Corrall -- seeming Fount,
Came sweeter breath then musk of Araby,
whose teeth ye white of blanched pearl surmount
Her neck the Lillies of Lyguria
Did much exceed; Thus looked fair Gyneura.
These Dryades Diego then bespake,
with sugared terms of mildest courtesy,
And craved to know which way he best might take
with shortest cut, to such a Signiory,
Whereat he named himself; when presently
The Ladies knew him (as a Neighbor by.)
Gyneuras Mother (chief of all the rest)
(for that she knew his birth and his descent)
Desired him home, he grants her such request,
and thanks the Fates that him such hap had lent,
For still on fair Gyneura were his eyes,
And she reciprocally on his replies.
These dumb Ambassadors, Loves chief combatants
tell (softly whispring in each others heart)
Her of humble service; him of acceptance;
his craved love, hers wished they nere might part,
Much talk they had with tongues, more with their eyes,
But (oh) most with their hearts, where true love lies.
Now were they come whereas the good old Lady
might boldly welcome her invited guest,
Where after little talk, (Hunters are hungry)
they all sat down unto a soone-made feast,
The Lovers fed on glaunces of their eyes,
It Is heavenly food when both do simpathize.
At last, the Lady of the house espied
the intercourse of those bright Messengers,
Who inwardly rejoicing, as fast plied
hers on her daughter, fittest Harbengers,
To bid her keep the fairest and the best
Place in her heart, to entertain this guest.
Word back again was sent by her fair light,
how that was done already; and replied,
The Landlord over his Tennant has such might,
that he to enter in is nere denied.
I, in a little corner of my heart
Do live, (quoth she) he has the greatest part.
Diego wished this supper nere would end,
(and yet he longed to be in private place,
To ruminate upon his fairest friend,
and to recount the beauties of her face)
So wished Gyneura, were never such two,
That loved so dearly as these Lovers do.
The gloomy Curtains of the tongue-lesse night,
were drawn so close as day could not be seen,
Now leaden-thoughted Morpheus dyms each sight,
now, murder, rapes, and robberies begin:
Nature craved rest, but restless Love would none,
Diego, Loves young prentice, thus began moan.
Oh heavens, what new-sounde griefs possess my mind,
what rare impassionated fits be these?
Cold-burning Fevers in my heart I find,
whose opposite effects work me no ease,
Then love assailes the heart with hotest fight,
When beauty makes her conqust at first sight.
I little dreamed of this strange event,
(this harts-inthraller, mindes-disturbing Love,
When with my Huntsmen to the woods I went,
Oh near till now did I his greatness prove,
Whose first impression in the Lovers heart,
Till then nere tainted, brings deepest smart.
Thus lay Diego tossing in his bed,
bound to the will of all commanding beauty,
Whom angry Cupid now in triumph led,
expecting from his slave all servile duty,
He might have freed his prisoner so dismayed,
For sighs and groans had double ransom paid.
In like extremes, (Love loves extremity)
did fair Gyneura pass the long-thought night,
She raild against fell Cupids cruelty,
that so would tyrannize over a Maidens spright.
There needs no blows, quoth she, when foes do yield,
Oh cease, take thou the honor of the field.
The valiant Greeks (fair Ilyons fatal Foes)
their tedious ten years siedge for Spartaes Queen
Nere thought so long; (yet long, it was) as those
loue-scorcht enamored (so restles) now ween
This night to be; A night if spent in care,
Seems longer then a thousand pleasant are.
Thus lay they sleeplesse, thoughtfull, ever thinking
on sluggish humor of expected Morn,
They thought that Lovers eyes were never winking
nor sleep they e're in whom Loves newly borne.
He vowed, when day was come, to woo his dear,
She swore such wooing she would gladly hear.
At last, the guyder of the fiery Coach,
drying his locks wet in Eurotus flood,
Began resaluce the world with bright approach,
angry he seemed, for all his face was blood:
Aurorites have had made him look so red,
For loath he was to leave fair Thetis bed.
Scarce were his horses put in readiness,
and he himself full mounted on his seat,
When Dom Diego full of heaviness,
abroad did walk, his night talk to repeat:
Some two hours spent, he in again retires,
And sees his Mistres, whom he now admires.
Whereat inflamed, (love brooks no base delay,
whose fruit is danger, whose reward is pain)
With fine-fil'd terms he gives her the good day,
and blushing, she returns it him again.
Endimeons blush her beauty did eclypse,
His causd by Cynthiaes, hers Adonis lyps.
Boldly encouraged by her mild aspect,
he told her that which Lovers use to tell,
How he did live by her fair eyes reflect,
and how his heart in midst of hers did dwell:
Much eloquence he vsd, it was needles done,
To win that heart which was already won.
Never did the dungeon thief condemned to dye
with greater pleasure hear his pardon read,
Then did Gyneura hear his Oratorie,
(of force sufficient to revive the dead)
She needs must yield; for sure he had the Art,
With amorous heat to fix Dianaes heart.
These Lovers (thus in this both-pleasing parley)
were interrupted by Geneuraes Mother
Who newly up, (age seldom ryseth early)
began straight salute her guest, so did he her,
Some terms of kindness mutually past,
She friendly leads him in, to break his fast.
Which done, (as all good manners did require)
he thankt his Hostis for her courtesy,
And now at length went home for to retire,
where he was looked for so earnestly,
The Lady craved if ere he came that way,
To see her house, and there to make some stay.
Then heavily, and with a dying eye,
(ioylesse) he takes his leave of his fair Love,
Who for to favor him, full graciously,
with loving countenance gave to him her Glove.
Keep this (quoth she) till better fortune fall,
My Glove, my Love, my hand, my heart, and all.
At this large offer, bashful modesty,
with pure Vermilion stained her all fair face,
So looked Calystome at her great belly,
when chaste Ilythia spied her in such case;
Let Lovers judge how grievous us to part,
From two, twixt whom, there lives but one heart.
Now is he gone, who after little travel
attained his house (not pleasing thought desired)
At whose late absence each one much did marvel,
but (come) at his sad looks they more admired,
Great Cupids power, such sadness in him bred,
Who (erst) all loving hearts in triumph led.
One month (consumed in pensiuenes) expired;
to recreate and revive his tired spright,
He now on hunting goes, which he desired,
not for the (once well-pleasing) sports delight;
But for he might some fit occasion find,
To see his Love, on whom was all his mind.
Where being come (suppose his sports proved bad)
Gyneura gave him welcome from her heart,
The Sea-tost Lord of Ithica never had,
after his twenty years turmoile and smart,
More joyful welcome by his constant wife
Then had Diego from his love, his life.
Two days he stayed, whence he would never depart
but custom wil'd that he should now return,
Yet though he went he left with her his heart,
which for their parting heavily began mourn,
But far worse news had it poor heart to grieve,
In that Gyneura would so soon believe.
For sooner was he not departed thence
but straight there comes a Rival of his Love,
Who under true fidellities pretense
wrought wondrous hard Diego to remove,
Nor could at first his oaths or vows prevail,
To make Gyneuraes love one whit to fail.
For yet they lyu'd fast bound in Fancies chains,
stryuing to pass each other in pure love,
But (as there is nothing that for aye remains
without some change.) so do these Lovers prove,
That hottest love has soon'st the cold'st disdain,
And greatest pleasures, have their greatest pain.
For now no longer could she so persevere,
she turns to deadly hate her former kindness,
Which still had lasted; but that Nature ever
strikes into women's eyes such dim-sight blindness,
And such obdurate hardness in their hearts,
They see, nor know, not truest loves deserts.
Gyneura this confirms against her Lover,
whom now (all guiltless) she condemns to die,
That in his deed or thought did nere offend her,
unless by loving her so wondrous dearly:
Such Love, such hate, such lyking, such disdain,
Was never known in one heart to remain.
Thus it was; Diego had an enemy,
(immortal virtue ever lincked is,
With that pale leane-fac'd meager-hewed envy)
who secretly (so falsely) tells his Mis.
How she was mocked; Diego loved another,
And stormed and raged what madness so should move her
To dote on him that else where sets his Love,
he makes you think (quoth he) what ere he list,
That this is true, you easily may prove
for still he wears her favor on his fist,
A Hawke it is; which she (so stands the Mart)
Gives him, he you fair words, but her his heart.
With this incenst, (that sex will soon believe)
soonest when enuies brood to them display it,
Is It true (quoth she) for true love does he give,
such smooth-faced flattry, does he thus repay it?
She never scanned, the truth of this her grief,
Love in such cases, is of quick belief,
Her love to him was never half so great,
(though once she loved him) as is now her hate,
This Momus breath (like bellows) to her heat,
did kindle fiery coals of hot debate.
He plyes her; and exasperates his spite,
And swears, and vows, he tells her but the right.
She (like a frantic Froe of Thessaly
madded with Bacchus brayne-distempring liquor)
Runs here, and there, exclayming furiously
with hideous, uncouth mind-affrighting terror.
Swearing revenge on false Diegoes head,
Whose lying looks in her such madness bred.
Wherewith she inuocates great Nemesis,
and begs the power of her deity,
She tells her case, to Iustice-doing Themis,
and shows how she is wronged mightily.
She leaves no power unsought for, or vnpraide,
That use to help distressed with their aid.
Wronged Diego (little this suspecting)
now thought it time to see his dearest fair,
And (other matters of import neglecting,
he presently to her makes his repair.
Where being come, such welcome he did find,
As at the first did much disturb his mind.
For fair Gyneura would not now be seen,
she sent him word she scorned his fauning flattrie,
And much did grieve, that she so fond had been,
to yield her heart to such deceitful battrie:
Bid him (quoth she) go flatter where he list,
I like not I, that favor on his fist.
Such hap it was, Diego then had brought
his Hawke; (the author of this fell debate)
Which well confirmed her ever doubtful thought,
that now she was resolved on deadly hate,
Bid him (quoth she) depart hence from my sight,
His loath-some presence brings me irksome spite.
It Was hard; that he whose love was never tainted
whose sincere faith was kept inuiolate,
Nay, in whose face all truest love was painted,
should for his spotless truth be paid with hate,
He stone-astonied, like a Dear at gaze,
Admired these speeches in a wondrous maze.
At last he craved this favor be might have,
that she her self would hear what he could say,
So Neptunes Town (quoth she) such lycense gave
to smooth-faced Synon (Ilions last decay)
So Sirens sing until they have their will,
Some poor mistrustlesse Passenger to kill.
She would not hear him speak (oh cruel she)
that causeless this would kill him with disdain,
He swears he is guiltless, vows innocence,
and in such vows, tears down his cheeks did rain,
Those cheeks which stain the blushing of ye morn
Gyneura now most hatefully does scorn.
It Is strange that Maids should ere be so abused,
to credit each malicious-tongued slave,
And to condemn a man (if once accused)
before or proof, or trial, he may have.
Too many such there be; wo's me therefore,
Such light credulity, I must deplore.
When sighs, salt tears, and vows could do no good,
nor sighs, nor tears, nor vows could pierce her heart,
In which, disdain triumphant victor stood
holding in either hand a sable dart,
Wherewith he strikes true love, and stainlesse truth,
Condemning them unto eternal ruth.
Home goes Diego, with a cheerelesse face,
whose steps were led by leaden-footed grief,
Who never goes but with a dead-slowe pace,
until he find some ease, or some relief;
Twould melt a marble heart to see that man,
(Erst, fresh as a new-blowne Rose) so ashie wan.
Where being come, he straight for four days space,
locks him in his chamber, and there did pour
Huge shewers of crystal rain adowne his face,
(for sure he loved her dearly at this hour)
All ouerwhelm'd in waves of sea salt tears,
Some fatal shipwreck of his life he fears.
Wherewith he calls for paper, pen, and yuck,
and for his Hawke, which presently he killed,
Die thou (quoth he) so shall my love nere think,
that for thy sake to any else I yield.
And plucking of her head, straight way he writes,
Who (sending it as token) thus indites.
Lo here (thou cruel fair) that gracious favor,
the Ensign (as thou say) of my untruth,
Behold in what high-priz'd esteem I have her
that gave me it, the cause of all my ruth:
Look as this Hawke, fair Love, so is my heart,
Mangled and torn, cause thou so cruel art.
I swear to thee by all the rites of love,
by heavens fair head, by earth, and black-fac'd hell,
I nere meant other love but thine to prove,
nor in my heart that any else should dwell;
Let this suffize, my joy, my dear, my chief,
My griefs are too too long, though letter brief.
It Was time to end, for floods gusht out amain,
out came the springtide of his brinish tears,
Which whatsoere he writ blot out again
all blubred so to send it scarce he dares:
And yet he did; go thou (quoth he) unto her,
And for thy master, treat, solicit, woo her.
And pray thee (if thy Fortune be so good
as to be viewd by sunshine of her eyes)
Bid her take heed in spilling guiltless blood,
tell her there is danger in such cruelties:
With this, he gave it to the messenger,
Who (making speed) in short time brought it her.
She, when she heard from whom the Letter came,
returns it back again, and straight replied,
My friend (quoth she) had thou not told his name
perhaps thy Letter, had not been denied:
VVhereat she paused; but yet i will see (quoth she)
With what persuading terms, he flatters me.
It Was quickly read; (God knows it was but short)
grief would not let the writer tedious be,
Nor would it suffer him fit words to sort,
but pens it (chaos-like) confusedly.
Yet had it passion to have turned hard stones
To liquid moisture, if they heard his moanes.
But cruel she, more hard then any flint,
worse then a Tygresse of Hyrcania,
Would not be moved, nor could his lines take print
in her hard hurt, so cruel was Gyneura.
She which once loved him deerly, (too too well)
Now hates him more then any tongue can tell.
Oh Nature, chiefest Mother of us all,
why did you give such apt-beleeuing hearts
To women-kind, that thus poor men inthrall,
and will not duly way true loves deserts?
O had their hearts been like unto their face,
They sure had been of some celestial race.
She pittiles, sends back to Dom Diego,
and says, his words cannot inchant her heart,
Vlisses-like, she will not hear Calypso,
nor lend her ears to such intising art.
Bid him (quoth she) from henceforth cease to write,
Tell him his Letters agrauate my spite.
Full heavy news it was to stainelesse love,
to him that had enshrined her in his thought,
And in his heart had honored her above
the world; to who^ all else save her seemed naught.
Nay, unto him, whose person, wit, and fair,
Might surely with the best make just compare.
But (blinded as she was) she steemes him not,
hate and disdain do never brook respect,
She did not know that beauties foulest blot
consisted in true-louing h^rts neglect.
No, she (more stubborn the^ the North-east wind)
Would not admit such knowledge in her mind.
Let those who guiltlesslie have felt disdain,
whose faithful love has been repaid with hate,
Give rightful judgment of Diegoes pain
who bought his favors at the highest rate.
This news such pleasure in his soul had bred,
As has the thief that hearts his judgment read.
After some time, he writes again unto her,
he could not think she would persevere so,
But when he saw her answer like the other
he then surceas'd to send her any more.
But did resolve to seek some uncouth place,
Where he might (unfound out) bewail his case.
Thinking indeed; she by his absence might
at length intenerate her flintfull heart,
And metamorphize her conceived spite
into true love regardaunt of his smart;
He seeks all means (poor Lover) how to gain
His rigorous Lady from such fell disdain.
At last, he calls to mind the Pyren Mountains,
those far-fam'd, woody hills of wealthy Spain,
Which for wild Beasts, and silver visag'd Fountains,
has got the praise of all that there remain:
Hither posts Dom Diego fraught with grief,
Hoping those woods would yield him some relief.
Where, being come, all Pilgrim-like attired,
he pryes about to see if he could find,
Some house-like Cave, for rest he much desired,
his body now was weary, as his mind.
O Gods (quoth he) if youth find such distress,
What hope have I, of future happiness.
With that he sees a Rock made like a Cabin
all tapistred with Natures mossie green,
Wrought in a frizled guise, as it had been
made for Napaea, Mountains chiefest Queen,
At mouth of which grew Cedars, Pines, and Firs,
And at the top grew Maple, Yough, and Poplers.
So, here (quoth he) i will rest my wearied body
in thee (delightful place of Natures building)
Will I erect a griefe-fram'd Monastery,
where night and day my prayers i will never cease yielding,
To thee my decre; (no other Saint I have)
Oh lend thine ears, to him that his heart gave.
Two days were spent in this so pleasant seat,
(this stone-built Palace of the King content)
Before Diego tasted any meat,
or once did drink, more then his eyes had lent.
O irresisted force of purest Love,
Whom pains, thirst, hunger, can no whit remove.
Sometimes, when as he scans her cruelty,
and feels his pains (like Hydreas head) increasing,
He wished the Scithian Anthropophagie
did haunt these woods that live by man's flesh eating;
Or else the Thracian Bessi, so renound,
For cruel murdring, whom in woods they found.
That so the Gordyon knot of his pain
indissoluble e're whiles he did live,
Might be untied when as his heart were slain,
when he (o restfull time) should cease to grieve;
But yet the Sisters kept his vital breath,
They would not let him dye so base a death.
Some other times when as he ways her beauty,
her Venus-stayning face so wondrous fair,
He then does think to wail it is but his duty
since caused by her that is without compaire,
And in this mood unto high Jove he prays,
And praying so, he thus unto him says.
Great Governor of (wheele-resembling) Heaven,
command thy under Princes to mayntaine,
Those heavenly parts which to my love th'aue given,
o let her never feel death, or deaths fell pain.
And first upon thy Sister lay thy mace,
Bid her maintain my Loves maiestick grace.
Inioyne the strange-borne mother-lesse Mynerua,
and her to whom the fomie Sea was Mother,
Still to uphold their gifts in my Gyneura:
let wit and beauty live united with her;
With sweet mouthed Pytho I may not suspense,
Great Goddess, still increase her eloquence.
Thou musical Apollo gave her hand,
and thou her feet (great Sun-Gods dearest love)
To such your rare-knowne gyfts all gracious stand;
and now at last this do I crave great Jove,
That when they dye (perhaps they dye above)
Thou will bequeath these gyfts unto my Love.
On every neighbor Tree, on every stone
(he durst not far range from his secure Cave)
Would he cut out the cause of all his moan,
and curiously with greatest skill ingraue:
There needed no Leontius, his Art,
Grief carueth deepest, if it come from th'hart.
When some stone would not impression take
he straight compares it to his Mistress heart,
But stay, (quoth he) my working tears shall make
thee penetrable with the least-skil'd art.
Oh had my tears such force to pierce her mind,
These sorrows I should loose, and new joys find.
Thou euer-memorable stone (quoth he)
tell those whom fate or fortune here shall lead,
How dearly I have loved the cruel'st she
that ever Nature or the world has bred.
Tell them her hate, and her disdain was causeless.
Oh, leave not out to tell how I was guiltless.
Whereat, the very stone would seem to weep,
whose wrinkled face would be besmeard with tears
O man what ere thou be, thy sorrows keep
unto thy self, quoth he; i will hear no cares.
Tell them that care not, tell Gyneura of thee,
We stones are ruthful, and thy plaints have pierced me.
With this, he seeks a russet-coated Tree,
and straight disclothes him of his long-worne weed
And whilst he thus disroabes him busily,
he felt his halfe-dead heart a fresh to bleed.
Greeuing that he should use such cruelty,
To turn him naked to his foe, winds fury.
But now vncas'd, he gins to carue his cares,
his passions, his constant-lyuing Love,
When (lo) there gushes out clear sap like tears
which to get forth from prison mainly strove,
Since pity dwells (quoth he) in trees and stone,
Them will I love; Gyneura, thou have none.
Yet needs I must confess thou once did love me,
thy love was hotter then Nimphaeum hill,
But now when time affords me, means to prove thee,
thy love then Caucase is more cold and chill,
And in thy cold, like Aethiopyan hue,
Thou art not to be changed from false to true.
O look (fair Love) as in the springing Plant
one branch intwines and grows within another,
So grow my griefs; which makes my heart to pant
when thicke-fetcht sighs my vital breath does smother,
I spoild my cruelty am adiudg'd to death,
Thus all alone to yield my living breath.
Thou have the fairest face that e're was seen,
but in thy breast (that Alablaster Rock)
Thou have a fouler heart; disdain has been
accounted blacker then the Chimnies stock.
O purify thy soul my dearest Love,
Dislodge thy hate, and thy disdain remove,
But all in vain I speak unto the wind,
then should they carry these my plaints unto her,
Me thinks thou still should bear a gentle mind,
(dear loving Zephire) pray, entreat, and woo her;
Tell her twere pity I should dye alone,
Here in these woods where non can hear me moan.
But it is no matter, she is pittylesse
like the Scycilian stone that more it is beat
Does wax the harder; stones are not so ruthlesse,
which smallest drops do pierce though nere so great;
If Seas of tears would wear into her heart,
I had ere this been eased of my smart.
Thus in these speeches would Diego sit
bathing his silver cheeks with trickling tears,
Which (often running down) at last found fit
channells to send them to their standing meares,
Who at his feet (before his feet there stood
A poole of tears) received the smaller flood.
Never had the world a truer loving heart,
Abydos cease to speak of constant love,
Por sure (thou Sygnior Dom Diego) art
the only man that e're hates force did prove;
Thy changelesse love has close inrol'd thy name,
In steele-leau'd book of euer-lyuing fame.
That wide-mouthed time with swallows good deserts
shall shut his jaws, and never devour thy name,
Thou shall be crowned with bays by loving hearts,
and dwell in Temple of eternal Fame;
There, is a sacred place reserved for thee,
There, thou shall live with perpetuity.
So long lived poor Diego in this case
that at the length he waxed somewhat bold,
To search the woods where he might safely chase,
(necessity, thy force cannot be told)
The fearful Hare, the Connie, and the Kid,
Time made him know the places where they bid.
This young-year'd Hermit, one day mong the rest
as he was busily providing meat,
Which was with Natures cunning almost dressed,
dried with the Sun new ready to be eat,
Enraged upon a sudden throws away
His hard-got food; and thus began to say.
O cruel stars, Step-mothers of my good,
and you, you ruthlesse Fates what mean you thus,
So greedely to thirst for my hearts blood,
why joy you so in vnuniting us?
Great powers infuse some pity in her heart
That thus has causeless caused in me this smart.
I never was wont to use such Cookerie,
to drudge and toil when pesants take their pleasure,
My noble birth scorns base-borne slavery,
this easelesse life has neither end nor measure;
Thou great Sosipolis look upon my state,
Be of these nere-hard griefs compassionate.
I feel my long-thought life begin to melt
as does the snow against midday heat of Sun,
(Fair love) thy rigor I have too much felt,
oh, at the last with cruelty have done,
If tears thy stony heart could mollify,
My brinish springs should floe eternally.
Sweet love, behold those pale cheeks washed in woe
that so my tears may as a mirror be,
Thine own fair shaddowe lively for to shoe,
and portraite forth thy Angel-hued beauty.
Narcissus-lyke then should thou my face kiss,
More honny sweet, then Venus gave Adonis.
Fear not Gyneura, fair Narcissus hap;
thy neck, thy breast, thy hand is Lilly-white,
They all are Lillies taken from Floraes lap;
never be thou changed unless to love from spite.
Oh that thou were but then transformed so,
My Summers bliss, would change my winters woe.
If thou did know in what a loathsome place,
I spend my days sad and disconsolate,
What foggie Stigian mists hang over my face,
thou would exile this thy conceived hate;
This Hemisphere is dark, for Sol him shroudes,
My sighs do so conglomerate the clouds.
I told thee, I, (thou cruel too severe)
when hate first began to rise how I was guiltless,
Thine ears were deaffe, yt would not harken ere thee,
thy heart was hardened, rockie, pitiless.
Oh had mine eyes been blind when first they viewed
Would God I had been tonglesse when I sewed thee.
But thou wast then as ready to receive
as I to crave; o great inconstancy,
O it was that fatal hour did so bereave
my blisfull soul of all tranquillity:
Thou then did burn in love, now froz'd in hate,
Yet pity me, sweet mercy never comes late.
Look as the crazen tops of armelesse Trees
or latest downfall of some aged building,
Do tell thee of the North-windes boistrous furies,
and how that Eolus lately has been stirring;
So in my thin cheekt face thou well may see,
The furious storm of thy black cruelty.
But thou inexorable art, never to be wone,
though Lions, Bears, and Tigers have been tamed,
Thy wood-borne rigor never will be done,
which thinks for this thou ever shall be famed;
True, so thou shall, but famed in infamy,
Is worse then living in obscurity.
If thou did know how grievous it is to me
to live in this uninhabited aboade,
Where none (but sorrow) keeps me company,
I know thou would thy hearts hate then unload,
Oh, I did never deserve this misery,
For to deny the truth were heresy.
I tell thee (Love) when secret-tongued night
puts on her mistie sable-coloured veil,
My wrangling woes, within them selves do fight,
they murder hope, which makes their Captain wayle,
And wailing so, can never take his rest,
That keeps such vnrul'd Soldiers in his breast.
So when the clear nights-faults-disclosing day
peepes forth her purple head, from out the East,
These woes (my Soldiers) cry out for their pay,
(and if denied) they stab me, with unrest;
My tears are pay, but all my teates are dri'de
Therefore I must their fatal blows abide.
In these laments did Dom Diego live
long time; till at the last by pourefull fate,
A wandering Huntsman ignorance did drive
unto the place whence he returned but late;
Who viewing well the print of human steps
Directly followed them, and for joy leaps.
At last he came unto Diegoes Cave
in which he saw a sauadge man (he thought)
Who much did look like the Danubyan slave,
such deep-worn furrows in his face were wrought,
Diego much abashed at this sight
Came running forth, him in his arms to plight.
For glad he was (God knows) to see a man,
who (wretch) in two years space did never see any
Such gladness, joy, such mirth, such triumph can
not be set down, suppose them to be many.
But see, long had they not conferred together,
When (happy time) each one did know the other.
With that Diego shows him all his love,
his penance, her first love, and now her hate,
But he requested him hence to remove,
and at his house the rest he should dilate,
Which he denied, only he now does write
By this his friend, unto his hearts delight.
Dear Love (quoth he) when shall I home return,
when will the coals of hate be quenched with love,
Which now in raging flames my heart do burn,
oh, when will thou this thy disdain remove;
Ask of this bearer, be inquisitiue,
And he will tell thee in what case I live.
Inquire of her, whose Hawke has caused this woe,
if for that favor ever I did love her,
And she will curse me that did use her so,
and she will tell thee how I loved another;
It Was thee Gyueura, it was thy fairest self,
I hel'd thee as a Pearl, her drossie pelf.
Then, when thou have found out the naked truth,
think of thy Diego, and his hard hap,
Let it procure in thee some moving ruth,
that thus have causeless cast him from thy lap:
Farewell my dear, I hope this shall suffize,
To ad a period to thy cruelties.
The Messenger to spur forth her desires,
and hasten her unto his well-lou'd friend,
Tells her, how he lies languishing in fires
of burning griefs, which never will have end:
Bids her to fly to him with wings of zeal,
And thus Diegoes pains he does reveal.
Oh Adamantick-minded Maid (quoth he)
why linger you in this ambiguous thought,
Open thine eyes, no longer blinded be,
those wounding looks, thy Lover, dear has bought.
Vnbolt thy hearts strong gate of hardest steel,
O let him now the warmth of pity feel.
Oh let him now the warmth of pity feel,
that long has knocked cold-staruen at thy door;
Wanting loves food he here and there does reele
like to a storme-tost Ship that is far from shore.
Feed him with love that long has fed on cares,
Be Anchor to his soul that swims in tears.
Gyneura, let him harbor in thy heart
rig and amend his trouble-beaten face,
O calm thy hate, whose winds have raised his smart
see him not perrish in this woeful case.
And for in Sea Salt tears he long has lived,
Let him by thy fresh water be relieved.
Oh, shall I tell thee how I found him there,
his house wherein he lived (if live he did,
Or rather spend his time in dying fear)
was built within the ground, all darksom hid,
From Phoebus light, so ugly, hell-lyke Cave,
In all the world again you cannot have.
All made of rug'd hard-fauour'd stones,
whose churlish looks afford the eye no pleasure,
In whose concauity winds breathed horce groans,
to which sad music Sorrow daunc'd a measure.
O'regrowne it was with mighty shadefull Trees,
Where poor Diego Sun nor Moon nere sees.
To this black place repaired every morn,
The fair Oreades pitty-moned gerles,
Bringing the poor Diego so forlorn,
Moss to dry up his tears, those liquid pearls:
Full loath they were to loose such crystal springs,
Therefore this Spunge-like Moss each of the^ brings.
Here dry (say they) thou loue-forsaken man,
those glassy Conduits, which do never cease
On this soft-feeling weed; and if you can,
we all entreat, your griefs you would appease,
Else will thou make us pine in griefe-full woe,
That nere knew care, or love, or friend, or foe.
Straight (like a shooting Commet in the air)
away depart these sorrow-peirced maids,
Leaving Diego in a deep despair,
who now, his fortune, now his fate vp-braides.
O heavens (quoth he) how happy are these trees,
That know not love, nor feel his miseries.
Melts not thy heart (Gyneura) at his cares?
are not thy bright transparent eyes yet blind
With monstrous diluge of o'reflowing tears?
remains there yet disdaines within thy mind?
Disgorge thy hate, O hate him not that loves thee,
Maids are more mild the^ men, yet pity moves me.
Break, break in pieces that delicious chest,
whiter then snow on Hyperboreall hill,
Chase out disdain, deprive him of his rest,
murder and mangle him that rules thy will.
Be it nere said that fair Gyneuraes beauty,
Was ouer-peiz'd by causeless cruelty.
Cruel to him that merrits courtesy,
loathed of thee that does deserve all love,
Basely rejected, scorned most churlishly,
that honors thee above the Saints above.
True love is pricelesse, rare, and therefore dear,
We feast not royal Kings with homely cheer.
Too long it were to tell thee all his merrits,
for in delay consists his long-lookt death,
Post-hast of thine must now revive his spirits,
or shortly he will gasp his latest breath;
Speak fair Gyneura, speak as I desire,
Or let thy vaine-breath'd speeches back retire.
Look, as a man late taken from a trance,
stands gazing here and there in senseless wise,
Not able of himself his head t'aduance,
but stands like a stone in death-like guise,
So looked Gyneura, hanging down her head,
Shaming that folly her so much had led.
Repentant sorrow would not let her speak,
the burning flames of grief did dry her tears,
Yet at the last, words out of prison break,
that longed to utter her hearts inward cares:
And stealingly there glides with heavy pace
A Riuolet of Pearl along her face.
O cease (quoth she) to wound me any more,
with often repeating of my cruelties,
Thou of thy tears (kind man) have shed great store,
when I (vnkinder maid) scarce wet mine eyes.
O let me now bewail him once for all,
It Was none but I that causd his causeless thrall.
Eternal Jove, rain showers of vengeance on me,
plague me for this black deed of wrongful hate,
Be blind mine eyes, they shall not look upon thee
Diego, till thou be compassionate:
And when thou do forgive what I have done,
Then shall they shine like shortest-shaded sun.
O slack thy swift-pac'd gallop winged Time,
turn back, and register this my disdain;
Bid Poets sing my hate in ruthful ryme,
and pen sad Iliads of Diegoes pain:
Let them be writ in plain-seene lines of glass,
To show how loving he, I, cruel was.
Hereat she pausd, tell me sweet sir quoth she,
how I might see my deere-embosom'd friend,
That now (if what is past may pardned be)
unto his griefs I may impose an end;
Wherewith they both agreed, that the next day.
They would eniourney them without more stay.
Long were they not, Desire still goes on Ice,
and nere can stay tell that he has his wish,
Men's willing minds each thing does soon entice,
to have to ye which they would feign accomplish.
But that they came (as having a good guide)
Unto the place where they Diego spide.
Sacred Pymplaides on dip my quill
within the holy waters of your spring,
Infuze into my brain some of your skill,
that joyfully of these I now may sing:
Those Lovers now twixt whom late dwelt annoy,
Swymming in seas of ouer-whelming joy.
But, pardon me you Dames of Helycon,
for thus inuoking your diuinest aid,
Which was by me (unworthy) called upon,
at your rare knowledge I am much dismaide;
My barren-witted brains are all too base,
To be your sacred learnings resting place.
Thus, of themselves, in pleasures ecstasy,
these Lovers now embrace them in their arms,
Speechless they are, eye countersixt on eye,
like two that are coniur'd by magique charms,
So close their arms were twined, so near they came
As if both man and woman were one frame.
In the end, (as does a Current lately stayed,
rush mainly forth his long-imprisoned flood)
So brake out words; and thus Dyego said,
what my Gyneura? O my hearts chief good,
Is It possible that thou thy self should daigne
In seeing me to take so wondrous pain.
Oh, speak not of my pain (my dearest love)
all pain is pleasure that I take for thee,
Thou that so loyal and so true do prove,
might scorn me now, so credulous to be:
Then sweet Diego, let us now return,
And banish all things that might make us mourn.
Twere infinite to tell of their great gladness,
their amorous greetings, and their souls delight,
Diego now had exiled grief and sadness,
ravished with joy whilst he enioyde her sight.
Let it suffice, they homeward now retire,
Which sudden chance both men and maids admire.
Gyneura now delights but in his presence,
she cannot once endure him from her sight,
His loue-ful face is now her souls sole essence,
and on his face she dotes both day and night.
She nere did once disdain him half so much,
As now she honors him, loves force is such.
Diego now wrapped in a world of pleasure,
imparadiz'd in having his desire,
Floting in Seas of joy above all measure,
sought means to mittigate loves burning fire,
Who walking with his love alone one day,
Discharged his mind, and thus began to say.
O fair Gyneura, how long will it be
ere safron-robed Hymen do unite us?
My soul does long that happy hour to see.
O let the angry Fates no longer spite us,
Lingering delays will tear my grieved heart,
Let me no longer feel so painful smart.
Gyneura, which desired it as her life,
tells him that pain shall shortly have a cure,
Shortly quoth she, I Will be thy married wife,
ty'de in those chains which ever will endure,
Be patient then, and thou shall plainly see,
In working it, how forward I will be.
And so she was; no time did she mispend,
wherein she gets not things in readiness,
That might to Hymen's rites full fitly tend,
or once conduce to such their happiness,
All things prepared, these Lovers now are chayned
In marriage bands, in which they long remained.
These, whilst they lived, did live in all content,
contending who should love each other most,
To we pure love, proud Fame her ears down lent,
and through the world, of it does highly boast.
O happy he to whom love comes at last,
That will restore what hate before did wast.
Then (dearest love) GyneuryZe at the last,
And I shall soon forget what ere is past.
AND now farewell, when I shall fare but ill,
flourish and joy, when I shall droope and languish,
All plentious good awaite upon thy will,
when extreme want shall bring my soul deaths anguish.
Forced by thee (thou mercy-wanting maid)
must I abandon this my native soil,
Hoping my sorrows heat will be allayd
by absence, time, necessity or toil.
So, now adieu; the winds call my depart.
Thy beauties excellence, my rudest quill
Shall neuer-more unto the world impart,
so that it know thy hate, I have my will;
And when thou hear'st that I for thee shall perrish,
Be sorrowful. And henceforth true love cherrish.
FINIS.
Poco senno basta a chi Fortuna suona.

