AN ANSWER TO THE VNTRVTHES, PVBLISHED AND PRINTED IN SPAIN, IN GLORY OF
THEIR SVPPOSED VICTORY achieved against our English NAVY, and the Right
Honorable CHARLES Lord HOWARD, Lord high Admiral of England, etc. Sir FRANCIS
DRAKE, and the rest of the Nobles and Gentlemen, Captains, and Soldiers of our
said Navy. First written and published in Spanish By a Spanish

Gentleman; who came hither out of the Low Countries from the service of the
prince of PARMA, with his wife and family, since the overthrowe of the Spanish
Armada, forsaking both his country and Romish religion; as by this Treatise
(against the barbarous impiety of the Spaniards; and dedicated to the Queens
most excellent Majesty) may appear.

Faithfully translated by I. L.

LONDON, Printed by John Iackson, for Thomas Cadman. 1589.

England to her Queen, S. D.
Eternal years, thee prosper and uphold,
(My sovereign Queen) the MIGHTY HAND,
And grant thee morn and evening to behold,
Health, content, joy, on thee, and me thy land.
Treasure heaped up, of silver and of gold,
Both day and night, within thy presence stand.
And for reward befall upon thy foe,
punishment and pain, with ever during woe.
England to her Admiral.
The Lion white, his looks against the sky,
His visage grim, his dreadful frowning browe,
Does well bewraie, my Howard, to the eye.
Triumphing stands, who rules my Navy now:
And long may thou it rule: far of, thy day to die:
That frighted foes, may never dare again
To sail my seas, nor once approach my Maine.
I. LEA.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, CHARLES, LORD HOWARD, BARON OF Effingham, Knight of
the most Noble order of the Garter, Lord high Admiral of England, and one of
her Majesty's most Honorable privy counsel, I. L. wishes long life in
perfect health, with great increase of honor.
WHen Caesar swaid the dictatorship of Rome, those (right Honorable) that wrote
the Romain conquests, offered their papers under his patronage as coveting a
martial Mecoenas, for works treating of high performed chivalrie: Entering into
the sight of the Romain method, chauncing upon a Spanish Pamphlet, dedicated
to the Queens most excellent Majesty, containing an answer against certain
untruths published and printed in Spain: when I noted that virtue could not
but be praised, even by a late enemy, (though now reconciled) a stranger, naie
a Spaniard, forceced by truth it self, to defend the woorthines of our English
Nobility, against his own countriemen: I could not (right Honorable) but (for
the benefit and farther encouragement of my country) publish his works in
English, and presume to present it to your good Lordship; who, being (most
woorthilie) high Admiral of England, and chief agent, in so honorable a
service, did blazon to the Spaniards the matchless resolution, of your
knightly prowess. And although Sir Francis Drake be most touched in their
invectives, as an enemy cheefely noted for his private prejudice, offered them
in Spain, and in the Indies (and as they thought) the chief governor also in
this honorable action; Yet now feeling and knowing the valor of your honors
woorthines; time shall make your name as fearful to the Spaniards, as was that
of high minded Scipio against the Numidians. And somewhat (by comparison) to
note (right Honorable) the slacknes of Englishmen, in yielding high deservers,
(in so honorable and profitable a service) their due: I say, that if the Duke
of Medina, (being in the same place for Spain, as your Honor for England) had
gotten (as God forbid) the like glorious conquest against our English Navy, as
your Honor woone against the Spanish Armada; the chronicles of Spain had bin
stuffed with his praises, the clergy had soong him in, with Te Deum, through
the streets of Toledo, made him triumphs in his town of S. Lucar, and in fine
Deified him, and registered him amidst their catologue of Saints. If then (right
Honorable) the Spaniards setting out such hyperbolicall trophies of their
co^quests, seek by such praises to encourage their nobility: It behooveth us,
not to be stained with ingratitude, but to publish the prowess of such worthy
men as still with their blood do paint out, the woorthines of their
resolutions. Amongst whom your Honor having the cheifest place, as high
Admiral of so victorious a fleet, and performing in your own person such
honorable service therein: I humbly present this my simple translation to your
Honors patronage, as the Romans did their martial discourses, to the
Dictator, hoping your Honor will bear with the harshnes of my style, in that
verbally it answers the authors mind, and to accept of my well intended
meaning, with that honorable courtesy, that your noble mind has always
extended toward others: In which hope resting, I wish to your lordship, such
health and happiness, with such most honorable success to all your attempts, as
your Honor can desire, and I imagine.

Your Honors most humble in all obedience JAMES LEA.

TO THE QVEENES MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY ELIZABETH BY THE GRACE OF GOD, QVEENE OF
ENGLAND, FRANCE, AND IRELAND, DEFENDER of the faith, etc. all blessedness, good
hap, victory, with increase of triumphant reign, and life everlasting.
SAint John Chrysostom (most renowned Queen) says in one of his Homilies of
the praise of S. Paul, that such is the condition of falsehood, that of it
self it comes to naught; and on the contrary, that truth is knit together
with such strength, that well it may be assaulted, but never conquered: and that
deceit yields unto her, as having no power to resist hirs. I remember to have
read in the 3. book of Esdras; being questioned before Darius king Esdras 4.
of Persia, what might be the thing of greatest strength, it was agreed and
concluded, that it was truth; which not only overcommeth those things that
time goes on consuming, but triumphs also over time it self: false opinion,
for a while, may bear authority, but at length truth prevails: whose nature
is wonderful, for where most force is opposed against her, there becomes
she most strongest, and the more they strive to throw her down to the
bottom, and to bury her in the bottomless pit of oblivion, the more she
ascends aloft, and shows hirselfe in the highest: even as the oil, though
it be put under the water, yet straight comes above it, so is truth, for in
case men would put it under falsehood, yet it shall arise to the highest place,
for it abides not to lie long in covert. For even as a comet appears for a
season, in which it shows some brightness, but yet endures not long, because
though it seem a star, yet is none: even so is deceit, though it may be
believed for a time, by a false appearance of light, yet at length it shall
vanish and consume away, when as truth shall endure to the end. Truth is a thing
so precious and belooved of God, that al they who seek to excel in virtue, do
prefer her before treasure, choosing to be behind in wealth, to go forward
with truth: And finally they esteem the hazarding of their life (which soon
passes away) for well employed, for the love of truth which abides for ever.
David, preferring truth before al worldly matters, says: Take not o Lord thy
truth out of my mouth. In ancient histories we read Psalm. 119.
that Simandrus prince of Egypt, commanded his picture to be engraved on his
tomb, and a jewel on his breast, with his eyes fixed thereon, which jewel
was the image of truth, as records Diodor. Sicul. Elianus says, that
Pithagoras called truth a thing divine. And of the same Pitha. it is written,
that he said, that for a man to make himself a God, he ought to speak the
truth. Truth is a center where virtues repose, the north star of the virtuous,
the balm of the wounded, and finally it is the butte whereat many shoot, and
the white that few do hitte. All these I bring (renowned Queen) that they who
shall read my answer may know (that in the defense I make of the truth,
which happened in both Navies) that my intent is to deal in truth and not to
flatter your Majesty, you being an enemy to adulation: and I knowing it to be
as far from the princely nature of your Majesty to hear it, as from mine, to
write it. And that you have in memory the saying of S. Hierome; that he that
would be accounted worthy of true praise, should not seek it of men. That
which here I mean to speak of are certain truths, so clear and manifest,
that they publish themselves. For who sees not the great regard in your
Majesty of divine woorship, the great devocion to the sacred scripture, the
fulness of Religion that shines in your Majesty, the always opened large hand
to the poor: And who sees not more clearly with his eyes, then I can utter
with my words, the singular prudencie of your Majesty, your sound justice,
your excellent fortitude, your mavelous temperancie, your firm truth, your
clemency, your benignity, your good government, your royal condition, and
the shining of your works, enterlaced with divine love. Your Majesty may be
said to be a coffer wherein nature has laid up her treasure, and her
gathering together of those perfections, which were repartederst, amongst
many, Such finites answer well to the trunck, from whence your Majesty
descends, even from that invincible king, and most christian prince, Henry the
8. whose worthy deeds live in the remembrance of this present age, and shall
never die in the times to come. These and many such perfect virtues of your
Majesty, have wrought in me such love, that I have bin very desirous to do
you some service, and determining to effectuat these my desires, which long I
have bread in my breast, I purposed to offer to your Majesty this my answer,
but I chanced to meet with a new fear, which made me doubt. For perceiving it
not, to deserve to appeer before so excellent a Queen: I stood in suspense
what to do, being driven into many and sundry thoughts, as having experience
that boldness without deliberation, most commonly causes repentance; At length
the one and the other considerations felt and waied together, I found love, to
overcharge and way down respect. Through which I determined to dedicate it to
your Majesty, thereby as well to show the desire I have to serve you, as also
that this short answer and poor work, belonging to your Majesty, may
receive that authority, which it cannot have in being mine, and the dark mist
which it has on my part, may be banished by the resplendent shining, that it
shall receive from your Majesty, whose Royal person the Lord Almighty
preserve and prosper in his blessed service,

Amen.
Your Majesty's humble and loyal servant which kisseth your Royal feet and
hands, D F. R. de M.

The Answer.
I Marvel good Sir, to see a man of so noble a lineage, and no less endued
with the gifts of nature than others, should have your ears so opened to hear
the rumors and lies, which the scoffing and gibing flatterers do write you: and
I wonder not so much in that you credit them, as at the speed wherewith your
Honor does write them. Truly I am sorry for it. Look into your self, and you
shall see, that they who write you such novelties, do but fill your sides with
sharp darts. Your Honor writes to Spain, that it is a matter most true, that
the Lord high Admiral of England, was come, running away with 25. or 26. ships
unto London, and that he had lost his ship that was Admiral, and that this was
written for a matter most certain, by persons of credit from London. I know
not what men of credit they should be, that wrote a matter of so great
discredit. But at leastwise this I know, that if your Honor were in London, we
might sing unto you the song of Don Pedro: More enemies than friends have
compassed his person. For in truth I know not so much as one in that city,
that is your friend. You say farther in your letter, that the Admiral was
lost; hardly may a ship be lost that had for her governor so noble a captain,
as is, that noble gentleman my L. Charles Howard; who, when fortune should have
bin so wholly his enemy would rather have chosen to die than fly. But both the
Admiral and his ship that was Admiral, entered both together (as together they
erst went forth) into the river of London, triu^phing in the victory, that the
Lord vouchsafed to give them, unto whom they yield all praise and thanks. Your
Honor says farther, that Drake is prisoner: I demand by whom? Know you not
that from the The word, Drago which signifies a Dragon, made the Author thus
to run upon Draque, whom the Spaniards do not let to call also Drago.
Dragon the Lion flies, the Bear fears, the Oliphant hides himself, the
Lybard trembles, the Tygre retires, the Ounce dismaieth, and the rest of the
beasts tremble? If then this be so, who should he be, that should take Drake,
that the venom and poison of his sword, bereft him not of his life? It was
then an unbridled boldness in him that wrote your Honor this matter. Concerning
which, read a short letter, which I make in answer of that of Diego Perez
postmaster of Logronio, and therein (although I deal softly with him) you may
see, who Drake is, and what he has done in the Indies and in Spain, and
chawing it in the cud, you shall know some part of his valor. Your honor says,
that if he be not prisoner he is slain, in these words. Drake is either taken
or dead. The Ginets in Spain deliver themselves flieng and hurt the more, so
that they do more harm flieng then assaulting, but on the sea it is contrary.
For if his enemy fled from him, who took him or slew him? If your Honor in
saying Drake is prisoner or dead, had added, he is prisoner to her Majesty;
then would I be silent, for that he is so loyal a subject unto her, that,
though free, yet always in her prison, and sacrificed day and night to do her
service, and for and in all to accomplish her will. And in saying dead, had
your Honor named the disease whereof he died, we would say that the hour were
come, wherein the Lord almighty had called him unto himself: but finally he is
both free and alive, and as loyal a vassal to her Majesty as ever. Farther
your Honor says, that, the Queen commanded that there should be no talk of
her Navy: giving thereby to understand, that it was in regard of the great
damage her said Navy had received. She commanded no such matter; but had she
so commanded, it had bin a thing both holy and just, for as she is an enemy
to all vainglory, even so the spoils of her victory and triumph, she
offered it all to God, from whom it came. And if, for not receiving these
letters so plenty as at other times, you gathered, that it was ordained by her
Majesty, that they should not write, you gathered amiss, for the cause was no
other, but that for the general repairing of all people to give thanks to God
(at the Churches) from whom all their good proceeded, they became unmindful of
all worldly affairs. Great ods between this celebration of victory and that
which was used in Spain, where in steed of singing Psalms and praises unto
God, they made fire and sports, and blind men in open places, pirkt up, upon
fishmongers stals, soong songs, making the people believe that they were
victors: the contrary where of is true. Your letter relates farther, that her
Majesty had 30000. men between Dover and Margate, raw soldiers, here to I
answer; that this balance runs too fast: for that her Majesty's camp was
hard by Tylberrie, in the province of Essex, a far different place from Dover
and Margate. And that her Majesty was with them, it was so; and mark your
Honor what I say, that the sight of Julius Caesar in his host, wrought not so
great effect, as did the sight of her Majesty amongst hirs; for she being a
valiant Mars, and showing her self a most expert warrior, clad her soldiers
with the webs and fels of Hercules, where there was not any that esteemed
himself in less than a Hanniball or a Cevola: whereunto they were invited, by
the sight of a tender woman, being the first that put hirselfe to such a
travel, for Christendom, the peace of her country, and for the quietness of
her subjects. And who so had seen her Majesty, I say not, that he should have
seen an angry Mars, a Julius Caesar, or Charlemaine, for all this is wind in
comparison of her: But he should have seen a Debora, a Hester, a Ruth, and a
Judith, and finally he should have seen a Valor second to none. You said
farther in your letter, that her Majesty went to and from the Camp, because
the Catholics had made a mutiny. Your Honor knows that it is an old
Proverb, that when you see your neighbors beard a shaving, prepare yours to
the washing basen. And in this country they remember what the Gospel says,
Every kingdom divided against it self, shall be Luke 11.
desolate. And the experience hereof, they find in their neighbors the french
men, that for not having peace amongst themselves, their poor kingdom is
destroyed. Concerning this matter I have heard it questioned in this country,
by some persons of no base calling, who say plainly that while your Honor was
here, they never had any perfect quietness amongst them, and since your
departure they have had no broils nor Save such as he left kindled before his
going.
strife: and it may be, that the going of matters in such sort in the kingdom
of France, so troubled and kindled as they are, that it is by reason your
Honor is there, and that your absence might quench so great a fire. You say
farther in your letter, that there was none other ship brought hither but that
of Don Pedro de Valdes. Heerin is the publishing of victory gainsaid, and
loss, evident; the which ship, had your Armada bin victors, they had not
permitted to be brought hither, neither was Don Pedro de Valdes, so ill a
soldier, nor for so little, as to suffer himself to be taken by a people
already overcome, and running away; neither the soldiers which he had with
him (which were four hundredth at least) of less valor then the rest of those
of the Armada, they were rather every man to conquer a kingdom, and to give
a thousand victories. But the thrice noble Lord, high Admiral, not flieng, but
assaulting, and he the captive or slain Drake, his fetters broken, and risen
from death; fettered the conquerers, and bereaved their life, who lived a
little before. In conclusion there were no more ships brought into England but
that of Don Pedro, as for the rest (for a better demonstration of the truth)
they were contented that their friends and neighbors should participate with
them; and so they left a Galleasse at Callis, wherein amongst others, was
slain Don Hugo de Moncada, and Don Georje Manrique, (being Veedor General)
escaped to carry the true relation thereof unto Spain. And the Saint Matthew,
and S. Philip, being two most strong Gallions, were carried to Flushing, out of
one of the which escaped Don Francisco de Toledo, with six and thirty
soldiers, which were the remainder of four or five hundredth, which he had with
him: and in the other was taken Don Diego Pimentel, with all his men save those
that were slain, and many other ships (by divine providence) by force of wind
and sea, were destroyed upon the coast of Ireland. If I have bin large in
answering your Honor, the occasion excuses me; and the matter which is wider
then the sea, makes me think to be worthy reprehension for being so short.
Yet notwithstanding, time, which gave an end to these my wearisome reasonings,
seemed to call upon me to pass on farther. And having cast about, I fell into
consideration with my self, what occasion I might have to enlarge farther,
since (though briefly) I had answered to the letter: and I perceived that the
law of love, and Christianity in the Lord, did bind me to admonish you like
a true neighbor. The law of love in Christ says, Love your enemies. And this
Matthew. 5.
said Christ after that he had said, Ye have heard, that it has bin said,
thou shall love thy friend and hate thy enemy; and he passes on saying, and
do good to them that hate you. There is another law which says: Ye shall not
render ill for ill, but good for evil. These and such other, sacred words do
bind me to love your Honor: but not your condition and proceedings, for if I
should have respect thereunto, I should follow the law of old, Thou shall
love thy friend, and hate thy enemy; and I should be more bound to hate then
love you. But for that the Gospel commands me, To do good to those that hurt
me, and to render good for evil, and to love my enemies: I will do both the
one and the other, so that I will both love, and do you good. I mean not to do
you good, by bestowing treasures upon you, because I have them not, but I will
give you of that, which books have given me, which are certain counsels, by
mean whereof, it may be, you shall live less troublesome, and not so much
abhord: whersoever I come I hear, that your Honor is an enemy to peace, and
unquiet. To the first I answer, that Et ex consequenti, you are an enemy to
God. When Christ our Redeemer departed from his disciples, amongst other gifts
which he gave them, and free mercies bestowed upon them, he gave them his
peace, and it was neither the peace of the world, nor that of Judas, for these
are peaces of death and damnation, unwoorthily called peace, but such a peace
as was a pledge of blessedness. Blessed are the peacemakers, says the Gospel.
I might allege many places to show, how grateful that peace is Matthew. 5.
unto God, and they that love it, and how he abhors the contemners thereof,
and so I admonish your Honor to cloth your self with peace, and let it be
that of Christ which saves, and not that of Judas which betraieth, nor that of
the world which kills. To the second, that I am informed you are troublesome,
I answer, that if for the first you are an enemy to God, that by this you are
the like unto Heaven; and for confirmation of this truth, you must understand,
that of diverse senses, diverse are the objects. So that (according to Aristotle)
one sense cannot judge directly Aristotle.
of the object of an other sense, for the taste judges not of the color, nor
the sight of the taste, rather beholding Sugar, we judge it to be white, and
tasting it, we judge it to be sweet. So they that have the earth for object
cannot judge well of Heaven, and they who live according to the flesh,
comprehend not the sweetness of the spirit, and they that go entangled in the
affairs of the world and seated in their wiles, attain not the delectation of
spiritual repose. Such is your Honor, who being entered into the laberinth of
the restless labors of life, you cannot make an end to know the sweetness of
the tranquillity of life it self. Open your eyes, and behold that much self
trust grows not but of small knowledge, and you shall see, that the first
degree for a man to know little, is, to suppose that he knows much. I hold
that for a most certainty, which Saint Hierom says, Hierom.
that the acknowledging of imperfection, is, a certain kind of perfection in a
man: regard that it is not a small matter for a man to know, that he knows
nothing. And if your Honor knew this of your self, you would become peaceable,
and live a quiet life, and so be accounted quiet. Where the river goes
stillest, there has it most water, and is deepest; and where it makes most
noise, there has it least water: so the quiet and still man is of great depth,
and is to be holden and accounted of greatly; and he that prates much is he
that does least, for the ignorant have great sound, and small depth. The wise
are free from passions, far from molestations, and full of tranquillity. So
then, to have a share in heaven, a good life on earth, and to be accounted
wise, it is to be quiet, and a peacemaker. And now let the former turmoiles
suffice, and the hurt that you have already done unto Spain by your
unquietnes, giving her so ill counsel, making her to leese Armada, treasure,
munition, credit and reputation; and that which is more to be lamented, so many
thousands of souls: for verily Spain should have been full both of men and
money, were it not for so long and costly wars, and altogether unprofitable.
Whereby it had been better for thee, o Spain, to have contented thee with thy
towe, than to have desired the hollands of Flanders, where there is scant a
span of earth, that has not been watered with the blood of thy Spaniards. And
to have contented thee with thy pots of clay, rather than to have lusted for
the silver dishes of English men, which are so hardly gotten. I thought also
here to advertise you more at large, than I did in my answer to your letter,
concerning the few friends which here you have, rather I put you out of doubt,
that you are to make no account of them, no, not to think that you have a
friend in London: to prove this to be true, I will avail my self with that
saying of Saint Paul, who says, that Charity well ordered, must begin in
himself. If then this be so, who would you have to be such a friend to your
Honor, that he should cease to be a friend to himself, his wife, children,
and substance. May you be persuaded that your friends here, should open
their doors to their enemies, to the end to rob them of their goods? for in
very truth, not one in this kingdom (though he had a safe conduct from your
Honor) should have escaped from being robbed, slain, or dishonored. If this
then be true, how can you hope for any friends here? Rather, in truth, if you
would consider and open your eyes, you shall see that all are your mortal
enemies. If it be the duty of a friend to deal truly, and he that writes you
most news, does notso, then have you here no friend. As also, he is no
friend, that requires of his friend, what is unjust and unlawful, and this
the very Gentiles understood, for so Marcus Tullius teaches, even as I speak
it, in his book of Mar. Tu. Pericles.
Friendship, and before him Pericles taught the same, when a certain friend
requested him to affirm a lie for him and that with an oath, he answered him
saying: It is lawful to be a friend, yet no farther than the altar. And so
records Plutarch. Aul. Gel. Bruson.
Plutarch, Aulus Gellius, and Bruson: Pericles meant, that friendship was good,
and worthy to be conserved, with gifts given and received, but that it should
be in such sort that it should not be against the good liking of God. For
friends ought not to impugn religion, nor pass the limits of conscience:
friends are bound to do one for another, so that their good works pass not the
bounds of reason, nor the limits of virtue. Publius Rutilius denied a certain
friend a matter, because it was unjust, which made his friend to Publius
Rutilius.
say; Why should I account of thy friendship, if thou will not do as I request
thee? And Rutilius replied: But why should I make account of thine, since thou
requestest me that which I ought not to do? Authors heerof are Valerius Maximus
in his sixth book, and Brusonius in his first. Since therefore your Honor
demands unjust things of English men, as are, to admit entrance to their
enemies, and to suffer themselves to be robbed, dishonored, massacred, and to
be traitors to their Sovereign: how can you challenge them for your friends?
True friends ought to be just, and to love the souls of their friends better
than their bodies; to be more affectionate to their souls than to their
substance, and more to their consciences than to their lives. To do any good
deed to a friend, is also the office of a friend; even as at the play of
tennise, it is not enough to reach the ball in the air, but also to strike
him, and send it from whence it came: in like sort in friendship, it is not for
one friend always to expect good turns of the other, but also to endeavor to
requite it: there should never be a (take) without a (regive:) and good deeds
must result from both parts full of love. And since your Honor will take and not
give (except it be death and dishonor) we will not accept you for a friend. You
have men that are altogether sand without lime, all words and no deeds; and in
England they account your Honor for one of the number: from which England and
your pretended friends therein, remoove your bloody hand, so shall you live
more in quiet and rest, and then shall you have friends indeed: and one that
so means to be your friend, since the victory that this kingdom atchived
against the Spanish Armada (or better to say, that God gave them) made this
Sonet in praise of the noblenes of this kingdom, wherein are many Caesar's and
Pompeies, unto which valor and magnanimity, they are stirred up by the love of
her Majesty their Queen: a matter well known to your Honor, insomuch that by
none of your practices you have prevailed to pervert them.

A Sonet to England.
PRoud Rome her ensigns, bravely displaies
In cruel sort, thy famous name to blot
If that she could, but all to weak, God wot,
Envieng still thy Crown, as she has done always.
The Spanish arm, her instrument to do the feate
Did furrow up the sea, but all his labor lost,
Yet marvel not there at, though they were beat and tossed:
For so had Persia been, and Macedon the great.
Assault thou may, where that thou please and when,
Though doubtful, sharp, and strong it seem to men,
And never dread the conquest at the length,
For from thy feats heroical, is spread both far and near,
Of famous and renowned deeds, a river great and clear.
Which fills the earth full of thy praise and strength.
The copy of a letter sent unto Spain by Iuan de Gamarra, a Spanish merchant,
dated the 31. of September 1588.
THat the English have lost 40. ships at Ho, ho, master lier, not too fast I
pray you, for 40. is much at one clap for them to take which still ran away.
one encounter, where they could not fly, the which was in Luxaten, a port of
Scotland, unto which place the English had followed the Spanish Armada from
before Callis; and they thinking that our Armada had gone to take this port,
got before ours to defend it: but ours seeing themselves so near the English,
(and that they could notretire, as they had often done before, running for
succor to the English ports) had them now as they would; and set upon them so
strongly, that they soonke 20. ships, and took 26. safe and sound. And the
rest perceiving their destruction, fled without men, all rent and torn; and
then (it is reported) that our Armada took the said port, where they are in
very good harborow, as all affirm. Thus is the news, God grant them such
success as is needful; and this is understood by a Post that is come from
Callis: and that it is commanded in England, upon pain of loss of life and
goods, that none write news to any place, which is a confirmation of the
aforesaid.

The Answer.
THree or four times I laid aside my pen, at such time (Sen^or Gamarra) as I
purposed to answer your blurs: for I thought it a matter very improper to
answer to a thing so devoid of reason and truth, and that, that was sufficient,
which time it self has long since answered. But seeing your estate deserves
no less, I could not excuse my self: but first receive from me this counsel
for another time; and is, that you show not your self so very a merchant; for
if it be lawful for a merchant to lie in his prises, yet is it not, to lie in
his writings; and you would be so wholly a merchant, that you have played
bankrout with truth. It seems unto me, that you being a merchant of cloth,
will become a merchant of wines; and proclaiming wine, you sell vinegar, giving
very cheap, that which has cost you so dear: and you sell victory, being no
victor; and you promise palm, yours being the nettle. You say in your letter,
that the Spanish Armada won 46. ships, 20. soonke, and 26. taken, and that
this was in Luxaten a port in Scotland. You take an ill course for a
Chronicler; for the English Navy was not at also far as Scotland, neither did
my Lord high Admiral break the order which he had of her Majesty, which was,
not to leave her own ports ungarded: and in this you may know the humility of
the Queens Majesty, in that she would not put her self so much to offend, as
to defend her own; and therefore that befell her, which Saint James mentions
in his fourth chapter; God resists the proud, and gives his Iam. 4.
grace to the humble: and so as God saw the humility of his servant Elizabeth,
he raised her up, and gave her the victory over her enemies. The pride of a
Pharao in Egypt, God confounded Exodus 14.
by the waters of the red sea, as in Exodus. And the pride of your hautie
Armada has he confounded in the Ocean sea. God is he that takes in hand the
cause of his servants. This then being true, you have small reason to say, that
you soonke and took so many ships. Though when the Egyptians were drowned,
there escaped none to carry news thereof unto Egypt; there are some gone from
hence, which have carried the news of the rest unto Spain, whereby yours will
be thought of small moment. I purpose not here to give you a particular
account of the ships, which the English Armada took and soonke, nor of those
which have perished in Ireland, neither the number of prisoners and slain;
because it is the doings of the Lord and his works, and from him comes all
goodness, on whose divine Majesty this whole kingdom has put and laid his
trust, and to him alone do they give the glory of this victory, singing to
him Psalms and Hymns, as they did in the city of Bethulia, after the
beheading of Holofernes. So, to conclude, Judith 16.
neither went the English Armada into Scotland, neither brake they the order of
their roial Sovereign the Queens Majesty, rather they visited their own
ports, gathering (as it were) under their wings their scattering chickens. This
(friend John Gamarra) is true, and since you knew it not at the beginning, when
first you became an Historiographer, meddle not hence forward any more in that
office (for it is for you a matter too high) that it befall you not, as unto
Icarus, and Phaeton, and occupy your self in weight and measures, Burse
affairs, and Cash books; and if you be weary of this, then were it best for
you to become a crier of figs about the streets; or a cobbler, or matmaker, for
this shall be easier for you, than to become a Chronicler. A Chronicler ought to
consider what he says, and of whom, to write the certainty, and to follow the
truest authors, and of most credit: You (Sen^or Gamarra) observe none of all
these. If thou did consider the valor of the Queens Majesty, her courage
and greatness; thou would not dare to publish such falsehoods. And know that
it is such and so much, that, for not being able to utter it, I think it
better to keep it silent, than to come short therein: for that I should need
for such a purpose, not one Angelical tongue, but a thousand. To compare her
with Hester for humility; in compassion to an Abigail; in prudencie and valor
to a Debora; and in courage to a Judith. Notwithstanding, of that little light,
which I have gotten of her valor, I will make you partaker, and so accept of
these poor verses, made with a greater love and good will, than with knowledge
or art. Praieng you (that since you are resident in Andwerpe in the affairs of
the Malvendas) that you write no more such fained letters, using for excuse, to
date them from Roan.

SONET.
GReat Elizabeth, whose fame at this day
From the one, to the other poale, is spread so and known,
By having incountred fierce Mars in his way,
That now not a God, his Godhead is flowen.
The glorious deeds, which the world had raised
To the highest room; when viewing thy acts
Start back, and gave place, as things all amazed,
Undoing the done, and hiding their facts.
To say that thou do, surpass and excel
All the whole world; thy battles and deeds
Do say now the same, thy standerds it tell,
To search for antiquities, which prove now but weeds,
Is for to go warm us, by smoke of wet straw:
Thou winnest more glory, than yet any saw.
The copy of a letter which Pedro de Alva (a Spanish merchant) wrote from Roan
unto Spain, the first of September 1588.
I Write no news of the Spanish Armada, for that they be varieng, and I
desirous to write nothing but truth. Now by news which run from many places,
from Callis, Deep, Holland, and by some presupposings, from England and other
places, it is held for a matter most certain, that they have fought with the
English, spoiled and suncke many of them, and taken others, and that the rest,
(reported to be 27. ships) are returned spoiled, to the river of London being
all that could escape. With this post there goes one from George Seguin of
Callis, who says that Masters and mariners of Zeland, have affirmed to the
governor of Callis, Monseur de Gordan: that the Armada is in a port or river of
Scotland called Triffla, where they say, there may ride two thousand ships;
this is No lie.
the common report.

The Answer.
WE would have highly esteemed you (Sen^or Pedro de Alva) and I would say the
dog had not bitten you, had you contented your self with the first words of
your letter, (where you said, I write no news of the Spanish Armada, for that
they be varieng, and I desirous to write nothing but truth) without passing any
farther, that it might not have bin seen, how full of blots you have your
understanding, you say that you are a friend to soundnes and truth, and an
enemy to variety, and immediately you show proofs to the contrary, written
with your hand and firmed with your name. Such a thing is called in good
Spanish a pressed folly; pardon me herein because the love I bear you and
the respect due to your graie hairs, urges me to speak so plainly. And
though my words scald you, yet I pass not, for if you remember the saying of
Solomon, Better are the wounds of Prove. 27.
him that loves thee, then the false kisses of him that abhors thee: You
would not take in ill part my manner of speech. But for that I know you to be
sound and a friend of truth, I will briefly inform you of the certainty, and
such as is devoid of doubt. For though time has sufficiently showed thee the
contrary, of that whereunto thou firmedst, according as you are massy, sound,
and weighty, it shall be well to recount it you, yea and with hammer and nail
to beat it into your head. The truth then is, that as soon as it was known in
this kingdom of the coming of the Spanish Armada, the noble Lord Charles
Howard, (Lord high Admiral,) went forth with his navy, who reparted the
said into sundry squadrons (according as time and place afforded) at times
making two squadrons, and then three, and more or less, as was fittest for the
purpose, to fight and defend themselves, without cumbring one another: In this
order they went defending their ports, wherein they not only observed her
Majesty's order, but there was also seen the valor in fight, of the L. high
Admiral, who is a man not only sufficient to rule and govern such a Navy as
this of England is, but if all the Christian princes of the world should
join, and make by a loving union, an Armada against the Infidels, they might
well trust and commit the same to his Honors government, and I doubt that there
shall be any found more worthy. For though it be true that there are some to
be found in Christendom most fit for such a charge, yet none so much nor
repleat with so many virtues; for what is reparted amongst others, is wholly in
him. You have in the world soldiers ripe in giving counsel, others to fight
and others to govern, etc. But many of these are gamestars, backbiters,
blasphemers, and ill Christians. But in the Lord Admiral, is the fear of God,
Christianity, science, government, knowledge, practice, policy, justice,
forecast, agilitie, assaulting, perseverance, courage, chollor, patience and
suffering, with many other graces. These are things not found in all men. So
that then, the English Armada to be governed as is said, was by the order of
her Majesty, and the performance and industry of this Lord. Observing this
order, the Duke of Medina durst not assault the^, dreading the hurt which might
ensue: notwithstanding his Armada was more puissant, greater ships, stronger,
and more in number and men, though (I believe) not in Artillery. The Spanish
Armada the^ entered the mouth of the chanel, and the English followed by little
and little, and tarrieng the opportunity to work the effect: and what befell
afterward, I will not detain my self in recounting it, ask it of Don Pedro
de Valdes (when you see him there) who lost his ship with 400. men, yielding to
Sir Francis Drake, having so few men that for the honor of the Spanish nation,
I name not the number. You may also inform your self of Don Diego Piementel,
which was lost with 500. men: and of Don Francisoode Toledo, which was lost
with so many more within the sight of Newport, though it be true that he saved
himself with thirty soldiers, in the skiffe, the ship and the rest perishing,
where none would succor the^: if this suffice not, the^ enquire of Don Ieorge
Manrique veedor general, who fled out of the Galliasse, which was lost before
Callis, a place not far from Roane. I show you not particularly the matters of
Ireland, for it would be long, and greevous to your hearing. The loss of the
ship called La Rata, and the Venician, and the ship Santa Maria, and many
other, and so likewise it will be yerksome for you to hear of so many noblemen
which there are perished: Don Antonio Manrique, Don Beltran de Salto, Don
Garcia Davila, Don Gaspar his Brother, Don Alonso Luson, Don Rodrigo Laso de la
Vega, of the habit of Saint James, and innumerable other, gentlemen and
soldiers, some slain by the Irish, others drowned in the sea. This story
being so lamentable, I proceed no farther therein, but I pray you that this
may be a warning for another time, and let that which is said serve you for a
rod. And verily if thou knew who the Admiral is, (under whose government
the English Navy rests) I believe; that though he had been taken or lost,
that thou would skant credit it, and consequently, not write as thou did.
And know that he is the Lord Howard, Knight of the order of the Garter, and to
the end it slip not out of thy memory, I send thee here this Sonet, lay it up
in thy breast, not for that which the Sonet contains, nor for the arts sake,
but for that with a sound intent I present thee therein, some part (though the
least) of the valor of this excellent Gentleman, the Lord high Admiral.

THE SONET.
THe Lion fierce, his eyes against the sun
Like Eagle bold, for pray prepared to flight,
And round about the noble garter done
With sword and crown to show the more his might.
From end to end he throws down, and levels all,
Famous is his ensign bright on earth and brackish wave,
And Mars the jarring God, resignes his right and all,
Both honor, arms, and rests as his slave.
Neptune, now afraid, and skared in his flood,
By view of noble Charles, and his famous fleet,
Resignes his name of God, his rule, and all his good,
To Howard he, that of the same was meet,
With everlasting name and scepter he remains,
For serving so his Queen, in hazard great and pains.
The copy of a letter which Diego Perez, Postmaster of Logron^o wrote in
confirmation of the victory against England in the Ocean sea, dated the 2.
September. 1588.
THis day is the English news confirmed, by a letter from the governor of
Roan, who writes that he has in his power the chief Pilot of captain Drake,
and that he knows that all the English Navy was utterly discomfited, 25.
ships sunk, and about 40. taken, and Francis Drake prisoner, having chased
them as far as Abspurg, and put many to the Heerin they show their pretense,
if they had had their will.
sword: saying, that there was found in Drakes ship a piece of 25. spans, of
one kintall of munition, made of purpose, with one only shot to sink the
Admiral of Spain, but it pleased God (though she was hurt therewith, yet she
was repaired again) and overcame the English fleet.

The Answer.
I Would never have thought (Sen^or Diego Perez) that so wittingly, a man of
your account, and Postmaster of Logron^o, should settle himself so lightly to
write matters so void of reason. But I marvel not; for that your post horses
are such yerkers, whose plungings have set you quite besides the saddell. In
the examining of Notaries, entreating of the manner how to examine them, it is
recorded, that one being demanded by the examinars, how he would make a false
writing, that yet should be available, he answered; By bringing for witness the
dead, and those of strange countries and unknowen: of such an occasion, me
thinks you would advantage your self: but let us see master Post, how you
shamed not to bring for witness of such a falsehood, the Governor of Roan, which
is not a man of such lightness, as you paint him to be, since you lade him with
such a lie; for he is rather a man of a very ripe understanding, a sharp wit,
considerat, and very wary; and finally, accompanied with many perfections; and
so you have overseene your self, in bringing such a witness for the making your
false writing good; for though he be of a strange country, yet he is well
known, and his virtues, every where. I can tell thee one thing, that when the
English Armada should have been lost, and the Governor of Roan certainly
advised thereof, yet would he doubt, and never have written it; for that it
would be hard for him either to write or believe it, not so much, in regard
that the English Navy should simply be invincible, or more strong than the
Spanish, but for that it belongs to a Catholic Queen, and so justly employed;
as, in the defense of Christian religion, their houses, people and subjects,
and in defense of the goods of the poor, the lives of the afflicted pilgrims
and disinherited strangers. If in many places of the sacred scripture, God
commands a regard to be had of the widow, the poor, the pupil, of the
orphan and stranger: and if this English Armada, was in defense of all these,
and for the propagation of the Christian religion, matters, whereof the Governor
of Roan was not ignorant, how then would you have him to write you a thing,
which in his opinion is contrary to the will of God. You allege a notable
reason to confirm the loss of the English Armada, as to say that Francis
Drake is prisoner: I grieve not a little, to see now, how apparently Spain is
given to lie. For, what Julius Caesar, what Scipio, or what Alexander,
assaulted the Admiral (under whom Drake was) to take him, but a Duke, that
knew no better than to fly him, thereby to bereave him of a wonderful
victory, yea one of the greatest that had ever been achieved in the world,
and if thou know it not, it is good that thou know, that now Julius Caesar
lives not, Pompeie is dead, Scipio forgotten, Alexander banished, Judas
Machabeus sleeps, Hector is slain, Achilles is no more. Nor none of those
whose theaters fame so adorned, live now in remembrance of this present age:
and the reason is; for as the stars shine not by reason of the force of the
sun; so all those aforenamed, in respect of the valor of the Lord high
Admiral, and Sir Francis Drake, are of no account. For more than Achilles,
Charles; more than Hector, Drake; more than Machabee, Charles; more than
Alexander, Drake; more than Scipio, Charles; more than Pompey, Drake; more than
Caesar, Charles; and finally, more than all the rest: and for that thou may
comprehend part of the greatness and valor of Drake, Read this Sonet, seeing you
may have read that of the excellent Lord high Admiral.

SONET.
SO was the name of Solomon, dispersed and spread at large,
By winged fame, in voice and stately song,
So that no wight alive, but gladly was at charge
And took the pain, to see him still among.
From countries far the Saba Queen did pass
Of purpose for to see, that prudent youth and sage,
Whose sacred breast, a perfect closet was
Where wisdom sat, in young and tender age.
A temple huge both fair and gilded well:
A Justice great that in the child did dwell,
Did blaze him thus with everlasting name:
To Francis Drake, his government likewise,
With greater praise and triumph has lift him to the skies,
And by the raging sea augmented is his fame.
AND if this suffice not to make thee know the valor of Sir Francis, fix
then your eyes on that he did at Cales, where the fear of him remains yet to
this day: and in Sancto Domingo, where, only with 1200. men which he la^ded,
did put to flight two squadrons of light horse, and two of footmen, and no
other horse, nor foot men, but Spaniards, and sackte the city, and the same
he did in Saint Augustine, and in Santiago and in Carthagena: And I entreat no
farther of this history, because there be others that have written and
entreated thereof at large. And if to this you answer me, that it was not he
only that did it, but also the valiant gentleman M. Christofer Carelile,
campmaster, and Powell the sargent mayor, and sundry other captains, and that
Drake went not a shore. To this I answer, that a general does more in
governing and conserving then in fighting, and I do not only thus answer you,
but I tell thee, that Drake both governs, conserveth and fights, and
knows how to prevent. You say farther in your letter, that the Spanish Armada
gave chase to the English, unto Abspurge. To this I answer you nothing, because
the ambassador in France does, and sets down the contrary, calling the place
Trapena Euxaten: and Iuan de Gamarra, gaine-saith the ambassador, calling it
Luxaten: and Pedro de Alva, gainsaith him, being his neighbor of Roane, no
great distance from Andwarp, and says that the port is called Triffla: atone
me these measures. It is a great desperatenes of Spain, to consent a matter to
be imprinted so apparent fabulous. But Spain will answer me and say, that
none of these authors disagree in calling the port by such sundry names (as
are Abspurge, Trapena, Euxaten, Luxaten, Triffla) and that though there be a
difference in the names, yet that there is none in the place, and
signification, and that the writers are of sundry nations and so speak with
sundry toongs, and every one rather uses his mother tongue, then a strange
language, for some are Arabians, others Hebrews, others Galileans, others
Parthians, and Caldees, and every one named the port in his own language. You
(Sen^or postmaster) whose speech is Arabian, call it Abspurge; the ambassador,
who is a Galilean, Parthian, and Meede, says Trapena Euxaten: Gamarra, is a
Caldean (though he be indeed a Burgales) and says Luxaten; Pedro de Alva who
is a Jew, says Triffla. To this loose answer of Spain, I will answer, and
rid them of doubt, giving them to understand, that as well in the place, as the
signification and name, there is in all, difference and error. For why
Abspurge, which Diego Perez writes should be called Ausburgo, which is in
Almanie, and not in Scotland; Luxaten, which Gamarra names, is called
Newcastell, and is no port of Scotland, but of England: Triffla, which Pedro de
Alva names, is called Tasfill, and is hard by the Brill: Trapena, or Euxaten,
which the ambassador rehearses, Trapena is called Traport, a little port of
France hard by Deep, (if he will not have it to be Trapena in Levante) And
Euxaten is the said Newcastel a port in England. Let us see then whether the
ships were Angelical spirits, to be at one instant in sundry and diverse
places, there being distance off many leagues one from another; so hereby I
prove it manifest, that the error is both in the name and place: If it so be
not, then the purpose of the Chroniclers, is, under those unknown and
disconsorted names, to give to understand the success of their Armada,
interpreting them thus, Abspurge, an Armada, dispersed; Luxaten, an Armada of
weeping: Triffla, an Armada that trembles; Trapena, an Armada which brings
sorrow: and Euxaten, an Armada of sighs: and so the consort is good, for God
showing his arm of power and wrath against them, he scattered them, he gave
them weepings, tremblings, sorrow and sighs, such as Spain never had. You say
farther (Sen^or postmaster) that there was found a piece of 25. spans in the
ship of Drake, of a kintall of munition: In the ship of Sir Francis Drake,
there were no other pieces but those, which she had in time before, and this
piece that you speak of, should be of your Armada, which peradventure you
threw overboord, to make you more light to fly away, as some did. And
concerning that you say, that your Admiral was shot with this piece, but that
God preserved her: In good sooth she preserved her self by flight, not daring
abide the musket and caliver shot, and indeed they wished for the wings of a
bird to fly the faster, and I think all the whole company fell a blowing in
the sails to give the ship more way. But now, seeing you have prooved so ill,
leave the office of a Chronicler, and be that of Marfodius or Pasquin, if you
be weary of being a post, but if you be not, follow your function, and another
time lay not the fault on him that has it not, neither write that which is
unlawful, seeing you shall get nothing else thereby, the^ hethat spits against
Heaven, which spittle falls again back on his eyes.

By a letter from the postmaster of Bordeaux written to the Ambassador in
France, the 2. of December 1588.
SInce the writing hereof, here is arrived a Scottishma^, who says, that all
the Spanish Armada, are harbored in Scotland, and that the Scots have taken
arms against England.

The Answer.
THe tongue of the slanderer is the pensill of the devil, and as the Psalmist
says, their throat is an open sepulcher, Psalm. 5.
they flatter with their toongs.

These be they of whom Saint Paul speaks, that evil speakers shall not
inherit 1. Cor. 6.
the kingdom of God. The tongue of a wicked person has power to unburie the
dead, and to bury the living: Death and life are in the hands of the tongue,
says Wisdom: an ill tongue has power to altar cities and towns, to bring
hoasts into mutiny, to moove the people, to trouble kings and disquiet souls.
Such was your pretense (Sir postmaster of Bordeaux) with your ill tongue to have
engendered hatred and sowed dissension between us and our brethren the
Scottishmen, to banish us out of the world (whereunto I will answer farther
hereafter.) Now I will produce certain human histories for confirmation
heerof. Hermodorus being virtuous, and that beyond all those of Ephesus
(whereof he was natural) he was so persecuted of ill toongs, and so much, that
they banished him the city, their venom exceeding his virtue. The like did the
Atheniens to Aristides, to Cimon and Themistocles; and the Siracusans to
Hermocrates and Dion: and the Romans to Camillus and Rutilus, and to Metellus.
And Cato Vticensis, being nothing covetous, nor Hercules at any time a coward,
Plutarch mentions, that they noted Cato for covetous, and Hercules for a
coward: Finally, all men of great and heroical virtues, are envied and wounded
by the evil tongue: for even as the shadow accompanies the body, so does
envy pursue virtue, and from hence it grows that the virtuous are so
murmured at and persecuted by the wicked. O England, England, and how art thou
bound to give immortal thanks to God, in seeing thy self persecuted and
murmured at by so many, an evident sign and probable token, that thou art the
city of the most highest. To those whom God loves he sends troubles,
prooving them as Gold in the furnace: And to his beloved people in Egypt he
sent many and sundry scourges, and this because he loved them. The troubles of
the Psalm. 34.
just (says David) are great, and adds forthwith, but the Lord delivers
him out of them all. Even so thee (O England) has the Lord delivered from all
thy troubles: from so mighty an Armada, from so much death, from so many and
sundry kinds of torments, as having bin overcome, thou must of necessity have
tasted: from these tribulations has he delivered thee by his strong hand,
giving thee such valiant captains: If he gave to the people of Israel, for
they bringing out of Egypt, a Moses, an Aaron, and a Marie; To thee he has
given, a most Christian and puissant Queen, adorned with sundry virtues, a
Charles Howard, a Francis Drake, and many others, whom the Lord had ordained
and kept long before, for the defense of his universal church and this
particular kingdom, which all he yet still preserves for greater matters: and
what these thy woorthies (o England) made not an end of, in performing thy
total deliverance, the rest did the wind, the sea, the rocks, the sand, the
heavens, the foul, and the fish: and now lastly he delivers thee, of the
untruthes wherein thine enemies boasted and slandered thee; putting time for
the unfolding of deceit, fame for the proclaimer, and truth, for the certain
proof; and so their slanders and false publications remain al untwisted. But
returning to my purpose, Saint Anastasius says, that even as he who takes up
a viper in his hands to throw to another (to bite him) is first bitten of the
viper himself; so the malicious and murmurer that would persecute and infame
the just, does first persecute himself, and remains infamed, and desirous to
bite the fame of another, slaieth his own soul: for there is no biting of
Viper or Aspe so poisonsome, as the malice of the perverse; But this cannot
sink into their understanding, which murmur at virtue, and charge her with
vice, and with falsehood, make that which is good seem ill, and of stocks make
stones, like to the fountain in Almaine whereof Albertus Magnus makes
mention. Of the number of these, me seems, that the Postmaster is, seeing, of
the peace and affinity, which is between the English and the Scots, he will
make wars, saying, that the Scottishmen had taken weapon against the English: a
most inconvenient thing, and utterly unwoorthie to be believed; for it were the
very instrument for the Scots to strike off their own heads withal, to favor
their enemies in arms and religion, whereby to make them Lords of their houses
and possessions. And without all doubt, had the Spaniards taken sure footing in
this land, they would never have staid till they had been Lords also of
Scotland; and who can doubt it, for the only blazon, now adays amongst
Spaniards, is nothing else but NON SVFFICIT ORBIS, as if they should say, All
the world is too little, and they cannot see, that their grave suffices them.
But such was the malice of him that wrote this letter, that therewith he meant
to stir up the minds of English men, that there might be wars between two
kingdoms, borne of one belly, brethren in religion, confederate in perfect
peace, and of one language (in a manner:) and the health of the one, depending
in not damaging the other. And this the Scottishmen knowing well, when the
Spanish ships passed by their coasts, the King commanded to take weapon against
them, forbidding to permit any Spaniard to land: this is the truth; go not then
about to make of stocks, stones; neither to give us to understand things so
contrary to reason. In this prevention, the King of Scots showed plainly, that
he knew the kindled and lofty minds of the Spaniards, who, if they had landed,
(imitating the Goads, of whom they descend) though it had been under the title
of peace, they would soon have reached the crown, not so much to depose the
King, as to become Lords of the whole world, and to show their greatness and
courage. Now in fine, he that will see clearly, who these glosers are, let him
behold what they say, and be attentive to their speeches, and he shall see
their putrified hearts laid open. Saint Ambrose says, that most commonly the
looking-glass of the soul shines in the words. Saint Hierom says, that the
words which issue forth, are the signs of that which remains within: this
is also asentence of Aristotle. Saint Bernard says, that the mouth is a gate
and servant of the heart. Socrates says, that such as the man is, such is his
talk. Themistocles compares men that be silent, unto pictures rold up and
enclosed; and those who talk and use speech, to pictures spread abroad and laid
open. If thou will know what pictures there are in a linen cloth painted in
Flaunders, spread it abroad: would you know whereof the heart of a man is
painted, be conversant with him. What need we more? Christ our Savior says,
that Of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, and that by our words we
shall be justified or condemned. Well known and Matthew. 12.
manifestly do the writers of these letters show here, their want of charity,
and as to the sons of leazings it may be said unto them; You have the Devil
for your father. This seems unto me, like that which we reading the sacred
Scripture, where the incontinent mistress of chaste Joseph condemned him of
incontinencie: and the proud Hebrews Genesis 39.
condemned divine Moses of pride: and the unruly Absolon Number. 16. 2. King. 15.
reprehended David of ill government: and the mischievous Rabshaketh living by
deceit, accused the innocent king Hezechiah, 4. King. 18.
of deceit: Even so the writers of these fabulous letters, they being the
vanquished, publish themselves victors, and the Englishmen by the divine favor
being conquerors, they accuse them for vanquished; and they being those that
disquiet this kingdom, and make war against it, lay the fault upon the
Scottish men, publishing them for our enemies, and that they took arms
against English men, and they being the swift inventors of these novelties so
false, they accuse the Governor of Roan of an inventor and lightness, and the
like they lay upon George Seguin of Callis. To all this I say, that it is
better to be slandered by the wicked, for being virtuous, than by being evil,
to be hated of the good. I will put an end to the answering of these five
Letters; for that I have sufficiently done it (and for that I may have some
time to answer the blind man, the tongue and publisher of them) only putting
Spain in mind of a mavelous policy observed by the Lacedaemonians, who, the
better to conserve themselves, established a law, that none should be so bold
to invent any noveltie in the Common weal. And as this law was upon a time
broken, by a famous musicion (called Tependarus) whose transgression was, that
his instrument whereon he used to play, being of five orders, he added a
string, and made it of six: a noveltie offending none, neither did it good or
harm to the Commonweal, neither altered it the minds of the citizens, for all
this, him they banished the Commonweal, and brake the instrument in pieces.
With how much more reason then (dear Spain) may thou bereave the lives of
these inventors of false novelties, written so much in thy prejudice, and the
pen, inkhorne and paper, which served to that use, to burn them in the market
place. Receive this, o Spain, from him that bewailes thy weepings, widows,
moorning attire, and thy scattered small orphans remaining without their
fathers aid; and consider how far better it had been for thee, to have
employed such a puissant Armada against infidels, than against Christians,
baptized in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, and
redeemed by the blood of Christ, from whom comes all our weal, and to whom
we yield infinite thanks and praise for ever and ever,

Amen.
An end to the answer of the Letters, with a brief, true, and Christian
relation of that which was done in England after the departure of the Armada.
THis victory thus obtained, the whole kingdom of England (by the commandment
of her Majesty) was employed in spiritual plays, wherein was nothing else
represented than thanksgiving to God, singing of Psalms, and preaching the
Gospel, and to this spiritual exercise repaired all, both small and great,
poor and rich, and this endured for certain days, and at the length the
Queens sacred Majesty, accompanied with the Nobles, as Earls, Lords, Barons,
Knights, and Gentlemen of the land, came unto the church of Saint Paul, where
she was received of the Bishops and other Ministers; in whose presence, with
great reverence, solemnity, and devotion, there was giving of thanks to God,
preaching the divine word, and singing sundry Psalms, of which I will only
name this himne.

The Himne. Te Deum laudamus, and so forth.
WE praise thee O God: we knowledge thee to be the Lord.
All the earth does worship thee: the father everlasting.
To thee all Angels cry aloud: the heaven and all the powers therein.
To thee Cherubin and Seraphin: continually do cry.
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath.
Heaven and earth are full of the majesty: of thy glory.
The glorious company of the Apostles: praise thee.
The goodly fellowship of the Prophets: praise thee.
The noble army of Martyrs: praise thee.
The holy Church throughout all the world: does knowledge thee.
The father of an infinite majesty.
Thy honorable, true, and only son.
Also the holy Ghost: the comforter.
Thou art the King of glory: O Christ.
Thou art the everlasting son of the father.
When thou tookest upon thee to deliver man: thou did not abhor the virgins
womb.
When thou had overcome the sharpnes of death: thou did open the kingdom
of heaven to all believers.
Thou sit on the right hand of God: in the glory of the father.
We believe that thou shall come to be our judge.
We therefore pray thee help thy servants: whom thou have redeemed with thy
precious blood,
Make them to be numbered with thy saints in glory everlasting.
O Lord save thy people: and bless thine heritage.
Govern them: and lift them up for ever.
Day by day we magnify thee.
And we worship thy name: ever world without end.
Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this day without sin.
O Lord have mercy upon us: have mercy upon us.
O Lord let thy mercy lighten upon us: as our trust is in thee.
O Lord in thee have I trusted: let me never be confounded.
THere were also said sundry prayers, some of thankesgiving for so great
benefits received from the Lord; others for the life and prosperity of the
Queens Majesty, and for peace, others for the increasing of our zeal, and
the holding of his holy hand over us, and for his church universal. To him be
all praise, honor and glory for ever and ever, Amen.

FAr otherwise, o, Spain, they celebrate here such victories, then they do in
thy kindomes and provinces; for there they pass all in worldly sports, as
maskings, dauncings with bells, hurling of canes, launcing of bulls, Iusts and
torneies, and with these feasts, o, Spain, thou give the glory of thy
victories to the world, as though the world had given them unto thee; but from
hence forth take my counsel and give them to God, and turn to him. But if
thou will be obstinate and still give them to the world, here I present thee a
Himne, which thou may sing to the head of this world.

The Himne.
TE Papam damnamus.
Te confusum confitemur.
Te confusionis Patrem, omnis terra arbitratur.
Tibi Ecclesiastici and seculares incessabili voce proclamant. Mundanorum mundo
gratiarum actio.

Confusus, Confusus, Confusus dominus Babaloth.
Vacui sunt coeli and terra: operibus gloriae tuae.
Te gloriosus, Theologorum chorus.
Te Medicorum laudabilis numerus.
Te Philosophorum candidatus, vituperat exercitus.
Te per orbem terrarum omnis confitetur schola.
Patrem Mentis aegestatis.
Reprobandum tuum falsum and innorme Collegium.
Malum quoque tuum spiritum
Tu rex gloriae vanae.
Tu superbiae sempiternus es filius.
Tu ad regendam suscepturus Ecclesiam, confudisti mundum.
Tu injuncto mortis juramento, clausisti tibi credentibus Regna coelorum.
Tu ad dexteram Diaboli seeds: in pena Luciferi.
Iudicatus crederis esse venturus.
Te ergo quae sumus tuis Scholis subueni, quas ligitioso furore perdidisti.
Aeterno fac cum sociis tuis igne numerari.
Damna Papatum hunc Domine, and maledic haereditati suae.
Et doma eum and humillia illum usque in aeternum.
Per singulos dies Papam maledicimus tibi.
Et vituperamus nomen tuum in seculum, and in seculum seculi.
Dignare Domine die illo, Peccatorem hunc damnare.
Nemiserearis ejus Domine, ne miserearis ejus.
Fiat maledictio tua Domine super eum, quemadmodum speravimus in te.
Tibi Domine peccavit, confundatur in aeternum, Amen.
The same in English.
WE condemn thee o pope. A thanksgiving of worldlings to the world.

We knowledge thee to be confounded.
All the earth judges thee to be the father of confusion.
To thee the clergy and laity continually docrie
Confounded, confounded, confounded: Lord of Babaloth.
Heaven and earth are void: of the works of thy glory.
The glorious company of divines: dispraise thee.
The goodly society of Physicians: dispraise thee.
The noble army of Philo sophers: dispraise thee.
Every school throughout the world does knowledge thee:
The father of the poverty of mind to be.
Thy counterfeit and enormous college to be reprobate.
Also thine evil spirit.
Thou art the king of vain glory.
Thou art the everlasting son of pride.
When thou tookest upon thee to govern the church, thou disorderedst the world.
Thou by an injoined oath of death, have shut the kingdom of heaven to all that
believe thee.
Thou sit at the right had of the devil: in the pain of Lucifer.
Thou art believed that thou shall come: to be judged.
We therefore pray thee, help thy colleges: which thou have cast away by
co^tentious fury.
Make them to be numbered with thy fellows: in fire everlasting.
O Lord, condemn this papacy:
And curse his inheritage.
Subdue him: and cast him down for ever.
Day by day o pope we curse thee.
We dispraise thy name: ever world without end.
Vouchsafe, o Lord, that day, this sinner to condemn.
O Lord have no mercy upon him, have no mercy upon him.
O Lord let thy curse lighten upon him: as we have trusted in thee.
O Lord, against thee has he sinned: let him for ever be confounded.
An answer to the songs of Christovall Bravo, of Cordova, blind of body and
soul, in praise of the victory, which the Spanish Armada had against the
English the year of our Lord God, 1588
The first song.
O Emperor most high, Jesus Christ consecrate,
Son of the virgin pure, without The virgin in her song calling God her
Savior, confesses to be a sinner.
sin begat:
Which would for our sin, suffer and die
upon the cross, whipped, crowned, and hung on hie,
Give me thy grace, thou crowned king of kings
to sing and recount, these memorable things,
Which in England There passed no such thing in England, it was at sea.
past, as told False witness, is no proof.
I have been,
and thou blessed virgin, divine-garden and Queen
Of Christ An error to call on any saving Christ, of whom Saint Paul says we
have an advocate with the father Christ Jesus.
get me favor, since he is thy son,
that my tongue may well end, what I have begone:
Since our Armada went forth, as is prooved at last
from the city of Lishborne in May that is past:
Sailing with diligence, care, and all speed
passing by the Groine, a good harborough at need.
Here begin the plagues
of Egypt.
And after few days, great Because they came not in the service of God but to
distroy his Church.
storms there arose
that unto the Groine the fleet again gose.
Pharao his heart is hardened.
And the three and twenty of Iulie, this year yet in hand,
they purpose to prosecute, their voyage began.
Now begin the lies.
The second of August, the Armada of The Army was not under the government of
Sir Francis Drake, but under the Lord high Admiral.
Drake
that pestilent man, toward ours did make.
A lie.
On whom ours set, with courage not thought,
and straight seven and twenty, to the bottom were brought:
And four more, without yards there were staid
when all the rest fled, they were so afraid,
Toward Dover in haste, as written I found,
to enter the Thames, (their fortune so fround)
to live in their harbrough, more safe and more sound.
The Answer to the first Song.
Blind fool, lier, unbaptized and scald
why thus devoid of fear, on Christ have thou called,
To give and repart, of his bountiful glory,
to thee the treasure, of his grace (thou unhollie)
Saying, thou will sing, a matter strange and true,
which was a loud lie, as every man knew:
Proclaiming (dog) truths, yet sellest thou lies,
giving victory to the vanquished, and the victors despies,
Abasing the victor, and exalting the slain,
And the glory of England thou give to Spain.
Monster of nature, borne in some lake,
among flags, the son of a toade or a snake,
Lucifer thy father, and Satan thy brother,
a vassal of hell, Leasings thy mother,
Thou want thy three powers, and in steed thou have got
lieng and blindness, and of asses brains a pot,
I call thee Lope, the Vylde, blind ass, and dolt,
Ram, ape, parret, munckie and colt:
Oystridge, and ape, clad in a coat,
of green and sundry colors, thy lightness to note.
Mutinous, perverse, shameless in all things,
enemy to see peace, amongst Christian kings:
Say, how durst thou sing, the king of Spain had destroide
the English Navy, (and yet he the annoid.)
Thou infamest thy worthy king, and dispisest his decree,
thou overthrowest his crown, scepter and degree:
And tell me bold bayard, more foul then horse gall,
why such words thou usest, against a soldier so tall,
As is Sir Francis Drake, of Gods temple a prop,
a defender of faith, and to Britain a hoape:
Of whom, the universal, trembles at his name,
the Indies for witness, can speak of his fame:
Galicia, Cales, San. Domingo, Cartagena, fear him at this day,
San. Augustine, Santiago, and the fierce Ocean sea:
The duke of Medina, feared, and durst not abide him,
Valdes that fled not, may say how he tried him:
He lost his strong ship, and his soldiers stout,
but he lost not his honor, by fighting it out:
They (blind) who blindfold fled, are of thy side,
whose ships are lost, displanckt, and opened wide.
Who came out of the Groine, in month of Iulie last,
of munition full, of men, powder shot, and good repast:
These are the lost, the English have the best,
for God was on their side, who now does give them rest.
The end of the answer to the first song.
The blind man's second song, wherein he prosecuteth his untruthes and injuries.
AFter the great battle, was ended (as before)
the second of August, a fight most fierce and sore,
Our Armada retired, to place most apt and meet,
to know if any hurt, had chanced to our fleet:
One ship alone was mist, which burned was at sea,
by slight regard, hard mishap, and lucklesse day:
But all the men were saved, and not a man was lost,
and other harm was none, for that was all and most.
And on the sixth day, of month I named last
our Armada going on, through narrow channel past:
And so did the contrary, proceed the self same way:
as near unto England, as either of them may,
And the English thought, the wind of us to get,
but God would it not so, their purpose he did let:
And when the darkesome night, was come upon the sky,
the adverse part prepared, at anchor where they lie,
Eight ships all burning bright, which seemed to the view,
each ship of them a hell, all what I sing is true:
Of powder full and stones, with timber huge and great,
with engens many more, which I can not repeat,
That they on our Armada, at unawares might drive
to burn our ships and men, not leaving one alive:
But he the king of Heaven, which rules the world wide,
permitted not theffect, their treazons put a side.
For he inspirde our Duke, of that his foe had wrought,
and then the prudent Duke, to prevent the treason sought,
Or else they burnt must be, wherefore the Duke does send,
and wills each man his cable cut, and all away to wend
Unto the sea, where larger scoape they had.
his grace did so command, which made them also glad,
Every one did go, the way that he thought best,
and then the flaming ships came burning from the rest,
They came with lofty pride, with fire which they brought,
but our Armada gone, behind they leaving naught.
And their pretended ill, on us took no effect,
for all their hidden harm, in vain flew up direct.
Now all this past and done, and that the night was spent,
and the resplendent Pheb, his beams abroad had sent:
There blew a pleasant gale, great joie unto all,
but chiefly our To fly.
Armada, did need it most of all.
So Assaulting the Spanish.
came the adverse ships, that were not far behind,
and at this very time, as fortune had assignd,
Both Armadas went, with power and courage brave,
by a channel straight, made by the brackish wave:
And in the sight of Dunkerck, appeerd another fleet,
and the gallion S. Martine, for the duke a ship so meet,
Knew that they were of England, the fleet which all descrie,
and all the rest do know them to, by flag that stands on hie:
And in this sort, they sailed on their way,
until the twelfth of August, after which said day
Befell, as hereafter, my pen shall you declare,
that day into Callis, a ship arrived there,
Which said, they saw together, the two Armadas fierce,
and after her another ship, which did the same rehearse,
And that he saw much stuff, and riches cast in sea,
and that in boats They of the Galliasse threw themselves into the sea,
without boats to escape ashoare.
to shore, the English ran away
To save themselves from harm, which came on them so fast.
and then the thirteenth day, more news there came in haste
From the kingdom of England, most certain and most sure,
by our spies and toongs, which there for us endure,
That fifteen of their ships, were sent unto the ground,
and that the Gallion, wherein our duke was found,
Called the Sant Martine, which is her proper name,
had grappled with the ship, wherein the great thief came,
Called Francis Drake, who brought in his consort,
of all the men of England, those of the highest sort,
Marqueses, There are no Dukes in England.
Dukes, Counts, and men of honor great:
and our great duke him took, and did him ill entreat.
And then toward Scotland, because he thought it well,
he went, with wind in poupe, as I do hear tell:
These (lordings) are the news, which hitherto we know,
of the estate of war, that this our church does follow,
Beseech we Jesus, and blessed Marie divine,
to give us victory, for she can do it fine,
And preserve our great mornarch, Don Phillip of Spain,
and give us his grace and glory, for that must be our gain.
The end of the second song.
The Answer.
BY saying the furious sea, and Phoebus shining bright,
by calling policy treason, (which is not so in fight.)
A blind dolt and fool, a fool in highest degree,
does now become a Poet, his verse that we may see:
A perfect Jew, by due descent, borne in Cordova,
which is a City in the kingdom of Andaluzia.
And to give us to understand, that verse he could devise,
he writs in ragged rhyme, approoved filthy lies:
And sings them in streets, with music, in his lays,
the people clapping hands, then in his song he says.
After the great battle, was ended (as before,)
the second of August, a fight most fierce and sore.
How much better might thou say, (unprofitable blind,)
(since that there was no battle, but flying with the wind.)
After that our Armada, the English had descride,
they began themselves to lighten, and fast away they hied,
Cables cut, and sails they hoise, to escape away with vita,
their backs they turn to death, the soldiers of Medina,
While Charles and his many, to death do turn their breast,
like valiant and stout champions, brought up in Mars his nest.
And there like men courageous, esteeming life in little
preferring first their honor, before a thing so brittle,
The duke flies, Drake follows, by order that he had
of Charles the great Admiral, whose sight the Drake did glad,
With whose only presence, Drakes valor did increase,
doing immortal deeds, which I cannot rehearse,
And so the worthy Drake, like eagle high that lay,
closing his two wings, falls down upon his pray,
In this same manner and sort, on Spainyard he lays load,
he closes up his wings, his tallons are abroad:
The tallons that he opens, are courage and attempt,
his closed wings are fear, from which he is exempt.
His wings he does resign, his tallons serve him best,
wherewith he takes or kills, all them that do resist.
Let Valdes heerof be witness, and those with him that were,
also Don George Manrique, which fled away for fear,
The Sant Phillip, and S. Matthew, ships of great account,
and all those who ruled them, whose fame in Spain did mount:
If such be Drakes valor, why then, (thou tongue of snake)
do thou defame for thief, and of no account him make:
But he that is base, can never defame the valorous man,
nor yet the coward, the bold, nor king, the rustic swain.
If thou this had known, thou would not be so bold,
so openly to speak, and such foul lies have told.
The good tree, good fruit does yield, with blossoms fair and gaie,
the ill yields none but leaves, worms, and webs alwaie:
Thou art an evil tree, thy root all rotten lies,
the fruits that come from thee, are false and shameless lies.
The English Navy to be overcome, I say it is a lie,
thou lie in saying in boats, the English then did fly,
Thou lie in calling thief, him that deserves so much,
and him that by his courage, has gotten honor such:
Thou lie in saying you took prisoners that same day,
fourteen English ships, and all they brought to sea.
Thou lie both loud and low, at first and in the midst,
thou lie all in all, thou lie in all thou did:
Dogs eat thy tongue, the ants eat thine ears,
hungry ravens eat thy guts, as hellish griffen tears.
Thy head upon a gibbet, in heat, and whorie frost,
let stand in desert place, like one forlorn and lost.
Thy hands chopped off alive, thy feet and yeke thy knees,
thy shoulders all bewhipt, thy belly burnt, and thies.
The rest of thy members, consumde to dust and Ash,
the eyes which thou do want, let them remain as trash.
The end of the Answer to the second song.
The Author yelds the reasons that moved him, to answer matters so fabulous
and base.
LEast any man should blame me for imploieng my pen in answering matters so
base (as are these five letters, and especially the blind man's songs) and
should say that it had bin better employed in matters of greater moment. Not
gainsaieng him that shall thus correct me, I give him to understand, that the
good tennis plaier, labors as much, and uses as great diligence, to reach that
ball which comes aloft in the air, as for that which comes close by the
ground: So that neither for the height, it passes from his sight, neither for
the lownes it escapes him: the consideration of this comparison, has lifted
up my mind, not to dismaie in great matters, nor to be ashamed of the lesser,
so I disdain not to answer this (though short) for that the mind wherewith I
do it does greaten the same. And that Spain (which not being faulty in this
mischief) suffer not unpunished the blindman and his auctors, the disturbers
of the common wealth, nor to consent to be deceived henceforth with such light
vanities, chiefly their descent being from Tubal the son of Noah, and of the
Goads and Vandals, nations so worthy that at this day the memory of their
noble deeds endures, and shall endure for ever, and being endued with so good
and mavelous wits, and having so good a king as they have, of whose
friendship all Christian kings are glad, chiefly in respect of his great power
and treasure, also for his worthy and political government, experience,
learning, and due administering of Justice. I have also taken this labor to
show unto Spain, that il counselors and flatterers, destroy her: and so that
it is convenient to avoid them, or better, to punish them, that the punishing
of these may be a scaring to those that shall come hereafter. I have also
charged my self with this burden, to show in short reasons, how contrary
things have happened, to that as was there published and given to understand. It
was divulgated in Spain, that they were victors, they being then vanquished,
as well is seen. They also thought in Spain not to have left an English man
alive. O blind imagination, and, o, sorrowful Spain, how far better were
it for thee to emploie this imagination (that it might take effect) against
Infidels, (setting all thy rest, and calling all Christian kings to thy aid,
and it should not be a small succor which thou might have out of this
kingdom of England) rather then against Christians, which do nothing day nor
night, but serve God and give him thanks. There, there, o Spain, should thou
show thy power to the enlarging of Christendom, and not here in diminishing
thereof. Thou persecutest English men, as thine enemies, to maintain the
opinion of men, and thou persecutest not the Turk, to maintain and defend
that of God. Thou persecutest Englishmen, poor in goods and rich in faith, and
thou persecutest not the Turk rich in substance, and altogether without faith.
Thou troublest the minds both of us and thy own common weal, and thou causest
tranquillity amongst the Turks, enemies to us all: thou make wars against
Christianisme, and give peace unto Paganism. Finally that which results
heerof is, that Christianity weepeth, and Gentilitie laugheth; Christianity
troubled, and Gentilitie at quiet; Christianity in wars and the Gentiles in
peace: Christians in torments, Gentiles in contentments: Christians in mourning
weeds, Gentiles in feasts; and Christians in burials, and the Gentiles in sports.
Behold here, Spain, whereto thou have made this great and costly Armada, to
discontent thy friends, and pleasure thy enemies: and the better to pleasure
them, thou would not content thee with less than the bereaving of the life
of those of this kingdom. And put case it had fallen out according to thy
thoughts, do thou not consider how dear it would have cost thee, and that
thou should have remained only with the lordship of earth and stones,
mountains and brambles, and not of men? And if it seem unto thee an easy
matter, to people it a new: thou have not people to do it, unless thou will
leave thy self desert. For if thou look well into it, thou shall see how
lost, thou art already, which loss consists not in sacks of wool and other
merchandise, and money, but of thy men: Now for Naples, now Cicilia, for
Lumbardie, Flanders (which is thy Sepulcher) for the Indies, Portingall, and
the Terceras, for thy own coasts, for Barbary, for the Islands of Mayork and
Menorcke, for Sardenia, and the galleys, and finally for the frontiers of thy
own kingdom. And if thou could decerne the people that every hour goes
out of thee, thou should see how-soon thou art like to lie waste, for though
thou have much ground, yet is it not all peopled, and that which is inhabited,
has want both of men and women, but specially of men, and so if thou should
compass to conquer this kingdom, thou must leave thy own to the Moors; who
if the knew the few men that thou have, they would not sleep so long, neither
leave thee at such rest; though peradventure their rest, is for our unrest; as
one should say, let now Christians break one another heads, let one kill
another, and after we will enter to keep the peace, and so remain lords of
all. Who doubts but that the Turk rejoiceth at the troubles in France. And
no less would he rejoice, that thou, o, Spain stoodest in the like estate;
yea, that there were no Christianity in the world. You see then hereby, that
the desire which you had, to bereave Englishmen of their life, was to consent
with that of the Turks. Against this thy wicked desire, did the mighty arm of
God oppose it self, that thou might not pass on therewith, hindering thy so
ill a thought, and punishing thy (so great a) folly: punishing thee, as thou
would have punished us. Content thy self Spain with that thou have, and
desire not to embrace more within thy arms, then thou art well able to
compass, for he that so does cannot hold it fast: and he that murmures at many
is hated of many, and he that disquieteth many, is persecuted of many. O dear
Spain, and if thou did but know and consider, how dangerous a thing it is,
to procure kingdoms and Signiories, by unlawful means, and by prejudicing
thy neighbors and brethren; how should thou then withdraw thy hands from so
many wars, excuse thee of so many hard labors, and persecutions, and loss of
men and money: how much more, I know thou art not ignorant of that old proverb
which says; That which is well gotten is lost: but that which is ill, both it,
and the getter. It is a rule of right, That of goods ill gotten, the third
heir shall never enjoie. Open thy eyes, o, Spain, and see what best complieth
thee. Example heerof we have in the sacred Scripture. That Herod Ascolonita,
which tyrannically and against reason and Luc. 3.
justice, had usurped the kingdom of Judea, had his eyes scant closed up, when
his kingdom was divided into four parts, and in the principal part thereof,
which was Judea, succeeded a Gentile for president, called Pilate.

The tribes which Jeroboam tyrannically usurped is a matter 3. King. 12.
well known, that all his sons enjoied them not. And king Achab (which
unlawfully possessed another heritage) his house was destroyed by Iehu.
Neither should it better 4. King. 10.
befall thee, o, Spain, then it did unto Achab, Jeroboam, and Herod; for
had thou gotten thy pretense, yet should thou not have enjoied it, for
being il gotten. But me thinks I hear thee, o, Spain to say, that if the
heirs of these enjoied not the goods and possessions which they got, it was
because they got it against reason, justice, and the will of God. But that thou
came with thy mighty Armada, by the ordinance of God and government of the
holy Ghost, and therefore thou came to destroy and kill, and that thou
should have enjoied that which thou had gotten. If, of so vain a
presumption, thou could allege any place of the sacred Scripture in thy
defense; then neither would I call thy presumption vain, nor gainsaie thee.
But I gainsay thee, because thou have no reason, and I call it vain, because
they are smokes of thy vainglories, like those of them (of whom Moses
speaks) that would build a tower, Genesis 11.
whose top should reach unto heaven, who, (in reward of their pride) were
punished and destroyed. When the Lords people went forth of Egypt, remaining
in the wilderness, amongst other things that the Lord spak unto Moses their
guide and captain general, this was one (as appears:) Exodus 23.
That they should not incline to the Gods of the Gentiles, but that they should
destroy and break their altars. And afterward the Lord says unto Moses:
Take heed to thy self that thou make no Exodus 34.
compact with the inhabitants of the land, whether thou go, least they be
the cause of ruin amongst you. But you shall overthrowe their altars, and
break their images in pieces, and cut down their groaves. God commanded
Joshua to destroy the city of Jericho, Joshua 6.
even to the overthrowing of the walls. All the inhabitants of Ai were destroyed
and the city laid waste. God Joshua 8.
commanded Gideon to destroy the altar of Baal, and he did it. So then these,
(and others which I might allege:) If they conquered kingdoms, slew the
people, and raced cities unto the ground, it was by the commandment of God.
For such kingdoms, people, and provinces lived, prejudicial to the honor of
God. But who commanded thee, o, Spain, to come to make war upon Englishmen? If
it were by the commandment of God, and for their idolatry; give us testimony
and show us the place where God spoke, and show us thy Moses, thy Joshua, or
thy Gideon: and if it were by ill counselors, punish them, and repent thee of
that which is done, and amend from hence forth. I would gladly know which of
these two causes stirred up this war, whether the commandment of God, or ill
counsel. To the first I say (if thou say it was by the commandment of
God) that thou errest in so saying, since heaven and earth shall fail, but the
word of God shall never fail: and so, had his divine Majesty commanded thee
to come, he had given thee victory: he gave it thee not; then he was not
pleased with thy coming. He promised the land of promise to the children of
Israel, and though the country was strong, and the defenders strong and many,
and they weak and weary; yet he gave it them: and to thee would he have given
this Island, had he promised it thee. Besides this, thy coming could not be
acceptable to God, neither was it with his consent: For God now, is not a
blouddy God, but a God of love; he punishes not now in a strong arm, (as he
was wont under that hard law) but with a hand of compassion: and thy coming
was, throwing lightnings, thunders, and thunder bolts, and saying; let them
die, let them die, let not a man remain alive; a matter most abominable to
God, ergo, without his consent. That God commanded the captains of his people,
to destroy the gods, altars, walls, and groves of their enemies, and to put them
to the sword, the cause was (as I said a little before) because God was
offended and dishonored by them. But we according to the poverty of our
strength, bless, and give God thanks, and the honor that is his, we give it
not to creatures: Then it is likely he would not command us to be destroyed by
thy wrathful hand. When his people of Israel committed idolatry, he put them
into his enemies hands, and when they acknowledged their sin, he delivered
them: But God delivered not his people of England into the hands of the
Spaniards: then God commanded them not to com against England, neither is this
kingdom an enemy to God. The Gentiles had many gods, but Englishmen, only
one God, Father, Son, and holy Ghose, three persons, and one only true God,
omnipotent, and creator of the universal. And in such sort we believe in this
God, that we confound not the persons: for one person is of the Father, another
of the Son; another of the holy Ghost; and so we believe three persons, that
yet we make not three Gods, but one God, as the scripture does teach us, where
he says; Hear, o, Israel, the Lord our God, is Lord only. He names God
Deuteronomy. 6.
three times, because he consists of three persons: and because these three
persons are one God, and not three gods; he says, is Lord only: and for that
of this blessed Trinity, the second person was incarnate, and clothed himself
with our humanity (for our salvation) therefore he says in the second place,
our God. If then we have one God, whose pursons we confound not, and whose
substance we separate not; and say that this God, clothed himself with our
miseries for our salvation, and reconciled us with the everlasting father, whom
(according to our small power) we worship, and serve and obeie him according to
his laws, and not after the laws of men: Then we have not many gods, with
the Gentiles, neither are we idolators, why God should send you to make war
upon us: and hence I conclude, that seeing God sent you not, that it is the
second cause that moved you: Which is ill counselors; who moved by some
secret hatred, deceiving their king, and destroy his kingdom: The destroiers
of kings and kingdoms are ill counselors. Three hundred years the Romans
made wars upon thee, yet never werst thou overcome of them, but always victor,
till such time as ill counselors deceived thee, sowing in thee hatred and
division. The ill counsels of the false prophets, destroyed Iezabel, Achab, and
others. And so thee, o, Spain, have thy il counselors, and false prophets,
washed and destroyed. One of the chiefest causes why, thou have obtained so
many victories against Turks, Moors, the French, and other nations, has bin
because of thy good counselors: the conservation of the prince and people
depends upon good counsel. And so, many honorable personages, have exalted
many for their good counsel, and utterly rejected il counselors and
flatterers. Octavius Augustus gave the dignity of Consulship, to the
philosopher Frontonius, with sundry other dignities, for giving good counsel.
Marcus Antonius caused a Statua to be erected, which might remain for a
memory for the celebration of his name, for the excellency of his learning,
and good counsels, as records Julius Capitolinus. The Emperor Domitian made
Scillus oftentimes Consul for his good counsel, as may be gathered, by
certain verses of Martial. Trajan carried with him in his chariot triumphall
Dion Prusio, as affirms Suidas, for his good counsels, which he obeyed. The
Emperor Constantine made Ablabius of his Royal counsel, for his good counsel;
so says Eutropius, and Volatteran. Petrus Crinit. says, that Theodosius the
Emperor gave the prefectship and charge of war, to the excellent Poet Aurelius
Prudentius, for the good counsels which he gave him. And Artaxerxes king of
Persia, bought good counsel with the weight of money, (for in good counsel
consists the peace and conservation, of the king and kingdom) and so did
many other most honorable men: the which for not to be tedious, I repeat not,
contenting my self with those rehearsed. If then Spain and his king have good
counselors, let them take view of the success of their counsels received.
Good counsels pacify and increase, and ill counsels trouble and diminish. And
so it appears plain that poor Spain and his king for having ill counsel,
is so troubled, and diminished of people and honor. Being now poor of people,
and rich in enemies: poor of money and rich in expense: empty of peace and
full of war, and heavilie laden with offenders, and well lighted of
defenders. O poor Spain, and what a perfect picture is every one of thy
counselors, of a king Herod, who, to kill Christ and triumph over him, slew
both his own and the children of his subjects, diminishing the fruit of his
kingdom: even so has it befallen thee, who to destroy the English and
triumph over them, have lost both thy substance and subjects: And as Christ
remained free from the bloody hands of Herod, so have the English escaped
(by the divine favor) from thine. Banish (sacred king) thy ill counselors,
and behold how they are deceivers and flatterers which destroy thee and with
their fained words deceive thee. Ioab came 2. Kings 20.
smoothly to his friend Amasa, and stabbed him through. Thy ill counselors
come smoothly to thee (sacred king) flattering thee with their adulations, and
destroy thee. Sawsin by trusting to the sweet words of Dalila, was put into
his enemies hands. Thou have trusted (sacred king) in Iud. 16.
the flatteries of those who are about thee, whereby thou have delivered thy
treasures to the custody of thy enemies: O, lamentable case, that so mild a
king should be in vironed with so many flatterers. Note (king) that our
ancestors were voont to call the toongs of flatterers, a sword anointed with
honey, which proverb, S. Hierome uses in an Epistle. God commanded the
children of Israel, that they should not touch the tabernacles of the ungodly,
nor any thing of theirs, that they might not be defiled. And also, that at
their entering the land of Canaan, that they should Number. 33.
destroy and banish all the inhabitants of that province, to the end that they
might not be infected with their ill manners and customs. For even as the hands
(though never so white) by handling of coals, become black and polluted; even
so, be a man never so good, if he be conversant with ill counselors, shall
also become ill. Solomon says, that he that touches pitch, shall be defiled
therewith. Depart then, o, king, and most worthy prince, from such ill
counselors which waste and consume thee, and trouble and destroy thy
kingdom. They fell themselves unto thee for true friends, being deceitful
enemies. Take heed (mighty king) for if these flatterers follow thee; it is
not for thy royal persons sake, nor for thy virtues, but only for thy great
riches. For in like sort as the wood breeds the woorme which eats and
co^sumeth it; even so rich men bring up flatterers which by little and little
destroy them. This understood Psalm. 141.
well the Psalmist when he said. Let the righteous rather smite me friendly, and
reproove me. But let not their precious balms break mine head. There he calls
the flattery of the wicked, precious balmes: My people, (says Isaiah) they
that call thee blessed, even they deceave thee. More hurt (says S. Hierome)
does the tongue of the flatterer, then the sword of the enemy. By admitting
(most worthy king) the balm of thy ill counselors, thou have deceived thy
self: They call thee most mighty, and the only deserver of all the kingdoms
of the world. They warrant thee, that thou may raise a thousand tributes in
thy country, wherewith to conquer others kingdoms: and they have done thee
more harm then the swords of thine enemies. Flatterers are so prejudicial,
that Antistenes says, it is better to fall into the power of Ravens, then of
flatterers, for the Ravens eat the eyes of the dead, but the flatterers
corrupt the minds of the living: so record Laertius and Brusonius, though
others attribute this saying to Diogenes. And the same Laertius says, that
Bias, the philosopher being asked, what beast was most poisonsome, he answered,
of wild beasts the tyrant, and of tame beasts the flatterer. AEneus Silvius
reports, that the Emperor Sigismund, was such an enemy to flatterers, that
on a time not being able to suffer the flatterings of one that praised him
overmuch, he gave him a blow, who saying, why do thou strike me Emperor? He
answered; flatterer, why do thou bite me? And with this (most valorous king)
I conclude and make an end of this particular matter: That men of high
spirits, give not their ears to flatterers, neither accept ill counselors.
Behold it here prooved, that the arming of Spain, was not by the commandment
of God, but through ill counsel, and therefore it perished. Besides this, the
Spaniards gave out (the more to prick their people forward in fury) that if
the English should take any of them, that they would kill him, and not leave
any alive that should fall into their hands. Truly, though the English had
bin of that mind, yet had they offered no injury to the Spaniards: for if they
came proclaiming death; had it bin much that English men should proclaim
death? The Echo answers still unto the voice without changing the words. If
you say evil; it answers evil; if good, good; if pain, pain; if glory,
glory; the Spaniards come then, saying, fire, the Echo answers in Englishmen,
fire; Spaniards say blood, Englishmen say blood; Spaniards say death,
Englishmen say death; Spaniards say war, Englishmen say war; and when they
shall say peace, then Englishmen will answer peace: But now if Englishmen
should kill all their prisoners, they should do them no injury, nor break jus
Gentium, neither that which is de jure belli, for this war deserves not the
name of a good war, because it was moved by covetousnes and tyranny, and not
for valor and increase of honor. There were wars between the Emperor Charles
the fifth and Francis king of France; but the original was neither of
tyranny, nor covetousnes: and this was seen apparently; for Francis being
prisoner by the Emperor, near unto Pavia, in the year 1525. and from thence
carried into Spain: the Emperor never willed him to resign his crown,
neither was his thought such, or ever went he about it; but rather set both him
and his free, for in fine, they were rather wars of braverie then tyranny. But
in this war of Spain against England, Spain coming with armed hand, to
deprive her Majesty of Sceprer and crown, what injustice should she do, in
causing all to be slain, that shall come to hand? for tyrants deserve no less
then death: And since Spaniards in this war show themselves tyrants, ( My author
is a Spanyard and therefore whatsoever you think or know to the contrary, yet
you must bear with his parenthesis in this point.
though naturally they be not so) they should have no wrong done them, had they
all bin slain. But in fine, such as the fountain is, such are the streams,
if the fountain be sweet, the streams are sweet, and if the fountain be
brackish, the rivers are brackish. The fountain of England, which is the
sacred Majesty of Queen Elizabeth (whom the Lord long preserve) is a sweet
fountain, full of love, compassion, clemency, and benignity, and so are her
subjects; for such as the Lord is, such is the vassal. This is verefied in the
sacred Scripture. Herademas troubled and all Jerusalem with him. And Achab and
Mat. 2. 4. King.
Iesabell being wicked, so were the people: so that a good king has good
subjects; and so as her Majesty is merciful, so are her subjects; and hence it
grows, that the Englishmen not respecting the tyranny of this war, nor the
blouddie hands of the soldiers; but using clemency with the prisoners, they
have not taken their lives, but rather as though the wars had bin such, as was
between Charles and Francis, so have they bin well entreated and succored
with meat, with apparel, hose and shoes, shirts, firing and other
necessaries, Englishmen seeming to be sorry, and to bewail the poor
Spaniards, which perished in Ireland, by the hands of the savage Irishmen; and
to serve for meat, some in the sea for the fish, and others on the land, for
the carrion Crows; so that they sorrow the loss of the dead, and succor the
necessity of the prisoners. And all this, for being her Majesty full of love
and not of rigor, and so abundant in clemency, and not in revenge, a greater
friend to pardon, then to punish: and using more of mercy then justice, she
shows her self most Christian, and fearing God: Unto whom, his divine
Majesty grant, long years of life, augment and prosper her estate, as is
needful for the holy church sake, (she being a true defender thereof) and as
her humble and loiall subjects desire, Amen.

The translator.
I Am to request thee, (courteous Reader) to bear with the translations of the
blind man's songs and their answers, for I know the verse will seem somewhat
harshe unto thee, wherein I was overshot, in tieng my self so much to the
Spanish, (at the authors request) as you may see, the English to answer verse
for verse with the Spanish: to avoid which inconvenience, receive these verses
following (I humbly beseech thee) in good part, (with the rest of the
translation) which verses follow (almost) verbally, though not in meeter: in
stead whereof, I pray thee also, accept with good will, certain verses of my
own to the same effect, wherein thou shall both pleasure and encourage me,
fare well.

Thine in good will I. L.

A song in the praise of the English Nobility.
ARraied, in sundry colors, white, red, and incarnation,
blew, green, yellow, and murrie color fine:
Plumes of feathers brave, displaieng forth their minds,
streamers fringd with gold, and silver round about,
Armor shining, white helmets, fine and graven,
swords broad and sharp, daggers strong and large,
Lances great and long, and sharpened steel at end,
targets fair of steel, iacks of proof, of male,
Ensigns brave advaunst, with red cross in field white,
and a rose for devise, set out in color read,
With letters which do say, I think he means the posie of the gatter.
Let him be punished and correct,
which evil thinks, and does not do, all what, that he is bound
For to defend, and enlarge his cuntry and faith unto the death.
From great Brytaine, issueout, gentlemen of fame,
Youths, desirous of honor, and used the same to win,
do take their leave of friends, with many a brace and kiss,
From Father, from mother, from brothers, and from sisters,
from kindred, and from neighbors, and from their household chere:
They go toward the sea, their enemies to seek,
to die, or overcome, regarding life in little,
They go thinking upon war, and upon deeds of old
of their fathers, grandfathers, and others of their blood,
They print in their memory, the facts of their forefathers,
to show themselves no cowards, but bold, fierce, and stout,
And they, who thus do go are Gentles passing brave,
the Earls of Oxford, Northumberland, and Cumberla^d,
Of valor, force, and courage, they bear the prick and prise,
three famous worthy Earls, well known and tried at arms,
Lord Dudley, Henry Brook, Arthur Gorge and Gerard,
which to assault and win, are four worthy soldiers,
The valorous Cicill, which Thomas has to name,
who in affairs of wars, did never fear his foe,
Charles Blunt, William Hatton, two soldiers noted well,
Walter Rawleigh, not the least, nor used less in arms,
Robert Cicill, and William, that is his brothers son,
whose valor goes beyond, that of the wrathful Mars,
Two famous Roberts eeke, Carry and Harvie called,
of whom Fame proclaims, affairs strange and great:
Of Darcy the valiant, whose name is called Edward,
Heaven bears witness, and all the British I Will:
And Horatio Palavezino, a gentleman well used,
in letters, counsel, and arms, a gallant knight of strength.
These and many other, with Charles the Lord Admiral,
accompanied with Drake, in arms are all as brethren,
One body, one resolute mind, the one has care of the other,
and one does courage each, in such so brave a case,
Now my hearts, go to, they say, remember we are bound
rather to die then fly, for flight belongs to base:
Better to die with honor, then live long dishonored,
it is life to a gentleman, to die in such a quarrel:
To serve God and his prince, the loyal subject fights,
and for his dear country, the citizen yields his life,
To this then and more, we present all are bound,
since that we be gentlemen, and serve so brave a Queen,
In such conversation, the sail, and pass the time
when suddenly with sails, they see the sea bespread,
They know it to be the Armada, of the mighty Spaniard
whose ships are like strong castles, full of artillery,
Provided well with men, and loaded with munition
in despite of raging sea, they part in two the waves,
Reparted into squadrons, and marching in good order,
and with their pleasant music rejoicing sky and sea,
They put fear and dread, on all that them behold,
such a number of ships, as furrow up the sea,
France fears, and Almany, the force of Spanish king,
so does the Turcke and all the world, save England fair:
If France fear, it is for civil wars,
and Almany has not her Signiories unite:
And the Turcke because great Can, does make him wars,
and if the world be afraid, the world is a coward:
But famous England which, in peace has all estates
and full of martial men, her cities and her towns,
Which live one with another, as faithful loving brothers,
they fear at all no force, nor Spanish mighty arm,
But with boldness, valor and force that is seldom seen,
regarding them in naught, to foe they set their breast,
And with fewer men and ships to sea themselves commit,
determind all to die before they fly a foot:
And like to Tygres fierce, and Lions fraught with ire
they press unto the fight, armed with armor brave:
And this determination, perceived by the foe,
they fly like little conie, before the cruel graiehound,
And better for to fly, they hoise sails and cut cables,
and of their treasure rich, yield part unto the sea:
They fly without all order, like soldiers young and raw,
some here, some there, as best may serve their turn,
And the nobles of England, do follow at their heels,
chasing and charging, glory and honor they gain,
Winning from them their ships, and captiving their men,
returning with great victory, unto their English I Will,
Whereas they land with joie, their banners brave advanst
and with heavenly music, their trumpets sound aloud,
Crieng with voice most shrill, long live our royal Queen,
live, live, and God preserve, her from all foreign foes,
That all her subjects true, may long her grace enjoie,
and that almighty God, augment her lands and state.
Then all the spoil which in the war, they gained have,
they offer it unto the Lord, their triumph and their joie,
And in the church they yield him thanks, as is their due,
for so great grace on them bestowed so free.
Sundry songs they sing to him, and David's Psalms in verse,
which lives for ever and ever, and reigns without all end.
FINIS.
The translator to the same effect.
When from the Hesperian bounds, with warlike bands,
the vowed fo-men of this happy I Will,
with martial men, drawn forth from many lands:
began set their sail, on whom the winds did smile:
the rumors ran of conquest, war, and spoil,
and hapless sack of this renowned soil.
From forth his channels glide: the Ocean gasd,
To see the furrowing keeles, beat on his breast:
And The Lady of the sea.
Thetis wept, her tides as one amasde,
To see her watrie bosom overprest.
The spreading pendents, and the flags from far,
With braieng trumps, so threaten balefull war.
The goddess of war.
Dictimne, wakened by their bitter threats:
Armd with her tools, and weapons of defense:
Shaking her lance, for inward passion, sweates,
Driving the thought of woonted peace from hence.
And gliding through the circute of the air,
Unto Under the name of Elisa is meant, our gracious Queen Elizabeth.
Elisas palace did repair.
As when the flames amidst the fields of corn,
With hidious noise, awakes the sleepie swain:
So do her threatenings, seldom heard beforne,
Reviue the warlike courtiers hearts again:
So forth they press, since Pallas was their guide.
And boldly sail upon the Ocean glide.
The Admiral with Lion on his creast, L. Admiral.

Like to Alcides on the strond of Troy:
Armd at assaie, to battle is addreast:
The sea that saw his frowns, waxt calm and coy,
As when that Neptune with three forkedmase,
For Trojans sake, did keep the winds in chase.
De-Vere whose fame, and loyalty has pearst, Earl of Oxford.

The Tuscan clime, and through the Belgike lands,
By winged Fame, for valor is rehearst:
Like warlike Mars upon the hatches stands,
His tusked Bore began foam for inward ire,
While Pallas filled his breast, with warlike fire.
Percy whose fame the northren Albane kings, Earl of Northumberland.

With bleeding creast report and publish forth:
Pressed then in place, him Pallas armor brings,
And bids him boldly to avowe his worth:
Laieng her lip upon his Ivorie browe,
Enjoining Fate, his fortunes to allow.
A-downe his shoulders hang his ambar locks,
Like Phoebus golden tresses feately spread:
Manly he stands to bide the Spaniards shocks,
Awarlike helmet fixed upon his head,
May God of Physic.
Aesculapius with his cunning charms,
Preserve the toward Lord, from future harms.
Next him the matchless Clifford shakes his sword, Earl of Cumberla^d.

(Like to Hercules the son of Jupiter and Alcmena.
Alcides, fair Alcmenas son)
His looks are stern, his locks do fear afford,
Within his breast does manly courage woone,
Upon his crest the dragon list to frown,
Empald and compast with a golden crown.
On sudden began haught Howard press in place:
His argent lion couched at his feet: L. Thomas.

Often looked he back, and from his honored face,
The trickling tears dropped down, so ambar, sweet,
That fair Elisa viewing of his will,
Avowd, my Howard will be faithful still.
Seymor the chiefetaine next supplied his room,
A wreath of Baie his temples did adorn, L. Honrie.

His arm to war Minerva first did dombe,
His pen by proof brought foreign styles in scorn,
Phoebus so shine upon his courage now,
As each his skill and poems do allow.
What need I write of Brook, or Gorges praise, M. Henry Brook. M. Gorge.
Sir William Hatton. L. Dudley. M. Gerard. Sir Thomas Cicill. M. William Cicill.
M. Darcie. M. R. Harvie. Sir Walter Rawleigh. M. Robart Carry.

Of Hattons will, of Dudleys skill in arms,
Of Gerards hope, of Cicils haught assaies,
Of Darcies power, of Harvies hot alarmes,
Of Rawleighs art, of Caries skill in lance:
Of haught Horatios stately check of chance.
From forth the Oxford. Sir Charles Blunt.
Oxens tract, to courtly state,
I see the treasure of all Science come:
Whose pen of yore, the Muses style did mate,
Whose sword is now unsheathd to follow drumbe,
Parnassus knows my Poet by his look,
Charles Blunt, the pride of war, and friend of book.
Moorne not thou matchless parragon of war, Sir Francis Drake.

In these descriptions, to be placed last:
Thy glories take their essence from a far,
Haught Drake himself the brunt of war has past,
Enough to arm these nobles to the deed,
Whilst matchless thou command, advise, and lead.
Help Muses now, with fruitful lines to note
This warlike work: the fleets are both in sight:
The canons rore, makes ring the trembling flote:
The armies join, and grapple to the fight:
As he that sees the winds with bitter blast:
The stately towers in winter time to taste.
Naught sounds or ecchoeth in the woondring air,
But noise of death and dreadful drirement:
As when the sons of Cham sought heavens repair,
Each neighboring regions hears of languishment,
Thus opened Goddess of discord.
Pandoras box of scath,
That filled the seas with blood, with spoils and wrath.
At last the heavens began clear, the foes began fly,
Iehovahs hand assisted Englands right:
Our thankful peers lift up their hands on hie,
Avowing still in countries cause to fight:
Blessing our God that on his people spreads
His grace, and heaps his ire on envious heads.
And home returned (the dastard Spaniards gone)
They humbly bend at fair Elisas feet,
Whose prayers mean while, had piersd the heavenly throne,
Each one with duty do their Princes meet,
Whiles midst their joie true peace began soon return,
Intending with Zabetha to sojorne.
Long may thou rest sweet Peace.
Nymph within her bower,
Whilst foreign countries wonder at her wit,
That swaies her Scepter with a matchless power,
Sweet muse now cease, though scarsely wakened yet,
That when her fame by virtues conquest shines,
Thou may eternize her, within thy lines.
FINIS.

