A rule how TO BRING UP Children.

A treatise wherein is declared, how the Father apposeth his Son in the holy
Scripture, whereby all Parents may be taught a rule how to bring up their
Children, briefly collected into a short volume.

Psalm. 119. Where-withall shall a young man cleanse his ways, even by ruling
himself after the word of God.

John. 5. Non quero gloriam meam, sed gloriam Patris qui me misit.

Romans 4. By faith is the inheritance given, that it might come of favor.

Romans 14. Whatsoever is, not of faith, the same is sin.

To the right honorable and my very singular good Lord, the Earl of
Huntingdon, Knight of the noble order of the Garter, Lord President of her
Majesty's honorable counsel established in the North parts, your Lordshippes
daily Orator, and humble suppliant, John Lyster, Clarke, late Cutate of
Leedes, and now Vicar of Thorpeach, wishes good health, long life, much
increase of honor, and after a godly and faithful end.
IN most humble wise, showing your good Lordshippe, that by your lordships good
means I obtained the benefice, whereof I am now resident, and remembering a
saying of that worthy Philosopher SENECA, that there be three degrees of
thankfulness, one, recognoscere beneficium, an other, gratias et lauds
agere, and the third, pro loco et tempore secundam suam facultatem retribuere,
or rather considering the Samaritan in the Ghospel healed by Christ of his
Leprosy, returned and acknowledged Christ's mercy toward him, prostrate
himself before him, and with a loud voice gave him thanks, so likewise (good
my Lord) I returning, do acknowledge your Lordships great goodness unto me,
render most hearty and humble thanks unto your honor for the same, and not
being able to make any recompense unto your Lordshippe, (as Seneca teaches)
although I have meditated with my self sundry times how to do the same. Yet
notwithstanding, that your Lordship may perceive that I am not forgetful or
negligent of your Lordshipps great good will unto me, I have drawn in
Dialogue wise out of scripture, (which is able to make one learned to
salvation) the duty of all states and degrees of people, how a Christian life
is to be led, what things are needful to salvation, the end of man,
and the straight account in the day of judgment, with the punishment of the
wicked, and reward of the righteous, briefly set down, and plain for the
capacity of the ignorant, putting or adding nothing thereunto, which I do
present unto your good Lordshippe, in remembrance of my humble duty and
obedient service unto your Honor, beseeching your Lordshippe to accept of my
good and simple meaning, and to bear with my boldness and small knowledge, to
write any thing to such a Noble personage as your Lordship. And I shall
incessauntlie entreat the eternal and everliving God till ATRAPOS shall cut
my fatal thread, for the preservation of your good Lordshippe, whom the King
of glory, Lord of hosts, and Father of all mercy, bless, save, and keep
for ever more, Amen.

Your Lordshipps poor suppliant, JOHN LYSTER.

To all Ministers and fellow laborers in the Lords vine-yarde, salutations in
Jesus Christ.
IT is not unknown unto you (my brethern) that the Lord has elected us before
we were fashioned in our mothers womb, sanctified us or ever we were borne,
ordained us to be stewards of his secrets, watchmen over his people, shepperds
of the sheep of his pasture, to the edifiyng of the saints, to the work and
ministration, even to the edifiyng of the body of Christ, till we all come to
the unity of faith and knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man, even
unto the measure of the full perfect age of Christ. And knowing my self to be
the meanest among you, in respect of my knowledge, not worthy to be of that
calling, although the grace of God has otherwise dealt with me in calling me
to that function, and has given one talent unto me, for the instructing a
little number of his flock which he has bought with his blood, of whom he
has made me an ouerseer, and therefore it is not meet for me to pass over
the sum of this life with the singing Grasshopper, till the stormy nights and
Boriall blastes of winter come upon me, neither to let the clear day pass
idlelie, till the dark night come, when none can travel, neither to follow
the drone Be, eating the labors of others, but rather to study to discharge
(in some measure) my self, according to my function, and to profit others.
Seeing that I perceive the greatest number of you my brethren, to follow the
example of the Emmit, working in the day, and busy as the Bees in the spring
of the year, to gather their home, so you to accomplish the work whereunto
you are called, the Lord prosper you and continue your proceedings. I have
therefore for my part drawn a short treatise in Dialogue manner betwixt the
Father and the Son out of Scripture, wherein may fully and perfectlye be
perceived the duties of all sorts of people, how a Christian life is to be
led, what things are needful to salvation, the end of man, and strait
account in the fearful judgment, with a punishment of the wicked, and reward
of the righteous, not seeking any praise for the same, but Gods glory, which
all men ought to do, seeing we are oftentimes tried by our chief Diocesan
(according to our gracious Princess commandment) how we profet Gods people
committed unto us within his graces province, but especyally seeing we shall
appear before the great shepperd and Bishop of our souls Jesus Christ, to
give accounts of the bestowing of our Talents, that we may receive an
incorruptable crown of glory, where they that have taught others shall be as
the shining of heaven, and they that have instructed the multitude unto
Godliness shall be like the stars world without end, and thus not doubting
of your great care and dyligence in your functions, I beseech the eternal God
from whom all good gruiftes do proceed, increase you with wisdom and
knowledge in this life, and with eternal happiness in the world to come.
Thorpearche, within the ancienty or lyberties of York, the 12. day of Iunne.
1587.

Your faithful yokefellow in the Lord John Lyster.

The Father examineth his son how he has profited in the word of Salvation.
Father. MY Son, seeing it is the duty of parents not only to educate and
bring up their Children with meat and apparel, but also to enstruct and teach
them in the fear of God, and Christian religion, for which cause I have
committed thee to the government of a learned and Godly Master, these seven
years past.

Wherefore my will and mind is to know how thou have profited in the same, and
what thy profession is?


Son. Good Father, 1. Peter. 3
seeing it is your pleasure to demand of me a reason of my faith, I must
follow the exhortation of the Appostle Saint Peter, that I be ready to give
answer to every man that asks me a reason of the hope that is in me, and
that with meekenes and fear, having a good co^cience, that whereas they back
byte me as an evil doer, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse my good
conversation in Christ, demand therefore what pleases you, and I will
according as Gods holy spirit shall teach me, answer to the same.


Father. In whom do thou believe, and whom do thou worship?


Son. Acts. 24
I answer with Saint Paull, and confess unto you, that after the way which
some called heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers, believing, al things
that are written in the Law and Prophets, and have hope toward God, that the
resurrection of the dead, shall be both of just and unjust, and therefore I
study to have always a clear conscience toward God, and toward men.


Father. Show me if thou have read perfectly the whole book of God?


Son. Psalm. 1.
Yea father, I may say with David, my delight is in the Law of the Lord, and
in his word have I exercised my self day and night.


Father. Are all things necessary to salvation contained in that book of
life, called the Bible?


Son. Yea truly father, Io. 5.
search the Scriptures says Christ, for in them ye think ye have eternal
life, and they are they which testify of me, and yet ye will not come
vnto-mee, that ye might have life.

Saint James says, James. 1
Suscipite insitum verbu^ quod potest saluare animas vestras, receive with
meekness, the word which is grafted in you, being able to save your souls.

Many signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, Io. 20.
which are not written in the Bible, but so many are written that may learn us
to believe that Jesus is Christ the son of GOD, and that in believing, we
may have life through his name.

Saint Peter says, 1. Peter. 2
although we see not Christ, yet we do believe and rejoice with joy
unspeakable and glorious, The end of faith is salvation.
receiving the end of our faith even the salvation of our souls.

Io. 15.
Christ Jesus himself says, that we are clean through the words which he has
spoken unto us.

Peter the Appostel rose up and said, ye men and brethren, Acts. 15.
ye know that GOD did choose among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should
hear the word of the Gospel, and believe, and GOD which knows the hearts,
bare them witness, and gave unto them the holy ghost, even as he did unto us,
and put no difference betwixe us and them, Purified by faith.
seeing that with faith he purified their hearts.

Saint Paull says to Timothy, continue thou in the things which thou have
learned, which also were committed unto thee, knowing of whom thou have
learned them. 2. Tim. 3
And for as much also as of a Child thou have known the holy Scriptures,
which are able to make thee learned unto salvation, through the faith which is
in Christ Jesus, for all Scriptures given by inspiration of GOD is profitable to
teach, Scripture makes men perfect in righteousness.
to improve, to amend, and to enstruct in righteousness, that the man of God
may be perfect and prepared unto all good works.

Whereby you may plainly perceive (Father) that all things needful to
salvation (both to the Jews and Gentiles, Conclusion
bond and free, is contained in the written word of GOD.


Father. Me thinks that by these proves the holy Scriptures contained not
only all things necessary for Salvation, but also all other things
needful for the good government of a Christian life.


Son. It is so (Father) as if it please God, you shall hear afterward in
the declaring of the duties of all estats and degrees of people, for what
blasphemy were it to the holy spirit of God to say, that God has left his
word, will, and Testament imperfect.


Father. Is there nothing then left out of Scripture for manne to teach that
is needful, many rites, ceremonies, ordinances, and inventions of man have
been added thereto and taught, as things most requisite even in my time.


Son. Deu. 4.
No father, the Lord says, you shall put nothing unto the word which I
command you, Prou 30.
neither do ought there from, put thou nothing unto his words, least he
reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.

Revel. 22.
I testify says Saint John, unto every man that hears the prophecy of ye
Lords book, if any man shall add unto those things, God shall add unto him
the plagues that are written in that book, and if any man shall minish of the
words of ye prophecy of that book, God shall take away his part out of the
book of life, and out of the holy City, and from the things that are written
in that book, who then dare be so bold father, to thrust in among the
ordinances and statutes of our heavenly father, man's inuencions and
constitutions, seeing there hangs Gods vengeance and eternal punishment over
the heads of such, ready to destroy soul and body, when the Lord
commands, and to cast them into hell fire that never quecheth.


Father. Seeing that the Scripture is the word of salvation, why do so many in
these days refuse to hear or read the same. Recusants



Son. Christ Jesus says, Io. 8.
he that is of God hears Gods words, they therefore hear them not, because
they are not of God.

To those Recusants says Christ further, Io. eod.
why do you not know my speech? even because you cannot abide the hearing of
my word.

Ye believe not my words, Io. 10.
because you are not of my sheep: for my sheep hear my voice, and I know
them, Recusants none of his sheep.
and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never
perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hands.

He that hears you says Christ (to his disciples) hears me, Luke. 10
and he that hears me, hears him that sent me, Recusants despise Christ.
and he that dispiseth you, despises me, and he that despises me, despises
him that sent me.

The Queen of the South shall rise at the day of judgment, Luke. 11.
with this nation, and condemn it, for she came from the uttermost parts of
the earth, to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold a greater then Solomon
is here.

Luke. 14
Nemo virorum istorum qui vocati sunt gustabunt cenam meam. None of these
(says Christ, that were called, and refused to come) shall taste of my Supper.

Acts. 3.
The time will come (says the Apostle. That every soul that will not here
that same Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people.

1. Io, 4. Recusants are not of God, neither know him.
We are of God, says Saint John: he that knows God, hears us, he that is
not of God, hears us not, hereby know we the spirit of God and the spyrite
of error.

Math. 10.
When Christ sent his Desciples to preach, he said, whosoever will not receive
you nor hear your preaching, when you depart out of that house, or that
City, shake of the dust of your feet against them, Recusants worse then
Sodomits.
verily I say unto you, it shall be easier for the Land of Sodom and Gomorra in
the day of judgment, then for that City.

Conclusion.
Whereby you may perceive Father, that the Recusantes to hear the blessed
word of OOD taught by his true preachers, are already condemned with the
Cities of Sodom and Gomorra. Io. 8.
Except they repent and a mend, for he that believes not (says Christ,) is
already condemned, because he believes not in the only begotten son of
God.


Father. If those that refuse to hear the word of God, be in such peril of
condemnation, why are they so bewitched that they deny their own salvation.


Son. They are so taught by the Priests of Baall, who cause division,
Seminarie^
and give occasions of evil, Romans 16
contrary to the wholesome doctrine which we have learned, and therefore
avoid them, for they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own
bellies, and with sweet and flattering words deceive the hearts of the
Innocents.

The Apostle S. Paull Prophecyeth and foretells; 2. Tim. 4
that the time shall come when they shall not suffer wholesome doctrine, but
after their own lusts shall they get them an heap of teachers, and shall
withdraw there ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables.

Acts. 20.
He shows further hat after his departing should come grievous woolues among
the people, not sparing the flock, and speak perverse things to draw
disciples after them.


Father. What is the practice of these seducers and Seminaryes go about, and
what punishment has happened to some of them?


Son. Acts. 17.
The Appostle shows that the Jews which believed not had indignation, and
took unto them evil men which were vagabounds, Seminaries would make rebellion.
and gathered a company and set an uproar amongst the people.

Acts. 13.
One Sergius Paullus a prudent man and ruler of the Country, called Paull and
Barnabas, and desired to here the word of GOD, but Elymas the sorcerer
withstood them, and sought to turn the ruler from the Faith.

Then Paull being full of the holy Ghost, looked on him and said, oh full of
subtyltie and deceipte, thou Child of the Diuill, A seducer smitten with
blindness.
thou enymie of righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the straight
ways of the Lord, and the Lord smote him that he was blind.

Corah, Dathan, and Abyron, Numer. 16
going about to seduce the people of Israel from the law of GOD taught by
Moses and Aron, the earth opened her mouth, and they, there wives, children,
famely, cattle, and all that they had, Sunck to hell quick
went down quick into hell.

Whereby you may see (Father) that utter ruin, and perpetual desolation is
ordained of ye almighty, for all Seminaries of false doctrine, and seducers of
his people from his holy Laws.


Father. Seeing that the Scripture is the word of salvation and that there be
many that go about to seduce us from the same, tell me in what language or
kind of speech ought that word to be. Service in a known tongue.



Son. Even in such a speech or language that every one may learn the same,
Deu. 4.
for the Lord commanded that the people should teach their children even their
sons and their sons sons, the ordinances and Laws which he set before
them.

Deu. 6.
Moses said unto the people, the Lord your God commanded me to teach you his
commandments ordinances and laws, that they might do them in the land which
they go to possess it.

Esaias. 28.
If he that speaks to the people be even as one ye uses rudeness of speech,
and a strange language, whom then shall such one teach knowledge.

Mark. 4.
The candle says Christ is not lighted, to be put under a Bushel or under
the Table, but it is lighted to be put on a Candlestick for there is nothing
so priuye, that shall not be opened, neither so secret but it shall come abroad.

Acts. 8.
The cha^berlaine of Candice Queen of the Ethiopeans, although he red the
Prophet Esaias, yet he confessed he could not be profited thereby, The way to be
expounded.
except he had a guide, and the spirit of God caused Philip the Apostle, to
read and expound it unto him in his own language.

Acts. 2.
There were at Jerusalem of every nation of them that were under heaven, and
after they had received the Holy Ghost, every one of them heard them speak
in his own language, the great works of God.

Saint Paull says, 1. Cor. 14.
greater is he that prophecieth, then he that speaks with tongues. Except he
expound it that the congregation may have edifiyng, let all things be done to
edifiyng. For when thou blessest with the spirit, how shall he that occupies
the rowme of the unlearned say Amen, at the giving of thanks, seeing he
understands not what thou say, thou verelie give thanks well but the
other is not edified.

I had rather says the same Appostle in the congregation to speak five words
with my understanding to the informacion of others, Eod.
rather then ten thousand words with the tongue. Conclusion
And therefore you may well perceive (Father) that the sacred word of our
merciful God and loving Father, has been keept to long hid under avayle
from us his people, who now embrace it with joy and gladness, as it is in
deed the word of salvation.


Father. Thou saydest my Son that the written word of God contained not only
all things necessary to salvation as thou proved, but also all things
needful for the government of a christian life.


Son. 2. Tim. 3
I said so Father, for saint Paull says, all scripture given by inspiration of
God, is profitable to teach, to improve, to amend, and to instruct in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect and prepared unto all good
works.


Father. Show unto me then (Son) how every particular person ought to behave
himself toward God his creator, toward his own soul and conscience, and
toward all men generally?


Son. I am most willing to do your commandment (loving Father,) but first I
besceeh you declare unto me whether I shall beeginne with the inferior and
lowest degree, or with the supreme and chief head and governor.


Father. Son begin at the superiors, and so descend, showing first who is
the supreme head.


Son. Christ that anointed of the Lord God, 1. Cor. 12
is supreme head over all people, and the faithful and elect are his body and
members one of another.


Father. Declare that the Church is the body of Christ, with some definition
thereof, that the better the Church of God may be known. Church.



Son. Saint Paull says, 1. Cor. 12
ye are the body of Christ, and members one of an other.

The Church, says the Prophet Ose, Oscas. 2.
is married unto the Lord in righteousness, in equity, in loving kindness,
in mercy, and also in faith.

There is neither Jew nor Gentile, Gal. 3.
bond nor free, man nor woman, but all one in Christ Jesus.

As the body (says Saint Paull) is one, and has many members, 1. Cor. 12
and all the members of one body, though they be many, yet are but one body,
even so is Christ, for by one Spirit we are all Baptized, to make one body,
whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have all
drunk of one spirit.

Romans 12.
For as we have many members in one body, and all members have not one office,
so we being many are one body in Christ, and every man among our selves, one
an others members.

Ephe. 1. Christ the head, we his members.
Christ, says Saint Paull, is made above all things the head of the
congregation, which is his body, and the fullness of him that fills all in
all.

Ephe. 2.
Ye are not strangers and forrenners, but Citizens with the saints, and of the
household of God, and buylt upon the foundation of the Apostles and prophets.
The true Church.
Jesus Christ himself being the head corner stone. In whom what building so
ever is coupled together, it grows unto an holy temple in the Lord, in whom
ye are also buylt together, to be an habitation of God through the holy Ghost.

Ephe. 4.
Let us follow the truth in love, and in all things that grow in him, which is
the head even Christ. Head.


2. These. 2
They that are chosen to salvation, sanctified by his spirit through belief of
ye truth, What is the Church 1. Tim. 3
whereunto they are called by ye Gospel, and so obtain the glory of our Lord
Jesus Christ. The house of God the congregation of the living God, 2. Tim. 3.
the Pyller and ground of the truth.

Christ has rule over the house, whose house we are, if we hold fast the
confidence and the rejoicing of that hope unto the end.

Saint Peter says that the Church of God is a chosen generation, 1. Peter. 2.
a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a people which are won, that should
show the virtues of him, that called them out of darkness.

They that hear the voice of God indeed, and keep his appointment, Exodus 19.
are chosen above all nations to be the Lords own people, a kingdom of
priests, Deuteronomy. 7.
and an holy people. The true Church.
Whereby father you may see that the faithful which hear the voice of God,
and keep the Lords appointment, are members of the mystical body of Christ,
and Christ Jesus their head, whereby they are made an holy Temple.


Father. Is there (my son) some that are not of this true Church of God,
Christ being the head?


Son. Yea Father, for true is that saying, The devils Chaplen.
where God has a Church, Satan has commonly a Chapel.


Father. Tell me in few words, who are of the Devils Church.


Son. Exodus 19. 2 Thessalonians. 2
They that refuse to hear the voice of God in deed, and deny to keep his
appointment, that believe not the truth whereunto they are called by the
Gospel, that buyld not upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets: Jesus
Christ being the head corner stone, The malignant Church.
for any other foundation can no man lay then yt which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ.


Father. My Son, I perceive that there be many that are Recusantes, and
refuse to hear Gods voice, deny his holy laws, believe not the truth, which
is Christ, and that build not upon this rock, but upon the constitutions of
men, and traditions of Elders, flatly denying (as I think) their own
salvation, whom the Lord in his good time call home out of Satan's hold,
that there may be one foulde, and one shepherd. But proceed (Son) to show
me who is the head of the Church of God next and immediately under Christ the
chief head.


Son. Every Emperor, King, or prince, King supreme head
within their several Empyres or kingdoms.


Father. What say thou then to those that challenge Supremacy over Kings (as
they say) by the succession of Saint Peter.


Son. Let Saint Peter answer that himself, 1. Peter. 2
who being inspyred with Gods holy spirit, did foresee that many would seek
honor, ambition, and promotion, and desire to be called Rabbi, contrary to
Christ's words, prevented them in these words. Submit your selves unto al
manner of ordinances of man, for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King,
King chief head.
as unto the chief head, either unto Rulers as unto them that are sent of him
for the punishment of evil doers, but for the love of them that do well.

Nay, 1. Peter. 2
in an other place he (concluding upon the duty of all the true servant of
God) says, honor all men, Honor Kings. Titus. 3
love brotherly fellowship. Fear God, honor the King.

Saint Paul wills Titus and all ministers and Preachers, to warn all
subjects, that they submit themselves to their King and Prince, and that
they also obey all the officers ordained by them.


Father. Kings are the ordinance of God.
Well does the Apostle S. Peter show who is the head of Christ's members,
which as he says is the king, therefore tell me by whom are kings ordained?


Son. Romans 13.
Saint Paul says that there is no power but of God, the powers that be are
ordained of God.

Wisd. 6.
Hear O ye kings and understand, O learn ye that be judges of the earth, give
ear ye that rule the multitude, and delight in much people, for power is given
you of the Lord, and the strength from the highest.

1. Kings. 9
The Lord told the prophet Samuel in his ear. And said, to morrow this time
will I send a man out of the land of Byniamin, him shall thou anoint to be
king over my people of Israel, that he may save my people out of the hands of
the Philistines.

1. King. 10
Samuel took a vessel of oil and powered it upon the head of Saull and
kissed him and said, the Lord has anointed thee to be king over his
inheritance.

David said to his wife Michell the Lord has chosen me, and commanded me, 2.
King. 6,
to be a ruler over all the people of the Lord, even over Israel.

Thus says the Lord of hosts unto David, 1. Cro. 17.
I took thee out of the pastures when thou wentest after sheep, that thou
should be king over my people Israel.

Solomon (the third king of Israel) said to the Lord, 2. Cro. 1.
thou have made me a king over a people, which is like the dust of the earth in
multitude.

Solomon said, ^. Kin. 3.
O Lord my God it is thou that have made thy servant king in stead of David my
father.

Wisdom and strength are the Lords, Dan. 2.
he puts down kings, and sets up kings.

The Lord has set a ruler over every people, so that the ruler, Eccle. 17.
Conclusion, that the Prince is the head.
Prince or king set over every people by the Lord being so ordained of God, is
chief head over those people, where the Lord has placed and set him.


Father. Thou proouest very well and directly my Son, if Kings and Princes
are ordained of God. But now proceed and tell me for what cause?


Son. 1. Pet. 2. Romans 13.
The Apostle answers thus for the punishment of evil dooers, but for the
love of them that do well.

Rulers are not fearful to them that do well, but to them that do evil,
for he is the minister of God for thy wealth. But and if thou do evil, then
fear, for he bears not the sword for naught, for he is the minister of
God to take vengeance of him that does evil.

Exodus 18.
Moses said, judge between every man and his neighbor, and show them the
ordinance of God and his laws.

Genesis 26.
Abymelech the king, commanded that none of his people should touch Abraham or
his wife, and whosoever hurt either of them should die the death.

Who are to be chose^ kings. Deuteronomy. 17. No stranger to be thy king. Deuteronomy. 17.
Thou shall make him king over thee which the Lord thy God shall choose, even
one from among, thy brethren shall thou make king over thee, thou may not
make a stranger king over thee which is not of thy brethren.

The king ought to read in the law of his God all the days of his life, and
not turn there from, neither to the right hand nor to the left.

David reigned over Israel and executed just and right over all his people. 2.
kings. 8


The King shall give sentence between parties, 2. king. 25
and justify the righteous and condemn the ungodly.

The King is like an Angel of God to hear good and bad. 2. king. 14


The King ought to defend the fatherless and poor, Psalm. 82.
to see that such as be in need and necessity have right.

A wise King destroys the ungodly, Pro. 20.
and brings the wheel over them.


Father. Son, 1. Pet. 2.
I understand the Kings duty and that the God of heaven has chosen him for
the punishment of the wicked and for the praise of the good doer, but tell me
if he have this power and authority from God over all his subjects spiritual
and temporal.


Son. Yea Father, over all people within his several jurisdiction, whether
exclesiasticall or cyuell.

Joshua commanded the Prists to take Joshua. 3.
up the Ark of the Lord and to go before the people, and they so did.

Joshua. 4
The Lord said to Joshua, command the Priests that bear the Arc of witness, to
come up out of Iourden, and the people to follow.

3. Cron. 8.
Solomon set the sorts of the Priests to their offices, and the Priests in
their watches to minister to the Lord, and the Priests the Levites, omitted not
the commandment of the King concerning any manner of thing.


Father. Well, but what further has a Prince to do in the Church of God.


Son. 4. king. 18
You may perceive Father by these examples following. Hezechia did that which
was right in the sight of the Lord, as David had done, he put down the hill
Alters, and brake the Images, cut down the groves, and all to brake the brazen
Serpent which Moses made, for unto that time the people did burn sacryfice to
it and called it Nehustan.

Dan. 6.
Daryus the King wrote a commandment that all men spiritual and temporal
within his domynion should fear and stand in awe of Daniels God, for he is the
living God, that abides ever, and his kingdom shall not fayll, it is he that
delyuereth and saves.

The King ought to overthrow all Alters, break down their Pyllers, Deu. 7.
cut down their groves, and burn the graven Images with fire.

Whereby you may plainly see that the King or Prince in the Church of God has
aucthorytie to root out all supersticion and Idolitrie.

And to command that the living God be feared and worshipped.


Father. What punishment may the King or Prince appoint for Idolaters and for
those that pollute the Temple of the Lord, and will not fear the God of
Israel.


Son. Even what punishment as ye Prince shall think good, for the Lord
says, Joshua. 2. The kings displeasure is a messenger of death.
whosoever does disobay his mouth and will not harken unto his words in all
that he commands him, let him dye.

Solomon said if thou be a Child of 3. Kings. 1
virtue, there shall not one hair of thine head fall to the earth, but if thou
be wicked thou shall dye.

Deu. 13
If there arise (says the Lord) among you a Prophet, a dreamer of dreams, and
give a sign or wonder, and that sign or wonder come to pass, and shall then
say, come let us worship strange Gods, thou shall have no pity nor compassion
upon him, but cause him to be slain, thou shall stone him with stones that he
dye.

Exodus 22
He that offers to any Gods but to the Lord only, let him be rooted out.

Exodus 21
He that smyteth a man that he dye, shall dye for it.

He that curses his father or mother shall dye for it. Eye for eye, tooth for
tooth, hand for hand. etc.

By these examples you may well note Father, that Princes may punish with
imprisonment, fine, or death, offenders: whether Priests or seculer persons.


Father. Seeing that Princes are ordained of God for these causes, and have
power to punish with death, or otherwise according to the offense, must not all
persons then needs obey them.


Son. Yes Father, all subjects must honor them, and obey them with their
bodies, goods, and prayers: Over all which the Prince has power.

Let every soul says Saint Paull, Romans 13.
submit himself to the aucthorytie of the hyer powers.

Ye must needs obey, Eod.
not only for fear of vengance, but also because of conscience. Warn them
that they submit themselves to rule and power, Titus. 3
that they obey the officers.

Submit your selves unto all manner of ordinances for the Lords sake, 1.
Peter. 2
whether it be to the King, as to the chief head, either unto rulers, as unto
them that are sent of him for the punishment of evil doers, but for the praise
of them ye do well.

All our Cities, possessions, Iudeth. 3
al mountains and Hills, all Fields great and small, Cattle, Sheep, and
Goats, Horses, Camels, all our goods and households, are in the power of the
King, and under his subjection, we our selves and our Children are his own.
Christ Jesus says, Math. 22
give to Caesar ye things that belong to Caeser, and unto God the things that
are goods.

Esdras 7
Whosoever will not obey the King, let him have Judgment without delay.

Romans 13.
Give to every man his duty, tribute to whom tribute belongs, custom to who^
custom is due, fear to whom fear belongs, honor to who^ honor
pertains.

Math. 7
Jesus said to Peter, of whom do the Kings of the earth take tribute or toll,
and further said, go least we should offend and take thine angle and look
that thou take the fyshe that first comes up, and thou shall find in his
mouth a piece of xx. pence, that take, and give it unto them for me and thee.

1. king. 8
The Lord showing the domynion of a king over subjects, says, he will take your
sons and put them to his Chariots and make horsemen to run before him, and
make of them Captains over thousands, and over hundreths, to ear his ground,
and gather his harvest, and your daughters will he make cooks, apotecaries, and
bakers, and he shall take the best of your feildes, vine-yerds, olyues, and
give the^ to his servants. I exhort says saint Paull, Tim. 2
that above all things prayers, Prayer for Kings.
supplications, intercessions and giueing of thanks, be had for all men, for
Kings and for all that are in authority, that we may live a quiet and
peaceable life, with all godliness, and honesty.

And all the people said, 1. King. 10
God send the king long life.

I pray God that my Lord King David may live ever. God save King Solomon, 3.
kings. 1.
and the people said Amen. I pray God that the Lord God of my king say so too.

Daniell said, oh king, Dan. 2.
God save thy life for ever.


Father. What, Evil princes.
are all kings and Princes to be honored and prayed for, if they be evil and
wicked?


Son. Yea, Dan. 3.
for why they are Gods ministers ordained of God. I read that Nabugodonozer
King of Babulon, made an Image to be worshipped, howbeit Sidrach, Mysaac, and
Abednago, although they refused to worship that Idol, yet they submitted
themselves, and honored the King.

Daryus king of Babulon, Dan. 6
casting Danyell into a Lions Den, yet Danyell honored the king, and said, oh
King, God save thy life for ever.

Saull a wicked king purposing to have killed Da. yet Da. honored him, and
said, 1. king. 24
the Lord forbid that I should touch the Lords anointed.

Job. 34.
For the wickedness of the people does the Lord make an hippocrite to reign
over them.

Pro. 21.
The kings heart is in the hand of God, like as are the ryuers of water, he
may turn it whether soever he will. So that you may perceive Father, that God
ordayneth a wicked king to reign over wicked people, to scourge and plague
the^: For a wicked king is the lands scourge.


Father. Depose.
May not Subjects labor to depose their Prince if he be evil, and place
another?


Son. Daniel. 2.
The Lord forbid, for why, wisdom and strength are the Lords, he sets up
kings, and puts down kings.

1. king. 17.
The Lord has rented his kingdom from thee, and has cast thee off, that thou
shall not be king.


Father. But by whom, and wherefore was Saull deposed?


Son. 1. Cro. 10.
By the Lord was he deposed. Because he trespassed against the Lord, in that he
kept not the word of the Lord, but sought and asked counsel of a woman ye
wrought with a spirit, and asked not of the Lord.

The highest has power over kingdoms of men, and gives them to whom he will,
Daniel. 4.
and he brings even the very abiectes of men over them.


Father. Then it is not lawful for any person to rebel or make insurrection?
Rebellion.



Son. Who can lay his hand says David, 1. king. 26. 1. king. 24.
on the Lords anointed, and be guiltless, the Lord be merciful unto me, that
I do not touch the Lords anointed.

David said to the young man, 2. king. 2.
how is it that thou wast not afraid to slaye the Lords anointed, and his
young men came upon him and slew him.

The unrighteous and wicked men that slew the kings son in his own house, 2.
king. 4
and upon his bed, shall not I says David, require his blood at your hands,
and take you from the earth, and David caused them to be hanged up, and cut
of their hands and feet.

Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, 1. king. 15
and disobedience, is as the sin of Idolatry.

2. king. 18
Absolon rebelling against David his father, road upon a Mule, who ran under
a tree, and was hanged by the locks of his hair, and was cast into an hole
and stones upon him.

Math. 27
Judas who betrayed his Master for xxx. pieces of silver, went out and hanged
himself, and his bowels gushed out.

Numer. 16
Corath, Dathan, and Abyron, rebelled, and they, and their wives and children,
goods and cattells, being in their tents, the earth opened her mouth, and they
went down all quick into hell.

Nume. 16.
Two hundredth being of the same conspiracy, not then there present, fire came
down from heaven, and destroyed them.

Ecclesi. 10
Wish the king no evil in thine heart, nor thy Prince any hurt in thy prieuie
Chamber, for a bird of the air shall bewray thee, and with her feathers shall
she bewray thy secrets.

Romans 13
But chiefelye mark Saint Paul's words. Whosoever resists, shall receive to
themselves damnation, whereby you may well perceive Father, how the Lord God of
heaven plaugeth rebels, not only with bodily death and destruction, but also
with eternal confusion and condemnation, in the burning lake of hell, where
fire and Brimstone, storm and tempest, shall be their portion to drink.


Father. Jesus, my son, how many conspiracies and traiterous rebellions, have
been of late against our gracious Princess.


Son. Yea father, yet the Lord that great and mighty Iehoua, does save his
anointed out of their bloody hands. A prayer
And I beseech our God and heavenly father, for Jesus death, and innocent
bloodshedding, to bless, preserve, and save her Majesty, and either in mercy
convert their hearts to their dutiful obedience unto her Majesty, or else in
justice destroy them, that they may perish and have their portion with Corath
and his company, which thing the eternal God for his great mercy sake grant.
And thereto let all that fear God say, Amen.


Father. And I beseech ye Lord God, 3. kings. 1
of my princess to say so to, Amen. Proceed my son to tell me of whom have
Judges, Judges and magestrato
Rulers, Magestrates and Officers of every degree in the common wealth, their
power and authority.


Son. Of their head the Prince, even as the Prince has power from his head
Christ. For they are the hands of their king or Prince, whereby he works.

Exodus 18.
Be thou unto the people to Godward, yt thou may bring the causes unto God,
and thou shall teach them ordinances and laws, Judges must be true men such
as fear God, not cou^tus
and show them the way wherein they must walk, and the work which they must
do. Moreover thou shall seek out among all the people, men of actiuitie and
such as fear God, true men, hating covetousness, and make them heads over
the people, Captanines over thousands, over hundreths, over fifties, and over
ten, and let them judge the people at all seasons.

Deu. 1.
Moses said to the people, I took out of your Trybes, The prince commandment
to Judges and officers with their duties.
Captains, men of wisdom, and that were expert, and made the^ rulers over
you, and I charged your judges that same time, saying, hear the cause of your
brethren, and judge righteously between every man and his brother, and the
stranger that is with you, see that you know no face in judgment, but hear
the small as well as the great, and be afraid of no man, for the judgment is
Gods.

Thou shall not favor the poor, Leuitic. 19
nor honor the mighty, but in righteousness shall thou judge thy neighbor.

Thou shall not reign over thy brother cruelly, but shall fear thy God,
Leuit. 25
ye shall not reign over an other cruelly.

Turn not aside from the law of God, Deu. 5.
neither to the right hand, nor to the last.

The judges shall give sentence between parties, and iustisie the righteous,
Deu. 25.
and condemn the ungodly.

Thou shall take no gifts, Exodus 23
for gifts blind the sight, and pervert the words of the righteous. Psalm.
28.
Defend the fatherless and poor, says David, see that such as be in need
and necessity have right.


Father. Ought these rulers also to be obeyed?


Son. Yea Father, Deu. ^.
for when Moses had ordained Rulers and Judges over the people, they all
answered and said, that which thou have spoken is good unto us to do.

Joshua. 1,
The people answered Joshua, all that thou commaundest us will we do, and
whether thou sendest us, will we go, and whosoever he be that disobayeth thy
mouth, and will not harken unto the words in all ye thou co^maundst him, let
him dye.

Exodus 17
When Moses sat down to judge the people, all the people stood before him
from morning till even.

Exodus 22.
Thou shall not rail on the Gods, neither blaspheme the ruler of the people.

Ieremi. 35
We have (said the people) obayed Ionadab our father, in all that he commanded
us, and the Lord said to those Rachabites, God blesses obedient persons
because you have been obedient to Iona. Iona. shall not fail to have one to
stand always before me out of his stock. And concluding with S. Paul's words
to Titus, Titus. 3
warn the^ yt they be subject to rule and power, and that they obey the
officers.


Father. Prechers and Ministers.
My Son, I am now desirous to know the duties of Preachers and ministers of
the word of God.


Son. Deu. 10.
According to my little knowledge, and as I have red in Gods book, I will show
you ye same. The Lord separated ye tribe of Leuy, to bear ye Arc of the
appointment of the Lord, and to stand before the Lord, and to minister unto
him, and to bless in his name.

Whosoever kills a beast, Leuiti. 17
and brings it to the Tabernacle of witness, to offer to the Lord, No man
may take upon him the Priests office uncalled.
blood shall be imputed to that man, as though he had shed blood, and he shall be
rooted out of the people of Israel, wherefore when the people bring offerings,
let them bring them to the Priests to offer them.

Look out among you seven men of honest report, Acts. 6.
and full of the holy Ghost and wisdom, Who ought to be chose^.
to whom we may commit this business, and when they had prayed, they laid
their hands upon them.

I warn thee that thou stir up the gift that is in thee, Tim. 1. Ordering of
Ministers. Acts. 14 Titus. 1.
by ye putting on of my hands. And they ordained them elders in every
congregation, by election, and prayed. Reform things yt are imperfect, and
ordain elders in every city, as I appointed thee. Let them be sober, sage,
discret, Titus. 2
sound in the faith, in love, in patience. 1. Cor. 6.
Let us give none occasion of evil, yt in our office be found no fault, but in
all things behave our selves as the ministers of God, in much pains, in
afflictions, in necessities, in anguish, in stripes, in prisonments, in
stryfes, in labors, in watchinges, in fasting, in pureness, in knowledge, in
long suffering, in kindness, in the holy Ghost, in love unfeigned, in the word
of truth, in the power of God, by the armor of righteousness, on the right
hand and on the left, by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report,
as deceauers, and yet true, as unknown, and yet known, as dying, and behold
we live, as chastened, and not killed, as sorrowing, and yet always merry, as
poor, and yet make many rych, as having nothing, and yet possessing all
things.

Esaias. 62.
I have set watchmen upon thy wales Oh Jerusalem, which shall cease neither day
nor night to preach the Lord.

Jeremy. 3.
I will give you heardmen after mine own mind, which shall feed you with
learning and wisdom.

Ezech. 3
Thou son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel, and
therefore take good heed unto the words of my mouth, and give them warning at
my commandment, if I say unto thee concerning the ungodly man, that without
doubt he must dye, and thou give him no warning, nor speak unto him that
he turn from his evil way and so live, then shall the same ungodly man dye in
his unrighteousness, but his blood will I require at thine hands, but if thou
give him warning, and yet he forsake not his ungodliness, then shall he dye in
his own wickedness, but you have discharged thy self.

If the people take a man of their Country, and set him to be their watchman,
Ezech 34
the same man, when he sees the sword come upon the Land, shall blow the
Trumpet and warn the people. etc.

I set thee over people and kingdoms, Jeremy. 1
that thou may root out, break off, destroy and make wast, and that thou
may build up and plant.

I will send out my fishers to take them, Ieremi. 6.
and after that, I will send out my hunters to hunt them out, from all
mountains and hills, and out of the Caves of stone.

In the Priests lips should be sure knowledge, Malachi. 2 Gods messenger.
that men may seek the Law at their mouths, for he is a messenger of the
Lord of hosts.

Ye are the light of the world, Math. 5.
let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven.

Math. 10.
Go (says Christ) and preach, the kingdom of heaven is at hand, heal the
sick, cleanse lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils, that which I tell you in
darkness speak in the light, and that ye hear in the ear that preach on
the house tops.

Math. 28
Preach the gospel to all creatures, and babtisme them in the name of the
Father, and of the Sun, and of the holy ghost.

Mark. 16
Go into all the world and preach the Gospel to all creatures, he that
believes and is baptized shall be saved, he that believes not shall be damned.

Io. 4.
He ye God has sent speaks ye words of god.

A true precher. Acts. 6.
They ought to give themselves continually unto prayer, and to the ministation
of ye word, and to be obedient unto the faith.

Acts. 20.
Take heed says the Apostle, unto your selves, and to all the flocks, among
whom the holy ghost has made you overseers to rule the congregation of God,
which Christ has bought with his blood.

1. Peter. 5.
Feed Christ's flock as much as lies in you, taking, the oversight of them not
as compelled thereto, but of a good will, not for desire of filthy lucre, but
of a good mind.


Father. Are all the ministers in the Church of God of like calling?


Son. Some are Appostles, some Prophets, 1. Cor. 12
some teachers, some workers of miracles, unto some is given the gifts of
healing, helpers, governors.


Father. I here thee make no mention of Bishopes or ministers.


Son. Father there be Bishops, Tim. 3.
ministers and Deacons.


Father. Let me here their several duties with the manner of their
conuersations?


Son. A Bishop must be blameles, A Bishops A^^ie. 1. Ti^. ^.
the husband of one wife, diligent, sober, discret, a keeper of hospitality, apt
to teach, not given to overmuch wine, no fighter, not greedy of filthy lucre,
but gentle, abhoring fighting, abhoring coueteousnesse, one that rules well
his own house, one that has Children in subjection with reverence, Titus. ^.
no young scholar, least they swel and fall into ye judgment of ye evil
speaker, and also have a good report of them that are without.

A minister must be honest, A Ministers duty.
not double tounged, not given to much wine, neither gredy of filthy lucre,
but holding ye mystery of faith with a good concience, Proved and then chosen.
let him first be proved, says saint Paull, and then let him minister, so that
no man be able to reprove him.

Deacons.
Let the Deacons be the husbands of one wife, and such as rule their Children
well and their own households.

1. Tim 4 The duty of all Ministers.
Let no man says Paull to Timothe, dispyse thy youth, but be unto them that
beeleeue an example in word, in conversation, in love, in spirit, in faith, in
pureness, give attendance, to reading, to exhortacion, to doctrine, and
despise not the gift that is given unto thee through proficie with the laying
on the hands, by the authority of priesthode.

2. Tim. 4
Preach the way of God, be fervent in season, and out of season, improve,
rebuke, exhort with all suffering and doctrine.


Father. False teachers.
Son, but I have heard that there be false teachers, and seducers of the
people, therefore let me have some mark whereby they may be known.


Son. Acts. 5.
The true preachers daily in the temple and in every house cease not to preach
Jesus Christ. True teachers.


When they are called straight way, Acts. 9 Acts. 10
they preach Jesus Christ in the Synagoges, how that he is the Son of God,
and very Christ, they keep nothing back that is profitable, but openly and
in every house, both to the Jews and Greeks, they witness the repentance
that is toward God, and faith toward Jesus Christ.

They neither choppe nor change with the word of God, 2. Cor 2.
but even out of purensse and by the power of God, in the fight of God to
speak in Christ.

They do not preach themselves but Jesus Christ, to be the Lord, 2. Cor. 4.
and themselves the peoples servants for Jesus Christ sake, and further you may
perceive who are true teachers by the word going before.


Father. Let me hear some doctrine of the false teachers, and seducers of the
people. False teachers.



Son. The false teachers you shall know by their fruits, Math. 7.
they go in long garments and love salutacions in markets: etc.

Ezech. 34.
Woo be to the shepherds of Israel, they feed themselves, they eat up the fat
and cloth themselves with the wool, the best have they slain, C^uetous and
doing not good.
but the flock have they not nourished, the weak have they not holden up, the
sick have they not healed, the outcasts have they not brought again, the lost
have they not sought, but churlish and cruelly have they ruled them, but I will
require my sheep at their hands, says the Lord.

Jeremy. 2.
They teach their own ways, and dare say they are without sin, Iustifiers.
and guiltles, I have not offended, and therefore the Lord says, I condemn
thee in judgment.

Ieremi. 14
They preach unto you false vysions, Charms, vanyties and deceitfulness, of
their own heart.

Mark. 12
They go says Christ in long garments, and love salutacions in the market
place, False teachers deceive widows with praying for their dead husbands
and chief seats in feasts, and in the congregation, and devour widows
houses under pretense of long prayers, but their damnation shall be great.


Father. I perceive well what the false teachers are, and yt their end is
damnacion, but let us come again to the true teachers, tell me wherefore ye
Lord has placed Appostles, Prophets, Euengelists, sheepherds and teachers in
his Church.


Son. Saint Paull says, Ephe. 4
even to the edifying of the saints to the work and ministratio^ even to the
edifying of the body of Christ till we all come to the unity of faith and
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man unto the measure of the full
perfect age of Christ.


Father. If preachers and ministers be sent for this purpose, then surely we
ought to maintain them with our goods, and reverence them as the chosen
messengers of God, tell me whereupon they shall live?


Son. The Tithes of the people has the Lord given them to be thire
inheretaunce. Numer. 18 Tithes.


They shall have says the Lord the tithe Deuteronomy. 14
of all the increase of the field that springs year by year.

Deu. 8.
The first fruit of corn, wine, and oil, the first of the wool, of thy
sheep, shall thou give to the priest.

1. Cor. 9.
If we sow unto you, says Saint Paull, special things, is it a great thing if
we reap your bodylie things, do you not know that they which minister
about holy things, live of the sacrifice, even so did the Lord ordain that
they which preach the gospel should live of the gospel.

Gal. 6.
Let him that is taught in the word minister unto him that teaches him in all
good things.

Joshua. 13 Offerings. Heb. 13,
Joshua gave none inheretance to the Leuits but the offerings of the people.

Remember them that have the oversight of you, which have spoken unto you the
word of God, whose faith see yt you follow, and mark the end of their
conversation.

Reverence Ministers
Obey them that have the oversight of you, and submit your selves unto them
for they watch for your souls even as they that must give accounts, that they
may do it with joy and not with grief.

I beseech you be obedient to all that help and labor, 1. Cor. 16.
look that you know them that are such.

I was filled after that I received the things which were sent from you,
Phillip. 4
an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice accepted unto God.


Father. But Son, what shall Ministers and Preachers do with that which
remains of the tithes and benefices, more then they bestow of themselves,
their wives, Children, and famelie?


Son. They shall give it says the Lord, Deu. 26.
unto the stranger, the fatherless, and the wydowes, that they may eat within
their gates, and fill themselves.


Father. Thou have spoken much what Ministers must do, and whereupon they
shall live, but tell me what reward the Lord prepares for them in the world
to come.


Son. The wise, Dan. 12.
such as have taught others unto godliness, shall glyster as the shining of
heaven, and shall be as the stars world without end.

Revel. 213
A crown of glory, a throne of Majesty, a paradise of pleasure, a life
everlasting.

Math. 15
They shall shine as the Sun in the kingdom of the Father.

Esaias. 51.
An everlasting joy is upon their heads, they possess joy and exultacion, and
all pain and forrow is fled from them.

Revel. 3,
I will says Christ, grant them to sit in my seat with me.

1. Peter. 5
When the chief shepperd Jesus Christ shall appear, they shall receive an
incorruptable crown of Glory.

Revel. 22
They shall see the sace of God, and his names shall be in their foreheades.


Father. Well son, the Lord is a great God and merciful father, thus to
reward them that work his work, but are Ministers and Preachers reverenced of
all men as the messengers of God, and disposers of his secrets?


Son. No Father, sometime slandered, sometime mocked, sometime bett, and
sometime put in death.

They ^acked the messengers of the Lord, and despised his word, 2. Cro. 36
and misvsed his prophets, until the wrath of God arose against the people.

They had the messengers of the Lord in^ension, 3. Esdras. 1
and look what GOD said unto them by his prophets, they made but a sport of
it.

The rulers beat the Apostles, Acts. ^.
and commanded them not to speak in the name of the Lord Jesus, but they went
away from the Counsel, rejoicing that they were compted worthy to suffer
rebuke for his name.

Christ left us an example that we should follow his steps, 1. Peter. 2
who did no sin, neither was there any guile found in his mouth, which when
he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, by
whose stripes we were healed.

The wicked says Saint Peter, 2. Peter. 2.
live in pleasure in their own deceyueable ways, and feasting, and mocking
the desciples.

Elia said, 3. kings. 1
the Children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, broken down thine alters,
slain the Prophets with the sword, and I only am left, and they seek to take
away my life.

Heb. 11.
Some are racked, some reproched, some whipped, some chayned, some imprisoned,
other stoned, cut in pieces, slain with the sword.

Math. 26.
Yea, Christ our Master and head, crucified. Wherefore if we be compted the
off skowring of the world, and with the Apostles, and Christ himself killed,
let us rejoice, Math. 5.
for great shall our reward be in heaven.


Father. ^a^sters.
Proceed to the duties of Masters to their servants.


Son. ^ollo. 4.
Saint Paull teaches plainly, saying, that Masters must do to the servant
that which is just and equal, knowing also that they have a master in heaven.

^phe. 6
Ye Masters, do that which is right unto your servants, putting away
threatninges, for the Lord has no respect of persons.

^euitic. 19
Let no servant wages abide with she until the morning.

Whosoever woorketh any thing for thee, Tobias. 4.
immediately give him his hyre, and look that thy servant wages remain not
by thee one night.

If thy brother or sister serve thee six years, Deu. 15.
and in the seventh year depart from thee, thou shall not let him go from
thee empty, but shall give them of thy sheep, and of thy corn, and of thy
wine.

Whereas thy servant works truly, Eccle. 7.
entreat him not evil, nor the hireling that is faithful unto thee: love a
discrete servant as thine own soul, defraude him not of his liberty,
neither leave him a poor man.

He that defraudeth a labourer of his hyer, is a bloudshedder. Eccle. 34


The hyer of the laborers that have reaped down your Corn fields, James. 5.
which hyer is of you kept back by fraud, cries, and the cry has entered
into the ears of the Lords Sabbath, so that if Masters detayne their
servant wages, or deal cruelly with them, the king of glory will burn
their flesh in the fire.


Father. Let me hear the servant duty to their Masters? Servants.



Son. Titus. 2
Saint Paull says, exhort servants that they be obedient unto their own
masters, and to please them in all things, not answering again, neither to be
pickers, but that they show all good faithfulness, that they may do worship
to the doctrine of Christ our Savior in all things.

Ephe. 6.
Ye Servants obey them that are your bodelie masters, with fear and trembling,
even with the singleness of your heart, as unto Christ, not doing service unto
the eye, as they that go about to please men, but as the Servant of Christ
doing the will of God from the heart with good will, serving the Lord, and not
men.

Collo. 3
Ye Servant be obedient unto your bodily Masters in all things, not with eye
service, as men pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing God.

1. Tim. 6
Let as many servant as are under the yoke, count their Masters worthy of
all honor, that the name of God and his doctrine be not evil spoken off.

1. Peter. 2
And concluding with Saint Peter's words, which are, Servant obey your Masters
with fear, not only if they be good and courteous, but also though they be
froward.


Father. Tell me some thing of the duties of husbands to their wives? Husbands



Son. Saint Peter who was married himself, thus exhorts husbands, 1. Pet.
3^
ye men dwell with your wives according to knowledge, giueing honor to the
wife as unto the weaker vessel, and as unto them that are heirs of the grace
of life, that your prayers be not hindered.

Ye husbands (says Saint Paull) love your wives, and be not bitter unto them.
Collo. 3


Ye husbands love your wives, Ephe. 5.
even as Christ loved the congregation, and gave himself for it, to sanctify
it, so ought men to love their own wives, as their own bodies, he ye loves
his wife, loves himself, for this cause shall a man leave father and mother,
and shall be joined unto his wife, Genesis 2.
and of two shall be made one flesh.


Father. Show me what wives should do to their husbands, because many now
adays grow stubbourne and wilful.


Son. Ye wives says Saint Paull, VViues duties.
submit your selves unto your own husbands as unto the Lord, for the
husband is the wives head, even as Christ is the head of the congregation,
therefore even as the congregation is in subjection unto Christ, likewise let
the wives be in subjection unto their husbands in all things.

Genesis 3.
Sub potestate viri eris, thou shall (said God) be subject to thy husband.

Col. 3.
Ye wives submit your selves unto your own husbands, as it is convenient in the
Lord.

1. Peter. 3
Ye wives says Saint Peter, be in subjection to your husbands, that even they
that obey not the word, may be without the word won by the conversation of
the wives, while they behold their chaste conversation coupled with fear,
VViues apparel.
whose apparel shall not be outward, with broyded hair, and hanging on of
Gold, either in putting on of gorgious apparel, but let the hyd manne which
is in the heart, be without all corruption, so that the spirit be myld, which is
before God, a thing much set by, for after this manner in the old time did the
holy women which trusted in God tire themselves, and were diligent to their
own husbands even as Saray obeyed Abraham, and called him Lord, whose
daughters ye are, as long as ye do well and are not dismaide with any terror.

All women should hold their husbands in honor both among great and small.
^ester 1



Father. What, may not man and woman be divorced, after they be married
together?


Son. At the beginning God made man and woman, and said, Gene. 2 Divorce.
for this cause shall a man leave father and mother, Math. 19.
and cleave to his wife, and they twain shall be one flesh, wherefore they are
not twain, but one flesh, let no man therefore put a sunder that which God has
coupled together.


Father. Moses gave the people a testimonial of diuourcement, that they might
put them away.


Son. Yea father, Moses, Fornication Math. 19.
because of the hardness of their hearts, suffered them to put away their wives,
but whosoever says Jesus Christ, puts away his wife, except it be for
fornication, and marries an other breaks wedlock, and whosoever marries
her that is deuorsed commits adultery.


Father. Parents.
The duty of parents would I learn, for many bring up their children
wantonlie, tell me therefore plainly and truly, although thou be but a Child
in years yet I praise God thou art almost a man in wisdom and knowledge.


Son. Genesis 13
The Lord said, I know that Abraham will command his Children and his household
after him that they keep the way of the Lord, and do after right and
concience.

Eccle. 26
If thy daughter be not shamefast hold her in straitely, least she abuse her
self through to much liberty.

Eccle. 7.
If thou have sons bring them up in nourture and learning, Daughters married
to wisemen.
and hold them in awe from their youth up, If you have a daughter keep her
body and show not thy face cherefull toward her, marry thy daughter, give her
to a man of understanding.

If thy daughter be wanton keep her in straightly, Eccle. 42
least she cause thine enemies to laugh thee to scorn.

You shall says God, Deu. 4.
teach all my laws and ordinances unto your Children.

Ye fathers move not your children unto anger and wrath, Ephe. 6.
but bring them up in the doctrine and informacion of the Lord.

Ye fathers provoke not your Children to anger, least they be of a desperate
mind. Collo. 3


He that spares the rood hates his son, Pro. 13.
but who so loves him chasteneth him betimes.

Who so loves his child holds him still under correction, Eccle. 30
that he may have joy of him afterward, and that he grope not after his
neighbors doors, he that teaches his son shall have joy of him, and need
not to be a shamed of him among his acquaintance.

Give him no liberty in his youth, Eccle. 30 Liberty hurts children.
and excuse not his folly, teach thy Child and be diligent therein, least it
be to thy shame.


Father. What says the scripture of Children to their parents.


Son. Children. Ephe. 6
Thus says S. Paull, children obey your fathers and mothers in the Lord, for
that is right, honor the father and mother that thou may prosper and live
long on the earth.

Col. 3.
Ye Children obey your fathers and mothers in all things, for that is well
pleasing unto the Lord.

Leuitic. 19
Ye shall (says the Lord of hosts) fear every man his father and mother and
keep my sabaoths.

Pro. 23.
Give ear to the father that begat thee, and despise not thy mother when she is
old.

Pro. 28. Robbers of parents. Tobias. 4.
He that robs his father and his mother, and say it is no sin, he is a
destroyer.

Hold thy mother says Toby, as in honor all the days of the life, for thou
ought to remember, how great perils she suffered for thee in her womb.

Tobias. 5.
All that the parents command them, that they ought to do dyligentlie, honor
thy father in word and deed, Ecclesi. 3
in paciens, that thou may have Gods blessing, and his blessing shall abide
with the at the last. He that defyeth his father shall come to shame, Fathers
blessing.
and he that forsakes his mother is cursed of God.

The blessing of the Father builds up the houses of the Children, Eccle. 3
but the mothers curse rooteth out the foundacions.

He that forsakes his Father shall come to shame, and he that defieth his
mother is accursed of God.


Father. Now would I know (Son) how elders both men and women ought to live
for the example of the younger sort? Elders.



Son. The elder men must be sober, sage, Titus. 2
discret, sound in the faith, in love, in patience.

The elder women likewise, Elder women.
must be in such raiment as becomes holiness, not being false accusers, not
given to much wine, but that they teach honest things, let them show
themselves in all things an example in good works, with honistie and gravity.


Father. How must the younger sort behave themselves?


Son. The young men must be sober minded Titus. 2 Young men young women.
The young women must be sober minded also, and love their husbands and
children, they must be discreet, chaste, huswifly, good, obedient unto their
husbands, that none have any evil to say of them.


Father. What say thou to soldiers toll-gatherers and Baylifes?


Son. Luke. 3. Soldiers
The souldyers demanded of John Babtist what they should do. And he said, hurt
no-man, neither trouble any man wrongfully, and be contented with your wages.

Luke. 11 Lawiers.
As for the lawiers the Lord cursed them, and said, woe unto you ye Lawiers, for
ye laden men with burdens which they are not able to bear, and ye your selves
touch not the packes with one of your fingers.


Father. But thou tellest me not what they should do. I see a great sort evil
enough.


Son. Math. 23
They ought to execute Judgment, mercy, and faith.


Father. What off bayllifs and common tol-gatherers and such like?


Son. They ought to require no more then that is apponted unto them. Luke. 3



Father. Thou have spoken of all perticulerlie. Every ma^s duty.
But now let me hear in general, words of the duties of all states and
degrees of people, young and old, learned and unlearned, rich and poor, man
and woman.


Son. The grace of God says saint Paull, Titus. 2.
has appeared, that brings salvation unto all men, and teaches that all men
should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that they should live soberly
and righteously and Godly in this present world.

They ought to fear, God, Revel. 14
and give honor unto him and worship him, that made heaven and earth, and
the sea, and the fountains of water.

They ought to follow righteousness, 1. Tim. 6
Godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness, to fight ye good fight of
faith, to lay hand on eternal life whereunto they are called, and have
professed the same before many witnesses.

They ought to recompense to no man evil for evil, to warn the^ yt are unruly,
1. These. 5
to comfort the feeble mind, to lift up the weak, and to be patient toward
all men.

Phillip. 2
They must be like minded, having one love, being of one accord, and of one
mind, that nothing be done through strife or of vain glory, but in
meekness of mind, let every man esteem an other better then himself.

Luke. 12
They ought to seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof.

Luke. 3.
He that has two coats must part with him that has none, and he that has meat
must do likewise.

1. Cor. 11
Every one must be a chaste virgin unto God.

1. Peter. 2
They ought all to love as the servants of God, to honor all men, to have
brotherly felloship, to fear God, to honor the King.

Ecclesi. 8
They must keep the kings commandment, and the oathe that is made unto God.

Eccle. 12.
This is the conclusion of all things, that they fear God and keep his
commandments for that touches all men.


Father. Election.
Begin to show me the goodness of God unto his people, I have heard that we
are elected of God, even of his mere love.


Son. Yea, Deu. 4.
whatsoever the Lord God does unto us, that it is of his mercy and love, and
for our election, the Lord says, because I loved thy fathers I chose their
seed after them, and brought them out of Egypt.

The Lord has chosen thee to be a several people and nation to himself,
Deuteronomy. 7.
above all nations of the earth.

The Lord chooses unto himself the man that is godly. Psalm. 4.


I prepared thee or ever thou knew me. Esaias 45.


The Lord says, Ieremi. 1.
before ever I fashioned thee in thy Mothers womb, I did know thee, and or
ever thou wast borne, I sanctified thee, and ordained thee to be a Prophet unto
the people.

The Lord choseth those that put their whoredom out of his sight, Oscas. 2.
and their adnoutry from their breasts.

He whom the Lord chooses, shall be holy. Nume. 16


Was not Esau, Jacobs brother, Malachi.
says the Lord, yet have I hated Esau, and loved Jacob.

Io. 6.
No man says Christ, can come unto me except my Father draw him.

Io. 15. Chosen to good works
I have chosen you, and ordained you, to go and bring forth fruit, and that
your fruit should remain.

Ephe. 1.
And concluding with Saint Paul's words, the Lord has chosen us in him before
the foundations of the world were laid, that we should be holy without blame
before him, through Jesus Christ, to be heirs unto himself.


Father. Creation.
What say thou touching our creation?


Son. Genesis 1.
In the beginning God made heaven and earth and all other things, and saw that
they were exceeding good.

Psalm. 33
By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the hosts of them by
the breath of his mouth.

Esaias. 41.
He that called the generations from the beginning, even the Lord which is the
first and the last, made and created all things.

^eremi. 27
I am says the Lord, he that made the earth, the men and Cattle that are upon
the ground with my power, and outstretched arm, and I have given it to whom
it pleases me.

The Lord is the worke-master of all things, which teaches wisdom. Wisd. 7


All things were made by the word of God, Io. 1.
and without it was made nothing that was made.

And concluding with Saint Paull, Collo. 1.
who says. That all things were created by him that are in heaven and that are
in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Maiestraies or Lordship,
either rule or power.


Father. But how was man created?


Son. Even after the image of God, Man's creation. Genesis 1.
God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him, Male and
Female created he them.

The Lord shaped man even of dust of the moulde, Genesis 2.
and breathed into his nostherells, the breath of life, and so Adam was made a
living soul.

The Lord (says Job, Job. 10.
) made me of the mould, and shall bring me into dust again, he has turned me
as it were milk, and turned me into cruds like cheese, he has covered me with
skin and flesh, and joined me togther with bones and sinews.

^ob. 33.
The spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the almighty, has given me
life.

Eccle. 7.
This I have found, that God made man just, but he has many inventions.

^ust. ^eremy. 2 Faithful.
I placed thee (says God) a noble vine, and a good root, whose seed is
faithful, but thou art turned into a bitter, unfruitful, and strange Grape.

Wisd. 2.
God made man to be undestroyed, yea after the Image of his own likeness made
he him, nevertheless through the malice of the Devil, came death into the
world.

^phe. 4
Ye are shapen after God in righteousness and true holiness. So that Father,
man was created after gods Image, that is just, faithful, undefiled,
fruitful, a noble vine, righteous and holy, for all that the Lord made, were
exceeding Good.


Father. Redemption
What say thou of our redemption.


Son. Even as the Lord God does elect and create man, Psalm. 31
so does he redeem man and none other. For David says, Psalm. 49
into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou oh Lord have redeemed me.

No man may deliver his brother, nor make agreement unto God for him, for it
cost more to redeem their souls. So that they must let that alone for ever.

I am he says the Lord, Oseas. 7.
that redeemed them, and yet they dissembled with me.

The spirit of the Lord (says Christ) upon me, because he has anointed
me, Luke. 4.
to preach the Gospel to the poor has he sent me, to heal the broken
hearted, to preach deliverance to the Captive, and sight to the blind, freely
to set at liberty those that are bruised, and to preach the acceptable year of
the Lord.

We have redemption through his blood, Ephe. 1.
even the forgiuenenesse of our sins.

Our Lord Jesus Christ has given himself for us, Christ's blood redeemed us.
to redeem us from all unrighteousness.

Redeemed of love. Romans 5.
God sets out his love toward us, seeing that while we were sinners
according to the time Christ died for us, much more then now we are justified
by his blood, shall be saved from wrath by him, for when we were enemies, we
were reconsiled unto God by his blood, much more seeing that we are reconsiled,
we shall be preserved by his life.

1. Peter. 1 Redeemed by the blod ^f Christ ^nely.
We were not says saint Peter redeemed from our vain conuersations with
corruptable things, as silver or gold, but with the precious blood of Jesus
Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled.


Father. Sanctifica^ion.
What says the word of God of our sanctification?


Son. ^o. 3.
Christ himself says, except a man be borne of water and of the holy Ghost,
he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

^o. 17 Prayer of Christ to ^anctifie ^is church.
O father of heaven sanctify them (says Jesus Christ) through the truth, for
the word is truth, and I do not only pray for my disciples alone, but for all
those also which shall believe their preaching, that they may all be one.

Cor. 1.
To them says Saint Paull that are sanctified by Jesus Christ, called Saints,
Sanctfied by Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 6. Jesus and his spirit sanctifies. Titus. 3
peace and grace.

We are washed, we are justified, we are sanctified by the name of Jesus
Christ and through the spirit of our God.

The Lord according to his great mercy has saved us, by the fountain of the
new birth, and renewing of the holy Ghost, which he has showed on us
abundantly, through Jesus Christ our savior.


Father. Let me hear now by whom we are preserved, saved, and defended,
Preserved, saved, defended
and of whom we have our being?


Son. Even by that great and mighty Iehoua, Genesis 7
the Lord of hosts. For the Lord called Noa into the Arc, and his household
wherein they might be saved, when he destroyed the world with the deluge.

The Lord said unto Isaac, fear not, Genesis 26
I am with thee and will bless thee and multiply thy seed, for my servant
Abraham's sake.

I will be with thee, Genesis 40
and will be thy keeper in all places whether thou go, and will not leave
thee, till I perform my promise.

Gene. 40.
The Lord was with Joseph, and got him favor in the sight of the Lord of the
prison, and showed him mercy.

Exodus 13
The Lord went before the people of Israel, in the day in a pillar of a cloud,
and in the night in a pillar of fire.

Exodus 29.
I will dwell among my people, and will be their God.

Deu. 33
The eternal God is thy refuge, and under the arms of thine everlasting shall
thou live.

Joshua. 1,
I will be with thee said God, and will not forsake thee, I will be with thee
whether so ever thou go.

Psalm. 17.
The Lord is the savior of all them that trust in him.

Acts. 17
And concluding, in God we live, move, and have our being, and are all his
generations.


Father. Gyfts.
That we are defended, saved and preserved by our God and merciful father I
perceive, but proceed and tell me of whom we have all our meat, drink,
apparel, silver, gold, riches, possessions, wisdom, knowledge, learning,
with all other good gifts?


Son. Saint James thus answers, James. 1
that every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes
down from the Father of light, and further says, Wisdom
if any man lack wisdom let him ask of him that gives it, even God.

It is the Lord God that gives the substance. Deu. 8. Riches.


It is the Lord God that gives an heart to perceive, eyes to see, and ears to
hear. Deu. 29.


The Lord said to Solomon, 3. Kin. 3.
ask what thou will and I will give it thee.

All things under heaven are mine says the Lord. Job. 41.


God gives unto man that is good before him, wisdom, understanding, Eccle. 2
and gladness, but to the wicked the Lord gives werinesse and superfluous
care to heap riches for other men.

All that a man eats and drinks, Eccle. 3. Meat. Drink.
yea whatsoever a man earneth of all his labor, the same is the gift of God.

God gives unto man riches, Ecclesi. 6
goods and honor, so that he wants nothing that his heart can desire.

When I perceived that I could not keep my self chaste, Wisdom Chastetie
without God gave it me, I stooped to the Lord and besought him.

Wisd. 9.
Who can have understanding of thy meaning, Holy ghost a gift of God.
except thou give him wisdom, and send thy holy ghost from above, that the
ways of them that be upon earth may be reformed, that men may learn the
things that are pleasant unto thee.

Luke. 11
Your heavenly father shall give his holy spirit to him that asks of him.

Wisd. 3. Faith.
Unto the elect shall be given the special gift of faith. And the most
acceptable portion in the temple of God.

1. Cor. 4.
Who preserves thee, or what have thou that thou have not received.

Genesis 8
The Lord gave to man that he should Subdue the earth, and have dominion of the
fish, of the sea, and foul of the air. And of every living thing upon earth.

2. Peter. 1
And closing this with Saint Peter's words. According to his Godly power he has
given unto us all things that pertain unto life and Godliness.


Father. God one.
Son, who is this God of whom we receive all goodness, is he but one or
many, for many there be that be called Gods and Lords many?


Son. There is but one true God, One true God.
although there be three distinct persons of that one true GOD, I cannot make
further relacion of his Godhead, then that he has spoken and called himself
thus.

I am, that I am. I am. Exodus 3
I am (says he to Moses) have sent thee.

This God appeared unto Abraham, Exodus 6. Iehoua. Gene. 17
Isaac, and Jacob, as an almighty God, and in my name (says he) Iehoua, was
I not known unto them.

I am the almighty God behold I am. Almighty. True God. Deuteronomy. 7. Eod. Mighty.
Terrible, Deu. 9. A consuming fire. Deu. 32


The Lord thy God is a true God.

God is among you, a mighty and terrible GOD.

The Lord thy God is a consuming fire, he shall consume and bring the enemies
down before his face.

I alone am God, and there is else none, I kill and make a live.

He is a God of truth without wickedness, right and Just is he. Without sin.


He is an holy an Ielious God, Joshua. 24
and can not bear with iniquity and sin.

The righteous god tries ye hearts and reins. Psalm. 7. What is God.


The Lord is my stony rock and defense, my savior, my God, and my might, in
whom I will trust, my buckler, the horn also of my salvation and my refuge.

Psalm. 14
He makes his Angels, spirits and his ministers a flame of fire.

139.
If I clime up to heaven he is there, if I go down to hell he is there also.

Pro. 5.
Every man's ways are open in the sight of his God, and he pondreth all men's
goinges.

Pro. 15.
Hell with her pain is known unto this God, how much more then the hearts of
men.

^eremi. 10
I am, even I am the Lord of hosts, and besides me there is no savior, The
Lords ^ame.
the lord is a true God, a living God, and an everlasting King.

Eod.
The name of GOD is the Lord of hosts.

Dan. 4.
There is none that may resist his hand, or say why do thou this.

Daniel. 7
He sat him down and his clothing was as white as snow, and the hairs of his
head like the pure wool, his throne like the fyery flame, and his wheles as
the burning of fire, The second ^erson.
a thousand served him and ten thousand times ten stood before him, the
judgment was set and the books opened and the beast slain.

Math. 1.
Thou shall call his name Jesus, quia is saluum faciet populum a peccatis suis
For he shall save the people from their sines.

In the beginning was the word, Io. 1.
and the word was with God, and God was the word. And the same word became
flesh and dwelt among us.

The spirit of God came upon the messengers of Saull, and they prophesied.
Third person.


The Lord GOD and his spirit, Esaias 48.
has sent me.

I will power down of my spirit upon all flesh, Joel. 2 Procedit Apatrie. Romans
8 Procedit a filio. Io. 16.
and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy.

He that has not the spirit of Christ he is none of his.

When the spirit of truth comes whom I will send from my father, he will lead
you into all truth.

This spirit certyfieth our spirit, Romans 8.
that we be the sons of God. Trinity. Math. 3.


When Jesus was baptized, he came straight out of the water and heaven was
open unto him, and the spirit of God came down like a Dove, and light upon
him, and there came a voice from heaven which said, this is my beloved Son, In
whom I am well pleased.

Genesis 19.
The Lord appeared unto, Abraham, and he lift up his eyes and looked, and lo,
three men stood by him, ^3. seem one worshipped
and he ran to meet them at the Tennte Door, and fell to the ground and
said, Lord I beseech thee go not from thy servant.

Esaias. 6.
The Cherubin song, holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts.

Io. 5.3. persons one God.
There be three yt bear record in heaven, the father, the son, and the holy
ghost, and these three are one.

Spirit, water and blod
There be three that bear witness upon earth, the spirit, and water, and
blood, and these three are one.

Revel. 22,
And concluding that these three persons, the father, son, and holy ghost, are
consubstantiall and coequall. Alpha and Omega, without beginning or end.


Father. Prayer.
I beseech this holy and blessed Trinity, one true and everlasting GOD, to
continue his mercy and goodness toward us his people, for his own name sake
Amen.


Son. And I do most earnestly entreat his majesty, to give us grace to put
off the old man which is corrupt, and to put on the new man, taking hold of
his mercy by faith, and so continue, never looking back, but still proceeding
from virtue to virtue, till we enjoy that kingdom prepared for the elect and
chosen, by this blessed Trinity. Amen.


Father. Go forward son, tell me how man at the beginning knew the will and
good pleasure of his God, before the Law was written, that he might do
thereafter and live?


Son. When the Lord made man at the beeginning, Genesis 1
he made him after his own Image that was just, so that he knew how to eschew
evil and do good, for it was grafted in him when he was called of God. Free
will.


For the Lord sent fire and water, life and death before man, Eccle. 15.
that he might reach his hand to which he would.


Father. And what did man being Just and in that free choice?


Son. Gene. 3
He chose death and left life. He became obedient to the subtle serpent the
Devil, and disobedient unto his God.

As appears when God had made man and woman, he placed them in Paradise,
where they should have lived and all their posterytie, in Joy and filicitie
for ever, they had free will and liberty over all the trees and herbs in that
garden, Tree of knowledge. Genesis 3.
and all other things whatsoever, except the tree of knowledge of good and bad,
which the Lord commanded, that they should not (upon pain of death) touch.


Father. Could they not be content with all the fruits of the garden, and
abstain from that one tree, and so be blessed for ever?


Son. No Father, they forsook their blessedness, and chose to be cursed, to
leave life and take death, they forsook their inherytance in heaven, and chose
to be fire brands in hell, they cast off the Image of GOD, and took upon them
the Image of the Devil. The devils ^mage.



Father. Tell me by what means this came to pass.


Son. When the Lord had thus blessed them with all blessings, Genesis 3
the Devil and Sathanas hating their happy state from which he was fallen, A
liar. Serpent subtiller then any beast.
Came as a Serpent to Eua, and demanded why they eat not of the Tree of
knowledge, she said that the Lord had forbid them, and threatened death unto
them, if that they eat thereof, but he said, the Lord knows that ye shall
be as Gods, and not dye, if you eat. Women are proud.
So the woman desiring to be a Goddess, took and eat, and gave to her
husband who did eat also, and they saw then that they were naked, destitute
of all felicity, happiness, grace, and virtue. Wherewith the Lord had endued
them, and were most loathsome, filthy, and stinckeyng in the Nosthrells of the
Lord: and the Lord God calling them to an account, bolted out the matter how
Adam had eaten, moved by Eua. And Eua had eaten by the enticement of the
Serpent, and the Lord said to the woman, in multiplying, I will multiply thy
sorrow, and thy conceauing in sorrow shall thou bring forth thy children,
VViues subject to their husbands.
and thy lust shall pertain to thy husband, and he shall have rule over thee.
And unto Adam he said, because thou have harkened unto the voice of the woman,
and have eaten of the tree, concerning the which I said unto thee, thou shall
not eat of it, cursed is the ground for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat
of it all the days of thy life, Thorn also and Thistle shall it cause to
grow unto thee, and thou shall eat the herb of the field, and in ye sweat
of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou be turned again to the ground,
for out of it wast thou taken, in as much as thou art but dust, into dust shall
thou be turned again. And the Lord said to the Serpent, Genesis 3.
because thou have done this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above
every beast of the field, upon thy belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou
eat all the days of thy life, I will also put enmity between thee and ye
woman, between thy seed, and her seed, the same shall tread down thy head,
Christ promised.
and thou shall tread on his heel.

And the Lord clothed Adam and Eua, with leathering garments, drove them out of
Paradise to dress the ground out of the which they were taken. And he set the
Cherubins, and the glistering flame of a shaking sword, to keep the way of
the tree of life.


Father. Let me now hear how they lived and their posterity, and whether
they for the most part served God or no?


Son. Adam, Sin increased^
having shortly after a Son named Cane, and after him Abell, and Cane and
Abell going to the field together, Cane rose up against his brother Abell and
slew him, Murder.
and after dispayred of the mercy of God, and said, my sin and iniquity,
is more then it may be forgiven.

And God saw that the malice of man was great in earth, Despair.
and all the imaginations of his heart, was only evil, and that continually.

The imaginations of man's heart, Genesis 6.
was evil even from his youth.

The earth was fiilled with cruelty, and corrupted before God, for all flesh
had corrupted his own way upon earth. So that the Lord destroyed all the
world with the flood, Noas flood Genesis 9. Drunckennesse. Mocking. Genesis 13
except eight persons.

Noa being drunk, was uncovered in his tent, and his son Ham mocked him,
being newly delivered from drowning.

The men of Sodom were wicked and exceeding sinners before the Lord.

Genesis 18.
The cry of Sodom is great (says God) and their sins are exceeding grievous.

Genesis 19.
Lot being drunken with wine, lay with his two daughters, being newly
delivered from destruction of fire and Brimstone.

Genesis 38.
Eer, Judas eldest son being wicked in the sight of the Lord, and the Lord slew
him.

Genesis 38
Onan, another of Judas sons being wicked, did the Lord slay.

And thus the people still wrought wickedness in the sight of God, and sundry
times the Lord therefore destroyed them with fire, pestilence, swoorde, noisome
beasts, and such like death.


Father. Exodus 20
The Lord punished the people for their uncleanness and sin as I perceive,
but now tell me, Ten com.
when the law was given by God which revealed sinners, Law written.
which is called the law written, or ten commandments.


Son. The God of heaven and earth gave the^ to Moses, to be taught unto his
people in mount Sinay, written upon two tables of stone.


Father. How many commandments were written in the first table?


Son. Four, Deu, 5.
even with the finger of God wherein is contained our obedience unto our God,
and in the second table six commandments, wherein we may learn a perfect
and absolute duty to our neighbor.


Father. I have often red those precepts, I think there be none ignorant
thereof, therefore thou shall not need to repeat them, but can any man be
saved by observing and keeping of them.


Son. The Lord shall answer you, Leuitic. 18
who says, ye shall keep my ordinances and judgments, which if a man do,
he shall live in them, I am the Lord.

Math. 19.
One came to Christ and said unto him, good Master what shall I do that I may
attain eternal life. Christ answered, if thou will enter into life, keep
the commandments.

Math. 22
A Lawier said unto Christ, Master what shall I do to obtain eternal life.
Christ said, how read thou. And the Lawier answered, thou shall love the
Lord thy God, with all thine heart, with all thy soul, with all thy strength,
and with all thy mind, and thou halt love thy neighbor as thy self. And
Christ Jesus answered, Hoc fac et viues. This do, and thou shall live.

Gal. 2.
And concluding with Saint Paull, the man that does the things contained in the
law, and fulfilleth them, shall live by them.


Father. Well, let me now see how well we observe these, and whether any are
saved thereby or not?


Son. Deuteronomy. 11
I shall answer you thereunto, but first fee what the Lord adds. Behold
says the Lord, I set before you a blessing and curse, a blessing, if you obey
the commandment of the Lord thy God. And a curse if thou will not obey the
commandment of the Lord thy God.

Cursed is he that continues not in all the words of the law to do them.
Deuteronomy. 27.



Father. I fear then we all incur the curse of God. Go to now, do we keep
this law?


Son. I will show you by what means we may violate and break the law. And
then if we examine our selves, we shall perceive as it were in a glass, our
corruption and disobedience. We may break the law of our God, by thought,
word, and work.

The imaginations of man's heart is evil, even from his youth. Thought. Genesis 8.


The Lord smote Pharao and his house, because of Saray Abraham's wife, Genesis 12.
he lusting after her.

Math. 5
I say unto you (says Christ) that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after
her, he has committed adulery with her already in his heart.

Math. 15
Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, breaking of wedlock,
whoredoms, theftes, false witness, blasphemies, these defile a man.

James. 3.
So that evil thoughts with consent, says Saint James, procure death.


Father. Words
Let me hear what words hurt?


Son. 1. Cor. 15
Corrumpunt bonos mores colloquia praua. Evil words corrupt good manners.

James. 3
If any man sin not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able also to same
all the body.

Ephe. 4
Let no filthy communication proceed out of your mouths says Paull, but that
which is good to edify withal, that it may minister grace to the hearers.

Eod. 5.
As fornication or uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once named
among you, as becomes Saints, or filthienesse, or foolish talking, or
ieasting, which are not comely, but rather giueing of thanks.

Of every idle word that men shall have spoken, Math. 12
they shall give accounts in the day of the Lord.

Ex abundantia cordis os loquitur. Eod.
Of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.

Out of thy words thou shall be justified, Math. 12
and out of thy words thou shall be condemned. So that the Law condemns
wicked words.


Father. Proceed to speak of works? Works or deeds.



Son. The deeds of the flesh says S. Paull, Gal. 5.
are manifest, which are these, adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
wantonness, worshipping of Images, witchecraft, hatred, variance, strife,
sedicions, sects, envying, drunckennesse, gluttony, and such like. The
committers of them or such shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

Whosoever breaks one of the commandments, and teaches other men, Math. 6.
so he shall be called the least in the kingdom of God.

Who lives father, James. 2
that has not offended either in thought, word, or deed, and if he has
offended in one point, he is guyltie of all, for saint James says, whosoever
shall keep the whole law, and yet faill in one point, he is guilty of all.


Father. Was there never any man nor woman that fulfilled the whole law?


Son. All sinners none just.
No father, but the man Jesus Christ who was perfect God, and perfect man, for
saint Paull says, all are sinners, and stand, Romans 3. Eod.
in need of ye grace of God, we do perceive that both Jews and Gentiles are al
under sin, there is none that does good, their is none righteous.

Original sin. Romans 5 Gal. 3.
By the sin of Adam, there sprung up evil on all men unto condemnation.

The Scripture concludes all things under sins, that the promise by the
says of Jesus Christ, should be given to all that believe.

Io. 1.
If we say that we have no sin we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in
us.

Math. 19.
None is good says Christ but one, and that is God.

Psalm. 14.
There is none righteous, no not one, there is none that understands, there is
none that seeks after God, they are all gone out of the way, they are all
unprofitable, there is none that does good no not one.

There is none just upon earth, Eccle. 7
that does good and sins not.

So that Saint Paull concludes, Romans 3. None justified by the law, because
none fulfill the same.
that all mouths may be stopped, and that all the world may be subdued unto
God, because that by the deeds of the law, there shall no flesh be justified
in his sight.


Father. What a kind of doctrine was that which has been taught, that man
might be saved by his own merits, seeing all are sins?


Son. A detestable doctrine father, Genesis 32.
as you may perciue by this going before, yet for satisfiyng your mind I will
prove further unto you, mark what Jacob even the Lords elect said to God. Oh
Lord I am not worthy of the least of all thy fatherly mercies and truth, which
thou have showed unto thy servant.

It was not for thy righteoussnes sake, Deu. 9.
or for the right heart that thou go to possess the Land, for thou art a
stifnecked people, but for the wickedness of them that dwell therein, and for
my promise sake to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

Psalm. 89.
What man is he that shall not see death, and shall he deliver his own soul
from the hand of hell.

Romans 8.
I suppose that the afflictions of this life are not worthy of the glory that
shall be showed on us.

Luke. 17
Christ wills us therefore when we have done all that ever we are able to say,
we are unprofitable servants.


Father. What say thou of those that justify themselves before men?
Iustifiers.



Son. Math. 23.
Christ Jesus curses such. Woe unto you Scribes, Pharisees, Ipocrites, you make
clean the outside of the cup; and platter, but within you are full of brybery
and excess, even so they outwardly appear righteous before men, but within
are full of faynednesse and iniquity, and all their works they do of intent
to be seen of men, Math. 6
but they have their reward.

Ieremi. 2
Though you washest thy self with Nitrus, and make thy self to smell with ye
sweet herb of Loreth, yet in my sight thou art stained with thy wickedness.

Why bostest thou thy self says God so highly, to obtain favor thereby,
Iustifiers. Condemned
when thou as yet have stained thee with blasphemies, and teach thine own
ways, and yet thou dare say, I am without sin and guiltles, I have not
offended, and therefore I condemn thee in judgment.

The Prophets and Priests are polluted, Ieremi. 23
Ipocrytes, and their wickedness have I found in my house, I will therefore
bring a plague upon them.

The Pharisy said, God I thank thee, Luke. 10.
I am not like other men, I am no extorcionor. I am not unjust, I am not as
this Publican, I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all, that I
possess, and yet he went home not justified.

Seeing thou put thy trust in thine own ways, Oseas. 9. Merits.
and leanest unto the multitude of thy merits, there shall grow a sedicion
among the people, and all the strong holds shall be laid wast.

If I justify my self, Job. 9.
mine own mouth shall condemn me.

Tush I have good enough, Oseas. 12.
in all my works shall not one fault be found that I have offended, but thou
art like a false Merchant that occupyeth extorcion, Iustifiers punished
^and therefore shall his blood be powered upon himself, and the Lord God
shall reward his blasphemies.

Math. 16. Iustifiers of themselves follow not Christ.
Therefore I will conclude with the words of Jesus Christ, if any man will
follow me, let him forsake himself, and take up his cross. Let none trust in
their own worthiness, but in Jesus, and follow him.


Father. Thou speak the truth that all are sinners, that we mirrit or
deserve no goodness at the hand of God, and that none what soever is just, but
sins seven tims a day, but what say thou of the elect Saints of God.


Son. Job. 15.
Job that just man (in respect of others) says, behold the Lord does not
trust his saints, yea the very heavens are not clean in his sight.

Job. 25
How may a man compared to God be justified, how can he be clean that is born
of a woman, the stars are corrupt in his sight.


Father. What say thou of that Virgen Mary Mother of Jesus Christ, Virgin
Marie.
for some say that she is coequall with God, and some affirm that she may be
compared to a sack, that when the meall is out is nothing better?


Son. I for my part, Exodus 20.
think well of neither of these, for the one speaks blasphemy to make any
like God, who created and made all things, and the Lord is a Iellious God,
and I will have none to be compared to him, as for the other they speak
irreverently to compare that elect and chosen of God, Marie blessed.
that blessed among women to a sack or filthy vesture, for she is called of
the Angel Gods messenger unto her, blessed, for thus he says: Luke. 1.
Haill full of grace, our lord is with thee, blessed art thou among women, for
thou have found grace with God.

The mother of John the baptist that holy woman full of the holy ghost, Luke.
1
cried with a loud voice and said, blessed art thou among women, and blessed
is the fruit of thy womb.

Luke. 11
Even a simple woman cried before Christ, and said, blessed is the womb that
bare thee, and the paps that gave the suck.

She was called blessed, because she was elected to salvation by faith in her
savior, she was called blessed, because she was chosen of God to bear Jesus
that anointed of the father, she is called blessed by reason she obayed the
Lords commandment, and yielded to his will.

Luke. 1.
And she was most blessed that the Lord imputed no sin unto her, and as
touching this her blessedness, she says her self. Behold from hence forth
all generations shall call me blessed, so that this blessed and elect of God,
is neither Goddess, for she exalts not her self so hie, neither to be
compared so irreverently, seeing that it pleases the Lord our God and savior
to be borne of her.


Father. Math. 1
Then thou make her without sin.


Son. As touching the conception and birth of Christ, she was a most pure
Virgen, and in all respects touching the same undefiled, but as touching her
own conception and birth, Psalm. 51.
she will say and confess with David, behold I was gotten in wickedness, and
in sin my mother conceived me.

How can he be clean that is borne of a woman, Job. 25.
the stars are not clean in his sight.

Look at her own words. She says, Luke. 1.
my soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my savior, if
she had been clean from all sin, then she might have been saved by the
law, and Christ Jesus (although her Son) should have profited her nothing,
therefore you may see yt she finds something in her self, yt causes her to
confess with joy and gladness of soul, that her own son must be her
savior. For why there is none that comes unto the Father of heaven, but
those that are brought by Christ, for he says. Nemo venit ad patrem nisi per
me. There is none that comes unto the father but by me.


Father. May we not lawfully woorshippe and pray unto this blessed Virgin and
other Saints? Prayer to Saints.



Son. Noe Father, for Christ says, Dominum deum tuum adorabis, et illi soli
feruies. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

Revel. 19
John fell down at the Angels feet to worship, but he said unto him, see
thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant, and one of thy brethren, even of
them that have the testimony of Christ Jesus, but worship God.

Acts. 10
Cornelius fell down at Peter's feet and worshipped him, but Peter took him
by the hand and said, stand up, I my self am also a man.

Acts. 14
Jupiters Priests brought Oxen and garlands unto the Porch, and would have
done sacrifice with the people, which when the Apostles Barnabas and Paull
heard, they rent their clothes, and ran among the people and said, sirs why
do ye this, we are mortal men like unto you, and preach unto you that ye
should turn from these vanities to the living God.

4. king. 17 Fear, serve, bow, and do sacrifice to God and to none else.
The Lord charged that they should fear none other God, nor bow them selves
unto them, nor serve them, nor sacrifice to them, but fear God that brought
them out of Egypt, him fear, and to him bow, and to him do sacrifice.

And as touching prayer, Christ teaches his Disciples to pray. Prayer.
Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, etc.

When thou prayest, Math. 6 Pray to the father of heaven.
enter into thy Chamber and shut the door, and pray to thy Father which is in
secret, and he will reward thee openly.

I cry unto the Lord with my voice says David, Psalm. 77
even unto God will I cry with my voice, and he shall harken unto me.

Look unto whom Abraham's servant prayed, Lord God of my Master Abraham,
Gene. 24
send me good speed this day, and show mercy unto my Master Abraham.

Abraham prayed for Abimelech unto the Lord, Genesis 20.
and the Lord healed Abimelech.

He that offers to any but to the Lord only, let him be rooted out. Exodus 22


Serve where thou will says Joshua, Joshua. 24
I and my house will serve the Lord God.

The Angel said, Judge. 13.
if thou will offer an offering, thou must offer it unto the Lord.

Elcana went every festival day to pray, and to offer unto the Lord God of
hosts in Silo.

Anna prayed and said, I have powered out my soul before the Lord, whereby you
may perceive father, that none is to be worshipped, bowed unto, feared,
sacrificed before, prayed unto, but only the God of heaven and earth.


Father. May we not pray thus and say, GOD and our Lady help me, or God and
S. John, Peter, or James*


Son. Esaias. 59 None can help but God.
That is to make others equal with God. For Esaias says, that the Lord saw that
none was righteous, and he wondered that there was none to help him, wherefore
he held him by his own power, and sustained him by his own righteousness.

And I told you before that it was blasphemy to compare any with GOD, and
besides such are enemies to those Saints, for they wish that the Lord in his
jealousy should plague them, by reason that they attribute that unto them, 2.
King. 6.
that belongs only to the Lord.

Vsa (as we reed) when he saw the Oxen stumbled which carried the Ark of God,
and the Arc like to fall as he thought, None joined with god to help
he offered to uphold or stay the Arc, No good intent pleases God that is
contrary to his will.
and God smote him that he dyed suddenly. Therefore whosoever thinks the
Lord so weak that he must have the blessed Virgin Marie, the Saints,
Apostles, or Angels, to take hold with him, let that man or woman doubt, for
fear the Lord smite them, as he did Vsa suddenly, for let men know that God is
almighty.


Father. Thou prouedst before that all are sinners, but I have brought thee
from that matter, yet I would gladly know further touching sin, what those
are wherein all for the most part have offended.


Son. Idolatry, Idolatry.
for that most displeases God, whom all people, kindreds, and toungs ought to
worship.

Exodus 22.
He that offers unto any Gods but to the Lord, let him be rooted out.

Exodus 32
The people made a Calfe and woorshipped it, they sat down to eat and drink,
and rose up to play, but the Lord slew three thousand for the same.

Leuiti. 19
Ye shall not says the Lord, turn to Idols, nor make you Gods of metal.
Jacob commanded all his housholdes to put away the straung Gods that were
among them, Genesis 35
and be clean, and so they did.

Leuitic. 17
Let none offer their offeringes unto Devils, after whom they have gone
awhoring.

Leuit. 26
Ye shall make you no graven Image, neither rear you up any stone, neither any
Idol to worship it, for I am the Lord.

Deu. 4.
You saw no Image says the Lord, when I spoke unto you out of the fire, then
take heed that you make no manner of Image to worship, neither of man,
beast, foul, etc.

For if thou do, I call Heaven and Earth to record over you this day, you
shall perish shortelie out of this land.

Ye shall overthrow their Alters, Deu. 7. A kings duty.
break down their pillars, cut down their groves, and burn their graven
Images with fire.

The people used to burn their sons and daughters with fire before their
gods. Deu. 12.


If there be any within your gates, Deuteronomy. 17. Idolaters stoned.
man or woman that have or worship strange Gods, the Sun, the Moon, or
any of the host of heaven, they shall be stoned to death.

Th people served Baall, and offers, Judge. 2
and the Lords wrath was hot.

The Ark of God was set before Dagon the Philistines God, 1. king. 4.
but Dagon was cast down, and legs and arms broken.

Jeroboam made two Calves of Gold, 3. kings. 12 Bethell Gods house made a
place for Idol. Psalm. 9^
and made the people worship, and said, these are Gods that brought you out
of Egypt, and set one of them at Bethell.

Confounded be all they that woorshippe Carved Images, and that delight in
vain Gods, woorshippe him all ye Gods.

Let them be ashamed early that hope in Idols, Esaias. 42.
and say to fashioned Images, you are our Gods.

Ezech. 8.
There were all manner of Images, of worms and beasts, all Idols, and
abhominacions of ye house of Israel, painted every one round about the wall,
there stood before the Images 70. Lords to offer incence secretly and said,
tush, the Lord sees us not.

Abacuc. 2.
Woe be unto him says the Lord, that says to a piece of wood, arise, and to a
dombe stone, stand up.

Wisd. 14
So father I will conclude with the Lords words. Cursed is the Image, and he
that made it.


Father. Pride.
Go to, speak of other vices, what say thou of pride.


Son. Eccle. 10
Initium omnis peccati superbia, quia tenebit eam ad implebitur maledictis.

Proud people cursed. Eccle. 32
Pride is the beginning of all sin, he that is proud, is filled with cursing.

If thou be made a ruler, pride not thy self therein, but be thou as one of
the people.

Pro. 26.
The Lord abhors all such as be of a proud heart, his hand is against
their hand, and they shall not escape as innocents.

After pride comes destruction, Pro. 18.
and honor after lowlines.

Thou Capernaum which art exalted up to heaven, Mark. 11
shall be brought down to hell.

Every one says Christ that exalts himself shall be brought low. Luke. 18.
And he that humbles himself shall be exalted.


Father. What, is not covetousness a sin? Covetousness.



Son A sin? yes an horrible offense, Tim. 6.
for Saint Paull says, that the covetousness of money, is the root of all
evil.

Woe be unto him that heapeth up other men's goods, Abacuc. 2 Covetous and their
goods burned with an hot fire.
woe unto him that gathers evil gotten goods into his house, that he may set
his nest on hie, to escape the power of misfortune, but the Lord of hosts shall
bring this to pass, that the laborers of the people, shall be burnt with a fire,
and the thing whereupon they have weried themselves shall be burnt.

Like as hell and destruction are never full, Pro. 27
even so the eyes of men can never be satisfied.

Esaias 5.
Woe be unto them that join one house unto an other, and one land to an other,
that the poor can get no more ground.

Ecclesi. 14.
A covetous eye has never enough in the porcions of ungodliness, until the
time that he wither away, and have lost his own soul.

Mark. 10
It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle then for the rich
to enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Mark. 8.
And thus concluding, what will it gain a man if he win all the world, and
leese his own soul. Or what shall a man give to redeem his soul again
withal.


Father. Lechery.
Tell me something of Lechery?


Son. Job. 31.
This sin of lechery says Job, is a wickedness and sin, that is worthy
to be punished, yea a fire that utterly would consume and root out all a man's
substance.

Leuit. 20
A man that breaks wedlock with an other man's wife, let both the aduouterer,
and the aduoutris be slain.

Leuiti. 19
Thou shall not make thy daughter common, that thou would cause her to be an
whore, least the land fall to whordom and be full of wickedness.

There shall be no whore among the daughters of Israel, Deu. 23
nor no whore keeper of the sons of Israel.

There were slain of the Tribe of Biniamin, xxv. thousands, Judge. 20.
and all their Cities burned for adultery.

In the desire of vncleanlie lust, Ieremi. 5
they are become like the stoned horse, every man neeth at his neighbors wife.

The children of the aduouterers shall come to naught, Wisd. 4
and the seed of the unrighteous bed, shall be rooted out.

An whores house is the way to hell, Pro. 7.
and bring men down into the chambers of death.

An whore is first unfaithful to the law of the highest, Eccle. 23
secondly she has forsaken her own husband, thereby she has gotten her
children by another man, and played the whore, but a shameful repoorte shall
she leave behind her, and her Children shall take no deep root.

Whosoever sees a woman and lusts after her, Math. 5
has committed adultery with her alredie in his heart.

^. Cor. 6.
And I will conclude with saint Paull, flee fornication, every sin that a man
does is without the body, but he that is a fornicatour sins against his own
body.


Father. Wrath.
What son, is wrath compted a sin?


Son. Ecclesi. 7
Yea Father, a detestable sin, be not says the wise man hastily angry in
thy mind, for wrath rests in the bosom of fools.

Eccle. 28
Be ware of anger, and thou shall make thy sins fewer, for an angry man
kindles varyance.

Eccle. 30
Zeall and anger shorten thy days of life, and carfulness, and sorrow brings
age before the time.

James. 1
The wrath of man works that which is unrighteous before God, whosoever says
Christ is angry with his brother unadvisedly shall be in danger of judgment.
Math. 5.



Father. What is said of envy?


Son. Father, Wisd. 1.
wisdom enters not into afroward and envious soul, nor dwells in the body
subdued unto sin.

I will not have to do with consuming envy, Wisd. 6.
for such a man shall not be pertaker of wisdom.

Let all bitterness, and fearcenesse, Ephe. 4
and wrath, and roaring, and cursed, speaking, be put from you with all
maliciousness.


Father. Tell me something of gluttony and drunkenness. Gluttony



Son. Excess of meats brings sickness, Eccle. 37.
and gluttony comes at the last to an unmeasurable heat, through surfeit have
many one perished, but he that dieteth himself temperatlie, prolongeth his
life.

Take heed to your selves, Luke. 21
least at any time your hearts be ouerco^med with surfeting, and drunckennesse.

He that has pleasure in bankets shall be a poor man, Pro. 21.
and he that delights in wine and delycates shall not be rich.

Esaias. 5.
Woe be unto them says the Lord, that follow drunkenness, and so continue until
night.

Luke. 16 For abusing Gods graces.
There was a certain rich man clothed in purple and fine white, and fared
deliciouslie every day, but when he dyed, was tormented in hell.

Gal. 6.
These are some of the deeds of the flesh, drunkenness, and gluttony, they
that commit such things, shall not be inheretours of the kingdom of Christ
and of God.


Father. What say thou of sloth and Idleness?


Son. Pro. 6.
The wise man says, go to the Emit thou slougerd, consider her ways and
learn to be wise.

Luke. 13.
Behold says Christ these three years have I sought fruit of the fig tree, and
find none, cut it up, why does it trouble the ground.

Math. 25
The Lord said unto the servant that had one talent, thou evil and slothful
servant, thy tallent shall be taken from thee, and thou cast into utter
darkness, where is weeping and gnasshing of teeth.


Father. What says the scripture of swearing, Swering.
that is almost in every man's mouth a common thing?


Son Let not (says the wise man) thy mouth be accustomed with swearing,
Eccle. 23.
for in it there be many falls, if he swear in vain he shall be filled with
wickedness, and the plague shall never go from his house.

I say unto you, says Christ, Math. 5
swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods seat, neither by the
earth, for it is his foot stool, neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City
of the great king, neither by the head, because thou can not make one hair
white or black, but your communication shall be yea yea, nay nay, James. 5
and whatsoever is more comes of evil

Thou shall not take the name of God in vain, Exodus 20
for the Lord will not hold him guiltles that takes his name in vain.

The prophet saw a flying book of xx. zachary. 5
cubits long, and ten cubits broad, this is the curse that goes over the
earth for all thieves shall be judged after this book, and al swerers shall be
judged after this book, and it shall come into the house of the thief, and
into the house of him that fastie swears by my name says the Lord, and
shall remain in his house, and consume it with the timber and stones.


Father. Then it is not lawful to swear for any cause?


Son. Ieremi. 4.
No father, except for the testifiyng of the truth in doubtful causes, being
moved thereunto by a judge, and then they must swear in justice, judgment,
and righteousness.


Father. It would be to long to recite perticulerly every sin committed in
the world, therefore show me the most usual sins in general words.


Son. Ieremi. 22
In the world they despise Father and Mother, in it they have oppressed the
stranger, the fatherless and widow, they have despised the Lords sanctuary,
and unhallowed the Sabothes, murders are therein, many deal shamefully with
their neighbors wife, gifts are received therein to shed blood, and usury
have been committed.


Father. Is not usury lawful? Usury.



Son. Lawful? No horrible, Deu. 23
thou shall not says the Lord, hurt thy brother by usury of money or Corn, or
by usury of any thing that he may be hurt with all.

If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by thee, Exodus 22
thou shall not be as a tyrant unto him, neither shall thou oppress him with
usury.

Thou shall take no usury of thy brother, nor vantage. Leuiti. 25.


Blessed is that man that has not laid out his money for usury, Psalm. 15.
nor received rewards against the innocent, so on the contrary part, cursed is
he that lends out to usury.


Father. Thou say that the Lords sabbath is unhallowed, Saboth.
is it a day to be hallowed and sanctified?


Son. Genesis 2.
Yea Father, for the seventh day the Lord ended his work which he had made, and
rested from all his work, and GOD blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it,
because he had rested from all his work which he ordained to make.

Exodus 16
No Manna fell on the Sabbath day, for it is an holy rest unto the Lord.

Exodus 23.
The seventh day thou shall rest, thine Ox, thine Ass, thy son, thy maid,
and the stranger, and so to be refreshed.

Numer. 16
Let him that gathers sticks on the Sabbath day, be stoned without the host.


Father. Has the Sabbath been sometime unhallowed?


Son. Esdras. 4
Yea, for Esdras saw some treading wine presses on the Sabbath, and bringing
Asses laden with grapes, figs, and bringing all manner of burdens unto
Jerusalem upon the Sabbath day, and I rebuked them (said he) earnestly, the
same day that they soulde their victuals, and soulde fish, and I reproved
them, and the rulers for breaking the Sabbath day, but after this there came
none to buy nor sell on the Saboth day.


Father. Who does keep the Sabbath and sanctify it? Sanctifiers of the Saboth.



Son. He that keeps himself that he do no evil. Esaias. 56


If thou turn thy feet in the Saboth, Esaias. 58
so that thou do not the things that pleases thy self in my Sabbath, and
thou call the pleasant, holy, and gracious Sabbath of the Lord, and that thou
give him the honor, so that thou do not after thine own imaginations,
neither seek thine own will, nor speak thine own words.

It is lawful says Christ, Math. 12
to do good deeds on the Sabbath day.


Father. Me thought thou spakest that the Lords sanctuare was defiled?


Son. Yea Father, Jeremy says, Jeremy. 22
they have despised the Lords sanctuary.


Father. Temple.
Who did first build the Temple unto the Lord?


Son. 3. Kin. 6.
Solomon the third king of Israel, built an house for the Lord in Jerusalem,
that was three skore cubits long, and xx. cubits broad, and fifty cubits
high.

Cro. 17.
The Lord said to David, thy sons shall build me an house, and I will
stablish his seat for ever.


Father. Why did not the Lord suffer David to build his Temple?


Son. 1. Cro. 22.
Because he had shed much blood, and made great battles in the Lords sight upon
earth.

2. Cro. 7.
The Lord appeared to Solomon by night and said, I have heard thy petition,
and have chosen this place for my self to be an house of sacrifice, A house of
sacrifice.
I have sanctified this house, that my name may be there for ever.


Father. Where did Solomon build the Lords house?


Son. At Jerusalem in mount Morea where the Lord appeared unto David his
father in the threshing floor of Ornan the Iesubite. 2. Cro. 3



Father. Thou say that we may not buy and sell on the Sabbath, what must we
then do?


Son. We must go to the Temple of the Lord, and pray, 1. king. 1
and offer unto the Lord of hosts.

Serve the Lord only, 1. Kings. 6
and prepare your hearts unto him, and he will rid you out of the hands of your
enemies.

Solomon the king made a long prayer in the Temple upon his knees, 3. king. 8
and his hands lifted up to heaven.

The Lord answered Solomon and said, I have heard thy petition, 2. Cron. 7.
and have chosen this place for my self, if I shut up heaven that there be no
rain, or if I command the Locusts to devour the la^d, or if I send pestilence
among my people, Prayers, repentance, conversation in gods temple
and if my people upon whom my name you called upon, do humble themselves and
make intercession, and seek my presence, and turn from their wicked ways,
them will I hear from heaven, and be merciful unto their sin, and will heal
their land.


Father. What name gave Solomon to the house that he builded for the Lord?


Son. 2. Cro. 2
He called it an house of sacrifice, for he said even to burn sacrifices
before the Lord shall his building be.


Father. Some refuse to go to this Temple of the Lord, what say thou to
those?


Son. Psalm. 27.
I say they are not of the mind of the king and Prophet David, who said, one
thing have I desired of the Lord which I will require that I may dwell in the
house of my God all the days of my life.

I was glad when they said unto me, we will go into the house of the Lord.

Psalm. 122 Thanks giueing.
Therefore the cries go up, even the cries of the Lord, to testify unto
Israel, to give thanks unto the name of ye Lord.

Eccle. 4 To offer acceptable offerings.
When thou come into the house of God, keep thy foot, and draw nigh, that
God which is at thine hand may hear, that thou give no offeringes of fools,
for they know naught but to do evil.

We will go into the tabernacle of the Lord, Psalm. 132
and fall low on our knees before his footestoole.

The Publican coming to the Temple, kneeled down, prayed, Luke. 18. Prayer
and confession.
and smote upon his breast and said, God be merciful unto me a sinner.


Father. Are not the preachers and Ministers (that be in the temple) to be
heard?


Son. Yes truly, no less then Christ himself, for he says, he that
hears you hears me, and he that hears me, hears him that sent me.

They have Moses and the Prophets, Luke. 16
let them hear them.

He that is of GOD, Io. 8.
hears Gods words.

He that God has sent, Io. 3.
speaks the words of God.

How shall they call on him on who^ they have not believed, Romans 10
how shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard, how shall they
hear without a preacher, and how shall they preach except they be sent.


Father. Why, is the word of God to be heard? Gods word to be hard.



Son. Romans 10
That by hearing we may have faith, and by faith be saved.

Psalm. 119
That we may learn to walk in the law of the Lord.

It is to be laid up in our hearts that we should not sin against the Lord.

Micheas. 4
Let us go to the house of our God, that he may teach us his ways, and that we
may walk in his paths.


Father. What ought we to do after we have heard the preacher.


Son. Ieremi. 26
We ought to fear the Lord, and make our prayers unto him, and then the Lord
will repent of the plague that he has devised, and not do it.

Jonas. 3.
The people of Niniuie, when Jonas preached, that within forty days their
City should be destroyed, they put upon them sackecloth, laid them down in
ashes, fasted, and cried mightelie unto the Lord, and the Lord spared them, and
destroyed them not.


Father. I meruell much that the Lord destroyed not that City, for he said
plainly that within forty days it should be destroyed, and yet he did it
not, whereby it should seem that Gods purpose is often changed.


Son. No father, the Lord is no changeling. James. 1
There is no variableness with God. For the Lord says, when I take in hand
to root out, to destroy, Ieremi. 18
or to wast away any people or kingdom, if that people against whom I have
thus devised, convert from their wickedness, I repent me of the plagues that I
devised to bring upon them. Again, when I take in ha^^ to build, to plant a
people or kingdom, God repent
if the same people or kingdom do evil before me, and here not my voice, I
repent of the good that I devised to do for them, and do it not, so that the
people are changed and not good.


Father. Blessed be God therefore. Is the preacher appointed what he shall
speak*


Son. Yea, Exodus 4
the spirit of God speaks by his mouth, if he be a true preacher, for the
Lord said unto Moses, I will be with thy mouth, and teach the what thou shall
say.

Joel. 2.
I will (says the Lord) power out of my spirit upon al flesh, and your sons
and your daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, and
your young men shall see visions.

Micheas. 3
I am full of strength, and the spirit of the Lord full of judgment and
boldness, to show the house of Jacob their offenses, and the house of Israel
their sin?

1. king. 19
The spirit of God, came upon the messengers of Saull, and they prophesied.

Math. 10.
Christ told his disciples and said, it is not you that shall speak, but the
spirit of my father that shall speak within you.

Luke. 12.
The holy ghost shall teach you what you shall say.

Io. 16.
When the spirit of truth comes, he shall lead you into all truth.

Fear not what you shall say, for it shall be given you in the same hour what
ye shall speak.


Father. If the spirit of truth speak by the mouth of his true messengers,
then it is likely that the spirit of error, I mean Satan, speaks by the
false Prophets, Seminaries and seducers of Gods people.


Son. True it is father. 1. King. 1^
For an evil spirit sent of God came upon Saull.

I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all the Prophets. 3. king. 2^
And deceive king Ahab that he may go to war in Ramoth Geliad, and so be
slain.

They are of their father the Devil, Io. 8.
and his lusts will they follow says Christ, he was a murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth, The devil speaks by Seminaries.
for there is noe truth in him, when he speaks a lie he speaks of himself,
for he is a liar, and the father of the same thing: take heed father of these
seducers, by whom the devil speaks.

This false spirit spak to Eua, Genesis 3.
that if she eat of the tree of knowledge she should not die the death, but
be as God, knowing good and bad: so many deceived now by this serpent, dye the
death.


Father. ^an.
What say thou by Man, what is he, and to what end shall he come?


Son. Psalm. 144
Man is like a thing of naught, his time passes away like a shadow.

Psalm. 90.
When the Lord is angry, all our days are gone, we bring our years to an end
as it were a tale that is told.

^ames. 4.
The life of man is even a vapor that appears a little time, and then
vanishes away.

Genesis 3
Man is dust, and into dust thou shall be turned again.

^ob. 7.
Has man any certain time upon earth, are not his days like the days of an
hired servant.

^ob. 10
The Lord made man of moulde, and shall bring him to dust again.

^ob. 14.
Man that is borne of a woman, has but a short time to live, and is full of
misery.

^od.
While he lives his flesh must have travel, and while the soul is within him
he must be in sorrow.

Isay. 40
All flesh is grass, and all the goodlinesse thereof is even as the flower of
grass, the grass is withered and the flower falls away, even so the people
are as grass, when the breathe of the Lord blows upon them.

Statutum est omnibus hominibus semell mori, Heb. 9.
it is appointed that all men shall once dye.

Remember his judgment, Eccle. 38
thine also shall be likewise unto thee yesterdaie, unto me to day.


Father. I see plainly by these parts and by dalie experience, that all men
must dye, and that none can escape the hand of death, therefore what say thou
to the death of the righteous.


Son. The souls of the righteous, Wisd. 3.
are in the hands of God, and the pains of death shall not touch them.

The righteous shall shine as the sparks of fire in the read bushe, Eod.
and shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their GOD
shall reign for ever.

Psalm. 65
Blessed is the man whom the Lords choseth and receives unto him, he shall
dwell in his court, he shall be satisfied with the pleasure of his house, even of
his holy Temple.

Psalm. 72
The Lord shall deliver their souls from falshod and wrong. For dear is the
blood of his Saints in his sight.


Father. I perceive that the righteous are always preserved, but what
becomes of the wicked?


Son. Psalm. 9
The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the people that forget God.

Macha. 2.
Fear not an unrighteous man's words, for his glory is but donge and worms, to
day he is set up, to morrow he is gone.

Job. 24.
Some men there be says Job, that remove other men's land marks, and rob them
of their cattle, and keep ye same for their own, The life and end of the
covetous and wicked.
that take the ass of the fatherless, and take the widows Ox for a pledge,
that thrust the pore out of the way, that reap down the corn that is not
their own, they are the cause that so many men are naked and bare. The eye of
the aduoute^er waits for the darkness, and faith no man seethe him, but
shortile are they gone, and plucked out of the way, and utterly plucked off as
the ears of corn.

Upon the ungodly shall the Lord rain fire and brimstone, storm and
tempest, Psalm. 10
this shall be their portion to drink.


Father. What say thou to purgatory, Purgatory
out of which men's souls are delivered by the prayers of holy Priests?


Son. I say the Scripture makes mention of no such thing. But of heaven and
hell, Christ's blood.
and Saint John shows by what means we are purged and cleansed. Io. 1.
The blood of Jesus Christ, cleanses us from all sin.

Through mercy and faith are sins purged. Pro. 15.


Almost every thing is by the Law purged with blood, Heb. 9
and without bloodshedding is no remession.

The blood of Jesus Christ does purge our consciences from dead works, Eod.
to serve the living God.

Jesus Christ loved us and purged us from our sins in his blood, Revel. 1
and made us Kings and priests unto God the Father, to him therefore be
glory and dominion for ever more. Father, yt was a false doctrine which was of
purgatory (as you may see) and made to fill Priests purses.


Father. What profit could that bring to Priests?


Son. Mark. 12
It brought much worldly riches, and Gods curse withal, as Christ says,
beware of the scribes which love to go in long clothing, and love salutations
in market places, Damnacio^ to the^ that devour widows houses with prayer.
and the chief seats at feasts, and in the congregations, which devour
widows houses, under a pretense of long prayer, but they shall receive greater
damnation.

Math. 23.
And Christ says in the xxiii. of S. Mathewes Gospel, woe unto you ye scribes,
Pharasies and Ipocrits, for ye devour widows houses, Sore punishment.
and that under a pretense of long prayers, therefore ye shall be sorer
punished.


Father. What son, does not prayer avail the dead?


Son. No father, Eccle. 10^
for when the tree falls whether it be to the South, or North, there it lies
in what place soever it fall.

They that be living, Ecclesi. 9
know that they shall die, but they that be dead, know nothing, neither
deserve they any more, for their memorial is forgotten, so that they be
neither loved, hated, nor envied, neither have they any more profit in the
world, in all that is done under the sun. Prayers help not the dead.
But prayers and offerings (father) are done under the same, and therefore the
dead have no part thereof.


Father. If prayers help not the dead, wherefore should we go to the houses
of the dead?


Son. To give thanks unto God, Io. 11
and to comfort the friends and kinsfolks of the dead, as the Jews when
Lazarus was dead, there came many to comfort Martha and Marie, over their
dead brother.


Father. What must we carry out of this life with us?


Son. Revel. 14
Our good deeds, and our evil, Opera eorum sequntur eos, their works says
Saint John, shall follow them.


Father. Shall the rich take none of their substance and treasure with them,
that they so diligently seek for, and so carefully keep?


Son. Job. 27.
When the rich man dies says Job, he takes nothing with him, but perishes,
and the things he leaves behind him come to naught.

Luke. 12
Christ told a rich man that had filled his Barnes and houses to the doors,
and said to his soul, eat and drink, take thy rest for many years, and the
Lord said, thou fool, this night shall they fet thy soul away from thee,
then whose shall those be that thou have prepared.

Eccle. 41
The remembrance of death is bitter to a man that seeks rest and comfort in
his substance and riches, to remember that he must bid all farewell in one day.

Job said, Job. 1.
naked came I out of my Mothers womb, and naked must I return thither again.

We brought nothing into this world, Tim. 6.
neither must we carry any thing out.


Father. Well son, shall none walk (as some imagine) nor come again after
death?


Son. None father, for Job says, Job. 1^
the way that I most go, is at hand, from whence I shall not return again.

He that goes down to the grave shall come no more up, Job. 7.
till the heavens perish, nor turn again to his house, neither shall his place
know him any more.

Whether his children come to worship or not, he cannot tell, Job. 14
and if they be men of low degree, he knows not.

After our end there is no returning, Wisd. 2.
for it is fast sealed, so that no man comes again.

Eccle. 38.
Forget not there is no returning again.

2. kings. 12
David said, seeing the child is dead, I cannot bring him again, I shall
go to him, rather then he shall come to me, by this place you may perceive
that men walk not, Job. 7.
nor rise, till the heavens perish, which is at the day of judgment.


Father. What say thou by the prophet Samuel, who appeared to king Saull,
after he was dead, being called up by a woman?


Son. 1. king. 28 31.
He whom the woman called up, was a devil, as appears by these words. To
morrow shall thou and thy sons be with me, for in the day following. Saull
took a sword and fell upon it, dispayring of Gods mercy, and so perished,
and had his part among the desperate, and not with Samuel that elect of God.


Father. But son, why was Saull the first king of Israel, that anointed of
GOD cast off from the Lord.


Son. Because he trespassed against the Lord, 1. Cro. 10
in that he kept not the word of the Lord, and in that he sought and asked
counsel of a woman that wrought with a spirit, and asked not of the Lord.


Father. Seeing that none return to show how they are dealt withal, and that
prayers will not help those that be dead, what must we do to be without
danger.


Son. We are taught by the prophet Sophonie, to examine our selves, Sophony.
2.
and search our consciences, or the things go forth that God has concluded,
Good counsel.
and or the time come wherein man shall pass away as the dust, and or the
fearful wrath of God come upon us, work while we live.
yea or the day of the Lords sore displeasure come upon us, seek the Lord all
ye meek hearted of the earth, ye that work after his judgments, seek
righteousness, seek lowliness, that ye may be defended in the wrathful day
of the Lord.

Get thee righteousness before thou Eccle. 1^
come to judgment, learn before thou speak, go to physic or ever thou be
sick, examine and judge thy self before the judgment come, and so shall thou
find grace in his sight.

Io. 9.
Christ says, work while it is day, for the night will come, in which none can
work.


Father. Why should we be so earnestly moved to flee from sin?


Son. Sins part from God. Esaias 59.
Because they separate from the Lord, for your iniquities says God, has
separated you from me, and your sins hide my face from you that I hear you
not, for your fingers are defiled with blood, and your hands with
unrighteousness, your lips speak leasing, and your tongues speak out
wickedness.

4. king. 17
They left the commandment of the Lord their God, and made them Images of
metal, even two Calves, and made Idol groves, These sins part from God.
and worshipped the host of heaven, and served Baall, and sacrificed their
sons and daughters in fire, and used witchcraft and inchauntment, and the
Lord therefore was exceeding wroth, and put Israel out of his sight.

The Lord drove man out of Paradise at the East side, Genesis 3.
because he had sinned.

By the sin of one man there sprung up evil on all men to condemnation, Romans
5
for we were enemies unto God. There is nothing that causes the Lord to hide
his face from us, but our sins and iniquities.


Father. I understand that all men and women by the sin of Adam were subject
to death and condemnation, What we are made by sin.
in the hands of the Devil, made strangers and aliantes from the Lord
enemies unto God, children of wrath, firebrands of hell, but tell me how
mankind was redeemed and delivered, being in this damnable state?


Son. When manne and woman had transgressed and broken that commandment
of GOD the father, Gene. 3
and that the Lord have judged them guilty, by their own confessions, and had
cursed the Serpent who deceived them, then he spoke a comfortable word, for he
said, there should be one springing of a woman that should tread down all
Satan's power, Seed of a woman.
for he should tread on his head, yet he should prick him in the heel, this
seed of the woman was promised also to Abraham.

Genesis 22.
In semine tuo benedicentur omnes gentes et nationes terra. In thy seed shall
all the nations of the earth be blessed.

Esaias. 7.
Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and thou his Mother shall
call his name Emanuell, butter and honye shall he eat, that he may know to
refuse the evil, and chose the good?

Ezech. 35
I will raise up unto them, one only shepherd, even my servant David, he shall
feed them, and he shall be their shepherd, I the Lord will be their God, and
my servant David shall be their Prince.

zachar. 10
Out of Judah shall come the helmet, the naill; the battle bow, and all the
princes together.

It were too long for me to show you all the scriptures wherein there is
prophesied of Christ his coming, death and passion, and therefore I pray you
let these suffice, for one scripture is a sufficient testimony for any cause or
controversy whatsoever?


Father. What say thou of Christ's birth and coming into the world.


Son. Christ was borne in Bathlem of the blessed Virgin Mary, Luke. 1
by the power of the holy ghost, as saint Paull says, when the time was full
come, that God the father had put in his own power, he was reveled unto us,
for before, God the father dyuerslie and many ways spoke unto our fathers by
Prophets, Heb. ^
but in these last days he spoke unto us by his own son, whom he made
heir of all things.

Whereas we were dead says Saint Paull, in trespass and sins, Ephe. 2
in which in times past we walked, Dead in sin.
has he quickened us according to ye course of this world, even after ye
governor ye rules in ye air, the same yt works now in the children of
vnbelef, Children of wrath by nature
among whom we had our conversation also in times, in the lusts of our flesh,
and fulfilled the lusts of the flesh and of the mind, and were by nature the
Children of wrath, even as well as others, but God which is rich in mercy,
for his great love wherewith he loved us (even when we were near dead by
sins, What we were but for Christ.
quickened us together in Christ, by grace are we saved, and raised us up
together with him among them of heaven in Christ Jesus.


Father. Tell me what benefits we have by the nativity, death, passion,
resurrection and ascencion of Christ Jesus?


Son. Esaias. 4.
We are purged by Christ from all our sins, Esaias says yt the Lord shall wash
away the filthinesss of the daughter of Sion, and purge the blood out from
Jerusalem with the wind of his judgment, and with fire.

Ezech. 36.
I will power clean water upon you, and you shall be clean, yea, from all your
uncleanness and Idols, shall I cleanse you.

Sopho. 3
I will cleanse the lyps of the people, that they may euery-each one call upon
the name of the Lord, Purged to serve the Lord.
and serve him with one shoulder.

The house of David, zachary. 3
and the Citizens of Jerusalem shall have an open well to wash off sin and
uncleanness.

He is like a goldsmith fire, Malachi. 3
and washers soope, he shall purge the Children of Leuy, and puryfie them as
gold and silver, that they may bring meat offerings unto the Lord, in all
righteousness.

If the blood of Oxen and of Goats, Heb. 9.
and the ashes of an young Cow, when they be sprinkled, pacified the unclean,
Purged by blood to serve him.
as touching the puryfiyng of the flesh, how much more shall the blood of
Christ purge our consciences from dead works, to serve the living God.

He was in all things like unto us, Heb. 2.
that he might be merciful, and a faithful hye Priest, in things concerning
God, Actual and original.
to purge the peoples sins.

The blood of Jesus Christ purges us from all sins. 1. Io. 1.


Christ washed his disciples feet, Io. 13. None clean but he that Christ
washes.
and Peter said, Lord thou shall never wash my feet, but Jesus answered, if I
wash the not thou have no part with me.


Father. But how is this purgation, by Christ his precious blood applied unto
us, so that thereby we are purged and cleansed?


Son. Acts. 15
By faith, for saint Peter says, the Lord which knows the heart of men, and
gave unto the Ientiles the holy ghost, because they did believe, even as unto
us, and put no difference between us and them, seeing that with faith he
puryfied their hearts.

Pro. 15
Through mercy and faith are sins purged.


Father. And to what end are we thus purget by faith, in the blood of Christ?


Son. Io. 15. Purged to bring forth good fruits good works
That we may bring forth fruit in him, for the branch cannot bring forth
fruit, except it abide in the vine, no more can ye except ye abide in me, for
without me ye can do nothing.


Father. Tell me how we are redeemed and to what end?


Son. We were not redeemed with corruptable things, as silver, or goold, 1.
Peter. 1
but with the precious blood of Jesus Christ, as a Lamb undefiled,

We have redemption through his blood, Ephe. 1.
even the forgiveness of our sins.

Our Lord Jesus Christ has given himself for us, Titus. 2 Redeemed to do
good works.
to redeem us from all unrighteousness, and to purge us a peculiar people unto
himself, fervently given unto all good works.


Father. How are we saved, and through whom have we salvation?


Son. Saint Paull shows you that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners. 1. Tim. 1


Show thy marvelous works, Psalm. 17
thou that art the savior of all them that trust in thee.

I shall with joy draw water out of the wells of my savior, Esaias. 1^
for the Lord is my strength, and my song, and is become my salvation.

I am, even I am the only Lord, None can save but Christ on^ Esaias. 4.3.
and beside me there is noe savior.

I have trodden the wine press alone, and of all people there is not one with
me, I looked about me, and there was none to show me any help, No Angel or
Saint can save or help. Math. 1
I meruailed that no man held me, then I held me by mine own strength, and
mine own arm sustained me.

He shall be called Jesus, for he shall save the people from their sins.


Father. How take we hold of this salvation?


Son. Acts. 15.
By faith, for Peter says, we believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus
Christ we shall be saved.


Father. What must we do to be saved?


Son. Acts. 17.
We must believe on the Lord Jesus and we and our households shall be saved.

1. Pet. 1.
If we believe, we shall receive the end of our faith, even the salvation of our
souls.

Romans 10
If thou believe in thine heart, thou shall be safe, for to believe justifies,
and to knowledge with the mouth makes a man safe.


Father. What does the Scripture say of our justification, Justification.
because some teach that we are justified by our works?


Son. A man is not justified by the deades of the Law, but by the faith of
Christ Jesus, Justified b^ faith, and not by the law.
and we have believed on Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith
of Christ, and not by the deeds of the Law, because that by the deeds of the
Law no flesh shall be justified.

The scripture concludes al under sin, Gall. 3.
that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ should be given to all that
believe.

The Law was our scholemaister unto Christ, that we should be justified by
faith, Eod.
but after that faith is come, God onel^ justifies
ye are no longer under the scholmaister.

It is God only that justifies the circumcision that is of faith, Romans 3.
Circumc^sion and (...) circumcision iusti^ed by fai^
and the uncircumcision through faith.


Father. Who are thus justified by God only?


Son. ^om. 3.
Both Jews and gentiles, circumcision, and uncircumcision, are iusttyfied by
the faith of Jesus Christ.

^^d,
He is compted just, and the iustifier of him that believe on Jesus Christ.


Father. ^orgiuenes
Then tell me who does forgive us our sins?


Son. ^ark. 2
Nemo potest demittere peccata nisi solus deus, there is none that can forgive
sins but God only.

^od.
When Jesus saw their faith, he said unto the sick of the palsy, son thy
sins are forgiven thee, the son of man has power to forgive sins on earth.

^phe. 4.
Be courteous one to an other, merciful, forgiueing one an other, even as God
for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

^ollo. 2 The law, ^he devil, ^orld and ^esh, conquered by Christ's death.
When we were dead through sin, and through uncircumcision of our flesh, has
he quickened with him, and has forgiven us all our trespasses, and has put
out the hand writing that was against us, and has fastened it to his cross,
and has spoiled rule and power in his own person.


Father. But to whom does the Lord forgive sins?


Son. To the faithful, Mark. 2
for when Jesus saw their faith, he said, thy sins are forgiven thee.

Brethren, Acts 13. Sins are forgiven to the faithful.
through this man is preached forgiveness of sins unto you, and that to all
that believe.


Father. What enemies has the Lord conquered by his death in his own person
for our sakes, and what further profit has he brought us.


Son. The Law, the Devil, the world, the flesh, sin, death, hell, and al
other things, the wrath of God the father has he pacified, and reconciled us
again unto him, and we that were a far off, has he brought nigh, has
purchased the kingdom of heaven for us, and opened the same, made us fellow
heirs thereof with him self.


Father. Prove that unto me briefly?


Son. Heb. 2. Dyed for all.
It was appointed that Jesus Christ should taste of death for all men, and that
by the grace of God the father.

Heb. 2, 1. Devil conquered.
Through death he has expelled him that had lordship over death, that is to
say, the Devil, and that he might deliver us.

Col. 2. 2. Law Fastened to the crossa.
He has put out the hand writing that was against us, and has fastened it to
his cross, and has spoiled rule and power, in his own person.

Esaias. 22. None can open nor shut but he. Esaias. 42.
The key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder, so that he shall
open and no man shut, he shall shut, and no man open.

I will give him for a covenant unto the people, and a light to the Gentiles,
to open the eyes of the blind, to let out the prisoners out of their bonds,
and them that sytte in darkness, out of the dungeon house.

Math. 18.
The son of man came to save that which was lost.

Math. 3
This is my dear son, in whom I am well pleased.

A light to lighten the Gentiles, Luke. 3. A light.
and to be the glory of the people Israel.

And there went out virtue from him, Luke. 6 Heal all. A Phisiti
and healed them all that touched him.

John says, Io. 3. Life. Io.
he that believes on the son, has everlasting life.

I am the way, the truth, and the life, Way, truth, and life.
no man comes to the father, but by me.

I have finished the work which thou gave me to do, consumatum est. Io. 17.


For this cause was I borne, Io. 18.
and for this cause came I into the world, that I might bear witness unto the
truth,

Be it known unto you men and brethren, Acts. 13
that through this man is preached unto you forgiveness of sins, Beleuere
justified.
and that by him all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye
could not be delivered by the law of Moses.

When we were enemies, Romans 5.
we were reconciled unto God by his blood, much more seeing that we are
reconciled, we shall be preserved by his life, and we shall be saved from wrath.

What the law could not do (in as much Romans 8.
as it was weak, because of the flesh, An offeri^g ^r sin.
that performed God, and sent his son in the similitude of sinful flesh,
and sin damned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the law might
be fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

^ulfillers ^f the law. Romans 16 Romans 14
Christ fulfilleth the law, for all that believe to justify them.

The Lord Jesus died and rose again, that he might be Lord both of quick and
dead.

^. Cor. 15
Death is swallowed up in victory, death where is thy sting, hell where is thy
victory, the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law,
Death and ^ell ouer^me.
but thanks be unto God that has given us victory, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

^say. 25 Death. ^seas. 25.
Death has the Lord destroyed for ever.

O death, I will be thy death, O hell I will be thy stinge.

^al. 4. ^onne and ^eire of ^od.
Thou art not now a servant, but a son, if thou be a son, thou art an heir
of God through Christ.

^phe. 2.
Remember that in times past ye were without Christ being aliants from the
common wealth of Israel, and strangers from the testament of promise, having
no hope, being without God in this world, but now by ye means of Jesus Christ,
ye which were sometime far off, Peace made.
are made nigh by the blood of Christ, he is our peace which has made of both
one, and has broken down the wall that was a stop between us, and has also
put away through his flesh, the cause of hatred, even the law of
commandments contained in the law written, All thing crucified with ch^
for to make of twain one new man in him self, to make peace, and to
reconcile both unto God in one body, through the cross, and slew hatred
thereby, and came and preached peace to you that were far off, and to them
which were nigh, All one now both Jews an^ Ientiles.
for by him we have both one entrance unto God the Father.

It pleased the father that in him should all fullness dwell, Collo. 1. Blood
of the cross^
and by him to reconcile all things to himself, and to set at peace by him
through the blood of the cross, both things in heaven, and things in earth.

This we know that the father sent the son to be the savior of the worle. 1.
Io. 4


And concluding to speak further of the benefits we receive by the death and
passion of Christ Jesus, Acts. 3.
because no tongue is able to express the same, for there is no other name
under heaven, by whom we must be saved, but only in the name of Jesus Christ.


Father. If we be purged, saved, redeemed, delivered, justified, made the
children of God, and fellow heirs with Jesus Christ by his death and passion,
tell me to what end was the law ordained?


Son. ^all. 3
It was added, because of transgression, till the seed came, to whom the
promise was made.

^om. 7
To reveal sin, for I know not says saint Paull sin, but by the law, I
had not known what lust had meant, except the Lord had said unto me, thou
shall not lust.

^ll. 3.
The Law was our scholemaster unto Christ, that we should be justified by faith,
but after that faith is come, we are no longer under the scholemaster.

^b. 7.
The law brought nothing to perfection, but was an introduction to a better
hope, by the which we draw nigh unto God.


Father. Then the law saves none?


Son. No, for none fulfilleth it, Gall. 3
therefore brings a curse upon the transgressors, for it is written, cursed
is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the book
of the law to fulfill them.


Father. How are we then delivered from this curse, seeing that none fulfill
the law.


Son. Christ Jesus has delivered us from the curse of the law, Gall. 3.
in as much as he was accursed for us, for it is written, Leuiti. 18
cursed is every one that is hanged on tree, that the blessing of Abraham
might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, that we might receive the
promise of the spirit, through faith.


Father. What say thou to the ceremonial law, wherein were sacrifices,
oblations, Ceremonial law.
burnt offerings, sin offerings, heave offerings, peace offerings,
sprinckling water, and many such like ordinances of God.


Son. Heb. 9.
In the old Testament were ordinances and seruings of God, and worldly
holiness.

Heb. 10.
The law having but a shadow of good things to come, and not the very fashion
of things themselves, can never by those sacrifices that they offer year by
year continually, make the comers thereunto perfect.


Father. Was the law therefore abolished?


Son. Heb. 10
Yea, for it did but prefigure the sacrifice, death, passion, and other things
fulfilled by Christ Jesus, for the Lord said, sacrifice and offering, and burnt
sacrifice, and sin offerings thou would not have, neither have thou
allowed them, which are yet offered by the law, then said he, To do gods will
is the best sacrifice.
lo I am here to do thy will, oh God, he takes away the first, to establish
the latter.


Father. Was Christ but once offered, and was that offering perfect, how
chances it that Priests in some places affirm that in their masses they
offer Christ still unto the Father, for the sins of the quick and dead.


Son. It is not in man's power to offer Christ, Heb. 9.
for Christ Jesus freed himself once and not every day, Christ was once
offered says S. Paull, to take away sins, and not to offer himself often as
the hye Priests does, for the^ must he often have suffered since the world
began.

Christ needs not daily first for his own sins and then for the sins of
the people to offer up sacrifice, Heb. 7.
for that did he once when he offered up himself, and therefore perfect for
evermore.

Christ loved us and gave himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice of a
sweet savor unto God.


Father. Can not then our anointed Priests offer Christ in their masses every
day? Ephe. 5.



Son. No father, for see what Saint Paull says, we have an hye Priest in
heaven that sits on the right hand of God, and is a minister of holy
things, and of the true Tabernacle which God pight, and not man, Heb. 10.
this man after he has offered one sacryfice for sins, is set down on the
right hand of God, for Vnica oblatione profectos imperpet. effecit eos qui
sanctificantur, with one offering he has made perfect for ever those that are
sanctified.

Heb. 1
So that father, now after that he has purged our sins with this sacryfice,
he is set down on the right hand of ye majesty on hye, no more to be offered.


Father. Is he set on the right hand of his father no more to be offered, what
profit have we by him being there?


Son. Heb. 13 Sacrifice of praise.
He does always offer to God his father the sacryfice of praise, that is, the
fruit of those lipes wherewith we confess his name.

Heb. 9.
Christ entered into very heaven for to appear in the sight of God for us.

Io. 2.
If any man sin we have an advocate with the father Jesus Christ the
righteous, Advocate to purchase mercy for us.
and he it is that obtains grace for our sins, and not for our sins
only, but for the sins of the whole world.

He sits on the right hand of God and makes intercession for the saints
according to the pleasure of God. Romans 8.


He is says saint Paull, at the right hand of his father to make intercession
for us.

I saw an Angel says S. John, Revel. 8
that stood before the Alter offering the prayers of Saints upon the golden
Alter, which was before the seat, and the smoke of the odours which came of the
prayers of all saints ascended up before God out of the Angels hand.

This Angel father, is Jesus Christ that prays for us, and presents the
God of heaven with our prayers, whereby they are accepted, and for whose sake
our peticions granted.


Father. Thou say that Christ Jesus sits at the right hand of his father
to pray for us, to offer up our prayers and sacrifice^ of thanks giueing to
him, to be our advocate to obtain mercy for us, what say thou then to
the^, that say yt the saints departed and the blessed Virgin Mary, do that,
and not he.


Son. I say the devil has always some shift, to draw men from a steadfast
faith in Christ Jesus, otherwise his kingdom should decay, but there is none
that is a mean for our sins, Mediator.
but only Jesus Christ the only Son of God, that undefiled Lamb, which
has paid our ransom. 1. Tim. 2.
Thus says Saint Paull, there is one God, and one mediator between God and
man, even the man Christ Jesus, which gave himself a ransom for all, that it
should be testified at his time.

Io. 17.
This is eternal life, that we know the one only true God, and Jesus Christ
which thou have sent.

Gal. 3.
A mediator is not a mediator of one, but God is one.

Heb. 9.
He is a mediator of the new Testament, that through death, which chanced for
the redemption of these transgressors that were under the first Testament,
they which are called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance,
whereby you may see none to be any mean to the father for our sins, but
only Jesus Christ, his own natural son, fitting on his right hand.


Father. Show me what mercy we may look for at the hand of God, and how
merciful the Lord is?


Son. God is most merciful, Ezech. 18
and would not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should convert and
live.

The Lord God was merciful, Exodus 34
and gracious, long suffering and abundant in goodness and truth, and keeping
in store mercy for thousands, forgiving wickedness, ungodliness and sin.

The Lord is merciful unto Israel, Judge. 10
and his soul had pity upon their misery.

Even as a father is merciful unto his Children, Psalm. 103
even so is the Lord merciful unto them that fear him.


Eather. What must we do to be delivered from the curse of the law, and so
obtain mercy of our God through Jesus Christ, seeing that we are all sinners?


Son. Acts. 2.
Consider what answer Saint Peter gave to them that demanded what they should
do to be saved, he said, repent of your sins, Repentance
and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy ghost.

Math. 3.
R^pent said John Baptist, for the kingdom of God is at hand, prepare the way
of the Lord make his paths straight.

Math. 4
Jesus began to preach and said, repent for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Mark. 1
And in the first of Saint Lukes gospel, repent and believe the gospel.


Father. Repentance.
What is this repentance, whereunto we are exhorted by Jesus Christ and his
messengers?


Son. defined.
It is a sorrowing and continual mourning of ye heart and conscience because of
sin, joined with faith and amendeme^t of life.


Father. Let me here how we must sorrow, which some call contricion?


Son. The Lord by the Prophet Ioell says, Contricion.
turn you unto me with all your hearts, Joel. 2.
with fasting, weeping, and mourning, rent your hearts and not your garments,
and turn unto ye Lord, for ye Lord is merciful, gracious, long suffering, and
of great goodness and compassion, and ready to pardone wickedness.

Gyrde thee about with sack cloth, Ieremi. 6
sprincle thy self with ashes, mourn and weep bitterly, weep bitterly.
for the destruction else shall sodenlie fall upon you.

When Ahab hard that the Lord would destroy him and his house, 3. king. 21
he rent his clothes, and put on sackcloth and fasted and went bare foot, and
the Lord said, because he submits himself before me, I will not bring this
evil in his days, but in his sons days.

David said, Psalm. 102
my heart is smitten down and withered like grass so that I forget to eat my
bread, for the voice of my groaning, my bones will scarce cleave to my flesh.

Psalm. 6.
Every night wash I my bed, and water my couch with my tears.

Esaias. 30.
In repentance and in rest shall thou be safe, in quietness and sure confidence
shall ye put your trust.

Ieremi. 31 Repentance a gift of God.
Convert thou me and I shall be converted, as soon as thou turnest me I shall
reform my self, and when I understand, I shall smite upon my theigh.

Ezech. 20. Condemn your selves
You shall judge your selves worthy to be destroyed, for all your wickedness
that you have done.

Luke. 7 Tears of repentance.
A woman stood by Christ at his feet weeping, and began to wash his feet with
tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of her head.

Luke. 23
And he said, many sins are forgiven thee, for thou loved much.

Wept bitterly.
The Lord looked upon Petter, and Peter remembered the Lords words, and went
out from among the wicked Jews, and weept bitterly, whereby you may perceive
father, that he which truly repents, he is sorrowful for all his sins, as
Petter was, and weepeth bitterly.


Father. What other thing shall we find in him that truly repents?
Confession.



Son. A confessing, No auriculer confession.
an acknowledging of his iniquities to the Lord, and not in the ear of a
sinful man.

David said, Psalm. 32.
I will confess my sin unto the Lord, and so he forgave me the wickedness
of my sin.

The people of Israel cried unto the Lord and said, Judge. 10.
we have sinned against thee, and have forsaken our own God, and served Balam.

Esdras kneeled down on his knees and spread out his hands unto the Lord,
Esdras 9 Kneeled down.
and said, my God I am ashamed, and dare not lift up mine eyes unto thee my
God, for my wickedness is gone over my head, and my trespasses are exalted to
heaven, oh Lord, we have forsaken thy commandments, and made the land full
of uncleanness on every side.

I will says David confess my wickedness, and be sorry for my sin. Psalm 38


Daniell said, Daniel. 9
oh Lord unto us our kings and princes, belongs nothing but open shame and
confusion, we have sinned O Lord against thee, yet Lord let thy face shine over
the sanctuary.

Many that believed, came and confessed, and showed their works.


Father. Prayer.
Are there other qualities to be found in him that truly repents?


Son. Psalm. 51.
Yea Father, hearty and devout prayer unto God for pardon?

David, when he had sinned, prayed thus, have mercy upon me O God after thy
great goodness, and according to the multitude of thy mercies, do away mine
offenses. ^. Cro. 21.


David said, I have sinned exceedingly in doing this thing, but now I beseech
the Lord, do away the sin of thy servant, for I have done wickedlie.
Daniel. 9


Oh Lord, we have sinned and done wickedlie against all thy righteousness, yet
O Lord let thy wrathful displeasure be turned away, I beseech thee from thy
City of Jerusalem, thy holy hill.

Daniel. 9.
O Lord hear us, O Lord forgive, O Lord consider, tarry not over long, but for
thine own sake do it, O my God even for thy mercies sake, and for the temple
at Jerusalem.

All the people prayed and humbled themselves with fasting and prayer, Iud. 4
Fasting and prayer.
they and their wives, the priests put on heyrie cloth, and with one accord
prayed unto ye Lord.

And all the people fell down flat on their faces and prayed, Iudeth. 6
The song of the thr^ children.
and wept till evening, and besought the Lord of Israel ye he would show his
mercy upon his people.

For thine own sake, for thy beloved Abraham's sake, for thy servant Isaac
sake, and for thy holy Israells sake, give us not up for ever, neither take thy
mercy from us.

The prodigal child repented, Luke. 15 Confession prayer.
and came to his father and said, father I have sinned against heaven and
against thee, I am no more worthy to be called thy son, make me I beseech
thee as one of thy hired servants.

The thief at Christ's death thus prayed, Luke. 23
Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom, for I am justly
condemned, but thou have done nothing amiss, Christ answered, Amen, Dico
tibi, hodie mecum eris in Paradiso. Verelie this night shall thou be with me in
Padise. Luke. 18.
The Publican durst not look up to heaven, but smote upon his breast and
said, God be merciful unto me a sinner, and he went home justified.


Father. Is prayer so effectual, and of such virtue?


Son. Prayer of ^reat ver^ue. Math. 21
Yea, if it be devout and faithful, for Christ says, all things whatsoever
ye ask in prayers, if ye believe, ye shall receive them.

^o. 16
Verelie verelie I say unto you, whatsoever ye ask the father in my name, he
will give it you, hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name, ask, and ye shall
have, that your joy may be full.

^ames. 1
Ask in faith and waver not says S. James, and it shall be done to you.

^ames. 5
Helias was a man under infirmities as we are, and he prayed in his prayer that
it might not rain, and it rayned not the space of three years and six
months, and he prayed that it might rain, and the heavens gave rain, and
the earth brought forth her fruit. Whereby you may well perceive Father, that
hearty prayer avails much.


Father. ^atisfactio^ ^ot made (...) man.
What say thou to satisfaction, a part of repentance, as we have been taught?


Son. Father, Math. 3.
there is none that can make satisfaction unto God, but the man Jesus Christ,
who has made satisfaction for our sins, in whom the father of heaven is
well pleased, and his justice pacified.

David says, Psalm. 49.
no man may deliver his brother, nor make satisfaction unto God for him, for it
cost more to redeem their souls, so that they must let that alone for ever.


Father. What if we have taken our neighbors goods, or done him wrong, must we
make no recompense or restitution to the^, Restituti^
although we can make no satisfaction to God?


Son. Yes truly, that we must, for we reed in the book of Tobias, that
when he was blind, his wife brought home a Kyd, and her husband hearing it,
said, look that it be not stolen, restore it again to the owners, for it is
not lawful for us to eat any thing of theft.

A thief shall make restitution. Exodus 22


If a soul sin and trespass against the Lord, Leuiti. ^
and deny unto his neighbor it which he has taken to keep, or that which
was put into his hands, or does violence or robbery unto his neighbor, or if
he have found that which was lost, and denies it, and swears falsely upon
what-thing soever it be that a man does, and sins therein, if he have so
sinned or trespassed, he shall restore again that he took violently away,
or ye wrong which he did, and he shall restore it again in the whole sum,
and shall add the fifth part thereto, ^f ye re^ore you ^all be par^oned.
and shall give it unto him to whom it pertains, that day that he offers
for his trespass, and in so doing it shall be forgiven him what soever he
has done.


Father. What if he be dead unto whom ye have done wrong, or whose goods you
have taken, so that the same can not be restored to him?


Son. ^um. 5
Then shall they acknowledge their offense, and restore the hurt that they have
done in the whole sum, and put the fifth part thereunto, and give it unto his
next kinseman, to whom he did wrong, but if there be none to restore the hurt
unto, nor a kinseman of his, let the trespass be made good to the Lord, and it
shall be the Priests.

Zacheas said unto Christ, Leuiti. 19
Oh Lord the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have done wrong
to any man, I will restore to him four foulde. And what answered Jesus
Christ, this day is salvation come to thine house, because thou art become a
child of Abraham, for the son of man came to save that which was lost.


Father- I perceive the most of these parts that thou have spoken off, Judas
the traitor repented, but not truly.
to be in Judas that traitor, and yet a damned creature, he repented, he
confessed that he had sinned in betraying innocent blood, and he made
restitution, and cast down the thirty plates of silver, yet he desperately
went and hanged himself.


Son. True it is father, Faith.
but he wanted the chief point of all other, which was faith, he had no
belief to be saved, and therefore craving no mercy dispaired, and dispairing,
hanged himself. Despair.


The like we reed of Cain that Genesis 4.
flew Abell his brother, he said unto the Lord, my sin is greater then that
it may be forgiven.

1. king. 29
King Saull dispayring in God, and trusting to Enchaunters and Couniurers, fell
upon his own sword and slew himself, and all his host fled.

Heb. 4.
The Jews entered not in, because of their unbelief.

2. kings. 17
Achetofell when he saw his counsel was not followed, he went home and set his
house in order, and hanged himself.

Exodus 9
Pharo said, the Lord is righteous, and I a sinner, and so dispayred.

Job. 15. One may perceive who dispaireth. Faith.
He that never believes to be delivered out of darkness, for the sword is
always before his eyes.


Father. Proceed my son, tell me of this point which thou call the
principal above others in repentance, which thou say is a steadfast and true
faith, and first tell me what faith is?


Son. Heb. 11
Saint Paull says, that faith is a suer confidence of things which are hoped
for, and a certentie of things which are not seen, and further without faith
it is impossible that any man should please God.

He that comes unto God, must believe that God is, Heb. 1
and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him.

Ye must ask in faith and waver not, for he that doubts, James. 1
let him not think that he shall obtain any thing.

It profited them not, Heb. 4.
in that they heard the word, because that they coupled it not with faith.

By grace are ye saved, through faith, Ephe. 2.
and that not of your selves, for it is the gift of God, and comes not of
works, least any man should rejoice.

Abraham believed God, and it was compted unto him for righteousness, Gall. 3.
ye know therefore that they that are of faith the same are the children of
Abraham. All the faithful are blessed with faithful Abraham.

The life that I now live in the flesh, I live by ye faith of ye son of God,
Gall. 2. Live by faith. Gall. 2.
which loved me and gave himself for me.

We have believed on Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by ye faith of
Christ.

Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10
and hearing comes by the word of God.

Romans 4,
By faith is ye inheritance given, that it might come of favor, we are
justified by the faith of Christ Jesus.

Acts. 15.
We believe that through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved.

Acts. 2.
It shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord
shall be saved.

Io. 5. The kingdom of heaven given to the faithful. Mark. 9
He that believes my words says Christ, and believes on him that sent me,
has everlasting life, and shall not come to damnation but is escaped from
death to life.

So that I will conclude with Christ's own words, that all things are
possible to him that believes, Romans 12,
and S. Paull says whatsoever is not of faith is sin.


Father. Faith a precious Jewel.
I see that faith is a precious Jewel, Gods only gift whereby we take hold
of his mercy, but is this faith alone without fruit, idle without good works?


Son. Math. 13
No father, the true iustifiyng faith which I showed unto you is never Idle, for
it is like a grain of musterseede which a man took and sowed in his garden,
Luke. 13
and it grew and waxed a great tree, Luke. 4.
and the fowls of the air made their nests in the branches of it. etc. So if
we have faith like a grain of musterseede, it will grow up so great, that the
birds of the air may make their nests in it, that is, the poor people may
lodge in our houses, Faith and works.
may be feed at our tables, clothed with our clothes, relieved as brethren, and
succored as much as lies in us.

Faith without deeds is dead in it self, therefore says saint James, James. 2
show me thy faith by thy works.

There was a fig tree which Christ came unto, Math. 21
seeing many fair leaves being an hungered, supposing to have been sustained
with the fruit, but there was none but leaves only. And Christ cursed it,
and said, never fruit grow of ye heerefter, and it withred, so that we have
fair leaves and not fruit, Math. 3
the curse of Christ will wither us.

Bring forth fruits of repentance, Io. 15.
and say not we have Abraham to our father.

Every branch says Christ that bears fruit in me, will I purge, Io. 1^
that it may bring forth more fruit.

Heb. 6.
The earth that drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, The fruitful
blessed, the barren cursed.
and brings forth herbs, meet for them that dress it, receive the
blessing of God, but the ground that bears thorns and brieres is reproved,
and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned.

Math. 3
The Axe is put unto the root of the tree, every tree yt brings not forth
good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire.

Luke. 13
A certain man says Christ, had a fig tree in his vienyard, and he came and
sought fruit of it, and found none, and he said, these three years have I
come and sought fruit of this fig tree, and find none, cut it up, why does it
comber the ground.

Titus. 3
And concluding with Saint Paulls words, because I may hereafter speak more
of works joined to faith, He that believes does good.
or rather springing of faith, let those that believe in God, go on forward in
all good works.


Father. Conuersio
Is there ought else that pertains to true repentance?


Son. Romans 6.
Yea, amendment of life, conversion, a new life, S. Paull says, Amendment of
life.
as you have given over your members servants unto uncleanness and to
iniquity, from one iniquity, unto an other, even so now give over your
members servants unto righteousness, that you may be sanctified, for the end
of sin is death.

If you will turn unto me says the Lord, and keep my co^mandeme^ts, 2.
Esdras. 1
though ye were cast into the utter most part of heaven, yet I will gather you
from thence, and I will bring you to the place that I have appointed and chosen.

Wash you therefore, make you clean, Esaias. 1.
put away your evil thoughts out of my sight, cease from doing evil, learn
to do right, apply your selves unto equity, deliver the oppressed, pelpe the
fatherless to his right, let the widows complaint come before you, yea though
your sins were as red as scarlet, I shall make the^ as whit as snow, and
though they were like purple, I shall make them as white as wool.

Let the ungodly man forsake his own ways, Esaias 55.
and the unrighteous man his own imaginacions, and turn again unto the Lord,
and so he shall be merciful unto him, and to our God, for he is ready to
forgive.

Ieremi. 7.
Amend your ways and counsels, judge right between a man and his neighbor,
oppress not the stranger, the fatherless and the widow, shed no innocent
blood in this place, cleave not to strange Gods to your own destruction, then
will I let you dwell in the land.

Ieremi. 15
If thou will turn thee again, I shall set thee in my service, and if thou will take out the precious from the vile, thou shall be even as mine own mouth.

Ezech. 16.
Think upon thy sins and be ashamed, excuse thy confusion no more when I
have forgiven thee all that thou have done, says the Lord.

Ezech. 18
When the wicked man turns from the wickedness that he has done, and does
the thing that is equal and right, he shall save his soul alive.

Eod.
Be converted, turn you clean from your wickedness, so shall there no sin
do you harm.

Oseas. 11
Turn to thy God, keep mercy and equity, and hope still in thy God.

Jonas. 3.
All the Nymuits every one turned from his evil way, from the wickedness that
he had in hand, and the Lord spared them.

Turn you therefore, says the Angel, Tobi. 13.
ye sinners, and do righteousness before God. And be sure he will show mercy
upon you.

Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance, Math. 3 Saying without doing, is
naught. Reuela. 2
and say not we have Abraham to our father.

Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent and do the first works, or
else I will come unto thee shortelie and remove the candelsticke out of his
place, except thou repent. Ieremi. 11


When I take in hand says the Lord to root out, to destory, or to wast away
any people or kingdom, if that people against whom I have thus devised,
convert from their wickedness, I repent me of the plagues, that I devised to
bring upon them.

Again, when I take in hand to build, to plant a people or kingdom, if the
same people or kingdom do evil before me, and here not my voice, I repent
of the good that I devised to do for them.


Father. Blessed be that merciful God. But tell me can there none be saved
without repentance, faith and conversion?


Son. Revel. 2 Luke. 13.
No father, for Christ says, except you repent and do the first works, he
will come shortelie and remove the candlestick out of his place, except, ye
repent ye shall all perish.


Father. Refusers to ^epent.
What will come or happen, to those that will not repent, having this good
warning of the Lord?


Son. ^eremy. 22
The Lord answers by Jeremy the prophet, I gave thee warning in the time of
prosperity, but thou saydest I will not hear, therefore thou shall be brought
to shame in thy wickedness.

^om. 2
Do thou not know that the patience and long suffering and kindness of God,
leads thee to repentance, but thou after thy stubburne and hard heart that
cannot repent, heapest unto thy self wrath against the day of vengeance, when
shall be opened the righteous judgments of God which shall reward every man
according to his deeds.

^euel. 2
I gave Iazabell time to repent says the Lord, of her fornication, but she
would not, therefore will I kill her children with death.


Father. Tell me (seeing that if we repent not, we shall perish, when and what
time ought we to repent?


Son. The Prophet Ioell shows and says, what time we must repent. Joel. 2.
turn you unto the Lord your God, speaking in the presentense, that is even
now repent.

The holy Ghost says, Heb. 3.
to day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.

Make no tariyng to turn unto the Lord, and put not off from day to day,
Ecclesi. 5
for sodenlie will his wrath come, and in time of vengeance he will destroy.


Father. Thou say that a desperate man believes never to be forgiven, A
desperate person
and be delivered out of darkness, and that the sword is always before his
eyes, how shall a man or woman that has committed some great and notorious
sin against the majesty of almighty God do, to be delivered from despair?


Son. ^dultery and murder ^orgiuen. Great sins forgiven.
Let that man remember David, who sinned a great sin, he was an adulterer, yet
when he repented, the Lord said, thou shall not die.

Let him remember Saint Peter, who sinned a great sin, for he denied his
Master, Good coun^ell against ^esperatio^.
and sword, and cursed himself, if ever he knew him, and yet when he
repented, went out and wept bitterly, the Lord forgave him, and placed him in
his former state.


Eather. Many sins ^orgiuen.
But what if your sins be many, these two sinned but in one or two things,
once or twice?


Son. Let us remember Marie Magdelen possessed with vii. devils, and
acquainted with all sins, yet when she repented and washed Christ's feet
with tears, he said unto her, Multa peccata tibi condonantur, propteria quod
delixisti multu^. Many sins are forgiven thee, for thou loved much.


Father. What if our sins be filthy and loathsome?


Son. Let us consider the woman taken in adultery, Filthy sin pardoned.
even when the deed was in doing, yet when she repented, Christ said, I will
not condemn thee, go and sin no more.


Father. What if our sins and offenses be known to every man?


Son. Let us remember that Saint Matthew was a tolle-gatherer, had openly
offended, Known and open sins forgiven.
and his extorcion known all abroad, yet when Christ said, sequere me,
follow me, he straight way obeyed his calling.


Father. What if we have been naughty even from our youth?


Son. Then let us consider the thief that was hanged with Christ, Sins from
our youth used, forgiven.
whom we never read to have done good, yet when he repented and said, Lord
remember me when thou come into thy kingdom, Christ answered Amen. Dico
tibi hodie mecum eris in Paradiso. Verelie I say unto thee, this day shall
thou be with me in Paradise.


Father. What if I have been a cruel man and persecuter, shall I not despair?


Son. The Lord forbid, remember Saint Paull, a cruel persecuter of all that
professed Christ Jesus, ^ruelty ^ardoned.
and yet being called of the Lord, obeyed him and repented, and Christ said.
Iste est vas electionis mihi. This man is a chosen vessel unto me.


Father. What if I have hourelie fallen to sin, and from one sin to another,
and that even by custom, then I may despair?


Son. No Father, if we sin seven times in one day, ^urely ^nes for^en.
no, seventy times seven times, and so often repent, the Lord is merciful and
will forgive, for the mercy of GOD is from everlasting to everlasting, he
would not the death of a sinner, look as a Father pittieth his own children,
even so is the Lord merciful unto them that repent and turn unto him, ^ayer.
blessed be the majesty of that merciful God and loving father, for ever and
ever, Amen.


Father. Son, thou say that sins be they never so great, so many, so
filthy, yet if a man repent, the Lord through Jesus Christ does pardon and
forgive all, Clothed.
but thou show me not of any righteousness wherewith the sinner shall be
clothed or covered from his nakedness and sin.


Son. Father, Oscas. 2.
after that we are washed from our sins, we are joined a new unto God, and
clothed with righteousness and merits of Christ Jesus, for the Lord says, I
will marry thee unto my self for evermore, even to mine own self will I
marry thee, in righteousness, in equity, in loving kindness, and mercy,
in faith also will I marry thee to my self, and thou shall know the Lord.

Behold says GOD, zachary
I have taken thy sin from thee, and I will now deck thee with change of
rayments.

Ezech. 36.
I will power clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean, a new heart will I
give you, and a new spirit will I put in you, I will restore you to your old
state, ^et in their ^ormer ^ate.
and show you more kindness then ever you had before, I will give my spirit
among you.

Luke. 15
The prodigal child returning by repentance to his father, was forgiven, and
his father said to his servants, bring forth the best garment and put it on
him, and put a ring on his hands, and shoes on his feece, and rejoice and be
merry, for this our son was dead, and is now alive again, he was lost, but
is now found.

Romans 13,
Let us walk honestly as it were in the day time, putting on the Lord Jesus
Christ.

^phe. 4.
We must lay away the old manne which is corrupt, and put on the new man which
after God is shapen, in true holiness and righteousness.

^euel. 3
He that overcomes, shall be clothed with white array.

^od.
Buy of me (says Christ) I counsel thee, gold that is tried in the fire, that
then thou may be rich, and white raiment, that thou may be clothed, and
that thy filthy nakedness do not appear, and anoint thine eyes with eye
salve, that thou may see.

Long white garments were given to every one of them. Revel. 16


Let us be glad and rejoice, Revel. 19
and give honor to him for the marriage of the la^be is come, and his wife
made her self ready, and to her was granted, that she should be clothed with
pure and goodly raines.

And concluding this with the words of the Evangelist John: Revel. 7.
who beheld a great multitude in heaven which no man could number, of all
nations, people, and tongues, that stood before the seat, and the Lamb,
clothed with long white garments, and Palms in their hands.


Father. If we shall be clothed with the merrits and righteousness of Christ
Jesus, good work
then it is not needful for us to do any good works?


Son. Yes Father, Ephe. 2. Created t^ good work^
for we are the workema^ship of God, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, yt
we should walk in him.

I have made thee that thou might serve me says God. Esaias. 44.


Ephe. 1. Elected to good works
The Lord has chosen us in him before the foundations of the world were laid
that we should be holy and without blame before him.

^o. 15.
I have chosen you says Christ to go and bring forth fruit, and that your
fruit should remain.

Luke. 1 R^demed to good works.
Christ has redeemed his people, that they should serve him without fear, in
holiness and righteousness all the days of their life.


Father. I perceive that all men are elected, created, redeemed, sanctified,
and ordained of God to do good, and to live holelie. Name unto me some of
those good works commanded by God, that we should walk in them.


Son. The chief work is faith.
The first and principal work of all other, and the spring or fountain out of
which all other works flow, and the foundation next unto Christ, whereupon all
are builded, shows our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, Io. 6. Faith the ^hief
work
by his Evangelist Saint John. This is the work of God, that ye believe on him
whom he has sent.


Father. Thou touchedst that work of faith at large before (the Lord Jesus
increace our faith) but now proceed to the other.


Son. Charity, father, Charity.
springs and grows out of this root faith.


Father. What is Charity?


Son. It is the love of God for his own worthiness, and the love of our
neighbor, Charity defined.
for the love we bear to our God.


Father. First tell me of the love of our God, and how he is to be loved?


Son. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy
soul, Math. 22. Luke. 10.
with all thy mind, and with all thy strength. etc. Of this love of our God, I
have spoken before.


Father. What say thou of the love of our neighbor?


Son. Christ says, Luke. 10
thou shall love thine neighbor as thy self, above all things have fervent
love amongst your selves, 1. Peter. 4
for love shall cover the multitude of sins.

Romans 13.
Dilectio proximi malum non operatur, love does hurt none.

1. Io. 3
We must love says saint John, not in tongue nor word only, but in deed and
verity.

1. Io. 3
This is the commandment of God, that we believe on the name of the son of
GOD Jesus Christ, and love one an other.


Eather. Math. 5
It should seem that even brute beasts will love those of whom they are fed,
the wicked man will after a manner love them that love him, what say thou,
ought we not to love our enemies?


Son. Math. 5
Christ says, love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them
that hate you, pray for them that persecute you, that you may be the children
of my father which is in heaven. Love our enemies.



Father. Is it enough to love them, is no more required at our hands?


Son. We can no more but love them, Math. 18
how be it there is much contained in this word love, for we must forgive them.
If thy brother offend against thee, thou must not only forgive him seven
times, but seauentie times seven times.

If thy brother trespass, Luke. 17 Forgive your enemies.
rebuke him, and if he repent forgive him, and though he sin against thee
seven times in one day, and seven times in one day turn unto thee, saying,
it repents me, thou shall forgive him.


Father. Is there yet any more contained in this word love, but to forgive?


Son. Yea, we must pray for them, Pray for your enemies.
for Christ says, pray for them that hurt you, and persecute you.

Saint Stephen kneeled down and cried with a loud voice, Acts. 7.
and prayed thus for his persecutors, lord lay not this sin to their charge,
and when he had thus spoken he fell a sleep.

And concluding with Christ's own words, Luke. 23
he prayed thus for those that crucified him, father forgive them, they wot^
not what they do.


Father. Is there any more that we must do to our enemies?


Son. Math. 5. Romans 12
Yea, we must love them so, that we do for them what soever good we are able,
for Christ teaches thus, do good to them that hate you: if thine enemy
hunger, feed him: if he ^hirst, give him drink.


Father. I perciue that all virtues and good works proceed of this love, being
a fruit of a lively faith.


Son. Romans 13
Yea father, the whole law is fulfilled in this word love, for whatsoever ye
would that men should do unto you, even so do ye to them, for this is the
law and prophets.

Io. 14,
He that has my commandments and keeps them, the same is he that loves me,
and he that loves me, shall be loved of my father, and I will love him, and my
father and I, will dwell with him.

Io. 4.
God is love, and he that dwells in love dwells in God, and God in him.

Io. 16.
By this shall ye be known to be my disciples, if ye love one an other.

If we examine our selves we shall find whether we be in the faith or not, 1.
Cor. 15.
for the Appostle says, prove your own selves, know you not that Jesus Christ
dwells in you, except ye be reprobates: and he in whom Christ dwells, 2.
Cor. 5
has crucified the flesh with affections and lusts, and is a new creature in
Jesus Christ.

So that if we be the Children of God, Romans 8.
and love one an other, Gods holy spirit will certify us thereof.


Father. Any man may perceive then, Religion.
who is a man of God and sincere religion.


Son. Yea, Io. 4.
he that worshippeth one true God in spirit and truth, and loves all men
friend and foe, and has crucified the old man, and put upon him the new,
and is become a new creature in Jesus Christ.

Pure religion and undefiled before God the father is this, James. 1
to visit the fatherless and widows in their adversity, and to keep
himself unspotted of the world.


Father. Alms.
Is it a sign of men that be of perfect religion to help the fatherles, widows
and poor, let me here how we ought to help them.


Son. Deu. 15.
If any of your brethren among you be poor, says God, within any of your
gates, in the land which I give you, thou shall not harden thy heart, nor shut
thine hand from thy poor brother, Give and lend.
but open thine hand and lend him sufficient for his need.

Daniel. 4
Oh King said Daniell, be content with my counsel, that thou may redeem thy
sins with alms, and thine offenses with mercy to poor people, for this
shall be an healing of thine error.

Tobi. 4.
Give alms of thy goods, and turn never thy face from any poor man, and then
the face of the Lord shall not be turned away from thee.

Be merciful after thy power, if thou have much give plentiouslie. If thou
have little, do thy deligence to give of that little, for so gatherest thou
thy self a good reward in the day of necessity, for alms delivers from
sin and death, Alms rewarded.
and suffers not ye soul to come in darkness.

The mercy that a man shows is as it were a purse with him, Eccle. 17
and the grace that is given to man, preserves him as the apple of an eye.

The bread of the needy is the life of the poor, he that defraudeth him of it,
Eccle. 34
is the child of death.

When thou give thine alms, Math. 6.
let not thy left hand know what the right hand does, that thine alms may be
in secret. And the Lord which sees in secret, Rewarded.
shall reward the openly.

Whosoever has this worlds good, 1. Io. 3
and sees his brother have need, and shuts up his compassion from him, how
dwells the love of God in him.


Father. What say thou to those that are unmerciful unto the poor, and
will not suffer them so much as to gather the ears of corn, and to gleane in
their fields?


Son I say they are wicked people, Leuit. 19.
not yet received to be of Christ's church, nor members thereof, for ye Lord
commanded thus. When ye reap down your corn fields, Gleaning.
you shall not gather that which is behind in the harvest, but thou shall leave
it for the stranger and poor.

I am the Lord.

Leuiti. 23.
When you gather in your corn field, thou shall not make any after gathering
of thy harvest, neither shall thou make clean riddance of the field, but shall
leave it to the poor and stranger.


Father. Company.
Tell me what company we ought to use, if we be new creatures, and what
company eschew?


Son. Exodus 23
The Lord says, thou shall not let the wicked dwell in the land, lest they
make thee sin against me.

2. kings. 22
With the Godly thou shall be Godly, with the pure thou shall be pure, with
the froward thou shall learn frowardness.

Job. 31.
He that joins himself to wicked company, shall not destruction come upon
him?

Ecclesi. 13.
Who so touches pitch shall be filed with all, and he that is familyer with the
proud, shall cloth himself with pride.

Bear not the yoke with the unbelievers, 2. Cor. 6.
what fellowshippe has light with darkness, what concord has Christ witst
Beliall, wherefore come out from among them, and touch no unclean thing.

We require you brethren, 2 Thessalonians. ^
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from
every brother that behaueth himself inordinatelie, and not after the
institution that ye have received of us.


Father. Whose company then must we use?


Son. I am a companion says David, Psalm. 119
of them that fear the Lord, and keep his commandments.

I will go among the wise, Pro. 13
and learn wisdom.

With the holy, thou shall be holy, Psalm. 18
and with a perfect man thou shall be perfect, and with the clean, thou shall
be clean.

Thou may not dwell with vain persons, Psalm. 2^
neither have fellowshippe with the deceitful, I have hated the congregation
of the wicked, and will not sit among the ungodly.


Father. Marriage.
Let me hear something of marriage, because thou have omitted that point?


Son. Genesis 1
God the father did institute marriage in Paradise, and joined Adam and Eua^ in
marriage together, and said, grow and increase, and replenish the earth.

^o. 2.
Christ himself, his mother, and his disciples were presents at a marriage in
Cana a City of Gallelie, where he turned the water into wine, for
confirmation thereof.

Tobias. 6.
Take her in the fear of God, and more for children, then for lust, that in the
seed of Abraham, Marriage ^er procre^tion of ^hildren,
thou may possess the blessing of Abraham.


Father. There be almost none that deny marriage, but that it is lawful for
seculer people, and lay men to marry, but not priests and ministers, what
says the scripture therefore to them?


Son. ^. Cor. 7. Marriage ^or auoi^ing of ^inne.
Thus says Saint Paull, to avoid fornication, let every man have his own
wife, and every wife her own husband.

If they cannot abstain, let them marry, it is better to marry, then to
burn.

Have we not power to lead about a-woman, a sister, as well as other Apostles,
1. Cor. 9
and as the brethren of the Lord, The Apostles married.
and Cephas, either I and Barnabas only have not power this to do.

Honorabile est inter omnes coniugium, Heb. 13
et thorus immaculatus. Marriage is honorable among all men, and a bed
undefiled, but as for whoremongers and adulterers, God will judge.


Father. Thou speak generally of all men, that all may marry, but tell me
by express words perticularlie of Bishops or Ministers marriage?


Son. A Bishop (says Saint Paull) must be blameless, the husband of one
wife, 1. Tim. 3. Bishops married.
and one that rules his own house well, and that has children in subjection
with reverence.

The wives of the ministers must be honest, not evil speakers, but sober, 1.
Tim. 3 Ministers married.
and faithful in all things.

Let the Deacons be husbands of one wife, 1. Tim. 3 Decons married.
and such as rule their children well and their own householdes.


Father. I perceive that all the Apostles almost were married, and I see that
Bishops, Ministers and Deacons, and all others may lawfully marry, why then
was marriage made unlawful for Priests?


Son. ^. Tim. 4
Because that those that forbed the same were led by the spirit of error,
which thing Saint Paull did foreshew, and said, that the spirit of God spoke
evidently, that in the latter days many should depart from the faith, Marriage
^orbid.
forbidding to marry, and to abstain from meats, both which the Lord had
ordained.


Father. Baptism.
Proceed and tell me what thou say of Baptism?


Son. Math. 28
It is an holy Sacrament instituted by Jesus Christ, for he sent his Apostles
to preach and to Baptize, go into all the world and preach the Gospel to all
creatures, and Baptize them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost.


Father. Wherefore was this Sacrament instituted by Jesus Christ.


Son. To be a seal of his promise, Acts. 1.
for Sacraments are seals of Gods promises.

John (says Christ) baptized with water, Io. Water and the holy ghost. Romans 6.
but ye shall be Baptized with the holy Ghost, after these few days.

All we which are Baptized in Jesus Christ, are baptized to die with him, we
are buried then with him by baptism for to die, for like as Christ was raised
up again from death by the glory of GOD the father, even so we all should
walk in a new life.

By his mercy (says Saint Paull) he saved us by the fountain of the new
birth, and renewing of the holy Ghost, Titus. 3
which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Abraham received the sign of circumcision, Romans 4.
as a seal of the righteousness of faith, that he should be the father of all
that believe, though they were not circumcised.

So that you may see father, that Baptism is a seal to assure us of the
spirit of God, whereby we are regenerate and fully certified to have all our
sins washed away.


Father. Children that dye before bap^isme.
I pray thee son, tell me what thou think of Children that die before they
be Baptized, for in old time we judged them to be condemned, and buried many
in profane places, and not in the accustomed place of burial.


Son. Genesis 17.
Consider Father, I pray you, that the Lord promised to Abraham, that he should
be father of many nations, and that kings should come out of his loins, and
that in his seed all nations of the earth should be blessed, and he gave him
this sign of circumcision as a seal thereof.

Romans 4.
Faith was reckened for righteousness to Abraham, before he was circumcised, so
that children being borne of christian and faithful parents, dying without
baptism, are at no danger, but in the hands of God, for Abraham was compted
righteous before he was circumcised.

Acts. 10.
Peter the Apostle being sent to Cornelius, and preached unto him, to his
friends, famely, even while he was preaching, ye holy ghost fell on them all ye
heard the preaching, and Peter said, ca^ any man forbid water that these should
not be baptized, which have received the holy ghost as well as we, and he
commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord. Holy ghost given before
baptism.
You may perceive father, that they were endued with the holy ghost, before
they were baptized.

Even as baptism now saves us not the putting away the filth of the flesh,
1. Pet. 3.
but in that a good conscience consents unto God, through Jesus Christ.

The son of man came to save yt which was lost, therefore despise them not.
Math. 8.


Those yt are elected, Reuela. 1.
has Jesus Christ loved and washed from their sins in his blood.

Non est voluntas coram Patre vestro qui est in coelis vt pereat vnus de
pusillis istis. Mark. 18
I baptize (says S. John, Math. 3
with water unto repentance, but Christ baptiseth with the holy Ghost, and
with fire, so that all that the minister can do is but baptize with water,
besides prayer, but Christ either before or after can baptize with the holy
spirit, and therefore father, to judge them to be condemned, whom Jesus
Christ has elected, created, and washed by his blood, and regenerat by his
holy spirit, is abominable.


Father. If children may be saved without baptism, then it is but foolishness
to use ye same?


Son. This Sacrament father, was instituted and commanded by Jesus Christ,
and therefore to be received, for as I said before, Math. 28
he commanded his Disciples to go into all the world and preach the gospel,
and baptize in the name of the Father, the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Which
Sacrament was a seal, that the Gospel being the power of God, Romans 1
should bring salvation to all those that should believe.

Mark. 16
He that believes and is baptized says Christ, shall be saved, and he that
believes not shall be damned, he that believes not be he baptized or not
baptized, circumcised or uncircumcised, shall be damned.

Romans 3.
The circumcision or washing of the heart, is true circumcision and washing.


Father. What say thou to the Sacrament of the Lords supper, by reason I
perceived you do grant to no more?


Son. Father, there be but two Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper.
And of Bptisme I have spoken, and this other was also the ordinance of Jesus
Christ, instituted in the same night that he was betrayed he took bread, and
when he had given thanks he brake it and gave to his disciples and said,
take, eat, this is my body, and he took the cup and thancked and gave it them
saying, drink ye all of this, for this is the blood of the new Testament that
is shed for many, for the remission of sins.


Father. What was meant by this Sacrament?


Son. It did signify the deliverance of his disciples and of all faithful,
Math. 26 Mark. 14 Luke. 22.
out of the bondage of Satan and prison of the Devil, for this night says
Christ shall my body be slain, and my blood shed out, for the remission of
sins, for this night shall the shepperd of the sheep be smitten, Luke. 2^
and the sheep scatered, but behold, afterward will I go before you into
Gallalye.


Father. Why did Christ institue this Sacrament?


Son. First, to help our weakness being dull and slow to the understanding
of heavenly things, he gives us sensible things, external singes to bring
our minds by these outward singes to consider his invisible graces.

Luke. 22. 1. Cor. 11
And an other cause was to put us always in remembrance of his death and
benefit of his passion, for he says, do this in the remembrance of me.

As often as ye eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, ye show the Lords
death till he come.

And an other cause there is that moved Christ Jesus to institute sacraments,
that they might be linckes and bond of love, unity and concord among our
selves, for we have but one God, Ephe. 4.
one Faith, one baptism.

1. Cor. 10.
Vnus panis vnum corpus, but one bread, so all but one body.


Father. Passover.
There were Sacraments in the old Law, as the passover, what did that signify?


Son. Exodus 12
It was a Lamb of a year old without blemish, which was killed and the blood
sprinkled, signifiyng this immaculat Lamb of God Jesus Christ, that takes
away the sins of the word.

The pascall Lamb put the people of Israel always in remembrance of their
bodelie deliverance out of Egipte from Pharo, and from the filth and clay of
the Land, by the power of God, by a mighty hand and stretched out arm.

So in like manner this Sacrament of the Lords supper, 1. Cro. 11
signifies to us how that we are not only delivered from a bodelie
servitude, but also from hell, the devil and sin, and that by the cross,
passion, Luke. 22.
and blood shedding of our pascall Lamb Jesus Christ.


Father. Seeing that this Sacrament is so worthy a mystery, tell me how we
ought to communicate?


Son. We ought to judge and examine our selves, and then eat of that bread,
1. Cor 11
and drink of that cup.

If any man be defiled says God, Number. 9.
let him not eat of the passover, but it must be eaten with sweet bread and
sower hearbe^, so father is this Sacrament to be eaten, no unclean person that
has not examined himself, may eat threof. The passover was to be eaten with
sweet bread and sower herbs, so he that eats this Sacrament must be
contrite in heart, and his conscience unleavened, that is, pure and clean.

^euiti. 7.
If any soul that is unclean, eat of the flesh of the peace offering, the
same soul shall perish from among his people.

^. Cor. 11
Whosoever says Saint Paull shall eat of this bread and drink of the cup of
the Lord unworthily shall, be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, and
eats and drinks his own damnation.


Father. ^eall pre^ns.
Then belike in this Sacrament is the real presens of Christ his body and blood,
so that this Sacrament is transsubstantiall into his natural body and blood,
if there be such benefit for the worthy receivers, and so great perell to the
unworthy.


Son. ^uke. 22 ^. Cor. 11
No father, for it is but a memorial of his death, and instituted for a
remembrance of the same, his natural body with all parts and members thereof
is ascended into heaven, Heb. 1
and sits on his fathers right hand, Heb. 8.
and shall abide there till the end come.


Father. How can the unworthy receivers be in such danger then?


Son. Because they set at naught the ordinances of Jesus Christ. And
therefore saint Paull says, he that despises Moses law dies without mercy
under two or three witnesses, how much sorer shall he be punished that treads
under foot the son of God, and compteth the blood of the testament,
wherewith he was sanctified, as an unholy thing, and does dishonor to the
spirit of grace.


Father. What punishment are they worthy of that refuse or negligentlie regard
this institucion of Jesus Christ our Lore and savior?


Son. Numer. 9
The lord says, that man yt is negligent to offer passover in his due time,
shall be rooted out of his people and parish.

Heb. 10.
He that treads under foot the institucion of Jesus Christ, is worthy of
death, because he does dishonor to the blood of Christ, and to the spirit of
grace.


Father. Thou have spoken well by these two Sacraments, baptism, and the
Lords supper, being instituded by Jesus Christ, and therefore to be had in
reverence, as the seals of our salvation, but proceed, tell me what thou say
of extreme unction, for it should seem that Saint James allows of the same.
James. 5



Son. James. Annoynti^g
The Appostle, father, speaks of the holy ghost in that same place, as we may
perceive by other places expounding what the annoynting is, the annoynting that
dwells in you says saint John, teaches you all things, Io. 2.
and is true and no lie.

2. Cor. 1.
It is God that stablysheth us with you in Christ, and stands by us, and has
anointed us, which has also sealed us, and has given us the earnest of the
spirit into our hearts.

When the spirit of truth comes, Io. 16,
he will lead you into all truth.

The spirit of God upon me, Luke. 4.
because he has anointed me, to preach the gospel to the poor has he
sent me, to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the captive,
and sight to the blind. Freely to set at liberty those that are bruised, and to
preach the acceptable year of the Lord. So that the ministers or elders, ought
to pray over the sick and diseased, and to annoynte them with this oil, which
is Gods spirit, to certify their conscience that their broken hearts are
healed, that whereas they were captives, they are delivered, whereas they were
in darkness now lightened, being in bondage, True annoynting by the spirit of
God
now set at liberty, whereas they were ouercharged with sin, ye Christ had
taken upon him all their offenses, and that now they were acceptable offeringes
unto their GOD through Jesus Christ. And this is the annoyting that every
minister must annoint the diseased withal.


Father. Ecclesiastical au^horitie.
What say thou of ecclesiastiall authority and jurisdiction?


Son. I say that they have power and aucthority to excommunicate and punish
offenders, and when they repent, to receive them into the congregation again,
and absolve.

Jesus breathed on his disciples and said, ^o. 20.
receive the holy ghost, whose sins soever you remit, they are remitted, and
whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained.

The minister may bind, that is, preach the Law and curse thereof, Binding and
loosing.
to impenitent persons that will not regard their own salvation, and they may
loose, that is, preach the gospel and glad tidings to those that repent
unfeignedly, Matb. 11
and would gladly come unto Christ to be refreshed.


Father. Let me here that they have authority to excommunicate, and power to
receive into ye congregation again, such as repent.


Son. Leuiti. 13
The Lord commanded that if any man should be a leper the Priest should look
upon him, and if he judged him to be a leper he should shut him out of the
congregation until he were cleansed.

Saint Paull speaks of one that was a special Leper, 1. Cor. 5
who had committed fornication with his Mother in law, and willed the
Corinthians to excommunicate him saying, deliver the man that has done this
deed unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, put away the evil from among you.


Father. What if the Leper be cleansed, and the fornicatour be penytent, how
must they be used?


Son. The Leper shall come to the priest, Leuiti. 13
and if he be cleansed, the Priest shall show it to the congregation, that their
brother being Leprous is healed, and after the offering commanded by God, and
he shall be received into the congregation again.

So likewise if the offender repent and come to the Priest, having such
authority, he shall receive him, and give notise to the congregation whom he
had offended, that he has repented, and so receive him again, offering an
oblatio^ of thanks giueing unto the Lord, for Saint Paull says, Absolution ^.
Cor. 2.
to whom you forgive any thing, I forgive also in the sight of Christ, least
Satan should prevent us.

^. Cor. 2.
It is sufficient of the man, that he was rebuked of many, so yt now
contrariewise ye ought to forgive him, and to comfort him, least that same
person should be swalowed up with overmuch heauienesse. Comfort the broken
hearted.
Wherefore I exhort you, that love may have strength over him.


Father. Ignorance,
What if a man sin ignorantly, is not that excusable?


Son. Leuiti. 4
No father, for the Lord commanded, that if any man should sin of ignorance
and should do any of the things that the Lord had forbidden in his
commandments to be done, that he should bring for his sin which he had
sinned, an Ox without blemish, or a Goat for a burnt offering, and the Priest
shall make an atonement, and the sin should be forgiven.

If the blind lead the blind, says Christ, both fall into the dytch.

That servant that knew not his lords will and did it not, Luke. 2
shall be beaten with few stripes. So that ye may see ignorance shall not
excuse.


Father. What say thou of holy water that was used of late years? Holy
water.



Son. I say it was a ceremony reproved by the Lord, speaking by Jeremy,
Ieremi. 2.
the people have forsaken me, the well of the water of life, and have dug
themselves pitts, yea, vile and broken pitts, that can hold no water.

Ye are like to those that go down to the grave, Baruc. 3
even because ye have forsaken the well of wisdom.


Father. Yea, Nume. 19
but the scripture makes mention of sprinckeling water, and says, he that
touches any unclean thing, shall be unclean, until he be sprinckeled with
the sprinckeling water.


Son. That was accounted a ceremony ordained by God the father, to signify
that all were unclean, except their hearts and consciences should be
sprinkled with the water of life, zachar. 1^
which the Prophet Zachary speaks of the house of David and the Citizens of
Jerusalem shall have an open well to wash of sin and uncleanness.

zachar. 14
In that time shall the waters of life run out of Jerusalem, then shall there
be but one Lord only, and his name shall be one.

Jeremy. 17
They have forsaken the Lord, even the waters of life.

^o. 19 Sprinckli^g Water.
One of the soldiers, when Jesus was upon the Cross, with a spear thrust him
to the heart, and there out came blood and water, this is that sprinckeling
water wherewith we are cleansed, so that I will conclude with Christ's own
words to Peter, ^o. 13. Holy wa^er.
when he washed the Disciples feet with water, Peter said, Lord thou shall
never wash my feet, but Jesus said, if I wash thee not, thou have no part
with me, so that unless we be washed with this water by Jesus Christ, we
shall never be clean, and this water of life being come that sprinckeling
water (you speak of in the ceremonial law) is taken away, seeing the very
thing it self is come, the shadow or figure is abolished.


Father. What does the scripture speak of free will? Free will.



Son. Since the fall of Adam, Ieremi. 10
there was none that had free will, for Jeremy the prophet says. I know Lord
it is not in man's power to order his own ways, or to rule his own footesteps
and goings.

Who can have understanding of the meaning, except thou give him wisdom,
Wisd. 10
and send the holy Ghost, that the ways of them that be upon earth may be
reformed.

What I would do, do I not, Romans 7
but what I hate, that do I, to will is present with me, but I find no
means to perform that which is good.

It is God that works in you, Phillip. 2
both the will and also the deed, even of good will.

We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, 2.
Cor. 3
but if we have been able unto any thing, All goodness comes of God.
the same comes of God, which has made us able to minister the new
Testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit.


Father. Evil counselors.
What say thou of evil counselors, for many great men delight therein.


Son. Math. 16
I say they are devils incarnate, mark the words of Christ, when he was showing
his Disciples that he must suffer death for the sins of the world, Peter his
servant called him aside and said, Master, favor thy self, save thy self,
but what answered Christ Jesus, when he had turned that all might hear,
Openly reproved.
he said to Peter, go after me Satan, for thou sauourest not the things that
be of God, but the things that are of men.

I pray God that all noble men, Gentlemen, and Landlords, having stewards and
servant that move them to favor themselves, to live daintely in this world,
to oppress their poor tenaunts, to enhaunce their rentes, to pill and poll
them, to drive them out of their houses, and do join house to house, and
land to land, that they would answer them openly to their shame, Evil
counselors are devils.
and say, come after me satan, thou art an impe of the Devil, and a
messenger of death, thy Master Satan has sent thee to get my soul (which
Christ Jesus bought with his precious blood) for a little pleasure to be
tormented in hell for ever, for what will it gain me if I win all the world,
and leese my soul.


Father. God grant that all Landlords would so do, for then God should be
glorified, the poor well relieved, they themselves more honested, and in the
end rewarded, the Realm by a strong and mighty commonaltie strengthened, and
her Majesty by dutiefull subjects, dread, feared, and honored. But proceed,
tell me what is the end commonly of such evil counselors?


Son. If Satan their Master see that through them he cannot prevail, 2.
king. 17
he will do with them as he did with Achetofell, for when Absolon did not
follow the counsel of Achetofell his most trusty counselor, Evil counselors
hanged.
Achetofell went home and set his house in order, and hanged himself, ye may
see yt when Satan by his naughty counsel could not come to his purpose, to
obtain the more, yet he took the less.


Father. Some there be that will not only move their Masters to mischief,
but also mock the poor when they cry and complain. Mockers.
What say thou of these?


Son. Math. 27
Will ye think much to suffer reproach, mockeing and derision, Christ our King
and Savior was derided, they that passed by when he was upon the Cross
reviled him, wagging their heads and saying, thou that destroyest the Temple
of God, and buildest it in three days, save thy self, and the high Priests
likewise mocked him.

Job. 30,
The fools and villaynes says Job, make me their song, and I am become their
jesting stock.

4. king. 1
Little children came from Bethell, and mocked Elizeus and said, go up thou
bald head, and he cursed them in the name of the Lord, and two she Bears came
out of the wood, and tare them in pieces. Ye may see that mockers shall be
punished.


Father. Merciless men.
What say thou of such unmerciful men, that mock and oppress the poor,
what shall become of them?


Son. Except they repent they shall all perish, James. 2
for he shall have judgment (says S. James) without mercy, that shows no
mercy, for mercy reioyseth against judgment.

Judge not, that ye be not judged, Math. 7
condemn not, that you be not condemned, for with what measure soever you
meet to others, with the same measure it shall be measured unto you again.

The Lord will not be slack in coming, nor tarry long, Ecclesi. 36
till he have smitten in sunder the backs of the unmerciful, till he have
revenged himself of the cruel.


Father. Well son, Sacrifices.
leave these merciless men to the good pleasure of God, and proceed to tell
with what offerings and sacrifices of man, is the Lord best pleased.


Son. He that is merciful and gives alms, Eccle. 35 Alms.
offers a right thancke offering.

A troubled spirit, Psalm. 51,
a broken and contrite heart, is an acceptable sacrifice.

Psalm. 54.
An offering of a free heart will I give thee, and praise thy name, oh Lord,
because it is so comfortable.

Psalm. 112.
He that is merciful, loving and righteous, and guides his words with
discretion, offers a sweet savor unto the Lord.

Heb. 13
To do good and to destrybute forget not, for with such sacrifice God is
pleased. By Jesus Christ we do offer sacrifice of land always to God, ^o^.
that is to say, the fruit of those lyppes which confess his name.

Romans 12
Chiefelie we ought to make our bodies a quick sacryfice holy and acceptable
unto God, which is our reasonable serving of God.


Father. Vengance
Unto whom belongs vengance?


Son. Romans 12,
Unto the Lord, for vengance is mine, and I will reward, says the Lord.

Psalm. 94.
O Lord God to whom vengance belongs, thou God to whom vengance belongs,
show thy self.


Father. Humble and poor.
Shall not the humble and poor be once exalted and helped?


Son. Yes father, Christ says, Luke. 18
he that exalts himself shall be brought low, and he that humbles himself
shall be exalted.

He has put down the mighty from their seat, Luke. 1
and has set up the humble and meek.


Father. What say thou by these land-lordes and other unmerciful and wicked
men, Evil example.
that do not only wickedlie, but also give evil example to others.


Son. It were better for them that a Millstone were hanged about their necks,
Luke. 17
and that they were drowned in the depth of the sea, for woe be unto them by
whom the offense comes.


Father. Whereof ought we to glory or rejoice? Glory.



Son. The Prophet Jeremy says, Ieremi. 9
let not the wise man rejoice in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his
strength, nor the rich man in his riches, but let them rejoice in this that
they know me, says the Lord.

Let him that rejoices, rejoice in the Lord, for he is made unto us wisdom
and righteousness, and sanctifiyng, and redemption.


Father. In the beginning almost, thou toldst me that all things needful
for salvation, were contained in the book of life, and also all other things
necessary for the good governing of a christian, which thou have proved, but
tell me now why we ought to live so precisely as thou have showed.


Son.






Father. Let me know first what those enimes are that are so lusty and
careful, or rather watchefull to draw us from God, that they may have
something wherewith they may accuse us in the day of the Lord, and so bring us
to perdicion.


Son. The Devil, the world, and flesh.


Father. Describe unto me the qualities and force of that enemy the devil,
and Sathanas?


Son. Job witnesses that the Lord called his people before him, Job. 1.
and Satan appeared also. The devil searches every place
And the Lord demanding of Satan where he had been, he answered and said,
I have been through the world and seen it.

Jesus said to his disciples, Luke. 22. The devil tries. Genesis 3. Crafty.
Satan has desired to sift you as it were wheat.

The serpent the devil was subtiller the^ every beast of the field, which the
lord has made.

There was a man named Goliath of 1. King. 17
the Philistines host of six cubits and an hand breadth long, A strong enemy
and well armed and weaponed.
and had an helmet of brass upon his head, and a coat of male about him, and
the weight of his coat of male was five thousand sickles of brass, and had
boots of brass upon his legs, and a sheeld of brass upon his shoulders,
and the shaft of his spear was like a weauers beam, and the head of his spear
weyed six hundred sickles of Iron, A blasphemer of God Arailir.
and he blasphemed God, and rayled upon the host of Israel.

Job. 40, A strong enemy and mighty.
Behold the beast Behemoth, lo how strong he is in his loins, and what power
he has in the navel of his body, he spreads out his tail like the Ceder
trees, all his veins are stiff, his shinnes are like pipes of brass, and his
rydge-bone was like staves of Iron.

A great deceuer.
Leuiathan dare not thou draw out with an angle, no man is so cruel that
dare stir him up, when thou thinckest to have hold upon him he shalbeguile
thee, he has horrible teeth round about, his body is covered with scales, as
it were sheelds locked in, keept and well compact together, his weysing is like
the glistring fire, and his eyes like the morning shine, out of his mouth go
torches, and out of his nosthrells there goes a smoke, like as out of an hot
pot, his breath makes the coals burn, He is never weary.
and the flame goes out of his mouth, in his neck remains strength, and
there is nothing to laborious for him, he is as fast as the stithie that the
Smith beats upon, there may neither spear, Iauelen, or brestplate abide
him, he sets as much by straw as by iron, he sets as much by a roten stick
as by brass, a sword hurts him not, he makes the deep to boil like a pot,
The devil is a king over al chi^dren of pride.
and stirs the sea like an ointment upon the earth, there is no power like
his, for he is so made that he fears not, and he is a king over all Children
of pride.

The Devil is a liar, Math. Liar.
and the father of the same thing, even from the beginning.

From the time of his creation he was right excellent, Ezech. 31
till wickedness was found in him.

Lucifer. Zachar. 13
The Angel showed me Joshua that hye Priest standing before the Angel of the
Lord, and Satan stood at his right hand to resist him, and the Lord said,
the Lord reprove thee Satan. Once an Angel, but now a devil. Io. 13. A
tempter Ephe. 6.


The devil put in the heart of Judas to betray Christ.

We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against rule, against power,
against wordlie rulers, even governors of the darkness of this world,
against spiritual craftiness in heavenly things.

^. Peter. 5. A ^ror^ng ^on.
Your adversary the devil goes about like a roaring lion seeking whom he may
devour.

^euel. 2
Behold says Saint John, the devil shall cast some of you into prison and
tempt you, and you shall have tribulacion ten days.

^euel. 9 ^ferior ^^rits.
I saw a star fall from heaven unto the earth, and to him was given the key of
the bothomles pit, and there came out of the smoke that arose out of the pit,
Locust upon earth, and to them was given power, and they had a king over them
of the bothomles pit.

And his name was called Abdon in Hebrew, but in greek Apollio^, a destroier. A
great dragon. Revel. 12


The great Dragon, an old Serpent, the Devil and Sathanas, the accuser of the
brethren, that deceaueth the world.

The Dragon and all the beasts that rose up with him, An accuser Revel. 13
blasphemed the God of heaven, and his name, and his tabernacle, and them that
dwell in heaven, and he had power given to war with the saints and overcome
them, and all people and nations worshipped him, whose names were not written
in the book of life, and of the lamb which was killed, from the beginning of
the world, and to every one that worshipped him, was given a mark in their
hand or foreheade, else they could not be permitted to buy or sell. And thus
Father, you may perceive the strength, subtlety, craft, and falsehood of this
beast, yea, this deadelie enemy our adversary, that runs daily through
the world, like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour.


Father. I tremble and quake to remember this great Dragon, this old Serpent
and destroyer, tell me therefore or thou proceed any further, how I and
every man and woman may escape his power, and keep us out of his hands.


Son. Father, as you see that Satan is strong and well armed, so ought we to
be well weaponed, and besides, manly soldiers, fighting under the banner of
Jesus Christ, who has overcome, and conquered this enemy in his own person,
Armor of a christian
we must stand says Saint Paull, and our loins gyrded with the truth,
having on the brestplate of righteousness, Ephe. 6,
and having shoes on our feet, that we may be prepared for the Gospel of
peace: above all, Truth. Righteousness. Peace. Faith. Word and prayer.
let us take unto us the shield of faith, wherewith we may quench the fiery
darts of the wicked, and take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the
spirit which is the word of God, and pray always with all manner of prayer and
supplication in the spirit.

1. These. 5 Faith and hope. Love. James. 4
Be watchful and sober, armed with the brestplate of faith and love, and with
hope of salvation for an helmet.

Submit your selves unto GOD, and resist the Devil, and he will fly from
you.

Be sober and watch, 1. Peter. 5
for our adversary the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom
he may devour, whom resist steadfast in the faith, knowing that the same
afliction is appointed unto your brethren that are in the world, but the Lord
Jesus shall after that we have suffered a little afliction, settle, strength
and stablish us, to whom therefore be praise for ever.

We must fight with him, 1. king. 17
as David did with Goliath, he said to Goliath, I come unto thee in the name
of the living GOD, and in his name I shall subdue thee, and so he did.

Satan will seek to sift you like wheat, Luke. 22. Faith.
but resist him by faith, and let them that be strong (says Christ) help
their brethren.

Satan will tempt you, Reave. 2
but be faithful to death, and I will give thee faith the Lord, the crown of
life.

The Saints of God overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, Revel. 12.
and by the word of his testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the
death.

Conclusion.
So that although this Dragon the Devil, makes war with the people and
saints of God, and with all them that have the testimony of Jesus Christ, yet
if we, like manly soldiers resist him by faith, we shall overcome him by the
blood of the Lamb Jesus, and that Dragon will flee away, for all the
soldiers of Christ are called, Faith.
and faithful, and chosen, and keep their garments upon them, that men see
not their filthienesse.


Father. Blessed be that Lamb for ever, through whose precious blood we are
delivered from this roaring Lion, Those that ^ied before Christ.
and always increase our faith, so that it grow daily more and more. But
son, what became of our forefathers that died before Christ suffered his
death, and destroyed Satan, and delivered us, were not all in the power and
hands of the Devil before that time?


Son. Wisd. 3.
The Lord forbid, the righteous were in the hands of God, so that no torments
did touch them. And besides, Saint John says, Revel. 13
that Christ was a slain Lamb from the beginning of the world, for the
beasts fell down before him and worshipped him, and said, Revel. 5,
thou wast killed from the beginning, and have redeemed us by thy blood, and
have made us unto our God kings and priests, and we shall reign ever.

Oh think upon thy congregation, Psalm. 74. Conclusion.
whom thou have redeemed and purchased of old.

By which father, you may well perceive, that even those holy, faithful, and
virtuous men that were before Christ, came in the flesh, were saved by his
death, for the Devil was conquered by Christ before the foundations of the
world, his promise also to Adam was yea, and Amen, but revealed to us in the
time that the Lord had appointed. 1. Cor. 10
All which holy fathers drunk of that spiritual rock Christ, which we drunk
off, and saved as we are. For Saint Paull says, our fathers passed all through
the sea, and were Baptized all under Moses in the cloud, and in the Sea, and
did all eat of one spiritual meat, and they all drank of one spiritual
Rock that followed them, which Rock was Christ.


Father. Go on Son, to the other enemies, the world, and flesh?


Son. Math. 4
These are instruments whereby the Devil and Sathanas works, to bring man to
perdition, for the Devil tempting Christ, showed all the world in the
twinckeling of an eye, and said unto him, Hec omnia dabo tibi: All these will
I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me.

1. Tim. 6
They that desire to be ritche says Saint Paull, fall into many temptations and
snares of the Devil, and into many foolish lusts, which drown into
perdition and destruction, for covetousness of money, is the root of all
evil, which while they lusted after, they erred from the faith, and entangleth
themselves with many sorrows, In exhor^ation to ^ee the ^orld.
but thou man of God, flee such things, follow righteousness, godliness,
faith, peace, love, patience, meekness.

^say. 48.
Egrediamini de Babulone vt saluet vnusquisque anima sua. Come from the world,
and save thy soul.

Flee from the world (says Christ) for in the world ye shall have
tribulation, Io. 17,
but in me peace.

Behold all the world is set on wickedness. 1. Io. 5


Every one that sees the world, Nah. 3.
should go from it.

The world and all the concupisences thereof, shall pass away. Io. 2.


The rich man of all the world, Job. 25.
when he dies, carries nothing away with him.

The Devil deceived the rich man that Christ speaks off, Luke. 12.
and persuaded him that he should live long, and he therefore willed his own
soul to eat, drink, and take his ease and pleasure for many years in the
world, with his worldelie riches, but Christ told him, that the Devil that
night should have his soul, therefore beware good Father of these practices of
Satan, for the world will deceive such as trust thereunto.


Father. What means are there for men to resist this eneime?


Son. Exodus 20.
A remembrance of the commandments of God, which has taught that we should
not so much as desire any thing pertaining to our brethren, Tim. 6.
that we should not carefully seek riches, for thereby men fall into snares
of the Devil, and that the world passes away, and yet the sinner remains,
and that the worldelings fall down and worship Satan, math. 4
therefore we ought to seek an other place then this world: for, non habemus
hic ciuitatem manentem, sed futuram inquerimus, we have here no byding place,
but look for an other, that is an heavenly.

Heb. 13
Our conversation must be without covetousness and love of this world, and be
content with that which we have already.

1. Io. 2.
So that as Saint John says, if any man love the world, the love of God the
father is not in him, for the world passes away, and all the lusts thereof.


Father. What say thou of the flesh?


Son. All that is in the world says saint John, 1. Io. 2
is the lusts of ye flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and pride of life, these are
not of the father, but of the world, but the world passes away, and the lusts
thereof, but he that fulfilleth the will of God abides ever.

These deeds of the flesh are these, Gall. 5,
adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, worshipping of Images,
witchcraft, hatred, variance, strife, wrath, enmity, sects, drunckennesse,
gluttony and such like, but they which commit such things shall not be
inheritours of the kingdom of Christ and God, unto these does Satan tempt man.


Father. How are the fleshly acts and devilish temptacions to be refused?


Son. They are te be resisted and withstand by hearty and devout prayers.
Math. 17


For whereas there was a certain man that came unto Christ for his son that
was lunitick, he tauld him how that he had brought him to his disciples, that
they might heal him, and they could not, and after when he had healed him his
disciples demanded secretly how that they could not cast out that devil,
Fleshly devil cast out by fasting and prayer.
and he said, because of your unbelief, how be it this kind goes not out but
by fasting and prayer.

Tobias. 6.
The Angel said to young Tobyas, I will tell thee of whom the devil has
power, namely of such as receive, meaning that they shut GOD from them, and
from their hearts, and give themselves to lust, like horse and Mule that have
no understanding.

Math. 26
Christ warned his disciples, that they should watch and pray, least they should
fall into temptation, for the spirit is wiling but the flesh is week.

1. Cor. 9
I tame my body and being it into subjection, says Saint Paull, least by any
means it come to pass that when I have preached to others I my self should
be a castaway.

Gall. 6.
So father, we must cast away the works of the flesh, and receive the fruits of
the spirit, which are these, love, joy, peace, long suffering, ge^tlenesse,
goodness, faithfulness, meakenesse, temperance, for truly they that are
Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts.


Father. Let me here who are soldiers under this great dragon the devil,
Satan soldiers.
what cognizaunt or badge they bear, that they may be known, and what
destruction comes upon them?


Son. Every one that confesses not Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh,
The devils soldiers. 1 Io. 4
is a souldyer of Satan.

He that commits sin, Io. 3.
is of the devil, for the diull sins from the beginning, whosoever does not
righteousness is not of God, neither he that hates his brother.

He has power over all people and kindreds, and tongues, and nations, Revel.
13
and all that dwell upon the earth, whose names are not written in the book of
life of the Lamb.

He is the Captain over all that worship devils, and Images of gold, Revel. 19
and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood, which neither can see, hear,
nor go, of all murderers, fornicatours, sorcerers, Impenite^t persons are his
soldiers.
and thieves which repent not of the deeds of their hands.


Father. Many souldyers then has the devil under his banner, if all naughty
men that repent not of the deeds of their own hands, be his: but what will
the Lord do to them, if they amend not; and come home to their God?


Son. Revel. 8
Saint John tells, that their plauges shall come in one day, death and sorrow,
and hunger, and they shall be burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord God, which
shall judge them.

Romans 1
There shall come tribulacion, wrath, and anguishe upon every soul of them.


Father. Tell me who are souldyers under Christ's banner, and what reward shall
they have?


Son. Reuela. 16
Those that watch and keep their garments, that they walk not naked, so that
men may see their filthienesse.

Io. 4.
He that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God.

They that keep his commandments and do those things that are pleasant in
his sight, and this is the commandment, Faith and love are badges of Christ's
soldiers.
that we believe on the name of his son Jesus Christ, and love one another,
as he has given commandment.

They are buried by baptism, Collo. 3
but raised again by faith.

They have their conversation in heaven from whence they look for a savior,
even the Lord Jesus Christ. Phillip. 3


They believe only in Christ Jesus. Gall. 3.


I beheld says Saint John, Revel. 7,
a great multitude which no man could number, of all nations, people, and
tongues that stood before the seat and the Lamb, clothed with long white
garments and palms in their hands, they are they that came out of tribulation
and made their garments white with the blood of the Lamb, therefore are they
in the presence of God, and serve him day and night in his temple, and he that
sits upon the seat will dwell among them, they shall hunger no more,
neither thirst, neither shall the sun light on the^ any more, neither any
heat, for the Lamb which is in the midst of the seat shall feed them and
lead them unto fountains of living water, and God shall wipe away all tears
from their eyes.


Father. Let us pray against these enemies, the Devil, world, and the flesh.


Son A prayer
O Lord God and merciful father, the devil goes about like a roaring Lion
seeking whom he may deuouer, the flesh lusieth against the spirit, the world
persuades unto vainities, that we may forget thee, and so for ever ^e damned,
thus are we myserablie beset and be seeged on every side with cruel and
restles enemies, and like at every moment to perish, if we be not defended by
thy mighty hand against their tyranny, we therefore poor and wretched
sinners, disparing of our own strengthes, which in deed is none, most
heartely pray thee to endue us with strength from above, that we may be able
with strong faith to resist Satan, with fervent prayer to mortify the lust
of the flesh, with continual meditation of thy holy Law to avoid the foolish
vanities and transitory pleasures of this wicked world, and being set at
liberty from the power of these our mortal enimes, may serve thee in true
holiness and righteousness, and after be partakers of thine everlasting ioies
prepared for thy Children, which as they are great and unspeakable, so are they
few that do enjoy the^, for strait is the way, and narrow is the gate that
leads thereunto, and few therebe that find it. Notwithstanding thou have a
little flock, to whom it is thy pleasure to give that joyful kingdom, whose
names are written in the book of life, make us of that number for Jesus Christ
his sake, and place us amongst those sheep that shall stand on thy right hand,
and receive that blessed inheritance, and dwell with thee for evermore. Amen.


Father. Judgment general.
Grant this O Lord for Jesus Christ his sake. Well proceed son, is there
once a reckning to be made and an account to be given, before whom shall that
reckning be, and who shall reckon?


Son. That straight account and reckning shall be before the majesty of that
terryble and fearful God and judge Jesus Christ, and they that shall reckon are
all people, kindreds and tongues, good and bad, that have been, are, or shall be
till the end of the world come, and that fearful judgment be.


Father. Resurrection.
How shall the dead be raised up, if all shall be judged?


Son. Trumpe. 1. Cor. 15
With the sound of Gods trumpet father, for the trumpe shall blow, and the
dead shall rise incorruptable, and we shall be changed, for this corruptable
must put on incorruption, and this mortal, shall put on immortality.

In that day shall the great Trumpet be blown, Esaias. 23
so that they which were lost in the land of Assyria, and those that were
banished into the land of Egypt, shall come and worship the Lord in the holy
mount at Jerusalem.

The Lord shall cry with a great shout from his court regal, Ieremi. 2
he shall give a great voice like the grape gatherers, and the sound thereof
shall be heard to the end of the world.

The Lord shall roar out of Sion, Amos. 1
and show his voice out of Jerusalem, that the heavens and earth shall quake
withal.

He shall send his Angels with the great voice of a Trumpet, Math. 24
and they shall gather together his chosen from the four winds, even from the
highest parts of heaven, to thendes thereof.

The Lord God shall blow out the Trumpet, zachary.
and shall come forth as a storm out of the south.

The Lord shall disend from heaven with a shout, 2 Thessalonians.
and the voice of the Archangell and trump of God.

I will blow for them, zachar. 1
and gather them together says the Lord, for I will redeemed them.

Thus by the sound of the Trumpet, shall all be raised up from death.


Father. The Lord be merciful unto us.

The remembrance of the voice of the Trumpet terrifieth me, which shall be
heard in Heaven, Earth, and Hell, but proceed, how shall men rise?


Son. ^ob. 19
Job says, I know that my redeemer lives, and that I shall rise out of the
earth at the last day, and shall be clothed again with my skin, and shall
see GOD in my flesh, yea, and I my self shall behold him, not with other,
but with these same eyes.

^say. 26
The dead men shall live (says GOD) even with their bodies shall they rise
again, awake and singe, thou that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is even
as the dew of Pearls, and the Earth shall cast them out that be under her,
the earth shall disclose her own blood, and shall no more hide them that are
slain in her.

Behold (says the Lord) I will open your Graves, Ezech. 37
and take you out of your Sepulchers, and bring you out of the land of
Israel: again my spirit shall I put in you, and ye shall live.

Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, Dan. 12*
some to everlasting life, some to perpetual shame and reproof.

There shall be a resurrection both of just and unjust. Good and bad. Acts. 24,


For by Christ shall all men live, 1. Cor. 13
and GOD shall give to every one his own body at his pleasure. For when the
Trumpe shall blow, the dead shall rise incorruptable, and be changed.


Father. (...) terrible lay.
Jesus be merciful unto us. Proceed, tell me now of this terrible day of
judgment?


Son. ^say. 13.
The day of the Lord shall come terrible, full of indignation, fury, and wrath,
to make the land wast, and to root out the sins thereof, for the Stars
and Planets of heaven shall not give their light, the Sun shall be darkened
in the morning, and the Moon shall not shine with his light, I shall shake the
heaven, and the earth shall remove out of her place, says the Lord of hosts.

^say. 14
Hell be-neath trembles to meet the Lord at his coming.

^say. 24.
The earth shall reele too and fro like a drunken man, and shall be removed out
of her place like a tent in one night, and the iniquity thereof shall be
heavy upon it, it shall fall and not rise again, in that day shall the Lord
visit the host that is on high above, and the kings that are upon the earth,
and they shall be gathered together, and they that be in prison: the Moon
shall be abashed, and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign
in Syon and in Jerusalem with worship, and in the sight of such as shall be
of his counsel.

Behold, Esaias 28.
there comes a vehement and sore day from the Lord, like an unmeasurable
hill, and perilous tempest, even like the force of mighty and horrible
waters, that violently bears down all things.

The earth shall be visited of the Lord of hosts, with Thunder, Esaias. 29.
Earthquake, and a great noise with storm and tempest, and with the flame of a
consuming fire.

The heavens shall vanish away like smoke, Esaias. 5^
and the earth waxes old like a cloth, and they that dwell therein shall
perish in like manner.

The very fishes of the Sea, Ezech. 3^
the fowls of the air, the beasts of the field, and all people that are
upon the earth, shall tremble for fear of me (says the Lord) the Hills
shall be turned vpside down, the stares of stone shall fall, and all the
walls shall sincke to the ground.

^oel. 2.
The day of the Lord comes, and is hard at hand, a dark day, a glouming
day, a cloudie day, yea, a stormy day, before the Lord shall be a consuming
fire, and behind him a burning flame.

Micheas. 1
The mountains shall consume under him, the valleys shall cleave a sunder, like
as wax consumes, and like as water runs a pace.

^. Pet. 3. The world shall perish ^y fire.
The heaven and earth that are now to be kept by his word in stoore, and
reserved unto fire against the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men.

^opho. 1
The great day of the Lord is at hand, it is hard by, and comes on a pace,
horrible is the tidings of the Lords day, then shall the Giants cry out, for
the day is a day of wrath, and of trouble and heaviness, a day of utter
destruction and misery, a dark and glouming day, a cloudie and stormy day,
a day of noise of Trumpets and Shalmes, Trumpets and shalms.
against the strong Cities, and high Towers.

^euel. 6
I saw the Sun as black as sackcloth, and the Moon as blood, the Stars
fell from Heaven, the Heaven vanished away, even as a scrolle that rooled
together, and all mountains and Isles were removed out of their places, the
great day of his wrath is come, and who is able to endure.

Christ himself says, Math. 24
the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, the
Stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of Heaven shall be moved, and
then shall appear the token of the Son of man in Heaven, then shall all
kinredes of the earth mourn, when they shall see the Son of man come in
the clouds of Heaven, with power and great glory.


Father. Merciful God, deliver us on that terrible and dreadefull day of
vengeance and wrath, shield us under thy wings, and cover us with thy
feathers. But tell me of that Judge, before whom we must make our appearances.


Son. The Lord Jesus shall show himself 2. The^ ^
from Heaven with his Angels of his power, and with a flaming fire.

Math. 25
The son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him,
and then shall he sit upon the seat of his glory, and before him shall be
gathered all nations.

Daniel. 7.
The old aged satte him down, and his clothing was as white as snow, and the
hairs of his head like pure wool, his Throne like the fiery flame, and his
wheels as the burning fire, a thousand served him, and ten thousand times
ten stood before him, the judgment was set, and the books opened.

Reuela. 1
Behold says Saint John, he comes with clouds, and all eyes shall see, and
they also that pearsed him, and all kinreds of the earth shall wail over him.


Father, Oh great and mighty GOD, merciful father, The judgment not ^scaped.
be mindful of thy people whom thou have bought with thy precious blood. Go
on, tell me Son, if none can escape this judgment, neither by wit,
policy, strength, riches, by hiding or covering themselves, nor by any
other shift.


Son. No Father, Revel. 20
none shall escape that ever were, are, or shall be, to that day. For S. John
says, I saw the dead both small and great, stand before God, and the books
were opened, and the Sea gave up her dead which were in her, and death and
Hell delivered up the dead that were in them.

There shall be Kings of the earth, Revel. 6,
great men, and rich men, and chief Captains, and mighty men.

We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.
that every man may give account of his works.

All mighty men and Princes of the earth, Esaias. 14
and all Kings of the earth shall stand up from their seats, that they may
answer and speak unto the Lord.

The glory of the Lord shall appear, Esaias. 40
and all flesh shall at once see it.

All flesh shall come to worship before me, says the Lord, Esaias. 66.
and they shall go forth and look upon the carrions of them that have
transgressed against me.

Amos. 9
They shall not flee away, there shall not one escape, nor be delivered, though
they were buried in hell, my hand shall fetch them from thence, though they
clime up to heaven, yet shall I cast them down, though they hide themselves
on the top of Carmell, yet shall I seek them out, and bring them from thence,
though they creep down from my sight into the depth of the Sea, I shall
command the Serpent there to bite them.

Math. 25
Jesus Christ shall send his Angels with the great voice of a Trumpet, and
they shall gather together his chosen from the four winds, even from the
highest part of heaven, till the ends thereof. Thus father, you may see that
this judgment cannot be secaped.


Father. Son, the Lord comfort us. What say thou, shall there be no
warning before the Trumpet be sounded, Suddenly.
and all summoned to judgment, but shall it come unawares and suddenly.


Son Christ says, if we shall not watch, Revel. 3
he will come as a thief, and we shall not know what hour he shall come on
us.

The day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night, 1. These. 5
for when they shall say peace, then shall sudden destruction come upon them,
even as sorrow upon a woman in traueile, and they shall not escape.

Of that day and hour says Christ, Math. 24
knows no man, but my Father only, for as it was in the days of Noa,
they eat and drank, married, and were married, builded and planted, until Noa
went into the Arc, and the floude came and took them all away. So shall the
coming of the Son of man be. Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour
the son of man will come.


Father. The Lord give us grace to be watchful. What shall the Lord do, when
all people, kinredes and tongues, and nations, are set before him?


Son. Partition Math. 25
He shall separate the good from the bad, even as a shepperd parts the sheep
from the Goats.

Ezech. 34.
I will says the Lord, put a pertition, and make a difference among the sheep,
among the weathers, and Goats.

Math. 25
He shall set the sheep on his right hand, and the Goats on the left hand.


Father. Christ help us, but how shall the Lord Jesus among all the people
of the world, know which are good to set them on his right hand, and the
evil, and place them on his left hand?


Son. Father, the Lord sees and knows all thoughts, words, and works of
all men, he sees from everlasting to everlasting, there is nothing hid from
his eyes, and besides, they shall all be marked, the faithful and good with
the mark of the Lamb Jesus. The wicked shall have in their hands or
foreheades the Beasts mark.

The Lord said to one that had a linen raiment upon him, Ezech. 9
and a writers Incke-horne by his side, go thy way through the City of
Jerusalem, set a mark upon the foreheades of them that mourn, and are sorry
for all the abhorcions that are done therein.

And to an other he said, go after him through the City, slay, over see
none, spare none, kill and destroy, both me^, and young maids, children, and
wives, but as for those that have the mark upon them, see thou touch them not.

An Angel having the seal of the living God in his hand, Revel. 7
and he cried to the four Angels that have power over the Earth, and said,
hurt not the Earth, neither the Sea, neither the Trees, till I have sealed the
servant of GOD in their foreheads.

The names of the good are written in the Book of life of the Lamb. Revel. 3


They have his name, Eod.
and his Fathers name written in their foreheads.

When the Lord would smite the first borne in Egypt, Exodus 12
and deliver his own people, he commanded that all his own people, every
householde should kill a Lamb late at night, and sprinckle the door cheeks
and posts of the door, with the blood, so that when the destroyer should
come, he might see the blood, and might pass by that house, and not smite it.
So in like manner, whosoever have their hearts and consciences sprinckeled with
faith in the blood of the Lamb Jesus, the destroyer in the day of vengeance
shall not hurt, but destroy the Egiptians, that is, the wicked that have
received the beasts mark.


Father. Not pacified.
The Lord our God sprinckle our hearts with that blood. Son, I have brought
thee a little from the purpose, but turn again to it, and tell me if the
Lord will not be a merciful God at that time, and soon entreated?


Son. Pro. 6.
Merciful? no Father, not merciful but just, full of wrath and indignation.
Solomon compares the Lord to a Iellious husband, the Jealousy and wrath of
the man will not be entreated, no not though thou would offer him great
gifts to make amends, he will not receive them.

There is no daise-man betwixt GOD and man. Job. 9.


When he is wrath, the earth shakes, Jeremy. 10
all the Gentiles may not abide his indignation.

Heaven and earth shall remove in the wrath of the Lord of hosts, Esaias. 13.
and in the day of his fearful indignation.

Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in that
wrathful day of the Lord, Sophony. 1.
but all the whole land shall be burned with the fire of Ielousiie.

Behold, Amos. 2
I will crash you in sunder like as a waine crasheth that is full of sheaues,
so that the swift shall not escape, neither the strong do any thing, no, the
Giant shall not be able to save his own life.

I will not spare, because he persecuted his brother with the sword, destroyed
his mothers womb, bare hatred very long, and so kept indignation always by him.

Who may abide his wrath, Nah. 1.
or who is able to abide his grymme displeasure, his anger takes on like fire,
and the hard rocks are cloven asunder.

He shall be like a Bear that is ravished of her whelps, even full of wrath
and indignation shall the Lord be in that day.


Father. Good God, what shall we do, seeing there is no mercy, but that
Clausae sunt ianuae, the gates of all mercy are shut up, and justice
drawn out. Cognoscetur dominus iuditia faciens. The Lord shall be known to
execute justice and judgment. Proceed to tell me when all people, kinreds,
and tongues, are araigned before this terrible judge, Plead guilty or not
guilty.
and plead guyltie, or not guilty, what shall the judge object or lay to
their charge, what will he say to the faithful on his right hand?


Son. Math. 25
He shall say, Oh ye blessed children of my Father, when I was hungry, you gave
me meat, when I was thirsty you gave me drink, Blessed.
when I was harbourlesse, you lodged me, when I was naked, you clothed me,
when I was sick and in prison, ye came unto me and visited me.


Father. And shall they answer any thing?


Son. Yea father, for the Lord says, Esaias. 14
there shall be all mighty men of the earth areigned, and Princes, and kings,
and small, and great, shall stand from their seats, that they may all answer
and speak unto the Lord.

They shall answer, Math. 25
Lord Jesus when saw we thee an hungered and feed the, thirsty and gave the
drink, harbourles and lodged thee, naked and clothed thee, sick and in
prison, and came unto thee? he shall answer and say, in as much as ye have done
it to the least of these my brethren, you have done it unto me.


Father. What speech shall his Majesty use to the wicked on his left hand?


Son. Oh ye cursed of my father, Cursed.
when I was an hungry you gave me no meat, when I was a thirst ye gave me no
drinck, when I was harbourlesse, ye lodged me not, when I was naked ye
clothed me not when I was sick and in prison ye came not unto me to visit
me, and they shall answer, Lord when saw we thee an hungry, or a thirst,
or harbourlesse, or naked, or sick, or in prison and came not unto thee, he
shall say in as much as ye did it not to these my brethren, ye did it not to me.


Father. Jesus God, if the Lord condemn them that help not their brethren,
what will he do to the unmerciful, that rob him, that takes meat, drink,
apparel, lodging, relefe, and all from him, even fleaing the skin from the
bone, as much as lies in them?


Son. The Lord or they pass away will reward them for all, as you shall
hear afterward.


Father. Well son, who shall be present to hear all causes pleaded, and what
witness shall there be against ye wicked, for I am sure that the Lord will
have all men see that he deals justly and vprightlie withal?


Son. True it is father, VVitnesses. 2. Cor. 5
there shall be present all Angels, Archangels, and all the hosts of heaven,
there shall be all Saints and righteous, all wicked, and ungodly that ever were
upon the face of the earth, young and old. There shall be the great Dragon, the
devil, and Sathanas, with all the rabble of hell-houndes and damned spirits,
for Saint John says, Revel. 20.
that he saw the dead, both great and small stand before God, and the books
were opened, which is the book of life, and an other book was opened and the
dead were judged of those things that were written in the book according to
their deeds.

Whereby we may learn yt the books were their co^ciences, laid abroad to al ye
world. Consciences.
It is a sore thing when a man's own co^cience bears witness and record of
his wickedness and condemmeth him. Wisd. 17


He that speaks unrighteous things cannot be hid, and why, Wisd. 1.
inquisition shall be made for the thoughts of the ungodly, and the report of
his words shall come unto God, so yt his wickedness shall be punished.

Eod.
There is nothing so hid that shall not be reveled.

Luke. 22
There is nothing so covered says Christ, that shall not be uncovered, neither
hid that shall not be known.


Father. I see then that every thing shall be opened, for I have heard that a
man's concience is quasi millie testis. As a thousand witness, but what other
witnesses will there be.


Son. God himself a witness.
GOD himself who sees all things from the beginning shall be both the judge
and witness.

Malachi. 3
I my self says the Lord, will be a swift witness against al witches, against
aduoulterers, against false swerers, against those that wrongfully keep back
the hyrelinges duty, which oppress the stranger, and hurt the widows and
Fatherless.

Cor. 10.
The Lord will come and open the things that are in darkness, and declare
the counsel of Princes, and then shall every one have praise of God.


Father. What other witnesses will there be against the wicked? Works.



Son. Their own works, in fine hominis denunciatio operum illius, at the
end of man, there is a declaration of their works. Blessed are the dead that
dye in the Lord, Revel. 14
even so says the spirit, that they rest from their labors, but their works
follow them.

The Appostle Saint Paull teaches all men that they learn to excel in good
works, Titus. 3
that they be not unfruitful in the Lords day.

My dear brethren be steadfast and immovable, 1. Cor. 15.
always rich in the works of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor
is not in vain in the Lord.


Father. What, are there any more witnesses?


Son. The Devil that great dragon as says saint John, which deceived all
the world, Devil a witness.
the accuser of our brethren which accuse them before God day and night.

1. Peter. 1
That adversary the devil like a roareing Lion seeks whom he may devour.


Father. Lord God what shall the worme-eaten conscience then do, what shall
the unmerciful and covetous man say?


Son. Luke. 23.
Decent montibus cadite super nos, they shall say to the mountains fall upon
us, and to the hills cover us from the face of the Lord. Oseas. 10


Esaias. 2
Then shall they seek to crepe into holes and caves, and rocks, for fear of
God, but they cannot escape.

Reave. 6
They shall covet to hi^e themselves in dens and Rocks of the Hills, and
shall say unto the rocks, fall on us and hide us from the presence of him that
sits on the seat, and from the wrath of the Lamb. For the great day of his
wrath is come, and who is able to endure.

Revel. 9
At that time shall men seek for death, and shall not find it, they shall
desire to dye, and death shall flee from them.


Father. Can there none hide themselves?


Son. I told you before father, Amos. 9
that although they were buried in hell, the hand of the Lord would fetch them
from thence, though they clyme up to heaven, yet will he cast them down,
though they hide themselves upon the tope of Carmell, yet will he seek them
out, and bring the^ from thence, though they could creep into the deep of the
sea, yet he will command the Serpent there to byte them.


Father. Father of heaven be merciful to us. Well go on, seeing that every
one must abide the sentence of God, and his strait judgment, tell me now
what will follow?


Son. Then shall the Lord Jesus Christ call those on his right hand, and
say, come ye blessed of my Father, Math. 25
inherit the kingdom of heaven prepared for you from the beginning of the
world.


Father. I perceive that the faithful, merciful, and righteous, shall then be
blessed, and without all fear. But what shall he say to the wicked?


Son Revel. 12
First when they are areigned, there shall stand before them a terrible and most
fearful Judge on the one side, Wisd. 17 Malach. 3. Revel. 14, 2. Peter. 3.
Math. 25
their works accusing on the other side, the Devil and all hell hounds to
draw them away: with in them, their conscience crying out against them, on
every side the whole world burning under them, hell and damnation wide open to
swallow them, the fire of pain therein to bunre them, the sentence of Jesus,
thus shall be then prononced. Go you cursed of my ^ather into everlasting fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, after which curse they shall be prese^ly
cast into a lak^ of fire and brimstone, Math. 3
where the fire never quenches, and the worm never dies, and have
everlasting pain.


Father. Proceed, tell me what shall become of ye Devil, death, and damned
souls and bodies then?


Son. Saint John says, Revel. 20
that death and Hell shall be cast into a lake of fire, which is the second
death.

The beast and the false Prophets were taken, Revel. 19
and cast quick into a ponde of fire, burning with Brimstone, and all that had
the beasts mark.

The wicked shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, Revel. 14
which is powered into the cup of his wrath, and shall be punished in fire and
Brimstone, VVher punishment never ends.
before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb, and ye smoke of their torments
asce^deth evermore.

The damned shall suck the Gall of Serpents, Job. 26.
and the Adders tongue shall slay him, so that he shall no more see rivers of
Honey and Butter.

The wicked shall be turned unto hell, and all they that forget God, Psalm. 9
so that upon the^ shall the Lord ra^^e fire and Brimstone, storm and tempest,
this shall be their portion to drink.

In that day, the Lord with his sore, Esaias. 27. Christ conquered Satan and
destroyed his power.
great, and mighty sword, shall visit Leuiathan the fugetiue serpent, even
Leuiathan that crooked serpent, and shall slay the Dragon that is in the sea.

Esaias. 30. Hell in the depth prepared for Kings, so that none are spared.
The fire of pain is ordained from the beginning, yea, even for kings it is
prepared, this has the Lord set in the depth, and made it wide, the burning
whereof is fire and much wood, and the breath of the Lord, which is a river of
Brimstone, does kindle it.

Esaias 3^
The wicked says God, shall conceive stubble, and bear straw, and my spirit
shall be as fire, that it may consume, and the people shall be burnt like lime,
and as thorns burn that are hewed off, and cast into the fire.

Esaias. 34.
They shall be so changed, that they shall be as black as a pot, my sword
shall come down in judgment, and upon the people which I have cursed for my
vengeance, The pain and fire shall continue evermore.
thy folk shall be t^rned to pitch, and his earth to Brimstone, therewith shall
ye land be kindled, so yt it shall not be quenched day nor night, but smoke
evermore.

Esaias. 66.
Their carrions shall lie and be looked upon, their worms shall not die,
neither shall their fire be quenched, and all flesh shall abhor them.

Iudeth. 16
The Lord shall give fire and worms into their flesh, that they may burn and
feel it for evermore.

Thunder-boltes, hills, Wisd. 5
waters of the sea, floods shall run roughly together, a mighty wind shall
stand up against them.

Their joy shall be turned to sorrow, Baruch. 4
for fire shall fall upon them from the everlasting God, long to endure, and
shall be inhabited of Devils,

The wicked will the Lord burn with unquenchable fire, Math. 3
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Mark. 13


The fearful and unbelievers, Revel. 21
and abominable, and murderers, and whorrmongers and sorcerers, and idolaters,
and all liars shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire and
Brimstone, which is the second death.

And Christ thus concludes, that they shall be bound ^ande and foot, and
cast into utter darken^sse, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth.


Father. The Lord make our hearts stable and unblameable, 1 Thessalonians. 3
in holiness before God our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with all Saints, Amen. Proceed, tell me now of the joy prepared of God,
for his elect and chosen.

Revel. 28,
I saw says Saint John, a new heaven, and a new earth, new Jerusalem come
down from heaven prepared as a bride garnished for her husband, ^oye.
and I heard a great voice from heaven saying, behold the Tabernacle of God
is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God
himself shall be with them, and be their God, and GOD shall wipe away al
tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow,
neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for the old things are
gone.

Revel. 21
They shall see his face, and his name shall be in their forehead^, where shall
appear the brightness of God.

Revel. 14
They shall drink of the well of the water of life.

They shall rest from their labors.

Genesis 1.
The Lord himself will be their reward.

Revel. 7
They shall be in the presence of the seat of God, and serve him day and night
in his Temple, and he that sits in the seat, will dwell among them, they
shall hunger no more, neither thirst, neither shall the Sun light on them,
neither any heat, for the Lamb which is in the midst of the seat, shall
feed them, and lead them unto fountains of living water, and God shall wipe
away all tears from their eyes.

They shall stand before the seat of the Lamb, Eod.
clothed with white long garments, and Palms in their hands.

They shall singe night and day, saying, Revel. 4
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.

In the kingdom of heaven shall the Lord of hosts make unto all people a
feast of plenteous and delicate dishes, Esaias. 25
even of most pleasant and dainty dishes.

The Lord of hosts shall be a crown of glory and di^mond of beauty, Esaias 28.
unto his faithful people.

Jacob shall not be confounded, Esaias. 29.
nor his face pale.

The reward of righteousness, Esaias. 32.
shall be rest, peace, and quietness, for ever.

There shall Sion be seen, Esaias. 33
the head City of our solemn feast, there shall thine eyes see Jerusalem,
that glorious habitation and Tabernacle, that never shall remove, ^eauen.
whose nails shall not be taken out world without end, the Majesty of God
shall be there present among us, Majesty (...) God ^ene. ^dge. ^aw-giuer ^ing,
Sa^iour.
as a place where broad rivers and streams are, for the Lord is a Judge, the
Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, and he himself is our Savior,
the lame men run after the pray, there lies no man that says I am sick,
but all evil is taken away from the people that dwell there.

^say. 35
They shall flourish pleasauntly and be joyful, and ever be giving of thanks
more and more, ^hanks ^ueing.
everlasting joy shall they have, pleasure and gladness shall be among them,
and as for all sorrow and heaviness shall vanish away.

^say. 60.
The Lord himself shall be their everlasting light, and their God shall be
their glory.

^zech. 37
Their children, and their childers children shall dwell in that land for
evermore, christ.
and my servant David shall be their everlasting prince, and I will be among
them for evermore.

^uke. 5
Rejoice and be glad, for great shall your reward be in heaven.

They shall be equal (says Jesus Christ) with the Angels, Luke. 20.
and are the sons of God, for as much as they are the children of the
resurrection, for all men live unto him.

They shall eat and drink with Jesus Christ in his kingdom, Eod. 23
and sit on seats iudgeing the twelve Tribes of Israel.

They shall give praise, glory, Romans 2
and immortality to God.

They shall always be with the Lord says Saint Paull. 1 Thessalonians. 4


They shall be Kings and Priests of Christ, Revel. 20
and shall reign with him a thousand years.

And concluding that which has no end, with the words of Saint Paull, 1. Cor.
2.
the eye has not ^^^e, the ear has not heard, neither has it entered into
the heart of man, the joy that God has prepared for them that love him.


Father. Thou have brought every thing to perfection which I desired to know,
let us end therefore with making ou^ humble and hearty prayers unto God,
thanking his Majesty for all his gracious and merciful benefits, therefore
begin thou, and I will pray with thee.


Son. A Prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the everliving God, by whom all things were
made, are ruled and governed, as of thy love for our redemption, thou did
not disdain to be our mediator, and to take upon thee our nature, in the
womb of a most blessed Virgin, purelie and without sin, by the operation of
the holy spirit, that both ^hou might in thine own person, wonderfully
beautify and exalt our nature, and work the same in us, also for abolishing
the guiltiness of sin by redemption, then sin it self by death, and last
of al death, by raising again these our bodies, that they may be like to thine
own glorious and immortal body, according to the power wherewith thou art
able to subject all things unto thee. And as of thy love for our redemption,
thou becamest manne, and that most poor and afflicted upon earth by the space
of three and thirty years, in most humility, and payest ye price of our
ra^some, by thy most bitter death and passion, for ye which I give most
heartlie thanckes unto thee, so of the same thy love toward us in thy good
time, thou will come again in the clouds of heaven with power and great
glory, with flaming fire, with thousands of Saints, with Angels of power,
with a mighty cry, shout of an Archangell, and blast of a Trumpe, sodenlie as
a lightning that shines from the East, when men think least even as a thief
in the night, when men be a sleep. Thou will so come ^^us sodenlie in the
twinkling of an eye, all men that ever have been, be, or shal^^, with women
and Children, appearing before thy tribunal seat, to render an account of all
things which they have thought, spoken, or done, against thy Law, openly and
before all Angels, Saints and Devils, and so to receive the just reward of
thy vengance, if they have not repented and obeyed thy Gospel, and so depart
from thee to the Devil and his Angels into hell fire, which is unquenchable,
and of pains intolerable, easeles, endless, hopels even from the face of thy
glorious and mighty power.

But if they have repented and believed thy Gospel, if they be found
watching with their lamps, and oil in their hands, if they be found ready
appareled with the wedding garment of innocence, if they have not hardened
their hearts and hourded up the treasure of thy vengance in the day of wrath
to be reveled, but have used the time of grace, the acceptable time, the time
of salvation, that is, the time of this life, in the which thou stretchest out
thine hand and spreadest thine arms, calling and crying unto us to come unto
thee, which art meek in heart and lowly, for thou will ease all that labor
and be heavy laden.

If they have visited the sick and prisoners, comforted the comfortless, feed
the hungry, clothed the naked, lodged the harborles.

If they have not lodened their hearts with gluttony and surfeting, and
carelessness of this life.

If they have not dug and hid their Tallent in the ground doing no good
therewith, but have been faithful to occupye thye guiftes to thy glory, and
have washed their garments in thy blood by hearty repentance.

Then shall thy Angels gather them to gether (not as the wicked which shall be
collected as fagots and cast into the fire) but as the good wheat that is
gathered into thy barn.

Then shall they be caught up to meet the in the Clouds, then shall their
corruptable body put on incorruption, then shall they be endued with
immortality and glory, th^^ shall they be with thee and go wheyth^r thou
go, then shall they hreae come ^lessed of my Father, possess the kingdom
of heaven prepared for you from the beginning, and then shall they be set on
seats of Majesty, iudgeing ye whole world, then shall they reign with thee
for ever, then shall God be all in all, with them and to them, then shall they
enter and inherit heavenly Jerusalem and the glorious restfull land of
Canaan, where it shall always be day and never night, where is no manner of
weeping, tears, infirmities, hunger, cold, sickness, envy, malice, nor
sin, but always joy without sorrow, mirth without measure, pleasure without
pain, heavenly harmony, most pleasant melody, saying and singing, holy,
holy, holy, Lord God of hosts: finally, the eye has not seen, the ear has
not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, that they shall then
inherit and most surely enjoy, although here they be tormented, prisoned,
solicited of Satan, tempted of the flesh, and enta^gled with the world, where
through they are enforced to cry, come Lord Jesus, oh gracious GOD, let us
find such mercy with thee, that we may repent, believe, hope and look for
these things, with full fruition of those heavenly joys, which thou have
prepared for all them ye fear thee. And so rest with thee for evermore, grant
this oh Lord and savior Jesus Christ for thine own name sake Amen.


Father. I Thought it my duty son, to bring thee up in virtue and knowledge,
and in the fear of God, whereof I have apposed thee, and I thanck GOD thou
have profited well, God grant that thou increase from virtue to virtue, until
thou be a perfect member of Jesus Christ, so that through thee, God our
heavenly father may be glorified, his kingdom increased, Satan abolished,
superstition and Idolatary rooted out, the common wealth beautified, thy
brethren and neighbors releaued, and I comforted: and grant that all people,
kindreds and tongues, may in the fearful day of the Lord be found stable and
unblameable, in holiness, and so reign with thee God our heavenly father in
his eternal kingdom, through the blood of ye la^be Jesus Christ, who lives
and ^igneth one true, eternal, immortal and euerliing GOD, world without end
Amen.


Son. Grant this O Lord and heavenly father, for Jesus Christ his sake,
Amen.


Father. Well son depart, apply thy study, the God of my fathers Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, bless the and prosper thy labor in the Lord, Amen.


FINIS.
Aucthor. Elizabetha diu valeat vigeatque regendo.
O Lord of Hosts defend with hand,
The gracious princess of this land:
Keep her from all her foes bloody,
I the beseech most hartelie.
And grant her strength, power and might,
Virtue and grace to hau^ a sight,
Of the O king of glory good,
That for us all shed or thy blood:
And thus I stay my hand and pen,
Beseeching all to say Amen.
EINIS quod Lister.
Printed at London by Thomas East 1588.


