A Profitable Dialogue for a perverted Papist. OR A little Labor of a Lay man,
tending to the profit of a perverted Papist: namely, by laying open unto him
his own error, in believing that the Church of Rome cannot err.

Composed in Dialogue manner, as it were between a simple Lay man, and certain
grave Divines, and published only for the benefit of the Lay Papist.

Written by R. M. Gent. and Student in Divinity.

Brethren, be not children in understanding,

1. Cor. 14. 20. If God be on our side, who can be against us?

Romans 8. 31. Seek, and ye shall find,

Math. 7. 7. LONDON. Printed by Simon Stafford, dwelling in the Cloth-fayre,
near the sign of the red Lion. 1609.

The Contents of this Book.
THis small Treatise is divided into two parts.
1 THe first part contaynes certain proofs from Antiquity, that it is only
the society of the faithful, (the holy Catholic Church) that can not finally
err; and that the visible Church of Rome (or where else soever) may err. And
therefore not lawful for any one Bishop on earth, to be admitted universal
Bishop, or supreme head of the universal Church. 2 THe second part confirms
the former proofs, by manifest proofs also from Antiquity, that the visible
Church of Rome does err in a principal point of Christian doctrine, as
namely, touching the Sacrament of the blessed Body and Blood of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

The Author to the learned Reader.
GOod Reader, my self being a Lay man, and altogether unskillful in Arts, I
am therefore to entreat of thee (being a scholar) that thou will not so much
regard the manner and form of this my weak work, as the matter and substance
it self, which is no other thing in effect, but certain manifest proofs from
Antiquity, that the Church of Rome does err, proved by such ancient witnesses,
as the Papists themselves allow for lawful; and so forcible are those
witnesses against those Romish adversaries, that if hereafter any of them shall
go about to reply against this Treatise ensuing, they shall but thereby the
more lay open their own follies and shame, in striving against the invincible
stream; for great is the Truth, and it will prevail: yea, what can more
confound the learned adversary, or (as S. Paul says Tit. ^. 10. 11.
) condemn him to err in his own judgment, then to find himself altogether
unable (without absurd cauelling and indirect dealing) to resist the weakness
of a simple Lay man, fighting in Trueths behalf? for notwithstanding my Six
demands to the learned Papists, be the simplest book that ever hitherto has
been brought forth against them, yet are they not able to reply directly
against it, without absurdity. Whereupon, I doubt, they will seem to skorne to
vouchsafe it an answer.

But here by the way, I acknowledge (and that sincerely) that it is unmeet for
any Lay man, although never so great a scholar, to take to himself the office
of ministry in the Church, or to clime up to the Pulpit, before he be lawfully
called to that holy and reverend function: But for Lay men decently to instruct
and admonish one another, it is no nouelty, but a thing allowable in the Church
many years since, as witnesses S. Hierome, who says plainly, Upon the
Ep^stle to the Colo. Chap. 3.
that the Apostle Paul does teach, that Lay men ought to have the Scriptures
abundantly, and to instruct and admonish one another, etc. But if it be
tolerable for Lay men to admonish one another, it follows then (because all
are not scholars) that some of them may be also tolerated to write simply and
plainly, and according to that manner of speech which the common vulgar sort do
usually speak, who never speak more eloquently, then when they speak truth
sincerely and plainly, and then they think they speak very well, if they be
understood very well.

But perhaps, some learned Adversary will object (according to his usual
manner) against these proofs, which I have here cited from some of the ancient
Fathers, living in the Church above a thousand years since, that they have
been brought forth already by diverse learned men, and long since answered by
learned men also, and therefore in vain for me being a Lay man unlearned, to
cite them again, thinking that I have but gathered them here and there out of
other men's works, where they have been collected before, and for that cause
likewise, from me the less to be regarded.

These things being objected, I answer, True it is, that the same proofs have
long since been brought forth against the Adversaries, and by the^ also
answered; but how well, or how ill they have bin answered, let that be tried by
those Christians which are of sound judgment; for this I da^e avouch, that a
lawful witness being brought against any man, it is no less then an absurd
answer in that man whosoever, to reply, that the same witness, in speaking of
one thing, does thereby mean another: But into the same strayte are all
Heretics brought, by resisting the apparent truth. And this is a principal
mark to be aimed at in this our corrupt age, in which there is so much
dissension and controversy among professed Christians. For if our adversaries
might be permitted to answer so absurdly, and to pass from one point to
another, before some one point only be thoroughly decided; all the labor we
take, to cleanse them from their infectious spots of error, would prove but
labor in vain: but (God be thanked) the faithful know well, how to prevent
the silly shifts of Heretics, and so with little labor, either to convert
them, or confound them: for commonly the Heretic may be condemned by his own
mouth, his doctrine contradicting some truth in Scripture, which himself
professes to believe: for where traditions and customs of men are regarded
before holy Scripture, there ignorance does soon beget error; especially if
diverse things called by one name, be not so perfectly distinguished, but that
the one may be taken for the other.

But let the ignorant learn, first touching faith. A true faith which works
by love, is one thing; and a verbal or vain faith another.

Secondly, touching justification; A justification before God, is one thing;
and a justification before men, another: for God justifies according to the
inward heart, (by the good tree, true faith:) but man justifies according to
the outward declaration, (by the fruits proceeding from that tree Luke. 6. 43.
, good works.) S. Paul treating of the first justification, denies not the
second; for he says, If Abraham were justified by works, he has wherein to
rejoice, but not with God, etc. Romans 4.
S. James treating of the second, denies not the first: for he graunts, Abraham
believing God, it was imputed unto him for righteousness, etc James. 2.


Thirdly, touching the Church: The society of the faithful, which live by true
faith, (and therefore hell gates not possible to prevail against them) is one
thing; and a visible congregation, which may profess Christ by words, and deny
him by deeds, another.

Fourthly, touching Baptism; the outward Sacrament, the washing of the outward
man, is one thing, and the inward grace, the clensing of the inward man,
another.

Fifthly, touching the Eucharist: The outward Sacrament also, food for the
Body, is one thing; and the inward matter, everlasting life for the soul,
another: and so forth in the like.

Now, the faithful, knowing well the differences in these things, and that the
one may be oftentimes taken without the other, will never permit the adversary
to pass away uncorrected) with any untruth therein, be it never so little;
because from one error, another may ensue; but not possible directly, an error
to proceed from truth: for Gods word is not both Yea and Nay in one thing,
but absolutely Yea, or Nay, as S. Paul testifies 2. Cor. 1.
.

As touching the manner of my collecting hereof, I may justly avouch it, from
the first authors themselves: but admit it were otherwise, yet let no man be so
vain, as to think the truth to be of less force in one place then in
another, but let him rather learn this wisdom from S. Paul, that although
Paul, or Apollos, or whosoever plant and water, yet it is God only that gives
the blessing of increase 1. Cor. 3. 6, 7.
.

And because God may give that heavenly blessing to whom he will, and without
respect of persons Ephe. 6. 9.
, in hope of the same blessing upon this my little labor, (rude and harsh in
manner and form, though in substance according to truth) I will now require no
more of thee (courteous Reader,) but that thou will permit it thy favorable
pasport, (and not to reject the manner of it, more then to respect the matter in
it;) in so doing thou shall declare thy self a most faithful friend to the
simple Truth, and thereby not justly to offend any whosoever.

Vale.
A profitable Dialogue for a perverted Papist.
Wherein he may clearly discern his own error, in believing that the Church
of Rome cannot err.

The first part, briefly treating of the Church.
Lay man. Divine Augustine, forasmuch as thy proper works are of great fame
and estimation in the Church of Rome; (which now in part is fallen from that
her first faith and integrity which sometime thou did know her sincerely to
hold; (for she does now presumptuously avouch, that she can not err in any
substantial point of the Christian faith, and by reason of that vain and
presumptuous opinion, she is fallen by evil custom, into diverse errors, by
which, great controversies among Christians do arise;) therefore in the behalf
of many simple Lay people, we most earnestly crave of thee (Reverend Father) to
tell us directly thy true opinion, touching the vain opinion of them, which
hold that the same Church cannot err.

We certaynely persuade our selves, that thy direct answers herein, will
greatly prevail with those our adversaries; for some of them have written N.
D. Author of the Wardword in his 1. book of of the ^ conuersions of England,
Chap. 3.
as a matter of great moment against Heretics, that Wheresoever any doctrine is
found in any of the Ancient Fathers, which is not contradicted, nor noted by
any of the rest, as singular; that doctrine is to be presumed to be no
particular opinion of his, but rather the general of all the Church in his
days; for that otherwise it would most certainly have bin noted and impugned
by others, etc. Therefore whatsoever is spoken by thee (learned Aug.) not yet
contradicted, they must thereby grant it to be the Truth of the Church in thy
flourishing days.

We confess, that the true holy Catholic Church cannot finally err; for hell
gates are not able to prevail against it: Mat. 16. 18.
but this holy Catholic Church, we understand to consist only of the Elect,
as our Creed witnesses, even the Communion of Saints, which without spot or
wrinkle, Christ, by his precious blood, has made glorious to himself Ephe. ^.
27.
; for against all other, hell gates do prevail; and that does the Evangelist
S. John witness, saying, 1. John. ^. 19.
They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us,
they would have continued with us: But this comes to pass, that it might
appear, that they are not all of us, etc.

But it is evident, that against whosoever hell gates may prevail, they also
may err: (for it is most true, that none can err more, then those that take
the ready way to hell, supposing they go to heaven.) By which, we may well
hold, (against the Church of Rome) that not all which receive the outward
Sacrament of Baptism, are then made members of that Church which cannot
finally err. And by this we may well prove also, that the Bishop of Rome may
as much err, as the meanest of us Laymen.

Saint Ambrose says, Upon S. Luk^, the 6. Book, and 9. Chap.
that The foundation of the Church is says. If thou will be a Rock (says he)
thou shall be in the Church, because the Church is upon a Rock; if thou be in
the Church, the gates of hell shall not prevail against thee: the gates of
hell, are the gates of death, but the gates of hell, cannot be the gates of the
Church; And what are the gates of death (that is to say, the gates of hell) but
every one of our several sins? etc. And more in an other place, Upon the 40.
Psalm.
Where Peter the Rock is, (says he) there is ye Church, where the Church is,
there is no death, but eternal life; and therefore he added, And the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it.

He then that lives and dies in his sins, both lives and dies out of the
unity of that holy Church, against which, hell gates can not prevail.

But for these things, speak, divine Augustine.


Aug. My son, Against Cresconius the 2, book Chap. 21, 22.
The Apostle Paul does say, Ephe. ^. 2.
that the Church is made subject to Christ; The Church therefore ought not to
prefer her self before Christ, that she should think to be able to baptize
those which are judged or condemned by him; but not possible of her self to
baptize them, because he always judges truly, but the Judges of the Church,
as being men, are often deceived; Therefore forasmuch as pertayneth to the
visible ministry, both good and evil baptize: But by them he does inuisibly
baptize, of whom both the visible baptism, and the invisible grace is. Both
good and evil then may sprinkle: but to wash the conscience, not any can do
it, but he which is always good None but God always good.
. And by this also, by reason of the evil and polluted conscience, the Church
is ignorant of such as are condemned by Christ. They are not the^ in the Body
of Christ, which is the Church, because Christ can not have condemned members,
etc. (Who then can point to those that can not err?)

Although both good and evil In his book of the unity of the Church, chap. 18.
may give and receive the Sacrament of Baptism, yet not any are spiritually
regenerated and built together in the body and members of Christ, but the good.

Doubtless, in the good is that Church, by whom it is said, Canti. Cap. ^. 2.
Like a Lilly among the thorns, so is my Love among the daughters, etc. For it
is in those that build upon the Rock, that is, those which hear the words of
Christ, and do them: (for it was said to Peter, Mat. 16. 18.
conf^ssing Christ the Son of God, And upon this Rock I will build my
Church.) It is not then in th^se which build upon sand, that is, those which
hear the words of Christ, and do them not; for he says, Mat. 7. 24.
He that hears my words and does the same, I will liken him to a wise man,
which builds his house upon a rock. And in the same place, a little a^t^r, he
says, He which hears my words, and does them not, I will liken him to a
foolish man, which builds his house upon sand, etc.

Those then that are incorporated by the joining of charity, dwelling upon the
Rock, and standing together bright as a Lilly among thorns, they shall verily
poss^sse the kingdom of God. But those which buyld upon ^and, or are accounted
as thorns, who can doubt that they shall not possess the Kingdom of GOD?
Truly, the Sacrament of Bapti^me profits not such, etc. They shall not possess
the kingdom of God: and therefore they are no^ on the Rock: and because they
are not on the Rock, without all doubt, they are not to be accounted in the
Church, because upon this Rock, says he, I will build my Church, etc.


Lay. To those that are not wilfully obstinate in erroneous opinions, thou have
said enough for this matter (most reverend Father:) for here thou do most
plainly declare unto us, who they are, of whom the true Church (the Spouse of
Christ) consists; even those that hear the words of Christ, and do them:
they only build upon the Rock, against which, hell gates cannot preuavl^; for
(as thou do most truly affirm) whosoever builds not upon that Rock, without
al doubt they are not to be accounted in the true Church, because upon the same
Rock, that Church is built.

But what is thy opinion, touching Peter, and Peter's successors in Peter's
chair, which in the new Law (as some say) is answerable to the chair of
Moses? If they hear the words of Christ, and do them not, shall they yet
notwithstanding be obeyed, as men that cannot err?


Aug. My son, In his (...) Sermon upon S. Mat.
This name that he should be called Peter, was given him of our Lord, because
by that figure, he might signify the Church: for Christ is the Rock, Peter
the Christian people; for that Rock is a principal name: Therefore he is
Peter from the Rock, not the Rock from Peter, even as Christ is not called
from a Christian, but a Christian from Christ. Thou art therefore Peter, (says
he) and upon this Rock which thou have confessed, upon this Rock which thou
have acknowledged, (saying, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God) I will
build my Church, that is, upon my self the Son of the living God, I will
buyld my Church: upon me, I will buyld thee, not me, upon thee: for men
(willing to be built upon men) say, I verily am of Paul, but I belong to
Apollos, but I am of Cephas, which is Peter; But others (which would not build
upon Peter, but upon the Rock) say, But I am of Christ, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 12.

Many in the Church follow after earthly businesses, In his 46. Treatis upon S.
John.
yet they preach Christ, and by them the voice of Christ is heard; but the
sheep follow not the hirelings, but the voice of the Shepherd by means of the
hirelings.

Note, the Lord himself does declare unto you, what hirelings are: Mat. 23. 2,
3.
The Scribes and the Pharisees (says he) sit in the chair of Moses, what they
say, do, but what they do, that do not. What other thing said he, but, By
hirelings, hear the voice of the Shepherd? for fitting in Moses chair, they
teach the Law of God: therefore God teaches by them: But if they teach their
own, neither hear nor do, (what they say:) for truly, such seek their own,
not those things which are of Jesus Christ, etc.


Lay. It seems then, by thy judgment, that we must not build upon men, of
what calling or place soever, unless what they teach, be agreeable to the Law
of God; and herein indeed thou do follow the good counsel and advice of
blessed Paul, who says plainly, touching the visible Church, Gala. 1. 8.
Though that we, or an Angel from heaven preach unto you otherwise, then that
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed, etc. And thereby proves
inuincibly, that no doctrine is to be received in the Church, (although
constituted by the Church) contrary and besides that pure doctrine, taught from
the beginning. And the same thing does S. John prove also, 1. John. ^. 24. and
^. 1.
and therefore our adversaries of Rome would gladly prove some of their own
doctrines, to be the traditions of the Church, received first from the Apostles
themselves: and vainly they boast, as a great matter against us, that we are
not able directly to show the time when the Church of Rome fell into any Error,
nor by whom she was first brought into error. But all this is but vain
cauelling; for the devil has not so little craft in him, as to change good to
evil, suddenly; for then the evil could hardly take place; but by little and
little, (which craft by a great number, is little or nothing perceived at the
first,) he brings much evil into the Church. By continuance of time, the often
drops of water have made a hole in the hardest stone: but none could tell the
time directly when that hole was made. It is sufficient, to prove the Church of
Rome to teach now, contrary to the doctrine taught in the same Church above a
thousand years since: which thing is easy to be proved by the help of thee
and other ancient witnesses.

They seem also to make good and lawful their own Doctrines and Traditions
besides the Scriptures, by that place in the Gospel, where our Savior says
to his Disciples, John. 16. 12, 13.
I have yet many things to say to you, but ye can not bear them now, howbeit,
when he is come, which is the Spirit of Truth, he shall lead you into all
truth, etc. But what say thou (ancient Augustine) to this delusion of
theirs?


Aug. My son, In his 97. Treatis upon S. John, and in his 96, Treatis.
By this occasion of the Evangelical sentence, (where our Lord says, I have
yet many things to say to you, etc.) all the most foolish heretics (that
would be called Christians) go about to color the boldness of their own
inventions, etc. But who dares to avouch, that such and such are those things
(which Christ had to say to his Disciples?) and, if they do avouch it, how do
they prove it, etc?


Lay. To this thou have answered very plain: for by this thy plain speech, we
well perceive thy meaning in an other place, Against the Epistle of Fundament,
Chap. 5.
where thou say, that Thou should not have believed the Gospel, unless
the Authority of the Church had moved thee thereunto, etc. We also in these
our days may justly avouch the same thing, because first, the authority of the
Church is the means (for the most part) to move the outward man both to know
and believe, and also to reverence the holy Scriptures. But tell us yet
(reverend Father) is that authority still absolutely to be obeyed, albeit it
teach uncertain things, which the Scripture does not allow? or may we then
lawfully forsake it, although by the same means we first believed?


Aug. My son, Against the same Epistle, Chap 14.
What have we to do, but to forsake them that inuit us to know things
certain, and afterward command us to believe things uncertain? and to
follow them which inuit us first to believe, that which we are not yet able to
behold? that being made stronger by faith it self, we may attain to
understand that which we believe, now not men, but GOD himself confirming and
lightening our minds inwardly, etc.

None can be ignorant In his ^. Book of Baptism, against the ^onatis^s. Chap.
^.
that the holy Canonical Scripture, (as well of the old as of the new
Testament) is contained within her certain limits, and that it is so preferred
before all later writings of Bishops, that whatsoever is certain to be written
in it, can not in any wise be doubted or disputed whether it be true or right.
But the writings of Bishops (which have By this distinction between the
certayney of holy Scripture, and the uncertainty of all other writings, he
proves (by good consequence) that the visible Church may err.
been written, or which are now written after the Canon is confirmed) may be
lawfully reprehended, both by a more wise speech of some man, which perhaps is
more skillful in that matter, and also by a more grave authority, and more
learned prudence of other Bishops; and by Councels, if perhaps any thing in
them have strayed from the truth. And even Councels themselves, which are
gathered in any Region or Province, must (without all doubt) give place to the
authority of general Councels, which are gathered out of the universal
Christian world: And oftentimes the former general Councels themselves may be
corrected by the later, when (in any try all of matters) that is opened, which
was shut, and that known, which was hidden, Nothing is hid from the holy
Ghost: therefore the holy Ghost is not assistant to those general Councels which
may be corrected.
without any swelling of sacrilegious pride, without any stiffe-necke of
puffing arrogance, without any contention of cankred envy; with holy humility,
with Catholic peace, with Christian charity, etc. (But for this matter, I have
written at large, in my book of the unity of the Church.)


Lay. Undoubtedly, these things from thee are most effectual to prove the
Church of Rome to err, in affirming that she cannot err; But yet, for more
confirmation thereof, we pray thee to deliver unto us thy judgment also,
touching a principal matter of the Christian faith, now in controversy
between us, to wit, concerning the presence of Christ in the blessed Sacrament
of his Body and Blood. But before we proceed in that matter, we will crave a
few words from Gregory the great, (sometime Bishop of Rome) touching the
universal supremacy of the Pope of Rome; for we take his universal authority
to be the only cause, that Romes errors have been so much scattered and
dispersed abroad into every Christian nation. And because they hold now in
Rome, that the Bishop of Rome cannot err, we think, the best proof against
them therein, is, to bring the Bishop of Rome, against the Bishop of Rome.

Speak, divine Gregory: what say thou to him that is called by the name of
Universal Bishop?


Gregory. (My son,) If any one in the Church snatch to himself that name, In
his Register the 4. Book, Epistle. 32.
then (by the judgment of all good men) when he falls which is called
Universal, the universal Church falls from her state; which God forbid. But
far be that name of Blasphemy from Christian hearts, by which the honor of
al Priests is taken away, while it is foolishly arrogated by one to himself,
etc. In his 6. Book, and (...). Epistle.
I speak it boldly, whosoever calls himself universal Priest, or desires to
be so called, by the same pride of his, he forerunneth Antichrist: for by pride
he prefers himself before others, and by the same pride he is led into
error, etc.


Lay. Verily, had not thou thy self been Bishop of Rome, the Church of Rome
could hardly brook these words of thine: for here thou do not only call
this name, A name of Blasphemy, but (contrary to their opinion, touching the
immutable doctrine of the visible Church) thou do also affirm, that (by the
judgment of all good men) when he which is called Universal, falls into
error, then the universal Church falls from her state also.

But yet thou seem here to speak somewhat doubtful, in discommending him
only, that does arrogate to himself this universal authority: It may be,
that thou do allow the Bishop of Rome to consent unto it, and so to take it,
being offered by others.


Gregory. (My son) In his 4. Book, and 36. Epistle.
This name of Universal, was by the Calcedon Council offered to one Bishop of
the Apostolic seat, in which I serve, (God disposing) but none of my
predecessors consented at any time to use this so profane a name.


Lay. Why would they not consent to it?


Greg. Truly, because if one be called In his 39. Epistle,
the universal Patriark, the name of Patriarks is taken from the rest: But away
with that, etc. To consent to that wicked name, is nothing else, but to destroy
faith, etc. In his ^. Book, and 69. Epistle.
One to be Universal Bishop, is to the injury and renting of the whole Church,
and as we have said, to the contempt of all Bishops; for if one be universal,
as he thinks, it remains that the rest are not Bishops, etc.


Lay. But if the Church of Rome permit this matter to be lawful, which thou
do so much gainesay, does any evil then come thereby? Our Lord prayed for
the faith of S. Peter, (and so consequently for the faith of all his
sucessours, according to the opinion of the adversary In their Rhemish notes
upon the 28 of S. Luke, verse, 31.
) that it should never fail. But if any Bishop of Rome may prove a false
Christian, and live so lewdly, that he may dye a Reprobate, then undoubtedly,
every Bishop of Rome is not the true successor of S. Peter, unless a true
faith may contradict in manners the things which it professes in words: for it
was a true faith in S. Peter, which our Lord prayed for, to continue in his
Church, and not a vain faith. And if it be true, that the Bishop of Rome may
err, as he is man, but not possible, as he is Pope, that is to say, although
in person he may err in his private doctrine and manners, yet not possible to
err iudicially or definitiuely, then could it not be prejudicial to the
Church, although Antichrist himself were Bishop of Rome, See S. Chrisost. upon
the ^ to the Th^ssa. and S. Barna^d in h^s 123. Epistle.
and Universal Bishop. But according to divine reason, this seems not
agreeable to truth.


Gregory. My son, If this be permitted to be lawfully spoken, In his 4.
Book, and 36. Epistle.
the honor of all Patriarchies is denied; and perhaps when he pe^isheth in
error, which is called vniuers^ll, then no Bishop is found to have remained in
the state of truth, etc. I say therefore, the universal Church In his 6.
Book, and Epi^tle 24.
falls to ruin, if one Universal fall; But far be this vanity and
foolishness^ from my ears, etc. *A true faith does not contradict in manners,
ye things which it professes in words *: for which Hom. 29 in Eu^ng. Tit. 1.
cause it was said of certain false Christians, by S. Paul *, that they
confessed God in words, but denied him in deeds: and by S. John *, that
whosoever (says he) knows ^. John. 2.
God, and keeps not his commandments, is a Liar. Which being so, we must
examine the truth of our faith, by consideration of our life: for then, and
not otherwise, are we true Christians, if we fulfill in works, that whereof we
have made promise in words, etc.


Lay. Would to God, thy successors had been of the same mind herein, as thou
and thy predecessors were; for then the Church universally could never have
been so much divided as it has been; for most true it is (according to thy
speech) that within less time then this 200. years past, hardly was there a
Bishop to be found remaining in that sincere and pure doctrine, taught in the
Primitive Church, but being revolted and departed from that sound doctrine,
they all from the highest to the lowest, taught lies in hypocrisy, (even as
Saint Paul prophested of them) forbidding to marry, 1. Tim. 4, 1, 2, 3.
and commanding to abstain from meats lawfully to be eaten, with other such
like errors, and deceyueable doctrines. But the principal cause of such
universal evils, thou have plainly declared to proceed from the pride of him
called universal Bishop: which man we take to be no better then Antichrist
himself: for (according to S. Paul) 2. Thesse. 2. 4.
he sits hypocritically in the Temple of God, in word, The servant of servants,
but in deed, extolling himself above all power on earth: for by usurped
authority he seeks not only to be supreme head over all Bishops, but over all
Chr^stian Kings also; which loftynesse was ney^her in thee, nor in thy
predecessors, and that you do make most manifest, not only by these plain
speeches here uttered, but elsewhere also, In hi^ 38. Epistle, Chap. 82.
with which we restfully satisfied herein.

And so we will conclude this first part, with a few words taken from our late
Minister (but now an Apos^ata) Theophilus Higgons Written since hi^ re^o^t, in
his first Motive, Page 64.
; because they co^taine a truth (touching this point) contrary to himself; as
thus:

It was a tyranny in Mezentius (says he) to bynd living men unto dead
carkeyses. But the wisdom of God does assure me, (and me also) that he will
not tie the living body of his Church, unto the dead and putrified members
thereof.


The end of the first part.
The second part, treating of the Sacrament of the Blessed Body and Blood of
our LORD and Savior Jesus Christ.
NOw, divine Augustine, let us go forward in that principal point, touching
the holy Sacrament: let us certaynely know thy mind, whether Christ be there,
after a spiritual manner, only for the faithful to eat, and drink, or after
a corporal and carnal manner, as food both for the worthy and unworthy
receyuer.

We find in holy Scripture, that our Savior called John. 6. 35. and 10. 7. and
15. 1.
himself Bread, called himself a Door, called himself a Vine: These things
in a spiritual sense, we know to be truly and properly spoken: yet according
to the letter, we take them figuratively to be spoken. But we would gladly
understand from thee, what our Savior meant, when he called Bread his body,
Mat. 26. 26.
and also what he meant, when he said, Exceptye eat John. (...).
the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you,
etc. Whether these speeches (according to the letter) were figurative or proper?

Aug. (My son) Our Lord doubted not to say, This is my body, Against
Adamantus, Chap. 12
when he gave the sign of his Body, etc. Upon the 3. Psalm.
Christ admitted Judas to that Banquet, in which he did deliver to his
disciples, the figure of his Body, etc. (Note this also) If it be a speech of
commandment, either forbidding a mischievous deed, or a heinous fact, In his
^. Book of Christian doctrine, Chap. 16.
or commanding a profitable thing, or a good deed, it is not figurative: But
if it seem to command a wicked deed, and a naughty fact, or to forbid a
profitable thing or a good deed, it is figurative. Unless ye shall eat (says
he) the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall not have life
in you, etc. He does seem to command a heinous or wicked deed. It is a figure
therefore, commanding us to communicate with the passion of our Lord, and
sweetly and profitably to lay up in memory, that his flesh was crucified and
wounded for us, etc. Upon the 98. Psalm.
The words which I have spoken unto you, (says Christ) is spirit and life.
John. 6. 63.
Understand spiritually, that which I have spoken unto you: Ye shall not eat
this Body which ye see, neither shall ye drink that blood which they shall
sheade that crucify me: I have commended unto you a certain Sacrament, which
being spiritually understood, shall give you life, etc. ^n his 2^, ^reati^ upon
S. John.
He himself does expound, how that may be done, which he spoke of, and what it
is to eat his Body, and drink his blood. He which eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, (says he) dwells in me, John. 6. 56.
and I^n him: This it is then to eat that meat, and drink that blood, to
dwell in Christ, and to have Christ dwelling in him. And by this, he that
dwells not in Christ, and in whom Christ does not dwell, without doubt, he
neither eats his flesh, nor drinks his blood, spiritually, although carnally
and visibly, he press with his teeth, the Sacrament of his body and blood;
but rather he does eat and drink the Sacrament of so great a thing to his
own Judgment, because he presumes to come unclean to the Sacraments of
Christ, which no man receyues worthily, but he which is clean, of whom it is
said, Mat. ^. 8.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, etc.


Lay. Then it seems by thee, (contrary to the doctrine of the Church of Rome)
that the presence of Christ in the Sacrament, is in such a spiritual manner,
that although the wicked may eat and drink the same Sacrament unworthily,
(according to S. Paul) 1. Cor. 11. 27.
yet they cannot by any means eat and drink Christ himself, the matter and
substance thereof. Whereby thou do declare this thing to be an unspeakable
mystery, only for the faithful to understand; for it seems here also by
thee, that none can receive the Body of Christ, but only the lively members of
Christ, that dwell in him; so that as they dwell in Christ, Christ dwells in
them: but this is not according to Transsubstantiation. Therefore, to satisfy
our weak brethren, speak yet more plain, if thou can (reverend Father) and
tell us by some familiar example, whether any can have true life, not eating
and drinking that holy substance, and also whether there be any cause or
spiritual sickness in man, (eating and drinking the Body and Blood of Christ)
to exclude him from that eternal life.


Aug. My son, In his ^6. Treatis upon S. John.
He has not that life, which does not eat that Bread, and drink that Blood.
Indeed, men may have a temporal life without that, but not at all the
eternal. He therefore which does not eat his flesh, nor drink his blood,
has not life in himself, and he which eats his flesh, and drinks his
blood, has life. He answers to both, because he said eternal.

It is not so in that meat which we receive for the sustayning of this
temporal life; for he which shall not receive it, shall not live: yet for all
that, he shall not live always, which does receive it: for it may come to
pass, that many which have taken that meat, may dye by old age, or by a
disease, or by some other cause. But in this meat and drink, (that is to say,
the Body and Blood of our Lord) it is not so: for both he which does not
receive it, has not life, and he which does receive it, has life, and this
likewise eternal. Therefore he would have this bread and drink, to be
understood the society of the body, and his members, John. 14. 20. and 17. 21,
22, 23.
which is the holy Church, his Saints and faithful, etc. The Sacrament of this
thing (that is to say, of the unity of the Body and Blood of Christ) is
prepared on the Lords Table, in some place daily, in some place at certain
times, and is received from the Lords Table, unto some to life, unto some to
destruction. But the thing it self (to which the Sacrament does belong) is to
every man to life, to no man to destruction, whosoever shall be partaker of it,
etc.


Lay. Here thou art most plain indeed, that the wicked cannot eat and drink
Christ Jesus, the Bread of life. And by this also, we find, that thou do
acknowledge, according to S. Paul 1. Cor. 10. 3, 4
that the faithful Jews did eat and drink the same spiritual substance
which we do, (but in their Sacraments, Christ to come; in ours, Christ is come,
the same spiritual virtue in both;) otherwise (as thou do affirm) they
could not have entered into eternal life.


Aug. (True, my son,) In his Book of the profit of repentance, Chap. 1.
Whosoever in Manna understood Christ, did eat the same spiritual food which
we do, etc. To the believer it was neither this nor that meat and drink,
which belongs to the hungry and thirsty, but to the believer, the same which is
now: for then, Christ to come, now, Christ is come: to come, and is come, are
diverse words, yet the same Christ, etc.


Lay. What other difference is there between their Sacramen^s and ours,
besides Christ to come, and Christ is come?


Aug. In his 26. T^eatis upon S. John.
In signs they are diverse, but in the thing signified, they are alike, etc.
They did all drink the same spiritual drink, but in the visible appearance,
they one thing, we another, but the same in spiritual virtue, which that
signified, etc.

Hold firmly (my son) and make no doubt thereof, In his Book to Peter the
Deacon, Chap. 18. 19.
the same only begotten Son, the word made flesh, to have offered himself
for us, a sweet smelling savor to God, Ephe. 5. 2
A sacrifice and Host, to whom, with the Father and the holy Ghost, beasts
were sacrificed in the time of the old Testament, by the Patriarks, Prophets,
and Priests: and to whom now (that is, in the time of the new Testament) with
the Father and the holy Ghost, (with whom he is equal in divinity) the holy
Catholic Church through the universal world, cease not in faith and love,
to offer the sacrifice of Bread and wine; for in those carnal oblations, there
was a figuration of the flesh of Christ, which for our sins, he without sin
was to offer, and of the Blood, which he was to sheade for the remission of our
sins. But in this sacrifice, there is a thanksgiving, and also a
remembrance of the flesh of Christ, which he did offer for us, and of the blood
which the same God did shead for us, etc. In his 20 Book against (...), Chap.
2^.
Before the coming of Christ, the flesh and blood of this Sacrifice, was
promised by oblations of similitudes: in the Passion of Christ, it was
delivered in the truth it self: After the Ascension of Christ, it is
celebrated by a Sacrament of remembrance, etc.


Lay. We note here from thee, one thing well worth the nothing, against our
adversaries, that is, if Christ be really contained in the Sacrifice of their
Mass, then Christ, the second person in Trinity, is offered to himself the
second person in Trinity. But we assure our selves, that it cannot stand with
thy gravity, to allow of such absurdity. Thou do here call this (...), The
sacrifice of Bread and Wine, as it is indeed; for we find in holy Scripture,
that the heaven must receive or contain Christ, until his second coming:
Acts. ^ 21.
and therefore we hold him not to be in diverse places at one time, as in heaven
above, and in the bread and wine beneath: but as thou have fully resolved us,
that the reprobate can neither eat nor drink Christ; and also, that the
faithful Jews did both eat and drink the same spiritual food which we do,
even Christ himself, the spiritual Rock that followed them; 1. Cor. 10. 4.
so we pray thee to resolve us also, if Christ (as he is man) may be in diverse
places at once; if not, then how we may hold him here on earth, he being only
in heaven.


Aug. My son, In his 30 Treatis up on S John.
Christ being absent, is also present; unless he were present, we could not
hold him; but because it is true which he said, Math. 28. 20.
Behold, I am with you to the end of the world; both he went away, and is here
also, he returned, and did not forsake us.


Lay. But how did he both go away, and also remain? Is he present here both
according to his Majesty, as he is God, and also according to that substance
which he took of the blessed Virgin his mother? did not he carry his Body into
heaven, and there sits at the right hand of God?


Aug. He carried his Body into heaven, but he took not his Majesty away from
the world, etc. The poor ye shall always have with you, (says he) John 1^. 8.
but me ye shall not have always, etc. He spoke of the presence of his Body:
for according to his Majesty, according to his providence, according to his
infallible and invisible grace, it is fulfilled which he said, (Behold, I am
with you to the worlds end.) But according to the flesh which the word did
take, according to that which was borne of the Virgin, according to that which
was apprehended by the Jews, which was nailed upon the Tree, and taken down
from the Cross, lapped in linen clothes, and put in the Sepulcher, which was
manifested in the resurrection; Ye shall not have me always with you. Why?
because, according to the presence of his Body, being co^uersant with his
Disciples forty days, in their sight he ascended into heaven, and is not
here; for there he sits at the right hand of his Father; and is here: for the
presence of his Majesty did not depart. After another sort, according to the
presence of his Majesty, we have Christ always; according to the presence of
his flesh, it is truly said to his Disciples, But me ye shall not have
always: for according to the presence of the flesh, the Church had him but a
few days; but now she holds him by faith, etc.


Lay. Notwithstanding all this plain speech of thine, yet some do absurdly
affirm, that thou do here but deny a Visible presence only; and that thou
do great (according to Transsubstantion) a corporal presence of Christ in
the Sacrament, after an invisible manner: how shall we (from thee) answer to
that absurd cauelling?


Aug. (My son) His divinity truly is always with us, In his 60 Sermon upon
S. John.
but unless he were absent corporally, we should always carnally see his
body, etc. In his 2. Sermon upon the birth of our lord.
The Word being made flesh, it is evident, God and man, two, to be in one
flesh; sometime man speaks to the Father, sometime God; sometime visible from
his mother, sometime invisible from his Father, etc.


Lay. But God is omnipotent, and therefore by his omnipotent power, he may, (as
some think) be both in heaven, and also corporally invisible in the Sacrament,
and occupy no place; for he may (say they) take away spaces of places from
Bodies, and yet the Bodies may remain still: and so he himself both God and
man, to be both here and there at one time.


Aug. (My son,) God is in such wise omnipotent, In his 284. s^ntence.
that he never pulls in sunder the institutions of his own order, etc. In his
^^. Book against Faustus. Chap. 1^.
According to a corporal presence, Christ could not be at one time, both in
the Sun and Moon, and upon the Cross, etc. In his 57. (...) to Da^danus.
We must take heed, that we do not so build up the divinity of the man, that
we take away the truth of the Body, etc. Take away the spaces of places from
Bodies, and they are no where, and because they be no where, they are not at
all. Take away Bodies from the qualities of Bodies, and there shall not be any
place where they may be: and therefore of necessity it must be, that they have
no being, etc. If the substance of a body (how little or great soever it be) be
utterly taken away, there shall be no place where his qualityes may be, etc.


Lay. Thou have now fully resolved us in this last point, touching Christ to be
only in heaven; and it does evidently appear also by these few words from
thee, that the forms and accidents of Bread and wine, cannot remain without
their substances (as some do vainly imagine) but that it is truly Bread which
we see in the blessed Sacrament, even as our eyes do declare unto us.


Aug. (Verily, my son) In his Sermon to the children, cited by Bid upon the
1. and 10. to the Cor.
That which ye see, is Bread and the cup, which also the eyes do declare unto
us: But as touching that which your faith requires to be instructed in, the
bread is the Body of Christ, and the Cup is the blood.


Lay. But Christ being now in heaven only, (as thou do affirm) how is that
Bread his Body, or the cup, or that which is in the cup, how is it his blood?


Aug. These things (my son) are therefore called Sacraments, because in them,
one thing is seen, another thing is understood; That which is seen, has a
corporal form; That which is understood, has a spiritual profit: Therefore
if thou will understand the Body of Christ, hear the Apostle, saying, 1. Cor.
1^. 27.
Ye are the body of Christ, etc.


Lay. We do so, divine Augustine: for this matter, we both hear him and note
him, not in that place only, but in diverse other places also; Romans 1^. 5. 1.
Cor. 6, 15. and 10. 16, 17. Ephe. 1. 22, 23, and ^. 4. etc. to 17. and 5. 2^.
etc. to the end.
and therefore the faithful cannot mistake thee herein, thou agreeing so well
with holy Scripture. But wherefore do thou write in some place, that Christ
did carry himself in his own hands, when he did deliver to his disciples, the
Sacrament of his Body and Blood? And again, though Judas received it
unworthily, yet thou say also, that the same Sacrament was to him likewise,
the Body and Blood of Christ. Thou seem thereby to contradict thy former
speeches here uttered touching the same thing: declare unto us therefore the
cause, why thou did write after that manner.


Aug. (My son) If Sacraments In his 23. Epistle to Boniface.
had not some similitude o^ likeness of these things whereof they be
Sacraments, they should not be Sacraments at all; and from this similitude,
most commonly they receive the names also of the same things: so that after a
certain manner, the Sacrament of the Body of Christ, is the Body of Christ: The
Sacrament of the Blood of Christ is the Blood of Christ, etc. (And therefore,
as I said before, Pag^ 18. at the letter ^o.
) Our Lord doubted not to say, This is my Body, when he gave the sign (or
Sacrament) of his Body, etc.


Lay. Undoubtedly, thou have laid open this matter also very plain; for
indeed, after a certain manner, both Christ carried himself in his own hands,
and also Judas did eat and drink the Body and Blood of our Lord. But do
thou allow it lawful for any man to follow the literal sense in a contrary
respect, that is, with a carnal servitude to take the signs for the things
signified by them, and so to reverence the Sacrament, as the thing it self?


Aug. (My son) The Lord himself, In his ^. Book of Christian doctrine.
Chap. 9.
and the Apostolical discipline, has delivered some few signs for many, and
the same most easy to be done, and most reverend to be understood, and most
pure in observation; as is the Sacrament of Baptism, and the Celebration of
the Body and Blood of our Lord; which things, every one (being instructed when
he receives) acknowledges to what they are referred, that he reverence them
not with a carnal servitude, but rather with a spiritual liberty, etc. But as
to follow the letter, and to take the signs for the things which are signified
by them, comes of servile infirmity; so likewise, to interpret the signs
unprofitable, proceeds from the evil of wandering error, etc.


Lay. These last words of thine (most reverend Father) are invincible against
the doctrine herein of our Romish adversaries: for if hereafter they shall
boast, that thou do agree with their Transsubstantiation, and carnal
aderation in the Mass; we will then demand of them, what other thing it is to
follow the letter, and to take the signs for the things signified, (and so to
reverence them with a carnal servitude) but the selfsame carnal doctrine of
Transsubstantiation? And therefore we will now rest fully satisfied with these
thy former speeches, as being from thee a sufficient witness herein against
them. And the better to approve this thy doctrine to be the doctrine of the
Church, above a thousand years since, we will join here with thee, a witness
or two more from Antiquity, that by the mouth of two or three witnesses, 2.
Cor. 13. 1.
the Truth may be confirmed.

Speak, divine Hierome, what is thy true opinion, touching this matter now in
controversy, about the mystery or Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord.
Speak briefly (learned Father:) yet let it be so effectual, that thy words
may plainly declare thy meaning.


Hierome. (My son,) Upon the 147. Psalm.
I think the Gospel the Body of Jesus, etc. And where he says, He which
shall not eat my flesh, and drink my blood, etc. John. 6. 5^.
although it may be understood in the mystery, yet more truly the word of the
Scripture is the Body and Blood of Christ. The doctrine is divine. Look the
26. Homily of S. Aug. and against Maximil. Chap. 22. and note how he does agree
with this of ^ Hierom
If at any time we go to the mystery, he which is faithful, understands it;
If he fall into a spot, he is in danger; If at any time we hear the word of
GOD, both the word of God, and the flesh of Christ, and his blood, is powered
into our ears, and we think an other thing, to what great danger we run
into, etc.


Lay. Verily thou have here (according to our desire) briefly spoken to the
purpose indeed, and it may well suffice for a testimony from thee, against that
strange doctrine of Transsubstantiation; for according thereunto, we know not
how the holy Scripture can be so truly the Body and Blood of Christ, as the
holy mystery: and therefore, because yea or nay is a sufficient answer, we
will content our selves, only with this thy brief affirmation herein, and so
proceed to the third witness.

Speak, divine Theodoret, what say thou, touching the Sacrament of the Body
and Blood of our Lord?


Theodoret. (My son) All this from Theo. is to be found in his 1. and 2.
Dialogue.
Thou know that God called his Body, Bread. John. 6. 51.



Lay. I know it.


Theodoret. Moreover, in another place, he named wheat, flesh. Math. (...).



Lay. I know this to be true also.


Theo. In the tradition of mysteries, he called bread his Body, and that which
powered and commixed in the cup, Blood.


Lay. So he did call these things indeed; but did he rightly call them so, as
being his natural Body and Blood? or did he but change the names?


Theo. (My son) That which is a body according to nature, shall rightly be
called a body, and likewise blood, etc. But our Savior changed the names
verily, and imposed to the body, that name which rightly belonged to the sign
and Symbol, but to the sign he imposed that name which belonged to the body;
so when he had named himself a Vine, he called that Blood, which was the sign.


Lay. But the nature of the Bread and wine still remaining, what is ye cause of
the alteration of the names?


Theo. To those that are admitted to ye divine mysteryes, the institution is
manifest; for he would not have them which are partakers of the divine
mysteries, to regard the nature of those things which are seen, but by the
changing of the names, to believe the alteration which is made by grace; for he
which named that, Wheat and Bread, which by nature is a body, and again, named
himself a Vine, he has honored the Symboles and signs which are seen, with
the name of the Body and Blood, not verily changing nature, but adding grace to
nature, etc.


Lay. What say thou then to those Heretics, which hold, that as those signs
of the Body and Blood of our Lord, were one kind of things before the
inuecation of the Priest (or minister) and after are changed and made other
things, even so the Body of our Lord also, after the resurrection, is changed
into the divine substance?


Theo. (My son) In his ^. Dialoges
They are taken in their own snares; for neither do the mystical signs
depart from their own nature after sanctification, but they remain in the
former substance, and figure, and form, etc. Compare the sign with the
truth, and thou shall understand the similitude; for the figure ought to be
like the truth: for truly, that body has the first form, and figure, and
circumscription, and (that I may say at once) the substance of a body, but it
was made immortal after the resurrection, etc.


Lay. Most true it is (grave Father) Christ has still the true substance of a
Body, and therefore (the sign and the thing signified being alike) those
Heretics, whosoever they be, that seem to prove the form of Bread in the
Sacrament, to be there without the substance of Bread, do thereby seem to
prove also, Christ to a have a fantastical Body, that is, a Body in show,
without the substance of a body. But thou do here most plainly confute that
palpable absurdity, and therein thou art agreeable to the true doctrine of the
Primitive Church; for what Christian living a thousand years since, or upwards,
did ever affirm such a real presence in the Sacrament, that thereby Christ
God and man, is to be swallowed into the bodies of many damned creatures? We
find many proofs from Antiquity to the contrary, as partly has been noted
already; and yet for more witness thereof, we note S. Ambrose also, who says
plainly, touching this sacred Bread, (even Christ himself) that it is not
bread which goes into the body, In his ^. Book of Sacraments, Chap. 4.
but the Bread of eternal life, which strengthens the substance of our
souls, etc. He says not (as some peruersly misconster him) Non transi^e in
corpus per nutritionem: Bellarm. upon the Eucharist, the 2. Book and 14. Chap.
it passes not through the body, by nourishment; but, Non vadit in corpus: it
goes not into the body, etc. Who then can mistake him here, but he that
wilfully makes himself ignorant, even he which by such indirect dealing,
peruerts thy words also, saying, Bellarm. in the same Book, Chap. 27.
Where thou do affirm the Bread and wine to remain after sanctification
(both in substance, nature, figure and form as they were before,) thou do
thereby mean, only the sensible accidents and visible forms do so remain,
but the substance to be changed? But if such weak defending of errors be
allowed for good and lawful, in vain then it is to bring any testimony from
antiquity against Heretics. But we hope, that such perverse answers from the
peruerter, may prove in good time, a good motive for the perverted, to look
about him betimes, and not both to live and dye a child in understanding; for
ignorance cannot excuse those that wilfully refuse to walk by the light of
holy Scripture. The word of God is a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto
my paths, (says ye Prophet David Psalm. 119.
) It is as a light shining in a dark place (says S. Peter. 2. Pet. 1.
) By which we are given to understand, that as the Sun gives light to the
corporal eye, so does the holy Scripture give light to the spiritual eye.
Whereupon it follows, that if neither our adversaries nor our selves would
wilfully become blind, (and then trust to the leading of others) we should
soon all agree in one outward profession: for who is he that can believe,
contrary to that which he seeeth? or where is that spiritual man, so
contentious, as not to allow those Traditions and customs of the Church, which
are not contrary to the express word of God?

We grant from the Sacrament, (according to that truth which we find in holy
Scripture John. 6. 63.
) the true eating and drinking of the flesh and blood of Christ, spiritually;
(we say word for word, as Saint Basil said above a thousand years since; In
his 141. Epistle.
We eat his flesh, and drink his blood, being made partakers of him by
incarnation and sensible life of the word and wisdom: for he called all his
mystical conversation in the flesh, flesh and blood, and made manifest that
doctrine which depends of his life, actual, natural, and divine, by which the
soul is nourished, exercised, and trained up to the contemplation of heavenly
things, etc.) but we deny such a gross eating and drinking therein, that
thereby both the righteous and the unrighteous are made partakers of Christ;
which doctrine is most manifest against the sacred Scripture: 1. Cor. 10. 21.
we deny also such a gross eating and drinking therein, that thereby Lay
people must not communicate with the blessed cup of our Lord, fearing lest they
should shead his prectous blood upon their garments: or lest by the weakness
of their stomachs, they should bring up again their Creator by belchings and
vomitings; which absurdity, the Church has long since confuted, as witnesses
S. Aug. Against Faustus the 20 Book, and Chap. 13.
for indeed, according to the doctrine of her head Christ Jesus, so does the
true Church teach always; But never did the true Church teach, that our
Savior Christ has any real being in ye body of a wicked creature; for Christ
himself is most plain against that vain doctrine. And briefly to prove that
to be true, we will now set aside all other witnesses and proofs whatsoever,
and humbly beseech the author of this blessed Sacrament (even Jesus Christ
himself) to resolve us herein.

Speak, holy Lamb of God, thou that art the only Savior of the world, and
speak so, we most humbly beseech thee, that thy words herein may prove a
sweet savor of life, to the small remnant of thy holy Church in this corrupt
age. Teach us (sweet Lord) whether any can have true life, without eating and
drinking that blessed flesh and blood of thine; and also, whether any can miss
of that true life, eating and drinking the same blessed food.


Christ. (My son) John. 6. 48. to 36.
I am that Bread of life: your fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness, and
are dead: This is that bread which came down from heaven, that he which eats
of it, should not dye. I am that living bread which came down from heaven: If
any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will
give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world, etc. Verily
verily I say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink
his blood, ye have no life in you. Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day: for my
flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.


Lay. My Lord and God, these words of thine are profound, and to the spiritual
man, spirit and life, although to the carnal man, far otherwise; for
notwithstanding thou have commanded us all, not to add any thing to thy
sacred word, Deuteronomy. (...) 2, and 12. 32. (...). 22. 18.
yet these carnall-minded men can not understand these thy comfortable
speeches, unless they add thereunto some matter of their own devising, as
namely, by adding a condition to the holy text, more then thou did there
express Bellarmine in his (...).
: as though there were a defect in thy word, by which all things are made
perfect, and by which, at the last day, they shall judge both the quick and the
dead.

But full well do thy faithful people, know by the direction of thy holy
spirit, that thou give not thy self for food to any reprobate and unworthy
creature; for thou say here most plainly; that whosoever eats and drinks
thy flesh and blood, has eternal life: and therefore, although the Sacrament
thereof may be eaten and drunken, both by the worthy and unworthy receiver, (as
witnesses thine Apostle Paul) 1. Cor. 11. 27.
yet that blessed food it self cannot so be eaten and drunken: for the virtue
thereof is, to give life to all that eats and drinks it; and this is thy
promise which can never be broken.

But, most gracious Lord, forasmuch as there be yet many weak people, that
cannot well understand thee herein, without adding to these thy words, this
word (worthyly) resolve them we (humbly beseech thee) whether it be so or not,
that some professed Christians may eat and drink this sacred banquet of thine
(even thy self) unworthily, and so dye in their sins, as the unworthy and
faithless Jews did, notwithstanding they did eat Manna. Speak so unto them,
(good Lord) that they may both hear and understand.


Christ. (My son) Let those weak people of little faith, mark well here,
what I say unto them:

Have not I graciously given you warning by my sacred word, saying,) Math. 16.
^. and 15. 9.
Take heed, and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadduces? in vain
they worship me, teaching for doctrines, men's precepts. (Have not I taught you
by mine Apostle Paul) faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God? Romans
10. 1^. John. 8. 4^. Mark. 1^. 24.
He that is of God, hears Gods words, etc. John. 5. 39.
Are ye not therefore deceived, because ye know not the Scriptures, neither the
power of God? *Search the Scriptures My sheep hear my voice, and I know them,
John 10. 27. and 12. 48. and 14. 6. Luke. ^1. 23.
and they follow me. He that refuses me, and receives not my words, has one
that judges him: the word that I have spoken, it shall judge him in the last
day. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. No man comes unto the Father,
but by me. John. 6. (...).
He that is not with me, is against me: and he that gathers not with me,
scatters. (but) * He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in
me, and I in him. As that living Father has sent me, so live I by the Father,
and he that eats me, even he shall live by me.

(Note well here what I say, I speak not one thing and mean an other; I make
not my promise so absolutely, and mean it but conditionally; I say not, he
that eats me worthily, because no unworthy creature that shall dye in his
sin, can eat me; And to make that most plain unto you, I say again as I
have said already) This is that bread which came down from heaven, not as your
fathers have eaten Manna, and are dead, he that eats of this bread, shall
live for ever, etc.


Lay. For this thy plain declaration, all praise be given unto thee, O Lord:
for hereby, all may discern most clearly, that thou do not commit thy
self to unfaithful creatures, and to be food for the reprobate, as Judas,
and such like: We therefore most humbly pray thee to open the eyes of these
blind weakelings, which (by too much establishing the doctrines of men) go
about to contradict thee herein, and so inspire their hearts with the grace of
thy holy spirit, that they may thereby discern the only cause of their great
blindness; (But the same cause being by thy gracious help taken away, they
shall then clearly see to seek and find, even according to thy divine
direction. Math. ^. 7.
Let them see (O Lord) that their Church of Rome does yet err, and will err
still, until she acknowledge her own weakness that she may err.

But so abundant is thy goodness and mercy toward repentant sinners, that if
she would in due time repent her former errors, with that vain and
presumptuous opinion touching her supposed purity, in her own doctrine
generally; no doubt, thou would not only pardon all her erroneous doctrines,
and superstitious ceremonies; but also restore her to her first dignity and
commendation, and cause all her good and laudable Traditions and Customs,
(which now, in respect of her wilful blindness in some points, are little or
nothing regarded by a great number) to be as highly esteemed, and as duly
observed, as ever heretofore they have been: for thy eternal wisdom does
more respect the good and faithful intent of the dooer, then the deed done,
whatsoever it be; because whatsoever is not of true faith, (seem it never so
holy in the sight of man) is no better then sin, in thy infallible Judgment
Romans 14. 23.
.

In consideration whereof, we most humbly beseech thee also to increase in us
(Protestants) true and lively faith, which always works by love, that we may
be all in general more zealous in thy service, then hither to we have been;
for we here acknowledge before thee that know the secrets of all hearts, who
also hereafter shall be our Judge, ye knowledge without true zeal, is more
unprofitable in thy sight, then zeal without knowledge: Math. 21. 28. to 32.
Luke. 12. 47, 48. John 9. 41. Acts. 10. 1. 10 5. Romans ^. (...). 5. 6.
therefore as we profess thee in words, so (good Lord) let us express thee in
works, that we may not be reckoned in the number of those foolish men, that
build upon sand, that is, those that hear thy words, and do them not. Math. ^.
26. 27.


We profess before thy divine Majesty, that none can be saved, but those that
have a faith working by love, Gala. ^. 6. 1. Tim. 1. ^. Tit. 3. 8. James. 2. 20.
other faiths we hold as dead, and vain, in respect of Justification, but that
faith only which works by love, we hold to justify without the works of
the law, even as thine holy Apostle has taught us. Romans 3 ^8.


Therefore, for the great love in thee declared unto us, when thou did suffer
torments and death for our sins, we beseech thee (sweet Jesus) so to bless
the hearts of all true Christians, that they may all from henceforth both live
and dye in peace and unity.

Behold, (says thy Prophet David Psalm. 1^.
) how good and how comely a thing it is, brethren to dwell even together. It is
like the precious ointment upon the head, that runs down upon the beard,
even unto Aarons beard, which went down on the border of his garments: and as
the dew of Hermon, which falls upon the Mountains of Zion: for there the
Lord appointed the blessing and life for ever.

Let thine heavenly blessing therefore so bless the Universal Church here on
earth, that it may even now (without any more controversies) conclude a
spiritual marriage as it were between faith and works, that so we may all
both truly glorify thee in this world, and also be made partakers with thee
of that everlasting felicity in the next world, even in that holy place of
en^lesse joy, which from the foundations of the world has been prepared for
thine elect, Mar^, ^^. 24,
by thine heavenly Father, our only God and Creator, to whom with thee our
sweet Redeemer, and the holy Ghost our sanctifier, (three persons, and one
everliving God) be ascribed all praise, power, honor, dominion and glory, both
now and for evermore. Amen.


FINIS.
Let no man deceive himself: If any man among you seem to be wise in this
world, let him be a fool, that he may be wise: for the wisdom of this world
is foolishness with God, etc.

1. Cor. 3. 18, 19.
Laus Deo, et pax Christianis. Glory be to God, and peace among Christians.
Faults escaped.
In Page 5. line 23. for a principal, Read the principal. Page 12. line 24.
for, (says he) knows God, Read, says, he knows God, Page 24. line 5. in
the mergent, for Page 18. Read, Page 15.


