AN AMVLET, OR PRESERVATIVE AGAINST SICKNESS AND DEATH: IN TWO PARTS,

The first containing Spiritual Direction for the Sick, at all times
needful; but especially in the conflict of sickness, and agony of death. The
second, a Method or order of comforting the Sick.
Whereunto is annexed, a most pithie and comfortable Sermon of Mortality,
written by the blessed Martyr S. CYPRIAN Bishop of Carthage, translated into
English by A.M.

Together with sundry Prayers needful in time of sickness.

Collected and set forth for the comfort of distressed souls, most especially
in time of sickness and mortality.

By A. M. Minister of the word of God in Henley upon Thames.

LONDON, Printed by R. F. for THOMAS MAN and Jonas Man, dwelling in
Paternoster Row at the sign of the Talbot. 1617.

To the right Worshipful and virtuous Lady, the Lady Elizabeth Periam of
Greenlands, A. M. Wishes a long and happy life, with health and prosperity
here on earth, and everlasting glory in the highest heavens.
GOOD MADAM,
I Do unfeignedly acknowledge and confess that in my private judgment I have
always distasted the too much forwardnes of this age in publishing unnecessary
books, and pamphlets. So far have I been from once intending my self to
offend in that kind. First, in consideration of mine own weakness and
insufficiency best known unto my self; Next, in regard of that great light
of learning and knowledge which shines most brightly every where at this day:
And lastly, in respect of the great perverseness and curiosity that reigns
in the minds of sundry men, whom nothing pleases and contenteth, but that
which they them selves do, or (at the least wise) affect. Howbeit
notwithstanding, after that I had (for mine own private use) collected and
gathered these spiritual directions and consolations; and also perceived how
that the same might be of some good use to others, not only in time of
sickness, but also in all other afflictions and distresses, whether of mind or
body: I esteemed it a part of that great duty which I owe unto the Church of
God, to communicate and impart these my poor endeavors unto such, and for the
benefit and comfort of all such, as shall stand in need thereof, in times of
sickness and mortality, in the conflict of death, and other sharp and bitter
days of trial and temptation; whenever their sins shall stand up against
them, to urge and accuse them, or the ugly appearance of death shall affright
them, or the fear and horror of hell and damnation shall seem to dismay them.
Against all which fearful and dangerous assaults of death, of sin, and of
Satan, here in this small Treatise are provided and selected (out of the rich
Armorie of the sacred Scriptures) several and peculiar weapons, and armor of
proof, both defensive, and offensive, both for the withstanding and resisting,
and also for the repelling and quenching of all the fiery darts of the wicked.
Now I have been bold to dedicate and offer the same unto your Ladyship, being
moved thereunto, partly by the sundry favors received from your Ladyship by my
self in particular, and partly by those gracious works of piety and charity
wrought, and the great and manifold benefits from time to time conferred by
your Ladyship, in and upon the whole Town or Parish in general, over which
God has placed me, (though his most unworthy servant and minister:) accept (I
beseech you) this small present (being as the poor widows mite) which here I
presume to offer unto your Ladyship, as a pledge and testimony of my unfeigned
thankfulness. Almighty God, (who is rich in mercy) grant that as you have
extended the bowels of compassion and mercy always for the relieuing and
comforting of many his poor children: so also you may find abundant mercy in
the last day, and may be filled with joy and comfort at the glorious appearing
of his Son Christ Jesus. Amen.

Your Ladyships in all humble manner to be commanded, A. M.

A preface to the Christian Reader.
THe sicknesses and diseases which vex and annoy these our mortal bodies,
together with the remembrance of death ensuing thereupon, how greatly do they
cause both our bodies and minds to quake and tremble? Insomuch, that many times
we shake, and are afraid at the only mention thereof. Verily, the nature of
man being such as had rather not be at all, then to be ill appaied, or to be in
misery, cannot whenever these things befall, but be much vexed and
perplexed, yea and sometimes ready to faint: And yet behold the sickness and
death of the soul far more dreadful, and more horrible; then which can
befall unto a man, no greater misery and torment. There is no man, but he does
fear and abhor, yea and by all means fly from corporal punishments and
afflictions, and from corporal sicknesses and deaths; how much more then
should we labor to eschew and avoid the causes of all these evils, which are
our sins? and how ought we to fear the wrath and displeasure of almighty
God, which we daily provoke against our selves by so manifold sins and
offenses?

If the body be never so little crazed, we run straightway to the Physician;
we spare no cost nor charge, preferring our life and health before all things
else: yea we are content to disburse we care not what, that we may procure
remedies and preservatives for the same; and all to patch up this tattered
garment of our flesh, this rotten carcass and clod of clay, which
notwithstanding must needs very shortly decay and perish, and be brought to
corruption. Why then do we not with like earnestness and carfulness seek
for remedies against the sicknesses of the soul, being far more deadly and
dangerous? For, what should it profit a man to live a whole thousand years,
and during that time to possess all the riches in the world, and to enjoy the
most exquisite pleasures of this life without being troubled with any sickness
or grief, or other calamity? and in the mean time to have his soul tainted,
and infected with the leprosy of sin, and in bondage to the tyranny of
Satan? and thereupon to have God always his utter enemy, and his wrath and
indignation raging against him, and lying heavily upon him? so as he knew, and
were assured after this life to suffer and undergo the judgment of eternal
death, and condemnation both of body and soul? Hereof our Savior Christ
admonishes us, Math. 16.26, saying, What shall it profit a man to win the
whole world, and to lose his own soul? And therefore in another place, he
warns us to watch (to wit, over our souls) watch, for ye know neither the
day, nor the hour, when the Son of man will come. And lest we should without
regard pass over far better things, and things far more profitable, and
should pursue after toys and trifles, things base and contemptible; therefore
he shows us the shortest and surest way, whereby to come unto true
happiness, which wills us, Math. 6.33
First to seek the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof: and then
all other things shall be added unto us. We are tormented, and wearied night
and day with care, how to live here, and how to settle and make sure our
worldly estate, our riches and worldly possessions, and other vain and
transitory things, which little avail us; yea rather which are sometimes
causes of great misery unto us, and of foul and horrible sins, which drown
men in perdition and destruction. But in seeking and providing our selves of
the heavenly riches, how secure and negligent? how sluggish and slothful? how
foolish and how lumpish and blockish are we? and what more strange or more
horrible blindness and madness then this, can there reign amongst men? So
long as we are in health we have scarce the least thought in our hearts at any
time, of the life to come, or of our death and departure hence. But as soon as
we are cast down with any sickness (death now knocking as it were at our
doors,) when as we should stand in the battle to fight, then at length we
bethink our selves of taking up arms, and of providing us weapons to fight
withal against the devil and his suggestions; then we begin to think of
repentance, and amendment of our lives, and not before: which is a plain
proof that our faith is very weak and slender, and that we are little
exercised in the Christian warfare. The Lord herein be merciful unto us: Amen.

Howbeit there is no age unfit, nor any season unseasonable, or ouerlate to
repent. Repentance is never too late, so that it be true, and unfeigned, and
that it be done and performed truly and unfeignedly. But I advise and counsel,
yea and earnestly exhort and admonish all men, to take heed, that they put not
off their repentance to that last and most sharp and dangerous conflict of
sickness and death. For if eue^ they (who being strong, and in health) have
all their life time fortified and armed themselves against this hour of their
departure, yet have much ado then to defend themselves from the assaults and
temptations which will offer themselves at that time: what then will become of
such, as (being void of all fear of God, and having hearts that cannot
repent) have led and still lead a dissolute and wicked life? how shall they be
able to encounter and to resist?

Now then, forasmuch as (the harvest being great) the laborers be but few, and
that (infinite multitudes of simple and ignorant people abounding in all
places) there are not Ministers of Gods word every where at hand to instruct
and comfort such as stand in need: and those that are, cannot apply themselves
to all, nor minister their help and comfort at all times: I have thought good
(Christian Reader) for the comfort and instruction of such as want the present
help and assistance of godly Pastors and Ministers (especially in time of
sickness,) to offer unto thy gentle acceptance this order and manner of
comforting the sick, gathered out of the sacred word of God; most especially
for their sakes, which are ignorant, and which are not armed, nor provided
against such occasions, neither furnished with sentences of holy Scripture;
that in reading or hearing these things read unto the^, they may receive true
and steadfast hope and comfort: that in the sharp and bitter conflict of
sickness, and agony of death, they neither faint nor perish.

The Contents of the first part. A Preface to the Christian Reader.
CHAP. I. Why sicknesses are sent of God. page 1 CHAP. II. The necessity of
faith in time of sickness, and the means whereby to strengthen the same. 12
CHAP. III. Of three things, which in time of sickness, and in the agony of
death, do much hinder and trouble men, to wit, the remembrance of their sins,
the fear of death, and the horror of hell and eternal damnation. 24 CHAP.
IIII. A remedy against the fear and remembrance of our sins. 28 CHAP. V.
Testimonies of Scripture concerning the forgiveness of all our sins. 39
CHAP. VI. Reconciliation and restitution in time of sickness, (if not
performed before.) 65 CHAP. VII. The lawful use of Physic in time of
sickness. 70 CHAP. VIII. A remedy against the fear of death. 74 CHAP. IX.
Testimonies of Scripture concerning the Resurrection of the dead. 82 CHAP. X. A
Remedy against the fear and horror of hell and damnation 105 CHAP. XI. How
Christ his temptations and sufferings were al for our sakes. 114 CHAP. XII. Of
Christ his threefold temptations. 117 CHAP. XIII. A short Admonition concerning
the ordaining of Wills and Testaments. 144 CHAP. XIIII. How to mitigate grief
co^ceited for the loss of friends. 149 CHAP. XV An Exhortation unto all
professors of the name of Christ. 157
The co^tents of the second part.
CHAP. I HOw to comfort all such as lie upon the bed of sickness. 167 CHAP.
II. How to comfort such as are in apparent danger at death. 199 A Sermon or
Mortality. 224
CHAP. III. How to comfort and call upon the sick party, being ready to give
up the Ghost. 311
The first part.
Spiritual Direction for the Sick, very needful at all times: but especially
in the conflict of sickness, and agony of death.

CHAP. I.
Why Sicknesses are sent of God?

AS death is the wages and punishment of sin, 1 For sin.
so are sicknesses also sent oftentimes unto us of God for our sins (as it is
clear and manifest in holy Scripture. Ioh. 5. Christ says unto the man that
had been sick eight and thirty years: Behold thou art made whole, Ioh. 5.14.
sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee: Implying plainly, that sin
was the cause of his sickness. Likewise Psalm 38. David professes of
himself, Psalm. 38.
There is nothing sound in my flesh, because of thine anger, neither is there
any rest in my bones, by reason of my sin: for mine iniquities are gone over my
head, and are like a sore burden, too heavy for me to bear. The same he
confesses and acknowledges, 2 Samuel 24.17.
2. Sam. 24. when he saw the Angel, that smote the people with the pestilence;
Behold I have sinned and done wickedly, let thy hand be against me, etc. And
Deuteronomie, 28. God threatens by Moses, that if his people will not obey his
voice, (among other plagues) he will consume them, and destroy them by strange
sickness and diseases; Deuteronomy. 28.21.22.27.
he will make the pestilence cleave unto them; he will smite them with a
consumption, and with the fever, and with a burning ague, and with a fervent
heat: and at the 27 verse, he will smite them with the botch of Egypt, and
with the emeroids, and with the scabs, and with such an itch as cannot be
healed. And as sicknesses and other crosses and afflictions are sent unto us of
God (for the most part) for our sins: So many times the same are sent unto us
for the proof and trial of our faith, 2 For trial of our faith.
(as we behold in Job:) for then it is seen how much we love God; and how much
we trust him and put confidence in him when we are oppressed, and vexed with
some greeuou^ cross and affliction. Her^ then before all things se^ that thou
turn unto Go^ with all thy whole heart, and mind, and understanding and with
all the powers o^ thy soul, unfeignedly repenting of thy evil ways and
bewailing and confessin^ before God thy manifol^ sins and offenses, for which
thou have justly deserve the wrath of God, together with all his plagues, and
punishments to be powered out, and to be inflicted upon thee. Then shall thou
reap and receive plentiful comfort and consolation, even a perfect discharge,
absolution, and remission of thy sins, from the promises of the Gospel;
which as an infinite treasury, every day stands open, and is offered unto
thee, and that by Christ his own appointment, and ordinance given unto his
Church, Ioh. 20.22. Receive ye the holy Ghost: Ioh. 20.22.
whosoeuers sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose sins soever
ye retain, they are retained Now when thou have thus prayed for, and obtained
pardon for thy sins, doubtless the punishment (whether it be of sickness, or
any other affliction, that lies heavy upon thee) shall either cease, and
leave thee altogether: or else shall (by Gods good will and pleasure) turn to
thy everlasting welfare and salvation. For this assuredly persuade thy self,
and nothing doubt of it, that the punishment which thou suffer (how heavy a
yoke and burden soever it seems to the flesh) is in deed a fatherly rod,
whereby God recalleth thee home unto himself, (being his child) and withdraws
thee from sinning securely. God with a tender affection loves us, he wills
and wishes well unto us: and he does all that be does to this end, that he
might reform us, and make us better; Hebr. 12.6
for whom he loves, him he corrects and chasteneth: and he punishes him
here, that after this life he may not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11.32.
nor tormented and punished everlastingly in hell. And do not thou fear, nor
doubt, but assuredly persuade thy self, that God thy heavenly father entirely
loves thee, and ten le^^th thee, howsoever he rec^^ueth for the time to be
displeased with thee This his w^^^^ and displeasure is not the wrath and rage
of a tyrant or tormenter, but of a father that dearly loves us who would not
that we perish; but that we should repent and amend, and so be saved. This is
so sure, that there is nothing more certain, if so be that we (who are of so
little faith) could believe it. First of all therefore desire, and ask pardon,
and forgiveness of all thy sins; but see it be done through Christ, and that
it be done with a true repentant heart, that so thou may be at agreement
with God; and being reconciled unto him, thou may have him friendly and
favorable unto thee. Then afterward thou may also desire, and pray to be
delivered from the present affliction that molesteth and greeueth thee. This
advice the son of Sirach gives, Chap. 38. My son, Eccl. 38.9.
fail not in thy sickness: but pray unto the Lord, and he will make thee
whole. Esaias 38.25 and 2. Kin. 20.
Thus Ezekiah turned his face unto the wall, and prayed in his sickness: and
his prayer was heard, and he recovered. Esa. 38.25. and 2. Reg. 20. And thus
David prays in his great affliction, Psalm. 39.8. etc.
Psalm. 39.8. etc. Deliver me from all my transgressions, and make me not a
rebuke unto the foolish: and verse 10, and 13. Take thy plague away from me;
and again, Stay thine anger from me, that I may recover my strength before I
go hence, and be no more seen. Likewise, Psalm. 79. Psalm. 79.8.
Remember not again^ us our former iniquities, b^ make haste, let thy tender
mercies prevent us: help us ((...) God of our salvation) and f^^ the glory of
thy name deliu^^ us, etc. In the which place^ and the like, David fir^^ prays
for remission of h^ sins, that by Gods fr^^ grace he may be justified and
then he entreats Go^ to stay his anger, to turn away his plagues, and
punishments from him, an^ to deliver him. And (...) may thou pray for
eas^ment and deliverance from thy sickness, or trouble but thou must always
add this condition; If it be t^ will of God, and seem go^ unto him: following
here the footsteps of Christ himself, and saying: Father (if it be possible)
let this cup pass from me: notwithstanding, not my will, but thy most holy and
blessed will be done. For indeed we cannot better provide for our selves, then
our most faithful and loving Father does provide; who is of infinite power,
wisdom and goodness; who never turns away his eyes from us, but still has
a diligent care of us; 1 Pet. 5. Mat. 10.30
who has numbered the very hairs of our head, that they perish not; who gives
life unto all things, and who nourishes and preserves, provides and cares
for all things, much better then the creatures themselves can wish or desire.

CHAP. II.
The necessity of Faith in tim^ of Sickness, and the meane^ whereby to
strengthen the same.

WHile a man lies upon his bed o^ sickness (being in dange^ of death) he is
commonly assaulted and set upon with many sore and grievous temptations: as
first of all, i^ is a very sharp and sore temptation and trial, when as
(having the horrible image of death before ou^ eyes) we think with our
selves, how that very shortly we must needs relinquish and leave the most
delightful and comfortable light of this world, together with all our friends,
our kinsfolk, and acquaintance, and all other things, which here are most
deligntsome and pleasant, and most dear unto us. By and by after, our deadly
and manifold sins committed against the divine will and commandments of God,
these will be ready to present themselves unto us; and rushing in upon us with
great violence, will become new and fresh again unto us: wonderfully
disquieting and troubling the conscience, and appearing far more in number,
and more heinous and grievous, then ever they did before. Then behold, the
horror and fear of death, and the terror of Gods judgments, of hell and
damnation, will (as it were all at once) be ready to vex and torment us, and
to set upon us with most sharp and bitter assaults of grief and sorrow,
causing our very hearts within us to quake and tremble. Now (amidst these
agonies and conflicts) unless our hearts be fortified, and established with a
constant and steadfast faith, we shall be in great danger of falling into
despair, being wearied with the multitude, and greatness of the temptations.
For those things which offer and present themselves unto us in time of
sickness, appear much more terrible, and more heinous, and grievous, then
ever before, and that for no other cause then this, for that our faith is
small, and very weak and wavering, not able to rest and rely upon the word of
God; and therein to apprehend and lay hold upon that infinite and inestimable
treasure and riches belonging to Gods dear children, (to wit, the forgiveness
of all their sins through Christ, the resurrection of their bodies at the
last day, that most wished for, and most sweet and joyful communion with the
Saints in glory, and comfortable society and fellowship of the elect of God,
Means of strengthening our faith.
and life everlasting) and all these freely given, and bestowed upon them in
Christ, and through Christ.

Continual meditation on the articles of our faith, in time of sickness very
needful.
it behooves us daily and continually to exercise our selves; and diligently
to meditate thereupon. But especially in time of sickness, and agony of
death, we are seriously and earnestly to meditate in our minds, and to
inculcate, and repeat often those four last articles of our Creed: Namely,
concerning the reckoned: concerning the Remission of all our sins

Now unto the serious Prayer.
and strengthening of our faith: praying with the Apostles of our Savior. Luke
17.5. Luke 17.5.
O Lord increase our faith: and with the father of the child, that had the
dumb spirit, Mar. 9.24.
Mark 9.24. Lord I believe, help my unbelief.

Unto prayer join careful Reading and hearing the word of God. Rom 10.17.
Esa. 57.19
For faith is both wrought and also increased by hearing of the word, Romans 10.
whereupon it is called the fruit of the lips, that is, of the words of God,
Esa. 57.19. And Acts the 10.44, it is said, that while Peter spoke those words,
Act. 10.44.
the holy Ghost fell upon all them that heard the word. Yea hereupon it is
called the arm of the Lord, Esa. 53.1.
Esa. 53.1, and the power of God unto salvation. Romans 1.16.
Romans 1.16. See therefore that ye word of God dwell plenteously in thee; Col.
3.16.
which alone is able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith in Christ
Jesus. 2 Timothy 3.15.
2. Tim. 3.15. And let thy heart and mind be evermore possessed with the
meditation and consideration of those three maine pillars and grounds of thy
faith whereof thou have assurance in the same word; namely:

First, the infiniteness of

Next, the omnipotency

And lastly, the universality,

Unto the careful and diligent study and meditation in the word of God and
prayer, Often receiving the Sacrament.
add this also, to frequent and to have often access unto ye holy Sacramen^
of the body and blood o^ Christ; (while yet thou ar^ in sound and perfect
health:) But beware, yt thou come unto it rightly instructed and prepared; and
that thou presume not to handle the same with defiled hands, nor to receive it
with an vnpure and unsanctified heart. And indeed it is an horrible and
fearful thing, and much to be lamented, that for so many years this holy
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ has been so unworthily received, The
vnreuere^t handling of the Sacrament dangerous.
and so irreverently handled; and of many contemned, and lightly regarded.
Wherein how grievously and dangerously men offend, even the judgments and
punishments which the Lord sends every day among us, do more then
sufficiently witness and testify, (as S. Paul has foretold should come to
pass, 1 Cor. 11.30. 1 Cor. 11.30.
) For even for this cause many are weak and sick, and many sleep, and are
dead. It is verily an exceeding great and a sure sign, and token of singular
and incomprehensible love toward us, The benefit offered in the Sacrament.
that in this Sacrament of his Supper, Christ will have it plainly confirmed
unto us, that he has given and bestowed himself wholly upon us; knitting and
joining us unto himself, as members to the head; to the end we may know and
be assured that we are regarded and loved, defended and saved by him. Thus
ought all godly minds to esteem and make account, that Christ is effectual,
and powerful in them. And it were to be wished, that we would at length
consider deeply of the greatness and worthiness of so excellent a gift, that
so we might be thankful, and might stir up our wavering and languishing
faith; remembering how heinous and horrible a sin unthankfulness is in this
kind; and how fearful punishments must needs follow the profanation of so
holy a mystery. Neither indeed are we to imagine, that the grievous threatenings
used by S. Paul are in vain; for God is true, yea truth it self; and
certainly, we are to think yt the greatest part of those plagues and
judgments, (both public, and private) which befall in these last times, is to
be imputed unto the prophanatio^ of this most holy mystery. It behooves us
then with godly care and zeal, to have often access unto that holy Sacrament;
wherein our souls being refreshed, and comforted with that heavenly food, our
faith and our repentance, our hope and our confidence may be more and more
strengthened and increased

CHAP. III.
Of three things which in the agony of death do most grievously torment,
terrify, and trouble our minds: The remembrance of our sins, the fear of
death, and the horror of hell, (together with the several remedies thereof.)

Sin.
and whereby we have most grievously offended, both against God, and against our
neighbors, these when on the bed of sickness they come unto our remembrance,
must needs greatly terrify us, and much vex and torment us, remembering that
saying of S. Paul Romans 2.9. Romans 2.9.
That indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of
every man that does evil.

Again, inasmuch as this Death.
thereof it is, that when death approaches, men's hearts begin to quake and
tremble, and are ready to fail them, through exceeding great sorrow and
grief. For this our fearful nature (or natural man) is miserably afraid,
lest being once dead and buried in the earth it shall never return, no^ come
again to the form state: but thinks now tha^ it is past all help, and hop^

Hell and damnation.
These things being thu^ offered unto our sight, the at length a man begins t^
fear, lest happily he be qui^ cast out from the face and favor of God, beholding
nothing else but eternal dead and condemnation. He^ therefore men have need
(...) be courageous, and of a constant heart and mind; th^^ they faint not, nor
give a^ place unto despair. Pra^ we therefore in this manne^

A prayer.
O most gracious God, ^ most merciful Father, gra^^ (we beseech thee) that by
thy grace, and help, while we are yet in health and prosperity, we may learn
to fear thee, to love thy holy word, to believe and embrace thy sweet and
comfortable promises; to set thee before us, as the scope and end of all our
actions: and that remembering always this sharp conflict and encounter, which
we are to undergo; we may fortify and arm our selves against this day of
trial; and so be saved, preserved, and defended: that serving and fearing
thee, we may direct all our doings to thy glory; and at the length obtain and
enjoy eternal life, which thine own Son has purchased for us, Amen.

CHAP. IIII.
A Remedy against the fear and remembrance of our sins.

Whensoever thy sins shall torment and trouble thee, or terrify thy
conscience; consider how that the Son of God himself for thy sake, and for the
purging and taking away of thy sins, came down from heaven, and humbled
himself to the lowest estate that may be; and yt he being made man, took upon
him thy sins, and the sins of the whole world; and of his own voluntarie^
will dyed for them upon the cross, and made full satisfaction for them all, by
suffering most grievous punishments in thy name, and for thy sake. This most
precious blood of Christ was shed, even for thee and for thy salvation. Of this
his death art thou also made partaker, if only thou shall believe, that he
dyed as well for thee, as for Peter and Paul, and others. Neither ought thou
any whit to doubt, but that he died as well for thee, as for Paul: for in that
thou art a sinner, even in this respect thou may and ought to be
comforted. Math. 9.13.
For Christ came not to call the righteous, but to call sinners to repentance.
Mat. 9.13. and 1 of Tim. 1.15. 1 Timothy 1.15.
It is a true saying (says Saint Paul) and by all means worthy to be
received, That Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. Yea admit thou
were one of the greatest sinners in ye world, yet doubt nothing; for such a one
was Paul (as he witnesses of himself in the same place) even the greatest,
and chiefest among sinners, an oppressor, a persecutor, and blasphemer.

Moreover, this may and ought to comfort thee, and to confirm and settle thy
mind, Romans 6.3.
that thou art baptized into the death of Christ. For seeing thou art baptized
into the death of Christ* Christ his death shall save and help thee; by Christ
his death, thou shall die unto thy sins; by Christ hi^ death thou shall
receive undoubted remission and forgiveness of all thy sins: finally, by
Christ his death thou shall rise again unto a new life here, and to a life
eternal, and everlasting in the world to come. The remission of our sins
confirmed in Baptism and in the Lords Supper.
For Baptism is a sure token and pledge, and a certain covenant (as it were)
of Gods mercy and favor, in which thou art reconciled unto God: So that by
means of it, thou may evermore have a quiet and cheerful conscience, by
reason of the forgiveness and pardoning of all thy sins through the death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ. Verily it is unto thee also, that Christ speaks
in the institution of his holy Supper; wherein he professes and witnesses,
that his blood was shed for the remission of sins. Now therefore, howsoever
the life which thou have led, has not been altogethe^ faultlesse and
blameless, no^ in all respects pure and free from sin, yet despair not but
without delay, fly for refuge and succor unto that blood of his, which was
thus shed for thy sins: and without ceassing call upon his Name, and thou
shall be saved, (according to his promise, Romans 10.13.
Romans 10.13.) Cri^^ out unto him therefore and call upon him in these o^ the
like words: A Prayer.
O most merciful God and father of al^ mercies, father of our Lord Jesus
Christ) be favorable and merciful unto me a sinner. Take pity and
compassion upon me miserable wretch; and speedily help me, even for that most
bitter, but yet most precious death and passion of Jesus Christ thy only Son
our redeemer, and only Savior, Amen: Amen. Enter not into judgment (O Lord)
with thy servant. Deal not with me after my deserts, neither do unto me
according to my sins and iniquities; but for thy infinite and endless
goodness and mercy receive me unto thy grace. I miserable, wretched, weak
and feeble creature am in thy hands, in thy power, and at thy disposing, to do
with me, what it pleases thee. (^ most mighty, and yet mos^ meek, most
gentle, and most gracious God, and merciful father) leave me not, neither
reject and cast me off, as a wretch that is quite forlorn and forsaken. I am
thine, whatsoever I am, and there is none can comfort me, none can help me,
none can deliver me; but thou only. Thou art the true preservative and remedy
against all evils and mischiefs, and against all infirmities and sicknesses
both of body and soul. Thou art the surest, and most present help, refuge
and succor, a strong hold, and a fortress and castle in all necessities.
Psalm. 46.
Thou (o Lord) art our hope and strength in troubles, Psalm, 46. In thee (O my
God) I put my trust, Psalm. 71. and 31.
let me not be confounded, nor ashamed, as being frustrate and disappointed of
my hope; but deliver me in thy righteousness: Incline thine care unto me, and
save me and make haste to deliver me; be thou unto me a strong rock, and house
of defense, that thou may save me: For thou art my rock and my fortress,
thou art my Lord and my God; Into thy hands I commend my spirit: for thou have
redeemed me (o Lord God of truth.) Let ye light of thy countenance shine upon
thy servant, and save me for thy mercy (O Lord my God.)

Moreover, here thou must especially be admonished, to take heed, that the
suffer not thy self, to much to be possessed wi^^ the cogitation and
remembrance of thy sins in pa^ticular. But rather if the same shall at any
time stan^ up against thee, set before thine eye^ the remembranc^ of that most
inestimab^ price of Christ his death and suffering; and fasten the same into
thy mind diligently (according to the advice and counsel of Saint Augustine:)
Inspice vulner^ pendentis, sanguinem morie^tis, precium redimentis. Capa^ habet
inclinatum in cruce a^ osculandum, brachia extens^ ad amplexandum totum denque
corpus expositum ad redimendum. Haec, quanta sint, cogitato: haec in statera
cordis appendito; vt totus tibi figatur in cord, qui totus pro te fixus est in
cruce: (Behold and look steadfastly upon the wounds of him, that hanged on the
cross for thee, upon the blood of him, that dyed for thee, upon the price of
him that redeemed thee. He has his head bowed down on the cross to kiss
thee; his arms stretched out wide to embrace thee; and finally, his whole
body exposed, and offered to redeem thee: Consider of how great price, and of
how great weight and moment these things are; and weigh well, and ponder the
same in the balance of thine own heart, that the same Christ may be wholly
fixed and fastened in thy heart, who was wholly fixed and fastened upon the
cross for thee. And assuredly persuade thy self, that not thou, but Christ is
charged with the sins which have been committed by thee, and that they are
all laid upon his shoulders: who having taken them upon himself, has
discharged us, and made full satisfaction and payment for us; so as he will
never impute them unto us, not lay them to our charge: but will freely forgive
them all, (as in our Creed we profess, and say, I believe the forgiveness of
sins.

CHAP. V.
Here it will be very necessary and profitable for the comfort of the patient,
or sick party, to urge and repeat often some testimonies of the word of God;
concerning the forgiveness of sins by, and through Christ (as these, and the
like.)

John the 1.29. Ioh. 1.29.
John the Baptist cries out and makes this proclamation, Ecce Agnus Dei,
Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world. Saint Peter
likewise 1 Epist. Chap. 1.18 Know this, 1 Pet. 1.18.
that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things (as silver and gold) from
your vain conversation: but with the precious blood of Christ (as of a Lamb
undefiled, and without spot.)

Let these things (dear brother) sink deep into thy mind, to confirm and
comfort thee. Thou have no cause to doubt of the remission and forgiveness of
thy sins, for in as much as thou have professed ye Name of Christ, and
put confidence in his mercy, he will also take away thy sins. And if
thou nothing doubt, but steadfastly believe this thou art already freed and
discharged from all thy sins; and art already become the child of God, there
is no cause for thee to waver or to fear. But yet hear and hearken unto
further testimonies; and so hear them, that thou imprint them thoroughly in thy
mind.

John 3.16. Ioh. 3.16.18
God so loved the world (says our Savior) that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish but have everlasting
life. And again: Whosoever believes in him, shall not be condemned, etc. And
again, Mat. 9.13. I am not come (says he) to call the righteous, Mat. 9.13.
but sinners to repentance, and Math. 11.28. and 11.28
Come unto me all ye that are weary, and laden, and I will ease you.

Mark, how that he calls al unto him; he refuses none, he rejects and
casts off none. In this word (All) he concludes thee. And therefore call
thou, and cry unto him for mercy, and he will assuredly accept thee, and will
refresh thee.

Romans 5.8.
Romans 5.8. God sets on^ herein his love toward us, t^ that (while we were yet
sinners) Christ died for us: much more then, being now justified by his blood,
we shall be saved from wrath through him.

This joyful tidings full of singular comfort (dear brother) almighty God,
thy most tender and loving father, will have to be preached and proclaimed unto
thee, for thy comfort. For, eue^ for thee it is, that Christ was sent, and for
thee it was, that he died. Only believe, and commit thy self unto Christ thy
redeemer and savior. Likewise in the same Chap. to the Romans, verse 10. If
when we were enemies, Romans 5.10.
we were reconciled unto God by the death of his Son, much more being
reconciled, we shall be saved by his life: And 1. Cor. 1.30, Christ Jesus is
made unto us of God, 1 Cor. 1.30.
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification and redemption. Now then
(dear brother) lift up thine heart and comfort thy self. Albeit, thou art
never so great and grievous a sinner, no cause there is wherefore thou should
therefore be discouraged: but acknowledge and confess thy self before God, to
be such a one; beg and crave for mercy in and through Christ; ask pa^don and
forgiveness, an^ believe Christ to be the only Savior, and thy
righteousness and salvation And he will evermore (...) thine; and will hide
and cover all thy sins; and vtte^ly abolish them, so as tha^ shall not need
to fear the^ by any hurt or danger. Again, 2 Cor. 5.21.
2 Cor. 5.21. God hat^ made him, who knew no sinn^ to be sin for us; that
(...) might be made the righteousness of God in him. Like wise, Gal. 1.4.
Galat. 1.4. Christ hat^ given himself for our sins that he might deliver us
from this present evil world, (according to the will of God, even our father.)
And Ephesians. 1.7. Ephe. 1.7.
By Christ we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of our
sins, according to his rich grace. And 1 Timothy 1.15. Christ Jesus came into
the world to save sinners, (says Saint Paul) of whom I am chief. Now then
(brother) have thou also good hope, and believe these words, as Saint Paul
did; and then shall thou assuredly be in the number of them that are justified
and saved.

1 Timothy 2.6. S. Paul says, That Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom for all.
1 Timothy 2.6.


Believe this then steadfastly, and without controversy thou art now one of
them already that are ransomed and redeemed. Furthermore, Math. 26.26. Thou
hear Christ in (...) last Supper, talking w^ thee: and thou see h^^
nourishing and feeding the with his body, and also o^fering and giving unto the
his blood to drink unto ^uerlasting life; Math. 26.26.
when he sait^ Take eat, this is my bod^ which is given for you: do t^ in
remembrance of me. Lik^ wise also after he had suppe^ he took the cup and
said: 1 Cor. 11.25
The cup is the blood of the (...) Testament, which is shed ^ you, and for
many, for the r^mission of sins. Do this, often as ye shall drink it,
remembrance of me.

These words (dear br^ther) it behooves thee (...) fix fast in thy memory;
(...) to think the^ spoken to the self. For when as he speaks unto all, he
speaks unto thee also. And all the things which Christ did or suffered, shall
be available unto thee, and shall turn to thy salvation, and to thy benefit,
no less then they did to Peter, or Paul. 1 Pet. 2.24. it is said, That Christ
his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree. 1 Pet. 2.24.
and 3.18.
And Chap. 3.18. Christ has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust,
that he might bring us unto God.

And Saint John 1 Epistle 1.7 says, 1 Ioh. 1.7.
That the blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God cleanses us from all sin:
and Chap, 2.1, If any man sin, and 2.1.
we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just; and he is the
reconciliation f^^ our sins; and not for ou^ only, but also for the sins
(...) the whole world.

Thou have heard he^ (dear brother) the word not of man, but of the holy
Ghost, which witness^ only, that God the father (who wills not the death of
a sinner, EZech. 18.
but that he^ should convert and live) even he, of his infinite lou^ toward
thee, has ease^ thee of the heavy burden of thy sins, and has lai^ them
on the shoulders o^ his best and only beloue^ Son. He has borne them and
suffered for them in hi^ body, that they cannot a^ any time condemn thee* For
as much as God accepts and reputeth the death of his Son in stead of
plenarie and perfect repentance, and of full payment and satisfaction for all
thy sins: so that thou believe in his Son Christ Jesus. Forasmuch then, as
thy sins being laid upon Christ, could not hold him in death neither condemn
him, verily, satisfaction is now already made for them; and to thee they are
all now remitted, and pardoned. Believe these things, and thou shall live
eternally and for ever. Christ himself has borne thy sins, and also died for
them: But he is risen again, and the sins of all true believers, are by the
death of Christ more then sufficiently purged and discharged; and the strict
and severe justice and judgment of God, abundantly satisfied for thy sins by
Christ Jesus. Christ now then is thine, togethe^ with all his benefits, with
his death, Romans 8.32.
resurrection, and ascension into heaven, with his merits, righteousness, and
obedience, and finally wit^ his life, and endless glory Satan therefore has
no right nor interest in thee nor power over thee, neither can he do unto thee
any hurt or injury, since thou art justified by Christ, seeing thou art freed
and deliuere^ from all thy sins, and seeing thou art the child o^ God. For,
behold God is thy father, and such a father, a^ entirely loves thee, for
Christ his sake, who has reconciled thee unto himself. Be of good comfort
then, Phil. 4.4.
and rejoice again and again in the Lord. For as much as thou art in the
hands of almighty God thy most tender and loving father, who is also most true
and faithful in his word and promises, thou art safe and out of all danger, so
as no evil can befall thee, being under his custody, and environed about, and
guarded with a troop of Angels, as he has promised, Psalm. 91.11. That he will
give his angels charge over thee, Psalm. 91.11
to keep thee in all thy ways. Christ also is thine, how mighty soever he be
in power, how rich soever in goodness, and how great and high soever in
majesty and glory. He it is that has covered all thy sins with the cloak
of his innocence and obedience, and taken them all quite away, Romans 8.32.
so that none shall be able to wrest or pluck thee out of the hands of thy
heavenly Father. As soon as thou shall have suffered and passed over this
bodily affliction, and temporal cross, (which being compared unto everlasting
life, is light and momentany,) thou have then got the victory. Christ Jesus
has gone before thee in suffering the like, yea and a far more sharp and
bitter, Luke 22.44
and a far more terrible conflict. Now he is thy head, unto whom thou must of
necessity be conformed and made like unto him, by dying unto thy sins, and
by leaving and laying down this life so embrued and defiled with sin: that
so with thy Lord Christ, thou may live the blessed life, and that for ever.
Let not thy sins then vex and trouble thee; there is no cause, why for them
thy conscience should be disquieted; seeing that they are already taken away
and abolished: the evil spirit (that seeks the destruction of our souls) is
for thee vanquished and overcome, cast down, and trodden under foot. God now
in favor looks upon thee, he takes care of thee, to defend and keep thee:
yea the society and fellowship of all the blessed Angels attend upon thee,
they watch over thee, and pitch their tents about thee; ready to minister unto
thee, and to carry thy soul into the bosom of Abraham: so that thou can in
no wise be condemned, no more then could thy head Christ Jesus: so that with
thy whole heart thou fix and repose thy confidence in him.

If sin death and hell be not able to do any harm or displeasure unto thy
Lord Christ, no more the^ can they do unto thee; for as much as thou art i^
Christ, and Christ in thee thou can never be condemned: whereas indeed, if
thou were to sustain and bear thine own sins, and to make satisfaction for
them, thou should never be able to sustain and undergo so great a burden;
but thy sins would weigh and press thee down into hell, and utterly
ouerwhelme and swallow thee up.

But now Christ (being the self same true God and true man) he has willingly
offered himself for thee; and has substituted himself in thy stead, making
full payment of all for thee, (as he says, Psalm. 69.4. Psalm. 69.4.
That he made payment of the things which he never took. Thou have indeed in
thy self committed many sins: but Christ has (in thy stead) discharged and
made satisfaction for them all. He it is that has set thee at liberty, and
that has made thee partaker with himself of eternal life; if only thou
shall believe, and give credenc^ unto this word and Gospel. Yea assuredly
(dear brother) though the sins of the whole world, did li^ upon thy neck
alone, ye^ notwithstanding (behold there is infinite mercy with God, abundantly
sufficient or rather more then sufficient for them all. Now God has promised
in Christ, his blessing of grace and mercy unto thee. And the same his promise
is in thy Lord Christ ratified and assured, and fully accomplished and
performed unto thee: so as thou can not, but be saved, if only thou do but
cast thine eyes upon Christ. There is then nothing more sure and certain, then
thy salvation. For Christ being the natural Son of God, and in his divine
essence truth it self, he is, in respect of humane nature, our flesh and
blood. Who then shall be, or can be more trusty, and more faithful to give
and perform this promise of grace and mercy, then this Christ? who is
himself the truth of the promise, and who loves us so fervently, and
earnestly, that he chose rather to suffer death voluntarily and willingly, the^
that we should be frustrated of any promise. Wherefore if thou shall believe in
Christ, thou art now already made partaker of God mercy; thou art now
already eased of the burden of thy sins; thou art now already the heir of
God, and coheire with Christ for ever and ever. Mat. 24 35
For heaven and earth shall pass away; but the word of the Lord abides for
ever. Believe then (dear brother) and be of good hope, and of good comfort
neither doubt, but that that great God, most gracious and most merciful, even
the son of God Christ Jesus, for thy sake, and for thy salvation, was made
man: yea that for thee and for thy sake he was borne into this world: for thy
sake dyed upon the cross; for thy sake rose again from death, and ascended
into heaven, and performed all those things that are promised unto us. So that
all the promises of God in and through Christ, are yea, 2 Cor. 1.20.
and Amen, 2. Corinthians. 1.20. Pray therefore unto God, and expect, and look for
nothing else from God, but mere grace and mercy, and that through Christ, and
for his sake: for as much as without Christ, there is no consolation, no
salvation, no hope, no help. In Christ only and alone is all comfort, all
manner of refreshing, all refuge and succor, and in a word, all the whol^
means of our salvation In him is all grace, goodness, and mercy, infinitely
greater, and far more abundant, then any man can wish or desire, or yet
comprehend. The Lord vouchsafe to give unto us a constant and steadfast faith,
to believe the same.

Furthermore (dear brother) I warn and admonish thee, to be careful, that
(with as much diligence, as thou can) thou withdraw thy mind from the
horrible and dreadful contemplation and view of thy sins, and of the fear
of death: and bend all thy cogitation upon Christ alone. Fix the eyes of thy
mind wholly upon him, cleave and stick fast unto him with thy whole heart:
call upon him with full confidence and assurance, and commit thy self wholly
unto him; for as much as in him thou shall find nothing else, but absolute and
perfect innocence and righteousness, life and salvation. All which being
derived from Christ unto thee, are now become thine; if only thou will
acknowledge Christ, and believe him to be thy Redeemer and Savior, and the
author and worker of thy salvation. I admonish thee therefore again and
again, and I urge and repeat the same often (not without cause) that thou
renew not in thy mind afresh the remembrance o^ thy sins: neither vex and
torment thy self by weighing and pondering too exactly the multitude and
greatness of them: But rather (having thy sins removed far away) set
before thine eyes only Christ crucified; let him be fixed fast in thy heart, let
thy mind and cogitation be wholly upon him; flee unto him with full assurance
and confidence; and with thy whole heart, stick fast unto him, without being
separated from him at any time. By this means thou shall prevail, and stand
fast against the gates of hell, (though never so cruel and terrible.) Call
unto thy mind, with how great humanity and kindness, with how great
clemency and gentleness, and with how great meekness and mildness. Christ
in the Gospel entreated and also received, and entertained all sinners that
repented them of their sins, and that desired help, and craved pardon and
forgiveness. There shall thou find Mary Magdalen, out of whom went seven
devils. Thou shall see there one of the thieves that were crucified with him.
Thou shall see the Publican, thou shall see Zacheus and diverse others; whom our
Savior Christ entertained with wonderful meekness and kindness; and
afterward pronounced them to be freed and set at liberty from all their sins,
(though never so heinous and grievous:) for Christ is grace ^ mercy,
consolation and comfort, joy and gladnes^ it self, and a present refug^ and
succor, yea life and salvation it self, unto a^^ that expect and hope for the
same from him, and tha^ set their affiance in him. Al^ these things God has
promised for Christ his sake, who is truth it self, and cannot lie: and
therefore will never deceive us, never disappoint us, never forsake us.

CHAP. VI.
Reconciliation and restitution required in time of sickness: (if not
performed before.)

NOW further, Reconciliation in time of sickness required.
while thou lie upon thy bed of sickness, it will perhaps come into thy
mind, how thou have wronged and injured thy neighbor, in his body or goods, or
estimation and credit; or contrariwise, how he has injured and wronged thee in
all or some of these things. Here thou must do as Christ did upon the cross:
thou must pray even for all thine enemies, and must from the bottom of thy
heart pardon and forgive all wrongs and injuries. If thou by d^^traction and
slander ha^^ been wronged in thy goo^ name and reputation, tho^^ must even from
thy ver^ heart forgive the autho^ thereof; and pray for the^^ with S. Steven,
Act. 7.60 Lord lay not this sin to the^ charge; Act. 7.60.
and with our Savior Christ himself upon the cross, Luke 23.24
Father forgiu^ them, they know not what they do. If on the contrary, thou have
slandered others, and wronged the^ in their good name and credit, it behooves
thee with all convenient speed, to seek reconciliation (if it be possible) at
the hands of the parties so offended. If any thing of thine have been taken
away by the^, thou shall not with ^olence, fierceness or cru^^tie, exact and
require the ^^me again. Restitution, in time of sickness required.
And if thou ^aue either by fraud or vi^lence taken away from others, (if thou
can) make ^estitution, or cause restitu^ion to be made: and do not ^n any
wise hide or conceal any thing, but confess the same, and be sorry for the
wrong committed, and desire pardon, first at ye hands of God, and then of the
party or parties wronged and offended. If the parties whom thou have wronged be
dead, make restitution unto their children, or others their heirs, executors,
or administrators. If thou have done wrong or oppression, and thou know not
to wh^ thou have done it, in stea^ the parties themselves the have the poor
and need unto whom thou may give cheerfully, and make restitution. So (...)
Zacheus, Luke 19.8.
Luke 19.8. A^^ the same is the counsel the Daniel gave unto Neb^chadnezar,
Dan. 4.24.
Dan. 4.24. ^ break off his sins by righteou^nesse, and his iniquities by
me^cie toward the poor. If it b^ so, that through pouerti^ and want thou can
no^ make restitution, it shall b^ sufficient if thou do it in desire and
affect, when tho^ can not do it in deed and effect. 2 Cor. 8.12.
If only there be a willing mind, it is accepted before God, according to that
a man ^ath, not according to that he ^ath not. 2. Cor. 8.12. In case ^f want
and poverty then ^ shall be enough for thee, comfort; doubt not, b^ that God
will also pard^ and forgive thee, whatso^uer wrongs and injuries do^ either to
himself or to others. For God cannot b^ remit and forgive that m^^ his
offenses, who readi^ and freely forgiueth h^ neighbor. For as much a^ he
himself has taught (...) this way of requital, Mat^ 6.14. If ye do forgive
m^ their trespasses, Mat. 6.14.
your heauen^^ Father will also forgive you.

CHAP. VII.
Of the lawful use of Physic in time of sickness.

A Question
NOW here a question may be made, whethe^ the sick man may with a good
conscience crave the help of the Physician, and also use physick^? o^ ought
only to depend upon God for the recovery of his health?

sometimes it is not amis^ to use the help and counsel of the Physician, le^
herein we should seem (...) tempt God in neglecting o^ despising his ordinance
an^ means appointed for restoring of nature, and recovery of health. For
howsoever medicines of themselves can do nothing, neither have any power and
virtue to g^ue health without the blessing of God, and his secret work and
operation* yet notwithstanding, when the same are ministered and applied by the
learned and well experienced Physician, they are to be held and esteemed not
only healthful and profitable, but also needful and necessary; and may also
rightly be called Manus Dei, the very hand of God himself. Hereupon it is that
Sirach, Chap. 38. counsels to honor the Physician with the honor that is
due unto him, Eccles. 38.1.4.
and that because of necessity: For the Lord (says he) has created,
ordained, and appointed him. For of the most High comes healing. And again,
the Lord from out of the earth has created medicines; and the man that is
wise, will not abhor the^. As for witches and wisards, inchanters and
sorcerers, and the like, who will take upon the^ to heal and cure the sick,
by certain fained and devised ceremonies, or by a certain number of words, or
prayers, whereunto they ascribe the virtue and power of healing diseases: these
are by all means to be avoided, and to be put away far from us. For they are
the very hand and instruments of the devils and evil spirits, and not the hand
of almighty God; by whose word and power all things are, and ought to be ruled
and governed.

CHAP. VIII.
A Remedy against the fear and terror of Death.

IF at any time thou be terrified with the fear of death: bethink with thy
self and consider, that by Christ, death is utterly vanquished and put to
death, (as it were.) Indeed if that Christ (in compassion toward us) had not
died for us, the fear of death must needs have vexed and troubled us. But now
(death being vanquished, cast down and trodden under foot by the death of
Christ) the souls of them that believe in Christ cannot die, nor perish: but
after their departure out of these bodies, they go straight unto him: Phil.
1.23.
as it was said unto ye thief on the cross, being ready to give up the
ghost; This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Luke 23.43
And in the mean time, the body rests in assured hope, that it shall at the
last day rise again unto a most blessed and happy life, which is immortal,
and never fades: and that the same body shall rise with exceeding great
glory and majesty, and with such beauty and comeliness as cannot be
expressed: that so being renewed again, and glorified together with the soul,
it may live for ever with Christ, and with all the elect. Among whom many shall
be found, which here on earth were knit and joined unto us in the bond of
amity and friendship. And therefore the sacred Scripture usually calls the
death of the godly by the name of sleep. Death a sleep.
For this same weak, frail, mortal, and transitory body, which now rotteth
in the grave, shall at the last day be raised up: even as a man that is fast
asleep, is rouzed and raised up out of his sleep. And then forthwith (death
being quite extinguished and abolished) it shall appear glorious and
beautiful, strong, and in perfect health, sound and entire, pure and
spiritual, immortal and incorruptible; 1 Cor. 15.53
When this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal shall put on
immortality. Whereupon it is that the Prophet David pronounces the death of
the Saints to be precious, Psalm. 116.15.
and of excellent account. Psalm. 116.15. and 16.9.
and in another Psalm, His heart within him leapeth for joy, and his tongue
rejoices, his flesh also rests in hope. Why? Because God will not leave his
soul in grave, neither will suffer his holy one to see corruption.

These things (dear brother) ponder and consider well in thy mind, that thou
be not deceived with the world; which imagines, that when we die, we die for
altogether; that our bodies perish together with our life, and that nothing
remains of us after our departure hence. But the world is herein altogether
deceived. For our body is not so little set by, nor so despised in ye sight of
God: it has his peculiar honor, and welfare prepared, and ordained of God.
For this same body, which now we carry about us, and which is now vexed and
tormented with so many griefs and pains; this same body (I say) being changed
and glorified, shall together with our soul live for evermore. Whereas indeed,
if we should for altogether lose and forgo this body, and never recover the
same again at any time, the death of the Saints and children of God should not
be precious and honorable, but rather vile, and of no worth, yea horrible and
dreadful. Considering therefore these things diligently, raise up, and comfort
thy wavering mind, and strengthen the same with sentences of holy Scripture.
Believe them faithfully, and doubt nothing. For the same are most certain,
undoubted, and true. As Christ his body being buried, and lying in the grave,
rose again on the third day unto a new life, and the same eternal and
everlasting, never to die again: so the bodies of all such, as are asleep in
Christ, (that is, who have believed in Christ,) being now dead, they rest in
their graves, only for a time, in a most assured hope of a joyful and
glorious resurrection; whereby they shall rise again in the last day unto a
new life, and that eternal and everlasting: wherein shall be nether sin nor
death, nor any misery; and wherein shall be nothing else but righteousness
and perfect holiness, life and salvation, joy and happiness for ever and ever.
These things God himself has promised, who is of infinite power, able to
perform whatsoever he has promised; and who is also truth it self, and
therefore neither will nor can fail in performance thereof. Trust steadfastly
then in his promises, and waver not.

CHAP. IX.
Testimonies of Scripture concerning the Resurrection of the dead.

Moreover, it is good for thee to repeat often, and in thy mind to ponder and
diligently to meditate upon those testimonies of holy Scripture, which concern
the resurrection of the flesh. Hereof it is, that Saint Paul admonishes us in
his first Epistle to the Thessalonians: That we raise up, confirm and comfort
both our selves, 1 These. 4.18
and comfort one another with these and such like words concerning the
resurrection. Neither indeed can there be any consolations more fruitful and
plentiful, or more sure and certain, then those which we fetch from those
testimonies of Scripture, which concern the resurrection of our bodies; they
being the words, not of man, but of God; who both can, and will assuredly
perform whatsoever he has spoken (as has been said.) There is none yt can
alter or change his will and determination, none that can let or hinder his
purpose and counsel. He is of power infinite, in his word and promises most
faithful and true, yea truth it self; his goodness and his mercy
unspeakable, and as a fountain that never can be drawn dry. And therefore
let no man doubt thereof. Math 13.43. Christ says: Mat. 13.43
The just men shall shine as the Sun in the kingdom of their Father.

John 5.24.
Likewise John 5.24. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my word,
and believes in him that sent me has everlasting life; and shall not come into
condemnation, but has passed from death unto life.

Chap. 6.40.
And Chapter 6.40. This is the will of my Father, that has sent me, that every
one that sees the Son, and believes in him, should have everlasting life,
and I will raise him up at the last day.

Again, Chapter 8.51. Verily, Chap. 8.51.
verily, I say unto you, if any man keep my word, he shall never see death.

And Chap. 11.11. Christ says, yt Lazarus slept, and 11.11.
who notwithstanding was dead, and his dead corpse did then lie in the grave.
But Christ raises the dead to life again; and calls those things which are
not, Romans 4.17.
as if they were (as Saint Paul says.) And therefore our Savior Christ
adds in the 25 verse, Ioh. 11.25.
I am the resurrection and the life, he that believes in me, though he were
dead, yet shall he live. And by and by after the uttering of these words, he
raised up Lazarus from death, having lien rotting and stinking in the grave
four days.

And because in these conflicts of sickness and death, we are naturally very
fearful, and faint hearted; to the end that we might be furthered and helped
on forward ye more to believe, that there shall be a resurrection, many have
been raised up from death unto life in the times of the Prophets and Apostles.
In the new Testament, Christ raised from the dead the widows son at Naim,
Luke 7. Luke 8.
Luke 7. He raised up Iairus his daughter, Luke 8. He raised up Lazarus, John
11 Act. 9. and 20.
John 11. Saint Peter raised Tabitha, Act. 9. and Saint Paul Eutychus, Act. 20.
In the old Testament, the Prophet Elias raised up the widows son at Sarephtha,
1 Kings 17.
1. Kings 17. and the Prophet Elisha his hostess son the Shunamite, 2 Kings
4. Genesis 5. ^ Kings 2.
2. Kings 4. And God also himself rapt up Henoch and Elias alive, both body
and soul, out of this miserable and transitory life, and conueighed and took
them up unto himself, Genesis 5. and 2. Kings 2. That by the^ he might leave unto
us some resemblance of the true life that is to come; lest (according to the
conceit and opinion of the Epicures and heathens) we should imagine, that after
this life nothing else remained unto us.

Furthermore, consider and think with thy self, what that great and mighty
Lord of life and death Jesus Christ says, Luke 8.52. Weep not, Luke 8.52.
the Damsel is not dead, but sleeps. Reason, not believing this,
notvnderstanding the mysteries of God, makes a mock of these things. Whereupon
it is added, that All laughed him to scorn when they heard it. But Christ
making good his own words; as soon as he had said it, he raised up the maid
that was dead, and restored her to life. And so in like manner will the same
Lord Jesus Christ, not only receive thy soul and preserve the same in sure
custody: but will also at the last day render and deliver again this body
unto thy soul, and will couple and knit them together again unto life
eternal.

John 5.28. Our Savior Christ pronounces plainly, Ioh. 5.28.
That the day and hour shall come, in the which all that are in the graves
shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good unto the
resurrection of life. And Daniel prophecieth and foretells also, Dan. 12.2.
That many of them which sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake unto
everlasting life: and that they that be wise, shall shine, even as the
brightness of the firmament: and they which turn many unto righteousness,
shall shine as the stars, for ever and ever.

Saint Paul in like manner proves and confirms the certainty of the
resurrection of our bodies, by many strong and infallible reasons and
arguments, Romans 8.11. Romans 8.11.
If (says he) the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell
(...) you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicke^ your
mortal bodies, because that his Spirit dwells in you. And 1. Cor. 6.14. 1
Cor. 6.14.
The same God that raised up the Lord Jesus Christ, he shall also raise us up
by his power. And as for the fifteenth Chapter of his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15.12. etc.
it is full of nothing else but sweet consolations and comforts, of wonderful
force and efficacy. In that Chapter Saint Paul linketh and joins our
resurrection so fast and close unto the resurrection of our Savior Christ,
that they cannot be separated nor plucked asunder the one from the other.
Christ (says he) is risen from the dead (which is a thing most certain and
sure:) therefore out of all doubt we shall also rise again. For Christ is our
head and we his members. This head neither is, nor can be without the members;
neither does he leave or forsake his members. Where Christ therefore is, there
also must we needs be. Ephe. 5.30.
For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. Ephesians. 5.30.
Now, who can sufficiently praise and magnify (according to the worthiness
thereof) the infiniteness of that inestimable and unspeakable grace and
me^cie of God, who vouchsafed so to debase himself, a^ to come down from
he^uen, and to be made a mortal man, in all things lik^ unto us (sin only
excepted) that this corruptible (...) frail nature of man, being united and
joined unto h^ divine nature, might by the infinite and incomprehensible virtue
and power o^ his divinity be advanced unto immortal life, and made partaker
with it of the heavenly kingdom? (...) we did believe, so great riches to be
given unto us, and to be laid up in store for us, and that so blessed and
happy a kind of life shall hereafter befall us; how I pray you, could we be
daunted or troubled? The humane nature of all the faithful, which have been
before and since Christ, and which shall be hereafter, in Christ (who is both
true man, and also true God) has and does put on immortality and glory.
Abundant then, and of great force and effect is that comfort concerning the
resurrection of Christ, wherewith Saint Paul does fortify and establish the
minds of the Corinthians; when he says: 1 Cor. 15.20. etc.
That Christ is risen from the dead, being the first fruits of them that are
fallen asleep; for since by man came death, by man also comes the
resurrection of the dead. For as by Adam all die: even so also by Christ shall
all be man alive. But every man in (...) own order: the first fruits (...)
Christ, afterward they tha^ are of Christ at his coming etc. And after all
this, Saint Paul adds a similitude concerning natural things whereby the
resurrection of our bodies is most clearly perceived, verse 36.
and plainly demonstrated. The similitude or comparison is taken from seed,
which being dry when it is cast into the ground by the seedsman or husbandman,
it dies as it were, and rotteth in the ground. But yet does it not perish
altogether: but it sprouteth and comes forth out of the earth, fresh and new,
in an elegant and a delightful shape and form. Even so also shall our bodies
arise, not corruptible, or subject to corruption, not frail and transitory,
not weak and feeble, not withered and decayed, and ready to die (as now it
is:) but comely and beautiful, strong and lusty, immortal and incorruptible,
and full of brightness and glory. This is ye way by which we are to pass
into our true country which is above, even by death unto everlasting life.
Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God; wherein is nothing else,
but life and immortality. For which cause, 1 Cor. 15.33
This corruptible body must put on incorruption, and this mortal body must
put on immortality: th^^ shall come to pass the saying that is written, Death
is swalowed up into victory. They that believe in Christ have now vanquished
sin, death and hell. And therefore co^temning and despising death and through
Christ being now become bold and courageous, they shall triumph and say: Hos
13.14. 1 Cor. 15.55
^ death, where is thy sting? O hell, where is thy victory? The sting of death
i^ sin; and the strength of sin is the law: But thanks be unto God, who
has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Hereunto also may be added other sentences of holy Scripture, full of comfort;
as that 2. Cor. 4.14. He that has raised up the Lord Jesus from the dead,
shall also raise us up by the same Jesus. And that to the Philippians Chap.
3.20. Phil 3.20.
Our conversation is in heaven; from whence we look for the Savior, even the
Lord Jesus Christ: who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned
like unto his glorious body; according to the mighty working, whereby he is
able to subdue all things unto himself. Again, Colos. 3.3. Ye are dead,
Colos. 3.3.
and your life is hid with Christ in God: but when Christ which is your life,
shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory. And 1. These.
4.13. 1. These. 4.14
I would not (says Saint Paul) have you ignorant concerning them, which are a
sleep: that ye sorrow not, as others, which have no hope. For if we believe,
tha^ Jesus is dead, and is risen again; Even so them, tha^ sleep in Jesus,
will God bring with him.

In like manner does S. Paul comfort his disciple Timothy, 2. Tim. 2.8.
Remember, 2 Timothy 2.8.
that Jesus Christ made of the seed of David, w^ raised again from the dea^
according to my Gospel. And verse 11. If we be dead w^ Christ, we shall also
live wi^ him: If we suffer with him, (...) shall also reign with him An^
again, 2 Timothy 1.9.
2. Tim. 1.9. God ha^ saved us (says he) and calle^ us with an holy calling,
not according to our works, but according to his own purpos^ and grace, which
was given: through Christ Jesus before the world was; but is now made manifest
by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished death, and
has brought life and immortality. And in his Epi. to the Heb. Chap. 2.14. he
says: That Christ was made partaker of flesh and blood, (that is, Hebr. 2.14.
was made true man) that through death he might destroy him, that had power of
death (that is, the devil) and that he might deliver all them, which for fear
of death, were all their life time subject to bondage. S. John likewise in his
1. Epistle, Chap. 4.9. tells us, that, 1 Ioh. 4.9.
In this appeared the love of God toward us, that God sent his only begotten
Son into the world, that we might live through him (to wit, eternally, and
for ever:) and Chap. 3.14. and 3.14.
We know that we are translated from death unto life, because we love the
brethren. And (to conclude) in the same manner Job comfort himself in the
midst of all his afflictions, Chap. 19.25. Job. 19.25.
I am sure (says he) that my Redeemer lives; and that he shall stand the last
on the earth. And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet shall I
see God in my flesh: whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and
none other for me, though my reins be consumed within me.

These testimonies of holy Scripture whosoever he be that pondereth well, and
meditateth on the same diligently, he cannot but be filled with exceeding great
joy and comfort. A most evident example whereof we have in Saint Paul. Phil.
3.10. Phil. 3.10.
Where he professes himself to rejoice, and glory in nothing more, then
this, yt he knows Christ, and the power of his Resurrection; whereby our
death was slain (as it were) and put to death. Now then, unto as many, as
believe in Christ, death is utterly vanquished, and is dead (as it were:) there
is nothing now in death, that is dreadful, or to be feared, besides only a
certain image and appearance. As a serpent that is dead, retains his wonted
form, which is dreadful and terrible, but yet has no strength or power in
himself to hurt. And even as by that brazen Serpent which Moses set up in the
wilderness, so often as it was beheld and looked on, the fiery Serpents,
wherewith the Jews were bitten and stung, were by the mighty power of the Lord
smitten that they died; so as the people could not be infected with their
poison: even so our death dies (as it were) and is made harmless, and in no
wise to be feared, if only with the eyes of faith we shall behold and look up
unto Christ hanging on the cross, and dying for us. Whereof the said brazen
serpent was a lively image and representation, as our Savior Christ himself
witnesses, Ioh. 3.14. Ioh. 3.14.
As Moses lift up the Serpent in the wilderness, so also must the Son of man
be lift up, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
eternal life. In a word, death is but a certain resemblance or image of
death; or rather, it is the beginning and entrance into the true and endless
life. Christ who is truth it self, tells us: Ioh. 8.51.
If any man keep my word, he shall never see death. How I pray you comes
this to pass? The case stands thus: Man trusting steadfastly in the mercy of
God, and merits of Christ Jesus, by means of his faith is so incorporated (as
I may say) and so knit and united unto his head Christ Jesus his Lord and
Savior, who is the true life, that he cannot be separated nor plucked away
from him. This body therefore by death is parted and severed from the soul,
in an assured and undoubted hope of a glorious resurrection unto eternal life.
For as much as within a short compass of time, the body shall be restored
again unto the soul to enjoy eternal bliss and happiness. And so believing
in Christ, he shall never see noe taste of eternal death of body and soul,
(that is, of eternal damnation, which is the only death indeed:) forasmuch as
the death of the godly is nothing else but a passage or a departure out of this
mortal life into life immortal, and unto the society and company of Christ
himself, and of all his holy Saints and Angels.

CHAP. X.
A Remedy against the fear and horror of Hell, and eternal Damnation.

THat malicious and wicked spirit the devil and Satan, here doubtless will
also cast into the minds of men a care and fear also concerning their
Predestination, by suggesting unto them, these or the like horrible and
dreadful cogitatations: What if for all this thou do not please God? what if
God have rejected thee, and cast thee out of his favor? or how know thou
thy self to be of the number of those, whom God has elected and chosen unto
eternal life? These and the like dangerous tentations will be ready to offer
themselves, which indeed are very hard and sharp, and will very grievously
torment and disquiet the minds of men (especially in sickness.) And therefore
a man has need in this case to stand fast, and manfully to defend himself.
Now, if in this combat and conflict thou will obtain the victory, it
behooves thee to withstand him by this policy: Straightway, as soon as these
tentations are sent unto thee of Satan, take heed thou do not enter into the
lists with him, or condescend to make him answer, or to dispute and reason the
matter with him: but repel him rather, and drive him from thee with these or
the like cogitations: Avoid Satan, depart and get thee hence; it is written:
Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Neither shall thou therefore tempt any
of his children, that are near and dear unto him. When as God (of his
fatherly love and kindness toward me always) has bestowed so exceeding great
and infinite blessings and benefits upon me; having endued me with life, and so
plentifully fed and nourished preserved and maintained the same hitherto,
having filled me with all good things needful and necessary for this life,
yea and ministered unto me abundantly all things behoouefull and profitable both
for my soul and body (and that so far above my desert, and beyond my desire
and expectation:) o what madness were it once to doubt of his mercy? When as
by Baptism he has accepted me to be of his flock, and has registered and
enrolled me in the Catalogue and number of Christian believers; when as he has
called me to the knowledge of his grace by the Gospel of his Son, wherein he
has promised that he will be a father unto me: how should I not expect and
look for all good from him? how should I not promise unto my self all the
favor that he can show me, and all the good that possibly he can do unto me?
how should not his good will and affection be most readily inclined toward me?
What needs to say much in this case? It is a thing both foolish and also
dangerous, to give way unto such thoghts concerning Predestination. It behooves
thee rather to prevent, to auert, and turn away, and so to overcome these
cogitations with other considerations, wherewith God will have thy mind
occupied; as namely those that Christ himself has prescribed in the Gospel:
where he says, That whosoever believes in him shall in no wise perish, Ioh.
3.15.16.36.
but has everlasting life. Hear thou not, that whosoever believes in
Christ, and that acknowledges Christ to be his righteousness, sanctification,
and redemption, can in no wise be damned, but that he shall be made partaker of
everlasting life and salvation? As many then as trust steadfastly and unfeignedly
in the mercy of God, and merits of Christ Jesus, are of the number of them who
are elect, and chosen unto eternal life, being foreknowne and predestinate in
Christ, and registered and written long ago in the book of life. But they who
are predestinate unto eternal life, Romans 8.29.
are made like unto the Image of Christ, being justified and made righteous
before God by faith in his Son. Therefore by this their faith, they are
undoubtedly saved. These things are most certain and true, God neither can be
deceived, neither can he deceive any man. Now this is the will and counsel of
God, our most loving Father, who is truly and indeed Philanthrop^s, a lover of
mankind. These things he has thus forepurposed and decreed from everlasting:
and therefore there is no cause of fear, no cause why those things should
hinder thee, or make thee afraid, which ye enemy of thine the devil (envying
thy welfare and salvation, and seeking ye destruction of thy soul) shall seem
to suggest and to oppose against these things. Only see yt thou p^^ thy trust
and confidence i^ Christ, and comfort thy self in an assurance of his mercy,
and behold, there neither is nor can be any danger. For if thou fix thy hope
and confidence in Christ, Christ now is thine, and thou art his. He having
redeemed thee, thou can in no wise perish, nor be damned. For as much as they
yt believe in Christ, are by the Father drawn unto Christ, Ioh. 6.44.
and by him the Fathers will is, that they should be saved; neither will he have
any of them to perish. John 10.28. Ioh. 10.28.
Be of good comfort then, believe faithfully, and have steadfast hope in
Christ. For whosoever believe in Christ, the same are predestined unto
eternal life. Upon Christ then it behooves thee wholly to fix the eyes of thy
mind, to fly unto him, and to lay fast hold upon him by faith, if thou will be
saved. Remembering that earnest exhortation of the Apostle, Heb. 12. Heb. 12.2.
That with patience we run the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus
the author and finisher of our faith; who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the Cross, and despised the shame, and is set at the right hand of the
Throne of God.

CHAP. XI.
How Christ his temptations and sufferings were all for our sakes.

FVrthermore, all the sufferings and temptations wherewith Christ was assailed
and tempted, (being exceeding many and grievous) he suffered them all for us,
and for our sake, (as the same Apostle witnesses in the same Epistle, saying;)
Heb. 4.15.16.
We have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities: but which was in all things tempted in like sort (yet without
sin.) Therefore let us go boldly unto the Throne of grace, that we may
receive grace, and find mercy to help in time of need. Imprint these things
(dear brother) steadfastly in thy mind. Christ given unto us for two ends.
Christ was given unto us for a twofold end: First, that he might redeem us,
and reconcile unto us both of living godly, and dying happily. See then that
thou set Christ his death before thine eyes, and that thou end thy life after
his example: for as much as Christ is set down unto us for as example, to be
followe^ both in his life, and in his sufferings and death. For there is no man
that shall be able to live godly, no man able to suffer afflictions, o^ to
undergo death happily, unless he shall propose unto himself both the life and
death of Christ for his imitation. By Christ his death it is, that the death of
all the godly is swallowed up, and quite abolished. I^ will be good for thee
therefore diligently to meditate and consider in thy mind, what manner of death
he died, and how he behaved himself in that most sharp and bitter conflict
of all others; when as hanging upon the cross, he was overwhelmed (as it were)
with most grievous and horrible temptations. Imitate and follow him, and call
unto God for help, that thou may be enabled thereunto.

CHAP. XII.
Of Christ his threefold Temptations.

FIrst, the Jews sought to tempt Christ with the fear of death, 1 Temptation
of Christ.
as one (in their opinion) utterly unable to deliver himself from the same,
when as it was objected unto him on the Cross, saying; He saved others,
himself he cannot sa^e* as if they should say; Now his case is altogether
desperate for he must die, and so utterly perish. None shall by force or
otherwise, take him away, nor deliver him out of our hands. After the like
manner will that unreconciled enemy of man the devil, be ready also to strike
into thee a scare and terror of death. But proceed and go on forward boldly,
be strong, and of good courage and comfort. Christ has vanquished this enemy,
and utterly cast him down. And thou also through the same Christ, shall
likewise cast him down, and overcome him. Stretch out thy shield of faith in
Christ Jesus. Thy Lord and Savior Christ, being Lord of life, and King of
eternal glory, was not so made subject unto death, as to be overcome, or to
be holden still of death: but he lives and reigns for ever. In this case
then thy Lord and Savior living, and reigning for ever, doubtless he will not
leave thee nor forsake thee; neither will he suffer death to exercise tyranny
and dominion over thee. He cannot deceive thee, nor falsify his word and
promise made unto thee, since he is truth it self. Have this confidence in him,
and assure thy self of his goodness, and of his love and care, and tender
affection toward thee: and behold, thou shall most assuredly live with him for
ever.

A twofold benefit we receive by death.
And whereas he will have thee through many afflictions and trials to undergo
this bodily death, it is for thine own sake, and for death is good and
profitable in this respect, that having tasted the sharpness and bitterness
thereof, thou might by experience know and perceive, how fervent the love of
Christ was toward thee, and how inestimable a benefit he bestowed upon thee,
when as dying for thee, in his own body he discharged and made satisfaction
for all thy sins: (death being altogether extinguished and abolished, and the
very gates of hell shaken in pieces, cast down and overthrown.) For otherwise
thou could not perceive, nor understand the operation and power of life in
Christ, how great it is which has swallowed up our death: neither should
thou acknowledge the greatness of the benefit, nor give due thanks (as thou
ought) unto Christ thy Lord and thy redeemer. Wherefore in that Christ
lives, thou also shall live; and this death shall be unto thee a happy and
pleasant sleep, and ^ door or entrance into that true and most blessed life.

2 Temptation of Christ.
Again secondly, the Jews sought to tempt Christ with the guilt of sin, as
being a wicked man, and a man guilty of horrible sin when it was cast in his
teeth* If thou be the Son of God come down from the cross. Thou sauedst
others, why the^ do thou not save thy self* These reproachful words, what
else did they mean and intend, but that by imposture, guile and cosenage he
deceived and deluded men; and that he was nothing less then the Son of God;
nay rather that he was a most ungracious and wicked man? In like manner Satan
tempting a man that is in extremity of sickness and ready to die, he lays
before him whatsoever at any time he has committed against God or his
neighbor; and he suggesteth unto his mind, whole cartlodes of his sins; and
he does aggrauate the same as much as possible may be; that so by the
heinousness and greatness of his sins, he may cause him to stand in doubt
of Gods mercy and pardon, and so drive him to despair. Here also be sure to
stand fast, and to resist manfully. And when the enemy in this manner sets
upon thee, entertain him, and repel him with these or the like words: True it
is, I confess my self to be as exceeding great and grievous sinner: but
Christ, who is not guilty of any sin, who is also that unspotted Lamb in
whose mouth was found no guile, he has suffered most bitter and cruel death
for all my sins, how manifold and how great soever they be, they are all
discharged by him; he has made full and perfect satisfaction for them all.
Christ his death is a sufficient atonement and propitiation for all my sins:
Esaias 53.4.
Christ truly and indeed has borne mine infirmities; Christ truly and indeed
has carried my sorrows; he was wounded for my transgressions, he was broken
for mine iniquities, and by his stripes I am healed: he has taken upon him all
my sins. So that now, though they have been never so many, yet now I
acknowledge not any: I thank my God through Jesus Christ, who in his own
body, and in his own person has discharged, and made payment and
satisfaction for them all.

3 Temptation of Christ.
Thirdly, the Jews sought to tempt Christ with the horror of hell, and eternal
damnation, when they objected unto him, and said: He trusted in God, that he
would deliver him. Let him deliver him, if he will have him, (as if they should
say:) All his hope and trust in God shall be vain and frustrate, God has
forsaken him, and rejected him; he hates and abhors him, and he will cast
him down headlong into hell, and condemn him everlastingly. Whenever then
that Tempter does urge, and trouble thee with such like temptations, take heed
thou move not one foot for all that. Fear not nor be afraid, let not these
temptations trouble thee, which he presents unto thee (though the same be
never so sore and grievous:) but shake them off, and banish out of thy mind
both the fear of sin, of death, and of hell. For they have no right nor
power over thee, if so be only thou cast thine eyes upon Christ; lay hold upon
him, and commit thy self wholly to him, Christ is thine, he has given and
bestowed himself wholly upon thee, and for thee. He has by an inestimable
price redeemed thee, and delivered thee from the tyranny of the devil, and
from eternal damnation. Christ here is become thy life, thy righteousness and
innocence. Only see, that thy heart and mind be not by any tentation
withdrawn nor removed from Christ crucified. If thou cleave and stick fast
unto Christ, thou art safe against all the gates of hell, as being placed and
set upon a most high tower, and upon a most strong and invincible rock. So as
thou may boldly cry out with David a true type of our Savior Christ: Psalm.
16.8.
I have see the Lord always before me: for he is on my right hand, the I
should not be moved. Therefore is my heart glad, and my tongue also rejoices,
and moreover my flesh also shall rest in hope: for thou will not le^^ my soul
in grave, neither (...) thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption. Thou have
showed me the path of life, and thou shall fill me with the joy of thy
countenance. For in thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy right hand
there is pleasure for evermore. By such a faith in Christ thou art made the
child of God, Gal. 3.26.
brother and fellow heir with Christ, and partaker with him of eternal life.
Ioh. 1.12.
This faith justifies the righteous (that is, all even as many as believe in
Christ.) By this faith, thou art made the blessed son of thy heavenly Father;
and as soon as thou departest hence, thou shall enter assuredly into ye
celestial kingdom, Mat. 25.34
which God has prepared for all his elect children from before the beginning
of the world.

Now, if in the midst of thy temptations, thy faith begin for all this to waver
and stagger: If thou perceive that thou do not bear so meekely and
patiently as thou should, the will and pleasure of God thy heavenly Father,
and his hand which is heavy upon thee* And if thou feel and find thy
love to war^ somewhat cold, and thy hope weak and slender; and thereupon
fear, that as ye^ thou art not at agreement with God, but that he is still
displeased with thee This temptation indeed is very sore and grievous, and full
of difficulty. But y^^ (dear brother) think thou with thy self and
consider, how that Christ has sustained for thee a far more invincible and
intolerable tentation, (wherein appeared no help nor comfort, no defense nor
succor) when he cried out: My God, Mat. 27.46
my God, why have thou forsaken me? O horrible and cruel temptation, O how
sharp and bitter, and how cruel and rigorous was that death, which he did
undergo for us, to the end that he might make the way of affliction easy unto
us? Seeing then Christ willingly submitted himself unto these, and plunged
himself in these so horrible and intolerable miseries and distresses, (and
that by the will and appointment of our most loving and heavenly Father) he
knows doubtless, and accepts also our infirmity and weakness, he verily
is full of compassion; and he will in no wise deal strictly with us, but will
pardon and forgive many things unto our weakness. Psalm. 103.14.
For he knows whereof we be made; he remembers that we are but dust, etc.
Psalm. 103.14. Is it not he also who calls all men unto him, saying, Come unto
me all that labor and are heavy laden, Mat. 11.28
and I will ease you? I pray you what greater, or more large and ample, or more
comfortable a promise could there be then this? Many things there be indeed,
which molest and trouble a man (especially in time of sickness) among which what
can more grievously terrify, or more cruelly torment and perplexe the
conscience of a man overwhelmed with his sins, then when he doubts of Gods
mercy, and fears lest God turn away his face from him, and has rejected
and cast him off? when he cannot conceive a steadfast and assured confidence in
Gods mercy and love toward him; but he imagines himself to be cut off and
cast away, as a member that is dry and withered? Here (sweet Savior Jesus
Christ) be thou present at hand with thy aid and succor. For here indeed is
need of comforting and refreshing; lest such violent and horrible waves and
storms as these, ouerwhelme wretched man, and utterly drown him and swallow
him up. But for all this, behold we have no cause either of doubt or fear.
Christ is not vain, nor untrue in his word; he will assuredly in due time make
his promises to appear; he will help, refresh, and comfort us. Whenever
then, thy faith and thy hope is not firm and steadfast as it should be; when
thou see and perceiuest thine heart smitten with fears and terrors; and when
thou find in thy self, that thou beginnest to doubt of Gods mercy, and
that thou have little or no faith at all: forthwith call upon God for help, as
Peter did when he was ready to sink and to be drowned, Math. 14.30. Implore
and crave for mercy from him; Mat. 14.30
and deplore and lament thine unbelief and incredulity before him. Request
and desire his help with earnest prayer and entreaty; and he will ease thee,
refresh and comfort thee: and thereupon thou shall glorify and praise him:
Psalm. 50.15.
God has undertaken to do it, and he will do it. Only see that thou cease
not to call upon him. Beg and crave incessantly with sighs and groans
proceeding from ye very bottom of thy heart; at the hands of alm^ghtie God the
father of all mercies, and the God of all comfort, that he will not turn his
face from thee. Cry out with the Disciples, Luke 17.5.
Lord increase my faith, and with the father of the lunatic child, Lord I
believe, help my unbelief. Mar. 9.24.


A Prayer.
O Lord make haste to help me before I be pressed down with this heavy
burden, and overwhelmed with the same. Thy mercy is above all thy works, (O
most meek, most merciful, and most gracious Father, O Lord God of my
salvation, my refuge and deliverer:) enter not into judgment with thy servant.
Christ is my righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30.
sanctification, and redemption. He it is that for me, and for my sake, has
endured, yea and most willingly has offered himself to die a most sharp and
cruel death. Let these things move thee, and prevail with thee (O Father of
all mercies:) For this Christ thy Son his sake have mercy on me; confirm
and strengthen my heart with true and steadfast faith in thy Son Christ Jesus;
and comfort me with the consolations of thy holy Spirit; that so I may have the
fruition of true and perfect joys in Christ Jesus for ever and ever: Amen.

In this manner laboring and wrestling, and fighting and striving with thine
own weakness, yea and accusing and bewailing unto God thine unbelief and
faintheartednesse; if thou shall withal lay hold on Christ, and shall cleave
and stick fast unto him, with fervent and incessant prayer, craving and
desiring his help; that he substituting himself (as it were) in thy stead,
would supply whatsoever is wanting unto thee: if thou shall do this, then
behold all is well with thee, then there is no danger, thou art safe enough:
for as much as there is little difference between these two, between belief
in Christ, and a fervent or earnest desire to believe. How weak therefore and
faint-hearted soever thou art, let this comfort and relieve thee, that God
wills and commands thee in thy greatest trouble and distress to call upon
him; Psalm. 50.15
and that he has promised, if thou do call upon him, he will hear thee and
help thee. Moreover, as nothing is or can be more justly and rightfully
desired of God, then true faith: so he hears no prayer sooner, nor more
willingly then that which a man powers forth, finding no goodness in
himself, acknowledging his own weakness and wretchedness, deploring and
lamenting his own incredulity and unbelief, and with fervent and earnest
prayers, and often sighs and groans desiring and begging for faith to be given
him. These desires and requests, these sighs and groans, these prayers, this
little faith (though it be never so little or so slender) it is verily a clear
spark of that holy fire, it is ye good seed of God, which can in no wise
spring up in us, but by the effectual working of God: who by his Prophet Esaias
thus speaks concerning Christ, That he will not quench the smoking flax,
Esaias 42.3.
nor bruise the broken reed. Wherefore, see thou believe steadfastly in Christ
thy Savior; or else pray heartily and fervently, that thou may believe:
lamenting in the mean time, and complaining unto God of thine unbelief. If
thou do this, thou need not doubt, but that thou art accepted and reputed
righteous before God, and art the child of God: who not in vain laid upon
Christ his only Son, our weakness and our sins. In the fifth Chapter of S.
Matthew his Gospel, Christ himself says, Math. 5.
That blessed are the poor in spirit; blessed are they that mourn, and
blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness. These things
(Christian brother) are spoken unto thee, and do properly belong to thee. Thou
art humbled and cast down; thou art poor in thine own eyes, and in thine own
conceit; even poor in the graces of Gods spirit; thou mournest and art
grieved, and vexed from thy very heart, for thy leude and wicked life formerly
spent; thou do hunger and thirst for righteousness, desiring to have faith,
whereby thou may be justified and saved. Be of good cheer, and comfort thy
self; thou shall have that thou desire, thou art even now already become
righteous before God. And hereupon thou may boldly (by the example of Saint
Steven, Act. 7.59.
Act. 7. and of Christ himself also, Luke 23.46
Luke 23.) commend thy spirit into the hands of God thy heavenly Father, saying:

A Prayer.
O most merciful and loving Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit, or
rather thy spirit: for as much as thou have and keep it; and finally of thy
free mercy, give unto it everlasting life, through Jesus Christ thy true Son
and our only Lord and Savior: Amen.

CHAP. XIII.
A short Admonition touching the making and ordaining of last Wills and
Testaments.

IT were to be wished, that while men are in sound and perfect health, they
would be careful to set in order all their worldly affairs; and by their wills
and bequests, or otherwise, to dispose of their temporal estate, and of such
earthly blessings as God has lent them (weighing and remembering the frailty
and uncertainty of this present life:) lest, if perhaps they defer this
business unto the last moment and period of their life, they be prevented by
death, or at the least wise hindered by extremity of sickness from
performance of the same. Howbeit, if either through negligence, or upon some
urgent and necessary causes, thou have put off and deferred this business,
until sickness suddenly and unawares seize upon thee: be careful then,
without further delay or protracting of time, to salve thy former error and
negligence by speedy diligence, and readiness in disposing of thy worldly
estate, (be it more or less:) first, unto them who are (according to the
flesh) nearest and dearest unto thee, (as wife, children, and parents, whom God
and nature has commended to thy care and providence;) next, unto thy poor
kinsfolks, being in want and necessity; and after them (according to thy
substance and ability) unto the poor in general, (as for the relief of
poor widows, and fatherless children; of the aged and impotent, the lame and
the blind) and unto other holy and charitable uses. And if the sick party
have got into his hands any money or goods of another man's, or is indebted unto
any man, let him in any case make it known, and provide carefully for the
payment and discharge thereof. Which being done, let him repel and put away
from him all such as shall go about to interrupt and trouble him with worldly
matters. Wherein a great many (both men and women) do above all measure offend:
who seeing and beholding their friend or neighbor now ready to give up the
ghost, and to breath out his soul into the hands of his Creator, are ready to
cast into his mind diverse and sundry scruples and doubts concerning his will,
and other external and worldly matters. Yea, and sometimes they enforce him to
subscribe, and set his hand unto Deeds and other writings against his will,
when as indeed his mind is not to do any such thing; yea, rather in his heart
he abhors and detesteth the importunity of such friends as enforce him
thereunto: by whose means it comes to pass, that he cannot die quietly, nor
depart in peace. These men, howsoever they pretend love and friendship unto the
party dying, and to his issue and posterity: yet indeed can there be nothing
more unfriendly, or more hurtful unto their friend in such a case. And
therefore ought the same by all means to be avoided.

CHAP. XIII.
How to mitigate and assuage the grief which we conceive (many times more the^
is meet) for the death of friends.

FOr men to cast off all measure and moderation in sorrowing for the death and
departure of friends, (though never so near or dear unto them) as it is
affirmed by S. Paul, to be the part, not of Christians, but of Ethnicks and
Heathen men, that have no hope. 1. These. 4.13
1 Thessalonians. 4.13: so is it convicted by this only reason, to be a thing
bootlesse and vain: In that no weeping nor wailing, nor shedding of tears,
(though shed in never so plentiful measure, or continued for never so many
years together) can yet call again from death unto life one man greater or
less. And therefore are all such tears fruitless and unprofitable, vain,
and of no effect. Whereof we have a memorable example in King David; 2. Sam.
12.16.
who so long as the child was sick that was borne of Bathseba, he fasted and
shed plenty of tears, he went into his privy chamber and lay all night on the
earth, entreating the Lord for the life and recovery of the child. But as soon
as he perceived and understood (by the whispering of his servants) that the
child was dead, then he cast away his mourning attire, and changed his raiment,
and washed his face, and anointed himself, and did eat his meat chearefully.
Which when his Servants admired, supposing that he would have sorrowed more, as
soon as he should understand of the death of the child (seeing he had so
punished himself with fasting and weeping, while the child was alive:) and
thereupon asked him the cause and reason why he did so? he made them this
answer: While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept: Verse 22.
for I said, who can tell whether God will have mercy on me that the child may
live? But now he being dead, why should I now fast? can I bring him again any
more? I shall go to him, but he shall not return unto me. In which words
David wisely declares and shows, that we ought not to grieve and lament for
that which cannot be recovered nor called again. And this is that which the
holy Father Saint Cyprian protests in his Sermon of Mortality, that he had
been of ten admonished by divine revelation, yea, and charged also, and
commanded of God that he should publicly advertise all men, and in his
preaching teach and instruct them, not to sorrow or lament overmuch for the
brethren which depart out of this world when God calls them; for that such
sorrowing is hateful and displeasing unto God.

Notwithstanding, that we may not seem hard hearted, or that we loved our friend
that is dead very slenderly, or no better then other common men: it is meet
and requisite, that we bestow upon him some tears, and those proceeding from
the sincere affection of commiseration, and of hearty and unfeigned love toward
him; but yet always measured and guided by the right rule of reason, and of
true piety and godliness. For Christ our Lord and Savior himself, being the
most perfect and absolute pattern of all virtues, did of a loving and tender
affection, weep for Lazarus being dead. Ioh. 11.35.
And his holy and godly sisters, Marie and Martha, are greatly commended for
lamenting the death of their brother. Likewise of those serviceable women which
stood by the Cross, Luke 23.27
and beheld while our blessed Savior suffered such extreme torments, it is not
with out John. 20.11.
cause registered in the Gospel to their especial praise and commendation, yt
they shed tears over him at his death and burial. And concerning the first
Martyr S. Stephen, we read in the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 8.2.
that certain men fearing God, carried him to be buried, and made great
lamentation for him. Whereupon it is, that the Son of Sirach gives advice
and counsel, to bestow some tears upon the dead: but yet in any wise he
wills that the same be immoderate, nor continued over long; Eccl. 22.11
Weep (says he) for the dead, because he has lost the light; but make small
lamentation for him, because he is at rest. And hereunto do tend all those
consolatorie Epistles of that holy Father Saint Jerome; wherein he comfort
the living for the death of their friends hence departed; auouching and
proving, both by authority of holy Scripture, and by strong reasons and
arguments, that they ought not to sorrow or weep immoderately, for them that
are departed hence, and have changed this life, (as that Epistle written to
Heliodor) concerning the death of Nepotian; the Epistle written to Paula,
concerning the death or sleep of her daughter Blesilla; the Epistle to
Tyrasius, concerning the death of his daughter; and the rest of the Epistles of
that holy Father which entreat of the like matter.

CHAP. XV.
An Exhortation to all professors of the name of Christ.

NOw I beseech and entreat all, even as many as are styled and called by the
name of Christians, and I charge and require you, even by the mercies of God,
yt once at the length forsaking your former sins and errors, and the horrible
darkness and blindness in which ye have lived, ye will return unto a better
course of life; with all care and diligence, and with sincere and hearty
devotion, hearing and receiving the word of God, which is able to save your
souls; and continually without intermission knocking at the gates of heaven,
and entreating the heavenly Father through his Son Christ Jesus, that he will
inwardly teach and instruct you, and enlighten your hearts and minds with the
true knowledge of Christ, and of his heavenly will. That denying and renouncing
all ungodly lusts, Tit. 2.12.
ye may live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world: looking
for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of the mighty God, and of our
Savior Jesus Christ; who gave himself for us, yt he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of good
works.

That same light of grace, and of all comfort and consolation, (as the day
star from on high) has visited us, and by the infinite goodness of God, has
in these last times in exceeding great brightness shined forth unto us. We
have manifold examples both in the holy Scriptures, and every day among our
selves; which testify the infinite bounty and mercy, long suffering,
patience and gentleness of our God toward us: whereby we may see, how God
would not that we should be lost, but that we should convert and live; how
soon his just wrath waxes hot against us, and how easily again he is moved
to succeasse from punishing us as we deserved, so soon as we unfeignedly repent
of our sins, and steadfastly intend and purpose an amendme^t of our lives. Let
these things move you (dear brethren) and stir you up to seek the Lord,
Esaias 55.6.
while yet he may be found; to call upon him while he is yet near unto you;
that the wicked forsake his own ways, and the unrighteous his own
imaginations, and return unto the Lord; and he will have mercy on him; and
unto our God, for he is very ready to forgive. Yea let the consideration
hereof encourage you in all your troubles and distresses to fly unto God, and
incessantly to pray unto him, that he will mercifully pardon and forgive you
all your sins, for his dear Sons sake Jesus Christ: and yt he will
vouchsafe to preserve and keep you, to sustain and uphold you, to cherish and
comfort you, and finally to hide and cover you under the shadow of his wings,
and to be present and ready to help and succor you in all your need and
necessity. Thus did David when he saw himself in great distress and danger;
2 Samuel 24.17.
and that for his sin there had fallen by a sore plague in three days space,
seauentie thousand men; straightway he flies unto God, confessing his sin,
and lamentably craving and begging for mercy and forgiveness, crying out:
Ecce, Behold, I have sinned, yea I have done wickedly. And when he had built an
altar in the threshing floor of Aranna the Iebusite, where the Angel had
appeared unto him, he offered burnt offerings and peace offerings thereupon.
And then the Scripture says, verse 25.
That the Lord was appeased toward the land, and the plague ceased from
Israel. By which example of David (dear brethren) confess your sins, pray
unto God for grace, and entreat for mercy and pardon: offering up unto God
that acceptable sacrifice of a penitent and contrite heart, which above all
things is well pleasing unto him: and behold, God will be present and ready to
help you, neither will he at any time fail you, or forsake you.

In like manner, Iona 1.3.
when God sent Jonas unto Nineue, he threatened to destroy that populous and
famous city. But straightway, as soon as at the preaching of Jonah, the
Nineuites had repented, God had compassion on them, he pardoned their sins
and remitted their punishment. Set before you (my brethren) these examples to
be imitated and followed. Distrust not the mercy and goodness of God. Esaias
59.1.
Behold, the Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot save: he both will, and
can save and help, yea relieve and comfort you: so as ye refuse not, neither
despise his grace and goodness so mercifully and abundantly offered: but call
upon him for help and assistance of his grace, Ephesians. 2.4.
who is rich in mercy, Ephesians 2.4 even rich unto all that call upon him,
Romans 10.12.
Romans 10.12.

Now I pray and beseech the Lord Jesus Christ that only true and approved
Physician both of body and soul, that these divine medicines, and spiritual
directions collected* and digested out of the rich storehouse of the holy and
sacred Scriptures, may have a powerful and effectual working in your hearts:
whereby faith may more and more abound and increase, and the love of God, and
of your brethren more and more fervently be inflamed in you. And that abiding
constant and patient in all temptations and tribulations whatsoever (after the
example of the same Christ Jesus,) ye may even unto the last gasp, cleave and
stick fast unto him, in assured hope of eternal life and salvation, through
the same Christ Jesus our alone Savior: To whom with the Father and the holy
Ghost, be all glory and praise for evermore, Amen.

The second part.
A Method or order of comforting the Sick.

CHAP. I.
How to comfort all such, as lie upon the bed of Sickness.

WHereas (dear brother) thou art so sore vexed and grieved with sickness,
know for surety and make certain account, that thou art thus afflicted and
punished, not by chance or fortune, but by the determinate will, purpose, and
permission of almighty God. For whatsoever affliction or calamity befalls
unto the children of God, it is doubtless sent of God, and it comes unto them
wholly and altogether at his appointment, and by his guidance and direction.
For as much as in him we live, Act. 17.
and move, and have our being. Psalm. 100.
It is he that has made us, and not we our selves. And doubt not thou, but
that it is indeed of his good will, and of his love and fatherly affection
toward thee, that he now sends this sickness (whatsoever it be) not to destroy
thee, but to call thee to repentance, and to exercise and stir up thy faith
and confidence in him. For afflictions are undoubted signs of Gods undoubted
love and favor toward us. Whom God loves, him (says Solomon) he corrects
and chastises, Prou. 3.12. Heb. 12.6.
yea he scourges every one, whom he receives. Heb, 12.6. Thy merciful and
heavenly Father most dearly and entirely loving thee, in his wise counsel and
tender affection which he bears unto thee, does by this sickness mortify
and bridle, repress and keep under thy old man, fast bound (as it were) in
ferters and chains, that so thou may more willingly and cheerfully offer up
thy body as a sacrifice to God, and fasten it with Christ upon his Cross. This
sickness of thine is therefore a fatherly chastisement, not sent for thy hurt,
or for thy destruction, but for thy great good, to the end that thereby thou
may be reformed, yea quickened and restored (as it were) to life again. God
thy heavenly Father sees perhaps, thy old Adam (that is, thy corrupt nature)
too lusty and unruly, and too froward and stubborn, to wax wanton and proud,
and unable to bridle and ouersway his lusts; and that while he satisfies too
too much his own desires and affections, he cannot restrain himself, nor
moderate and keep himself in any good measure: and therefore he does shut him
up (as it were) in this prison, and he binds him (as it were) with these
fetters and chains of weakness and sickness, thereby to bridle, repress,
and restrain him, lest he should bring the most noble and precious soul in
danger to be seduced. Flesh and blood does reign still, and bear the sway in
thee more then the Spirit. Here therefore, behold, God is present with thy
Spirit, ayding and strengthening the same, while it wrastleth against the
rebellious and unruly flesh; that having vanquished the same, it may subdue it
and keep it under. It may be, that if now at this time thou were in health and
prosperity, perhaps thy flesh (as it is always inclined to nothing, but
evil) having deceived thee, it would drive thee and cast thee headlong into
many dangerous sins against thy God, whereby the wrath of God should be
provoked, and a way prepared for thy soul unto hell fire and damnation. Now
behold thy heavenly Father, preventing this loss and danger, and providing
better for thee, and for thy welfare and safety; he restrains and holds
back (as it were with a bridle) this flesh of thine, which with tooth and
nail, and with all her strength rebelleth against the Spirit, and having taken
it captive (as it were) he restrains the same, that it tumble not into a
sink of sins; but rather may be subdued, and brought in obedience unto the
Spirit. Now, since this is the good will and pleasure of thy heavenly father,
who does all this in tender love unto thee, and fith that all this tends to
thy profit and welfare: take heed in any wise that thou strive not, nor oppose
thy self against the same. But rather suffer patiently, and pray that thy
heavenly Fathers will may be accomplished and fulfilled; that he will entreat
thee, and deal with thee according to his good pleasure; that thou will and
desire nothing, but that which shall seem good unto him; that all things may
tend to the glory and praise of God; and that his grace may still be present
with thee, to enable thee to bear meekely and patiently the Cross and
affliction that lies upon thee. For patience brings forth experience, and
experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed. Romans 5.4.
Romans 5.4.

Here have thou matter and occasion of learning, and of exercising patience in
all afflictions. First, thou learnest, that God afflicts and punishes thee
with a fatherly affection. And this thou learnest by experience. For unless
thou have experience hereof indeed, how behooueful and profitable it is for a
man wholly to yield and give himself unto God to obey his will (according to
that saying of David: Psalm. 119.
It is good for me that thou have humbled me) thou can not conceive sure and
steadfast hope and confidence in him; having not had proof and experience
before of so fatherly and loving affection of Almighty God toward thee, to
lie hid under his rod and chastisement. But when thou have learned the same
before by experience, and have now already some taste thereof, thy mind is not
daunted, nor overcome with any crosses or afflictions: but thy hope and
confidence is still more and more increased, when as once and again thou have
had experience of the help of God still present with thee. And if God (through
a certain conniuency) suffer thee sometimes to be plunged, and to stick fast
in the mire (as it were) for a time: yet notwithstanding at the length he will
reach out his helping hand, to save and deliver thee. He suffers thee
peradventure to swim a while, yea to be plunged in the water, or in the mire:
but he will not suffer thee in any wise to be drowned. Hereby the^ thou may
make sure account, that he will never forsake thee nor cast thee off, when as
being in danger he has so often preserved thee. In afflictions therefore thou
learnest to conceive, and cherish within thy self a certain and undoubted
hope and confidence in God. So as in far greater troubles and distresses
(when as no help appears from elsewhere) thou may boldly put trust and
confidence in him: (being already taught and assured of his usual and ordinary
manner, in saving and delivering his children.) Thou have learned, that
sicknesses, and other crosses and afflictions, are sent not in anger, but in
fatherly love and kindness: which when thou art persuaded of, (being taught it
by experience) thou do patiently wait for help. Neither art thou discouraged,
but steadfastly hopest, that at the length he will send thee help and
deliverance, howsoever he deferreth long, and hides his face, making as if he
heard not. And so at length thou understand well, and acknowledgest, that
thy grief and sickness is not sent unto thee for thy hurt or perdition, but for
the glory of God, and for thine own eternal welfare and salvation. He that
can thus commit and yield up himself unto God, resting and relying upon his
promises, he shall no wise dye for ever. Which thing Christ himself affirms
with an oath, that we might not doubt of it, saying; Verily, verily, I say unto
you: Ioh. 8.51.
If any man shall keep my word, he shall never see death. And in another place
he says; I am the resurrection and the life. Ioh. 11.25
He that believes in me shall live, though he be dead: and he that lives and
believes in me, shall not dye for ever. These words of thy sweet Savior
Christ (dear brother) be careful to keep diligently, and to have deeply
rooted in thy mind; and therewithal raise up and comfort this wavering mind of
thine. He that believes in me (says Christ) shall not taste of death. Ioh.
5.24.
He that believes in me, has everlasting life. Ioh. 17.3.
And This is everlasting life, that they know thee to be the only true God,
and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. This life everlasting is begun in this
world For whosoever has Christ, he has the true life: for Christ is the true
life. Ioh. 14.6.
Ioh. 14.6. and he is also the truth (as he witnesses in the same place.) And
therefore neither will nor can deceive us: but the promises of God in him, and
through him are (...) and Amen. 2. Cor. 1.20.
2. Corinthians. 1.20.

And to the end that thou may nothing doubt, but that God will abide by his
words and promises, he has by an especial and peculiar covenant and sign
added unto thy body, bound and tied himself (as it were) unto thee. For of an
earnest love and desire of thy salvation (having sent his own Son into the
world, to give up himself unto death for thee) he has made a covenant of
grace with thee through Christ; in whom he has promised, that if thou believe
and be baptized, he will freely give unto thee eternal life; he will never
leave thee nor forsake thee, but will be a Father unto thee, and will crown
thee with his goodness and mercy. Now the sign and seal of his covenant is
thy Bap^isme. Wherefore unto the promises annexed unto this sign it behooves
thee to cleave fast, and to lay sure hold upon the same. For God has given
thee this sign in thy flesh, that thou might nothing doubt of his favor
and mercy promised, and of his faithfulness and goodness toward thee. Romans
6.3.
Thou art baptized (as S. Paul says) into the death of Christ, that his death
may become thy death; and that he might make a full and perfect satisfaction
unto God for thee. Gal. 3.26.
Yea thou have put him on, (as it were) in Baptism (for so says the Apostle
unto the Galathians) that so thou might be wholly in him, and he in thee.
Baptism therefore is such a covenant, and such a figure and sign as
comfort, rejoices, and quieteth thy conscience before God (as Saint Peter
witnesses) assuring thee, 1 Pet. 3.21.
that God will never condemn thee for thy sins, being thoroughly purged and
washed away in the blood of his Son For being justified by faith, Romans 5.1.
thou have peace with God, To. 5.1. A quiet, peaceable, and cheerful
conscience is this true peace. Now thou have received Baptism, as a most
certain sign and seal of this thy justification, and of the remission of all
thy sins: that thou might assuredly believe, that God having mercy and
compassion upon thee for Christ his sake, will save and deliver thee.

Now then, forasmuch as God has a favor unto thee, and will be a Father unto
thee, and consequently will never forsake thee: and forasmuch as thou have so
infallible a sign and testimony thereof, thou ought to commit and give
over, both all thy affairs and thy self also wholly unto him, to obey his
will, and to suffer patiently his hand upon thee (whether it be his will that
thou live or die) praying and desiring that his good will may be done unto his
praise and glory. And it is impossible if thou trust steadfastly in Gods mercy
promised through Christ, and thus dedicate thy self wholly unto him: it is
impossible (I say) that thou should perish or be condemned. Forasmuch as God
has promised, that he will be thy Father, even the same God, who is most true
of his word, yea truth it self; while thou do believe and acknowledge him
so to be, and thereupon hopest and look for all good things from him; he
cannot, but (as a tender Father) take care of thee, and so consequently in good
time save and deliver thee (how hardly soever for the present he may seem to
entreat thee) yea forasmuch as he has promised to be a Father not only unto
thee, but also unto thy seed after thee, and thou steadfastly beleeuest these
his promises: he will without all doubt have a diligent and provident care both
of thee and thine. And therefore may thou well recommend unto him, not only
thy body and soul, but also thy wife and thy children, thy kinsfolk and thy
friends, and briefly all that thou have belonging unto thee. Nothing doubting
but that he will be a true Father unto thy children, a true husband unto thy
wife, and a true friend unto thy kinsfolk and friends. For God has hitherto
used thee in these, and toward these, only as a Steward. And now when he will
have thee to leave the execution of this office and charge, he will doubtless
substitute in thy stead another Steward over them, who shall faithfully and
diligently take care of them. If with full confidence of heart, thou shall hope
and look for this from him, there is no doubt but that he will do it (as I
have said.) Wherefore shake off from thee, and cast out of thy mind al care for
thy friends, and for all thy worldly affairs; and commit the same over unto
God. Be rather careful for thy self, and bethink how to provide for thy
soul, and to resign the same over into the hands of thy Creator and Redeemer.

And now, whereas God has freely for Christ his sake pardoned and forgiven
thee all thy sins: he requires nothing else of thee for this infinite and
inestimable benefit; but that thou in like manner from thy very heart forgive
all those yt have done wrong and injury unto thee. And he promises that he
will forgive unto us our trespasses, so as we shall forgive unto men their
trespasses. Wherefore having from the bottom of thy heart pardoned all wrongs
and offenses (so as thou intendest not ever after to renew, nor call to mind
again the remembrance thereof) pray earnestly and heartily for them that have
any way ^^iured or hurt thee, according to the doctrine and example of Christ
himself. And if thou shall recover of this thy sickness, help them to ye
uttermost of thy power (if they shall stand ^n need of thy help.) Now if thou
have thy mind thus void and free from inward grudge, malice and displeasure,
thou have also an undoubted sign, that God has pardoned thee all thy sins,
and utterly rased them out of his sight. For faith, whereby thy heart is
purged, showing it self, and bringing forth her fruits in thee for the
blessings and benefits of God toward thee, (being infinite in pardoning all
thy sins, which are in number infinite) it cannot but stir thee up in like
manner to forgive thy neighbor, and to do good unto him. Here the fruit of thy
love and charity witnesses unto thee, and puts thee in assurance, that thy
faith is a true and lively faith; when it brings forth good fruit and such
as is unfeigned. This is that which S. Peter means, when he wills us to give
all diligence to make our calling and election sure by our good works; 2 Pet.
1.10
giving us to understand, that those good works are witnesses and tokens that
we are elect and chosen of God, and adopted to be his sons, and consequently to
be heirs of eternal life and salvation.

Howbeit notwithstanding all this, know, that thou can not, neither must thou
in any wise hope or look that God will for the painfulnesse or grieuousnesse
of thy sickness and torment, pardon and forgive thee thy sins. For there is
no other satisfaction, nor other recompense for thy sins, but only ye death
of Christ. In this case God regards nothing else, neither does he accept of
any thing else, but of his beloved Son. He is that Lamb of God which only
takes away the sins of the word. Ioh. 1.29.
1 Ioh. 2.2.
He is a sufficient, perfect, and absolute sacrifice, and oblation for the
sins of the whole world. As for thy pains or sickness, or whatsoever
torments, or afflictions, (be the same never so great or intolerable) they are
not able to make satisfaction and recompense unto God for ye least of thy
sins; much less then can the same deserve salvation: (as Saint Paul
witnesses) I account (says he) that the afflictions of this present time are
not worthy of the glory that shall be showed unto us. Romans 8.18.
No creature either in heaven or in earth; no man nor Angel was able to
papacifie or to mitigate and assuage the wrath and indignation of God the
Father: much less then is this sickness of thine, and this momentanie
affliction able to do it. Yea (that more is) he that must pacify the wrath
and indignation of almighty God, and so reconcile God unto man, it was
necessary that he should be both God and man, being to undertake and deal,
yea, and to make intercession and atonement between God offended and
displeased, and man standing guilty and condemned. Therefore it was
necessary, that the Son of God should be made man, that in his body and in
his flesh he might satisfy the wrath of God his Father by his sufferings for
us, and so save and deliver us from the same: as the Prophet witnesses,
saying; Esa. 53.4.6.8.
He has borne our iniquities, and carried our sorrows. And again, The Lord
has laid upon him the iniquities of us all. And again, For the transgressions
of my people was he plagued. And Saint Peter tells us, 1. Pet. 2.24.
that his own self bare our sins in his body on the Cross, and that by his
stripes we are healed. For thy Lord Christ his sake it is then that thy sins
are forgiven thee, and for no other thing in the whole world for no affliction
nor suffering, though never so hard and sharp. Christ only and alone is our
righteousness, our satisfaction and redemption, out health and salvation. 2.
Cor. 5.21.
Him God made sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made righteous,
yea the righteousness of God in him. Wherefore if thou believe steadfastly,
John 1.12.
thou art now already the child of God: and if thou be the child of God, then
art thou also the heir of God, and coheire together with Christ, Romans 8.17.
(as Saint Paul witnesses, Romans 8.) Now if eternal life be the inheritance of
Gods children, and the gift of God, Romans 6.23.
(as S. Paul calls it) surely thou can not deserve it by any suffering of
pain or sickness. But God will therefore have thee tormented and vexed with
this sickness, that so thy old man might be subdued and overcome, repressed
and kept under, yea mortified and put to death (as it were) that so at length
it may cease to offend. And that will be finally at the last by the death of
the body. And for this cause are we to undergo this death, that our soul may
depart out and enter into eternal bliss. For this death of ours is the gate
unto eternal life. Then and thereby at the length, we are and shall be
delivered from all calamities, miseries, and troubles, and from all errors,
deceits, and suggestions of the Devil. Neither shall we any more be defiled
with the most loathsome filthiness of our sins; neither shall we be seduced
any more, or misled into heresies and errors, nor cast headlong into any
despair or doubting. Then shall be an end of all miseries and adversities, and
of all troubles and dangers. Then resting in the Lord, we shall enjoy
everlasting life, and joys without end. And therefore death is in no wise to
be abhorred nor feared. Nay rather, the same is earnestly to be wished for and
desired; forasmuch as thereby we pass unto everlasting joys. And it is most
true which Saint Paul says: Romans 8.28.
That unto the godly all things work together for good. Since that death it
self (a thing in the sight of the world, of all other most hateful, and most
hideous and horrible) is become unto the faithful most sweet and pleasant,
and most joyful and acceptable. Although our old Adam (that is, this flesh of
ours) does abhor it, and by all means fly from it, yea, and trembles for
fear of it: yet notwithstanding the inward man is ready and cheerful, yea,
glad and willing to undergo it: forasmuch as thereby he sees and knows, that
he is freed and delivered from the mire and filthiness of al his sins and
corruptions, from all pains and griefs, and all cares and troubles; and also
obtains a passage and entrance into everlasting bliss and glory, before the
throne of God, and of the Lamb Christ Jesus: In whose presence is the fullness
of joy, Psalm. 16.11
and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11.

CHAP. II.
How to comfort such as are in apparent danger of Death.

GOod brother, be of good comfort, lift up thy heart, and raise up thy spirit;
for behold, the day of thy redemption and dissolution draws nigh. Thy most
gracious and loving Father (in great mercy toward thee) does now call for thee
out of this wretched and miserable life, to translate and convey thee unto
himself, unto the endless joys of the heavenly life. And therefore now give
over, and wholly commend unto him both thy self and all thine. And let thy will
and his will be all one. Say within thy heart, Thy will be done (o God, my
heavenly Father) and not mine. Cry out unto Christ thy Savior, with the good
thief upon the Cross: Remember me (o Lord) when thou co^mest into thy
kingdom; Luke 23.42.
or rather, now that thou sit and reignest in thy glorious kingdom. Cry
with the Publican, Lord be merciful unto me, Luke 18.13.
a most miserable and wretched sinner. Cry instantly and earnestly with the
woman of Canaan, Mat. 15.22.
O Son of David have mercy on me. And when thou thus criest, doubt not but
Christ will hear thee, and will have mercy upon thee, in pardoning and
forgiving thee all thy sins: And whenever thou shall depart hence, thou
shall assuredly be with him in his kingdom, even in Paradise. Lay hold
therefore upon this thy Christ; stick fast unto him, and commit thy soul unto
him as unto a faithful Creator. 1. Pet. 4.19
With this thy Christ crucified upon the Cross, cry unto God the common Father
of you both, in the words of the Prophet David, Psalm. 31.1.
Psalm. 31. In thee (o Lord) I put my trust; let me never be confounded. Deliver
me in thy righteousness. Bow down thine ear unto me, make haste to deliver
me. Be thou my strong rock and house of defense, that thou may save me. For
thou art my rock, and m^ fortress and strength. Into thy hand I commend my
spirit: for thou have redeemed me, o Lord God of truth. Cry also with David,
Psalm. 18.1.
Psalm. 18. Thou, even thou (o Lord) art my strength and my fortress, my
refuge, and my deliverer, my God and my helper. In thee will I trust, for thou
art my shield, the ^orn also of my salvation and my refuge: unto thee (o Lord)
lift I up my soul; (o God) in thee do I trust; Psalm. 25.1.
Let me not be ashamed nor confounded Lead me and direct me in thy truth: for
thou art the God of my salvation. Remember (o Lord) thy tender mercies, and thy
loving kindness, for they have been for ever. Remember not the sins of my
youth, nor my manifold rebellions (o Lord:) But according to the multitude of
thy mercies, Look upon me for thy goodness (o Lord.) For thy name sake be
merciful unto mine iniquity, (o Lord) for it is great. Turn thy face unto
me, and have mercy upon me. Deliver me, and draw me out of my troubles. Pardon
and forgive me all mine offenses. Keep my soul and deliver me. Let me not be
confounded: for I put my trust in thee. If in this manner thou shall with thy
whole heart call upon God for help, God will assuredly relieve thee in due
time, and will say unto thee, as he did concerning David his servant: Psalm.
91.14.
Because he has trusted in me, therefore will I deliver him: I will therefore
save and defend him, because he has known my name. He has called upon me,
and I will hear him; I will be with him in trouble: I will deliver him, and
after glorify him. Wherefore (dear brother) fight now a good fight, fight
valiantly and courageously, and also constantly and steadfastly, as becomes a
true Christian, and a valiant soldier of Jesus Christ. Take heed in any wise
that thou lose not, nor give over thy standing. Turn not back, for behold,
here is no danger at all. Thou do not fight here alone: but Jesus Christ thy
Lord and King, he is thy guide and Captain in this fight. Him follow, who in
this sharp combat has gone before thee. He as he is thy guide and captain:
so he will be thy defender and deliverer, to defend and deliver thee in this
fight and conflict, from all the enemies of thy soul, and from all troubles
and dangers whatsoever. For he is not as a mortal and earthly king, who
sometimes for want of power, is frustrate of his will and purpose. But he is of
endless and infinite power, able to perform whatsoever he has purposed or
promised. Yea and he it is, that has already for thy sake vanquished and
foiled Satan, death, 1 Cor. 15.
and hell. Death is swallowed up into victory through Christ, who has died for
thee. And therefore everlasting death has no interest nor power over thee.
Christ for thy sake has descended into hell; that he might free and deliver
thee from that horrible and endless darkness. Be strong therefore and of good
courage, and with an undaunted heart and mind now fight that good fight of
faith, 1 Timothy 6.12
laying hold of eternal life, whereunto thou art called, and have professed a
good profession before many witnesses: shake off all fear, for here is no
danger. There is no cause for thee to fear the strictness and severity of
Gods judgment. For behold, Christ Jesus is thy mediator in the sight and
presence of God; he also is thy advocate and intercessor to plead thy cause,
and thine high priest to make atonement unto God for thee. He it is that has
reconciled thee unto God, and that has recovered unto thee and for thee the
love and the good will and favor of his heavenly Father, which by means of
thy sins was utterly lost and alienated from thee. God almighty (in and
through Christ, and for his sake) is now become thy Father, and he entirely
loves thee, and has care of thee as of his child that is most tender and
dear unto him. Now then, forasmuch as he who is so great and mighty a king is
with thee; who can go about to do thee hurt? who shall impugn or oppose and
set himself against thee? Hear what S. Paul says: Romans 8.31.
If God be with us, who can be against us? who spared not his own Son: but
gave him unto death for us all, how shall he not with him give us all things
also? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ who ^ath died; yea rather, who is
risen again; who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request also for
us. Who shall separate us from the love of God? I am persuaded that neither
death nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities nor Powers, nor height nor
depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Seeing then that Christ with all his
goodness and benefits is given unto thee; righteousness also and holiness,
justification and redemption, yea everlasting life and salvation, these are all
freely given and bestowed upon thee (as S. Paul witnesses, 1. Cor. 1. That
Christ is made unto us of God his Father, 1 Cor. 1.30.
both wisdom and righteousness, sanctification and redemption.

See then that thou have thy hope and confidence wholly settled, and firmly and
steadfastly fixed upon this corner stone Christ Jesus. He is a most sound and a
most strong and sure foundation, whereunto thou may safely commit thy self,
and whereupon thou may boldly rely. No tempest (though never so black and
cloudy, or never so hideous and terrible:) no showers or storms whatsoever,
are or shall be able to cast cast down or overthrow this foundation: upon
this thy sweet Savior Christ (I say) let all thy hope and happiness be
founded and built. Cast thy self upon him, and give thy self over wholly
unto him; put thy confidence in him, and cleave fast unto him. And let no
affliction nor temptation pluck thee away from him: (howsoever things seem to
come to pass never so aukwardly or contrary to reason and sense; howsoever
thine own reason shall deem and judge otherwise, or flesh and blood shall
never so much persuade and counsel otherwise; yea howsoever the devil now and
then may suggest unto thee, and whisper into thine ears, or put into thy mind,
that thou art quite undone, and art past all hope; that God cannot but still be
highly displeased with thee, and that thou shall be condemned to be punished in
hell fire (as thou have deserved.) Yet notwithstanding, all these and the like
suggestions, do thou by a steadfast and true faith rely upon thy sweet Savior
Christ Jesus, and stick fast unto him. Heb. 11.1.
For faith is the ground (or expectation) of things, that are hoped for (to
wit, being promised) not of things that are sensible, or conceived by sense:
and it is the evidence of things not seen, (that is a sure and certain
knowledge and proof of the things that appear not. Hebrews 11.1. It stands
thee upon therefore with the holy and faithful Patriarch Abraham, even beside
hope, and above hope, (...) believe under hope. Romans 4.18.
Thy faith and thy hope must set it self to resist all those things, which
either blind reason shall suggest unto thee, (...) that cunning and crafty
^nemie the devil (who lies ^n wait to destroy) shall seek to infuse and put
into thee. Here therefore thou ^^t to learn and observe, 1 Pet. 5.8.
for thy comfort, Gods manner and custom in saving those that are his: whom he
will lift up into heaven, him ^e does commonly first of all bring down to
hell. Whom he will quicken and make alive, him he does first bring down to the
gates of death. Upon whom he will show his greatest mercy and kindness, in
saving and delivering him, him he suffers before to be tempted, and makes as
if he would condemn him. Wherefore even then, when thou feel nothing else,
but present death; when God seems most of all to be angry with thee; when he
seems to be furthest from thee, yea and to have wholly and altogether
forsaken thee, and cast thee off (as one reproved and condemned) even then is
he nearest unto thee, to protect, defend, and deliver thee; then he most of all
loves thee, and then he ^ath greatest care over thee. For in the midst of
trouble and affliction God remembers mercy (as the Prophet in many places
bears witness. Psalm. 30.5.
) His wrath endures but the twinkling of ^n eye: but in his favor is life.
Weeping may abide at night, but joy comes in the morning. Lam. 3.31.
And again, He will not forsake (or be angry) for ever: yea rather, As a
father pi^ieth his own children: so is the Lord merciful to them that fear
him: For he knows whereof we be made; he remembers that we are but dust.
Now, Psalm. 103.13.
the mercy of the Lord is for ever and ever upon them that fear him. The Lord
is gracious and full of compassion, Psalm. 145.8
slow to anger, and of great mercy: yea our God is good unto all, (how much
more to his children? to them that love and fear him?) and his mercy is over
all his works, (as the same Prophet witnesses, Psalm 145.8.) And therefore
closing up the eyes both of thy mind, and also of thy senses, and utterly
casting off the judgment of reason, submit and give over thy self wholly unto
Christ, and take it in good part howsoever he shall deal with thee. Thou must
not esteem and judge of death, or of the horror and pains of death, according
to the judgment of outward sight, or of sense and reason; but according to the
word of God, and the censure and judgment thereof. David says, That Precious
in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. Psalm. 116.15.
And the voice of God himself from heaven cries in the Revelation of S. John.
Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord. Apoc. 14.13
And Christ himself says: John 8.51.
He that believes in me shall not taste of death. Wherefore, if any thing be
presented unto thee, which may seem to turn thee away from Christ: cast the
same wholly out of thy mind. Stick fast unto the word of God, which abides
for ever. Meditate still upon it, and by often repeating the same, imprint it
steadfastly in thy mind. For thou can not indeed ever conceive by the
quickness and sharpness of thine own reason, how all this may be; that thou
should pass thorough death unto the true life; how thou should die and
depart this world by breathing out thy soul; how thy soul should be kept
safe in the Lord, and should abide and rest with him unto the last day; and how
also thy body being putrified and eaten up of worms, and consumed to dust and
ashes, could rise again in the last day of judgment, and come forth in so fresh
and glorious a form and manner. This reason in no wise is able to conceive:
only faith can comprehend it. And therefore still meditate upon the Articles
of thy faith, and diligently weigh and consider in thy mind all the several
parts of the same, with a particular application thereof unto thy self.

CHAP. III.
How the sick party is to be called on and comforted, being ready to give up
the Ghost.

NOw (dear brother) is the time, that thou must fight that good fight, and lay
hold on eternal life. Now therefore fight manfully and courageously, keep thy
standing diligently, and lay hold fast on Christ Jesus, that none take away thy
Crown. Fix steadfastly in thy mind the promises of Christ thy Redeemer. I am
(says he) the resurrection and the life. Ioh. 11.25
He that believes in me shall live, and shall not dye for ever. Christ having
taken our nature upon him (with all those defects and infirmities whereto we
are subject) and dying upon the altar of his Cross, has offered up himself a
full and perfect sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction for all our sins. He
it is, that by his most precious blood, has purged away the sins of all that
truly and unfeignedly believe in him. And this thy Savior Jesus Christ will in
no wise forsake thee. He it is that undoubtedly cares for thee, to save,
protect, and deliver thee. Nothing therefore shall touch thee, nor prevail
against thee to hurt thee. The foundation of God remains sure, having this
seal: 2. Tim. 2.19
The Lord knows who are his. Christ says: My sheep, John 10.27.
hear my voice; and I know them, and they follow me; and I give unto them
eternal life, and they shall never perish: neither shall any be able to take
them out of my hand. My Father that gave them unto me, a greater then all: and
none is able to take them out of my Fathers hand. I and my father are one.
Wherefore (dear brother, beloved in Christ) commend thy soul into the hands
of God thy heavenly Father; who for his Son his sake, doubtless does entirely
love thee, having ransomed and redeemed thee with so great a price, as the
death and bloodshedding of his only son. Cry out therefore confidently with
thy elder brother Christ: O heavenly Father, into thy hands I commend my
spirit, which thou have redeemed with so great a price. Lord Jesus receive my
soul.

Now the Father of all mercies, and the God of all comfort and consolation,
confirm and strengthen thee, conduct and lead thee, and by the ministry of
his holy Angels, transport and carry thee (as they did Lazarus) into the
bosom of Abraham, even into everlasting life; and finally, preserve and keep
thee unto that most joyful resurrection at the last day. Amen.

A SERMON OF MORTALITY,
Written by that famous and blessed Martyr Saint CYPRIAN, Bishop of Carthage.
Wherein he exhorts to a vehement desire of leaving this miserable life.
Declaring withal, and showing, that (whereas the just and unjust dye alike) we
must not think their end to be all one: forasmuch as the righteous are called
away unto endless rest and happiness, and the wicked are violently haled and
carried away to be punished.

Howsoever it be true (dearly beloved brethren) that there appears to be in
many of you a sound mind and a steadfast faith, and an holy and devout will and
desire, which is nothing moved nor daunted at the greatness of this
mortality; but rather (as a firm and ^trong rock) beats back and
ouercometh all the violent and tempestuous assaults of the world: (It self
being assailed and tried, but not vanquished nor overcome with any
temptations:) yet notwithstanding, for as much as I perceive some of the common
sort of people, either through weakness of mind and slendernes of faith, or
through the sweetness of this worldly and temporal life, or through the
tenderness of their sex, or (that which is more) through error and ignorance
of the truth, not to stand so strongly and manfully as they should, nor to show
forth the divine and invincible courage of their hearts and minds: It was a
matter not to be concealed, nor passed over in silence; but that (according to
the measure of our ability) the cowardlinesse and laziness of such nice and
dainty minds ought, by strong force, and by some discourse conceived and
gathered out of the word of our Lord Jesus Christ, to be repressed and subdued;
and that whosoever has already begun to be a man of God, and of Christ, might
be esteemed worthy of God, and of Christ. For whosoever he be (beloved
brethren) that warreth under the ensign of God and of Christ, and being placed
in the heavenly boast and army, is already in hope and expectation of heavenly
things, that man ought to acknowledge and to auow and profess himself to be
such a one, that amidst the stormy tempests and troubles of the world, there be
in us no fear nor doubting. Especially, seeing that the Lord has foretold
that these things should so come to pass; prouidently encouraging, instructing,
and teaching, yea arming, and preparing, confirming, and strengthening his
people, and true members of his Church, unto all patience, and abiding of
things to come: Foretelling and admonishing, that there should be wars and
dearths, and earthquakes, and pestilences in all places. And, lest that the
unlooked for and sudden fear of new and fresh troubles, might happily dismay us;
he has warned us before hand, that in the last times worldly crosses and
afflictions should be more and more increased. Behold the things which were
foretold, are now com to pass. And when the said things which were foretold
do come to pass, then shall follow also whatsoever has been promised (the
Lord himself making unto us this warrantise and assurance, saying: Luke 21.
When ye shall see all these things come to ^asse, know ye, that the kingdom
of God is near.) The kingdom of God (beloved brethren) is now near at hand;
the gladsome tidings and joyful reward of eternal life and salvation, and the
joyful possession of Paradise, which before was lost, is now come in this last
passage and end of the world. Heavenly things do now succeed, and come in place
of earthly things; things of great weight and account in place of things of no
price and value; and things eternal and everlasting, in place of things frail
and transitory. What place then is there here for care and vexation and anguish
of mind? What man amidst these things will or can be fearful and pensive, but
he that is utterly void of faith and hope? It is indeed for him to fear
death, that is unwilling to go unto Christ; and it is for him to be unwilling
to go unto Christ that believes not, how that now already he has begun to
reign with Christ. For it is written, that the just man lives by his faith.
Romans 1.
If thou be made just and righteous, then thou live by faith. If then thou
have faith, and by the same faith do truly and steadfastly trust in God, why
do thou not show thy self as one that shall assuredly be with Christ? and
as one that is secure and assured of the Lords promise? Why do thou not (I
say) with gladness of heart receive and embrace this thy calling unto Christ,
and rejoice that thou have not any more to do with this earth and gravel?
Furthermore, that just man Simeon, Simeon. Luke 2.25.
who was truly just and righteous, and with steadfast faith kept the
commandments of God, when as a revelation was given unto him from God, that he
should not see death before he had seen the Lord Christ, and that Christ being
a little child, was now come with his mother into the Temple; he knew in the
spirit that now Christ was borne (of whom it was foretold him:) whom as soon
as he saw, he knew he should die quickly. And therefore being glad, because of
his death which was now at hand, and being secure and void of care for his
calling hence, (which was not far off) he took the child in his hands, or in
his arms, and praising God, he cried out and said: Lord now let thou thy
servant depart in peace, according to thy word: for mine eyes have seen thy
salvation. Proving undoubtedly, and testifying, that then the servants of God
have peace, and have free and quiet rest, when as being drawn and taken away
from the storms and tempests of this troublesome world, they ariue at the
haven of everlasting rest and safety; when as this death being quite abolished
and put away, they enter into the state of immortality. For that is our peace;
that is our sure rest and tranquillity; that is our constant and steadfast, yea
endless and everlasting safety and security. Moreover, what other thing else
do we in this world, but every day wage battle against the devil? what else
but with continual conflicts fight against him, and withstand and resist his
darts and arrows? We are to encounter with covetousness and worldliness,
Enemies, with whom we are to encounter in this world.
with uncleanness and wantonness, with anger and furiousness, with ambition,
and with pride and haughtiness. We are to wrestle and struggle daily and
continually (yea and that with no small difficulty and danger) against the
sensuality and corruptions of our flesh, and against the allurements and
enticements of the world. The mind of man being compassed about and enclosed
on every side with the trouble and molestation of this base earth and gravel,
is hardly able to resist and withstand every one of these. If covetousness be
put to flight and overthrown, behold, lust and sensuality rises up in place.
If lust and sensuality be repressed, ambition succedeth in their stead. If
ambition be despised and unregarded, then anger and rage whetteth a man and
exasperateth him; pride and vain glory make him to swell, drunkenness
provoke and allureth; envy breaks concord and unity, zeal and emulation
cut off friendship and amity. Thou art moved and enforced to speak evil, or
to backbite and slander, (which God in his law forbids) or thou art
constrained to swear, sometimes falsely, and sometimes vainly (which is a thing
not lawful.) A man's mind suffers every day so many pursuits, and his heart is
vexed and molested with so many dangers. And can it take pleasure to stay any
long time here amidst so many swords? When as rather we should wish and desire
(by the help of death) to hasten more speedily unto Christ; especially when he
has beforehand so instructed and forewarned us, saying: Ioh. 16.20.
Verily, verily, I say unto you: ye shall weep and lament, and the world shall
rejoice: ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. Now, what
man will not make haste to come unto joy? What man would not wish to be free
from sorrow? And when is the time that our sorrow shall be turned into joy? This
the Lord himself declares afterward, saying: verse 22.
I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice and your joy shall no man
take from you. For as much then, as in beholding of Christ there is true and
perfect joy, and that we can have no true and perfect joy, but in beholding
him; what blindness and sottishnes of mind, or rather what madness is it, to
love the tears, and pains and sorrows of this world, that are ready to
torment and oppress us, and not rather to make haste unto the joy that can
never be taken away? Now surely this comes to pass (well beloved brethren)
for want of faith, because there are so few or none that believe, how yt those
things shall assuredly come to pass which God promises, who is faithful and
true, and whose word unto the true believers is constant and firm, eternal
and everlasting. If some grave discreet man, and one that all men did commend
for his honesty and fidelity, should promise thee any thing, thou would
surely give him credit, and would persuade thy self of him, that he will in
no wise beguile thee, nor deceive thee, knowing him to be a man constant and
steadfast, both in his words and deeds. Now behold, God it is, that reasons
the case with thee, and that makes such gracious promises unto thee: and do
thou with an unbelieving heart, like a faithless wretch still waver and stand
in doubt? God promises unto thee, as soon as thou departest out of this
world, immortality and eternal life: and do thou doubt of it? Surely this
is as much, as not to know God at all; this is as much as to displease and
offend the master of al them that believe, Christ Jesus, by the sin of
unbelief; this is as much as for one that is placed in the Church of God, in
ye house of faith, to have no faith at all. How greatly behoouefull and
profitable also is it for us, to depart out of this world, Christ himself the
master and teacher of our salvation, and the author of our welfare, shows
plainly; who when his disciples were sorrowful and grieved, because he said
that he must ere long depart and go away from the^, he spoke unto them in this
wise: If ye had loved me, Ioh. 14.28.
ye would verily rejoice, because I go unto the Father. Hereby declaring and
teaching, that whenever our dear friends who^ we love, depart hence out of
the world, we should rather rejoice then be grieved. Of which thing the blessed
Apostle Saint Paul being mindful. Philip. 1. he lays this down for a
ground, and says: Phil 1.21.
Christ is unto me life, and Death is unto me advantage: accounting it the
greatest gain and advantage unto himself that might be, to be now no longer
bound and held in the snares of the world, to be subject now no longer unto any
sin, or corruption of the flesh: But being now exempted and freed from all
troubles and vexations, and set at liberty out of the venomous laws of the
Devil, (at the call and summons of his Lord and Master Christ) to pass unto
the joys of eternal salvation. But yet for all this, An objection.
it is a matter that still troubles some men; That such weaknesses and
sicknesses do seize upon us Christians, even alike as they do upon other
Heathens. others, as long as (according to the law and condition of our first
birth,) this flesh still remains common? In flesh we are all one like
another, but are severed in spirit.
So long as we are here in this world, we are knit and joined together with
all other men alike, and are all one in flesh, but are severed in spirit. And
therefore, until this corruptible do put on incorruption, and this mortal
body do put on immortality, and that the Spirit bring us unto God our
heavenly Father; whatsoever inconveniences and discommodities there be of the
flesh, the same are common unto us with all mankind. So that, when as (through
some unkind blasts and unseasonable weather) the ground becomes barren and
unfruitful, the famine and dearth ensuing thereupon, makes no difference nor
distinction of any. And when by invasion of enemies any City is taken, all are
spoiled alike, and carried away into captivity. Also when fair bright clouds
put off and drive away the rain some long time, the drought is alike unto all.
And when the hard rocks break in sunder the ship, the shipwreck is without
exception, common alike unto all yt sail therein. And so in like manner, the
pains and soreness of the eyes, the vehement heat of Fevers, and the
crazinesse and feebleness that is in all the members of our bodies, the same
are common unto us as well as others, so long as in this world we carry this
common flesh about us. Nay rather, in as much as upon covenant and condition a
Christian does believe in Christ, he must know and understand, yea, and hold
for surety, that he is to suffer more, and to take more pains in this world,
then others: having to wrestle and to encounter with the assaults of the Devil
more then others are. Of this the Scripture does forewarne and teach us. My
Son, Eccle. 21.2
if thou will come into the service of God, stand fast in righteousness, and
fear, and prepare thy soul unto temptation. Settle thy heart and be patient,
and shrink not away when thou art assailed. And again, Verse 4.5.
Whatsoever comes unto thee, receive it patiently; and be patient in the
change of thine affliction. For as Gold and Silver are tried in the fire: Even
so are men acceptable in the furnace of adversity. Thus it fared with Job, when
as (after the loss of all his goods, and the death of his children) being
grievously afflicted and tormented with botches and sores, and filthy vermin;
notwithstanding he was not overcome, but rather tried and purified in the
furnace of affliction: In so much that in the midst of all his conflicts, and
of all his pains and greefes, showing the patience of his devout and godly
mind, he brake out into these words, and said: Naked came I out of my mothers
womb, Job 1.21.
and naked shall I return to the earth again. The Lord has given, and the
Lord has taken away. As it has pleased the Lord, so it is come to pass.
Blessed be the name of the Lord. And when as his wife called upon him, and
urged him through impatiency and grief, to murmr and complain, and to utter
spiteful words against God, he answered her, saying; Job 2.10.
Thou speak like a foolish woman. For if we receive good things at the hand
of God why should we not tolerate and receive evil? In all these things which
happened unto Job, he offended not with his lips in the sight of the Lord his
God. And therefore does the Lord give this testimony of him, Job 1.8. and 2.3.
saying: Have thou not considered my Servant Job, how there is none like him in
the earth? an upright and a just man, one that truly fears and serves God,
and that receives all things patiently, without complaining or murmuring? This
patience the just and righteous have always had; and this order and course the
Apostles hold, and kept (according to the ordinance of God) in their
adversity; not to murmr nor complain, but whatsoever happened in this
world, patiently and manfully to receive and entertain the same. Whereas the
people of the Jews herein always offended, that they were still murmuring
against God (as the Lord complains, and bears witness of them, saying: Let
their murmurings cease from before me, and they shall not dye. But as for us,
we must not murmr (beloved brethren) in any wise; but we must patiently and
manfully endure whatsoever happens: In as much as it is written, Psalm. 51.
A sacrifice unto God is a troubled spirit, a broken and an humbled heart God
will not despise. In Deuteronomie also, the holy Ghost by Moses gives us
warning, Deuteronomy. 8.
saying: The Lord thy God will humble thee, and lay hunger upon thee, to prove
and know what is in thy heart, whether thou will keep my commandments or not.
And again, The Lord your God does try you, to know if you love the Lord your
God with all your heart, and with all your soul. Genesis 22.
Thus did Abraham please God; who (to obey Gods commandment, and to satisfy
his will and pleasure) was neither afraid to lose his Son, not refused to
execute murder upon his son. Thou that can not be content to lose thy son by
the ordinary course of death, what would thou do if thou should be charged
of God to slay thy Son (as was Abraham?) True faith and fear of God should
make thee ready and prepared for all assaies (be it loss of goods, or be it
daily and cruel torment of all parts of the body, by dangerous and deadly
sicknesses; or be it the mournful and sorrowful departure and taking away of
wife, children, or any other of our dear friends.) Let not these things offend
thee, nor be any lets or impediments unto thee, but let them rather be motives
unto thee, to fight and encounter so much the more manfully. Neither let
christians hereupon be faint hearted and discouraged, or any thing weakened in
faith: but rather in this their encounter, let them show forth their puissance
and courage; since that all the injury and despite of present miseries ought to
be contemned and despised of us, in confidence and assurance of the good things
that are to come. For unless there be a conflict and fight going before, there
can no victory follow after. When as in joining of battle, the victory is
achieved, then is the crown or garland given to the Conquerors. For it is not
but in some great and dangerous tempest, yt the Pilot is known and discerned
what he is. And so is a soldier not tried, but in a sharp and dangerous
war. It is but a nice and vain brag of men, to vant themselves of what they
have done, when there has been no danger at all. But for a man to encounter
manfully in time of trouble and adversity, is the right trial of the truth.
The tree yt is deeply rooted (though the winds blow upon it with never so
great force and violence) yet it is not moved at all: and the ship which is
strongly ioynted (though the waves beat upon it never so fast) yet is it not
pierced through. Also when as the corn is threshed on the floor and winnoed,
the strong and full corns contemn ye winds; when as the light and empty
chafe is violently carried away with every blast. Thus the Apostle Saint Paul
after all his shipwracks and scourgings, and many other grievous torments of
his flesh and of his body, affirms that he was nothing troubled, but rather
that he was made better, in and by his sufferings: so that the more grievous
his afflictions were, the more true and certain were his trials. There was
given unto me (says he) a prick in the flesh, 2 Cor. 12.7.
the messenger of Satan to buffet me, that I should not be exalted above
measure. For which thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from
me. And he said unto me; my grace is sufficient for thee: for my power is made
perfect in weakness. Whenever therefore any weakness and infirmity, or
any raging sickness wastes and destroys on every side, then is our strenght
made perfect; then (if our faith being tried, it does abide and stand firm and
steadfast) it is surely crowned, according as it is written: Eccl. 27.5.
The furnace proves the potters vessel: so does temptation try men's
thoughts. Furthermore, this difference there is between us and others that know
not God; that whereas they in their afflictions and troubles do murmr and
complain: no afflictions nor troubles whatsoever, do turn us away from ye
truth of our faith, and courage; but they do rather confirm and strengthen us
in the midst of grief and sorrow. Whereas we see now in some the strength of
their body drawn away through fluxes and looseness of the belly; in others a
certain fire engendered in the soreness of the jaws, which inwardly boileth;
the bowels and entrals, in others quaking and trembling through continual
vomiting; or their eyes through abundance of blood to be inflamed; some to have
their feet and other parts and members of the body that are corrupt (for
fear of infecting the rest of the body) to be cut off; and that by reason of
feeblenes, proceeding of some hurt of the body, the going is weakened, or the
hearing is stopped, or the sight is darkened: all this is good for us, and
profitable for the trial of our faith. For to encounter by the puissance of a
constant and steadfast mind against so manifold assaults of destruction and of
death, what great valor and magnanimity is it? and what an height of glory
amidst the ruins of mankind, to stand upright, and not to lie prostrate and
overthrown with them, who have no hope nor confidence in the Lord? How ought
we not rather to rejoice, and gladly to receive and embrace the benefit of the
time: in that we (while we steadfastly show forth our faith, and by suffering
grief and trouble patiently, go on forward unto Christ by that straight way
which he has set down unto us) we receive (even by his own sentence and
judgment) the end of our faith and confidence, even the reward of eternal
life? To whom death is terrible.
Let him indeed then fear to die, who being not borne again of water and of
the Spirit, is delivered up to ye bondage and thraldom of hell fire. Let him
fear to die, that is not reckoned with those, who shall be partakers of the
cross and passion of Christ. Let him fear to die who shall pass from this
death unto ye second death. Let him fear to die, who as soon as he departs
out of this world, shall be tormented in flames everlasting, with pains which
never shall have end. Let him fear to die, who has this only benefit by
longer tarrying here, yt in the mean time his torment and sorrow is a little
differred. Many of our friends in this time of mortality do deceasse and
depart hence, that is, many of our friends are released and delivered out of
this wicked world. This death and mortality, as it is a plague and punishment
unto Jews and Pagans, and other enemies of Christ; so to the servants of God
it is a comfortable departure, and behouefull for their welfare and salvation.
Whereas then (without any difference of mankind) the righteous and the wicked
both die alike: we must not think that good men and bad men have all one end.
For behold, the righteous are called hence unto ease and rest; and the wicked
are haled and carried away unto endless punishment and torment. The faithful
are ye more speedily received and taken into sure and safe keeping; and the
faithless and unbelievers the sooner delivered over to be punished. How
improuident and unadvised then are we? (beloved brethren,) and how unthankful
for Gods benefits, in not acknowledging nor considering what a good turn here
is done unto us? Behold how virgins depart in peace, and out of danger,
together with all their glory, not fearing the threats of Antichrist when he
comes, nor yet to be corrupted by the stews and brothelhouses. Little
children escape the danger of that slipperie age of theirs, and do happily
attain unto the reward of their integrity and innocence. The delicate and
dainty dame does not now fear nor feel any torments; having gained her
freedom from fear and hazard of persecution, and of the stroke and torment of
the hangman and executioner, by the speediness of her death. Further also, by
the fear of their mortality and of their short abiding here, cold and
lukewarm Christians are more inflamed, and are made more fervent and zealous;
dissolute persons are restrained, the sluggish and slothful are awakened and
pricked forward, straglers and such as have gone astray, are compelled to
return back again; heathens and Pagans are made to believe: the people of
God, which has been faithful of old, are called unto rest; and a fresh and
more plentiful band and troop with greater strength and courage is gathered
together, being ready to fight without fear of death, whenever the battle
should be; seeing they come so readily and chearefully to fight and encounter
at the time of their death. Again moreover, what say you unto this? (beloved
brethren) what a thing is it? how pertinent and ^ow needful and necessary? That
this death and pestilence, which seems to be so mortal and deadly, tries
the righteousness of every man what it is, and searches out and examineth the
minds and dispositions of men, whether the whole and sound will be ready to
provide and care for them that are sick and weak? whether kinsfolks and
near friends have any good love and sincere affection one to the other?
Whether masters have any pity or compassion on their sick servants? Whether
Physicians will forsake and give over their Patients or no, being sick and
earnestly craving their help? Whether insolent and outragigious persons will
repress and lay aside their rage and violence? Whether greedy covetous men
will (at the least through fear of death) be drawn and moved to quench and
abate the heat of their outrageous avarice, which otherwise is never
sati^fied? whether ye proud and haughty will bow and ^end? whether wicked and
obstinate persons will modera e and assuage their rashness and presumption?
and whether rich men when they see their dear friends eye (as their w^^es or
children, or near kinsfolk) and being themselves like to dye without heirs,
will be mo^ed thereby to distribute and give more liberally to ye re^eefe of
the poor? Yea, admit yt this death and mortality shall bring no further
benefit; yet has it done this great good turn unto us Christians, unto us
that are ye true servants of God: that we have now begun willingly to desire
martyrdom, whilst we learn not to fear death. These things then are but
exercises unto us, not dolours and mournful funerals; they bring unto the mind
the glory and renown of fortitude and courage, and by the contempt of death,
they prepare us, and make us fit and ready for a crown. But perhaps some man
will here object and say: full courage to endure and suffer whatsoever; I am now
deprived of my martirdom, while I am prevented by death. and perceiving thee to
have such strength and courage in readiness to suffer, will assuredly
recompense and reward thee for it. Had Cain when he offered up his gift and
oblation unto God, at that time killed his brother? No^ yet notwithstanding,
the murder that he had conceived in his mind God saw beforehand, and thereupon
reproved and condemned the same. So as his wicked and mischievous conceit and
imagination, was in Gods providence foreseen and known. Even so also is it in
the true servants of God, which have a purpose and will to confess Christ, and
which conceive martyrdom in their hearts and minds: the very will and
affection being given and inclined to goodness, is crowned of God in his
judgment. It is one thing for the mind and will to want or to be without
martyrdom; and another thing for martyrdom to want or to be without the mind
and will. Look after what manner God does find thee when he calls for thee,
As a man i^ found, so shall ^e be judged.
after such manner likewise will he judge thee: for as much as he himself
witnesses, saying: Apoc. 2.23.
All Churches shall know that I am he who searches the reins and the heart.
Neither indeed does God require or take pleasure in your blood, but in your
faith. For neither Abraham nor Isaac, nor Jacob, were slain and put to death;
and yet notwithstanding they being honored with the reward and benefit of faith
and righteousness, deserved to be reckoned the chief and principal among the
Patriarchs: unto whose fellowship and society, whosoever is found faithful and
righteous, laudable and praise worthy, shall assuredly be gathered. We must
remember that we are to do not our own will, but Gods will, according to that
which God has willed us daily to pray. Now, how preposterous, and how perverse
a thing is it, and contrary to reason, that (whereas we desire and pray that God
his will may be done) we should not straightway when God calls, and sends
for us out of this world, readily submit our selves unto the power and
government of his will? In words we rest and rely hereupon, but yet indeed do
struggle and strive against it: and like stubborn servants are unwillingly,
and with grief drawn into the presence of our Lord and Master, departing
hence, as being thereunto bound by necessity, not through any readiness of
will: and we desire to be honored of him with rewards in heaven, unto whom we
come by constraint, and against our will. To what purpose the^ do we pray and
desire yt Gods heavenly kingdom may come if this earthly bondage do so much
please and delight us? Why do we with often redoubled prayers beg and crave,
that God will hasten his kingdom, and make speed to admit us thereinto, if our
wishes and desires be greater and more earnest to serve the Devil here, then
to reign with Christ there? A vision is here reported by the Author which I
thought good to omit.
How often also has it been revealed unto us (the least and meanest of
others) and how many times has God vouchsafed to give open and manifest
charge, that I should make daily protestation, and publicly declare, that our
brethren are in no wise to be lamented, being (at Gods call and appointment)
freed and set at liberty out of this world? knowing that they are not lost and
forgone, but are sent before; that departing hence they do but tread the way
before us, and that (as travelers and passengers) they should be wished for
and desired of us, but not lamented. Neither should we take unto us black
mourning weeds here, when as they have already received white robes and
garments there. And withal, that we should not give occasion unto the heathens
and Pagans, justly to reprove, and worthily to reprehend us, for that we
sorrow and mourn for those, as utterly lost and perished, whom we affirm
notwithstanding to live with God: and that by the testimony of our own heart
and conscience we reject and disalow the faith, which in word and voice we
declare and profess. We are betrayers of our hope, confidence, and of our
faith and holy profession. All that we say, seems to be but in dissimulation,
and to be but feined and counterfeit. It avails nothing at all to talk of
grace and virtue, and in our deeds to destroy the truth and verity. Lastly, the
Apostle Saint Paul misliketh those, yea, and he rebukes and blames them that
are too much grieved for the death and departure of their friends, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
1 Thessalonians 4.
I would not (brethren) have you ignorant (says he) concerning them that
sleep: that ye sorrow not as others do which have no hope. For if we believe
that Jesus died and rose again, even so also them that sleep in Christ shall
God bring with him. Where mark how he says, that it is for such to be sorry
for the death and departure of their friends, who are void of hope. But as for
us, which live in hope and by hope, we who have hope in God, and confidently
believe that Christ has suffered for us, and is risen again, so long as we
abide and continue in Christ, and rise in him and through him, why either are
we our selue, so unwilling to depart hence out of this present world? or why
do we grieve and lament for our friends when they depart, as if they were lost
and perished? especially when as Christ himself our Lord and God admonishes
us, Ioh. 11.
saying: I am the resurrection and the life: He that believes in me, though
he were dead, yet shall he live; and whosoever lives and believes in me,
shall not dye for ever? If we believe in Christ, let us have trust and
confidence in his words and promises, and we shall not dye for ever; and let us
with joyful security go unto Christ, with whom we shall live and reign for
evermore. And whereas in the mean while we die (as concerning our bodies,) we
do but pass by death unto immortality. Neither indeed can everlasting life
succeed and come in place, unless it fall out unto us to depart hence. It is
then not a doath, but a passage, and after this temporal race and voyage ended,
a passing unto things eternal. Now, what man would not make haste to have and
enjoy better things? who would not wish to be changed and renewed, and
fashioned after the image and likeness of Christ? and to come (as soon as he
can) to enjoy the honor and dignity of that heavenly reward and benefit? Since
that the Apostle Saint Paul plainly pronounces, Phil. 3.20.
saying: Our conversation is in heaven; from whence also we look for the Lord
Jesus Christ, who shall transform and change our vile body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body. And that we shall be such, our Savior
Christ also promises, when as he prays unto the Father for us, that we may
be with him, and may live together with him in the eternal mansions, and
rejoice together in his heavenly kingdom. Ioh. 17.24.
Father (says he) I will, that they whom thou haste given me, be with me, even
where I am; that they may behold my glory, which thou have given me from
before the foundations of the world. He that is going to Christ his mansion,
and to the brightness and glory of his heavenly kingdom, ought not to wail
and mourn, but rather (according to the promise of our Lord, and according to
the stablenesse and steadfastness of his truth) to rejoice for his departure,
and for his translating and removing hence. Thus we find that Enoch was
translated, in as much as he pleased God. For so the holy Scripture of God
witnesses of him in ye book of Genesis, saying: And Enoch pleased God, Genesis
5.24.
(or walked with God) and he was no more found; for God translated him, or
took him away. This it was for him to please God, and to walk before him,
even to have this honor, to be translated and taken away from the danger and
infection of this present world; And this is yt which the wise man teaches us,
that they who please God are more speedily taken away hence, and sooner
released; lest while they abide and continue ouerlong in this world, they
should be corrupted and defiled with worldly affairs. Wisd. 4.11.14.
He was taken away (says he) lest wickedness should alter his understanding:
for his soul was pleasing unto God: therefore he hastened to take him away
from the midst of iniquity. So likewise in the Psalms, David having his soul
devoted and dedicated unto God, with spiritual confidence and boldness he
makes haste to go unto the Lord, as it is written of him, Psalm. 84.1. Psalm.
84.1.
O how amiable are thy dwellings (thou Lord of hoasts) my soul longs and
makes haste unto the courts of the Lord! So then, it is for him alone to be
desirous to abide long in this world, that places his delight and happiness
in the world, and for him whom this flattering and deceitful world tickleth,
and provoke with the allurements and enticements of carnal and worldly
pleasures. Moreover, whereas the world hates every one that is truly a
Christian; what meanest thou to love him, that thus hates thee? Why rather
do thou not follow after Christ, who has redeemed thee, and who still
continually loves thee? Hereupon it is, that S. John in his first Epistle
proclaims, and cries out earnestly, exhorting that we should not love the
world, in following after fleshly lusts and desires. Love not the world (says
he) neither the things that are in the world If any man love the world, 1 Ioh.
2.15.
the love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the world (as the
lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life) is not of the
Father, but is of the world. And the world passes away, and the lusts thereof:
but he that shall do the will of God, abides for ever, as God abides for
ever. Now therefore (dear brethren) let us with upright hearts and minds, with
steadfast faith and valiant courage be evermore in readiness to submit our
selves wholly to the will of God: and (casting off all fear of death) let us
meditate and think upon immortality, which is to follow after. Let us declare
and show, that this is the thing which we believe and look for, in that we
neither lament ye death of our friends (be they never so dear unto us,) and
also whenever the day and hour comes of our dissolution, and of our calling
hence away, we are ready to come willingly and without delay when God calls
for us. Which thing as the servants of God are to do at all times: so the same
ought much rather to be done now, that the world seems to be almost wasted
and spent, and also environed and beset with tempests of mischiefs and
troubles: that we (seeing and beholding so great and grievous miseries and
calamities already begun; and knowing that far greater are at hand, and like
to come ere it be long) should account it the greatest advantage that may be,
with speed to depart hence. 2 Pithie similitudes.
If the walls of the house where Behold, The world now bending and ready to
fall.
the world is now bending and declining, and even ready to fall; yea it does
openly proclaim and bear witness of his utter ruin and destruction, not so
much by the antiquity or oldnesse, as by the conclusion and by the
accomplishment and end of all things, which is now near at hand. And do
thou not thank God and rejoice in thine own behalf, that being taken away by
a more speedy death, thou art freeed from the ruins and shipwracks and
plagues that are now at hand? We must consider (beloved brethren) and ever now
and then remember and have in mind, that we have renounced and forsaken the
world; and that now in the mean time we live here as strangers and forreiners.
O let us then embrace and receive gladly the day that assigns and appoints
every one to their habitation and mansion place, where they may still abide and
dwell: which also (after we are taken hence away, and set free from the snares
and setters of this world) does restore us and bring us again into Paradise,
and into the kingdom of heaven. What man being in a strange country and far
from home, would not hasten to return into his own country again? What man
making haste to fail unto his friends (as his parents, or his wife and
children) would not wish with great desire to have a prosperous wind to carry
him, that so he might with as much speed as may be, behold and embrace them,
who are so near and dear unto him? Our country we reckon and make certain
account to be Paradise, (that is, the kingdom of heaven) and for our parents,
we have the holy and blessed Patriarchs. Why then do we not run and make
haste, that we may behold and see our country, and may salute our parents? A
great number of our loving and dear friends expect and look for us there (as
our parents, our brethren, and our children.) A populous and a large multitude
there is that long for us, and desire our company; being already secure, and
f^llie assured of their own immortality, and further desirous earnestly of our
welfare and safety. To come to the beholding and embracing of these, what
great joy and rejoicing must it needs be in general, both unto them and to us?
What manner of pleasure and comfort is there in the kingdom of heaven, without
fear of dying any more, and with eternity of living everlastingly, time
without end? How endless and exceeding great shall be the felicity and
happiness? There is the glorious company of the Apostles. There is all the
whole assembly of the Prophets, triumphing and rejoicing together. There is an
innumerable multitude of Martyrs crowned for the conquest of their conflicts
and sufferings. There are the virgins triumphing, who by the force and
strength of continency subdued the lust and concupiscence of the flesh, and of
the body. There are merciful men recompensed and rewarded, such as have
wrought the works of righteousness, by feeding and sustaining the needy, and
by giving liberally unto the poor; and finally, all they who keeping the Lords
Commandments, have translated and changed their earthly riches and
patrimonies into heavenly treasures. Unto these (beloved brethren) let us
hasten to go with greedy and earnest desire, that we may be with them as soon
as possible. And let us wish and desire speedily to come unto Christ. Now I
pray and beseech God that he will behold and consider this our meditation; and
the Lord Jesus Christ look upon this purpose of our heart, and of our faith and
belief: to give unto them greater reward of his glory, whose affection and
love has bin greater, and more abundant toward him, Amen.

A Prayer for the Sick.
O Almighty and eternal Lord God, and our most gracious and merciful Father
in Jesus Christ. Whereas among thy manifold corrections and chastisements,
whereby thou do inuit and call us, yea, and provoke and stir us up to come
unto thee, thine usual and wonted manner, is by sundry and manifold sicknesses
and diseases, to bridle and keep under this flesh of ours, to remove far
away from us our natural security, and to put us in mind both of our wicked
life past (together with the end thereof,) and of our death and mortality,
whereof we are forewarned by the griefs and pains which we suffer (as
forerunners of the same,) and finally of the last day of judgment, and of life
everlasting, which shall follow thereupon, and shall be continued
everlastingly, unto the glory and happiness of the good and godly; and
contrariwise, unto the just condemnation, and utter confusion of the wicked and
ungodly; the remembrance whereof, flesh and blood (being left unto it self)
will in no wise admit. And for as much as we find this our neighbor and
brother cast down upon the bed of his sickness, and grievously chastised with
the rod of thy correction, having a true and lively feeling of his sins, and a
representatio^ of death before his eyes: hereupon (o Lord) we miserable and
wretched sinners, (in respect of our natural condition) waiting and looking
for daily the like hour of adversity and sickness, we presume to come unto
thee in the name and mediation of Christ Jesus; praying and beseeching thee,
(together with this our brother, and in his behalf) that thou will in no wise
enter into judgment with him, neither deal extremely with him, according to
his deserts, and that for Jesus Christ his sake our Lord and Savior, who has
purged and cleansed both his and all our sins, and made full satisfaction for
them upon his Cross. But rather (O Lord) since thou have ransomed him with so
great a price; give him grace, and also strength and courage, whereby he may
quietly receive, and patiently suffer this thy fatherly visitation and
chastisement, and with all obedience, willingly and readily submit himself
unto thy good pleasure. Send him help in all his troubles, and be thou unto him
a defense and fortress against this present danger. Especially (O Lord) at
what time his conscience shall accuse him, and his inward, unknown, and secret
sins shall stand up against him: oppose then, and set thou for his defense,
the most bitter torments, and voluntary sacrifice of Christ thy dear Son;
who has borne all our iniquities and infirmities, and suffered the punishment
due unto us: Being made sin for us, while he dyed for our sins, (purging and
washing them clean away, in, and by his most precious blood) and who also
rising again from death, is become our righteousness and perfect redemption.
Grant we beseech thee (gracious Father) that by faith he may feel the force
and the power, and virtue of these good blessings. Being in this great anguish,
distress and trouble, let him have certain proof and experience of thy
present aid and succor: and at this present, let him have a sure and certain
taste of the fruit of all thy gifts and graces, and of all thy mercies and
benefits in Christ Jesus. Make him with earnest desire, with steadfast assurance
and faith unfeigned, to receive so great a treasure of happiness, (to wit, the
remission of all his sins thorough Christ Jesus, and for his sake) which by
the ministry of the word, and by the participation of the Sacraments has
heretofore been exhibited and offered unto him: that so it may be a comfort, a
fortress, and sure refuge against the fear and trouble of his accusing
conscience, and against all the subtle sleights and assaults of the Devil. Yea
let ye same his faith be unto him an armor of proof, whereby he may repel and
beat back all the fiery darts of the wicked, and so may safely pass even
through death unto life; which having once attained, he may enjoy the perfect
fruition thereof for evermore. We therefore wholly commend him unto thee (O
heavenly Father,) and inasmuch as he is so grievously sick and diseased, be
thou his Physician to cure and heal him. Forasmuch as he is weak and feeble,
confirm thou and strengthen him. Inasmuch as he is destitute and void of
worldly help, send aid (we beseech thee) and in due time relieve and succor
him. Forasmuch as he lies thus dejected and cast down, raise thou him up
again. Forasmuch as he is thus wounded, bind thou up his wounds. Forasmuch as
he is so fearful and timorous, give him O Lord, boldness and courage.
Forasmuch as he acknowledges his manifold sins and corruptions, wash him and
cleanse him from them all, in the blood of thy Son Christ Jesus, that
immaculate Lamb. Yea for as much as thou know all things whereof he stands
in need, and (according to thy good pleasure can bestow the same; satisfy
(we beseech thee, O gracious Father) his lawful and godly desires; satisfy his
inward hunger and thirst; yea satisfy him him abundantly with thy truth, and
with thy salvation. Receive and embrace him (for he flies only unto thee for
succor.) Accept him therefore, and make him constant and steadfast in all
things to obey, and to do thy will. Finally, we pray thee of thine infinite
goodness and mercy, to pardon and forgive all those sins, whereby he has
provoked against himself thy fierce wrath and displeasure. In stead of death,
and after death, grant unto him life, even life everlasting; that he may for
ever live with thee in glory. And if thou think it better and more expedient
for him, that he abide yet longer in this mortality; either for the benefit of
others, and for the use and service of the Church, or else for his own behalf
and benefit, that he may more nearely be conformed and made like unto the
example and image of thy Son Christ Jesus: restore unto him (merciful and
gracious Lord) his former health and strength; and with health and strength,
increase in him every day more and more the gifts and graces of thy holy
Spirit. Howbeit thy will be done always, and in all things, which cannot but
evermore be for the best. All these things grant unto us (we beseech thee most
gracious and merciful Father) and to this our feeble and distressed neighbor
and brother, for thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ his sake, who is our only
helper and redeemer; for his sake (who for the comfort of sinners) translated
(by the ministry of his blessed Angels) the thief on the cross into
Paradise, and the soul of Lazarus into Abraham's bosom; even for his sake who
sits at thy right hand of power and glory to be our Advocate, and to make
intercession for us; who also lives and reigns together with thine own
majesty, in the unity of the holy Ghost, ever one God world without end, Amen.

A Prayer to be said by the Sick party.
LOrd Jesus, thou yt art the health of al men living, and the life everlasting
of all that in thy true faith depart out of this wretched and transitory
world; I submit, and wholly give over my self unto thy most blessed will:
(whether it pl^a^e thee, that this silly soul of mine shall abide in this
house and tabernacle of my body, yet for some longer time to do thee service;
or whether thy will be, that I shall shortly depart hence) being certainly
assured, that the same can in no wise perish, which is committed and delivered
over into thy merciful hands. O Lord, I am most ready and willing to lay
down this frail and corruptible flesh, in certain hope of the resurrection
thereof at the last day; when it shall be restored unto me again much more
glorious and happy. In the mean time, confirm and strengthen my soul, (I
beseech thee) with thy grace and holy Spirit, against all temptations, and
against all assaults of Satan. Gird and compass me about with the shield of
thy mercy, as thou did in times past thy holy Saints and Martyrs, making
them thereby strong and invincible against all torments and deaths (though
never so cruel, or so fearful and horrible.) I see that there is no help in
my self (o Lord) but all my help and hope, my trust and confidence is in
thine unspeakable goodness and mercy. I have no deserts nor good works (o
Lord) that I can bring or allege before thee. But of misdeeds (alas) I see
many and infinite, as the sands of the Sea, which having passed and gone over
my head, are as a grievous burden too too heavy for me to bear. But yet
through thy precious death and bloudshedding, I believe that they are all quite
purged, and washed clean away. And through thy most perfect righteousness and
obedience imputed unto me, I trust and am assured that I shall be, yea and am
already registered and received into the number of thy righteous Saints and
servants. It was for me and for my sake, that thou wast borne into the world,
and wast subject unto all the miseries and infirmities of this life. Thou did
hunger and thirst for my sake; thou did teach and preach, and work many
strange wonders and miracles for my sake, thou did fast and pray for me, and
for my sake. For my sake it was that thou did so many good deeds, while thou
liuedst and did converse amongst men; for my sake did thou suffer so many
bitter pains and torments; yea and gave thy precious body and soul unto
death upon the cross for my sake. Now let all these things (sweet savior
Jesus Christ) be available and profitable unto me thy poor servant, who have
willingly performed all these things for me; and have given and bestowed thy
self wholly upon me and for me. Let thy blood cleanse and wash away the
filthiness of my sins; let thy righteousness hide and cover my
unrighteousness; and let thy merits stand for me before thy tribunal seat of
judgment. And as my sickness and pain increases: so increase (o Lord) in me
thy good gifts and graces, both of faith, and of patience, and of constancy
and perseverance; yt my faith and confidence may neither waver nor stagger, nor
my love toward thee be abated, nor my humane weakness be dejected and cast
down by fear of death. But after that death has seized upon, and closed up
the eyes of my body, the eyes of my mind may not swe^ue, nor turn aside from
thee. And when it has taken away the use of my tongue, yet let my heart
without ceassing cry unto thee: Lord into thy hands I commend my spirit, (or
rather thy spirit) for thou have dearly bought it and redeemed it, even with
thy most precious blood. Sweet Savior Jesus Christ, receive my soul. Save
and keep me, protect and defend me under the shadow of thy wings, that I
sleep not in death. Save and deliver me even in death, from the power of
death. In thee (o Lord my God) do I put my trust, let me not be confounded.
Thou art my only Lord and Savior; leave me not, neither forsake me (o God of
my salvation.) But be thou still present with me, to sustain and uphold me, to
refresh and comfort me, and finally (at the time which thou have appointed) to
convey my soul into thy heavenly kingdom, which thou have purchased and
prepared for me before the beginning of the world. Even so come Lord Jesus,
Amen. Amen.

A prayer for the Sick being ready to give up the Ghost.
LOrd Jesus Christ, thou which art ye resurrection and the life, in whom
whosoever believes, shall not die for ever, look down from heaven, even from
thy Sanctuary and holy habitation. Behold, visit and relieve this thy
servant. Correct him not in thine anger, neither chasten him in thy
displeasure: but according to the multitude of thy mercies, look upon him (we
beseech thee) with a fatherly affection. Restore him (if it be thy gracious
will and pleasure) unto his former health and strength, that so he may live to
glorify thy name. Or if it stand with thy will otherwise to deal with him,
even by this present sickness to call him home unto thine own self, out of
this vale of wretchedness and misery: give unto him constancy to endure
faithful unto the end, and patience to suffer quietly and meekely thy rod and
fatherly correction. His flesh (o Lord) is weak and frail; assist him with
thy grace, and strengthen his weakness by the mighty power of thy holy
Spirit. His spiritual enemies are many; and the craft and malice of Satan
never wanting (especially in the hour of death, when the body is most weak)
to daunt and affright (if it be possible) the souls of thy servants, that so
he might destroy the soul together with the body. Cover him therefore (dear
Father) under the shadow of thy wings, against all the assaults of the flesh,
the world, and the devil; that neither through the infirmity and weakness
of the flesh, nor through the grieuousnesse and painfulness of his sickness,
nor the love and desire of this world, nor the multitude of his sins, nor the
malice of Satan, nor by any other means he be drawn away from his love
toward thee, and his assured trust and confidence in thee We confess (o Lord)
that there is in himself (as in our selves) no power nor strength to help at
all, being borne in sin, and conceived in iniquity; whereunto also have been
added many actual sins and transgressions, both in thought, word, and deed,
whereby he has provoked thy just wrath and indignation. In whom then shall he
trust? and from whom shall he look for help, but only in thee, and from
thee, which art the Savior of all that put their trust in thee? Thou did
vouchsafe for his sake to be borne into the world, and to humble thy self to
the state of a servant; to suffer all the miseries and infirmities of this life
for his sake; to sustain and bear all manner of reproaches and injuries for
his sake; and finally, thou gave thy most precious body to die, and thy
blood to be shed upon the cross for his sake. Now let all these things profit
him, we beseech thee (most merciful Savior.) Let thy most precious blood wash
away the multitude of his sins; let that pure and unspotted garment of thine
obedience and righteousness, hide and cover his unrighteousness; let thy
grace and power evermore defend and succor him; and let the sweet comfort of
thy Spirit never depart from him, until thou have called him out of this vale
of misery, into ye blessed inheritance purchased for him, where he may rest
for ever with Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob, and all the Saints of God. Hear
us, we beseech thee, (most gracious and merciful Savior) save thy servant
that puts his whole trust in thee. Let thy mighty hand and outstretched
arm be still his defense. Let thy holy Spirit confirm and strengthen him; and
let thy loving kindness and mercte still abide and continue with him, and be
his stay and comfort always unto the end, and in the end, and for evermore.
Amen.

FINIS.

