THE Italian Prophecier.

THAT IS, A PROGNOSTICATION MADE FOR THE YEAR OF OUR LORD GOD 1622.

Practiced by Antonio Magino, Professor of the Mathematickes, in the Town of
BONONIA, written five years past: declaring many wonders and fearful
proceedings, wherewith the world is threatened to happen therein by War this
present year.

With notable complaints made by diverse Nations, touching the present estate of
their Country.

Faithfully Translated out of Italian into Dutch, and now into English.

Printed MDCXXII.

To the Reader.
IT is well known to all men of great account, and Mathematicians, what the
great learning and understanding of the famous Mathematician Anthony Magino,
Professor of the Mathematickes, in Bononia in Lombardie, as also that he has
particularly and generally made many Prophesies by the aspects of the Planets,
or course of the Heavens, and also showed unto me many things, which now at
this day I find to be true, in respect of these reasons, and many others the
like. I was moved to set forth some of his Kalenders, which by his son
Fabians means came to my hands, with other things, which after these shall
come to light. This learned Astronomer, by reason of the disease of the Stone,
was very sickly, and many times as he was in his passion, he was desired by
some Cardinal, Duke, or Earl, that visited him to set forth a Calendar or
Prophecy, which sometimes was very painful unto him, for these causes: he
determined as soon as he was somewhat eased of his pain, to effect the same,
and made a Calendar beginning at anno 1617. and continuing to anno 1630. which
now four years one after another has been Printed, and for the most part
found to be true: for these causes I thought good to Translate the same out of
Italian, and to Print it in Dutch, and now into English.

BEFORE I BEGIN THIS Prognostication, I will let you see, what happened the
last year.
SOme years past, there were the like Prognostications particularly set forth
touching the former years, and that of the year 1622. now present, was
entitled the Prophesier, made by Anthonius Maginus, sometime a Mathematician,
or Professor thereof in the University of Bononia in Lombardy, whose learning
was well known throughout the whole world, and shall yet be more known, for
that all his foreshewings and Prophesies, are done by the Aspects of the
Planets, and the truth of things, although it be a common saying, Almanacks are
a sack full of lies, yet we must not therefore contemn or despise the Art,
although that sometimes things may happen amiss: It is not so strange a thing,
for it daily happens so to our Contrymen, when after the Sun is set, we
say we shall have fair weather, and it falls out clean contrary, both I my
self and many more with me, know that the holy Scriptures speak thereof:
therefore these and the like reasons, do not make it a bad matter, the work
makes the Master to be commended, and if there be any man, whom in any sort it
does concern, let him look it out in the book or Italian Prophesier, last
year set forth, and confer the same with the former times, and he shall
find according to humane wisdom, that it was well done, and more then any
other Mathematician of our time ever did. Before we come to the matter it
self, every man must generally understand, that when he names such an
altitude, we must know, that the length from the East to the West, is
uncertainly taken, as in the year past, There was a great question made, when
he said, out of the North to the South, under 44. 45. and 46. days, Mars the
God of War will cause the red Cock to crow: and that there should be much
innocent blood shed: whereby without doubt he meant France, as in many places
it may be showed, and who was so wise, as to conceive or once imagine, that
there should such an alteration happen in that miserable Country of France,
speaking also very certainly of the great War upon the borders of the river
of Rhine, and of Valtolina, as also of the altitude of Leefland, where the King
of Swethland had great War against the King of Poland, and brought the most
part of that Country under his subjection; and proceeding further, you shall
find that he speaks of the white Eagle, and of them that bear the half Moon
in their shield, of the heighths, where the great battles were fought,
between the Turk and the King of Poland, that bears the white Eagle, as the
Emperor of Germany bears the black Eagle. Also touching the alteration in
Hungariae, it is triple-wise set out, and of the black Sea, of the Tartarians,
and other Countries there-abouts he speaks so exactly, as if he had seen
the same before. Whereof before that year there was no suspicion, he also
speaks of some wonders touching the height of Bauaria, that bears a
chequer-boord in his Arms: he speaks further of Bauaria, and if we look
nearly into the said Maginoes writing: we shall find wonderful fore-shewings
thereof, but he says plainly, that his greatness shall shrink and fail,
like a blast of wind before the fire, which as not now seems not so. In the
Country of Saxon, there are likewise great alterations fore-shewed, and of the
Palatinate most strange things, which shall be esteemed to be as fables; but
time will cause it to appear otherwise.

Of the War in the Netherlands.
TOuching the year past, what wagers were laid by diverse great personages,
that thought they had the world at command, they made a full account a truce
should longer be made: but to the contrary, all his writings speak of War,
and that Mars the great man should play his part, which sufficiently appears
to be true. And further, if you look narrowly into the matter, men may say
that he was a Sayler, because he spoke much of preparation made by Sea, as well
in the Mediterranean as the North Seas, and so forth. He has also fore-shewed
much touching the East Indies, which has fallen out to be true: for these and
other reasons I have caused his Prognostication for anno 1622. to be Printed,
that all men might know the course of the same.

Here begins the Italian Prophesier or Prognosticator, practiced by ANTONIO
MAGINO, Professor in the University of the City Bononia in Lombardie.
IANVARIE.
THE tenth of December old style, the Sun entered into Capricornus, and then
the Winter began, which was the 2. of December new style, of the year past,
being anno 1621. so that upon the fourth of January we have the last quarter,
and considering all the course of these Winter months, we find that we shall
have a long cold frosty Winter, with much Hail and Snow, and that very thick
under 52. degrees, but much favorable winds: In high Countries there shall
many people die with cold and poverty, they that die in War shall be free
thereof.

The 11. of January, with the new Moon under the government of Venus and
Mercury, there shall be many Rouers and murderers seen, whereof men that
travel in France and Germany, must beware: at that time also many wicked
practices shall be invented, and put in ure in Italy, to bring their neighbors
on the hills unto their ends.

The 19. of January the first quarter, many men shall speak of peace, but
Mars and Jupiter cannot agree together, because the Sun is entered into
Aquarius, so that the matter is put to Neptune and Mars. It shall be
troublesome to be in high degree, there shall also many bad tidings come
abroad, whereby men shall be in great fear of their lives, specially under the
height of 51. degrees 1/^ over Britain there will be a good Star seen, as
also over Denmark and Sweathland.

The 27. of January, the full Moon being in Leo, and the Sun still in
Aquarius, signifies some strange things to happen in the great Water-streame,
as also upon the Rhine, Donaw, Elue in Stlesia, Liffeland, France and Grecia,
in Sicilia in the Mediteranean Sea, there shall wonders be heard of, touching
great burnings and blood-sheddings; which Mars upon the 30. of this month sore
threatens.

FEBRVARIE 1622.
THE 2. of February shall be the last quarter, the Sun still in Aquarius,
casting great damps and mists over Germany, which will seem as if they would
darken the light of heaven, under the same to make some new aliances and
contracts: many shall run away to shun the wrath of God, but they shall be
overtaken by those whom they least suspect, their goods shall be carried into
strange Countries.

The 10. of February, being new Moon, Mars and Venus meet, to speak of
peace, that has been moved in Germany, which will make much more alteration
then was before, small things shall be great.

The 18. of February, the first quarter, Jupiter and Venus were in Taurus, the
Sun in the last of Aquarius, fighting with their beams one against the
other, which are certain tokens of some strange matter, so that all upright
Christians ought to pray unto God, to beseech him to withdraw his threatenings
from us.

The 19. of February, the Sun in Pisces, with much unwholesome cold
South-west winds, contrary to nature.

The 25. of February, with the full Moon Saturn the child eater reigns,
with Venus a light woman, what good these two will procure, the next month
ensuing will show.

Upon the 27. of February, the last aspect of the Planets with Jupiter and
Mars, are in Libra, and more shall follow.

MARCH.
THE fourth of March, the last quarter, Sol and Mercury reign, the next day
in the fourth aspect Jupiter again with Sol: This signifies that many Kings
and Princes shall meet together, to find means to be quit of this War,
because their money consumes, but Mars serves not to grant thereunto, because
that already he has made a contract with Neptunes Fleet, to augment his
Treasure.

The 12. of March, with the new Moon, many men's courages will fail, specially
under the height of 40. 41. 42. degrees, Northward of the line, others to the
contrary shall be encouraged, that is under 51. 52. and 53. degrees: To send a
great power to the Seas, the like whereof has not been seen: as long as the
world has continued, they shall make the new world quake, and seek to bind
the East and the West together; the Rose and the Lilly shall set a root,
although it be not seen.

The 20. of March, the first quarter, the Sun goes out of Pisces, and leaves
the land man in danger.

The 21. of March, the Sun enters into Aries or the Ram, and passes the
Equinoctial line: then day and night throughout all the world shall be of one
length: and this Mathematician says, that at that time all the Planets go out
of their houses, only Venus is in her house in Taurus, and Luna in her house
in Cancer, so that they two are the Lords of this year, Mercury and Saturnus
their coadiutors; this matter being looked into it, shall be found to be so.

The 27. on Easter day, with the full Moon, there shall many variable winds
blow, and it will be cold nights, in that time many shall lustily make
preparation for the Wars, not for the Hugonite nor the Papist, but for the
Idol money in the Chest.

APRIL.
THE second of April the last quarter, there shall many hard clouds with
Hayle fall upon the North Countries, and he that has good store of Oats and
Horses before hand, shall make good profit of them: there will be bad payment,
yet all kind of Wares shall be well sold, Saturnus and Mars shall consume
many, so that Husbandmen shall be forced to run away with their Cattle and
fowls.

The 10. of April a new Moon, the great King of Fowls shall bear fire in
his breast, therewith to hurt the Inhabitants in the Alps, or in the height
under the which the Switzers dwell: but in that time he must be wary, when he
flies from his own nest, that his own young ones be not hurt, and made
slaves. The 6. aspect with Jupiter and Sol are upon the 11. day, yet in Aries
under a sheep clothing, to discover some secret thing.

The 18. of April the first quarter, the Moon was in Leo, that signifies some
strange thing out of Turkey, and the adherents thereof against the Roman
Empire, and the next day upon the 19. the Sun enters into Taurus: therefore
all Countries under Taurus are to beware of themselves, for they shall endure a
great blow, such as they shall hardly bear, they are sore threatened by the
aspects of the Planets, specially in the West, therefore look to the wind, it
will blow.

The 25. with the full Moon, Sol and Venus were in Libra, then a certain
number of Neptunes Wagons shall go out of the Thames in England, to seek for
the people under Taurus, with a great power, so that it seems that all the
Gods in the air gather together, only to see the Sea Nymphs, but their
weapons were fearful: shortly after that, men shall hear a most pitiful
complaint, like a woman's vice, in the West.

MAY.
THE 2. being in the last quarter, is the holy cross day, whose virtues are
wonderful, and many times have done miracles: the other two days after
Ascension day, Saturn, Sol, Jupiter, Mercury, and Venus, shall be found in
Aries, with diverse aspects; whereby it appears, that some great Prince shall
undergo great danger.

The 10. with a new Moon, Luna will be in the Dragons tail, which signifies,
that many turbulent spirits shall scatter abroad diverse slanderous Libels, in
manner of merry songs, but Justice will find them out. In our Countries of
Europe, there shall be no Eclipse seen, but upon the 10. day of May. In
Africa, in the 20. degree of Taurus, there shall be a great Eclipse of the
Sun seen there: These signs ancient Astronomers have esteemed to be
notable fore-shewings of some alreration.

The 18. the first quarter, in the last Whitson holidays, there shall strong
winds blow in the North quarters; therefore Seafaring men shall be fortunate
that sail into South and West.

The 20. the Sun shall enter into Geminie, so that those that are wise, under
that climate to begin any enterprise, shall be fortunate therein, for their
Enemies shall like children run away in great fear, and give them gold and
silver, which they shall carry away for their wives and children.

The 24. the full Moon, preparation shall be made to enter into the field,
that is in the North land, on the other side of the Alps.

JUNE.
THE 2. of June the last quarter, it shall be fair pleasant weather, and men
shall seek to lay swords and nets, to catch others in. There shall be
bloodshedding in diverse places. The Turk shall fall upon the Christians, and
drive them to an Unity, as the Wolf does the Oxen: but some will not hearken
thereunto, so that great trouble is to be expected, and if he has the
courage, he shall enter far into Europa.

The 9. a new Moon, a good courage shall bring many things to light, and if
they hap well, it will be much furtherance for his adherents: and in this
month, as long as the Sun is in Geminie, the Subjects must be obedient to
their Lords, or they will fall into great danger, we shall hear strange things
out of Italy.

The 16. the first quarter, you shall have some special matter out of France
and England, in some things good for the East Country, and notable things out
of India.

The 19. the Sun is in Cancer, the first aspect in Jupiter and Mars, with
many beams, so that it seems, things will be turned topsie turuie, many men
shall be beaten by Mars.

The 23. the full Moon, the Sun enters into Cancer, which signifies a great
invasion in the Countries lying under Cancer, because that two days before,
some beams of the Planets shot that way, and also all the Planets at that time
have gathered together in the Sun, under the Twins, Leon and the Crab, Venus
and Lucifer go before, in that time, above our Netherlands Horison, that is,
in the morning before five of the clock, until July there shall a wonder be
seen, which is not much seen, and shall without doubt produce a new fearful
commet, ere it be long: therefore turn unto God, and pray that he will divert
his wrath from you.

The 30. in the evening at 6. of the clock the last quarter of the Moon.

IVLY.
THE 8. of July the new Moon, you shall see all the 7. Planets above the
Horrison, as I said before, you shall also hear of a new manner of War,
which shall be raised by Mars and Saturnus, which shall send many home without
arms and legs, but he that stays there shall not be hanged.

The 14. the first quarter, you shall hear many strange things out of Turkey
and Poland, and also out of the Grecian Islands, in the way to Constantinople.

Out of France, you shall have unexpected things, for ^he furtherance of the
North lands, people of mean quality shall wax great, and spread their wings
like a Pelican over her young ones, but before that happens you shall hear
wonders.

The 20. the Sun goes out of Cancer, and leaves her subjects in necessity,
and that day enters into Leo, under whose government all the Countries that
bear the Lion in their shield, shall be victorious. About Bohemia and Silesia,
or in the Countries bordering about them, you shall hear of great battles,
that is under 46. or 47. degrees, look in the Card, you shall easily see the
places; about that time you shall also have a great invasion under 50. degrees,
which shall make many men fly out of the field from their bad enemies.

The 22. with the full Moon, you shall also have many fires, and diverse hot
diseases, which shall kill and spoil many men.

The 29. the first quarter, the Sun in Leo, a great man shall be put to
shame: and the common saying shall be true, that is, he that seeks to have
all, shall get nothing.

AUGUST.
THE 7 being Sunday with the new Moon, you shall see the Sun still to be in
Leo, and then shall be many Armies in the field, yea, as many as ever were
seen in man's remembrance, much fruit shall be spoiled, the small shall beat
the great, and make his Subjects rich: therefore look that you defend an
upright cause, and then you shall be participant therewith.

The 13. the first quarter, many Forts and strong holds assailed and
undermined, pestilence and strange sickness shall reign; it shall be hot and
dry weather, by reason that the said Planets are very near to the Sun, and
have procured a great operation; also you shall have great store of Thunder
with Earthquakes.

The 19. the Sun enters into Virgo, or the Maid, there shall be fair and
good fruit in some places, but not so much as the last year, but it shall be
ripe in good time, that is, where it is not spoiled by the Enemy: under Virgo a
motion shall again be made touching peace, and it may possible be effected
hereafter, by good reasons alleged.

The 21. with the full Moon, he that protected and vpheld an unjust cause,
shall be mocked by all the world, and his adherents shall be sorrowful.

The 29. the last quarter, you shall hear strange things out of Barbary,
which before were little thought on, and the like out of Battauia.

SEPTEMBER.
THE 5. of September, with the new Moon, you shall see he that climes high
shall be brought low, a strange Cock shall crow there: there shall be great
misery and poverty in the hilly Countries, there shall be great pestilence and
dearth: therefore watch and pray, for who knows whom GOD will punish with
these plagues.

The 12. the first quarter, you shall see great smokes in the air with the
burning of some stuff, as in times past men use to make Boon-fires for joys
of victory, and there shall many be crowned with Laurel, for the former
victories; to the contrary others shall be clad in mourning weeds, to weep
for, and to bury their dead.

The 19. the full Moon, before the Sun goes out of Virgo, we shall hear of
the assembling of many Prin^ to treat of weighty matters, as the Planets
sufficiently give us to understand.

The 20. the Sun in Libra, signifies high water, and low Countries shall
suffer great danger, much notable alteration shall be in diverse places, all
good for Seafaring men, that travail in strange Countries.

The 23. Harvest shall begin, and it shall be warm and dry, in respect of the
reasons aforesaid, the Summer fruit shall be good.

The 27. the last quarter, they that have used false weight, shall undergo
great danger, whereby there will be ill earnings, and bad payments, and may
bankerupts.

OCTOBER.
THE 4. of October, the new Moon, you shall see many Ships upon the water,
serving for the War, there shall be no want of booty nor blows: The innocent
shall endure much wrong, by burnings and other barbarian tyrannies, never heard
of, extortions, and abusing of women and children.

The 11. the first quarter, there shall be much good Wine found in many places,
much better then the last year, but the owners thereof shall not enjoy them
all.

The 19. the full Moon, the Sun goes out of Libra, some Princes shall seek
so to mittigate matters, that they may be quit of the aforesaid Wars, and
thereby live peaceably again.

The 20. the Sun in Scorpio, a very bad sign for wounded men, specially for
the Spaniards and Italians, for that cold will strike into their wounds, and
under Scorpio make them die: therefore in that time be gone, as fast as you can.

The 27. the last quarter, there shall come many bad tidings, but it will soon
be cold, therefore you Batauians be watchful, strike with an Angels mind
thereupon, for then it begins to be slaughter time.

NOVEMBER.
THE 3. of November, the full Moon, Luna will be in the Dragons head, so that
some under the height of 50. degrees, that have Miters on their heads, shall
fall into great necessity, after that their Country is spoiled and burnt, and
their Subjects destroyed, who then shall call for peace, but shall not be
heard: these men aforesaid Magino, thinks that they are Ments, Tryer, and
Collen, or some Countries bordering upon them.

The 3. of November, you shall have an Eclipse of the Sun, which shall not
be seen in Europa, but over the Indian lands: yet they of Europa must not
therefore think, that they shall not be participant with his Eclipse, but
must know that the force thereof extends over the whole world.

The 10. the first quarter, under 50. degrees, over England or Zealand, you
shall hear good news out of strange Countries, and many strange things, but
they must be very wary, there will variable winds blow, and high floods rise.

The 18. the full Moon, the Sun will still be in Scorpio, and in that time
much misfortune shall happen, in those Countries where Scorpions are to be
found, that is, in Italy, Spain, Barbary, and in India, and also hurtful for
the same Nations, in what Country soever they shall be, by reason of the
aspects aforesaid.

The 21. the Sun enters into Sagitarius, under his government there shall be
great preparation of War, by Neptunes Fleet out of the North, to be made in
the South, more then in long time has been seen, and gathering together under
36. and 37. degrees, in the Mediteranean Sea.

The 26. the last quarter, Mars and Neptune, bids many to gest with Powder and
Match, there shall be a great battle by water.

DECEMBER.
THE 2. of December, the new Moon, War in the North lands shall lessen, and
increase Southward: there shall also great store of Ordnance be made ready, and
preparation of great Ships made, to assail strange Countries.

The 9. the first quarter, many cold winds shall blow, high floods, signifying
a cold Winter, with many storms of Hayle.

The 17. a full Moon, there shall many things be practiced, and there shall be
many Ambassadors sent, to treat of peace: some Princes will sit down, when
they see that Sagitarius has his bow still bent, to threaten them with great
loss of their riches and blood.

The 21. on Wednesday, the Sun enters into the hard headed Capricornus, much
addicted to butting, but it shall happen under his climate: There shall be
wonderful tidings heard of, and much complaint, out of Germany, Italy, Poland,
and other far Countries.

The 25. the last quarter, being Christmas day, many shall die with cold,
because that in the Summers past they could get nothing, by reason of the
former Wars. Therefore pray unto God, that he by his great power, will make
the year ensuing better, whereby his name shall be praised, now and for ever
Amen.

Complaints made by diverse Nations touching their present state.
The Spaniard speaks.
WHo is like unto me, in all the world, even from the East unto the West, it is
but chafe in respect of fine gold of Peru: behold our power out of our
Country, which is Naples, Millaen, Sicilia, Corsica, Sardinia, and Malta, and
the foot that we presently have in the Grisons and Switzerland: the higher and
lower Palatinate, with Gulick, Cleave, and Berghe: also our hereditarie
Countries of the Netherlands, with the notable aliance of the spirituality, and
the confederates in marriage, as Austria, Sauoy, and the other stand upon good
terms, who has so many gold Mines and revenues as our King: first in Ginnea,
and in all the Indies, where gold, silver, and precious stones are to be found,
as well in the Kingdoms of Goa, Sumatra, Borneo, Selebes, Banda; the
unspeakable Islands of Molucka, Philippinaes, Manilles, and Iapan, with all the
golden Kingdoms of the new world, as Chilla, Peru, Granada, Iucatan, Noua
Hispania, and new Mexico: all the notable Islands of Cuba, Hispaniola, Iaymaca,
and Santo Croys, and thousands thereabouts, we rule over Brasillia, and the
silver stream, of the Amasons, Rio Grande, Rio de Plato, to the Straights of
Magelanus, with the Canaries and the Flemish Islands, who dares be so bold as to
lift up his head against us, or point to us in Spain, to bid us milk our
Asses, make Fig Frayles, and such like things, all of us are Knights, and all
is ours.

The Italian.
THis pride is not to be borne withal, that we should in this manner suffer
the manly members and bodies of our Neapolitanes, Sicilians, Corcicaners, and
Sardinians, to be so much bridled, specially we that are Romans, whose might
and dominion caused the whole world to shake for fear, and now by a few
Lucitaneans, or bragging Spaniards, to be out-faced: it is too much, Tuscania,
Florence, Lombardy, Millaen, Parma, and Mantua, with the two famous
Commonwealths of Venice and Genua, I speak not of Treuisano, Ferara, and
Verona, have thus long been bewitched, to suffer these bloody Cullians, which
have not been known above 150. years past, in such manner to encroach upon
our dominions, under pretense of we know not what, I am in doubt it will be our
overthrow.

If we drive them not out of our borders, for I perceive that it will come to
the same pass that we were brought unto by the Goths and Vandales, that
commanded over our Country 300. years together, and spoiled the same, as by
the ruins thereof left; it is yet to be seen, we are not to expect any better
then this from the Turk, and that with good reason, because the Spaniard, not
long since prepared and made ready his ships in our Havens, and did some
exploits in the Greekish Islands, belonging to the Turk. Therefore let us unite
our selves together, and force the Spaniard to leave our borders, our Country
is strong enough to defend it self, we are enclosed round about by the Sea,
and toward France and Germany, we have the Alps, which always have been our
good neighbors, that is, the Sauoyans, Switzers, and Grisons, whom they now
fight withal as Enemies, they say that they are heretics, and under pretense
thereof, would pull the stool from under us: whereunto some of our Country
men are assistants: therefore rise up, for it is more then time, make you ready
for the War, and to speak the truth, I cannot believe that there is any of
our Nation to be found, that would suffer himself to be hanged or burnt for
the confession of the faith.

The Turk.
WE swear by our God, and Mahomet our great Prophet, that we will not endure
the wrong that not long since has been done unto us in Grecia and else where,
by certain Spanish ships, that were prepared and made ready in Italy, and
swear as before, that before the silver Moon, shall have showed her face with
clear light seven times: we will teach them to know who is Emperor, though
we should make peace with Poland and Persia, and therewith employ our power, of
Podolia, Meldauia, Walachta, Bulgaria, Seruia, and all Grecia, with all the
Islands thereof, Nat^lia, or Asia: The borders of the black Salt, and
Mediteranian Seas: I speak not of Siria, Judea, Egypt, and Barbaria, and all
the rest belonging to the Turkish power, we will set upon and assail all you
that are truce breakers, and utterly root you out, to the last man.

The Polander.
ALas, what does it avail us, that we have given aid to the Emperor or the
Spaniard, whereby we have been forced to sustain three cruel Wars, that
is, with the Swethlanders, Muscouites, and the great Turk, who spoyleth all
our land, and if we cannot speedily make peace with the Turk, all our Country
will be spoiled*

The Hungarian.
WE that are Soldiers, and men of courage, comfort our selves in all
occurrents that happen unto us, unless it be, when men seek to bring a
strange Nation of Spaniards to domineere over us, threatening to deal with us,
as they did in India, with the Country people there: but that is not yet
brought to pass, have we withstood so great a War, as all men know: we will
rather with our own Nation, in steed of suffering our King, to draw back and
give way, seek to enlarge our borders, as far as we find any Spaniards to
withstand us, and will set upon them all as Enemies, and make a prey of their
lands and goods, and will rather burn up our own houses, and eat our horses
flesh, then become Subjects unto the Spaniards or the Austrians.

The Germans.
What bad and crafty dealing is this, There comes a hundred thousand devils,
with that black company, that are brought into the land by the Spaniards, be
it as it will be, Hayle and Thunder consume them all, both Spiritual and
Temporal: It is no honor for us Germans, to seek to prevail by such a
company of Rascals, Pots excrement: a shame take all the villainous Priests
men, and their Wallon slaves, was, was, was: cannot we that are Germans
lustily fall together by the ears, and fight, and then again drink together
and be friends. Was, was, it is to great shame: There is no remedy, but that
we Germans generally altogether must drive the Spaniards out of the land, or
else we shall live under their yoke all our lives long, and ever have War in
our Country.

The Frenchman.
ONe devil or other here in our Country, has thrust his stick into the
wheel, seeing that many years together we have with great unity tolerated
the Religion, and now by means of a Spanish Jesuit, this heavy and deadly
trouble is raised, whereby many men come to their ends. If all that ungodly
company of Spanish brood were in India, we might be in hope of a peace. It
seems that wheresoever the Spaniard comes, Gods blessing is banished far
from thence.

The Switzers and Grisons.
What have we done? whose Country have we taken from them? or what riches
are here to be found? but only true Christian blood: God have mercy upon us;
for the great and miserable complaints of women and children are exceeding
much, they neither spare Catholic nor those of the Religion, in this great
extremity: it is unspeakable, what barbarous cruelty is at this day used here
upon poor oppressed men, by murdering, fleaing, slitting their noses,
dismembring their bodies joint from joint, casting them down from the tops of
hills into the water, ripping of women's bodies, to see the place from whence
men come forth; and with a thousand the like unspeakable manners of torments
and deaths, to kill and destroy the Inhabitants of our Countries, and to drive
the rest away, and make the remainer become obedient unto them: take example by
us, not to trust the Spaniards nor his adherents, but kill, before you are
killed, and so you shall have peace, and do well.

The English man, Dane, Swetherlander, and Netherlander.
WE have taught this Tyrant partly to know himself, and therefore we gnash
our teeth at him, and purpose rather with weapons in our hands, to die then to
live under such a Tyrant, or to endure his intolerable yoke: and without
doubt, if any of these Nations love the Spaniard, then for certain they are of
his mind, or at least some of his conquered Bastards, which he overcame in
the time, that he was in these Countries, and unless it be the Woolfe, I know
no beast, that willingly will suffer another beast to lie in his nest or den,
unless it be a Cucko: we find some in these Countries, that put their
children to School to learn Spanish, in that language to yield all honor and
courtesy unto those Signieurs, thereby to make him believe, that that honor
justly belongs unto him, to rule and domineere over all Nations, whereof he
persuades himself to be worthy, and to deserve it. No, no, not so, but keep
the Hollanders, Swethlanders, and Freseland, from yielding thereunto, and who
so ever so withstands the Spaniard, it shall go well with him, and they shall
leave their children great riches in this world, and in the world to come
everlasting life.

The Indians.
WE poor Indians can neither write nor read, and as yet have not seen many
more Christians, but the Spaniards: but none of our Nation wish to enter into
that heaven, where the Spaniards said they shall go, but rather to leap into
the burning hill of Vulcan, and to stay there: they have most barbarously
murdered and slain all our Kings and Princes, and taken away all their goods,
and put many thousands of our Indians, by the greatest torments that can be
invented, to miserable deaths, which still is in our minds: and if once the
great Creator that rules the Sun and Moon, would release us out of this
tyranny, what greater joy could there be heard of in India, and we hope that
ere it be long, it will come to pass, for our Prophets have fore-shewed the
same. Signieur, what think you: Is it not time with all speed to smeare your
self with Hares grease? Yes, yes, yes. Vamos.

FINIS.

