THE True Narration of the Entertainment of his Royal Majesty, from the time
of his departure from Edenbrough; till his receiving at London: with all or the
most special Occurrences. Together with the names of those Gentlemen whom his
Majesty honored with Knighthood.

printer's device of Thomas Creed, featuring the crowned, female figure of
Truth being scourged by a hand emerging from a cloud (McKerrow 299) VIRESSIT
VULNERE VERITAS

TC



AT LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, for Thomas Millington. 1603.

To the Reader.
AFter long travel, to be informed of every particular, as much as diligence
might prevail in; this small work of his Majesty's Receiving and royal
Entertainment is brought forth which though it may seem to have been too long
deferred, yet seeing nothing thereof has been public; no time can be too late,
to express so excellent a matter; wherein the dutiful love of many noble
Subjects so manifestly appeared to our dread Lord and Sovereign: and his
Royal thankfulness in exchange for that, which was indeed but duty: though so
adorned with munificent bounty, that most houses where his Highness rested,
were so furnished by the owners, with plenty of delights and delicates, that
there was discerned no negligence; but if there were any offense, the sin
only appeared in excess; as more at large you shall hereafter perceive: where
the truth of every thing is rather pointed at, than stood upon.

All diligence was used to get the names of those Gentlemen, that in sundry
places received the honor of Knighthood, and what the Heraldes have in
register, are duly set down, both for name, time, and place. If any be
omitted, let it please (...) him to signify their names, and the house where
they received that honor; and there shall be additions put to this Empressio^;
or at least (which will be by order more fitly) placed in the next Many I am
sure there are not missing, and only in that point we are somewhat doubtful:
the rest is from his Highness departure from Edenbrough: his coming to
London, so exactly set down, as nothing can be added to it, but superfluous
words; which we have striued to avoid.

Thine T. M.

A NARRATION of the Progress and entertainment of the Kings most excellent
Majesty, with the occurrents happening in the same journey.
THE eternal majesty, in whose hand are both the mean and mighty of the
earth, pleased to deliver from weakness of body and grief of mind,
Elizabeth his hand-maide, our late Royal Mistress and gracious Sovereign,
easing her age from the burden of earthly kingdoms, and placing her (as we
steadfastly hope) in his heavenly Empire, being the resting place after death,
for all them that believe faithfully in their life.

Thursday the 24. of March, some two hours after midnight, departed the spirit
of that great Princess, from the prison of her weak body, which now sleeps
in the Sepulcher of her Grandfather.

The Counsel of State, and the Nobility, on whom the care of all the country
chiefly depended, immediately assembling together, (no doubt assisted with the
spirit of truth) considering the infallible right of our Sovereign Lord King
James, took such order, that the news of the Queens death should no sooner
be spread, to deiect the hearts of the people; but at the instant they should
be comforted with the proclaiming of the King.

Being hereon determined, Sir Robert Carry took his journey in post toward
Scotland, to signify to the Kings Majesty the sad tidings of his Royal
sisters death, and the joyful hearts of his subjects that expected no comfort
but in and by his Majesty's blessed government.

This noble Gentleman's care was such, that he intermitted no time, but
notwithstanding his sundry shift of horses, and some falls that bruised him
very sore, he by the way proclaimed the king at Morpeth. And on saturday
coming to Barwick, acquainting his worthy brother Sir John Carry how al things
stood, poasted on to Edinburgh, where he attained that night, having ridden
near three hundre miles in less then three days.

But before we come there, you shall understand what was instantly done at
Barwick by sir John Carry, upon the news brought by Sir Robert his brother:
who like a worthy soldier, and politic Statesman, considering it was a Town
of great import, and a place of war, he caused all the Garrison to be
summoned together, as also the Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses, in whose
presence he made a short and pythie Oration, including her Majesty's death, and
signifying the intent of the State, for submitting to their lawful Lord. And
presently with great contentment of all parties, his Majesty was proclaimed
King of England, Scotland, France, etc. on Saturday in the afternoon, being
the 26. of March, about three of the clock. Where all the people (though they
grieved for their late Queen) yet was grief suddenly turned to pleasure, in
expectation of their new King. But we will post from Barwick after Sir Robert
Carey, and overtake him at Edinburgh.

You understood before, that Sir Robert came to Edinburgh on Saturday night,
where being admitted to the King, be-bloodied with great falls and bruses,
brought his Highness the first news of Queen Elizabeth's death; which
howsoever it presented him with kingdoms, glory, and immensiue wealth; yet like
his Royal self he showed apparent signs of Princely sorrow. And dismissing
Sir Robert Carry after so great toil to his repose, his Majesty continued in
his grief, and through that expressed his true piety.

It was thought necessary in so high affairs to let slip no occasion how ever
sorrow particularly touched his Majesty for the loss of his private friend,
and Royal sister: yet the general care as well of those his people in Scotland,
as for us in England, caused him on Sunday, being the 27. of March to dispatch
the Bishop of Halirud-house to Barwick, that he might receive the Town to his
use, as the nearest place wherein by right he claymed possession. Who
accordingly making all the speed he might, came to Barwick, where of the
Governor he was honorably entertained: and after signifying his majesty's
pleasure, reposed himself for that night.

On Monday, being the 28. of March, by sound of trumpet, the Governor, Mayor,
Officers, and Counsel of the Town, were assembled at the Cross, where there
the Governor surrendered to the Bishop of Halirud house his staff, and all
his authority unto the Kings Majesty's use: so likewise did the Mayor deliver
up the keys of the Town. And the said Bishop being thus seized of all the
authority to the Kings Majesty use, ministered the oath of allegiance, unto
the Governor, Mayor, and the superior Officers belonging to the Garrison and
to the Town. Which oath taken, the Bishop of Halirud-house, expressing the
gracious intention of his Majesty, as well to them, as all other his subjects
of England, whom he found like them affected: which was rather to maintain
then to infringe their Charters; to give, then take from them any thing;
redeliuered the keys and staff of authority to the Mayor and Governor: so
likewise to every Commander, Captain, Lieutenant, and whatsoever office they
had before her Majesty's death, there in the Kings name he confirmed them, to
their great joy and contentment. Thus spent the Lord of Halirud-house the first
part of Monday in Barwick, and dyned with the Magistrates.

In the afternoon the Lord Governor, and his chief Officers of place, called
together all the Soldiers that were under pay: so did the Mayor and Aldermen
conuene all the Communaltie of the Town: to whom when the oath was read, and
the Magistrates had certified them that they had been their example, the L. of
Halyrud-house wondered at, and much commended their joy and readiness to be
sworn servants to so regal a Master; which he amply discoursed to his
Majesty at his return to Edinburgh the next day, not hyding any of their
forward applauses, but delivered their willingness to his Highness with
express and lively words: assuring him by his entrance into England at that
little door, how welcome into the wide house his Excellence should be.

While this was a doing in Barwick, there drew to the King hourly most of the
Nobility in Scotland, with sundry Knights and Gentlemen, gratulating the
great blessings befallen his Highness, and attending his Royal pleasure.

Besides many numbers of Gentlemen came out of England to salute his Majesty,
all whom he graciously welcomed, and honored one of them with the Order of
Knighthood, being M. John Paiton, son to Sir John Paiton Lieutenant of the
Tower of London, this being to that noble Gentleman no little glory that he was
the first Knight (yea, named by the Kings Majesty himself, his first Knight)
that was made by our Sovereign after he was nominated and truly known to be
the mightiest king in Europe.

During the continuance of his Majesty in Scotland, before his Progress
toward England, his whole care was for the peaceable government of of that
realm, from which he was a while to part. And to that end, he had sundry
conferences with his Nobility, laying the safest proiects that in his wisdom
and their experiences seemed likely for effecting his royal desire; which God
willing will come to pass to his great liking and benefit of both the Realms.

But that it might more to his people appear, he in person came graciously to
the City of Edinburgh, unto the public Sermon: and after the Sermon was
finished, in a most learned, but more loving Oration, he expressed his occasion
of leaving the^, to the Burgesses and a number of the people: exhorting the^ to
contiune in obedience, being the bond that bind Princes to affect their
subjects, which broken on their part he trusted should never be, and of his
they were assured: persuading them also to agreement amongst themselves, being
the bond of charity that tied all men (especially Christians) to love and
bear one with another. In which obedience to him, and agreement amongst
themselves if they continued, howsoever, he was in a manner at that time
constrained to leave them: yet he would in his own person visit them, and
that shortly, in times convenient, and most necessary for his own advancement
and their benefit.

Yet for all his kingly Oratorie, mild behavior and true intention, the
peoples hearts against his departure were even dead, and grief seized every
private man's raynes, saving only those that were made happy by attending his
Royal person into England.

For now they began duly to think upon his unmatched virtues, which never the
most malicious enemy could impeach, being in the worlds eye innocent of any
capital and notorious crime, but such as may be incident to any just man, who
daily fall, but never fall away: they now considered his affability, mercy,
justice, and magnanimity: they remembered how in late years Scotland by his
government had increased in more riches, then in the time of many his
Predecessors. Besides, his care for establishing true Religion, his Traffic
almost with all Nations, the royalty of his marriage, the blessings hoped for
by his issue. And such an universal sorrow was amongst them, that some of the
meaner sort spoke even distractedly: and none but at his departing (which yet
we are not come unto) expressed such sorrow, as in that Nation has seldom bin
seen the like: albeit the Kings Majesty was possessed of that which the common
sort of the Nation long wished for, I mean the Kingdom.

The 31. of March, being Thursday, his Majesty with great solemnity and
pomp, was proclaimed King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, at the
Market Cross of Edenbrugh, in presence of the whole Officers of Estate of the
Realm, and many of the Nobility of Scotland, and sundry Knights and Gentlemen
of England. And in the evening of that day, there were many hundreds of
Bonefires made all about the City, with great feasting and merriment held,
till the appearing of the next day.

But as joyful as they were of his Majesty's great advancement and enlarging
of his Empire, so were they (as I before noted) for their private want of him
no less filled with grief, as above all other times was most apparently
expressed at his departure from Edinburgh toward England: the cries of poor
people being so lamentable and confused, that it moved his Majesty to much
compassion: yet seeing their clamors was only of affection, and not grounded on
reason, with many gracious and loving words he left them, and proceeded on his
Progress.

It was the fifth of April, being Tuesday, that his Majesty departed from
Edinburgh, gallantly accompanied with multitudes of his Nobility, Lords,
Barons, and Gentlemen of Scotland, and some French, as the French Ambassador,
being Ledger in Scotland, (whose wife was carried betwixt Edinburgh and London
by eight pioners or porters, one four to relieve the other four by turns,
carrying her in a chare with slings) as also his Majesty being accompanied
with his own attendants, as the Duke of Lennox, the Earl of Argyle, the Earl
of Murrey, the Earl of Cassils, the Earl of Mar, the Lord Home, the Lord
Oliphant, and sundry other too tedious in this place to be repeated: for that
their several names shall hereafter be more particularly expressed. Besides
there were in his Highness train many numbers of gallant and well appointed
English Knights and Genlemen, who attended his Majesty that day from Edinburgh
unto Dunglasse, a house of the Lord Homes, where his Excellence reposed
himself that night.

Wednesday the sixth of April, his Majesty progressed from Dunglasse toward
Barwicke, having then attending on him many more Noblemen, Knights, and
Gentlemen, besides the Lords Wardens of the borders of England and Scotland,
attended by the Borderers with several companies to receive him. The Lord
Governor of Barwick also being accompained with all the Counsel of war: the
Constables with their Cornets of horse, and diverse of the Captains: the band
of Gentlemen Pensioners, with diverse Gentlemen, advanced forward to entertain
and conduct his Majesty into the Town of Barwick. Happy day, when peaceably
so many warlike English gentlemen went to bring in an English and Scottish
king, both included in one person, into that town that many a 100. years has
bin a town of the enemy, or at ye least, held in all leagues either for one
Nation or the other. But the King of peace have glory, that so peaceably has
ordained, a King descended from the Royal blood of either Nation, to make that
Town by his possessing it, a harbor for English and Scots, without thought of
wrong or grudging envy.

Not to digress longer, these Gallants met him, and were graciously respected
of his Highness, so falling in among the other Trophies, they set forward; and
when his Highness came within some half mile of the Town, and began to take
view thereof, it suddenly seemed like an enchanted Castle: for from the
mouths of dreadful engines, not long before full fed by moderate attes-men,
that knew how to stop and empty the brass and iron panches of those roaring
noises, came such a tempest, as dreadful and sometimes more deathfull then
thunder, that all the ground thereabout trembled, as in an earthquake, the
houses and towers staggering, wrapping the whole Town in a mantle of smoke,
wherein the same was a while hid from the sight of his Royal owner.

But nothing violent can be permanent, it was too hot to last, and yet I have
heard it credibly reported, that a better peale of Ordinance was never in any
fouldiers memory (and there are some old King Harries Lads in Barwicke I can
tell you) discharged in that place: neither was it very strange; for no man can
remember Barwick honored with the approach of so powerful a Master.

Well, the King is now very near the gates: and as all darkness flies before
the face of the Sun, so did these clouds of smoke and gunpowder vanish at
his gracious approach. In the clearnes of which fair time, issued out of the
town, M. William Selbie, Gentleman, Porter of Barwick, with diverse Gentlemen
of good repute: and humbling himself before the kings Majesty, presented unto
him the keys of all the Ports, who received the^ graciously: and when his
Highness was entered betwixt the gates, he restored to the said M. Selbie the
keys again, and graced him with the honor of Knighthood for this his
esspeciall service: in that he was the first man that possessed his Excelle^ce
of those keys: Barwick indeed being the gate that opened into all his
Dominions.

This done, his Highness entered the second gate, and being within both the
walls, he was received by the Captain of the ward, and so passed through a
double gaurde of Soldiers, well armed in all points: but with looks humble,
and words cheerful, they gave his Majesty to know, their hearts witnessed
that their arms were worn only to be used in his Royal service.

Between this gaurde, his Majesty passed on to the Market Cross, where the
Mayor and his Brethren received him with no small signs of joy, and such
signs of triumph as the brevity of time for prepatation would admit. But the
common people seemed so ouer-wrapt with his presence, that they omitted nothing
their power and capacities could attain unto, to express loyal duty and
hearty affection: kneeling, shouting, (crying, welcome, and God save King
James, till they were (in a manner) entreated to be silent.

As soon as it pleased the people to give him leave that he might speak, M.
Parkinson the Recorder of Barwick, being a man grave and reverend, made a
brief speech to his Majesty, acknowledging him their sole and Sovereign Lord.
To whom in the Towns name he surrendered their Charter, presenting his
Highness also from them with a Purse of gold, which as an offering of their
love he graciously received. And for their Charter, he answered them most
bening and royally, that it should be continued, and that he would maintain
their Privileges, and uphold them and their Town in all equity, by reason it
was the principal and first place, honored with his mighty and most gracious
person.

These ceremonies amongst the Townes-men ended, as his usual manner is after
any journey, his Majesty past to the Church, there to humble himself before
the exalter of the humble, and thank him for the benefits bestowed upon him
and all his people: at which time preached before him the Reverend Father in
God, Doctor Tobie Matthew, Bishop of Durham, who made a most learned and worthy
Sermon; which finished, the King departed to his Palace, and then they gave
him a peale of great Ordinance, more hot then before. Barwick having never
had King to rest within her walls welnie these hundredth years.

The night was quickly ouerpast, especially with the Townes-men that never in a
night thought themselves securer; but the journey of the hours are always
one, how ever they are made long or short by the apprehension of joy, or
sufferance of grief. The mornings Sun chased away the clouds of sleep from
every eye, which the more willingly opened, that they might be comforted with
the sight of their beloved Sovereign, who in his Estate (attended upon by the
Governor and the Noble men, together with the Magistrates and Officers of the
Town) passed to the Church, where he stayed the divine prayers and Sermon;
which, when with his wonted himilitie he had heard finished, in the like estate
he returned to his Palace.

This day being Thursday the 7. of April, his Majesty ascended the walls,
whereupon all the Canoniers, and other Officers belonging to the great
Ordinance stood, every one in his place: the Captains with their bands of
soldiers likewise under their several Colors. Amongst which warlike train,
as his Majesty was very pleasant and gracious, so to show instance how he
loved and respected the Art-militarie, he made a shot himself out of a Canon,
so fair, and with such sign of experience, that the most expert Gunners there
beheld it, not without admiration: and there was none of judgment present, but
without flattery gave it just commendation.

Of no little estmation did the Gunners account themselves in, after this
kingly shot, but his Majesty above al virtues, in te^perance most excellent,
left that part of the wall and their extraordinary applause: but being attended
by his nobility both of Scotland and England, (the Lord Henry Howard, brother
to the late Duke of Norfolk, and the Lord Cobham being then newly come to the
Town) and guarded by the Gentlemen Pensioners of Barwick, he bestowed this day
in surueying of the plots and fortifications, commending the manner of the
soldiers, and the military order of the Town, being indeed one of the best
places of strength in all the North of England. All which, when with great
liking he had to his kingly pleasure beheld, he returned to his Palace, and
there reposed till the next day.

The 8. of April being Friday, the Trumpets warned for the remove; and all
that morning his Majesty with royal liberality bestowed amongst the Garrison
Soldiers, and every Officer for war according to his place, so rich and
bounteous rewards, that all soldiers by his bountiful beginning there, may be
assured they shall not (as they have bin) be curtald of their duties by
exacting pollers, but used as the servants and seruitors of a king: which very
name, but more his largess, adds double spirit to a man of war.

After dinner his Highness mounted on horseback and took leave of Barkicke,
where near the bridge, he Knighted M. Ralph Gray, a Gentleman of great
command and possession near the borders.

As his Excellence left Barwicke, and entered the Realm of England, he was
received by M. Nicholas Forester, high Shireffe of Northumberland, who besides
his own servants and followers, was accompanied with a number of gallant
Gentlemen of the shyre: who riding before his Majesty, led the way toward
Withrington, where his Majesty intended to rest that night.

By the way, of his Kingly goodness, and Royal inclination to the honor of
arms, and reverence of virtuous age, he vouchsafed to visit that worthy
honorable soldier, Sir William Read, who being blind with age, was so
comforted with the presence and gracious speeches of the king, that his spirits
seemed so powerful within him, as he boasted himself to feel the warmth of
youth stir in his frost-nipt blood.

The way his Majesty had to ride being long, enforced him to stay with this
good Knight the less while; but that little time was so comfortable, that his
friends hope it will be a mean to cherish the old knight all his life long. Not
to be longer writing this, then his Highness was riding the journey: he
departed thence upon the spur, scarce any of his train being able to keep
him company: for being near 37. miles, he rode it al in less then four
hours. And by the way for a note, the miles according to the Northren phrase,
are a wey-bit longer then they be here in the South.

Well, as long as the miles were, his Majesty made short work, and attained
Withrington, where by the master of the place, Sir Robert Carry, and his right
virtuous Lady, he was received with all duty and affection, the house being
plentifully furnished for his entertainment. Besides, for situation and
pleasure, it stands very delightful.

His Majesty having a little while reposed himself after his great journey,
found new occasion to travel further: for as he was delighting himself with
the pleasure of the Park, he suddenly beheld a number of Dear near the
place: The game being so fair before him, he could not forbear, but
according to his wonted manner, forth he went, and slew two of them. Which done,
he returned with a good appetite to the house, where he was most royally
feasted and banketted that night.

On Saturday the 9. of April, his Majesty prepared toward New Castle. But
before his departure from Withrington, he Knighted M. Henry Withrington, M.
William Fenicke, and M. Edward Gorge. After which taking his leave with Royal
courtesy, he set forwards toward New Castle, being 16. miles from Withrington.

To pass the occurrentes by the way, being not very material, when his
Majesty drew near to New Castle, the Mayor, Aldermen, Counsel, and best
Commoners of the same, beside numbers of other people, in joyful manner met
him. The Mayor presenting him with the sword and keys with humble duty and
submission. Which his Highness graciously accepting, he returned them again:
Giving also to his Majesty in token of their love and hearty loyalty, a
purse full of Gold. His Majesty giving them full power and authority under
him, as they lately held in her Majesty's name: Ratifying all their customs
and privileges that they were possessed of, and had a long time held. And so
passing on, he was conducted to the Mayors house, where he was richly
entertained, and remained there three days.

Upon Sunday, being the 10. of April, his Majesty went to the Church, before
whom the Bishop of Durham preached. And that day, (as it is his most
Christian-like custom) being spent in devotion, he rested till Monday, which
he bestowed in viewing the Town, the manner and beauty of the bridge and
keye, being one of the fairest in all the North parts. Besides, he released all
prisoners, except those that lay for treason, murder and Papistrie, giving
great sums of money for the release of many that were imprisoned for debt.
Who heartily praised God and blessed his Majesty for their unexpected liberty.

So joyful were the Townsmen of Newcastle of his Majesty there being, that
they thankfully bare all charge of his household, during the time of his abode
with them, being from Saturday till Wednesday morning. All things were in such
plenty, and so delicate for variety, that it gave great contentment to his
Majesty. And on the Townesmens parts there was nothing but willingness
appeared, save only at his Highness departure, but there was no remedy. He
has yet many of his people by his presence to comfort, and forward no doubt
he will, as he thence did, giving thanks to them for their loyal and hearty
affection. And on the bridge before he came at Gateside, he made M. Robert
Dudley Mayor of New Castle, Knight.

This Wednesday being the 13. of April, his Majesty set forward toward
Durham. And at Gateside near New Castle, he was met by the Shiriffe of the
County, and most of the Gentlemen in the same.

In his way near Chester, a street, a little Town betwixt New Castle and
Durham, he turned on the left hand of the Road, to view a pleasant Castle of
the Lord Lumleyes, which being a goodly Aedifice of free stone, built in
quadrant manner, stands on the shoring of a hill in the middle of a green, with
a River at the foot of it, and woods about it on every side: but to the
Towneward which is by the River, divided from it.

After his Highness had a while delighted himself with the pleasure of the
place, he returned on his way toward Durham, being six miles from thence. Of
which way he seldom makes long journey. And when he came near, the
Magistrates of the city met him, and behauing themselves as others before
them, it was by his Highness as thankfully accepted. And passing through the
gates, whence his Excellence entered the market place, there was an excellent
Oration made unto him, containing in effect the universal joy conceived by his
subjects at his approach, being of power to divert from them so great a sorrow
as had lately possessed them all. The Oration ended, he passed toward the
Bishops house, where he was royally received. The Bishop attending his Majesty
with a hundred Gentlemen in Tawny Liueries. Of all his entertainment in
particular at the Bishops, his merry and well seasoned jests, as well there as
in other parts of his iourny, all his words being of full weight, and his jests
filled with the salt of wit, yet so facetious and pleasant, as they were no
less gracious and worthy regard, then the words of so Royal a Majesty; it is
bootlesse to repeat them, they are so well known.

Thursday being the 14. day, his Majesty took leave of the Bishop of Durham,
whom he greatly graced and commended, for his learning, humanity and gravity,
promising to restore diverse things taken from the Bishoppricke, which he has
accordingly in part done, giving him already possession of Durham house in the
Strand. In brief, his Majesty left Durham, and removed toward Walworth,
being sixteen miles from Durham. Where, by the Gentlewoman of the house, named
Mistress Genison, he was so bountifully entertained, that it gave his
Excellence very high contentment. And after his quiet repose there that night,
and some part of the next day, he took his leave of the Gentlewoman with many
thankful and Princely gratulations, for her extending costs in the
entertainment of him and his train.

Friday being the 15. of April, his Majesty set forward from Mistress
Genisons of Walworth toward York. His train still increasing by the numbers
of Noblemen and Gentlemen from the South parts, that came to offer him fealty,
and to rejoice at his sight: whose love although he greatly tendered, yet did
their multitudes so oppress the country, and make provision so dear, that he
was feign to publish an Inhibition against the inordinate and daily access of
peoples coming, that many were stopped of their way, and only those that had
affairs suffered to have access, some of great name and office being sent
home to attend their places. All this notwithstanding, a number there were in
his Highness train, still increasing in every shyre. For now the high
Shireffe of York shyre, gallantly accompanied, attended his Majesty to M.
Inglebeyes beside Topcliffe, being about 16. miles from Walworth, who with
great submission received his Majesty, and there he rested for that night.

On Saturday being the sixteenth of April, his Majesty removed from master
Inglesbeye toward York, being sixteen miles from Topcliffe: and when he came
about some three miles from York, (the liberties of the City extending so
far) master Bucke and master Robinson, Shireffes of the City met him, and
with humble duty presented him with their white staves: which his Majesty
receiving, he delivered them instantly again, so they attended him toward
the City; within a mile of which, when his Highness approached, there met
him the Lord Burleigh, Lord President of the North, with many worthy Knights
and Gentlemen of the shyre. These also attended on his person to York. Where,
when he came near unto the City, there met him three of the Sergeants at
Arms, late servants to the deceased Queen, viz. M. Wood, M. Damfort, and M.
Westrope, who delivered up their Maces, which his Majesty with Royal
courtesy, redeliuered to them, commanding them to wait on him in their old
places, which presently they did. And at the same time the Sergeant Trumpeter,
with some other of his fellows, did in like manner submit themselves, and render
their service, which he beningly accepted, and commanded them in like manner to
wait on him.

Then rode he on till he came to one of the gates of York; where the Lord
Mayor of the City, the Aldermen, and the wealthiest Commoners, with abundance
of other people met him. There a long Oration being made, the Lord Mayor
delivered the Sword and Keys to his Majesty, together with a Cup of Gold,
filled full of Gold, which present his Majesty gratefully accepted, delivering
the Keys again to the Lord Mayor; but about the bearing of the Sword there
was some small contention, the Lord President taking it for his place, the
Lord Mayor of the City esteeming it his. But to decide the doubt, the Kings
Majesty merrily demanded, If the Sword being his, they would not be pleased,
that he should have the disposing thereof. Whereunto when they humbly
answered, it was all in his pleasure, his Highness delivered the Sword to one,
that knew well how to use a sword, having been tried both at Sea and on Shore,
the thrice honored Earl of Cumberland, who bare it before his Majesty;
ryding in great State from the gate to the Minster. In which way there was a
Conduit that all the day long ran white and claret wine, every man to drink as
much as he listed.

From the Minster his Majesty went on foot to his own house, being the
Manor of Saint Mary's, having all the way a rich Canopie over his head,
supported by four Knights, and being brought thither he was honorably
received by the Lord Burleigh, who gave cheerful entertainment to all the
followers of his Majesty during the time of his continuance in York.

The 17. day being Sunday, his Majesty passed toward York Minster, being
one of the goodliest Minsters in all the Land, England being as famous for
Churches as any one kingdom in Europe, if they were kept in reparations as that
Minster is. To this Minster the King passed to hear the Sermon, and at the
gate a Coach was offered to his Highness. But he graciously answered, I will
have no Coach, for the people are desirous to see a King, and so they shall,
for they shall as well see his body as his face. So to the great comfort of the
people, he went on foot to the Church, and there he heard the Sermon, which
was preached by the Bishop of Lymrick, whose doctrine and method of teaching,
was highly by his Majesty commended. And what his judgment is, is as extant
to us all of any understanding, as the light of the clear midday, or Sun to
every perfect eye. The Sermon ended, his Majesty returned a foot in the same
sort as he came, to his Manor, where he was Royally feasted.

This Sunday there was a Seminary Priest apprehended: who before (under the
title of a Gentleman) had delivered a Petition to his Majesty, in the name of
all the English Catholics; when he was taken, his Highness had some
conference with him: but by reason of other great affairs he referred him to
be further examined by the Bishop of Limbricke, who presenting the effects of
his examination, the Priest was the next day committed.

Dinner being ended, his Majesty walked into the garden of the Palace, being
a most delightful place: where there awaited him a number of Gentlemen of
great name and worth: whose commendations he received from Honorable persons,
and beheld honor charactred in their faces. For this is one especial note in
his Majesty; Any man that has ought with him, let him be sure he have a just
cause, for he beholdes all men's faces with steadfastness, and commonly the
look is the window for the heart. Well, to that I should handle. Amongst these
Gentlemen, it pleased his Majesty to make choice of these following, whom he
graced with the honor of Knighthood.

Sir William Cecill. Sir Edmond Trasford. Sir Thomas Holcraft. Sir John
Mallorie. Sir William Inglesbey. Sir Philip Constable. Sir Christopher Haward.
Sir Robert Swift. Sir Richord worthley. Sir Henry Bellouseyes. Sir Thomas
Ferfax: Sir Henry Griffith. Sir Francis Boynton. Sir Henry Cholmley. Sir
Richard Gargraue. Sir Marmaduke Grimstone. Sir Lancelote Alford. Sir Ralph
Eliker. Sir George Frauil. Sir Mayor Vauasor. Sir Ralph Babthorp. Sir Richard
Londer. Sir Walter Crape.
The same day, his Majesty caused five Gentlemen to be sworn his servants,
which served Queen Elizabeth before time, whose names were M. Richard
Connisbie, M. George Pollord, Vshers: daily waiters. M. Thomas Rolls, and M.
Hariffe, Gentlemen, quarter waiters: and M. Richard Read-head, Gentleman Sewer,
in ordinary of his Majesty's Chamber.

This day likewise, the Mayor of Kingstone upon Hull, delivered to his Majesty
a petition, which was also subscribed and justified by diverse Aldermen of the
said Town, to be done in the behalf of all the poor Inhabitants: who with
one voice besought his Majesty, that they might be relieved and succored,
against the daily spoils done to them by those of Dunkirk, that had long
molested them, and other the English Coast-men. His Highness, as he is
naturally inclined to much pity, so at that time he seemed to have great
compassion of their wrongs and afflictions, which were not hidden from him,
though they had been silent: but he comforted them with this Princely and
heroicke reply: That he would defend them: and no Dunkirkar should after dare
to do any of his subjects wrong. In which assurance they departed, and no
doubt shall find the effect of his kingly promise.

I told you before what bounty the Lord Burleigh used, during the continuance
of the kings Majesty in the Manor: but it was indeed exceeding all the rest
in any place of England before, Buttries, Pantries and Sellars always held
open in great abundance for all comers.

Monday being the 18. day, his Majesty was feasted by the L. Mayor of York,
whom he knighted by the name of Sir Robert Walter, at whose house there was
such plenty of all dilicates as could be possibly devised. After dinner, his
Majesty following the rule of mercy he had begun with, commanded all the
prisoners to be set at liberty, except Papists and wilful murderers. Which
deed of charity effected, he left York; and rode to Grimstone, being a house
of Sir Edward Stanhops, where he lay that night, and dined the next day, his
Majesty and all his Train having their most bountiful entertainment. All the
Offices in the house standing open for all comers, every man without check,
eating and drinking at pleasure. Before his Majesty departed from Grimstone,
he knighted these Gentlemen: Sir Roger Aston. Sir Thomas Aston. Sir Thomas
Holt. Sir James Harington. Sir Charles Montague. Sir Thomas Dawney. Sir william
Bambro. Sir Francis Louel. Sir Thomas Gerret. Sir Robert Walters Mayor of York.
Sir Ralph Conisbie. Sir Richard Musgraue.


The 19. day being Tuesday, his Majesty took his journey toward Doncaster,
where by the way he went to Pomfret, to see the Castle, which when he had at
pleasure viewed, he took horse and rode to Doncaster, where he lodged all
night, at the sign of the bear, in an Inn, giving the host of the house for
his good entertainment, a Lease of a Manor house in a reuersion, of good value.

The 20. day being Wednesday, his Majesty rode toward Worstop, the Noble
Earl of Shrewsburies house: and at Batine, the high Shirife of Yorkshire took
his leave of the King, and there M. Askoth, the high Shiriffe of
Nottinghamshire received him, being gallantly appointed both with horse and
man. And so he conducted his Majesty on, till he came within a mile of Blyth,
where his Highness lighted, and sat down on a bank side to eat and drink.

After his Majesty's short repast, to Worstop his Majesty rides forward, but
by the way in the Park he was somewhat stayed: for there appeared a number of
Huntes-men all in green: the chief of which with a woodmans speech did
welcome him, offering his Majesty to show him some game, which he gladly
condiscended to see: and with a train set, he hunted a good space, very much
delighted; at last he went into the house, where he was so nobly received with
superfluity of all things, that still every entertainment seemed to exceed
other. In this place, besides the abundaunce of all provision and delicacie,
there was most excellent soule-rauishing music, wherewith his Highness was
not a little delighted.

At Worstop he rested on Wednesday night, and in the morning stayed breakfast:
which ended, there was such store of provision left, of foul, fish, and almost
every thing, besides bread, beer, and wine: that it was left open for any man
that would, to come and take. After breakfast his Majesty prepared to remove,
but before his departure he made these Gentlemen knights, whose names are
following.

Sir John Manners. Sir Henry Gray. Sir Francis Newport. Sir Henry Beaumont.
Sir Edward Lockrane. Sir Hew Smith. Sir Edmond Lucie. Sir Edmond Cokin. Sir
John Harper. Sir William Damcort. Sir Henry Perpoint. Sir Thomas Grisbey. Sir
John Beeron. Sir Perciuall Willoughby. Sir Peter Freschewell. Sir William
Skipwirth. Sir Richard Sexton. Sir Thomas Stanley.
The 21. being Thursday, his Highness took his way toward New-warke upon
Trent, where that night he lodged in the Castle; being his own house, where the
Aldermen of New-warke presented his Majesty with a fair gilt Cup, manifesting
their duties and loving hearts to him, which was very kindly accepted.

In this town and in the Court, was taken a Cutpurse doing the deed: and being
a base pilfering thief, yet was all Gentleman-like, in the out side: this
fellow had good store of Coin found about him; and upon his examination
confessed that he had from Barwick to that place, played the cutpurse in the
Court: his fellow was ill mist, for no doubt he had a walking mate: they drew
together like Coach-horses, and it is pity they did not hang together: for his
Majesty hearing of this nimming gallant, directed a Warrant, presently to the
Recorder of New-warke, to have him hanged, which was accordingly executed. This
bearing small comfort to all the rest of his pilfering faculty, that the first
subject that suffered death in England, in the reign of King James, was a
Cutpurse, which fault if they amend not, heaven suddenly send the rest. The
King ere he went from New-warke, as he had commanded this silken base thief,
in justice to be put to death, so in his beninge and gracious mercy, he gives
life to all the other poor and wretched prisoners, clearing the Castle of them
al. This deed of charity done, before he left New-warke, he made these Knights.

Sir John Parker. Sir Robert Bret. Sir Jews Lewkener. Sir Francis Ducket. Sir
William Mumperson. Sir Richard Warbirton. Sir Richard Wigmore. Sir Edmond Fox.
The 22. day being Friday, his Majesty departed from New-warke, toward Beuer
Castle, hunting all the way as he rode, saving that in the way he made these
four Knights, one being the Shiriffe of Notinghamshire.

Sir Roger Askoth. Sir William Sutton. Sir John Stanhop. Sir Brian Lassels.
Sir Roger Askoth, high Shiriffe of Nottinghamshire, being Knighted, took
leave of his Majesty, and Sir W. Pelham high Shiriffe of Lincolneshire,
received his Highness, being gallantly appointed both with Horse and men;
diverse worshipful men of the same Country accompaing him, who conuoyed and
gaurded his Majesty to Beuer Castle, being the right Noble Earl of Rutlands:
where his Highness was not only royally, and most plentifully received, but
with such exceeding joy of the good Earl, and his honorable Lady, that he
took therein exceeding pleasure. And he approved his contentment in the
morning, for before he went to break his fast, he made these Knights whose
names follow.

Sir Oliver Manners. Sir William Willoughby. Sir Thomas Willoughby. Sir
Gregory Cromwell. Sir George Manners. Sir Henry Hastings. Sir William Pelham.
Sir Philip Tyrright. Sir Valantine Brown. Sir Roger Dallison. Sir Thomas
Grantham. Sir John Zouche. Sir William Iepson. Sir Edward Askoth. Sir Oliver
Digby. Sir Anthony Markam. Sir Thomas Cave. Sir William Turpin. Sir John
Ferres. Sir Henry Pagnam. Sir Richard Musgraue. Sir Walter Chute. Sir William
Lambert. Sir Edward Rosseter. Sir Edward Comines. Sir Philip Sterley. Sir
Edward Swift. Sir Basile Brook. Sir William Fairefaux. Sir Edward Bush. Sir
Edward Tyrright. Sir John Thorn. Sir Nicholas Sanderson. Sir Edward Littleton.
Sir William Fompt. Sir Thomas Beaumout. Sir William Skeuington. Sir Henry
Beaumont. Sir Philip Sharred. Sir John Tirril. Sir Edward Carre. Sir Richard
Ogle. Sir Haman Swythcoate. Sir William Hickman. Sir William Fieldings. Sir
Humfrey Conisby.
The 23. day being Satterday, after the making of these Knights, and having
refreshed himself at breakfast, his Majesty took kind leave of the Earl of
Rutland, his Countess, and the rest, and set forward toward Burleigh, and by
the way he dined at Sir John Haringtons, where that worthy Knight made him most
Royal entertainment.

After dinner his Highness removed toward Burleigh, being near Stanford in
Northamptonshire. His Majesty on the way was attended by many Lords and
Knghts: and before his coming, there was provided train-cents, and live hairs
in baskets, being carried to the heath, that made excellent sport for his
Majesty: all the way between Sir John Haringtons and Stanford, sir John's best
hounds with good mouths following the game, the King taking great leisure and
pleasure in the same.

Upon this heath, not far from Stanford, there appeared to the number of an
hundred high men that seemed like the Patagones, huge long fellows, of twelve
and fourteen foot high, that are reported to live on the Main of Brasil,
near to the streights of Megallant. The King at the first sight wondered what
they were, for that they ouerlooked horse and man. But when all came to all,
they proved a company of poor honest suitors, all going upon high stilts,
preferring a petition against the Lady Hatton. What their request was I know
not, but his Majesty referred them till his coming to London, and so past on
from those giants of the Fen, toward Stanford. Within half a mile whereof the
Bailiffes and the rest of the chief Townsmen of Stanford, presented a gift
unto his Majesty, which was gracioufly accepted: so rid he forward through the
Town in great state, having the sword borne before him, the people joyful on
all parts to see him.

When his Highness came to Stanford bridge, the Shiriffe of Lincolnshire
humbly took his leave, and departed greatly in the Kings grace. On the other
part (the Town standing in two shires) stood ready the high Shiriffe of
Northamptonshire, bravely accompanied, and gallantly appointed with men and
horse, who received his Majesty and attended him to Burleigh, where his
Highness with all his train were received with great magnificence, the house
seeming so rich, as if it had been furnished at the charges of an Emperor.
Well, it was all too little, his Majesty being worthy much more, being now the
greatest Christian Monarke of himself as absolute.

The next day being Easter day, there Preached before his Highness the
Bishop of Lincoln, and the Sermon was no sooner done, but all offices in the
house were set open, that every man might have free access to Buttries,
Pantries, Kitchins to eat and drink in at their pleasures.

The next day being Monday the 25. of April, his Highness rode back again
to sir John Haringtons: and by the way his Horse fell with him, and very
daungerously bruised his arm, to the great amazement and grief of all them
that were about his Majesty at that time. But he being of an invincible
courage, and his blood yet hot, made light of it at the first: and being
mounted again, rode to sir John Haringtons, where he continued that night.

And on Tuesday morning, the pain received by his fall was so great, that he
was not able to ride on horseback, but he turned from sir John Haringtons to
take a Coach, wherein his Highness returned to Burleigh, where he was Royally
entertained as before, but not with half that joy, the report of his Majesty's
hurt had disturbed all the Court so much.

The next day being Wednesday the 27. day of April, his Majesty removed from
Burleigh, toward Master Oliver Cromwels, and in the way he dined at that
worthy and worshipful Knights sir Anthony Mildmayes, where nothing wanted in a
subjects duty to his Sovereign: nor any thing in so potent a Sovereign, to
grace so loyal a subject.

Dinner being most sumptuously furnished, the Tables were newly covered with
costly banquets, wherein every thing that was most delitious for taste, proved
more delicate, by the Art that made it seem beauteous to the eye. The Lady of
the house, being one of the most excellent Confectioners in England, though I
confess many Honorable women very expert.

Dinner and banquet being past, and his Majesty at point to depart, sir
Anthony, considering how his Majesty vouchsafed to honor him with his Royal
presence, presented his Highness with a gallant Barbary horse, and a very rich
saddle, with furniture suitable thereunto: which his Majesty most lovingly and
thankfully accepted, and so taking his princely leave, set forward on the way.

In this remove toward master Oliver Cromwels, did the people flock in
greater numbers, then in any place Northward: though many before preast to see
their Sovereign, yet here the numbers multiplied.

This day, as his Majesty passed through a great common (which as the people
there-about complain, sir I. Spenser of London has very uncharitable
molested) most of the Country joined together, beseeching his Majesty that
the Commons might be laid open again for the comfort of the poor Inhabiters
there-about, which his Highness most graciously promised should be performed
according to their hearts desire. And so with many benedictions of the
comforted people he passed on till he came within half a mile of master
Oliver Cromwels, where met him the Bailiffe of Huntington, who made along
Oration to his Majesty, and there delivered him the Sword, which his Highness
gave to the new released Earl of Southampton, to bear before him.

O admirable work of mercy, confirming the hearts of all true subjects in the
good opinion of his Majesty's royal compassion: not alone to deliver from the
captivity such high Nobility, but to use vulgarly with great favors, not
only him, but also the children of his late Honorable fellow in distress.
Well, God have glory that can send friends in the hour he best pleases, to
help them that trust in him. But to the matter.

His Majesty passed in State, the Earl of Southhampton bearing the Sword
before him, as I before said he was appointed, to master Oliver Cromwels
house, where his Majesty and all his followers, with all comers whatsoever,
had such entertainment, as the like had not been seen in any place before,
since his first setting forward out of Scotland. There was such plenty and
variety of meats, such diversity of wines, and those not riffe ruff, but
ever the best of the kind, and the sellers open at any man's pleasure. And if
it were so common with wine, there is little question but the Buttries for
beer and ale were more common: yet in neither was there difference: for who
ever entered the house, which to no man was denied, tasted what they had a mind
too, and after a taste found fullness, no man like a man, being denied what he
would call for.

As this bounty was held back to none within the house, so for such poor
people as would not prease in, there were open beere-houses erected, wherein
there was no want of bread and beef, for the comfort of the poorest creatures.
Neither was this provision for the little time of his Majesty's stay, but it was
made ready 14. days, and after his Highness departure distributed to as many as
had mind to it.

There attended also at master Oliver Cromwels, the heads of the University
of Cambridge, all clad in Scarlet Gowns and corner Cappes; who having presence
of his Majesty, there was made a most learned and eloquent Oration in Latin,
welcomming his Majesty, as also entreating the confirmation of their Charter
and Privileges, which his Majesty most willingly and freely granted. They
also presented his Majesty with diverse books published in commendation of our
late gracious Queen, all which was most graciously accepted of his Highness.
Also Master Cromwell presented his Majesty with many rich and acceptable
gifts, as a very great, and a very fair wrought standing Cup of gold, goodly
horses, floate and deep mouthed Hounds, diverse Hawks of excellent wing, and
at the remove gave 50. pound, amongst his Majesty's Officers.

Upon the 29. day being Friday, after his Highness had broke his fast, he
took kind and gracious leave of Master Oliver Cromwell, and his virtuous
Lady, late Widow, to that Noble and opulent Knight, Seigniour Horatio Paulo
Vicino. Thence with many regal thanks for his entertainment, he departed to
Roiston. And as he passed through Codmanchester, a Town close by Huntington,
the Bailiffes of the Town with their brethren met him, and acknowledged their
allegiance. There, conuoying him through their Town, they presented him, with
threescore and ten Teeme of horse all traced too fair new ploughs, in show of
their Husbandry. Which, while his Majesty being very well delighted with the
sight, demanded why they offered him so many horses and ploughes: he was
resolved that it was their ancient custom, whenever any king of England
passed through their town, so to present his Excellence. Besides they added,
that they held their lands by that tenure, being the kings tenants: his
Majesty not only took well in worth their good minds, but bad them use well
their ploughes, being glad he was Landlord of so many good Husbandmen in one
Town. I trust his Highness, when he knows well the wrong, will take order
for those, as her Majesty began, that turn plough-land to Pastorage: and
where many good Husbandmen dwelt, there is now nothing left, but a great house
without fire: the Lord commonly at soioure near London, and for the Husbandmen
and ploughes, he only maintains a Sheepe-heard and his dog. But what do I
talking of sheep when I am to follow the gestes of a King. I will leave them
and their woluish lords, that have eaten up poor Husbandmen like sheep, and
proceed where I left.

His Majesty being past Godmanchester, held on his way toward Royston, and
drawing near the Town, the Shiriffe of Huntingtonshire humbly took his
leave: and there he was received by that worthy Knight, Sir Edward Deny, high
Shiriffe of Hartfordshire, attended upon by a goodly company of proper men,
being in number seven score, sutably apparelled, their Liueries blew Coats
with sleeves parted in the midst, buttoned behind in Ierkin fashion, and
white dublets, and hats and feathers, and all of them mounted on horses with
red saddles.

Sir Edward after his humble duty done, presented his Majesty with a gallant
horse, a rich saddle, and surniture correspondent to the same, being of great
value, which his Majesty accepted very graciously, and caused him to ride on
the same before him. This worthy Knight being of a deliver spirit, and agil
body, quickly mounted, managing the gallant beast, with neat and eiduing
workmanship, being in a rich suit of a yellow dun color, somewhat near the
color of the horse and the furniture. And thus in brave manner he conducted
his Majesty to one master Chesters house, where his Highness lay that night,
on his own kingly charge.

The 30. day being Satterday, his Majesty took his journey toward Standon,
to Sir Thomas Sadlers, and by the way the Bishop of London met him; attended on
by a seemly company of Gentlemen in tawny Coats and chains of gold. At Sir
Thomas Sadlers, his Majesty was royally entertained, for himself and his
Kingly train: nothing being wanting the best desired, nor that the meanest
could demand. There his Majesty stayed Sunday, before whom the Bishop of
London preached.

His Majesty now drawing near to London, the numbers of people more and more
increased, as well of Nobility, Gentry, Citizens, Countrey-people, and all,
as well of degree, as of no degree; so great a desire had the Noble, that they
preast with the ignoble to see their Sovereign. This being the difference of
their desires, that the better sort either in blood or of conceit, came to
observe and serve; the other to see and wonder.

The first of May being Monday, his Majesty removed to Sir Henry Cocks, being
nine miles from Sir Thomas Sadlers, where provision for his Majesty and his
Royal train, was so abundant, that there was no man of what condition soever,
but had what his appetite desired. For his Majesty's private and most to be
respected entertainment, it was such as ministered his Highness great
contentment. Continuing there but one night, and departing the next day,
honored the good Knight for his greater expenses.

The 3. of May being Tuesday, his Majesty took his journey toward Theobals, a
house belonging to Lord Robert Cecill, and about four miles distant from Sir
Henry Cocks, where met him the Lord Keeper, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord
Admiral, with most of the Nobility of the Land, and Counsel of Estate, who
were graciously received. At which time the Lord Keeper made a most grave,
learned, brief and pithie Oration to his Majesty. To which his Highness
answered with great grace and princely wisdom.

At this house, there met his Majesty, all, or the most part of the old
servants and officers in Household, of our late Royal Mistress Queen
Elizabeth, and with them the guarde of his Majesty's body, all of them being
courteously received to their own content. Also in this house of Theobals, his
Majesty made diverse Noblemen of Scotland, of his Honorable privy Counsel.
Viz.

The Duke of Lennox. The Earl of Mar. The L. Home. Sir George Home, Treasurer
of Scotland. Sir James Elphingston, Secretary to the King. The L. of Kinlosse,
now M. of his Majesty's Rolls.
Also of the English Nobility, he made these of his secret and Honorable
Counsel.

The Lord Henry Howard. The Lord Thomas Howard, who was also made there, Lord
Chamberlain. The Lord Monioy.
His Majesty stayed at Theobals, 4. days; where, to speak of Lord Roberts
cost to entertain him, were but to imitate Geographers, that sets a little
round o. for a mighty province: words being hardly able to express what was
done there in deed, considering the multitude that thither resorted beside the
train, none going thence unsatisfied. At Theobals, his Majesty made these
Knights.

Sir William Killegraue. Sir Francis Barinton. Sir Rouland Litton. Sir William
Peter's. Sir John Brograue. Sir William Cook. Sir Henry Capell. Sir Harbert
Crofts. Sir Edward Grenill. Sir Henry Butler. Sir Henry Maynard. Sir Richard
Spencer. Sir John Leuenthrope. Sir Nicholas Stanhop. Sir Thomas Popeblunt. Sir
Richard Iefford. Sir Thomas Medcalfe. Sir Emanuel Capel. Sir William Smith. Sir
(...) Ferres. Sir Robert Bitton. Sir Vincine Skinner. Sir Hugh Beeston. Sir
John Leigh. Sir Thomas Bishop. Sir (...) Jews. Sir Iaruis Elues. Sir Robert
Barker.
The 7. of May being Satterday, his Majesty removed from Theobals, toward
London, riding through the Meadows, where within two miles on this side of
Waltham, Sir Henry Deny discharged his followers, and there master Swinnerton,
one of the Shiriffes of London, accompanied with the Shiriffe of Middlesex, met
his Maistie, with 60. men in Liuerie cloakes, where an eloquent and learned
Oration was made to his Highness.

Besides these men in Livery cloakes that attented the Shiriffe, all well
mounted on gallant horses, most of the Shiriffes Officers attended him, who
conducted his Majesty within two miles of London. And at Stanford hill, the Lord
Mayor of London presented him with the Sword and Keys of the City, with whom
were the Knights and Aldermen in skarlet gowns and great chains of gold
about their necks, with all the chief Officers and Counsel of the City.
Besides 500. Citizens, all very well mounted, clad in Velvet coats and chains
of gold, with the chief Gentlemen of the Hundreds, who made a gallant show to
entertain their Sovereign.

There also met his Majesty, all his Officers of Estate, as Sergea^ts at Arms
with their rich maces, the Heralds with their coat of Arms, and Trumpetters,
every one in their order and due place. The Duke of Lennox bearing the sword of
Honor beford his Majesty, and so his Highness passed on, in Royal and
imperial manner.

At this time, that honorable old Knight, Sir Henry Leigh met with his
Majesty, being attended by 60. gallant men, well mounted on fair horses,
thirty of them being great horses, many of his men having chains of gold, the
rest wearing yellow searfes embrodered with these words: Constantia and fide.
To this old Knight, his Majesty spoke very lovingly, and so pacedthrough his
troops very well pleased.

The multitudes of people in high ways, fields, meadows, closes and on trees
were such, that they covered the beauty of the fields, and so greedy were
they to behold the countenance of the King, that with much unruliness they
injured and hurt one another, some even hazarded to the danger of death: but
as uncivil as they were among themselves, all the way as his Majesty past
with shoutes and cries, and casting up of hattes (of which many never returned
into the owners hands) he passed by them over the the fields, and came in at
the back side of the Charterhouse.

Thither being come, he was most Royally received and entertained, by the Lord
Thomas Howard, where was such abundance of provision of all manner of things,
that greater could not be: both of rare wild souls, and many rare and
extraordinary bankets, to the great liking of his Majesty, and contentment of
the whole train. He lay there three nights, in which time the Lords of
Counsel often resorted thither, and sat upon their serious affairs. At his
departure he made diverse Knights, whose names are these.

Sir Charles Haward. Sir Ambrose Willoughby. Sir Edward Haward. Sir William
Hastings. Sir Giles Alington. Sir (...) Verney. Sir John Thin. Sir William
Fitz-williams. Sir William Carrell. Sir Edmond Bakon. Sir Francis Anderson. Sir
John Pountney. Sir Edward Darcy. Sir (...) Sidenham. Sir John Tuston. Sir
Thomas Griffin. Sir Valentine Knightly. Sir (...) Wiseman. Sir Thomas Ayleffe.
Sir (...) Cromer. Sir Thomas Rowse. Sir (...) Rodney. Sir Henry Vaughan. Sir
John Smyth. Sir (...) Hamman. Sir Thomas Meade. Sir Eusebius Isham. Sir John
Cowper. Sir Robert Winkfield. Sir Thomas Iosling. Sir Henry Goodericke. Sir
Maximillian Dallison. Sir William Crape. Sir George Fleetwood. Sir Peter Euers.
Sir Henry Clear. Sir Francis Wolly. Sir Arthur Mannering. Sir Edward
Waterhouse. Sir (...) Twisaldon. Sir Hatton Cheek. Sir (...) Goring. Sir
Robert Townsend. Sir William Hynde. Sir William Sands. Sir Robert Cotton. Sir
Oliver Luke. Sir Thoms Kneuet. Sir Henry Sackford. Sir Edwine Sands. Sir John
Absley. Sir William Fleetwood. Sir Walter Mildmay. Sir Edward Lewkener. Sir
Miles Sands. Sir William Kingswell. Sir Thomas Kempe. Sir Edward Tirrel. Sir
Thomas Russel. Sir Richard Touchburn. Sir Thomas Cornwell. Sir Richard Farmer.
Sir William Stafford. Sir Thomas Carrel. Sir Edward Carrel. Sir Thomas Palmer.
Sir John Newdigate. Sir George Rawleigh. Sir Thomas Bewford. Sir William Lower.
Sir Charles Fairefaux. Sir Henry Sidney. Sir George Haruey. Sir Henry Crippes.
Sir John Himmegham. Sir William Bowger. Sir Jeremy Westam. Sir Edmond Boyer.
Sir Nicholas Halseworth. Sir John Gennings. Sir Ambrose Turwell. Sir John Luke.
Sir William Dormer. Sir Richar Saunders. Sir John Shearley. Sir Thomas
Wayneman. Sir Goddard Pempton. Sir Thomas Mettame. Sir Edm. Bellingham. Sir
John Harington. Sir Edward Harington. Sir William Dyer. Sir William Dyer. Sir
Walter Mountague. Sir Guy Palm. Sir (...) Ashley. Sir Thomas Vackathell. Sir
Thomas Stukeley. Sir Edward Watson. Sir Thomas Preston. Sir William Leeke. Sir
Thomas Cornwalles. Sir Edward Francis. Sir Hugh Loss. Sir William Lygon. Sir
Thomas le Gross. Sir John Taskerow. Sir Thomas Fowler. Sir Eusebius Andrew.
Sir Edward Andrew. Sir William Kingswel. Sir Robert Lucie. Sir William Walter.
Sir John Cuts. Sir Richard blunt. Sir Anthony Deerings. Sir H. Vaughan. Sir
John Carew. Sir Edward Apsley. Sir Bartram Boomer. Sir William Alford. Sir
Robert Lee. Sir Thomas Beaumont. Sir Robert Markam. Sir Francis Castilon. Sir
George Sauil. Sir George Martham. Sir Arthur Attie. Sir Pexal Brockhurst. Sir
John Washall. Sir Robert Cleueland. Sir Richard Farmer.
Upon Wednesday the 11. of May, his Majesty set forward from the Charterhouse,
to the Tower of London, in going quietly on horseback to Whitehall, where he
took Barge: having shot the Bridge, his present landing was expected at Tower
stayres, but it pleased his Highness to pass the Tower stairs toward S.
Katherines, and there stayed on the water to see the Ordinance on the white
tower (commonly called Julius Caesar's Tower) being in number 20. pieces, with
the great Ordinance on Tower wharfe, being in number one hundred, and Chalmers,
to the number of 130. discharged and shot off. Of which, all services were so
sufficiently performed by the gunners, that a peale of so good order was never
heard before: which was most commendable to all sorts, and very acceptable to
the King. Then his Royal person arrived at his own stairs, so called the
Kings stairs, and with him these Nobles, besides other gallant Gentlemen of
worthy note: Viz. The Lord Admiral, the Earl of Northumberland, the Lord of
Worcester, Lord Thomas Howard, etc.

At his coming up the stairs, the Sword was presented to his Majesty, by Sir
Thomas Conisby, Gentleman Usher of his privy Chamber, and by the King
delivered to the Duke of Lennox, who bare it before him into the Tower. Upon
the stairs the Gentleman Porter delivered the keys of the tower to the
Leiutenant of the Tower, and the Leiutenant presented them accordingly to the
Kings Majesty: who most graciously acknowledged the most faithful discharge
of the loyal and most great trust put in him, so taking him about the neck,
redeliuered them again. After his repose in the Tower some hour, it was his
Majesty's pleasure, to see some Offices, as the Armorie, the Wardrobe, the rich
Artillery, and the Church. And after for recreation, he walked in the garden,
and so rested for that night.

The next day being Thursday, and the 12. of May, he saw the Ordinance house,
and after that the Mynt-houses, and last of all the Lions.

The next day being Friday, the 13. of May, he made these Lords and Knights
following: Viz. in his presence Chamber, before dinner.

Lord Cecill of Esemdon. Lord Sidney of Penshourst. Lord Knowles of Grascy.
Lord Wotton of Guarleyes. Sir John Deanie. Sir John Traue. Sir Thomas Smyth.
Sir Thomas Hubbard.
And after Noone in the Gallerie- Sir William Dethicke. Garter. Sir Robert
Markam. Sir George Merton. Sir Edmond Bolt. Sir Thomas Paiton. Sir David
Fowls. Sir William Gardner.


FINIS.

