A TREATISE OF ARTIFICIAL FIRE-VVORKS Both for VVarres and Recreation: with
diverse pleasant Geometrical observations, Fortifications, and Arithmeticall
Examples.

In favor of Mathematical Students.

Newly written in FRENCH, and Englished by the Author THO: MALTHVS.

Printed for RICHARD HAVVKINS, and are to be sold at his Shop in Chancerie lane
near to Serieants Inn. 1629.

A TREATISE OF ARTIFICIAL FIREWORKES by F Malthus LONDON for Richard Hawkins
in Chancery Lane. 1629

THE PREFACE Apologetique to the Reader.
ALthough that Wars have been authorized by the divine powers, as witnesses
the new and old Testament, yet me thinks I hear many nice, peevish, and
ignorant brains blaming me for setting down to the view of the world (at a
few leisurely hours) so many ways and inventions how to corrupt and destroy
what nature and art strive to make, edify and conserve, to whom I answer they
have the same reason to exclaim against justice which has found and ordained
many means to abolish and exterminate wicked offenders: for my intention is
here but only to find inventions to confound and ruinate Rebels and their
habitations; that afterward Empires, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths may the
better live in peace and tranquillity: and what more is I have set down
perspicuously this Treatise of Fire-workes, which many heretofore have written
with confusion and great danger, having pend large Volumes with most ample and
idle discourses touching this subject, whose names for modesties sake I will
not here set down with an infamous character to posterity (as Master Robert
Norton has done some few slight offenders names in the Preface to his
translation of Vianos works, which he calls his own, having only added
seven figures taken out of Thybourels book, and transposing the Authors
works to disguise it) that I be not accounted amongst the calumniators of
this age, who write with serpents tongues spitting their venom upon the silent
and sleepi^g innocents gone before us. But I will only show their errors in
general, that the learners may the better avoid them: For in some you shall
see prescribed all sorts of Apothecaries drugges for the compounding of
Fire-workes, which are no more capable of fire then stones, earth, or mettle,
as Adamant-stone, Verdigrease, Cristall, Vitrioll, Salarmoniacke, Sublime,
Mercury, with a number of the like, which in the judgment of ignorants may
produce in Fire-workes wonderful effects. In others you shall find the
conjunctions of combustible materials in such a sort or manner disposed and
ordered to such strange ends, that you would say they were set down to make
the Reader laugh, rather then for service of Fire-workes either for Wars or
Recreation, as the means how to poison an Army in the wide Field by the
smoke of an artificial Ball, is it not to be thought a very pretty
imagination, or else that the Ball ought to be somewhat big; and afterward
which is more ridiculous, you shall find in the same Authors the same
ingredients and mixtures prescribed for Fireworks for Pleasure and Recreation:
which to me seems strange, that the Fire-workes whose smoakes are so venomous
even as to poison Armies in the open Fields, shall be also fit to burn in the
middle of a City or Town amongst thousands of people for Recreations: now
all these idle conceits with a number of the like are printed in many new and
recent books, the Authors whereof doubtless have set down all these
ridiculous inventions by ignorance, (thinking them good) and not of purpose for
spite; and therefore they do deserve pity rather then blame; as well as
Master ROBERT NORTON, (who has erred only in attributing another man's works,
and faults to be his own) and what is it that gives me cause to think that
all these have erred by ignorance, is because that all their works are alike
where that they do speak of Fire-workes. But reading these absurdities with a
great quantity of others, which made me take resolution to set my pen to
paper, and show to posterity how and what way to avoid their errors, having
here set down the true rules and mixtures required for Fire-workes, both for
VVarres and Recreation, with some few Geometrical observations necessary for
the practice of Fireworkes in wars; and also I have added unto it certain
rules and maxims of Fortifications, very requisite for Enginiers to have in
their memory, with a compendious Arithmetike, having written the whole first
in French at some broken hours whilst I followed the wars; and bringing
certain coppies from the Press to my special and very good friends; at whose
requests I have translated the same into English, that others might not
translating it, mistake my meaning; and the work being already but of small
commendations, they to make it of lesser. Adieu. London the 22. of May. 1629.

To the Author.
THy Archimedean hand has learnt to frame
Celestial Meteors out of Nitrous flame:
And represents strange fires of different sorts
Suited to Martial use, and Courtly sports:
So pleasing that great Kings have spared some hours
To be spectators of thy golden showers.
The Thames and Seyne have seen thy Balons fly,
From their affrighted bosoms to the sky:
Swift beyond all belief; as if thy aim
Were, to restore Prometheus theft again.
Were, when their force seems spent, breaking asunder
They rain down stars, or else outroar the thunder.
The Roman Apotheosis I deem,
Would still have had a reverent esteem,
If they had used these miracles of fire,
To mount their Caesar's souls, and bear the^ higher
Then Eagles flight, but now they serve to raise,
The Pyramid and Trophe of thy praise.
And sure thou have attained sufficient glory,
In perfecting the Pyrotecnique story:
Which some took upon trust, and by concealing
Their creditors; made borowing to seem stealing.
But their fire's out, now thine has passed the Press.
For greater fires do extinguish less.
WILLIAM BASTIAN studious in Mathematics.

A TREATISE OF FIRE-WORKES. for War.
CHAP. I.
TO imitate nature, our first and chiefest teacher, who far from error seems
to have produced and brought forth all things ^y a curious and special order;
without whose beautiful disposi^^on on the whole world had still con^^nued in
the most prodigious con^^sion of Caos, which displeased the ^^^ure aspect of
the highest, eternal and divine powers, being but a cloud or mixture of
darkness. My intention is here to institute and observe an order, treating of
every thing one after another in his proper and convenient place: beginning
with artificial Fire-workes, as the chiefest and principal cause which has
urged me to take my pen in hand, the description of those which belong to
wars, shall obtain the first place, and next the Fire-workes for recreation
or pleasure, passing from these to many pleasing Geometrical observations,
as well of Mecanical observation, as by the sines, tangents, and succents,
joining to them a most easy and succent method to fortify all places
regularly and irregularly. And to conclude I will add many brief and
instructiue Arithmeticall examples.

Now to begin with the Fire-workes for wars, I will first describe the
Morter-peece, and the use thereof: that being an instrument, the most noble,
the most universal, the best of greatest effect, and of most wonderful
operation of all the instruments, the practice whereof may be used amongst
Fire-workes for wars, for this instrument may serve for a Petard to split,
break and hurl down doors, gates or walls, likewise to massacre, tear in
pieces, overthrow and confound assailants of any place or breach: and for
diverse other most worthy offices, and accidental occasions, which happen in
the troubles of wars: whereof I will not here make a long, weary, and tedious
discourse, but in few words clearly set down the use of this instrument for
the shooting of diverse sorts of granads, stones, or other weighty burdens to
ruin rebels, their habitations and dwelling places. Then first of all I will
treat of the mettle, whereof this instrument ought to be made, and measures
appertaining thereunto.

CHAP. II. The manner how to make the Morter-Peece.
THis Instrument may be made of diverse sorts of mettle or stuff, according to
the means, times and occasions which shall offer themselves to those who would
make them, or cause them to be made. The first and chiefest matter of all, is
red copper, brass and tin, but very little of the two last, such as Canons
are made of, without any other brickle or harsh met^^^ mingled with it, and
being made of this stuff, let the measures following be observed. If the
diameter of the calliber or bore be one foot, let the mortar be two foot of
length, and let the sack or hole for the powder be the third part of a foot
broad, and half a foot deep, and let the mortar bear in thicknes an inch and
a half, about one foot high, and the rest only one inch thick, the foot
shall be one inch and a half thick, and made square whether the instrument
be for the service of wars, or recreation, as does plainly demonstrate the
Figure A following. The second mettle is iron, such as commonly Ordnance for
ships are made of: and being cast of this stuff, the rules prescribed shall be
found fit, only let the mettle be somewhat ^hicker in every place. The third
and fourth, and most common materials are past-boards and can^as, or
pastboords and chord, and either or these materials must be joined together
with glue, and being to be made of either of these materials there must be
had a woden foot, with the powder sack or hole made hollow below in the wood,
as is represented by the Figure B. the precedent measures being observed which
is the third part of the diametre, etc.

But if the instrument be to be made of either of the two first mettalls, that
belongs to the Founders office, but of the two last materials every man at his
own pleasure may compose it of what size he please, and to begin he must have
a wodden rowler of such bigness as he shall desire to make the diametre of his
Morter-peece, and upon that rowler let the pastbords and canuas with good store
of glue be rolled: which being done, let them dry a while upon the rowler, and
another while off from the ^owler, and when this kind of truncke is very dry,
let the woden foot be joined to the one end with glue and nails very fast; and
then cover the whole with chord and glue again; which being well dried, the
instrument may be of long service, provided that it be not overcharged, and
as for the length, the longest carry furthest, and the thickest dure longest,
by the figure C. precedent the instrument is represented perfect, with the
touchhole in the right place required.

CHAP. III. The manner how to make granades or mettle for the mortar, or hand.
ALl granads being made to break, ought to be composed of the most brickle
mettle that may be found, as of brass, adding the third part of Tin to it. (as
the Founders know right well) they may be also made of iron, or of glass to
cast out of men's hands, so that the glass be made very thick, and these will
work wondrous effects, especially in any throng of horsemen or footmen. And as
for the thickness of those which are made of brass, if the diameter be one
foot, let the mettle be one inch thick, and let them be somewhat longer then
they are round as does demonstrate the figure A. leaving at the one end, as it
were a handle, and on the other, a screwed hole; by which means the granad may
be charged, also, let there be made a hollow vice fitting for the former screw,
which vice shall be filled with a slow composition made with gunpowder well
^ruised and culled, and then made unto past with oil of petrole: but if the
powder be excellent good and strong, then mingle with a pound of powder, one
ounce of Charcoale dust, to make it weaker, then let ^he composition be well
beaten unto the hollovv vice, which is represented by the figure B.

And the granad shall be filled with fine gunpowder, which being full, let the
vice be screwed into the hollow hole of the granade, only it is to be noted
that the vice must not be open at the lower end, but have a bottom sodered
strongly, wherein shall be made three or ^^ure little holes about the bigness
of a tag of a point to give fire to ^^e powder when the granad has f^owne the
space required. For the performance whereof it is needful that you know the
quickness o^ slownesse of the mixture wherewith the hollow screw is to be
fill^d. And for the better experience, it shall be convenient to make of all
of one with a granade made (...) wood, cloth, pastboord, or a^y other stuff
filled with earth, ^ut let it be near to the weight of ^^ose which you desire
to make use of, afterward, and by that means you may know how long ^ou ought
to make your hollow vices, which are called by their ^roper terms Port-fires,
and ^hus much of your granade being performed, now let it be all covered
over, with either Chord, Canuas, or Pastboord, and dipped in glue or in pitch;
this covering may be near half an inch thick: to the end that the granade
going out of the Mortar with violence it break not, and work his execution
upon your self or your company instead of your enemies; of what metal
soever the granad is made, these rules are to be observed, and by the figure C,
is represented a granade quite finished; and dipped into pitch, by which
means it may be conserved many years: these sorts of granads work great
effects falling upon houses; they cast down the wales and coverings,
likewise they work vvonderous operations amongst either horsemen or footmen,
tearing both man and beast in pieces, sparing nothing.

CHAP. IV. The manner how to make Granads of Canuas for the Mortar.
THe operation or execution of these sorts of granads made of Canuas is quite
contrary to those prescribed: these are only fit to set a Town on fire, the
houses whereof are most covered with reed, straw, or broom, they are not of
so violent execution as the precedent, yet notwithstanding of as great cost,
and for the making of them, you must have a wooden ^owler, which is represented
by the ^igure A, of the bigness you desire ^o make the granad (which always
ought to be less then the Calliber or bore of your mortar, to the end ^hey may
be covered afterward) and upon the rowler make a sack of ^uch cloth as you
please, as does re^resent the figure B, cutting a piece to ^ouer the upper end,
when the sack shall be full of the composition fol^owing. Take four pound of
salt^eter, two pound of gunpowder-^ust, two pound of brimstone, all ^hese being
well pulverised, let them ^e moystened with oil of petrole, and then fill your
sackes with the ^ame, and cover them with chord, which done, pierce the sack
full of holes with a great bodkin, as represents the figure E, and in every
hole, place a little iron barrel charged like a pistol barrel, these little
barrells are represented by D, which must be driven into the sack up to the
head, and the granad being thus disposed, let there be made at the one end a
hole about one inch deep, which shall serve to prime it with powder-dust,
moystened with oil of petrole, only it is to be noted that the touch-holes of
the little barrells be made somewhat large, to the end that the rust stop them
not, being ^ong time kept amongst the salt-pe^er, and so they may be conserved
many years, and ready for service ^n all occasions, the figure C. does
^emonstrate the granad perfect and ^urning.

CHAP. V. How to make fiery arrows.
TO avoyde all confusion, I will treat first of all the fires which are cast
with violence, and afterward of those which may be cast out of men's hands. And
first it is to be observed, that fiery arrows are of great effects and noisome
at sea, specially if the ships approach any thing near, so that they may be
(...) or cast into the sails chording (...) of the ships, either by
cros-bowes, long bows, or any other means, for so much as a ship being once a
fire, hardly can it be extinguished. And thus the arrows ought to be made:
first a long shaft of wood, and joined to it an iron head made after the manner
of the figure A, and about the middle of that head, make fast a linen bag in
the form of an olive, leaving open a hole at ^he end before, as may be seen
by the figure B, that it may be filled with the composition following. ^ake
one pound of Saltpeter, half a ^ound of gunpowder-dust, and ^alfe a pound of
brimstone in ^ovvder: all these ingredients ^eeing well mingled, and min^ed
with oil of petrole, then fill ^e bag round about the arrow ^ead, noted by
B, and then let all be well bound about with wyre. And ^r the priming of these
arrows, dip cotton week into gunpowder, wet with water, but let the cotton be
well dried again before it be applied to the arrow head. Now for the joining of
your arrow head, to the wodden shaft it ought to be so slightly fastened to it,
that being shook into any sail, cordage, or wood, so that if any one would
pluck it back, the shaft should slip out of the head, and so continue burning
in the place pretended, and to hinder that one may not pluck out the head with
their hands, there may be made ^ small hole quite through backward, and so the
fire will hinder a man from touching any part thereof, al^hough it should
stick in other of his fellows clothes. There may ^e made little arrows of the
same fa^hion, to be cast out of men's hands in any meetings, assaults, breaches,
or ^ther occasions; and if there shall be ^reat have for the making of them,
^esse fashion may serve, having only ^^ttle sticks of wood, about a foot and
a half long, and in stead of the ^ead prescribed, a pyke (like a ^reat nail)
and in lieu of feathers, pieces of past-boord, stuck into the ends of the wood
being slit, but the former composition shall be required.

CHAP. VI. How the granads are to be charged into the mortar.
ALthough it seem to be but a small difficulty to charge the granads into the
mortar, yet it is the greatest mastery and most curious work which has been
found amongst fireworks, and the most industrious Enginers that ever I yet saw,
have after been deceived therein, and shor ^ut their granads, they not taking
^ire, which is absolutely one of the greatest faults that may be commit^ed.
Then to avoyde such great er^ors it shall be needful to note ma^y observations
following, whereof the first is that you put not too much powder in your
mortar, marmarked A, but only the powder-^ckefull; secondly, that the priming
^f your granad be firm, not spoy^ed with dust or dyrtie moistnes, or other
like thing, that it be not also too dry, least all break about your self
going out of the Mortar taking ^re too quick, which all fireworks ^re very
subject to do, then take ^eed that the granad enter not too ^ardly into the
mortar, which will cause it to break in the discharging, also it is not
needful that it enter too loosely. All these things being well observed, you
must have always ready port-fires for your mortar, which may be made about the
bigness of your little finger, and hollowed within about the bigness of a quill,
even to the bottom, noted B, this portfire is to enter with a vice into the
touchhole of the mortar, about half ^n inch, and to turn the vice without any
key: there may be made 4, buttons at the outside of the upper and, and let
this portfire be charged with a slow composition, mingling 4. ounces of
charcoale with a pound of powder-dust, this being done, and your granad placed
in your mortar, ^o that it shake not, close up the ^hinks round about your
granade, within the mortar, with grease, wax, ^itch and grease, or any such
like thing you may so cover the granad with ^ome such stuff; that in any
weather wet or dry, you shall find no difficul^y to shoot off the granad in any
place wheresoever you please.

CHAP. VII. The manner how to shoot the granads.
THere is no less difficulty well to discharge the granads then to charge
them, but the contrary will easily appear, for it is there where the hazards
and dangers most great, do meet together. And the first of all are the
adversaries Canons from whose dangers the Enginier shall easily conserve
himself, as follows, causing to be made a trench like unto an half moon,
the connexity thereof being toward the enemy, as appears by the figure A,
this trench shall be of such bigness ^s the Enginier may conveniently place
all such things as shall be need^ull for his present use. The second difficulty
following, is how to shoot them right to the places of any Fort ^or Town
desired, being not possible ^o see the places to take leuel at them without
eminent danger of their Canon and musket shot: which difficulty shall be thus
avoided, and ^et leuel right, and send the granads ^o the places required: let
there be ^e two staves set upright, between ^he Town, Fort, or Cittadell and
the Trench, the one of these staves shall be somewhat long, the other may be
^hort, and that, planted upon the ^rim of the trench; but the longest ^omewhat
distant in a right line toward the place pretended, as does demonstrate the
figures BC, these staves shall be so disposed that you may see the extremities
of each, being in the trench out of the enemies sight, and by the sight of
these two extremities, you may direct your granads at your pleasure inclining
your ^orter-piece upon either side, as shall (...) needful without danger of
the e^^mie, having only known the di^^^nce betwixt the trench and the ^wne,
or place of the town which ^^u shall desire to destroy. The third ^^d last
difficulty is to know the true ^^ngth or distance that your mortar ^oth bear,
of which to be certain, ^^u must try it before, shooting gra^^ds of the same
weight, and with one ^^rt of powder, and with a leuel, take ^^vers sorts of
elevations, and so may ^ou know such an elevation does oa^e so far, and such
carry so far with ^^ch powder such a weight, being ^^arged, the manner of taking
these ^^^vations is represented by the figure (...), and the level in a bigger
volume by ^^e figure E, this leuel being placed upon the mouth of the mortar
piece, under the foot thereof: wedges, yo^ may give to the mortar what
incli^nation shall be required: and to b^ sure from all harm of your own^
granads, which by chance may brea^ going out of the Morter-piece, le^ there be
made in the trench a little corner hollow into, or behind the which you may
always retire, ha^ving given fire to the Mortar. It shall be also needful that
some one watch where the granad does fall whethe^ too short or too far; that
you may the better direct the next shot: thi^ method is to be observed in
shooting all sorts of granads, stones, o^ other like things.

CHAP. VIII. A most violent method to set a Town on fire.
HItherto there has not been found any means or invention more certain or
violent, whereby one might convey fire for the destruction of the e^emies
habitations then by the help of the precedent granads, which very hardly cause
any disorder or combustion, unless amongst houses covered with straw, whereof
few are to be found in goodly towns. And therefore I will here prescribe a
^ew way much different from the others before written* against which hardly or
not at all may be made any resistance or possibility for defense, the
violence, rage, and order being of such a fearful power and execution,
provided that the Enginier do but meanly effect his purpose and design, and
for the practice hereof, let there be made a kind of well in the ground but
sloping, as does demonstrate the figure A, of such deepenesse as shall be
thought fit, but it is to be noted, that the nearer you are to the town, the
lesser slooping will be best, and most easy for the performance. The hollow
pit or well being made, let there be placed in the bottom thereof one or two
barrells of gunpowder, as shall be seen needful, according to the proximite or
^^stance between the place and ^^wne, and these barrels may be places ^^^ry
conveniently placed with good ^ore of straw about them to keep ^^em from the
moystures of the ^^rth. And in one, or else in both, (...) shall place a
gunlocke, making (...) to the clicket thereof a chain of sufficient length to
reach out of the hole upon the plain ground, but this chain shall be
curiouslyy lodged in a small gutter, which afterward shall be covered with
earth, to the end that the fire do not ouer-heate it, then cover the barrells
of powder with strong wooden planckes, or broad stones, covering them again
with earth, and then lay good store of fresh straw and bauins, and fagots, and
in the midst of these let there be placed a great faggot, made of pieces of
timber, of a reasonable length, being well bound together with chains of iron
in three or four places, as does appear by the figure B, and then set fire on
the straw wood, and all that shall be in the pit* giving the great wood time to
kindle, and this great faggot being in a great arder, let the chains be drawn
which are tied to the latches of the gunne locks, and doubtless you shall see
brave sports; and if there be many pieces of Ordnance about the town or place
thus besiedged, let them be all disposed ready to shoot where this great faggot
falls, and whosoever would hut this invention in practice, ought to make many of
these pats about a town, giving fire to them all at once: but the Inginier to
know justly how far these great flaming fagots may fly, the hollow pit
declining so many degrees, he ought to make trial before in some large place,
where he may have room for his experience: now rests only to explicate how a
man may give fire to the stra^ in the pit without danger, for so much that
every man would not least all should take fire together. Then to be free from
this peril, it may be fired by a train of powder, by a Gunlocke, a piece of
match, a candles end, or other like invention: Peradventure, you may think
that there may be danger in drawing the chain when all is on fire; to which I
answer these may be joined to it, a chord of such length as shall seem
necessary; The Enginier who shall put this in practice, may add of his
invention what he thinks fit, Facilius est enim addere invento quam in venire.

CHAP. IX. How to make Granads to cast with men's hands.
HAving taught how to make Granads for the Mortar, which by the violence of
that most wonderful instrument may be transported very far over waters,
walls, or bulwarks, working strange and rude executions or effects, I will now
show how it shall be easy to make two or three sorts of Granads to be cast
out of men's hands, the effects whereof are no less to be esteemed then the
other, chiefly in assaults, whether it be for the offendants or defendants. The
chiefest and of greatest operation is made of any kind of brickle mettle as the
precedents* and their fabrication is not much different from the other, only
more rounder and lesser, and the single ones having a long neck to seem for the
Port fire, as does appear by the figure A, and first of all the granad is to
be filled with fine gunpowder, and afterward fill the neck with a slow
composition as follows. Take 1. pound of gunpowder dust, two ounces of
charcoale d^ust three ounces of saltpeter, al these well mingled together, fill
the portfire required, but this mixture must be well beaten into the port-fire,
and the granads being thus finished, they may be kept a year, ten years, yea
twenty if need be. It is to be noted that ^hese granads must not be freed
until a man is ready to cast them away even in the same instant, because the
port-fire being consumed, the granad breaks in diverse pieces, and each piece
sufficient to kill either man or beast, and therefore the handling of them is
somewhat dangerous. The second manner of Granad to be cast out of the hand, is
made also of brickle mettle, but has no neck for a Portfire, but is only
round, having in one side a hole as appears by the figure B, and at this hole
it is to be filled with dry powder, and then is to be put into this hole to
stop it, cotton wieke made as follows. Take good Gunpowder and steep it in
fair water, and being dissolved, take the cotton wieke and steep it in the
Gunpowder dissolved, which done, hang it out to dry; but let it be doubled
eight or ten times, to the end that it may the better receive the powder, and
being dry, cut it in such pieces as you shall need, putting the one end into
the Granad at the hole, and then put that Granad into another pot a little
bigger then the Granad, as appears by the figure C, so that you may put a
little dry powder round about the lesser Granad between the pots and Granad,
then cover the mouth of the last earthen pot either with leather or such like
stuff; and bind it round about with wyre, but first put the wire through
pieces of match about half a foot of length as may appear by D, and when you
desire to make use of this sort of granad, set on fire every end of these
pieces of match, and cast the pot away, which falling either upon the ground,
or any soldiers Armor, you shall see the earth-pot break, the Granad split,
and work such furious effects, either at a breach or any approach. The third
sort of Granad is made much like to either of those precedent, except only it
may be made double or single, of glass or of earth only shall be needful to
be made very thick, and if it be to be made single, the portfire ought to be
either of wood or of pastboord, and well glued in, and this last sort may work
great effects. Now having somewhat largely treated of the mortar, granads, and
of their use, I will speak a little of other oily fireworkes very pernicious
and noisome to all assailants.

CHAP. X. How to make fiery wheels to be cast with men's hands.
FOr as much as every soldier will not meddle with making nor casting out of
his hands granads, the handling of them being somewhat dangerous, I will here
teach another manner of fireworkes, which is not much less offensive, which
being well compounded and compacted, and for the making thereof, these are more
ingredients required, then for the precedents, and is more difficulty in
making of them as follows, Take four pound of gunpowder in dust, one pound
of charcoale dust, two pound of tar, two pound of saltpeter, and one pound
of Rosin. All these ingredients being well mingled and heat over the fire,
steep tow or flax in the same, ^n^ then wrap the tow or flax about ^^ whope,
which is represented by A, and then cover all this again with Gunpowder dust,
and in time of need give fire to them, and cast hem amongst your enemies;
only is to be observed that the whops or circles ought not to be to large,
but falling upon a many of soldiers they may there stay and stick, and to
make them more troublesome and intangling, two may be tied a cross on another,
and then falling upon any man, he cannot choose but be much astonished with
such a fearful eleme^t, and put his company in great disorder.

CHAP. XI. How to make a Ship of wild Fire.
AFter a sufficient discourse of all manner of Granads, fiery arrows and
burning wheels, I cannot think it extravagant or amiss to lay open to the
industrious or curious, a method how to make a fiery ship at sea, which shall
not begin to burn till it hit against some other vessel, rock, or such like
obstacle, or be hooked or grapled on the inside to be drawn a shore. He that
will undertake to build one of these must spare no reasonable cost to put his
intentions or designs in execution, and first of all must be had one ship or
many, according to the times and occasions wherein they shall be required; and
within the ship shall be disposed great store of broken Canons well charged
with bullets, and from one Canon to another shall be joined a port-fire, so
that the first, having taken fire, all the rest must need do the same; these
Canons shall have their mouths put out of the Gun-ports ready to be
discharged; this done, let there be good store of dry straw, small dry wood,
and tow and flax steeped in pitch, turpentine, rosine, and tar; mingle and
wrap the tow thus steeped, about and amongst the wood and straw, and place it
between all the Canons; the straw and small wood shall be so disposed, that it
may take fire when the best part of the Canons are discharged, and the piece of
Canon which is to give fire to the straw, shall be set with the mouth upward to
blow part of the deck away, and at the same time give fire to great store of
granads of all sorts, to add musket-barrells to barrells of Gunpowder ranged
in order above the deck, to blow out these things by order, now one, then
another by the help of slow portfires, but the beginning of this sport ought
to be very violent and furious, to frighten and also tear in pieces the
enemies at once, and that the rage hereof be the more furious, let the greatest
part of the Canons ^^oot off thick one after another e^^n with the water, and
at the same (...) the Granads shall fly the one ^^re off, the others fall
near, now a ^^rrell of gunpowder blows out a ^^rt of the flaming ship here,
and a^n another barrel cast out a quar^^^ of the vessel ardent there,
casting ^^uers sorts of fire here and there as ^ls, arrows, granads, double
and ^^gle ones, made of the compositi^^ prescribed in the 5. and 10. chap^^^s,
but to hinder all the barrells of ^^wder from taking fire together, which is no
small difficulty, every ^^rrell ought to be plastered over, ^^d then covered
with glue and a ^^re-cloth, and then put into another ^^rell; but to make them
take fire e^^^y one at your pleasure, put a Port^^ unto the^, of such length,
and slow composition, as you shall think fit^ting. Now to begin this mad spor^
fasten three or four good strong gunlockes within the ship, at one en^ of the
train, which is to give fire to the first Canon, and to every clicke or tackit
of the locks, fasten an yro^ rod, and let the other end of the (...) rod pass
through the ship, and ^ee made fast to pieces of strong wood, in the manner of
a gyrdle on ^he outside of the ship, which is re^resented in the figure by the
points; ^o that touched upon the outside a^y thing rudely, the locks must needs
^trike fire, and set going all the rest; and to make it give fire being hooked
in the inside, to draw it ashore, (...) out of the way, let there be made ^ast
to each clicket of the locks, long wyers, and the other ends of the wyres may
be fastened to pieces of wood in the inside of the ship, round about the edge,
so that the first thing that shall touch it, sets all going as upon the
outside, but the pieces of wood upon the outside ought to be very near the
water, as does demonstrate the figure with the points, and so to conduct this
ship as near to t^^ place as may be, without dang^^ there may be fast ioind
to the stern piece of timber noted A, B, to the en^ whereof may be fastened two
lon^ ropes, and to them two little boats, i^ which men shall be for the
condu^cting thereof. This here is but a spar^ of invention, to which the
industri^ous Enginier shall add of his wha^ he please, and take this but for
an entry of such works; for although have here set down gunlockes* t^ give
fire to the Canons, my meaning is that they be made like gunlocks but ten
times stronger, and harder i^ going off, leaving to the iudgemen^ of the
discreet Enginier, the true disposition of his own designs.

CHAP. XII. How to make a Petard.
DIego Vsan, a Spaniard, Francis Tibourele a Loreine, and Master Robert Norton
an English man, having al written of fireworks, and neither of them all
understanding how to charge a simple Petard, I thought fit to end these
fireworkes for wars by the description of the same, that being of great
violence to make entries and breaches into towns castles, or houses, the mortar
prescribed, may serve to petard a place as has been said already: but
whosoever would make exactly a Petard, ought to cast a Mortar much like unto an
Apothecaries mortar, as does represent the figure A, observing the rules
following, if you make it, to weigh six pound of mettle, let the calliber or
bore be of such bigness to contain one pound of powder* or one pound and a
half: if you add or diminish more or less mettle, augment or diminish the
calliber likewise, to hold the fourth part of powder which the mettle does
weigh; and for the charging of the Petard, fill it only with the best gunpowder
you can, almost to the brim; and then cover it with a round board made fit for
the purpose, leaving aside all frivolous directions, written by others
aforenamed; and for the ^riming of the Petard, make a port-fire of slow
composition, as for the precedent fireworkes of what length you please; and to
break open the place you desire if it be accessible, then with the heel or
breach of the Petard upon the ground or some great stone or piece of wood, and
the mouth against the part of the door, gate, or elsewhere, which you shall
judge fittest, but if the place be inaccessible, then make a kind of a little
Cart with two or four wheels, as does appear by the figure B with a long
forke very strong to bear the Petard, and also support the requile of the
Petard shooting off: This forke is represented by C, but the backer end of this
forke must be stayed either in some hole, or against a stake, or other means;
Now here in this treaty not intending to imitate these late Authors, who
writing of artifi^iall Fireworkes; have prescrbed natures and compositions of
almost all manner of drugges, the means whereof may be found in any
Apothecaryes shopppe, doubtless either to persuade the curious Readers that
they had profound knowledge, many rare secrets, or else the better to hide
their ignorance, by that great confusion and expense, whereunto few or none
would extend and use their purses to make proof and experience of. I will
finish this treaty of artificial Fire-workes for Wars, and go forward to
the second treaty of Fire-workes for pleasure and recreation, and explain in
the Preface apologitike, for what use all these unknown dregs are fit for,
which seems to those that are ignorant of such rare and wonderful effects. As
Salarmoniake, Antemonie, Arseneeke, Vitrioll, Stonelime, Thutie, Adamant stone,
not forgetting quick silver.

THE SECOND TREATISE OF Artificial Fire-workes for pleasure.
CHAP. I.
PErspicuous and plain shall be the method to make all manner of Fire-workes
for pleasure, (which hear I will set down for the contentment of all curious
and ingenious Artists) without such a number of unknown dregs for mixtures,
as many heretofore have prescribed more fittest for some prodigious actions,
then to mingle for artificial fireworkes; and principally for those which are
invented for pleasure, for these have no need of venomous smoaks to poison the
spectatours, making mirth turn to mischief (which notwithstanding cannot be
done in an open air) neither have they need of such a continuing, ardent and
violent flame, as to consume Cities or habitations, but only of a gentle and
pleasing flame to the eyes of the spectactors; and thus they are divided into
three sorts; The first are those which ascend and mount into the air; The
second are such as consume upon the earth; The third and last sort, are those
which swim and burn in the water. Those which work their effects in the air,
are ^^kewise divided into three sorts, the ^hiefest and most noble of all are
the ^allouns; The second the rockets; and the third are flying saucissouns,
those which stand fixed upon the ^round are also distinguished into ^hree sorts;
The first are the rockets ^or the ground, the second the fiery ^nces and the
third saucissouns: The ^res for the water, may have their ^iple division;
globes or balls make ^he first, double rocket; the second, and single ones the
last; and to treat ^f every one in particular, I will begin ^ith the rockets
for the air; and ^^rst of all describe their moulds, and ^he measures which
must be obser^ed in making of them.

CHAP. II. A method to make moulds for rocket for the Air.
ALthough that ballou^ are absolutely the most noble sort of fir^ works, yet
for so much as all great fireworkes are compose^ rather of rockets, then of
balloun^ I think it convenient, to begin th^^ second treatise with these:
first of a^^ making the description of the moulds, which may be made eith^^ of
brass or wood, the one being (...) good as the other for use, if the mea^sures
following be observed; which ^^all be convenient for all sorts of ^^gnesses,
because they depend one^^ upon the calliber or bore, and that ^eing enlarged,
the other parts will ^e all enlarged also, that being dimi^^shed, all the rest
will be diminished ^^kewise. Then to make a mould, the ^^lliber whereof shall be
suppored an ^^ch of diamer, and is represented (...) the figure A, then the
mould ^ight to be six inches in length; (...) the breech which is represented
^y the figure C, must enter into the ^ould one inch and a half, and the ^och
noted with O, should be three ^^ches and a half long, and a quar^^r of an inch
in bigness, and the ^^wler D, which is to roll the ^artoush or coffins of
paper upon, ^^all be three quarters of an inch in ^^gnesse, and the rammer E,
to charge and ram the rocket, shall be some what less then the rowler, to the
en^ that it may enter easily into the ca^^toush or coffins.



Also it shall be made hollow, (...) deep as the broch is long, as dot^
appear at P, because the rocket mu^^ be loaded, the broch being in it, (...)
^^r the massif marked with F, shall be (...) the same bigness as the charger.
^he 2. other ^owlers noted G, G, or (...) make serpents, as shall be instru^^ed
hereafter, and the bodkin H, is (...) make holes through your stars, (...)
shall follow, the Lantern I, is pro^er to charge the composition into (...)
rockets. The figure noted K, is (...) cartoush or coffin ready to be ^harged,
and by the figure L, is re^resented a rocket quite made. This ^ethod prescribed
may be observed (...) all sorts of moulds, for if you ^ould make one lesser, as
of half an ^^ch, the calliber or bore, then the ^^ngth must be 3. inches,
which is 6. ^alfe inches, the breech shall enter 3. ^uarters of an inch, the
broch shall be (...) inch 3. quarters long, and the rowler ^^r the cartoush
shall be half a quarter of an inch; but if you make the calliber of two inches
of diameter, (...) the mould be 12. inches in length the breech shall be 3
inches, and the broch 7. inches of length; and so for all the other parts
appertaining to the mould. Now follows the descript^^on and manner how to make
a ro^^ket.

CHAP. III. How to make a flying rocket for the Air.
FOr to make the mixture or composition of all middle-sized rockets, take a
pound of gunpowder finely ^uised and boulted with two oun^^s of charcoale-dust,
mingle these ^ell together, and try one rocket, which if it break, add more
char^^ale dust to the composition; but the rocket do not ascend, being ^^eak,
add more powder dust boul^^d as before said; and so shall you make your
composition stronger (...) weaker according to your desire; ^^stead of
charcoale, you may put se^^coal^, saw-dust, or any other lik^ thing, so that
you keep a Medium not putting too much nor too little which thus you shall
know if the rocket mount not, you have adde^ too much coledust; but if it
break^ you have not put coledust enough for the charcole-dust which you p^^
into the powder dust, is only to m^derate the violence of the powder and to
make the rockets tail appe^^ more beautiful; which sea-coa^^ does as well as
charchoale, and (...) charge the rocket with this comp^sition as it ought to be
many rul^ are required or to be observed; and (...) of all that in charging the
rocket, yo^ put not too much composition at on^^ in the cartoush or coffin; 2.,
that (...) ^e beaten with a mallet 3. or 4. good ^^rokes; and then put new
composi^^on thereupon, beating it again with ^^lowes as before; and thus
putting (...) at several times the quantity of ^ne or two spoonefulls, at each
time ^eating it well with a mallet, and let ^ot the cartoush be filled higher
^hen the mould, but being just full ^hereto, then double down half of ^he
paper with the bodkin beating it ^as ^he composition before) and at last ^ierce
2. or 3. holes with the same ^odkin to the powder to give fire, to ^ither
stars, serpents, or faucessous, as shall be taught following; and these ^oles
are represe^ted by C, let the rest of the cartoush be cut even with the mould,
and thus must be made all ^orts of rockets, great or little ones. ^t is to be
noted, that the composition prescribed is fit; for all sorts of rockets, great
or little, but only it must be made weaker for great one^ then for little
ones, adding more charcoale to it, for the whole secret is in making the
composition neither to strong, nor to weak, and not as al writers hitherto
have thought, following each one the others errors, thinking that the true
manner of making excellent rockets, is to put many ingredients into their
compositions, wherein they have all erred absurdly; and last of all Master
Norton, for absolutely the best composition is, that which is made of fewest
ingredients; and the rockets made thereof may be kept many years, and good at
all times.

CHAP. IV. How to make moulds for Rockets for the ground.
THe mould must be otherwise made then the precedent, because such violence is
not required in these, as in those which mount into the air, but only of
somewhat longer continuance; and therefore these measures following shall serve
at all times, never being made bigger nor lesser, but always the same for all
occasions. Let the calliber behalf an inch, the diameter; and 5. or 6. inches
of length; and the rowler for the cartoush shall be four lines in diameter
which is the third part of an inch, and the rowler to charge withal somewhat
lesser to enter without spoiling the cartoush: next let not the broch be longer
then 3. quarters of an inch; and the breech shall enter half an inch into the
mould; and the cause of this great alteration is, that the rockets which mount
into the air, have need of great and violent strength; and by consequence last
not long, but we desire that those upon the ground may dure a long while, with
a gentle motion, which shall be easily performed, the rules following being
observed.

CHAP. V. How to make the composition for rockets upon the ground.
THis is the easiest composition of all others, for in this shall be nothing
required, but only Gunpowder well beaten and boulted, so that it be as fine as
flower, and then fill your rockets by little and little, well beating it into
the cartoushes or coffins with a mallet, as the rockets for the air, and being
full within an inch of the brim of the mould, double down one quarter of the
paper, or cartoush, beating or pressing it with 3. or 4. good strokes of the
mallet, and then with your bodkin, pierce a hole to the composition; which
done; put into the cartoush about the charge of a Pistol, of good gunpowder,
and then double down the one half of the cartoush, giving a gentle blow or two
with the mallet, and with a small cord, or big line, choke the rest, and what
shall rest above the choking, cut it off, leaving a piked point, as appears
by the figure E, in the 3. chapter of this Treatise; and your rocket being thus
finished, and primed with a little wet powder, and laid a drying, shall be
ready for all occasions.

CHAP. VI. The manner how to make Serpents.
THe Serpents are to be made either of the composition for rockets on the
ground, or of that for the air; for being filled with the composition fitting
for the grouund; they will spread and sparkle lively in the air, but if
filled with the other composition, they will fall weaving nearer together;
notwithstanding either sort will show diverse pleasing actions in the air,
being made as follows. Let the cartoush be about four inches long and rolled
upon a rowler, somewhat bigger then a goose quill, as is represented by the
precedent figure G, in the third chapter, the paper ought to go about the
rowler nine or ten times, and then choked almost in the middle, yet leaving a
little hole to see through, and the longest part shall be filled with the
composition, but the shorter with fine grayned powder, and choked close; also
the longest end must be half choked close; as does appear by the figure F,
chapter third but if you desire not to have them wamble in the air, then let
them not be choked after the composition, but as does represent the figure G,
both which figures, F, G, represent Serpents quite finished.

CHAP. VII. How to make golden rain.
MAny there are (specially in France) who make rockets, yea and boast that they
are perfect therein, who know not what golden rain is, but think it to be
some other thing then it is; wherefore to put them out of doubt, and to teach
all others who desire the knowledge thereof, I will here set down the
description and manner how to make it. Take goose quils, and cut off the hollow
ends, leaving them as long as may be, as the figure K, does demonstrate third
chap. and fill these quils with the composition of rockets for the air, at the
last stopping every one with a little wet powder to keep in the dry powder,
and crowning a rocket with these (as shall be taught following, chap. 12. in
its true place) will show a most glorious and pleasing rain, which some having
in times past seen, have called it golden rain for the beauty thereof, but of
later times it is more commonly called golden hear: many beautiful and strange
figures may be represented in the air, with this manner of rain, as shall
follow in the 13 chap. treating how to represent many sorts of figures in the
air with rockets.

CHAP. VIII. The manner how to make Stars.
ALthough that there be many sorts of compositions for stars, yet I will set
down here but two of the best; all the rest being nothing worth, but frivolous
and expensiue: the first and best sort, is to be made of dry powder, and the
other of moystened powder as follows. For the ^^sort take 1. pound of
saltpeter, half a pound of brimston, and a quarter of a pound of gunpowder
dust, al these being plu^ri^ed and mingled together, wrap the quantity of a
nutmeg in tow in a linen rag, or in paper, and bind it fast, as appears by
the precedent figure H, chap 3* and to prime them, you must pierce them with
the bodkin, and put stoupell or cotton wieke dipped in powder through them (which
shall be made as follows in the 11. chap.) and to make the second sort, take
1. pound of saltpeter, and half a pound of powderdust, and half a pound of
brimstone all these well pulverised and mingled together, moysten them with
either oil of petrole, or else wi^h fair water only, to make a past of them,
whereof make little balls about the bigness of a musket bullet, and whilst they
are moist, roll them in dry powder dust, then let them dry, and then may you
employ them at your pleasure, without further trouble; for the last powder in
which they are rouled, does serve for their priming. This last sort of stars
does not make so beautiful a show in the air as the others, for falling
down, the flame of them takes the form of a lamp, having no force to expel
it like wings as the others do, for the flame of the others blowing out of the
two sides pierced, make it stretch in length, and by that means show greater
in the air.

CHAP. IX. How to make Stars giving great Reports.
TO make Stars, that each one shall give a report like a Pistol or bigger
gunne, you must first make little saucissons (as I taught in the chapter
following, but the saucisson need not to be covered with chord) and being made
and pierced, take as much of the former dry composition, and bind it to the end
of the saucisson which is pierced, making a hole through the composition, and
pass a piece of stoupell or cotten-wieke as in the other stars; but if you
take of the moist composition, you may only leave the paper hollow at the end
of the saucisson, fitting to contain the quantity of composition required,
putting a little grained powder before, and prime these stars as the others,
of the same composition; these stars are very troublesome and little in use,
because that a great rocket can carry but few up into the air, and by
consequence work but a small effect, and moreover they are very long in
making. One may make Stars in the same manner, which ending, turn to
serpents and others as shall please the workman.

CHAP. X. The manner how to make Saucissons.
IN this chapter, my intention is not to treat of the saucisson which flies
into the air, but only of that which stands firm in great works, or else
which is applied to rockets, which thus is made as follows; you must have a
rowler of such bigness as you desire to have the concauity of your saucisson,
whereupon roll as much paper as you please, and then choke it at the one end;
which done, fill it with grayned powder, and choke the ^ther end also, and
cover all the sau^isson from the one end to the other, with small chord, as
does represent ^he figure I. chap. 3. and glue that lord with strong glue all
over, and when you would make use of these ^aucissons, pierce them at the end
with your bodkin, and put into the ^ole a quill filled with fine powder dust,
which shall serve for a portfire, and the other end of the quill shall pass
through a board, whereupon you mean to fasten them, and shall enter into a
portfire in the other side of the wood, which shall be fastened all along the
wood, and so may you fasten what store you please near together, or far
asunder, this quill is represented by the figure L, and by this means one end
of the (...) fire beginning; all the whole ran^ of saucissons will give their
repor^ one after the other. But if your sa^^cisson is to be applied to a
rocket, shall only be pierced at one end, a^^ primed with a little grained
powde^ and fasten it to the top of the rock^ either with paper, parchment, or
an^ thing else, so that the rocket, endi^ the saucisso^, may take fire; so shall
yo^ not fail of your intent or design.

CHAP. 11. How to make Stoupel or preparing of your Cotton wieke.
TO make Stoupell, not the meanest, but the best that may be made to give fire
(which in ^per term is called estoupel^^g) to all manner of fire-workes.
(...) Cotten-wieke, and double it ^oft as shall be needful for your (...), as
if it were to estoupel your fie^ances; then double it eight or ten ^^es, and
also for the stoupeling of great rockets; but if it be to (...) through your
stars, then 4. (...) threads shall suffice; so having do^ led your cotton
wieke fitting for yo^ purpose, steep it in fair water, (...) then wring it
between your han^ and take gunpowder dust, without other mixture, and steep
it in (...) water, not putting too much wat^^ nor too little, but only till it
app^ like dirt, and then put into it (...) cotton wieke, and there turning a^
winding it till it has sufficiently (...) powder in every place and (...)
cell, then draw it out, putting a (...) dry dust upon it, and hang it a dry^ in
the sun or els-where, and (...) being dry, you shall have the (...) excellent
stoppel that may be man for your use at al times, leaving (...) all such
ingredients which ignora^^ ^^^^eme so highly of, as Aqua-vitae, (...) wine,
strong lee, quicklime, ^ger, urine, and diverse others, for ^ich I would not
lose so much (...) time as to repeat them, but (...) go forward, and show how
to (...) all the parts of a rocket.

CHAP. XII. The manner how to assemble and set together the parts of a rocket.
WHen the rocket is finished and taken out of the mould noted A, in the figure
of the 3 chapter, an^ the rocket is noted with the letter ^ in the same figure,
then must yo^ join to the end of the rocket, which is not choked an empty
cartoush (...) coffin, much bigger then the rocke^ is large, which is
represented by (...) in the same figure, in this cartous^ you shall put your
serpents, golden rain, stars, saucissons, or other things at your pleasure,
but first of (...) you must put in the bottom powder dust; only enough to
cover the bottom of the large cartoush; and then put the serpents with the
ends downward which are to take fire; and likewise the golden rain in the
same manner, but it is the custom to put a little powder dust amongst the
stars; this cartoush being thus filled, cover it with a single piece of paper,
and afterward paste upon that a picked cap made also of single paper, and to
make perfect your rocket you must bind a rod of such length and weight, that
being bound to the rocket, it must weigh down the rocket on your finger being
near to the rocket, and then stoupel your rocket, that is to say, prime it
with cotton-wieke, and it is thus finished either ^o fire or keep.

This method is fit for all sorts of rockets, great ones or little ones, except
that little ones must have the upper cartoush no bigger then the rocket, only
to hold half a dozen of stars or serpents, or one saucisson for so much as
many being fired together, great confusion would happen, if great rockets
should be put together, and not prepared otherwise.

CHAP. XIII. How to represent diverse sorts of figures in the Air with Rockets.
THe first and most rarest is a tree or fountain, and is made putting many
little rockets upon one great rocket, passing all the rodes of the little ones
through the large cartoush of the great rocket, and if the little rockets take
fire while the great one is mounting up, they will represent a tree: but if
they take fire when the great rocket is turning down again toward the
ground, then they will be like to a fountain of fire, and if there be two or
three little rockets having no rods amongst others they will make diverse
motions contrary to the rest most pleasing. The second figure is the golden
rain; and that is made when many quils filled (as aforesaid) are put upon a
great rocket: for certainly all those quills taking fire will seem like a
great shower of fiery rain to those who are under it, but to those who are a
side of, like beautiful long hair. The third figure are Stars, which are
represented putting only many Stars upon a great rocket. The fourth are
serpents which are already described, but to make all these prescribed figures
vary, you may tie many little ones together by the ends, which take not fire,
the quils, or serpents may be tied in like manner; but the thread wherewithal
they are tied, must be at least two or three inches long, betwixt each one, and
you shall see diverse sorts of figures in the air, changing themselves into
much variety.

CHAP. XIV. How to make fiery boxes.
THe fire-boxes are made of many rockets being put into a large cartoush the
bottom whereof is covered with powder dust, and pierced in the middle to pass
through a port fire or stoupell, to give fire to the rockets within the
cartoush or coffin, which flying out, leave the cartoush most commonly whole
and vncracked, those boxes are only to be cou^red with a piece of paper, that
the rockets taking fire may fly out without resistance; and the reason why
they are to be covered, is because if many be made one near to another, they
should not take fire all at once.

CHAP. XV. How to make fiery Lances.
THe use of these lances is always required in all great fireworkes, wherefore
here shall be described the manner of their making. Their cartoushes are to be
made as other cartoushes for rockets; only these may be made of pastbord, and
glued as they are a rolling, if it be to make great ones, but if for little
ones, then paper shall suffice, the cartoushes being made, let them be filled
with the dry composition prescribed for stars in the 8. chapter of this
treatise, and prime them with wet gun powder, and the lower end of the cartoush
is commonly stopped with a piece of wood, to the end that they may be nailed
or stuck when they shall be needful, the wood being about two inches long
out of the cartoush.

CHAP. XVI. The manner how to make Rockets for the water.
TAke fire and water being two elements of contrary qualities, the one to the
other cause the rockets which work their effects in or upon the water to
appear to the spectators more beautiful, and seem more rare and admirable,
although that all sorts of rockets being fired, will work their effects upon
or under the water, but this only is to be noted, that those which are made
for the air, or for the ground, have such strength and force, that being once
kindled and cast into the water, they will consume themselves there, and not
rise up swimming as those which are made artificially for the water as
follows. To make good rockets for the water, the calliber of the mould ought
to be one inch of diameter, and in length eight inches, the breech to enter
one inch, having no broach; the rowler for the cartoush shall be three quarters
of an inch of diameter, and the charger shall be somewhat lesser then the
cartoush being ready to be filled as the others. Of two sorts of composition,
you shall make one as follows (if you desire to make a great fiery tail
appear upon the water, Then take one pound of saltpeter, half a pound of
powder-dust, half a pound of brimstone-dust, and two ounces of charcoale-dust:
but if you desire to have it to burn clear like a candle upon the water, then
take one pound of saltpeter, half a pound of brimstone-dust, and three ounces
of powder-dust, all these must be well mingled together, as all other
compositions) and with either of these compositions, fill your cartoush, and
join to the upper end a saucisson, and then cover it all with melted pitch,
rosine, grease, or painting, to hinder the water from spoiling the paper: and
to make it float and swim upon the water, bind a rode about two foot long to it
as to the others for the air. Now if that you desire that this Rocket charge
his actions upon the water, swimming now upon the water, and now under the
water, put here and there powder dust, power to the quantity of half a
spoonefull as you charge it; also may you make it change color, now red and
then white fire, only changing the composition in filling it, and so the
industrious may add many changes and diversities as they shall think fit: but
if you are to make a great number for a great fireworke, then the plainest are
the best, only filling therewith the first composition; but they must be
filled two or three fingers breadth with fine powder dust, to make them fly
far off, or else they must be made like rockets for the air, and afterward
charge them four inches with composition made for water; but to be the more
certain, it is best for those who have great works, to make to try one or two
before they finish many, that the better they may attain their designs, which
with eye they may accomplish, if the rules prescribed be observed; for as I
think there is not one rule neglected appertaining to the fabrication of these
fireworkes prescribed; and now I will set down the manner how to make all
sorts of ballouns and flying saucissons, which are absolutely the
beautifullest parts of fireworks for pleasure, and after them I will describe
a brave fireworke for pleasure with the manner how to place, dispose and range
every piece and part thereof, to make their play in order.

CHAP. XVII. How to make Girondells or fiery Wheels.
A Girondell (or as some call it a fiery wheel) is often required in great or
little fireworks for pleasure, and therefore I have thought fit and necessary
to set down their description, as well as of al other parts of fireworkes: for
according to the application of the Girondels in a Fireworke, one may judge of
the Enginiers industry, for being well applied, they adorn very much a
fireworke, and being ill applied they spoil all. And to make them, you must
make wheels of wood as big as you pretend to make Girondells, and unto those
wheels bind fast rockets of a mean bigness, binding the mouth of one toward
the tail of the other, and so continuing until you have filled your wheel
quite round, which done, cover them with paper pasted very curiously about
them, that the one taking fire, they take not fire altogether, but the mouth of
one shall be left uncovered and ready primed, fit to take fire, the which
ending shall give fire backward to the next, and so one to the other, every one
his turn: there may be bound fiery Lances to these Girondells either
upright, or near overthwart, which will show diversity of fire the wheel
turning: also there may be added to these wheels boxes of fire, provided that
they be artificially applied in such manner, that they balance the wheel
equally, although the proper use of girondeles, is only to garnish the angles
of a great Fireworke, without much trouble, for that confusion is too frequent
in fireworkes; and therefore it shall be expedient to avoid the multitude of
fireworkes too near compacted together; but placing them as much distant as
conveniently may be admitted, by which means you shall be the better able to
attain your designs pretended.

CHAP. XVIII. The manner how to make Ballouns.
THe ballouns being the perfectest part of all artificial fire-workes for
delight, I thought best to set their description here apart from the others,
to the end that the learners might the better and more easier attain to the
knowledge and perfection thereof; and being that I have already described the
mortar, which is represented by the figure A, following, I will only refer
the reader to the second chapter of the first Treatise for wars, where he he
shall find sufficient instruction for the making of the instrument. But to make
a Balloune shall be required a wooden rowler, which is represented by the
figure B following* this rowler must be of such bigness as you desire to make
the inside of your balloune; upon which rowler, let there be rolled as many
pastbords as you shall think sufficient for strength being well glued together
and choke this cartoush at the on^ end, leaving a little hole for a portfire
as shall follow, and glue it in. This portfire shall be made just like unto ^
rocket for the ground, but only tha^ the composition may be somewha^ slower; as
for the air, and to know of what length this portfire ough^ to be, it shall
not be amiss t^ try a balloune filled with earth; then your portfire being
well fastened to the balloune; place all your serpents within it, putting
nothing else amongst them, but only one or two saucissons, to break the
balloune on high, when the serpents be all on fire, these saucissons must be
made of the length of your serpents, and your serpents may be of the bigness of
your rockets for the ground before prescribed, but not so long, and they may
be filled with the composition either for the ground, or for the air: but it
is to be noted, that they must be primed with the composition for the air,
pressing very strongly the priming powder into the throat or gorge of the
serpents, if it be put in dry: but if that went, then only with the end of
a stick, or else with ones finger put in a little; as for other serpents and
the two saucissons shall have their primings somewhat longer then the serpents,
to the end that all the serpents may be a fire before that the balloune break.
The serpents being not made too long, one may put two or three ranks in one
balloune, as appears by the figure C, or one rank of serpents, and over them
many Stars; all these things being thus disposed within the cartoush, let it
be choked at the other end; and then prime the ballouns with cotton wieke
steeped in gunpowder as the stoupel before spoken of; but this cotton must be
well fastened to the end of the port-fire with strong packe-thread, which done,
charge the balloune in your mortar, as is taught in the 6. chap. of the first
Treatise; and you may shoot it when you please. This balloun is represented
perfect by the figure D, but if you will fill your ballouns with stars only,
another manner of proceeding shall be required; for as you put in your stars
into the cartoush; let there be powder-dust mingled amongst them here and
there to give fire to the stars, and to break the balloune being up in the
air. There is also another sort of ballouns to be made, but the expense of
making the^ is so excessive, that few or none will be at the cost, yet the
description shall now follow. In stead of serpents made of paper, you may have
them Iron about the bigness of your little finger, and one inch and a half of
length, or two inches; and near to the bottom there must be a double bottom
in the middle whereof there shall be a little hole, that one may fill the space
between the two bottoms with corned powder, and the rest is to be filled with a
composition somewhat slow, the diff^rence between those of Iron, and the
former of paper, is that many Iron ones may be laid in a lesser space; but in
stead of a pastbord cartoush, there must be had a wooden box, made by a
Turner, and covered with canuas and glue; the portfire must be made also of
Iron, like to a little hat, having in the bottom two or three little holes to
give fire to the serpents; but for the expense of one of these, there may be
made half a dozen of the others, nay near a dozen, wherefore I would wish no
man to trouble themselves with this sort, unless it be for the pleasure of
some great Prince.

CHAP. XIX. How to make flying Saucissons.
THe method which must be observed in making flying saucissons, is most easy,
provided that one knows already the manner how to make the common sort before
prescribed, for the cartoushes are to be made all alike; only excepted that
those which are for flyers, be somewhat longer then the others, they are to be
charged in like manner as the others, but the corned powder being put in, there
must also be a little powder-dust put after it, and beaten with a mallet, as the
rockets for the ground yet let not more then the thickness of a finger be of
dust-powder, and then choke it almost quite together leaving only a hole as
big as a small goose-quill, to which you shall put a little wet powder-dust for
priming. They may be made otherwise, as follows, which will make a more
beautiful show; first of all, you must charge the cartoushesas the common
saucissons, and then choke them as the common leaving only a little hole to
take fire at, or if the hole chance to stop quite up, open it with a bodkin,
but the saucissons being charged and choked, there must be part of the
cartoush left over and above that which is charged, which part shall be filled
either with powder dust, or else with composition of rockets for the air beaten
wit a mallet, as before mentioned, I think it shall be needles to tell you
that they ought to be covered with chord, being that it is sufficiently
demonstrated before, it is to be noted that the saucissons which have the
powder within the choking, does turn wonderfully in the air, but the other
sort which have the composition after the choking, fly up like to a rocket,
almost carrying a great tail after them but the tail of the others shows
but very little, they are both sorts represented by the figure E, in the 18.
chapter.

CHAP. XX. How to make short Gunnes for the Saucissons.
HAving already treated sufficintly and amply of the fabrication and making of
the Mortar, in the imitation whereof most easily may be made Canons to shoot
flying Saucissons very high in the air, making them of the one or the other
matter or stuff prescribed for the Mortar in the second chapter of the first
Treatise, but the powder sack needs not, and the touchhole ought to be in the
middle of the bottom; also it shall be necessary that every Canon have a
little breech to pass through a piece of wood, wherein they may be fastened, so
that a port-fire may be laid from one to another, these are represented by the
figure F, in the eighteenth chapter.

CHAP. XXI. The manner how to dispose and build a great or little Fireworke.
IT is a custom and usual thing among the brave and skillful Painters; 1 to
teach their apprentises how to draw limbs, or members, as the eye, the nose,
the mouth, the ear, the hand, the foot, and afterward the whole body; and in
like manner, the most learned and famous Philosophers, beginning their
schools, teach their disciples what is materia, forma, and primatio; and
afterward, totum compositum; and to imitate them in this Treaty, I have taught
the one after another, all the parties required are necessary for the composing
and building of a beautiful fireworke for delight, having begun with the
rockets for the air, afterward the rockets for the ground, the saucissons and
rockets for the water, and following the ballouns and flying saucissons with
all things belonging unto them; and to avoid falling into the old proverb ( Ex
omnibus aliquid, and in toto nihil: to know something of every thing, and
nothing perfectly) I have here set down after all these parts the description
and manner how to assemble, build and dispose any manner of artificial
fireworke great or little: and to begin, you must first cause to be built a
scaffold trianguler, square, round, or of such form and bigness as you shall
desire to have your Fireworke, your scaffold being built, dispose thereupon
your statues or figures which shall be prepared for it, let them be made of
osiers, and covered with paper or canuas, and curiously painted as here is
represented in this figure. Mountains, buildings and many statues, all which
are to be supposed, only osiers and paper, or canuas painted, your figures or
statues thus disposed upon your scaffold, round about the flore thereof, shall be
laid your saucissons, being already fastened to pieces of timber, and to the
pillars of your scaffold or rail, shall be fastened your fiery lances one right
upward, and the other flat along, each distant, the one from the other about
half a foot; and under the fiery lances, let there be nailed a rank of boxes
of fire, which shall be ranged upon pieces of wood as the saucissons; all your
fireworkes being thus disposed, you may place in the side which is of least
esteem, your partments of rockets made like unto square chests, or long boxes,
of such bigness and length as shall be required to hold those rockets which you
mean to place in each one: bu^1 these boxes must have a false bottom full of
holes for to pass every rod of every rocket apart, and having filled let the
box (which by proper name is called a partment) be covered with a leaf or two
of paper pasted close; but to give fire to the rockets, let there be made a
hole through the partment, through it shall pass a little piece of stoupel, or
cotte^ wieke and giving fire to that, all the rockets within the partment, fly
out, and in the same manner shall you give fire to all your fiery lances with
a stoupel going from the one to the other; and as for your girondells, you
shall give fire to them with a match, as you desire that they should play, and
by this means all your fire-workes shall begin to play at once, except those
parts which shall be reserved without priming to be fiered by the hand, as
best shall seem to the artist or enginier, and so the industrious shall not
fail to accomplish his designs, observing all the rules prescribed; which
being at large laid down I will go forward to the next chapter, and there show
how to make a most precious unguent for all manner of burnings, as well of
common fire, as of artificial fire, if by hazard any mischance arise,

CHAP. XXII. A most precious unguent for any burning.
LEt no man wonder if (having ended this Treatise of fireworkes) I take in hand
to describe a little part of Chirurgerie, whch I confess to have taken out of
a Treatise written by Thybourel, a Surgeon of Loraine, and having made
experience of this unguent diverse times as well for burnings, as that for
other accidents, I may say with boldness and truth, that there was never the
like secret of this kind left to posterity, specially against hurts come by
fire, and which leaves less scarres after the healing of the places wounded,
and therefore I have set down the very words which Thybourel has written in
the last chapter of his 4th. book, entitled Recueil de plusieurs machines
militaires.

Take fresh hogs grease or lard, as much as you please, and boil it, taking
off the skim until there arise no more skim; then set the lard three or four
nights in the air abroad, after which it must be washed in running water, to
take away the saltish nature, and also to cleanse it white, then melt it, and
keep it for your use. Bacon may serve in stead of lard.

Otherwise.

The white of an egg or fresh butter being mingled together and well beaten to
an oil are excellent.

Another sort most excellent.

Take a stone of vnslacked lime (or otherwise called quick lime) and let it
dissolve in clear water, and when the water is settled, power it gently out
from the lime through a linen cloth, then put as much sallet oil as you take
water together, and beating it all to an oil, you shall have a most excellent
unguent for all kind of burnings, neither of these unguents have any scarre,
but are precious remedies for the afflicted

We have seen Impostures* cover sores with this water alone, but observing
superstitious ceremonies, saying vain prayers, but we assure the posterity,
that the water only is sufficient to heal wounds and s^res, only washing
them with it, and covering them with a linen cloth wet in the same water,
without any superstition, it does modifie and percute, by which it does supply
nature, and does heal sores better then our ordinary unguents.

Thus may you see how this brave Surgeon that set forth to the face of the
world the perfection of this unguent (which cannot be sufficient-praised)
confirming by his own confession, that the Chirurgions do not use such good
remedies in their shops and ordinary operations; wherefore I have set down his
own words, that no man may esteem me inuenter of Calumnies, against the
practitioners of Surgery, nor any others, as many now adays seems to write
with serpents tongues, stinging virtue on every side, against who^ viperous
venoms patience is the only antedote, leaving them to sweat, vex, and torment
themselves in their insatiable rage, and to end my discourse touching the
perfection of this unguent, I will assure all these who shall have need and
make use thereof, that they shall find in operation what I have here set down
in description.

A Treatise of practical Geometry.
TO satisfy diverse of my friends and yield to their desires (whose treaties
have bin such powerful commands to me, that I have been constrained to lay
aside and forsake my own proper will and follow theirs, I have set forth this
little Treatise of practical Geometry to the view and censure of the world,
which I acknowledge to be unworthy of so many singular and industrious wits, as
yearly spring up in this Island, and the adiacents thereunto, notwithstanding I
have given way to their requests for their private contentment, and to assure
the world that I have nothing, no not my own will proper to my self, but that
I will follow as near as possible I may the precepts and documents of that
ancient, wise, and divine Philosopher Plato, who says, Non nobis nati sumus,
sed patriae and amicis; we are not borne for our selves, but for the service of
our country and friends: then for the satisfaction of my friends and service
of those who will accept these my labors, I have clearly and in few words set
down the manner how any man (who has never so little studied Geometry) may
take any distance, or height, depth, or breadth with two little sticks, yea
even strawes, being laid a cross, also I have set down a method how to take
any kind of height, distance or depth, with the Sector without any
arithmetike or rule thereof: and also by the sines tangents and secants, the
whole being very portable, to refresh the memory, and to strengthen and
augment the knowledge of those who (for want of practice) have not the perfect
use of those instruments: then first of all I will set down the manner how to
accomodate and dispose the sticks, twiggs, or strawes for the measuring of any
distance.

The method how to make the Cross.
Having two sticks, the one long, and the other somewhat short as are
represented in the figure following by CF, and DE, then mark upon the stick
CF, points the one distant from the other precisely, half the length of DE,
and let there be a hole made through the stick DE, so that it may slide upon
CF, from end to end, and you shall know the two parts of the cross by these
names, the longest part CF, shall be called the index, and the shortest DE, the
cross. Now if you have any height to take, then fasten to one end of the
cross, as to D, a perpendicular or plummet, and for the more easy and just
operation, you should have a foot to support the cross; the instrument being
thus prepared, you may measure with great facility either height breadth, or
depth, as follows.

PROPOSITION I. How to take a height accessible.
LEt it be proposed to take the height of the Tower AB, to the base or foot
whereof one may easily approach* dispose the cross of your instrument in such
sort that DCE be of equal distance there one from the other; as thus, settle
your cross upon the first point of the index; then setting the instrument to
your eye, go either nearer, or retire far^her from the object you desire to
measure until you see A the highest part thereof by the two extremities of the
cross CD, (the inden being paralled to the earth) which will happen in the
point C, and not elsewhere: that being measured, will be always the just
height of the Tower required, only observe that you must always add to the
distance between you and the Tower the length of the foot, which supporteth
your instrument, and so you shall have preciselie the height required: for
scarce ever will it happen, that the instrument may be placed level with the
base or foot o^ the height required, but if that should chance to be, then the
extremity of the index C would ariue in the point G, and so nothing to be
added, but only measure the distance between G and B, and that would be the
just height required; but if it chance that you may not plant the instrument in
the point C, by reason of some inconveniences which may happen retire further
back, and put forward the cross to the second point of the index, and then
accord your visuele lines to see the point A, (the index always being parallel
to the ground) which then will happen twice the height required, distant from
the foot thereof: but if it happen that going back you ascend any little
mountain, or descend into any little valley, you are then to observe some
point in the wall of the Tower, which the index shall direct you to by the line
visuel, and add only the height thereof unto half the distance twixt you and
the Tower, and that shall be the height required most exactlie: and thus you
shall never fail in your operations.

PROPOSITION. II. How to take a height inaccessible, or one height upon another
height.
SVppose the altitude BC, to be required, to the foot whereof one may come may
come no nearer then to the point D, then at the point D, accord your visuell
lines in B and C, the index being always level with the ground and the cross
fixed upon the first marks or point of the index, then set a mark there in D,
and going back toward F, as far as E, and put forward the cross to the
second point of the index, and then direct your lines visuel again in B and in
C which will arrive in E, and not elsewhere, then measure the distance between
DE, which will be the altitude precisely required, but if you desire the
height of the Tower B, and mountain level with the foot of your instrument,
then you must add the length of the staff, which supporteth it as in former
observations. And to have the altitude A B upon the top of BC, you must take
two other observations in FG as before, setting your instrument in F, the
cross being fixed upon the second point of the index, and direct your visuell
lines in A and in C, and then set up a mark in F, and go back, putting
forward the cross to the third point of the index, and direct your visuell
lines again in A and in C, which will happen in G, and not elsewhere, then
measure the distance between FG, which shall be equal to the altitude of the
Tower AC, and ha^^ing taken already the altitude BC, you may very easily
substract the little altitude BC from the greater Altitude AC, and then will
rest the altitude AB, which is required.

PROP. III. How to take any distance upon a place accessible or inaccessible.
IF it were proposed to take the distance AB, and that the place were
accessible only in the middle upon the ^^ne CF, then dispose your instrument
as before the cross placed upon the first point of the index, and going
forward or backward upon ^he line CF, direct your visuel lines (...) A and in B
by the two extreami^es of the cross, the end of the index resting against your
eye, then measure the distance between you and the point F, and that shall be
just half the distance required between AB, but if the place be inaccessible,
so that you may not approach nearer then the point D, put forward the cross to
the second point of the index, and then direct your visuel lines to AB, and
leave a mark at D, and put forward the cross one point more, and going back
upon the line DE, until you may direct your visuel lines by the extreamities
of the cross again in A and B, then measure the distance between DE, and that
will be half the distance between AB, and so may you operate going back, and
putting forward the cross.

PROPOSITION IV. Another manner how to take a distance inaccessible.
SVppose the distance AB to be taken, and that B is the nearest place that may
be required, then there must be set a mark, and withdrawing backward in a
straight line toward C, and there again plant another mark at C, then going
right toward one side, as toward F, counting your places equal to the number
which you have already found B and C, and there direct your visuel lines in
BGC, as in this figure at D, leaving there a mark, go straight along toward
F, not moving the cross of your instrument, and going along make trial where
your visuel lines may be directed again in A and in C, which will be in the
point E, and not elsewhere, then leave there a mark, and measure the distance
between DE, and that shall be the distance which you require, which is AB,
the demonstration of this proposition is grounded upon the second and fourth
propositions of 6 of Euclide.

PROP. V. How to take a distance only upon a line parallel to it.
LEt the distance AB be required, the which may neither be seen, nor come
near unto, but only upon the line or bank CK, then upon that bank draw out
a straight line with marks, as the line CK, parallel to the wall AB, and set a
mark in K, then go back toward D, and direct your visuel lines in B and in
K, by the extreamities of the cross GH, then leaving the cross in the same
state and a mark at D, withdraw your self further back toward C, until you
may direct your visuel lines to A and K, which will happen in C, and not
elsewhere, and leave there another mark, then measure the distance between
CD, and the same shall be the breach AB, equal to CD, and the demonstration
of this proposition is grounded in the 29. and 33. propositions of the 1. of
Euclide.

PROP. VIII. How to take the depth of a valley.
TO take the depth of a Valley, there is somewhat more difficult then in the
former operations, because there are more observations to be made, and to
begin you must from the point B observe in some place opposite a ^a^ke level
with the horison as A, the level whereof you may easily take at this
instrument, as is taught in the second proposition by the help of the plumbet:
then from the point B, take the distance BC, as in the fifth proposition, or
else mecanikelie, which being done, direct your visuel lines from B to A, and
to C, and leaving the instrument in same state, turning your self about, frame
the same angle upon the plain, which will be FBH, then plan^ marks upon the
lines BF and BH, and upon the line BH, count as many paces or fathoms as you
shall have found between B and C, and at the end of your paces* (...) mark,
which will be at E, thi^ being done, dispose your instrument to make a right
angle, placing the cross upon the first point of the index, for the cross
makes always a right angle when the cross is upon the fifth point. The
instrument being thus disposed, walk upon the line BF, until you may direct
your visuell lines (by the extreamities of the cross) to B and E, or else to
FE, which will happen in D, and no where else, then measure the line DE, and it
will be equal to the depth required G C, the demonstration of this proposition
is grounded in the 26, of the 1. of Euclide, or upon the equalite of the two
triangles BG C, and BDE, which are both equal and equal angles. Although this
operation be somewhat more obscure then the others, yet I think that it is
sufficiently explained, and therefore I will go forward to the use of the
sector.

PROP. IX. The manner how to take either distance or altitude with the Sector.
SVppose the altitude AD were to be taken to the foot whereof you may approach
open the Sector 45 adding to it the sights then going forward or backward upon
the line DI, until you may see the highest part of the altitude A, through the
two upper sights, the inferior branch of the Sector, being parallel to the
earth or horison, then measure the distance between the center of the Sector
and the Tower, adding to that distance the length of the leg, which supporteth
your Sector, and that shall be the altitude required, as appears in the figure
following AB, and BC, are of equal distance, and adding the length of the foot
of the sector, you will find, that it will be height of BD, which does
accomplish the altitude of the Tower. But to take a distance in any plain, as
in the figure precedent, the same operation may be used, except only the two
branches of the sector shall be turned parallel to the horison or ground,
having first made a right angle at the point G, or you may operate otherwise,
first of all prolong a straight line as EGH of what length you please, then
open your sector to a right angle, and set it the point G, so that you may see
through two sights the point E, and where the line visuel of the other two
sights strikes along, set up a merke as in I, then go toward it, and at your
pleasure in the same line, set your sector opening it, so that you may see the
point E and G, and keeping your instrument at the same width, and in the same
place place, only turn it to the other side, so that you may see the point G
through the sights which before saw E, and where the other visuell line shall
cut the first line EGH, set a mark which will be in H precisely, and that
shall be the distance required GE, the demonstration of this proposition is
grounded upon the 4. and 26. of the 1. of Euclide.

PROP. X. How to take any distance or altitude inaccessible with the Sector.
TO obtain the altitude AB, you must first take the distance BC. as is taught
by the 9. Proposition precedent, and knowing the distance BC, which I suppose
to be 100 fathom, set in the point C your Sector, and direct your visuell line
through the two upper sights to the top of the altitude A, and let the branch
of the Sector be parallel with the ground, then leaving your instrument at the
same width, let fall a perpendicular line upon the line of the Sector divided
into equal parts, passing by the 100 number of the inferior branch noted D,
and note what number the perpendicular does cut upon the upper branch of the
Sector noted H, which I suppose here to be^ the 150 part or number, and then
set the two points of a pair of compasses upon the two numbers, to wit, the
one point upon 100, and the other point upon 150. of the equal parties, then
transport the points of the compass all along one branch of the Sector upon
the line of equal parties, and the two points shall denote as many parties
upon the line of the Sector as the Tower does contain fathoms in altitude,
adding the length of the foot which supporteth the Sector, the demonstration
of this Proposition is grounded upon the 4. Proposition of the 6. of Euclide.

PROP. XI. Of Sines, Secants* and Tangents.
BEcause the most noble, most artificial, and most certain way of taking of
Altitudes, Distances, or other Dimentions, is by Sines, Secants, or Tangents, I
have set down their operations in such Propositions as are usual in this
subject at the end of this Treatise of Practical Geometry, and before I enter
on the method of operation, it is necessary to define what the said Sines,
Secants, and Tangents are.

1. A righ^ Sine is half the Subtence of of the double Arc.

A Subtence, sometimes called a Cord, is a right line drawn from any part of
the Circumference of a Circle, unto any other part of the same Circumference,
so the right line DE is the Subtence or Cord of the Ark DGH half of which is
DF, the Sine of the Arc DG; and so is MN the Subtence of the Circumference or
Arc MGN, half of it is MI, which is the Sine of the Arc MG; now the Arc MG
is half of the Arc MGN, and MI is half of the Subtence of that double Arc,
viz. MGN; hence it is according to the definition aforesaid, that the Sine of
any Arc is half the Subtence of the double Arc; by the same reason OT is the
Sine of the Arc BO and MS is the Sine of the Arc BOM and so of others.

Note that the Sine of any Arc less then a Quadrant is also the Sine of the
complement of that Arc unto a Semicircle, so the Sine of BO 20 degrees being
OT the same OT is also the Sine of the Arc OGL 160 degrees, for that the
Subtence of an Arc of a Circle is common both to the lesser Segment that it
subtendeth, and also to the greater, and therefore half of the Subtence which
is the Sine shall be common unto half the lesser Segment and also unto half
of the greater, which two halfes put together make a Semicircle; and therefore
the one is the Complement of the other.

Note further that the total Sine, the Sine of 90, or the Radius, is nothing
else but the Semidiameter of any Circle, viz. CB, or CG.

If a line be drawn tou^h a Cir^l^, it is called a Tangent, (a tango) as ^he
line AB touches the Circumference of the Circle in B, and so AB is called a
Tangent line, and is s^^^uated on the Term of the Radius CB, and perpendicular
thereto, by the 18 Proposition of the 3. of Euclid.

2. The Secant of an Arc is a line contained between the Center and the line
Tangent, so that it pass by the given Arc, so if BO be a given Arc, CQ is
the Secant thereof, and if BM be a given Arc, then is CR the Secant thereof.

3. The Tangent of an Arc is a line contained between the term of the
Secant, and the touch point, so BQ is the Tangent of the Arc BO, and BR is the
Tangent of the Arc BM, etc.

PROPOSITION. XII. How to take any altitude or distance by the Sines, Tangents
and Secants.
FIrst of all is to be noted that in all triangles as each side is the one to
the other, even so each sine will be one to the other: that is to say, each
sine of a triangle equilaterall shall be equal amongst themselves, or one
sine, as the sides of that triangle are all equal, and the sine of a Scalene
triangle shall be all inequall and different amongst themselves, as the three
sides of the triangle are different one from another. Now for operation let it
be proposed to take the Altitude AB, to the base or foundation whereof you may
well approach, then there begin to measure your paces or fathoms from the base
B to some place in the plain which I suppose to be C, and there set your
instrument either Sec^or, Graphometer, or any other with which you may take
the degrees of an angle, and in the point C, take that angle which is found to
be of 39. degrees, and the angle B is already known to be of 90 degrees, the
Tower standing upright. now rests to know the degrees of the angle A, which to
obtain add 90. to 39. and it makes 129 which you must substract from 180.
and then will rest 51. which the angle A contains, and so the three angles
are known, and the one side of ^he triangle BC, is also known to ^ontaine as
I here suppose a hundr^d ^athom, and to know the quantity of ^he other two
sides AB and AC, by the sines, tangents, or secants, you must seek in a table
of sines the sines of each angle which will be found as follows, the sine
totale, or the demidiameter being supposed of 100,000 parts, the angle*

A of 51, degrees will have for his sines, 77715, parts.

B of 90. degrees will have for his sines, 100,000. parts.

C of 39. degrees will have for his sines, 62932. parts.

Then working by the rule of three, you say if the sines of A 77715. give the
side BC of 100 fathoms, how many fathoms will the sines of C, 6.932 for the
side AB, and dispose your rule of three as follows. If 77715 -- 100 -- 62932.
And having multiplied the second number by the third or the third by the
second, and divided the product by the first number, and the quotient of the
division will be for the side AB 80. fathoms, 70. inches, 4. lines and 11/12
parts of a line And ^o find out the side AC, you must operate in the same
manner by the rule of three, and say if the sine A of 79715 gives the side BC
of 100. fathoms, how many fathoms will the sine B give, which is 100,000. for
the side AC, and having multipli^d the second number by the third, and divided
the product by the first, the quotient will be 128. fathoms, 48. inches, 7.
lines, and ^4875/77715. part of a line, which is almost one line for the side
AC, and thus may you know any kind of distance with great facility, only
knowing the angles and one side.

PROP. XIII. How to take any altitude or distance inaccessible by the sines.
LEt the altitude AC be proposed to be taken, and the nearest coming to it is
B, then in that point B, take the angle ABC, as in the chapter before, which is
of 61. degrees, then assemble 61. with 90. the right angle opposite and the
whole is 151, which you must substract from 180, and then will rest 29 for the
angle A, and so the three angles of the ^^iangle are known, but neither side;
and therefore to know one of the ^^des, that we may operate by the ^^es,
tangents and secants, retir^ ^^rther back or aside to D, and mea^^re your
paces or fathoms from B to ^, which I suppose here to be 300. ^aces, and in
the point D, take the angle ADB, which is 37. degrees, and then may know that
the angle exterior ABD, is of a hundred and nineteen degrees, for it is equal
to the two interior angles ABC and BAC by the 32. proposition of the 1. of
Euclide, or otherwise it is the complement of the half circle, of which the
angle interior ABC of 61 degrees is taken out, now you have the knowledge of
two angles ADB, and DAB, the which being joined, substract them from 180. and
then the third angle will remain DA B, then shall you know the three angles of
the triangle A BD, and one of the sides by which you may come to the knowledge
of the side A B of the first ^riangle A BC by the sine, and by the knowledge of
the side A B, you may also know the side AC, by the sines, tangents and
secants, as in the precedent chapter: and so in all manner of altitudes or
distances, accessibles or inaccessibles, and it is to be noted, that one is
not bound to wright backward, taking the second observation in D, but at the
pleasure of the workman to make choice of the fairest place in the field, so I
think no difficulty shall be found in these works

The manner how to take the plane of a town, or any place out of musket shot.
SVppose you were to take the plane ABCDE; first, having considered that the
situation of the plane has a crooked arc BA^; those two lines must be
supposed straight as EQ and BP, making an obtuse angle at the point A, and
being far off from this plane in the point P, consider that the lines PB and
QE, make but one angle in the point A, the^ leaving a mark at P, withdraw from
thence into some other place of field where your eye may rightly meet with the
line AE, which will happen in Q where you must set another mark now consider
that if a line be drawn from Q to P, it will form a triangle APQ, whereof you
may know two angles, P QA and AP Q which being done with your instrument, and
you find the angle AP Q to be of 45. degrees, and PA Q of 34. degrees, then
add 45. to 34. and comes in the whole 79. which you must substract from 180
degrees, and there will rest 101 for the third angle PAQ by the 32.
proposition, lib. 1. of Euclide, and the angle EAB is equal to the angle PAQ
by the 15. proposition 1. then let us conclude that we have the angle BAE of
101. degrees, which was unknown, then shall it be necessary in the place noted
H, to know how the side CD is situated in respect of the parts of the world,
and with a declinatorie we shall find it to be seated North, West and
Southeast, which shall serve us for the knowledge of all the rest: and in the
former manner may be taken all the other angles of the plane proposed, and to
have the distance of each side of the plane, you must measure one only as
before taught, which I suppose it shall be B C, which shall be found to be
100 fathoms, and having found aside homologe to it or like to it, and divided
into an hundred parts equally, it shall serve for a scale to measure all the
rest by.

CHAP. I. A treaty of fortifications as well regularly as irregularly.
IT is not my intention to treat here of all manner of fortifications, but
only of those which by the general and common opinions are held and approved
to be the best for the defense and conservation of deserving places; and to
begin this Treatise, I will set down certain rules which are now held for
maxims of the best fortifications.

Let the flanked angle be open 90. degrees, or the nearest to 90. that may be
it is the angle A in the next trianguler figure.

Let the flanking angle be not above 150. degrees open, but the lesser, shall
always be the best, this angle is BLC in the same figure.

Let not the line of defense be longer then musket shot, which is 100, or 110
fathom, it is CK or BY in the same figure.

The largest neck or gorge of a bastion or bulwark is always the best and
the longest flank lines, specially if ears be to be built upon them, CN or MI
are nose lines

Now shall follow all the denominations of fortifications for the better
intelligence of the better treating of them.

CHAP. II. Denominations of the parties of Fortifications.
A Flanked angle is the point of a bulwark in the figure following, it is the
angle SBN.

A flanking angle is BLC, which is made by two lines of defense meeting in the
point L.

A line of defense is the distance from the flank to the angle flanked, as
here BY, or CK.

The flank is K or L.

The line of the flank is KN or IM.

The curtine is the strait line drawn from one flank to the other, as here KI.

The shoulder of a bulwark is N or M.

The pane of a bulwark is BN.

The ear is always built upon the line of the flank, as in the second figure
following.

The capital or chief line is BY or FC

Bastion or bulwark is a piece contained within two lines, two panes, and two
flanks.

The neck or gorge of a bastion is the distance between the two flanks for
the entry into the bastion.

A rampard is the earth raised against the wall in the inside to strengthen it
against Canon shot.

The parapet is the elevation above the string of the wall.

The counter escarp is the exterior brim of the town ditch.

A half moon is a piece loose from the town raised of earth, and environed
with a ditch to hinder the assault of the enemies, it is sometimes made in
form trianguler, but sometimes oblong as occasion is, now shall follow the
Treatise of the regular forts, and first of all the trianguler.

CHAP. III. How to build a trianguler Fort.
SVppose A BC to be the Triangle, where in a Fort three square is to be built.

From the point C, as the center, and from the distance CB, let the arc BTA
for 60. degrees be described, which shall be divided into two equal parts at
the point T.

And again, the arc BT into four other equal parts, and O B shall be an
arc of 7 degrees, by which draw the line CO, and it shall form the diminished
angle OCB of 7 degrees.

Then divide each side of the triangle in two equal parts by the points QPR,
and draw the strait lines QC. PB. AR. and the center of the fort shall be D, and
the intersection E, which is made by the line OC, shall be center of one
bastion, and the line BE is the Capital line which shall be transported into CF
and AG, then draw the straight lines BF, FA. CG. and AE, which shall form the
diminished angles, and become lines of defense.

And to find the point for the flank divide the angle QCE in two equal parts
by the straight lines CH, which teaches us the point I, for the flank and
then take the distance FI, and carry it to EK, and the point K shall be another
flank, then draw the lines of the flanks KN and IM perpendicularly to the
courtine KI, which is drawn from the flank K to the flank I, and the same upon
the two other sides, and you shall have the trianguler sort perfect.

The flanked angle is of 45. degrees, and the flanking angle is 165. degrees
open, which is somewhat far from the best maxims of fortifications.

CHAP. IV. How to build a square Fort.
LEt the square ABCD be in which you desire to build the Fort, draw the two
diagonales AD. CB, which cut E the center of the Fort from the point D as
center, and from the distance DC, let the arc CGF be drawn, which shall be
divided in three equal parts, and from the point G draw the straight line GD,
which forms the diminished angle GDC of 15. degrees, and the intersection of
the line GD in H does show the line capitol CH, which shall be transported
into IKL, and then draw the straight lines CI. DH and their fellows, and to
find the point for the Flank, divide the angle FDG in two equal parts by the
line DM, which cutting the line CI does show us the point N for the Flank,
then take the distance IN, and bear it to HO, and the point O shall be another
Flank, then draw the courtine ON, and from the points O and N draw the two
straight lines OP and N Q perpendicularly to the courtine ON. Do the same upon
each other side, and you will have perfected the square fortres The Flanked
angle is of 60. and the Flanking angle is open 150. degrees.

CHAP. V. How to build the Pantagone Fort.
THe five sides and five lines being drawn from the point A as center, and
from the distance AB. ^et the ^rke BD of 60. degrees be described, which shall
be divided into ^oure equal parts, of which BE is one and from the point E*
draw the right ^ine AE, which cutting the line BC ^t the point F, does give the
part BF ^or the capital line; which distance must be transported to the other
lines AG, etc. then from the point B, draw the straight line BG, and so the
others which shall be lines of defense.

And to find the Flank, divide the angle EAC in two equal parts by the right
line HA and the intersection which it makes upon the line BG at the point I
shall be the Flank, then take the distance GI, and transport it into FK, and
so to IG, and the point K shall be a Flank and the point I, then draw the line
KI, which shall be a courtine, and draw the lines KL. and IM, which shall be the
Flank lines being drawn perpendicularly to the courtine, and doing the same to
every other side, you shall have the desired Fort.

CHAP. VI. How to build the Fort Hexagone.
Having divided your circle into six equal parts, and drawn the six
straight diagonall lines and the six sides.

From the point B as center, and from the distance AB, let the arc ADC of 60.
degrees be described, and it shall be divided into four equal parts, whereof
AD is one.

From the point D, draw the straight line DB, which cutting the line AC at the
pont E, does give the distance AE for the capital line, then transport that
distance to BF.

and so round to each angle, and draw the straight lines DB AF and the others
like unto them which shall be hereafter the lines of defense.

And to find the point for the Flank divide the angle D BC in two equal parts
by the straight line G B, which cutting the line AF at the point H does show
that point for the Flank, then take that distance HF, and transport it to EI,
and to all the rest.

From the point I, draw the straight lines IK perpendicularly to the curtin IH,
and draw the other line HL perpendicularly also, and do the same upon each
other side, and you shall have the Hexagone perfect, but if you will make
ears, they must be built upon the two third parts of the lines of the Flank
IK HL as appears at.

CHAP. VII. How to build the Heptagone.
LEt BKLMNO be the Heptagone given, and the center thereof A from whence shall
be drawn the seven lines AN. AK. AP, etc. Then from the point K as center, and
from the space KB, let the arc BCA of 60. degrees be described, which shall be
divided into four equal parts, whereof BC shall be one of 15 degrees, from
the point C draw the right line CK, the which cutting the line AN, at the point
D, gives that part for the capital line. Then take the distance ND, and
carry it to KI, and to all the rest likewise, then from the point N draw the
right line NI, which shall be the line of defense, and all the others like unto
it.

And to find the point for the flank, divide the angle AKC in two equal parts
by the right line GK, which cutting the right line NI at the point F shows
that intersection F, for the point of the flank take the distance and carry it
to D and E, and the point E shall be another Flank, then draw from E to F the
line (which makes the courtine) then the two perpendicular lines for the Flank
lines: whereupon shall be built the ears, and doing the same upon each side
your fort shall be perfect, as required.

CHAP. VIII. How to build the Octogone.
FIrst let the square AB CD be made, and then the square EFGH.

And to find the place for the Flank, divide the angle ADC by the strait line
DI, and the intersection K shows the point for the Flank, as in the Forts
precedent, and so transport to every side as in the other, and you shall have
the Fort finished.



CHAP. IX. The description of the height, depth, and thicknes of every part of
a complete Fortification.
AB The largiour or breadth of the rampard 66. foot.

AC Height of the rampard, 14. foot.

GA the interior heel of the rampard 14. foot.

OF The breadth of the parapet 20. foot.

EH Height of the parapet 6. foot.

BY. The exterior heel of the parapet 7. foot.

IK. The covered walk under the false bray 20 foot.

KL The parapet of the false bray 20 foot.

MN The breadth of the ditch 120 foot, and the depth thereof ought to be 10 foot.

NO The heel of the ditch 10 foot.

OP The covered walk of the counterescarpe.

PQ The counter escarpe 6. foot of height.



CHAP. X. The manner how to fortify places irregularly.
Upon a line of 100. fathoms is to be made a tenayle; upon a line of 150.
fathoms two half bastions. Upon a line of 200. fathoms a double tenayle. Upon a
line of 250. fathoms or therabout is to be made one bastion, and two half
bastions.

CHAP. XI. A Fortification irregular.
SVppose the place QRSTV to be fortified without diminishing the place, and
having taken it upon a fair sheet of paper and well considered, all the
measures thereof then without this plane conduct the line AB of 250. fathom,
and upon that line (according to the rules precedent) build one bastion, and
two half bastions taken from the Octogon, and then shall you be at the point
A, and from the point A, draw the line AP of 150. fathom, or thereabout, upon
which you may build two half bastions; then draw the line PO, upon which you
shall as before build one bastion and two half bastions, and so upon the line
OX, and upon all the others according to the length that they shall be found.
But if it should be required, that the Towne-walls should serve for the
courtines, the figure following shall be an example either for a part or for
all about a town.

CHAP. XII. Another manner of fortifying irregularly.
SVppose that one would fortify the plane BAPLMNO, but in such have, and with
so little cost that the town walls should serve round for the courtines, the
plane then being taken upon a fair sheet of paper, and having drawn the line
CDEF of 400. fathom, it shall be found necessary to build upon the same one
bastion two half bastions and a tenaile, viz. the bastion E, the two half
bastions D and F, and the tenaile DC, and having drawn the lines round about
the town, leaving sufficient space be^wene them and the walls to build
bulwarks or bastions, you may take for the length of every line of defense,
that is to say from the flank of one bastion to the point of another, 100. or
110 fa^hom and so every bastion shall be scowred with musket shot, as the
forts built regularly. This may serve for an example to those who by chance,
may have occasion to repair or strengthen any part of a town, wall, or the
whole, and for the fortifying of the wall, the earth must be raised in the
inside as a rampard.

A TREATISE OF Arithmetike.
CHAP. I. Addition
SInce that Arithmetike is absolutely necessary, and required in diverse and
many Geometrical operations, I have added the examples following only to
renew and refresh the memory of those who have already studied it; and not
those who are quite ignorant therein, (commending them to large and ample
Treatises together with masters of the scien^e) but for such as by a weak
memory have let slip the habitude which by practice they had in times past
obtaind, who may easily recover by this short Treaty sufficient knowledge to
perform any ordinary operation beginning with Addition, which is a collection
of many numbers in one, as he who would add together the numbers ABC,
following to have the sum D, must begin with the first colon: ^ And say 2 and
5, or 7 and 1 is 8, and set 8 under the line, as appears by the example above,
then in the second colon, say 3 and 4 or 7, and pose them as before; afterward
say for the 3. colon 6. are six, and posing or setting the numbers collected
directly under the figures not collected as 8 under 2, and 7 under 3, and six
under six, but if any should be above the number of 9, then to set 0 in the
place, and set forward all the tens.

The Proof.
MAy be made in casting all the 9 away, though many times falls but by
substraction is the way most certain, as thus, begin with the last collon and
say 6, cut of 6, rest nothing, and give the 6 under the line a flash, then 4
and 3, or 7 and 7, out of 7 rest nothing, and as before give it a flash, then
1, 5 and 2, or 8, which as before shall be made nothing, the 8 underneath.

CHAP. II. Substraction.
SVbstraction is to take away a little number from, or out of a greater, as if
one would from 8 6 4 2 take away 4 3 2 1, then must the numbers be disposed as
follows, the greater number uppermost, and the lesser undermost, then draw a
line: Great number 8642. A Lesser number 4321. B rest 4321. C And say he that
of 2 in the rank paieth one, rests 1, the which set under the line, then of 4
pay 2, rests 2, which must also be set under the line, and who pays 3 out of
6. rests 3. setting them as before, then 4. out of 8 rests 4. which shall be
also set as the others in the example above.

The Proof.
IS made in adding the lesser number B with the rest C as follows.

Little nummer. 4321 rest 4321 Great number. 8642 And the sum shall be the
first number A, if the substraction have been well made.

CHAP. III. Multiplication.
MVltiplication is the assumption of one number, as many times as the other,
contains in it self unities. ^ As if one would multiply 6. by 3, that is, to
take as often 6 as 3 contains unities, as in the example above, where 2 taken 4
times makes 8, and 5 taken 4 times makes 20. so that the number A multiplied by
the number B multiplicator 4 times comprehended, make the product 2608.

The Proof.
IS made only dividing the product 2608 by the multiplication 4 and the
quotient will be 652. if the multiplication were well made, as appears in the
example following. ^

CHAP. IV. Division.
DIvision is the separation of a number into aliquot parts thereof, as to
divide 5689 by 25. the figures must be disposed, as follows, viz. the divisor
under the first figures of the number, which is to be divided, as for example.
^ And after the last figure of the number, shall be drawn a half circle to
separate the quotient. The numbers being thus disposed, then say 2 in 5 how
many times, and it shall be found twice; then set 2 behind the half circle as
in the first example following; and then say twice 2. are 4 of 5 rests 1,
dashing out the 2 and the 5. and set the 1 over 5, and say again twice 5 are
10. and strike out the 5 divisor under the 6. and also the 1. over the 5, then
set forward your divisor one figure more as in the second example, and say 2 in
6. how how many times, and it shall be found 2, and say twice 2 are 4, and 4 out
of 6. rests 2. which shall be set over the 6, then say twi^e 5 are 10. and 10.
out of 18. rests 8 and 1 out of 2. rests 1. then dash out the 2. and set 1.
over it; and also dash out the 5 and 2. diuisors, and set more forward the
divisors, as in the third example, and say 2 how many times 18. and it shall be
found 7. times, and having set the 7, say 7 times 2 is 14. and 14 out of 18
rests 4, and set the 4 over the 8; and to conclude, say 7 times 5 are 35, and
35 out of 39 rests 4, and 3 out of 4 rests 1, and so your division is ended, as
appears here following by three examples one of each operation. ^

The Proof.
Multiply the quotient 227. by the divisor 25, and to the product partial,
add the numbers which rest, viz. 14. if any rest, and then add the whole
together, and the product shall be the first number if the division has been
well made as in the example following. ^

CHAP. V. Rules of Fractions.
A Fraction is a number noting the parts aliquot of an entire or whole number,
whereof it is said to be a fraction as a penny, the twelfth part of a shilling,
one inch the four and fortieth part of an Ell, etc.

CHAP. VI. How to reduce intiers and Fractions all into Fractions.
TO reduce 8 and 5 all infractions you must multiply 8 by 4, saying 4. times 8
is 32, and the 3 being added, makes 35, which shall be set above a line just
under the first figures, and under that line set 4, as in the example
following, to show that the 45 are al fourth parts, and do in the like manner
by the 5, and say 3 times 5 are 15, and 2 makes 17. and so you shall have 17.
thirds, as in the example following.

To reduce 8 and 5 all into fractions. ^

CHAP. VI. To reduce all fractions into one denomination.
TO bring these two fractions to one deno. the 35 quarters numerators must be
multiplied by the other numerators 17. thirds, and set the product over a line
as here following, then multiply the 4 denominator by the other 3. denominator,
and set the product of those under the line, and then will there be, ^

Addition of Fractions.
TO add to the figures, dispose the figures as follows, and say 3 times 1 is
3, and set the 3. over a line above the head of the others, and then say 4
times 2 are 8. and set them over a line above the head of the others also, then
say 3 and 8 are 11, and set them over a line between the first numbers and the
11, shall be numerators, and say 4 times 3 are 12, and set them under the
middle line, and those shall be denominators, and so you shall have eleven
twelfth parts as follows. ^ But if the numerator be greater then the
denominator, then it shall be divided by the denominator, and the product
shall be an entire or entires, and what rests (if any rest) shall be
fraction, which ought to be abridged, as appears here following. ^ Where the
numerator 38 is greater then the denominator 24. then being divided by the
denominator 24. does yield 1 entire, and 14/14 the which being abridged come to
7/12, which is almost two thirds, and so of all others.

CHAP. VII. Additions of intiers and fractions.
BEing proposed to 243 unto 462, the intiers must be added as in the first
chapter of Addition and the fractions must be added as in the precedent
chapter, and set product as appears following. ^

CHAP. VIII. Substraction of Fractions.
Whosoever would substract from must dispose the figures, as in the example
following; and first multiply the numerators by the denominators a cross, as
3-times 3 are 9. and 4 times 2 are 8, and set 9 and 8 over the lines above the
heads of the others, and then say take 8 out of 9, and there rests 1, which
must be set over a line between both, and afterward say 3-times 4 is 12,
multiplying denominators by denominators, and set them under the middle line,
which shall be the denominators for the rest, as appears clearly in the
example following.

Out of 9 pay 8 rest 1 ^

CHAP. IX. Substractions of intiers and fractions.
TO substract 1831 from 267 2/^ the fractions must first be multiplied as in
the example following; and say twice 2 are 4, and set the 4 over a line, then 3
times 1 are 3, and set them over a line, and then who pays 3 out of 4. rests
1, which must be set over the middle line, which done, multiply the one
denominator by the other, and set the product under that which does rest, as
follows.

^ But if the fraction of the received should be less then the fraction of the
sum paid, then must there be one borrowed from the whole or entire number,
and count it according to the denomination of the fraction; for if the
denominator be 4, then shall the intier be 4/4, if 5, then 5/5, if 6 then 6/6,
etc.

CHAP. X. Multiplication of Fractions.
LEt there be proposed a superficies in the form of a paralellogram, vulgarly
called square, the sides whereof the one is in length 7/8 of a fathom, and the
other in breadth, and these two fractions are to be multiplied together to
find out how much the whole superficies does contain the figures must be
disposed as follows. ^ And multiply one numerator by the other numerator,
and then one denominator by the other denominator, saying 3 times seven is 21,
and set them over head, then four times 8 is 32, and set them underneath, and
the whole will be 21/32 parts of a fathom, which certainly contains the
required superficies.

CHAP. XI. Multiplication of entiers and Fractions.
TO multiply by 2, you must first of al reduce the whole into fractions, and
then as here above multiply numerator by numerator, and denominator by
denominator, and the product will be 45/^8, as plainly appears by the
example following. ^ But if it were proposed to multiply greater numbers, as 20
by 15 26/29, then multiply the 15. intiers by the deno. 29. of the fraction,
and then add the numerator 26 of the same fraction; which done will mount to
461/29, then set the 461 over a line, and the 29. under it, and afterward
multiply the 20 intiers by the 461. which done, divide the product of the whole
by the denominator 29. and the numqer required shall be 317 27/19, as
appears: ^

CHAP. XII. The division of Fractions.
TO divide by, each numerator is to be multiplied by each denominator
opposite, and set the product over a line above them, and then divide the
greatest product by the least as follows. ^

CHAP. XIII. To divide intiers and fractions by intiers and fractions.
TO divide 12 by 3, they must first be reduced all into fractions as before,
and then you must multiply the numerators by the denominators acrosse as
follows, and then divide the greatest product by the least, as this example
does clearly demonstrate. ^

CHAP. XIV. Evaluation of fractions which may not be abridged.
SVppose you were to abridge 7/9 parts of a fathom, first you must consider
what are the parts of the intier or whole, as 6. foot, or 72. inches: then you
must multiply the numerator 7, by the denominator 72 parts, and let the product
be divided by the denominator 9, and then you will find 56 inches for the
eualuation of 7/9 parts of a fathom. ^ By this means any fraction may be
abridged as well in Geometry as as commerce, although they seem not to be
abridged.

CHAP. XV. For the eualuation of measuring lands.
YOu must consider that the fathom of 6 foot in length, does contain in
superficies 36. and that the 72 inches in length does contain in superficies
5184 inches, and of other measures then to valuate a fraction of 19/4^ parts of
a fathom, square in superficies you must multiply 5184 by 19. and divide the
product by 47, and there will be 2095 inches for the square of 29/47 of a
fathom square and so of other like measures.

CHAP. XVI. Of the rule of three without fractions.
MVltiply the second number 400 by the third 12. and product 4800 by the first
number 4, and the quotient shall be the number required, and dispose your rule
as follows.

months -- pounds -- months. If in 4 -- 400 -- 12

The probation of this Rule.
IS to multtplie the first number 4 by the fourth number 1200, and to multiply
the second by the third, and the two products will be equal if the rule be
well made.

CHAP. XVII. Of the rule of three with intiers and fractions.
FIrst all the intiers must be reduced into fractions as follows. yards
pounds yards. If 2 12 7 9/4 25/2 15/2 Which done, you must multiply the second
number of fractions as by the third number of fractions 15, and then again
multiply the product by 4 the denominator of the first number, and then say 2
times 2, or 4, and 4 times 9 is 36, which must be set under the line, by which
you shall divide the first product 1500, and the quotient shall be the number
required, as appears, ^

Here follows two examples, differing the one from the other; whereof the
manner of multiplying the one, is more easier then the other the first is
multiplied as the precedent, but the last is multiplied first by all the
intirres, viz. by 3, by 8 and by three, leaving the fraction ^ by it self, and
after all take the thir^ of the intier, viz. of 50000, saying the third part of
5 is one rest 2, for the 10 which is valuated at 20, then say the third part of
20 is 6, and so rests 2 for the second 0, and so to the end, and what shall
rest at last, shall be set over a line, and your 3 4th or 5 under the line,
then all being added together, you shall divide the product cutting off the
figures to the quantity of the first number, saying, by ten, by a hundred, by
a thousand, by ten thousand, by a hundred thousand, and the remainder is the
number required, as appears, 191.

The first example.
^

The second number being mul^^plied by the third, does mount to 57500000, and
being divided by the first multiplied by 3, as before is taught, the quotient
will be 191 2/^0.

The second example.
^

CHAP. XVIII. Extraction of the square root.
FIrst dispose your numbers as follows out of which you mean to draw the
root separating your figures by two and two beginning at the latter end; but
first strike the half circle 73/21/01 (and then say the root of 73 is 8, and
set 8 before the half circle, and rests 9, then double the quotient 8, and say
2 times 8 are 16, and set the 6 under the last figure of the second part of
figures, and 1 under the first figure of the first part a^ in this first
example. ^ Then say how many times is 1 in 9, and it shall be 5. which you
shall also set under the 1 of the second separation, as apppeares in this
second example. ^ And then say 5 times 1 are 5, which taken out of 9 rests 4,
and 5 times 6 are 30, and 30 out of 32 rests 2, and 3 out of 4 rest 1, and then
again say 5 times 5 are 25, which out of 3^ rest 6. and 3. out of 12. rest 9.
and then double the quotient, and say twice 5 are 10 set 0 under 0 of the last
separation, and keep ^ in memory, and say twice 8 are 16, and 1 that I keep
in mind makes 17, then set down 7 under the 5, and the 1 under the 6 of the
middle separation, as appears in this example following. ^ And then say how
many times is 1 in 9 and it shall be 5 times, which shall be set down for
quo^ient, and also under the last figure 1, and then say 5 times 1 are 5, out
of 9 re^ts 4, and 5. times 7 are 35, which out of 36 rests 1, and 3 out of 4
rests 1, and 5 times 0 is 0, and 5. times 5 are 25. out of 31 rests 6, and 3
out of 10 rests 7, and 1 out of 1 rests 0, and so the rule is ended as appears
following. ^

CHAP. XIX. Another example of the square root.
^ After you have separated your figures by two and two, and drawn 251 the
square root, there does yet rest 268, which must be reduced into fractions,
and to begin set that rest 268 over a line at the end of your root, and that
rest shall be numerator of the fraction; and to find the denominator only,
double the root 251 if it be bigger then the rest, but if less as here, add
one to the doubling of the first figure, saying twice 1 is 2, and 1 that I add
makes 3, add only double the rest, and set it under the line, and that shall
be the denominator of the fraction; and to have the root of this fraction here
above, first take the root of the numerator, and set that root over a line, and
it shall be numerator as appears following. ^ Then draw root of the
denominator, and set it under the line, and that shall be a denominator, and so
you shall find 16/22, and what rests is insensible. ^ But because that this
fraction 16/22 is not precisely perfect, and that there is a rest in each
extraction, you may operate as follows to have it move exactly, add as well
to the numerator as to the denominator two 00, or four, or six, etc. and from
each product or quotie^t out of one figure for every two 00 which you shall
have added, and the more that you add 00, the more precisely you shall have
the root as appears following. ^ But if it were proposed to extract the
square root of 16/25, there would nothing rest, nor would it be needful to
add any 00, for the root of 16 is 4 and the root of 25 is 5, and so we should
have 4/5, and the like in all such other accidents; and thus much for
Arithmetike. Vale.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
A Treatise of Fireworks for War, page 1. The manner how to make the
Morterpeece. page 5. The manner how to make Granades or mettle for the mortar
or hand, page 10. The manner how to make Granades of Canuas for the Mortar.
page 16 How to make fiery arrows. page 20 How the Granads are to be charged
into the Mortar. page 24 Thn manner how to shoot the Granads, page 28 A most
violent method to set a town on fire. page 33 How to make Granads to cast with
men's hands. page 39 How to make fiery wheels to be cast with men's hands.
page 45 How to make a ship of wild fire. page 48 How to make a Petard. page 55
A Treatise of artificial fireworkes for pleasure. page 61 A method to make
moulds for rockets for the air. page 64 How to make flying rockets for the
air. page 69 How to make moulds for rockets for the ground. pa. 74 How to make
the composition for rockets upon the ground page 76 The manner how to make
Serpents. pa 78 How to make golden rain. page 81 How to make stars, page 83
How to make Stars giving great reports. page 86 The manner how to make
Saucissons, page 88 How to make Stoupell or preparing of your cotton-wieke.
page 91 Thu manner how to assemble and set together the parts of a rocket.
page* 94 How to represent diverse sorts of figures in the air with rockets.
page 97 How to make fiery boxes. pa. 101 How to make fiery lances. page 103
The manner how to make rockets for the water. page 105 How to make Girondels
or fiery wheels page 110 The manner how to make Ballons. page 113 How to
make flying Saucissons. pa. 120 How to make short Guns for the Saucissons.
page 123 The manner how to dispose and build a great or little fireworke. page
125 A most precious unguent for any burning. page 131
A Treatise of practical Geometry. page 136 The method how to make the
Cross. page 139 How to take a height accessible. page 141 How to take a
height inaccessible, or one height upon another height. page 145 How to take
any distance upon a place accessible or inaccessible. page 149 Another manner
how to take a distance inaccessible. pa. 151 How to take a distance only upon
a line parallel to it. page 165 How to take the depth of a Valley. p. 157 The
manner how to take either distance or altitude with the Sector. page 161 How
to take any distance or altitude inaccessible with the Sector. page 165
Definitions of Sines, Tangents, and Secants. page 168 How to take any altitude
or distance by the Sines, Tangents, and Secants. page 171 How to take any
altitude or distance inaccessible by the Sines. page 176 The manner how to
take the Plane of a town or any place out of musket shot. page 180
A Treatise of Fortification, as well regularly as irregularly. page 184
Denominations of the parties of Fortification. page 186 How to build a
trianguler Fort. p. 189 How to build a square Fort. pa 192 How to build the
Pan^agone Fort* p. 195 How to build the Fort Hexagone. p. 198 How to build
the Heptagone. pa. 201 How to build the Octogone. p. 204 The description of
the height, death, and thicknes of every part of a complete Fortication. p. 206
The manner how to fortify places irregularly. p. 209 A Fortification
irregular. p. 210 Another manner of fortifying irregularly. p. 213
A Treatise of Arithmetike. Addition. p. 216 Of Substraction. page 219 Of
multiplication. p. 222 Of division. p. 224
How to reduce intiers and Fractions into Fractions. p. 229 To reduce all
fractions into one denomination. page 230 Ad^itions of intiers and fractions.
p. 234 Substraction of Fractions. p. 235 Addition of Fractions. p. 231
Substractions of intiers and fractions. p. 237 Multiplication of Fractions. p.
239 Multiplication of entiers, and Fractions. p 241 The division of Fractions.
p. 243 To divide intiers and fractions by in^iers and fractions. p. 44
Eualuation of fractions which may not be ^bridged. p 245 For the eualuation of
measuring lands. p 246 Of the Rule of three without fractions. p ^48 The
probation of this Rule. p. 249 Of the Rule of three with intiers and fractions.
p. 250 The first Example. p. 253 The second example. p. 25^ Extraction of the
square root. p. 255 Another example of the square root. p. 258
MILITARY BOOKS PRINTED FOR T. and I. EGERTON, MILITARY LIBRARY, Whitehall.
1. MULLER's Works of Fortification, Attack and Defense, Engineering,
Artillery, etc. 2. Simes's Military Guide for Young Officers, containing Parade
and Field Duty, Regulations, Orders, Returns, Warrants, etc. 8vo. 10s. 6d. 3.
-- Military Course for the Government and Conduct of a Battalion, 20
copper plates, colored, 8vo. 10s. 6d. 4. -- Treatise on the Military Science.
Comprehending the grand Operations of War, and General Rules for conducting an
Army in the Field, 4to. 15s. 5. -- Regulator, to form the Officer, and complete
the Soldier, 8vo. 6s. 6. -- Instructor for Non-commission Officers and Private
Men, 12mo. 2s. 6d. 7. Rudiments of War; comprising the Principles of Military
Duty, 8vo. 6s. 8. Discipline for the Norfolk Militia, by Lord Townshend, etc.
52 copper plates, 4to. 12s. 9. Regimental Book for the Use of the Major or
Adjutant, beautifully engraved, with proper Heads, folio. 10. Returns for
Horse, Dragoons, and Foot Mus^er-Rolls, Attestations, Furloughs, Discharges,
etc. 11. Miller's (Capt.) Art of Self-Defence, on copper plates, folio, 10s 6d.
12. Orders relative to the Sale of Commissions on Full and Half-Pay. 13. New
Exercise by his Majesty's Order, 1s. 14. Recruiting Book for the Army, 2s. 6d.
15. New Art of War, by Captain Anderson, 8vo. 7s. 6d. 16. Jones's Artificial
Fireworks. 17. Drummer's Instructor, with English and Scotch Duty, with
Beatings, Marchings, Calls, etc. 18. Cadet, a Military Treatise, 8vo. 5s. 19.
Phipps's Military Discipline, with copper-pl. 12mo. 4s. 20. General Essay on
Tactics, 2 vol. 8vo. with 28 copper plates, translated from the admired Essai
Generale de Tactique de Guibert, 2 vols. bound, 14s. 21. Lochee's Military
Mathematics, 2 vols. 8vo. many copper plates, 12s. 22. Lochee's Elements of
Fortification, many copper plates, 8vo. 6s. 23. -- on Military Education, 8vo.
2s. 6d. 24. -- Essay on Castrametration; or, Instructions for forming Camps,
with copper plates, 8vo. 4s. 25. Soldern's (Gen.) Tactics, translated by
Landmann, 7s. 6d. 26. Lochee's Field Fortification, with copper plates, 8vo.
5s. 27. Obrien's Naval Evolutions, with copper plates, 4to. 10s. 6d. 28.
Military Instructions for Officers detached in the Field, copper plates, 12mo.
4s. 6d. 29. King of Prussia's Military Instructions to his Generals, cuts, 8vo.
5s. 30. -- Campaigns, 12mo. 3s. 31. Dalrymple's Military Essay, cuts, 8vo. 5s.
32. Bell's Essay on Military First Principles, 8vo. 5s. 33. Donkin's Military
Collections and Remarks, 8vo. 4s. 34. Cambridge's Account of the War in India,
many large plates, 8vo. 6s. 35. General Review, Maneuvers, and Exercise, cuts
colored, 8vo. 3s. 6d. 36. Wolfe's Instructions to Young Officers, 12mo. 2s.
6d. 37. Elementary Principles of Tactics, many copper plates, 8vo. 6s. 38.
Antoni on Gunpowder, Firearms, and the Service of Artillery, by Captain
Thompson, 10s. 6d. 39. Elements of Military Arrangement, 2 vol. new edit. 7s.
40. Lloyd's (General) History of the War in Germany, vol. 2. 1l. 1s. 41. --
Political and Military Rhapsody. 42. Treatise on Military Finance, 2s. 6d. 43.
Complete Collection of Marine Treaties, subsisting between Great Britain and
the different Powers of Europe, etc. from 1546 to 1763 inclusive, 8vo. 6s. 44.
Tandon's French Grammar, to learn without a Master, 8vo. 2s. 45. Beckford's
Descriptive Account of the Island of Jamaica, 2 vols. 12s. 46. Theatrical
Remembrancer, boards, 4s. 47. Ireland's Picturesque Scenery of the River
Thames, 2 vol. 2l. 12s. 6d. 48. -- Picturesque Scenery of the Medway, 1l. 11s.
6d 49. English Anthology, 6s. 50. Pieces of Ancient Popular Poetry, 4s.

