A Grandfathers LEGACY; OR, Maltbey's Morsels for Mourners.

Divided into several Meditations for every Day in the Week.

Being a Comfort to all wounded and oppressed Consciences, which seek for
comfort by the Word of Truth.

By John Maltbey late Minister of Gods Word at Buckland in Gloucestershire.

LONDON: Printed by N. OAKS and are to be sold at the Crown in Paul's
Churchyard 1633,

TO THE Worshipful and well respected Gentleman Mr. JOHN ROBINSON Esquire, of
Denston-hall in Suffolk. And to the Virtuous and well-affected Gentlewoman
his wife, Mris. Briget Robinson, all terrestrial happiness.
AS there is an appointed time for the end of all our Acts, and by the
Almighties Decree once to dye; so has it pleased God, (that this Reverent
Divine) having paid that debt to Nature that we must all pay. And leaving
behind him this newborn Babe, which might have been obscured and buried with
him, had it not with a Religious Care bin preserved. And being brought to the
view of the World, and past the Press, I have selected you, amongst many
others, knowing you most fitting to Patronise this Work; and do desire you to
answer for this Child, and to receive it into your protection.

And withal, which was the chief motive, having bin often Resident with you,
and knowing in my self your pious and religious Government in your Family, in
offering up your first and latter Fruit of Prayer and Thanksgiving morning
and Evening, made me the more desirous to choose You. The Subject being of
Divine Meditations, gathered out of the Holy Scripture, for the comfort of all
oppressed and wounded souls.

For which causes, I have imboldned to fix your name as a Patron of this and
the like Subjects: and present it (though unworthy from my hand, being of this
Subject) as a token of my respect, showing my grateful mind to you (if it
came within my compass) for all your courtesies bestowed on me. I do therefore
presume to tender this my love, only as a remembrance of my thankfulness, and
witness of my true meanings. I will now cease troubling you, only turning my
Writing into praying for your good health: thus taking my leave, wishing you
all happiness in this life, and a correspondency in the world to come.

Your loving kinsman to command, I. OAKS.

The Printer to the Reader.
IT is a saying of Solomon, that it is better to go unto the house of Mourning,
then to the house of Banqueting; The house of Banqueting consisting of full
Dishes, which becomes not Mourners, but rather Fragments and Morsels. Our
blessed Savior feeding four thousand with seven loaves, and a few little
Fishes, Matthew the 15. Chapter, and the 34. verse. The morsels or Fragments
that were left, were seven baskets full. The same number has this Reverent
Divine observed in giving Method to the Book, in comparing them unto seven
Baskets full of wholesome Consolation, for the seven several Days in the
Week, in a plain and easy way, for the better understanding of the simplest.
Whose aged Life and Conversation, was well liked and approved of, amongst that
little Flock he had in his Pastoral charge, whose Loss was much Lamented by
many, who were his hearers. And leaving behind him this godly Work, which he
thought to have set forth in his Life time, Mistress Margaret Maltbey.
committed it on his death bed to his loving Wife, whose great care herein has
been largely expressed, and now desires that it may be courteously received at
the hands of all good Christians, Farewell. So I rest thine.

I. O.

A Grandfathers Legacy, OR, MALTBY his Morsels for Mourners.
The Introduction.
AS Jonathan Saul's Son hearing of the troublesome perplexity of David, sought
him out in the wood and comforted him in his God, 1. Sam. 32.18. So I now
having heard of your misery and weakness, am come to comfort you as a
neighbor, Job. 6. ver. 24. who desire your happiness from my heart, and
therefore would have you to consider, that God who caused Saul to return from
pursuing David, and to go against the Philistines, 1. Sam. 23. last verses,
can suddenly change your grief into gladness, and your misery into mirth, so
that you cry with faithful David, Psalm. 39.15 O spare me a little, that I may
recover my strength before I go hence and be no more seen. Psalm. 39.15. Psalm.
33.17
Psalm. 33 17. The eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and put their
trust in his mercy. verse 18. To deliver their souls from death, and to feed
them in the time of trouble and days of dearth.

God grant you may long for your appointed time, as the Servant for the shadow,
or the Hireling for the end of his work: cry and say, Lord, let thy spirit
within me, so make request for me, that thy hand may convey me from this
vale of tears to eternal bliss. Like as thine Angel guided Peter from
prison to liberty, Lord protect me, you, and us all from Satan's assaults,
keep us from despair, and secure us from evil, give to every one Comfort in
Conscience, Joy in the Spirit, Peace in believing, and a most settled
expectation of life by thy Son, our Savior Christ Jesus.

Monday Meditations.
NOthing more profits Gods Children then his Cross, this brings a loathing
of our troubles here below, and an ardent love of enjoying such things as rest
above in the Heavens. When Israel had peace in Egypt, they thought not upon
Canaan, so we bewitched with the world, forget our salvation. But as the
Angel caught Lot when he lingered in Sodom. Genesis 19. Genesis 19.
So does sicknesses and distasts withold us from Hell, inuesting us into
everlasting habitations in the Heavens.

We must not look to be carried into Heaven in a feather-bed; all Gods
Saints knowing this, that afflictions rest as Porters to the Kingdom of
Paradise, the Cherubins keeping the East Side thereof with a blade of a shaking
Sword. Genesis 3.24.

When we have health, we should praise God for it, and beware it become not
the cause of our ruin: You are sick, it is a sign of your heavenly Fathers
love, and of your everlasting happiness: this should make the cogitations of
your heart to strive as did the Children in Rebeccas womb; Leap we for joy
that our names, as the names of Gods Children are written in Heaven: what
though we be poor, sick, full of soars, and contemned of men, yet being the
Elect Children of God, and our names in Gods Book, we may have sound Comfort
both in life and death. Remembering that sanctified Crosses rest assured notes
of Gods favor, and therefore as soon as ever we read Gene. 6.12. of Abraham's
coming to Moreb, it is presently said, this Cannanite was then in the Land, by
whose cruelty God means to exercise both him and his; and the like must all
Gods Children look for.

Say not thou that afflictions rather drive us from God then to God, for where
the Holy Ghost sanctifies, all things there do prove most excellent. Albeit
Gods dearly beloved Children are put into strange extremities, yet look they
up with comfort at the last.

The body of Anaxarchus might be brayed in a Mortar, but never his soul:
Ieremies body might be sawed in pieces (of Manasses his own Cousin German)
not his sanctified soul. Amos was killed with a wooden beam, St. Laurence
broyled on a Grid-iron, St. John had like to have been boiled in an hot
Chaldron of scalding oil. Do not think but that your present Crosses may be
seconded with manifold comforts, and those cares on your Couch with Peter in
Gods kingdom. It may be the time is approaching (of putting off your
Mortality, and passing through death as through a gate into everlasting life)
to put you in mind to bewail your misdeeds, and to beg remission of your
sins, with pouring out of your tears, which are so gracious in Heaven, that
every sin is washed away with such a flood, no weeds ever springing after
such rain or sanctified shower: Depend upon Gods divine providence, have
patience with your Crosses, attend mercy for your comfort, beware of pride, too
often the overthrow of Honor, be weary of this world, make now your way
toward the kingdom of God.

Who long having tried you with Calamities, may bless you with eternal
Comforts, be you never comfortless, for no doubt God which tries his
servants, will likewise bless and comfort them.

As now sickness makes you sigh and be sorrowful, so much more let the Cause
thereof grieve your heart which is sin: And be you comforted in this, that
Christ Jesus suffered for you: lay away Melancholy, pluck up your spirits,
and put your self only upon God; live not like a woman, but dye like a living
Saint. Let not Impatience preiudise your heart, neither let thought pierce your
heart, but make patience and mirth the best physic to your mind, and surest
comfort in your lives.

Entreat the Lord to help you to bear your Crosses, and so to strengthen you
with his Spirit, that you become not hopeless of recovery, and let no sorrows
so afflict you, but as sacred Comforts may soon relieve you: Consider your
whole life to be nothing else but a continual trial of your Conscience in the
spiritual Warfare.

Remember that such as depend upon any thing but on God alone, refuse their
own felicity, and that goodness which they should else receive of God. Who
knows not this, that there is no Salvation but by Christ? There is no true
rest till I first feel Gods Judgments, and the weight thereof which shall
serve, through Christ, to my good.

God does now and then use to defer his help for a time, before he will
comfort his Church, People, or Children, yet when it is most expedient for
them, his help is ever ready at hand. Consider we all that the end of Gods
chastisements to his Children, is, to save them from Satan, and withold them
from Hell.

As God has strooken you, so has he power to restore you; as you are Gods
servant, you have an Angel to defend you from your enemies, you are so dear
unto God, that he can no more suffer your enemies to hurt you, then a man can
abide to be thrust in the eyes. Psalm. 17.8.
Psalm. 17.8. Satan sought to Iehoshuah when he was doing his Office, Zacha.
3.1. that is, praying for the state of the Church; where you must note, that
Satan seeks to afflict and trouble the Children of God, and hinder their
salvation, from doing their duties unto God if he could.

The Lord has punished you for a time, desire him now to be pacified, and
visit your sins no more, but that you may live in peace and quietness, as
in the Kingdom of Christ. Esaias 2.2. Micha. 4.4. Haggia 2.10. Esaias 2.2. Micah
4.4
The Lords hand of help never fails his faithful servants, but rests so
powerful in it self, that it brings all his promises and purposes to pass,
although he have no help of mortal man. Zachariah in the 14. Chapter of his
Prophecy tells, that these should be the great troubles in the Church, in
the Evening whereof the Lord will send comfort by a plentiful supply of
spiritual graces; marry into the new Jerusalem to continue for ever, where
there shall be one God, one Faith, one Religion.

In any wise beware of prosperity, premit and praeterit, it presses and
passes, staying by thee to thy hurt, and flying from thee to thy grief.
Prosperity is like the golden Bracelets that Turpeus had for betraying the
Roman Castle to the Sabynes, wherewith she was pressed to death. Pharaoh was
humbled being afflicted, but enjoying prosperity he was hardened. Noah was
sober in the Arc, but overtaken with Drunkenness in the Vineyard. Genesis 9.
Lot vexed in Sodom abhorred all uncleanness, but once safe in the
Mountains, Genesis 19.
he fell into gross Impiety. David being persecuted gave himself to
Meditation and Prayer, but once advanced in the Kingdom, committed bloody
sins. 2. Sam. 11. The best do commonly fall when they are furnished with
abundance, as the Moon is not Eclipsed but when she is in the full.

Learn therefore what to do, when God casts you down, or depriueth you of
any comforts you have formerly enjoyed, under so gracious a Lord, and loving
Father as is our God. Learn we this Lesson, that either God punishes us for
our sins, or for the probation of our faith, when he either compasses us with
his net, or takes from us the joy of our Honors, the pleasure of our Eyes,
and the Crown from our head, with the desires of our hearts.

Now know this, that our earthly house of this Tabernacle being destroyed, we
have a building given us of God, that is an house not made with hands, but
eternal in the Heavens: Strive we therefore to be clothed with a House which
is from Heaven, because if we be clothed, we shall not be found naked.

For indeed we which are in this Tabernacle, sigh, and are burdened, because
we would not be unclothed, but would be clothed upon that Mortality might
be swallowed up of Life. God that has Created us for this thing, has also
given unto us the Earnest of the Spirit: Therefore we are always bold, though
we know, that whiles we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord;
for we walk by faith, and not by sight nevertheless we are bold, and love
rather to remove out of the body, and to dwell with the Lord.

Wherefore we also covet, that both dwelling at home, and remoouing from our
home, we may be acceptable to him; For we must all appear before the
Judgment seat of Christ, 2. Cor. 5 1
that every man may receive the things which are done in the body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or evil. 2. Cor. 5.1. etc. to the end
of the tenth Verse: the eighth to the Romans all throughout it is comfortable.
It is the saying of St. Chrysostom, Crucem tollere and sequi Christum omnibus
imperatur, alligatus sum ego, sed Verbum Dei non alligatum. Are you sick? it
is not for your health, not for your hurt: Despair not, for our Salvation
depends upon the will of our most loving Brother Jesus Christ, who will
entreat the Father for the Children, and the Father will hear the Son for
his Brethren, not refusing them but feasting them.

And though the best of us have no merits, yet our Savior Christ has so
imparted to us his Righteousness, as if we had effected it our selves: By
which his most gracious suffering he has most surely signed and sealed his
Divine love and heavenly favor unto us which believe. The Lord delivers his
people by afflictions, preserves them upon his borders, Esdras 12.14.
making them joyful until the coming of the day of Judgment. I see you rest
weak and sick, I pray you be as quiet as you can, seeking no other remedy,
but content your self with Christ: God oftentimes sends afflictions on us,
to discover our vain Confidence, which we keep secret to our selves.

Terrors and destructions make men now and then to learn that which
exhortations and gentleness could not bring to pass: As the Plowman has his
appointed time, and diverse Instruments for his labor, so has the Lord for his
vengeance, for he punishes some at one time, some at another; some after one
sort, and some after another: So that his Chosen seed is beaten and tried, but
not broken in pieces as are the wicked.

The dearest of Gods Children may faint, but not finally fail and utterly fall
away. God will suffer his Church to be afflicted, and yet at length send it
deliverance. God suffers sometimes his dearest Children to want Consolation,
that his grace afterward may the more appear when they feel their own
weakness. Do we not by our sins provoke God to take our lives from us every
night? You are now afflicted in your bodies, yet assure your selves in the
Lord, that you shall find deliverance at last, both for body and soul, a very
translation into bliss: Gods power is sufficient without the help of any
other, our Heavenly Father has all means in himself to bring his will to
pass.

He shows his care and favor over them that are weak and tender: as God
has all power in himself, so does he use the same for the defense and
maintenance of his Members, Church and Children; See that you neither fear
neither man, nor put your trust in any save, only in God: you are worthy of
rebuke which will not rest on the providence of the Almighty, but think that
he has forsaken you in your troubles. All power rests in Gods hands to
deliver you when he thinks good.

Therefore learn to abide Gods hand with patience, and not curiously to seek
out the Cause of Gods delay in your Afflictions. Trust not in your own
Virtues, but acknowledge all good things to come from the Lord; you are in
Christ's protection, and therefore safe against all dangers, and free from the
fear of our infernal foes.

As a woeman cannot forget her Child, no more do the Compassions of our
heavenly Father fail us at our needful times of our several distresses.
Seek no Counsel in your own devices, lest refusing the Light and Consolation
which the Gospel offers, you remain still in sorrow, and never be
comforted. Esaias 51. God comfort his Church that they should not be
discouraged for their small number, but remember their Parents Abraham and
Sarah of whom they are borne. The punishment of the Elect is by measure,
according as God gives grace to bear it. But in the Reprobate it is the just
vengeance of God to drive them to an insensiblenesse and madness. Ier. 15 16
The Church of God in time of her afflictions and Captivity brings forth more
Children, then when she was at liberty. Wherefore does our God refuse us and
forsake for a while, but that with greater Compassions and everlasting Mercies
he may embrace us again as our Redeemer for ever.

It is our fault that we are not soon reconciled one to another, and judge God
by your selves: But he is most easy to be reconciled, offering daily his
mercies unto us, deliverance is from Heaven, and God never forsakes his
Children.

There shall be great afflictions in the Church, but God will ever deliver his.
True deliverance from sin and Satan, belongs to none but to the Children
of God whom he justifies, and when Gods will and pleasure is, he will show
you favor and feeling graces.

Our Heavenly Father has no need of man's help for the deliverance of his, he
can easily deliver his Children, and punish his foes. Consider not so much what
griefs and afflictions you now bear in your Body, as what Christ has borne
for you to purchase your salvation.

Remember why Israel was so sore afflicted, that they might in their troubles
call to remembrance the benefits which God had bestowed upon them in times
past. Yield not to the Censure of thy flesh, when God does not for Causes best
known to himself, send succor unto you presently. You are in distress and
trouble, dedicate your self unto Gods Service, and call upon his Name: let all
your Joy be in Gods Service and Worship, no man's help can save you; put your
confidence in GOD, look for help at his hands, who has better Physic for
your souls then any that comes from Gilead. Pray with true Faith and
Repentance, not for the smart and grief which you feel to be removed, but
finally sanctified to your Honors salvation.

Remember that God is the Potter, and we the Clay, he has power over us,
Esaias 45.9 Romans 9.10
to do with us whatsoever seems good in his sight. As no man that is a
thirst, refuses fresh Conduit-water which he has at home, to go and seek
waters abroad to quench his thirst: So we ought not to seek for help and
succor as Strangers, and leave God which is present with us. All which mean
to enjoy the Land of promise, must walk in the way of truth which God there
teaches them.

Let your Faith still strive against each temptation, and in your greatest
weakness seek to the Lord for strength: Know this my beloved, that the
dearest Children of God may be overcome in the battle between the Flesh and
the Spirit: and great inconveniences may they fall into, Job 3.1. etc. 15 10
till God raise them up again. The Scriptures telling us, that Judgments
begin at Gods own house: we may not think it strange that we are now
grievously punished, who have, now and then, Ezech. 9.6. 1. Pet. 4.14 17.
played he part of Gods enemies. Extreme are the afflictions that God
appoints for every one: as Psalm 15.8. Esaias 51.17. But the Cup which the
wicked drink, is more bitter then that which God gives to his Children: for
he measures the one by Mercy, and the other by Justice.

If you see you rest weak, commend your selves to Gods mercy, who means not
to destroy you for your sins, but to correct and chastise you, till he have
pardoned and purged your offenses; and so burn his rod by which he has
punished you. Esaias 33.1. Remember that as God was the Author of Isreal's
Captivity for their sins: so was he for his mercies their Redeemer, to
restore them to Liberty.

God in the midst of all his threatenings remembers his, and comfort them:
There is no greater sign of our Heavenly Fathers love, then when he
corrects us for our amendment, preserving us in despite of our Enemies; to
that end whereunto he has appointed us, even to the Glory of Gods Name, and
good of his Church. See Esaias 44.2. and Chap. 30.10. and 10.24. What though we
be forsaken for a time, yet the Lord casts us not off utterly, as though he our
Husband were dead; but in our dreadfullest afflictions still follows us with
his fatherly favors and manifold mercies, to make us all praise God in Syon;
let us still acknowledge God to be the Author of our afflictions, to the
intent that we may still seek to him for remedy.

Let your heavy sins be continually before your eyes, as one that tyeth a
thing to his hand for a remembrance: so will he forget them, cast them behind
his back, and tread them under feet. The Lord comfort and refresh your soul,
still treading down the insurgent Enemies that rise up against you: Let no
adversity utterly discomfort you, but wisely consider that there may be cause
of a Woman's separation from her Husband, and a joyful meeting and coming of
them both together again.

We can never be too timely exercised under our Cross, but we are to pray,
that when our afflictions grow greater, our patience also (by experience) may
be stronger; and thou Lord, become a Sanctuary unto us in the soarest times of
our saddest afflictions. Desire the Lord so to mitigate your afflictions, as
you lose thereby neither Sense, nor Reason; nor arrogate any thing to your
self: but trust in the Lord your God, who alone does save souls. Let no sins
so throw you down, as once to despair of your heavenly fathers mercies.

In the days of your afflictions and miseries, remember that God promised to
comfort his Church in all heaviness and deepest distresses: bless God for
your punishments, for thereby he calls you from your iniquities; as from the
beginning God has exercised his people under the Cross; so since Christ was
offered, has he left this exercise unto his Church, until the Dead rise
again, and Christ gather his into his Kingdom in the Heavens.

The Lord give you patience and constancy to abide the pains and plagues,
which the Lord inflicteth upon you, for the humbling of your soul, and hasting
it to eternal happiness. And doubt not, but for your enduring a painful
death, the Lord our God will give you a precious Life: and as you yet mourn
with men, cause you to triumph with Jesus Christ; and for anguish here below,
dwell and rest with Angels above.

Remember the three Children in the fiery Furnace, they would not come out, nor
depart thence for any fear, till the Lord bid them: neither came Noah out of
the Arc, till the Lord called him forth.

Stay your soul upon God who is now only to comfort you, and remember how
that our abominable sins bring upon our souls these horrible afflictions in
our last days: As you are one of Christ's members, you may not hasten too much;
but learn patiently to abide the Issues of Gods promise. As the Majesty of God
has struck you down, so I do not fear, but that his powerful and heavenly
hand will again raise you up: God that by one Angel could destroy all the
world, assures his Children so of his love, that rather then they shall
perish, he will send forth double power, even Christ Jesus, the Head of Angels
to deliver us.

What troubles soever befall the Church of Christ and his Members, they come by
the Counsel and providence of God, Dan. 12.
and still have happy Issues to all faithful believers. Dan. 12. The Angel
notes first how the Church shall be in great afflictions, and trouble at
Christ's coming; but God shall send his Angel to deliver it: meaning Christ
that is promised by the preaching of the Gospel. Therefore be not discouraged,
though Christ come not so soon as we cry and call for him: for what he
does, is to try our patience, that we with the Elect of God might be the
more pure in our hearts, and purged truly with his Church.

Be you never so weak or sick, yet remember who has said, Hosea 13.14.
Hosia 13.14. I will redeem thee from the power of the Grave, I will deliver
thee from Death. O Death I will be thy death, O Grave I will be thy
destruction. Fly to the Lord in Death, and he will be thy Life: to avoid the
Lords Judgments, you must learn to become obsequious to his Will; so will he
take away your Iniquities, and receive you most graciously.

Love we the Lord God of Hosts, who is in Christ Jesus now become our heavenly
Father; whosoever so does, are blessed: their branches shall spread, their
beauty shall be like the Oliue-tree, and their smell like Lybanon, which shall
revive as the Corn, flourish as the Vine, and their sent shall be like Wine of
Paradise; yet for all that shall the godliest be so shaken with terrible
temptations, that they shall not look for continual quietness in this world,
but still assure themselves and souls, that we and they shall be preserved in
our deepest dangers: because God may destroy his Enemies, but will deliver his
Children.

Does any adversity come without Gods appointment. Esaias 45.7. God deals not
with you as he does with other people, but warns you both by punishments and
Prophets, to beware of his plagues: you are told by Esdras the mildness of the
Almighty, 2. Book, 1.28. I have prayed you as a Father his Sons, as a Mother
her Daughter, and as a Nurse her young Babes: 2 Esd. 1.28
that you would be my people, as I am your God: and that you would be my
Children, as I am your Father. God our heavenly Father compares himself to an
Hen gathering her Chickens under her wings, Math. 23.37. And can we once
think that he will cast us out from his sight? Mat. 23.27.


Although you see no Prophets, yet should you hate your Iniquities; and though
the Lord God Almighty be not seen with bodily eyes, yet should our hearts
believe what he does both teach, and tell us, what best tends to his Glory.
2. Esdras 3.28. Are they that dwell at Babylon better then they which have
dominion in Syon? The Heathen may flourish there which never once think on the
Commandments of God: but in the world to come, true Israelites find peace
with God and Angels. 2. 2 Esd. 7.33.
Esd. 7.33. Remember that the Almighty shall appear upon the seat of
Judgment, when miseries shall vanish away, and long suffering shall have an
end. Thy Servant Esdras has told us of an eternal Paradise, whose fruit
remains incorruptible; wherein is safety and health if we will enter into
it. verse 53.

Draw we near therefore unto the Lord for an Inheritance, because we walk
in great pride in these latter days of this world, therefore do many miseries
meet us, and sundry calamities overtake us: But the wise must withold
sorrows in themselves, to allow Gods purpose, and receive his Corrections in
patience, if they look to be commended of him, and allowed by him: Be of good
comfort O Israel, and be thou not heauy-hearted O thou house of Jacob, 2.
Esdras 12.46. For the most High has you in remembrance, and the Almighty has
not forgotten you in temptation. 1.12.47. Neither will he leave Syon desolate,
but still mercifully remembers the low estate of his distressed Sanctuary.

The Lord gives us all good things, so does he enable us when he will, and
as he will: Remember we therefore his Commandments, neither let we them at
any time be put out of our minds, but fear we the Lord as we flee from
each sin; still doing the things which are acceptable to the Lord our God: As
the Lord does scourge, so does he pity; he leads to Hell, and brings up,
neither is there any that can avoid his hand. Our Heavenly father scourges us
for our iniquities, but again gathers us out of all Nations amongst whom we
shall be scattered. Wait ye for Salvation from God, call upon him to help
you, and he will hear your voice if it please him.

God has not tried you as he did the Patriarchs, to the examination of your
very hearts; neither does he take vengeance on you, but punishes you for
Instruction, to bring you nearer to himself: God seeing us to be unruly
Children, does therefore swing us, that we may be come quiet; and go from
under his fingers as tame Lambs, seeking for no other rest or peace, then is
found in Jesus Christ. Know you not this, that he which offers the most
blows is Crowned? Whither should we resort but unto the Lord in the times of
our dangers, and there cry most earnestly: death being still before us in our
own sight, humble we our bodies with fasting, and desire the Lord to help us
being desolate: Praise God in your misery, and magnify him for his mercy; the
souls of the righteous are in the hands of God where no torment can touch
them: the departure from us may seem as it were destruction, howbeit they were
in peace. What though you now suffer pains before men; yet is your hope full
of immortality: although you be prevented with Death, yet shall you be in
rest: God takes away his, least wickedness should beguile the mind: It is a
matter of endless comfort to the poor members of Christ, to see how upon
earth, none are more full of woeful pains in body and souls then Gods
children: who so full of soars as Job, Lazarus, even from the top to the toe?

Some are maimed in their bodies; Job 5. The Poole called Bethesda, with her
five porches, was filled with multitudes of sick folk, blind, halte, and
withered, waiting for the moving of the Waters, after the Angels stirring:
whereof, whosoever first stepped in, was made whole, whatsoever disease he did
languish of.

It is a comfort very cordial, to all Gods children, to remember their former
miseries, now turned into felicity, joy, and happiness; what though you rest
poor, yet may you possess a Kingdom.

Are you here hungry and thirsty? you shall assuredly taste of the Tree of
Life: Are you now wretched and naked? you shall be clothed with the Roabes of
Christ's Righteousness, and in the stead of the rags of infamy and Reproach on
earth, you shall be crowned with the Dyadem of immortal glory, in the highest
heavens.

Be not sad either for the sickness of your self, or your friends, for you
cannot perish, neither shall you be cast away, for your souls shall be
presently in joy, and your bodies buried in the Grave, as in a Bed of Down, to
take a sweet sleep till the day of Judgment, and then you shall rise to
glory. And according to your Religion, Faith, and good deeds, in feeding and
clothing Christ Jesus in his members, he will pity you in mercy, and now
provide comfort for you in the time of your Troubles. Assure your heart, and
persuade your own soul, that Christ Jesus rests the most true and absolute
Shepherd, who feeds his sheep with most wholesome pasture, not suffering
us to Rot upon earth, but assuring our souls to sing with Angels in Heaven.

We must not forget in the midst of our miseries, that Christ our Redeemer
was wounded for our transgressions, broken for our iniquities: the chastisment
of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. Esaias 53.5.

We are saved by coming unto God by Christ, Heb. 7.
he everliving, that makes intercession for us. Hebr. 7, And by none other
name can we be saved. Acts 4.
Acts 4. Remember and forget not, how we are made partakers of Christ and his
benefits, even by being of an humble spirit, by Faith apprehending and
applying Jesus Christ with all his merits unto our selves. Thus are we
justified before God, and sanctified for Christ's sake, and therefore we must
all be content to undergo shame, disgrace, trouble, persecution and bonds, yea
death it self, for Christ his sake. The Remembrance of Christ's coming to
Judgment, must cheer up your heavy souls. So labor now your heart, as you
may cry with the Spouse of Christ, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Hope we to
live with Christ in the Church Tryumphant, then must we dye with him in the
Church Militant: None shall live with Christ above, unless they suffer with
him here below: nor none shall have their tears wiped from them in Heaven,
unless they have first shed them on Earth.

It is the Lords usual dealing, after long time of peace, to bring some trials
that the Elect and true Christians may be discerned: It is known to us all how
a Christian man's life rests a war-fare; so that there is no dreaming of a
Victory, before we fight. It is our lot to suffer, and our comfort still to
stay upon Christ, who will so dispose of us, and our several troubles, as they
shall leave a blessing behind them, and we shall gain more in the Spirit, then
we can loose in the flesh. Which GOD grant we may.

Tuesday Meditations.
THis rests a Maxim in Religion, that God will have his own true Church and
Children to be tried, and undergo the heat of persecution: We must learn
therefore to be wise, and not to think our selves out of Gods favor when we
are tried; nor deem worse of the Gospel, because the Cross still goes with
it, and wicked people still hate it.

But still let us all learn to look at Christ Jesus, remembering that we
Servants, may not look for any larger privilege then had our Lord and Master
Christ Jesus. For a time the Father hid his face from him, but with everlasting
Compassion did he most graciously look upon him at last: God rests our
Father, having a care over his Church and Children; preserving us from fire and
water, and each other eminent danger.

God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are not
able; but will even give you the issue with the temptation, that you may be
able to bear it: You are the Lords workmanship, and he will undoubtedly
provide for you; both sheltering and comforting you, and that even then, when
you find the heat of afflictions to shine most hottest upon you.

Forget not to go and come unto the Lord in the time of your trouble and
deepest distresses, knowing Christ to be our Shepherd, and preserver in each
danger. We cannot honor God more, then to depend on him in our dangers, and
fly unto him in our extremities, as our only helper, hope, and fortress.

This rests a matter of endless comfort, that our Lord Jesus Christ will be a
place of comfort and refreshing unto us, and as a shadow at nooneday in the
greatest heat of bloody persecutions.

You are now cast down as the Children of God, to the disquieting of your
soul within you, yet for all that wait you still upon God: Let no fear or
danger make you deny Christ and his Gospel, who comfort us in his Church,
refreshes us in our troubles, and freeeth us from the dread and dangers of
Hells horrors, if we faithfully call upon him for pardon of our sins, as
once did Manasses. Be you still thirsting for life, and panting for Paradise;
power out your hearts before him that keeps Heaven for your house: assure
your self of Gods help, be you never so grievously tormented; the Saints of
God have still waited upon him, to teach us all to be constant, and to wait
still for our several deliverances.

We knowing the Lord God to be the Author of each calamity, may not murmr,
but seek remedy at his hands who wounds us; lift we up our hands in hope,
not boasting of our virtues, but declaring that we still rest upon God in the
midst of all our afflictions: It is a bad servant that will not wait on his
Master.

God does not always punish our sins, but by hard afflictions calls us to
the consideration of the heavenly Joys. We do not honor our God aright,
until we trust in him alone; taking his Majesty to witness, that we hunger
in heart to be upright toward God, still crying when we are grieved, This
God is my God for ever and ever, and he shall be my guide even unto death. Psa.
48.14. Psalm. 48.14


Life and death are in Gods hands, and no man can live for ever; howsoever
therefore you dream of Immortality, it is not to be founded upon earth:
although your disease is grievous and dangerous, yet know you this, that God
has infinite ways to deliver you. Did not God deliver his people from Og King
of Basan, and other Tyrants? and his own people from the the Red sea, when
they were in great extremity and danger?

Let not your present crosses rest an occasion of your falling from God, but
rather a Cause of cleaving faster unto him.

Howsoever you do yet suffer troubles, yet has God his time wherein he has
appointed your deliverance: A lively faith assures the soul that God is
favorable unto him, when he seems to be angry; and then at hand, when he
seems to be far off.

Fear you not but God will hear you, though Care make you think, that the
Lord long deferreth you: What though to day you seem as a Sheep beset with
many Wolves, yet put your trust in God, and depend still on his providence, and
you shall assuredly be comforted at the last.

Under the temporal punishment of the Land of Canaan, is comprehended the
promise of life everlasting to all the faithful, and their posterity.

In the time of our distress, we must learn to pray earnestly, and although
God stay as if he heard us not, yet is then our deliverance nearest, when we
seem void of relief and succor.

Are you in distress, God has millions of means to free you from miseries,
and preserve you from troubles. Acknowledge our heavenly Father to be the
only Author of all your deliverances from dangers and death, and that by his
providence you are still enfranchised from troubles: God will recompense his
long tarrying with double and undoubted comfort to your souls. There rests no
true praising of God, except it come from the heart.

Promise therefore to delight in nothing (if henceforth God send you life and
health) but only that wherein God may be glorified.

Remember that sickness is Deaths messenger, teaching us to rejoice in nothing
but in the Lord.

The faithful must learn to depend upon Gods hand in the time of their
miseries, knowing that when things are ever at worst, then will God come and
set them in order; and so bridle the rage of the enemy, as he shall become
mightlesse, were he never so strong before.

We may not look to be delivered at our first cry, our eyes may be kept
waiting for our coming with our deceitful hearts, and searching out of our
own spirits, crying unto GOD to know the Causes why we are chastened, and
when our sorrows shall have an end.

Desire you to know the way from Earth to Heaven, we must ascend by Faith up
thither, if we will know the ways of the LORD, or the secrets of his divine
Word and Will.

Then must we learn what extremities God will suffer us now and then to fall
into, and why to exercise our faith before he set to his hands to deliver us.

God for a time will exercise us with his rods, yet under the Kingdom of
Christ shall we rest assured both of our peace, joy, and comfort.

I beseech you learn so to call and cry upon God, as you never become weary,
though GOD grant not forthwith your requests: but learn rather to be more
earnest with God, and to call the more o^t^er upon him.

Though your state rest not so glorious as you wish, yet wait with patience,
and GOD will accomplish his most comfortable promises.

Acknowledge and confess God himself to be the author of our salvation, who
very often in love calls us by his rods to consider the shortness of our
lives, and how that for our sins sake he abridgeth our days, lest that his
wrathful Judgments should fall the more heavily upon us. Let this be the
comfort of your heart, that as God is all sufficient to defend you from
dangers, so rests he most willing to comfort you in your most perilous
agonies. Content your self with that life which God gives you, for by Death
the shortness of this Life is recompensed with Immortality. Know should we
all that God has care over his, and often chastises them for their wealth, that
they should not perish for ever with the wicked.

Faint not in trouble, and you shall assuredly find help: let me entreat
you to remember, that God requires two things at your hands, and of all his
Children in the world. First, that you detest vice, secondly, that you put your
trust in God for your deliverance; which though they appear not suddenly, yet
rest they most sure, and are all laid up in store for you I fear not. Be you
in never so great misery, yet is there ever left place for your prayers: see
therefore that you labor to have a lively feeling of that which you desire,
steadfastly believing to obtain it: Despair not of Gods mercies, for as great
as the World is, yet is it fraught with the signs of his favor; his mercies
remoouing sins, as the blast of winds do the dust. You have nothing in your
self to move God to mercy, but only the Confession of your infirmities and
misery: and though you be naturally flow to praise God, yet stir up your
selves to the performance of all the several duties of godliness.

Be not careful for those you leave behind you, for God which provides for
brute beasts, will much more extend his provident care unto the Children of
his sons and servants: there being no part of the world so barren, but that
most evident signs of Gods blessings appear therein.

God provides not only Herbs, and things necessary for us, but also things
to rejoice and comfort our hearts, as Wine, Oil, and ointments.

Doubt ^ou not of GODS providence i^ caring for your Wife and Children, knowing
that he provides even for the brute Beasts: he provides for all Creatures
their daily food, and he withdrawing his blessings from us, we all perish.

As Gods merciful face gives strength unto the earth, so does his severe
countenance burn up the Mountains: we sinners do so infect the world, that
GOD our heavenly Father cannot so rejoice in his works as he would.

Praise (I pray you) for his benefits passed, and be you thoroughly strengthened
and encouraged against all present and future sorrows whatsoever.

So inestimable is Gods goodness, that he would rather change the order of
Nature, then that his people should not be delivered. Exo. 14.27
Exodus 14.27. although they were wicked.

Not any one of Gods Elect, but early or late shall feel Gods help in their
necessity, neither rests there any afflictions so grievous, out of which God
will not deliver his: whereof we must learn to be mindful all the days of
our life. Not once forgetting this, that God does punish and correct us seldom
extremely, but because we cannot be brought unto him by any other means.

When in man's Judgment there seems in sickness no recovery, but all things
are brought to despair: then GOD chiefly shows his mighty Power, and brings
us by sharp and heavy rods to call mightily upon him, until we find mercy
and compassion.

So by healing and helping us when all secondary Causes, and means of Physic
failed us, it causes us with praise and glory to confess Gods benefits,
yielding unto him the sacrifices of our own souls.

When Humane arts fail, then does Gods providence preserve and bring unto the
Haven, where we would be. Such love did GOD bear unto his Church, that he
changed the order of nature for their commodities; even at the Red Sea, where
the Israelites went through the midst of the Sea, upon the dry Land: The
water being a Wall unto them on their right hand, Exodus 14.
and on their left. Exodus 14.

It is Gods manner sometimes to exalt us, and then again to humble us by
afflictions, that we may know our selves. Know that you belonging to the Lord,
all things shall turn to your profit; trust still fully on the Lord, and he
will finally free you from your troubles and sorrows. Care not for your outward
sorrows assayling you, so the Spirit within comfort you: Show your self a
faithful servant of the Lord God: In this your present adversity, still
remembering, that as the Lord is a a just God, so rests he a most merciful
father; and when we are in distress, then is it our time to seek him, and
his help when we rest destitute of aid, succor, counsel, and comfort.

God has a care over us, disposing of our Death, and taking account of our
Life: yet rests our best payment but thanks, laud, and praises for his
mercies. Refuse you not to be tried with temptations, but entreat the Lord so
to succor you in time, as you faint not through infirmity: Know this, that
with out the maintenance of Gods word, our life droppeth away like water.

Doubt not of Gods power yet, of each lawful means, and never abuse his
graces: and so shortly you shall be comforted. GOD will not suffer such as have
set forth his glory, to groan ouer-long in grief, and to be overcome with
misery, but with sound Doctrine will comfort our corrupting flesh, and
languishing desires, with the society of Saints, and melody of Angels in Heaven.

Understand this I pray, that we which are not yet punished for our
transgressions, have no cause to rejoice at others which are afflicted, but
rather to fear, that the dilation of our punishment will be more grievous: for
though our God does come with leaden heels, he strikes with iron hands,
recompencing the tardity of his stroke, with the gravity of the wound.

Do not grieve to depart out of the miserable cottage of this World, in-into
Heaven, the City of Saints: where possessing Christ, we shall enjoy all
things with him. Romans 8.32
Romans 8.32. Farewell Riches that are vanity, pleasures that are hurtful, and
sin which is damnable. Come to me, O my God, for thou art Truth, and thou O
Christ, my Redeemer, with thy merrits; and thou Holy Spirit, my Guide and
Comforter: Regard no earthly things, for they are of short continuance: make
the joys of Heaven the objects of your soul, which are eternal: Desire God
either mercifully to prevent the plagues, or else to grant you patience to
sustain them when they come.

It was Paul's advantage to have Agabus Prophecy of his Chains, that so by
his flight he might either defeat the Jews, or by premeditated Resolution
lighten or prevent his bonds.

Although no Repentancs can alter the Almighties decree, yet resolved patience
may the better endure it: the safest shelter in all our afflictions, is our
faithful relying upon Gods assistance. And our best improouements of Gods
power, is by our infirmity.

No stronger instigation of mercy, then our acknowledgement of misery, as the
privilege of greatness is to relieve the impotency of distressed supplicants.

We must labor to gain by faith, and not to loose by infidelity, well knowing
prosperous issues daily to attend the living images of the Deity: your
faithful weakness becomes not any disadvantage for glorious tryumphes.

No Martyr insulted upon by the furious tyranny of his enraged adversity, but
has faith for his Advocate; naked Truth for his Guardian; and the Holy Ghost
to keep him far from disconsolate distress. Let your still armed confidence
tire out your tormented sorrows, or sickenesses whatsoever: Let us all rest
undaunted, well knowing that God sustaynes us, who doubts of the Suns being,
although it do not always shine? Or of the faith of Job, though it were
ouer-whelmed for a while. Know this, we should all, that the Elect themselves
may fall, though built upon the Foundation of GOD: yet the Lord keeps them
from perishing, though when they stand, he keeps them not from falling.

That blessed Apostle Saint Paul, took between Damascus and Jerusalem, the
happiest fall that ever the Earth was honored withal: In via Iudaeus cecidit,
vt resurgat Christianus, says Chrysostom. He fell in the way a Jew, or
rather from a Jew, that he might arise a Christian. It is our heavenly Fathers
mercy that rayseth us when we are fallen, but our faith must keep us from
falling: When we are raised we stand by Faith, and we come through Faith
into this Grace, wherein we stand: Shall we stand by the habits of Gods mercy
and grace, Romans 5.2. and shall we fall from the act thereof by a wilful
Apostasy, God forbid? Let us rather persevere in Faith, and that unto the Death;
weighing what wavering Age we are fallen into, and strange opinions, even of
the pillars of these times.

Content we our selves to pass from troubles and calamities, into everlasting
joys: for Death is but an entrance into bliss, and as it were, a casting
Anchor into the Haven of Heaven: Cry to God with David, What profit is there
in my Blood, when I shall go down into the grave of forgetfulness.

Likewise Hezekiah prayed against Death, desiring to be reconciled unto God, to
give satisfaction to God, and his children.

None so free from sin, but stand in great need to be purified from sin,
and purged from the soars, blaines, and blemishes of iniquity: Beware of
grudging when the Lord strikes you, because it is always for our good, and he
rests both able and willing to deliver us at his pleasure. Psalm. 33.17.
Behold, the Eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, Psalm. 33.17
and put their trust in his mercy, to deliver their souls from Death, rest
there never so many turbulent trials: Yea, it is indeed our commodity that God
does not accomplish his promises, so soon as we could wish, that staying
with patience his leisure, we may be crowned with the more glory in the end.
As every father nurtureth his son, so does the Lord his children, but it is
to walk in his ways. The Children of God shall know this, that all sorrows
and sicknesses, crosses, and troubles, are to prove us whether we will: Love
the Lord God with all our hearts and Souls, Deuteronomy. 13.3
in our greatest griefs, and saddest sorrows, yea or no. Deuteronomy. 13.3.4. Gods
servants must be no flinchers, but both followers and fighters in the Lords
quarrel, preferring the Lords glory, before their own souls safety.

Do not think that each trouble comes on you, because the Lord is not with
you: For the most tender hearted mother will now and then hide her self from
her Child, to try the kind and loving affection thereof toward her, that
afterward finding the love of her little one, she may, as it were, put it in
her bosom: So our heavenly father, to find out our corruptions (whereof we
our selves are ignorant) he does swinge us for our follies, that falling
weeping at his feet, he might lovingly take us up, and kiss us with his mouth.

No evils come upon us, but when we forsake God, who rides upon the Heavens
for our help, and on the Clouds for his own glory. Deuteronomy. 33.16. When the hand
of God is upon you, repent of your sins heartily, rather then by your power and
policy to resist the working thereof: whatsoever your disease is, fail not
for to consecrate your self, both soul and body, to the Lord of glory, and
you shall not do amiss. No remedy but we must needs enter into the way of all
the World, know we all therefore in our hearts, and persuade our souls, that
all the good things which the Lord has promised us, shall come to pass unto
us, and no evil can come unto us, but by our Disobedience. God that plagued
Egypt, brought Israel out of Egypt: He that brought Israel into the Red Sea,
knew how to bring them out to their enemies confusion, and the comfort of his
children. Do we according to the course of nature, we may hope undoubtedly to
live in the state of grace: the Lord being far more willing to bless then
to curse: But alas, it is the nature of our flesh, no longer to obey God, then
when we are under the Whippe or scourge.

Therefore does the Lord make it oftentimes the end of his punishment: to call
us to Repentance, that we may seek both for health and help at his hands:
The Church of Christ now is, and must be still subject to manifold afflictions,
how be-be it, God at length will give joyful issue, delivering them from all
troubles.

Desire rather the comfort of your poor souls, then the ease of your bodies;
for the Almighty gives much bitterness to their souls, that now and then had
the fairest bodies, to cause us to have more care and respect to the inward
man, then to the outward form. It is usual with God to plunge into
adversities, not to hurt but to heal, not to kill our bodies, but to save our
souls from destruction.

It is GODS mercy toward his Children, and his favor unto his Friends and
followers, to make them pertakers of piety, and examples of Holiness in their
places. I desire you call unto mind this one thing, which is, that although
David were anointed King, and that by a Prophet, yet God would try him in
sundry sorts, before he had the use of his Kingdom. Art thou a David? think
it not much to fall upon thy face to the ground, before Jonathan, to crouch
knees, and kiss to save thy life; much more for a while to be sick (that in
fine) thou may become a Saint. In man rests no Justice, what is good in us,
rests all of Gods mercy, from him we receive it. It is our infirmity that in
time of our sorrows we do no more comfort our selves in the Lord our God then
we do.

In each trouble and adversity we are to consider the providence of God, and
not like raging Beasts to forget both our own duty, and contemn GODS
appointment over us. It is Gods pleasure, to make as though he would leave us
for a time, yet if we trust in him, we shall be sure to find comfort.

Our heauiest lamentations ought not to be excessive, but moderate; well
considering this, that we are to praise and glorify GOD in all his doings,
and remembering that many sobbes and fears both follow and befall the faithful
ones: yet shows GOD himself most liberal to his servants, when they seem to
be utterly destitute of any comforts at all.

Holy Scriptures do warn us at large, that there is neither rest nor
quietness to be looked for in the world, but variety and change of things
both in Church and Commonwealth, longer then God preserues them by his
protection; where his Word is truly set forth, Virtue! esteemed, Vice
punished, and Concord mainetayned, there all things flourish: but abominable
vices must wither before commendable Virtue can grow: we must loath the way to
the dungeon of Hell, before that with courage we can clime to the Kingdom of
Glory.

The sufferings of the faithful have their privileges. 1 Reg. 2.26.
1. Reg. 2.26. King Solomon would not slay Abiather, because he had borne the
Ark of the Lord God before his father David, and because he had suffered in
all wherein his father bad been afflicted. Eliah was a good man, and both
beloved of God and man; yet wearied in the Wilderness, fate down under a
Tree, willing to dye, said; It is enough O Lord, take my soul, for I am no
better then my Fathers. And why was this? because he was jealous for the Lords
Glory, which we all should stand out for to the loss of our limbs and lives.

Gods punishments are not to destroy us utterly, but to chasten us, and to
bring us to the knowledge of our selves: and to know how much better it is to
serve God, then Tyrants. God never seeks the Death of a sinner, but his
Conversion. Ezec. 18.32. etc. 33.11.

The Lord is with us while we be with him, and will be found of us, if we
forsake him not: God does reserve unto himself a number whom he will hear,
both for himself and others: Pray faithfully, and your confidence cannot be
frustrate. Be wiser then Asa, who when he was sick, in the extremity of his
disease, sought rather unto the Physicians, 2 Chronicles. 16.12.
then unto God. 2. Chron. 16.12. Where all Christians should know, that first
we should seek God to purge our sins, which rest the chief causes of our
Diseases; and afterward use the help of the Physician, as a means by whom
God waketh. Remember I pray you, that affliction gives understanding; so that
such as have hated God in their prosperity, must now in their miseries both sue
and seek to him.

The best of us are no better then was King Manasseh, who never regarded God
till he was put into fetters, and bounden in Chains, and carried to Babell:
Where being in tribulation, he then prayed to the Lord his God, and humbled
himself greatly before the GOD of his Fathers; and God was entreated of him,
and heard his prayer; and brought him again to Jerusalem, into his Kingdom:
then knew Manasseh that the Lord was God.

See how God by our afflictions does give us understanding, so that whereas we
hated God in our prosperity, now in our misery we seek unto him. When God
punishes us, it is to make us see our miseries: he would not exercise us under
our Crosses, but to make us loath the Earth, and love the Heavens. Why are we
all exercised with woeful crosses, and most bitter calamities? not to hinder,
but further our passage to Paradise.

I hold it far better in time of your sicknesses, to commend and commit your
self to God, and his protection; then by seeking ordinary means to give an
occasion to others, to think you doubt of Gods power.

Are we in misery, let us all fast and entreat God for mercy, and he will
not finally forsake us: we should consecrate our selves to him that made us,
so shall we be delivered at the last from each malady, hell, death, and
dangers: Our loving God and heavenly father would not afflict us, but to the
enforcing of us to the better keeping of his Commandments, whereunto we could
not be brought by Gods great benefits. Ahashuerus and Haman sat merry, and
drinking Wine, when Esther was fasting, and Mordecai mourning; yet went merry
Haman to the Halter, and Mordecai to preferment.

I entreat you that you never do mistrust the rare providence of God, who
turns the joy of the wicked into sorrow, but the tears of the godly into
gladness. It Is the lot of holy men not only to be afflicted outwardly in
body, but also inwardly in mind and conscience, with temptations of seeming
friends, and diabolical disputations urging to despair.

Satan will tell thee, that God is a severe Judge, and thy mortal enemy; and
therefore it is but in vain to sue to him for succor: Such comforters as
these be not come to comfort you, but torment you and to add one affliction
to another. Be you therefore constant to resist the Devil, and all his
temptations; and so at length you shall be sure of good success.

I know my Brethren, that ye rest not like a block, insensible; but that in
your patience you feel afflictions and grief of mind: yet keep you a mean
herein, and rebel not against God as the wicked and ungodly do: But confess
you that God is wise and good, although his hand be soar upon you, yet does
he all things in Justice and Equity.

Cease not therefore to fear God, when his plagues are most upon you: for the
more you suffer, the more glorious shall be your Crown: Satan can go no
farther in punishing you, then the Lord will permit him for your good.

Job teaches us not to measure Gods favor by the vehemence of the disease
wherewith we are perplexed: for then might Job, and peradventure your self
suppose that God had cast you off, because he uses often to leave his own
without help, and most wonderful afflicted with soars, sorrows, and
diseases. As we rest contented with prosperity: so should we be with
adversity, acknowledging his mercy in the former, and his Justice in the
latter; still bridling our Impatiency or murmuring against God.

Judge none the more sinful because of their sorrows, neither ought we to
be weary of our lives, because we are subject to infirmities: But because we
are given to sin and rebellion against God; therefore should we fear and
tremble, and the rather because murmuring against God in affliction does but
increase the pain, and utters man's folly. Job 5.17. Behold, blessed is the
man whom God corrects. Therefore refuse not thou the chastisements of the
Almighty: verse. 18. For he makes the wound, and binds it up, he smites,
and his hands make whole. God sends trouble after trouble, that his Childred
may not for one time, but continually trust in the Lord; and how they shall
have a comfortable issue even in their greatest and last temptation: which
promise though it be not always performed, yet it does the LORD recompense it
otherwise, to their advantage.

My GOD might damn me to Hell, whilst he whippeth me for Heaven: the
afflictions I sustain, came for my own sins; and promise to my soul
through my Savior Christ Jesus, a most happy conquest over them all.

By afflictions God keeps us as in prison, and restrains us from doing
evil; neither can any set at liberty but God our Lord, who is not rigorous to
any, but righteous to all. God sanctify your afflictions, and free you from
misery, comfort you in Paradise, and establish you really with Glory, Amen.

Wednesday Meditations.
WHen the LORD does visit us, and not presently free us out of trouble; we
must beware and take heed that we murmr not against God: to require, or
grudge at his chastisements. God sometimes suffers his even to wrestle against
desperation, and to see no glimering of his mercies; sometimes again he
causes the hearts of his dearest Children to leap for joy, then making his
Majesty most known, when it may tend most for the comfort of the Elect; Learn
we all to wait the Lords leisure for our deliverance, not to prescribe his
time, but stay his leisure; and willingly wait till he comfort us again.

God forgets not to be gracious, though sometimes he seems, as though
he would shut up his loving kindness in displeasure: Howsoever it pleases
GOD now and then to humble his Children, yet he forsakes them not for ever.

What are many nights of afflictions in comparison of the joyful morning, and
sunshine of the everlasting mercies and favors of God: These, these rejoice
our souls, and comfort our hearts which are oppressed with sorrow. Deutro.
8.16. The Lord humbles his Chosen people, and proves them that he may do
them good at their latter end.

A man may gather more undoubted assurance of GODS everlasting favors toward
his soul, by inward afflictions, then by any outward prosperity in the world.

Let us all consider the manner of Gods dealing with his people in the world,
he will now and then spoil us of all our Senses, and feeling of his Mercies
in Christ; yea, suffer us to lie bleeding in our miseries, yea, scorhed and
tormented with the heat of Gods anger for sin. But when our hope rests even
gone, then does our heavenly Father send a gracious rain, and a blessed
shower, to quench the heat of our poor afflicted souls for sin, which
shall be as mercy to men in smart and misery.

Object. But tell me this,

Ans. To make us all to depend of him only with faith and patience.

Secondly, to make us to know and see that we are nothing of our selves, but
that all the strength we

Oh wait we GODS leisure, though he defer long, and seem to forget us:
we hope Lord, for life in the midst of death, and say, though thou kill us,
yet will we trust in thee; although thou defer thine help and comfort for
many years, yet will we never let go our hold, but still hang on thy mercy
with our hands of Faith, saying thus; Lord, though thou have already whipped me
diverse ways, yet will I never forget to meet thee with my repentant tears:
well knowing thou esteemest nothing when Reformation of heart and life is
wanting.

Judgments come eftsoons from God for our sins, yet lays he no more
crosses upon us, then he in mercy will make us well able to bear: granting
such an issue, as we shall gain more in the Spirit, then we shall loose in
the flesh.

Content your self my Brethren, the Cross in GODS due time shall be your
advantage, and leave a sure blessing behind it; GOD imposing no punishments
upon us but for our sins, the trial of our Faith, Patience, etc.

For our Heavenly Father does afflict us with light affliction, to make us
run unto him and kiss his rod: he afflicting us for our good, the
reformation of our lives, and the salvation of our souls.

I deny not but the best of Gods children may be afflicted with sickness and
wounds, with troubled Consciences. Gods rod being good both to purge our
corrupt and cankered hearts, and for the humbling of them thoroughly to the
exercise of faith, patience, and prayer.

He knows little that knows not this, how the poor Members of CHRIST must
be afflicted, and live in sorrow, sickness, and grief of mind; yet grants
the Lord patience to endure all.

By tears, sorrows, and grievous sickness, does God fyle away the cankered
rust of our Rebellions, that we might be more fervent in Prayer, hunger more
after Heaven, and the more eagerly depend of his fatherly goodness, and divine
graces. When we do ask one thing, he gives us another that is better for
us, that we might learn wholly to depend of his goodness all the days of our
lives. Are you in distress, fling your self into the blessed Arms of the
LORDS mercy, so will he undoubtedly give you everlasting rest unto your
souls: such is the love of GOD, that he never fails nor forsakes his
Children.

Never despair for any troubles, but persuade your soul this, that the God of
peace will shortly tread down Satan under your feet: he is faithful that
have made us this promise. Romans 16.20. Romans 16.20.


Affliction being our portion on earth, we must labor to get faith and
patience in our souls, that so we may hold out unto the end. As we are Gods
Children, we find no promise in the Word of God to be freed from temptations
and trials, poverty, sickness, etc.

Howbeit as we are Gods Children, we have this promise, that these things
shall never hurt us, because the Lord will so sanctify them unto us, as they
will surely leave a blessing behind them.

In time of danger and death, naught in the world should more comfort us then
this, to remember that we have walked before GOD in truth, and with an upright
heart. Esaias 28.3. This cheered Ezechiah when he was going the way of all
flesh, that he had undertaken much pains to know the LORDS Will.

The best Christian is the most covetous in all heavenly knowledge of God, and
our salvation by Jesus Christ; the Child of God is no sooner in peril, but
the Lord puts under his own hand to deliver him from death and danger.

Forget not God who says, Esaias 54.17.8. For a little time have I forsaken
thee, but with great compassion will I gather thee. Psalm. 34.17 18.
Psalm. 34.17.18. The Lord is near unto all those that are of a contrite heart,
and will save such as are afflicted in spirit.

Does not our Savior comfort his Disciples thus, John 14.18. I will not leave
you comfortless, but I will come unto you, even I, and I am with you to the
end of the world.

Doubt not but there is coming a time of refreshing, that will break out as
the rising of the Sun, and the bright beams of the Morning after a
tempestuous Night: which of all things will be then most joyful and
comfortable. When deliverance shall be most welcome, then will she break
forth: Howsoever the hope that is deferred, may for a time be the fainting of
the heart, yet when the desire comes, it is as a Tree of Life. Proverbs 13.12.

The Children of God learn by Adversity to come home to their heavenly
Fathers house. For when neither preaching, nor praying, blessings, nor
threatening will cause them to come: then come the Plague and Pestilence,
Famine, and War of themselves, mere crosses, but sanctified by God unto us,
if we make right use of them: wherefore the state of affliction is safer then
the estate of prosperity. The Philistines could not understand Sampsons Riddle,
how sweet came out of sower, and meat out of the eater. No more can the
worldly minded understand, that tribulation brings out patience, and
momentary afflictions a most excellent weight of eternal glory.

Crosses for the present, it is true; they are not pleasant: but afterward they
bring the quiet fruit of Righteousness unto them which are thereby exercised.
Esaias 26.16 Luke 15.18.
See Esaias 26.16. Psalm. 1.17. Luke 15.18.

Know this all ye people, that there is more sollid Joy in suffering rebuke
with Christ our Master, then in all the pleasures of sin which are but for a
season. Why does God often thus visit our English Nation, and as it were the
very City and Seat of our Sovereign, with the famous Academies of Oxford and
Cambridge? but to this end, that troubles visiting us, we, even this whole
Nation might power out our prayers, whilst his chastening is upon us, or our
brethren; as Hager prayed while Ismael cried.

The Israelites in time of their prosperity, forgot God and all the mighty
works which he had done for them. Psalm 119.71. Therefore suffered he them
to wander in the Wilderness, Psalm. 119
where they found no City to dwell in: then cried they unto the Lord in their
troubles, and he delivered them out of their distresses.

Did the Prodigal son ever intend to return home again to his Father, till
the Famine Pinched him? No, no, it was the Famine that met him and pinching him
at the heart, made him to resolve to pack home to his Father, acknowledge his
fault, and entreat him for pardon. Jonas slept in the ship, but he both
watched and prayed in the Whale. It is good, says Jeremy, Lam. 3.27. Lam 3 27
for a man to bear the yoke in his youth: And David acknowledges it good for
him to be afflicted. And our Savior Christ tells us, that our heavenly
Fathers manner is, to purge every branch that it may bring forth more fruit.

Afflictions are of singular use, to turn us unto God: Suffer we them
therefore to turn us, and to bring us home to our Heavenly Fathers house and
presence.

Truly there is nothing better for any of us all, young or old, man or Woman,
then afflictions, if God sanctify them unto us, and give us the true use of
it, it will make us search our hearts, and call our lives to account: yea
compel us to run unto God by earnest and hearty Repentance and prayer,
denying our selves, and relying on the mercies of God in Christ.

True it is, that no Visitation for the present is sweet, but afterward it
brings the Fruit of Righteousness to such as are thereby exercised, more
sollid joys in suffering with Christ, then rest in Worldly pleasures, that
endure but for a season.

Whatsoever befalls us, look we always to the hands of God, and observe we
his angry Countenance toward us by reason of our sins, and horrible
impieties: Labor we to reform our faults, and mark we from whose hands our
punishments come.

This observation will be a good means to bridle us, and keep us from
impatience, murmuring, and muttering against the Lord: Think this of Gods
Judgments, that they come not by chance unto us, but look we unto the hand of
GOD: Who says, I draw my sword, I kill and make alive, I send the plague and
pestilence to consume and to Destroy.

In all this, let us say with the Psalmist 119.75. I know, O Lord, that thy
Judgments are right, and that thou have afflicted me justly, laying no more
upon me, then thou enablest me to bear: The Spirit of GOD teaches us wholly to
rely, depend, and wait duly upon his gracious promise, whose Countenance is
still toward us: Weigh well what true comfort and happiness it is unto a
poor distressed soul to hear, come thou hither, I am thy Salvation. It is
the manner of me (the God of all flesh) never to strike with my judgments, but
first to give warning: so as if men will be wise to believe my Word, and amend
their lives, they may avoid my Judgments, or going on in Vice and folly, be
most worthily plagued and punished.

It is the Lords mercy to admonish before he correct us: He speaks sometimes
unto us by himself, and sometimes by Christ Jesus: the wisdom of the Father
crying and calling us to hear his voice, and to receive Instruction, using
fair means to win us, rather then threatenings to fright us.

Let us all, I beseech you, be reclaymed by his Word and gentle Voice, before
his Wand showing Wrath, and the prepared rod both Wrath and Displeasure: Are we
weak; they are means to Repentance and Reconciliation: look we back
therefore unto our former Race of years, craving his Majesty to deal
mercifully with us. Let us take heed that we accuse not God of any hard
dealing, but rather accuse the hardness of our own hearts, that are so
unwilling to be warned by his Word and Judgments.

The Lord does often humble us, to bring us home to himself, by his Word and
by his Judgments; yea, his mercies, and the motions of his spirit does our
heavenly Father use to humble us. So plagues and judgments, woes and miseries
does the Lord cause to light upon us, mealting even away (as it were) our
corruptions in the boiling Caldron of common Calamities.

God by sickness teaches us not to trust in our strength, for we are as a
staff in a man's hand; except the Lord hold us up, we cannot stand, but down
we fall one way or another; as Peter had into hell, if Christ had not held out
his helping hand.

We are all the Lords Servants, hired to labor in his Vineyard, and therein
to persevere unto the very evening of our days, dedicating unto him both Cure,
Souls, and Substances, Lives, and Labors.

Lay hold betimes of the mercies of God in Christ Jesus, and let neither
sorrows nor sicknesses make us to shrink from him. Afflictions are of
excellent use, to turn us unto God, both the Church of God in general, and
the servants of God in particular: When they do not profitably use prosperity,
nor behave them selves thankefully in the day of peace, they must be touched
with Crosses and Troubles, sicknesses and sorrows, which will cause us all to
call our evil ways to remembrance, and turn our feet to Gods Testimonies.

It is the Promise of God, 2. Samu. 7.14.15. To David and his Posterity, 2.
Sam. 7.14.15.
that he will be his Father, and the Father of his Seed; and sinning he will
chasten us with the rod of men, and with the plagues of the Children of men:
That is, gently as Fathers chastise their Children, but never take his mercies
from us.

Why are we often scourged of our heavenly Father? but because we are frozen
in the dregs of corruptions, we spend our days in careless security, without
an holy fear of his Name: Therefore comes his holy hand to change our
estates, to awaken us from wickedness, to chasten us with his rods, and to
purge us with fire. Turn we our hearts toward our heavenly home, cease we
never until we get fast hold of his most holy hand, that can powerfully draw
us thorough Hell to Heaven. It is Gods favor to call us from Hell by
afflictions, and thereby to break in us the power of sin, and to let out
such corrupt blood, as else would much hinder the thriuing of the best graces
(of our most merciful Father) more souls, and this is oftentimes one cause:
why we are eftsoons held long in the Cabin of Care, and bed of Afflictions
and woes, by reason that through wilful wantonness, we abuse our strength,
and to the great dishonor of God, and ruin of our souls. Did not the
sufferings of our Savior shield us from damnation? Seek ye ever to be
bettered in Obedience, reformed in the whole man, humbled under Gods hands,
examining your hearts what sinful actions have passed from you, that the
Lord should thus strike and visit you. After sight of your sins, be
sorrowful in soul, and humbled in heart; marking well what God does still
aim at: Not by sorrowful sickness to destroy you, or to confound you; but to
enforce you to call your own soul to sigh, and your very heart so to see your
own sins, as (in a sanctified course) you may come home to your self, and
say from your soul, this surely rests the correcting hand of God, which now
strikes me for my sins. I will now therefore return unto my heavenly Father
by true repentance: for he that now strikes me, will both heal me, and
help me; or perceiving of Gods anger, and feeling of his Judgments upon us,
should cause us to sigh and sobbe, and go softly; yea, to seek the Lord
early, who in Judgment remembers Mercy: and howsoever God whip and scourge
us (that are his Children) yet his mercies will he never take from us.

Be you sure that God humbles you no otherwise in the world, then he handled
his only Son, who has begun to drink to you this bitter potion; not only
assaying it, but drinking to you a full draught. It Is not only a comfort, but
a glory, to be partner, and fellow-sufferer with CHRIST, who delights to see
in us some representation of himself.

We are no members of Christ, if we participate not with him of the
persecutions and injuries of this life. Our heavenly Father will never hold
back his mercies from those, whom our Savior entreats mercies, we can not
be ouercharged who are charged with Christ, who from every cross has now
taken away both the Infamy and the Curse, and has made it a Tribunal and a
Throne of Judgment for for all the World. Christ has now made the action of
bearing the Cross both inblameable and honorable.

Are you afflicted in Conscience, get you unto Christ, that good Samaritane,
who will power Wine and Oil into our wounds.

Christ suffered, all had all against him for us, and will we contentedly
suffer nothing for him? did ever any trust in God, and was not delivered?

Or did God ever finally forsake those whom he favored? Or is deliverance
from temporal calamities an assured sign of Gods favors? Surely no; for the
Judgments of God are both secret and unsearchable; nothing making us miserable
or happy, but that which is eternal: Cry we therefore, Lord, so sanctify our
griefs, as thou communicate therewith thy Graces unto us. Let every calamity
and cross admonish us of our Disobedience, that first brought into this world
sicknesses, and sorrows, molestations, and miseries, diseases and death. O let
us be glad to suffer troubles, and travels in this world, esteeming our whole
time of life, as the forty years travel into the Land of promise; or as the
six days of labor which go before the Sabbath of rest.

O Lord, we are all but as Lamps of Clay, and as unpolished pieces of Wood, yet
do we humbly present our selves unto thee, make of us what it pleases thee:
We offer our selves wholly unto thee, desiring to depend altogether upon thee

This World Iere. 30.7. is a time of Jacobs travel, yet shall he be defrom it.

The Lord of Hosts will break the enemies yoke from off his own peoples
neck, so that Strangers shall no more serve themselves of Jacob.

This is the comfort of Gods people, that howsoever God punishes, yet it is to
save them* though he corrects us by his Judgments, yet will he not utterly
cut us off in his anger.

If our bruisings were incurable, then were our wounds dolourous, if no
Plaster or Medicine could help us, then were our case most desperate.

But we have a Savior, and most kind Samaritane, restoring our souls both
from death and danger: yet as the Iron must be well heated in the fire, ere it
can be wrought with the Hammer, and driven out on the Anvile: So may we not
pass to the Palace of Paradise, till first we suffer many strokes of holy
temptations, and pass thorough the fire of piercing trials. The holy Saints,
and blessed Martyrs have thus passed through this world of woe, and come to the
Crown of glory.

God is eftsoons sending troubles and afflictions to such as he best loves,
because they should not busy their thoughts with worldly occasions, but still
be laboring and hasting on their Journey toward Heaven. It is the wisdom of
God to deal roughly with his chosen Children, making their lives both
painful and labourious to them, to cause them to make the more haste to
finish their Journey, without loytering in the shadow of this world, and so to
loose the daylight, and go on stumbling in the dark.

Nothing is more honorable for any Knight or Soldier, then to bear the Arms
of his King and Captain, neither to any true Christian, then for to suffer
travel and persecution, as his forgiuer and keeper Jesus Christ has done.

Learn we all to wade thorough calamities after our Captain, looking for
that Day which may enrich us with eternal happiness: I beseech you make
benefit of your present tribulation.

Gods people must remember that it is safer sailing through the bitter stormy
seas of afflictions, then dancing at pleasure upon the calm streams of
Vanities. But who flies from Prosperity, as from the Pestilence. Or think
themselves safest, when it is farthest from them.

Our way to Heaven, is not by prosperity or high looks, treading on our
Neighbors necks, and contemning of the poor: but through persecutions and
crosses, reuilings, scoffings, and all ignominies of the world, which patiently
we must endure and suffer, for our Saviors sake.

Shall the Estrich digest hard Iron to preserve her health: The Soldier endure
hardness, to achieue the Conquest: the sick Patient swallow bitter pills, to
be eased of his grief: and shall we neither abide soars nor sicknesses,
storms nor tempests to get into the place of bliss, and Kingdom of Glory.

As Jacob thought his seven years service short, for the great Love that he
bare to Rachell: So should all the tribulations of this World, for the Kingdom
of Heaven. The Lord will surely save the souls of his Servants that put their
trust in him, Psalm. 86.2. and call daily upon him.

He would not bid us call and cry unto him, unless he meant to ponder our
humble desires; let us truly worship him on earth, and he will surely glorify
us in Heaven: If we but once heartily desire to walk in the truth, God will
so knit our hearts unto him, that we shall surely find deliverance from the
nethermost Hell.

God will not finally fail to strengthen his Servants, to show some token upon
you for good, so as you shall be both helped and comforted. Psalm. 86. Though
the Lord our God sometimes turns his face from us, yet will he at last
satisfy us with his mercies, and being his servants, show us his glory, Psalm.
90.16. Yea, Psalm. 90.16
the glorious Majesty of the Lord our God shall be upon us, verse 17.

O persuade your self to be under the defense of the Lord, and to abide under
the shadow of the Almighty: so shall you be safe under the Wings of God; his
faithfulness and Truth shall be your shield and buckler: So high has God set
an house of defense for all his Children; Psa. 91.15
as he will deliver them from horror, and bring them to honor. Psalm 91.15.
Oh happy, and thrice happy are you, when for the voice of your groaning, your
very bones will scarce cleave to your skin; and when you do now and then
mingle your drink with Weeping, and washing your bed with brinish tears,
wayling for your sins: never think but that God which has cast you down,
will undoubtedly take you up. Ps. 101.10
Psalm 102.10.

What though your Spirit be vexed within you, and that your heart within you
be desolate and gasping; yet lift your souls to God, fly unto him to hide
you, so shall he lead you into the Land of Righteousness, keep you from
trouble, and guide you into the Celestial chamber of Presence, where as no
enemies shall vex you, because you are his Servants.

O the mercies of our most gracious God and Heavenly father, who whilst in
Justice he might consume you for sin: He sanctifies unto you your present
visitation, that your flesh being wounded with fear, you might possess your
souls by dreading the mighty power of God, and escape his Wrath, neither
stricken with terror, nor once tasting his judgments. Look you never
Despair, because God which smites, heals. Hosea 6. Hosea 6.
And tendereth his pardon, before that we perish. Jonas 3. Desire we should
still to have our Heavenly Father to correct us in mercies to amendment, but
not to plague us to our destruction. Judith 8. Job. Job. 11.
11. Wis. 11.

You cannot call faithfully upon God, but he helps: Nor trust truly in him,
and be confounded. Job 5. The Lord brings back from the gates of Death, and
restores the sick to their former health: yet use we must the Physician, and
medicinable potions, for the procuring and maintayning of our health. As King
Hezekiah being sick, he prayed and wept, using these means to pacify Gods
anger: And though GOD could have healed Hezekiah without means; yet God
directed his Prophet to apply a plaster of Figs to his soar, to ripen and
heal it.

Thus are we taught how to behave our selves in times of our sickness: First
to pray to our heavenly Father for health, and that with troubled tears, and
penitential cries. And then to use profitable means, and not to neglect them:
If at any time men think to prepare themselves to dye, especially when they
are in the greatest dangers, sick and in the way to the Grave, and so to
judgment: now see you have a charitable heart toward all men. David was
careless in Gods service, before he was afflicted. Psalm 119. Jeremiah never
thinks it too soon to suffer the Cross. Luke 9.23. Our Savior says, that
we must take up the Cross daily, although nothing did better befit us, then
afflictions. There is nothing better then it, so God does vouchsafe to
sanctify it unto you, and give you the true use of it.

For it will make you search your heart, and call your former Life to account:
sickness humbles, makes you see your weakness, compels you to run to God
by most earnest and hearty prayer: Inforceth you to deny your self, and to put
your trust and confidence in GODS mercies, through the merits of Jesus Christ.

The Lords bringing any calamities upon us, or upon our family, is to seek
him early, that he may remove his Judgments from us the sooner: All
chastisements and afflictions, yea all Judgments and corrections come from the
Lord alone, he sends them, he imposes them, and lays them on us, he
moderates them at his pleasure, his quiver rests full of such Arrows, to hit,
hurt, and consume us, or in his Fatherly kindness to correct and better us in
our courses.

Remember we ever, that Satan who could not enter into the heard of Swine
without Christ's leave: he has his power bounded and limited by God, so as he
cannot either touch us, or torment any of Gods people without his leave and
permission, Gods providence being over the Sparowes in the Field, and hairs of
our head, will never neglect the Salvation of our Souls, being a matter of
much more weighty worth and moment.

This being clear, that all our Afflictions come from God unto us, we must
needs learn patience under the cross: knowing that the times thereof are
still determined by God, and how they will leave a blessing behind them, giving
us far more in spirit, then we loose in the flesh. As Soon as we are
afflicted by the hands of God, we should presently labor to have our Souls
and Consciences disburdened of sin. Yea, we should learn to be bettered by
our afflictions, confess our sins, and bewail them with tears: and not
with Pharaoh to harden our hearts: but to Remember with Trembling, that the
Righteous themselves shall scarcely be saved.

We may not measure Gods favor toward us by our outward blessings or crosses.
Eccle. 9.2. All things come a like to all, to the Just as to the wicked: Nay
afflictions are tokens of the Lords love, the Child is corrected the servant
cashiered.

Are we Gods Wheat Math. 13.12. we must be cut with the Sickle, threshed with
the Flaile, undergo many blows, and be ground to powder, with the
Millstones of afflictions, nay baked in the Oven of a Wounded conscience,
before we can be bread for the Lords Table.

Art thou the servant of God? thy heart must be wounded for thy sins: Who ever
were more dejected then David and Job; Job. 31.
Job 13. Psalm 6. Wounded they were both in bodies and souls: the Lord seemed
to shoot at them, as at a mark; the venom of his Arrows pierced their
souls, and drunk up their spirits: yet at the last were Their Prayers heard,
and their tears seen. Esaias 38.5.

One drop of the blood of Christ Jesus, to a dying man, for the Salvation of
his soul, is worth ten thousand Worlds. We being wounded, must learn to fly
to God, who only heales and binds up the wounds of our souls: Our God is
merciful and gracious, yea his bowels earne within him to do us all good.
Build we upon his promises, as upon a sure foundation, that shall never be
removed, Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but his Word shall not pass away.

We have the Word and Oath of God, as two unchangeable witnesses so that we
cannot be deceived. Again, we have the Sacraments of God as two Authenticke
Seals, to ratify his promises, and to make them sure unto us: Again, we
have the pawn of his Spirit to assure us of his love and favor.

Now as with sickness God chasteneth for sin: so is he indeed the
spiritual Physician of our souls, to heal all our soars, and bind up our
wounds. Be not ashamed to lay open your sins, the soars of your souls to
Christ Jesus: Are you now spiritually wounded, make your moan to Christ Jesus,
beg as for life and death for one drop of his precious blood, to cure your
diseased souls, there is no plaster to cure us but the blood of our Savior.

To him therefore let us run, and make our moan unto him; fear we not to
lay open our wounded souls and distressed consciences unto him, that is a most
merciful Physician to our diseased souls. The plaster is tempered, and will thou none of it? shall thy soul rot in sin, and will thou despise God mercies
in Christ Jesus? Is not Christ Jesus the Physician of our souls? binds he
not up our wounds? powers he not the oil of Grace into our hearts? Cures not
he our wounded Consciences? Does not he wrappe us in the roabes of his own
Righteousness, and power out the oil of Grace, even the precious blood of his
own heart for our everlasting Salvation? I desire you to know this, that it
comes to pass many times in Gods Children, that the sense and feeling of
Gods favor is oftentimes extinguished, as the comfortable heat and light of
the Sun is taken away by some thick Clouds. Our faith is so weak, that some
times we think God himself to have forgotten us, and hide his face from us,
that he will see us no more.

But as after night the Sun her self does comfort us, so after the cloudy
night of affliction, the light beams of Gods mercy do rejoice our souls.

So long as it pleases God to sanctify our crosses, they shall work for our
good, and never depart from us, till they leave a blessing behind them. Doubt
you not but he that is privy to our prayers, will in love deliver us at last
from all troubles and calamities.

Gods humbling us, is to break down our pride and conceitednesse, to pray the
more earnestly, never to be left to our selves, lest we run and rush
headlong into Hell: No crosses should daunt us, but rather drive us fast
forward in the way unto Heaven. Herein are we discerned to be the Servants of
God, and Disciples of Christ, in that we bear stoutly whatsoever burden the
LORD lays upon us, the patient enduring the heavy hand of the LORD, is the
way to save our lives, and not to loose them. Mark 8.35.

Our bodies are all like old rotten Houses, which must be pulled down, and new
builded again; else can we not dwell in them with safety and delight; our
souls lament soar, and desire to be settled in more heavenly habitations,
still groan we for that glory which comes after the Resurrection. God will
hedge thy ways, darken thy paths, spoil thee of thine Honor, take the
Crown from thine head, remove thy hopes, and beset thy soul with the Armies
of afflictions, causing thy familiars to forget thee, and thy kindred to forsake
thee in the midst of all thy maladies: yet depend thou on Christ our
Redeemer, and peace shall come: Does the Lord tarry? we must wait and comfort
our hearts until he help us.

Whatsoever our troubles be, peace is our best plea; stay we the Lords
leisure, and he will comfort our hearts, and solace our sighing souls, and
will thereby make us more glorious to God and man.

Care we for no crosses whilst we have such inward comforts, the worlds
buckerings, and buffetings with Satan's winnowings, rest all as comfortable
crosses to help us to the Crown.

As there is no rest without toil, no Peace without War: so look we for no
place of bliss, until we be with Christ our Master, well buffetted before
hand in the Service of God, there is little looking for freedom from
afflictions, the way to Heaven being strawed with thorns, rather then flowers.

Jacob wrestled four times, first, in the womb with Esau, Genesis 25.22. Genesis
25.22.
secondly, in his Journey with Esau, Genesis 32.3. thirdly, in Mesopotamia with
Laban, fourthly, at Bethell with the Angel. To teach us, that if we will be the
Israel of God, we must be armed for all trials, at all times, in all places,
and with all persons, well knowing this, that at the length we being the
Israelites of God, shall never be left without a blessing at the last, Gods
Children shall never be without trouble, til the world be with out hatred, the
Devil without envy, and our Nature without corruption, we must be fined from
our dross, and renewed as the Eagle, never resting safe and sure until we
soar up into the bosom of our Savior.

God does not only by his Word, but also by his Justice make us fit for his
Kingdom: Do you think me now to be your friend, and to speak truth unto
you; trust me, there has no temptation befalne you, but that which
appertains to the Children of God; our GOD is faithful and true, and has
promised to give an issue with the temptation.

Against temptations hear Esaias comforting Gods Children, and crying to
Jerusalem, that her warrefare is accomplished, her iniquity pardoned, and that
she has received at the LORDS hand double for her sins. Esaias 40. Do thou
faint? art thou weary? in him that has no strength God out Heavenly Father
increases power, verse 31. Such as wait upon the Lord shall receive their
strength, run without wearisomnesse, and walk without fainting, verse 31.

Are we not by faith the Israel of God, as his servant Jacob whom he has
chosen, and the seed of Abraham his friend? Chap. 41.8. listen to the Lord,
verse 9. Thou art my Servant, I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away, verse
10. Fear not, for I am with thee; be not afraid, for I am thy God, I will
strengthen thee, and help thee; and will sustain thee with the right hand of
my Justice. Esaias 41.14. I the Lord thy God, will hold thy right hand, saying
unto thee, fear not; I will help thee. verse 14. Fear not thou worm Jacob,
and ye men of Israel, I will help thee says the Lord thy Redeemer, the holy
one of Israel. Esaias 42.16 I will not forsake thee, but make darkness light,
and crooked things straight unto thee.

Esaias 43.1. Thus says the Lord that created thee O Jacob, and he that formed
thee O Israel; Fear not, for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by name,
thou art mine; when thou passest through the water, I will be with thee through
the floods that they do not ouerflow thee. When thou walk through the very
fire thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Fear
not, for I am with thee; I will bring thy seed from the East, and gather thee
from the West, Esaias 43.11. I, even I am the Lord; besides me, there is no
Savior. And verse 25. I, even I am he that puts away thine iniquities for
mine own Names sake, and will not remember thy sins.

Math. 11.28. Come to me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will
ease you.

And learn this Lesson should we all, to suffer according to the will of God,
committing our souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator. 1.
Pet. 4.19. When our heavenly Fathers rods light upon us as it did upon Job
9.34. then must we entreat him with tears, not so to astonish us with fears,
but that we may speak unto him, when once he has clad us with the roabs of
his Righteousness, and washed us white in the blood of the Lamb, Revel. 7.14.

If we be afflicted in body or mind, cry mightily unto God, Revel. 14.15.
saying; Revel. 14.15. Reap O Lord, thine own Corn, thrust in thy Sickle,
the time is come to reap, I thy haruest-corne am ripe and ready for the
Garner: Yea, a Cluster of thy Vineyard, and a Grape for thy Press, yea, in
Christ Jesus a draught to delight thee, gather me O my Redeemer as wheat into
thine own Garner. But why do I cry so long unto my God and gracious Father?
sure I am I shall not dye until my Lord and God speak the word, saying unto
me as once he did unto Israel, You have dwelt long enough in this place. Deu.
1.16
Deutro. 1.16.

Let no pangs or pains fright us from our heavenly Father, we knowing that our
eldest Brother Christ Jesus, the very Author of our life, was condemned to
death Matthew 20.18. and that even then when he came not to be served, but to
serve, and give his life a Ransom for many. The Lord Jesus so open your eyes,
that receiving the true sight, you may follow him that courageously through
Death went himself unto life.

Fear no danger to be in death, it cannot be but a good Entry that the
faithful pass unto by deaths cruelty.

Dread not, neither be affraide, for when we renounce our own strength, and
constantly follow our own vocation, and depend on the Lord; this rests the
true boldness, and most agreeable to God: such Calebs rest fittest to enjoy
the land of promise, as treading it with the feet both of themselves and of
their Children, do most constantly still follow the LORD Deuteronomy 1.36.

Know this, there is no strength in our selves, where the hand of God is not
ready pressed to yield help: there is no standing but falling, when we fight
without our Captain.

You must know this, and all such as now fear the Lord, that God will ever
help his beloved in their necessities, marry, the times and hours are best
known to him who at his pleasure most mercifully reuealeth them unto us by his
Spirit. 2. Kings 7. verse 7. to teach us both to look, stay, and wait upon
his holy and divine pleasure and will. Be you not affraide God will comfort
you, you have lived long like a Christian, dye now like a Saint, surely
sanctified with Grace from on High. Foelix somnus cum requie, requies cum
voluptate, voluptas cum aeternitate Petrus Dauus de Stephan. Pleasant and happy
is that sleep which comes with rest, rest with pleasure, and pleasure with
Eternity. Send your thoughts before you into Heaven, as holy Harbingers of your
happy soul, and see whether there be not a desire in you to receive the
blessed Sacrament, Viaticum aeternitatis, a blessed bait for each devout
soul ready to travel for another life. It is the mercies of our God to make
death the way to life, and by the way of mortality to cloth us with
Immortality. Oh the ineffable Mercies and Wisdom of God, to sever our souls
from the dregs of our bodies, to enjoy the presence of God, and be environed
with troops of Angels, and souls of blessed Saints.

Let us not with the old Arcadians mourn one night for the setting of the
Sun, for we shall be comforted by the breaking of the day; when we shall
see him to shine again in his Sphere.

The people that were enraged at the death of Romulus, were quieted by Proculus
his news, that he saw him in Glory riding up to Heaven. Much more must we
Christians remain full of hope at the death of the Righteous, which are laid
to sleep with their Fathers.

Who amongst you do not mourn to behold the manifold outrages of the Children
of Beliall in this so glorious a Sunshine of the Gospel: Fear not death my
dear Brethren, but rather desire with hearty tears to be removed from the
seat of sinners, and scorners. Where some rest so unchaste, that moderate and
modest Christians may not safely consort with them: Some so insolent and proud,
that you may not plainly rebuke them of their faults: Some so insatiable and
gluttonous, that you may not long sit with them: and generally amongst sinners
of unsanctified hearts was godliness never more urged, yet never less
regarded, though malice by every mouth debased, yet never did she bear more
rule.

Godly Preachers were never more publickely paynefull: yet public pains did
never less profit in private: The Catholic and Apostolic faith, was never
since the Apostles times taught more truly, yet seldom seen less to
Fructify: Such is yet the Satanicall seminary of green growing iniquity and
sins amiddest the sons of men. Few now in these days do remember how that
the Cherubins of gold upon the two ends of the Mercy Seat, were a Work
beaten with the Hammer: Places of Prerogatives and Honor, are not easily come
unto: Neither can we pass to Heaven, but by Hell: Gods scourging us, shows
that he love us, and means to manifest unto the World whether we be slaves
or sons.

There is no greater Temptation, then to think God our enemy, going about to
destroy us, in withdrawing the most comfortable signs of his favor from us,
then yet must we rest upon the Lord, and by Faith cleave unto him.

What though by outward sense we are rejected of God, yet by our Faith must
we still apprehend his hidden mercies, and behold it a far off, in the Glass
of Gods Promises: Nay, although the Lord fail us, yet let us not leave him,
until that he have blessed us, well Knowing his love, that he will hold with
the one hand, when he assayles us with the other, proouing and Exercising our
Faith, as he did the VVomans of Canaan. Matthew. 15.22. First, Math. 15.22.
Christ gave her Faith, and by that Faith was she mooned to seek to him: but
when she was once come unto him, he gave her three Repulses. First, by saying
nothing; Secondly, by denying her: And thirdly by calling her Dog. Mark we
how Christ made show, as though he would never have granted her request: yet at
every repulse, she grew the more instant, crying more earnestly unto him; she
opposed herself unto Christ, and would take no denial.

Mark we all here, the nature of true Faith, if you do now rest faithful,
though you feel your self overwhelmed with sin, turmoyled with Satan's
conflicts, yea, and God himself both angry and offended with you. Yet can you
lift up your eye-liddes to Heaven, and give a glimpse at the Brazen Serpent
Christ Jesus, flinging your self into the Arms of GODS mercy, and catching
hold of that hand buffetting you, and kiss it: Then fear not, we must not
pass for the malice of men, but have an eye unto the mercies of God, well
knowing, that yet it is not made manifest what we shall be: But we know that
when Christ shall be made manifest, we shall be like unto him, for we shall see him
as he is. 1. Ioh. 3.2.

Do not I pray you, measure the Love of God unto your soul, either by your
prosperity, or by your Adversity: well considering that these rest common, both
unto bad and good: Take heed and beware of persuading your selves to be in
the depth of Gods favors, whilst you enjoy temporal peace, and external
glory: for Christ fled into the mountain, when he heard they would come to
make him King, choosing rather to be there alone, then for to enjoy a
transitory Crown.

To keep you now from despair, consider I pray you all, or some of Gods
former mercies toward you: He has protected you both in your Infancy,
Childhood, and Youth, and multiplied upon you many positive blessings, let all
these pleaders prevail for your faithful and hearty service to so heavenly a
Master. If any countenance a servant, and give him means and maintenance, he
would take it ill to leave him, and serve his very enemies: yet so do sinners,
that forgetting Gods favors toward them, fly unto the professed enemies of
God, yea, of Christ's Church and Gospel, I mean the Devil himself; from whom
to be saved, sigh we still to be anointed, until we be crowned, anointed
here with the oil of gladness in this Church militant, that we may be
crowned hereafter with the Church triumphant, 2. Tim. 48. Desire the Lord to
make your bed in your sickness, and that the voice of joy and health may be
heard in your habitation, account no privilege so precious as to be in GODS
fnuour, and have access to the Throne of Grace, and upon all occasions to see
the golden Scepter stretched out unto you: your prayers heard, your petitions
granted, and your suite obtained; assure your self that Christ sends no
sinners discontented or empty handed from him. Solomon craved Wisdom, Paul
power against Satan's buffetings, Ezechias and David deliverance from Enemies,
Moses from drowning, and the Thief from damning. No petition put up from a
sorrowful Soul, and a believing and touched Heart, but receives a gracious
answer for GODS glory and our good: Serve we Christ now upon Earth, and we
shall surely sing with him in Glory, trust and rely we still upon God, and he
will take us away as he did Josias from seeing of Evils, or as he did good
Augustine before the sacking of Hippo by the Vandals; or convey us to some
other place, as he did Lot when Sodom was burned; or provide some means for
our stay, as he did the Arc for Noah when the World was drowned.

He that saved Moses and the Israelites when the Egyptians were drowned,
wants no means to remove our painefullest Maladies; yea to rescue and redeem
our lives with the death of our Enemies, as Haman was hanged for Mordecai:
saved was the Corn, and burnt were the ^ares, one and the same Flaile beats
Chafe to be burned, and pure Corn to be preserved. Be not discouraged at the
fear of death, knowing (that with Christ) all Christians must die, that the
remnants of sin might be quite taken away and abolished, so as the root of
old Adam may be most absolutely stocked up. Remember (I pray you) that flesh
and blood must be changed, before it can inherit the Kingdom of God, 1. Cor.
15.50 Moreover, the blood as it is old, begins by little and little to
condensate, and wax thick, and so to corruption. Again, our spirits waste by
use and labor, (which wears even the Iron and hardest mettalls) and both the
body and the mind are weakened by corporal and mental exercises. Both of
them (like to unthrifty heirs) spending faster then either the father or
fosterer of them (the Heart) can digest and gather for them. All these things
tell us, that dye we all must, rich Dives as well as poor Lazarus, Simon the
wiser, as well as Naball the fool, Absalom the fair, as well as Thersites the
foulest and fulsome. Tall Saul must go to the Grave, as well as little Zacheus,
godly Jonathan as well as his ungodly Father, both Wife and Husband must
participate of the common condition of humane Nature, once to dye. Know this
all of you, that no Princes upon the earth can withdraw their necks from this
yoke, howsoever some seem as Gods upon the earth, yet must they die like men,
be they never so high of birth or blood.

Though my brethren and sisters, ye wear all golden Crowns, let us all
observe how loving our LORD and Master was unto David, in promising unto him a
Kingdom: but for many years was he so hunted, and persecuted therein, that
he knew not which way to turn himself to find peace and safety. And why was
all this, but that he might first become a good man, and then a good King:
whosoever will wear the Crown of Glory with Christ, must likewise with him
wear the Crown of Thorns.

Our heavenly Father scourges us, to see whether we will heartily love him
being our heavenly Physician, or no; and that with our very souls, Deuteronomy. 13.
Great cause have we all to love him, and that both with our hearts and souls,
because the LORD assures us of the Victory, but that it shall undoubtedly go
on our side, howsoever both Satan and Sinners shall strain themselves to the
uttermost against us Deu. 8. Moses shows us, how that it rests Gods will,
that we all must be afflicted, lest we should boast of our own power,
strength, and abundance. It is Gods order that he keeps us withal, as soon
as we first enter into his School, he begins with the scourge; making us to
feel hunger, thirst, poverty, sickness, sorrows, and sundry kinds of
adversities, because we are all for the most part of us so wedded to our
wanton ways and wills, and so peeuishly proud in our own conceits, that our
heavenly Father must perforce subdue us by some afflictions, else will we not
acknowledge him to be our Master: Although the Thief upon the Cross was
received at the last into mercy, yet must we all learn to leave our sins,
before they leave us, lest our GOD forsake us, and give us over unto Satan.

It is a privilege belonging unto us all, which rests Christ's, that God our
heavenly Father accepts our wills and endeauours of obedience, for perfect
obedience it self: Eccle. 25.10. Great is he that finds Wisdom, yet is
there none above him that fears the Lord, the fear of the Lord passes all
things in cleanenesse. Prou. 14.27. It is the wellspring of life to avoid the
snares of death. Affliction and not prosperity rests for the most part the
badge of Gods Church, and true note of the members of Christ: Gods Word it
self teaches us, that Christ his Kingdom is not of this World. The
Israelites which were the people of God, did soiourne as strangers, and were
evil entreated 400. years, from Abraham's time to Moses: for it is the
condition (for the most part) of the Church of God still to be given into the
hands of their enemies, Ier. 12. It is truly said that Crux est Ecclesiae
nota, the Cross is a note of the Church: Mark not triumphs but troubles, do
point out the Lords Servants, and singularize his Saints, unto whom not any
disease, plague, or punishment can come without Gods providence or sending it.
It Is not the washing of my flesh in water, but Christ my Savior his cleansing
our souls from sin, that purges us from all impurity: As pure Oil must not
be beaten, and the best Lamps burned, so the best Christians first crossed,
that at the last they be crowned and shine as Lamps before the Lord
continually. Let this be a medicine to each Malady, that God by his scourge
calls us to glory.

Let no afflictions move us knowing that as we are Christ's members, we are
borne thereunto; and therefore if we feel not Gods favor as we wish, we
must not think our selves miserable, because our life lies hid with Christ
in God. Col. 33. Therefore may we not hold it as a hurt unto us, that we rest
deprived here of sundry signs of Gods favor, he loving us nevertheless as it
manifestly appears by Moses, and many others, who had many tempests, and
troubles, that some even desired to be wiped out of GODS Book, who yet have
had works and faith toward the Almighty. 2. Esdras 13.23.

Bless the Lord for his Fatherly rod, and welcome his Wand; Wisd. 20.
what he does, it is in love to free us from wickedness, and convince us of
sin. Learn we therefore to be patient under the hand of Gods lashing us, for
so it becomes the children of God, and members of Christ. Job. 33. It is by
afflictions and corrections, that GOD opens our Ears, that were sealed up,
abating our pride. verse 17. And keeps back our souls from the Pit, our
life from the Sword: yea God will first cast down unto Hell, before he heaueth
thee to Heaven, and doom thee to Death, ere he bring thee to Life, because
that neither one nor other should be pertaker of his praise and glory.

It is Gods ordinance in this world, that his Church and Children, yea every
member of his body should be under the Cross, to learn the better to put
their whole trust in him, and seek the comfort of the Spirit, which never
fails to help the faithful into the land of Promise: Howsoever God leaves us
for the trial of our Faith.

The two Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, remain as pledges of our
Salvation. The first, washing away the guiltiness of sin, and the latter
strengthening our Faith to our very souls, receiving both the body and blood of
Christ Jesus, though that no man living can deserve Salvation: yet as Gods
adopted sons and children, must we all learn, by our good Works, to glorify
our Heavenly Father, declaring our true thankfulness for our Redemption,
through Jesus Christ our only Savior, and by good Works assuring our
Election, and winning others into Life, by our holy conversation in Christ
Jesus.

Remember that GOD being made man for us, has in his own Nature suffered
whatsoever our sins deserved, and made us with himself, the children of God,
and heirs of eternal life.

Whereof, least we should doubt, the Lord has appointed the Sacraments, as
outward tokens to be seen and felt of us, that we should not doubt of being
partakers of Christ himself and his benefits: his righteousness and Holiness
is ours, we being borne anew by the Holy Ghost, and walking in righteousness
all our days. Learn we all to be no less thankful for sicknesses then for
health: for sorrows then for comforts; imprisonment then for liberty; knowing
sanctified sorrows open the gates of Heaven, unto the Eternal majesty of God.
Our heavenly Father so loves us, that he will lay no other burden upon us,
then shall be to our good and profit: It may be that we have both called and
cried unto God in our extreamities, and have not bin released: what of that,
yet must we quiet our minds in this, that as Children we have laid our
complaints, griefs, and sorrows, in the bosom of our heavenly Father, (who
when he sees it time convenient) will undoubtedly help us, as certaynely as
you and I have souls, he never forgets the sorrows of his Servants, he
still sees their tears, and puts them in his bottle.

Our Heavenly Father, which has the issues of Death in his hands, will deliver
you from danger, shed you never so many tears, they shall all be dried from
your Eyes.

As our Victories in the field come not by our own strength, wisdom, and
policy, but by the Divine will and pleasure of our heavenly Father. So in our
sickness and weakness, it is neither physic, nor Physician, potion or
plaster, drugges, or dainty Dishes can fit us for Paradise; but Faith may
convey our souls past the mountains of Lebanon, to the Paradise of God; not
only to behold it with our Eyes a far off, but above the order of nature,
most comfortably to enjoy it, Consider often that the Word of God stands not
in bare Knowledge, but in the practice of life: It Is not an half service but
our full obedience that GOD looks for: he often promises us rewards, not
for our merrites, but to encourage that our labor shall not be lost. It is the
Lords manner in our greatest weakness, to manifest his power, and in deepest
danger make known unto us our salvation.

Content thy self a while with the water of tears, and thou shall be
refreshed with the Wine of comfort. Acknowledge Christ Jesus to be now thy
Savior, and thou shall not once fear him to become thy Judge. After trouble,
God sends comfort to all them which patiently wait on him, and constantly
put their trust in his mercies.

The Almighty put Jobs soul in bitterness; but it was to teach him to keep
righteousness, and not forsake it. God deals with some, as he did with Job,
he turned his Harp unto mourning, and his Organs into the Voice of them that
weeps. As often as God strikes us with any kind of troubles or afflictions,
whether inward in outward in our goods: It is to beat down our pride, and to
free us from afflictions, that we feel not the weight of them, nor the
heaviness of his VVrathfull hand or judgments, when he rests angry.

Sickness is GODS Herald, which he sends to thy house, home, and heart: Our
loving God will not afflict thee above measure, that thou should have
occasion to contend with him. It belongs unto God to moderate your
Corrections, and not man.

Can you pray with vehemence? fear not, but that both your secret complaynts
and sighings are seen of God, and sealed up with Christ in your deepest
temptations: God both can and will deliver you. Although your deeds have
deserved destruction, yet does God in mercy, pity your frailty. The more your
Conscience is touched with the fear of GODS judgments, the more hope may you
have to praise God in the Congregation of the faithful, who sends comfort
and boldness in time of our afflictions, who else were ready to drop down to
destruction. Howsoever either sorrows or sickness may somewhat discourage us,
yet rest our miseries good means to cause us to feel Gods present care over
us. When the Lord afflicts us, and we cry unto him, we think by and by that
he should help us: but that is not his due time, he has some work to work
with us, we must wait and stay the time, before we be comforted; and then
Physic and all humane means failing, God helps, that we may learn ever
after to look still to Heaven, knowing that not only our sickly bodies, but
our sinful souls, and unsanctified senses, such as all ours be: must hence be
purified, or else perplexed: Say, O my God, let neither Man nor misery, drive
thy Servant from his Hope of Gods promise, and joy in the highest Heavens, and
also Eternal felicity: Lord be moved with the complaint of thy poor Servant,
and d liver me in the end, from all manner of fearful dangers.

Remember that the Lords word and promise is true and unchangeable, he
preserves the poor from the peevish, and maintayneth the pyous against the
proud. Cry mightily to our God for this one thing, that whilst your
afflictions last, your faith may not faint.

Desire the Lord to comfort you both in soul and in body: without whose favor
there is no perfect felicity, nor hope of blessed immortality: What though
Satan has many ways to hurt you, yet has our heavenly Father many millions
more to save out of his mere mercy. The great power of Christ's Kingdom
against all Adversaries thereof, teach us all patiently to endure the Cross,
till God destroy the Adversaries. The more your afflictions do increase, the
more near shall you feel the helping hand of God, assisting you with his
spirit of comfort. Be not persuaded but that God loves you far better then
ever your Parents did, which very thought should pacify and bridle your rage.
Depending upon the Lord, who never brake promise with any of his servants.
Content your self, for the treasures of Gods mercies are always laid up in
store for his Children, albeit, at all times, they do not feelingly enjoy them.
How many seem to be swallowed up of grievous afflictions; yet rests God at
hand to deliver you. And it is our heavenly Fathers love, to cause us all to
feel that we are mortal, and that there is no estate wherein we can live, to
have perfect quietness in this world.

Christ Jesus is come to redeem the souls of his servants, that put trust in
him: how then shall the darts of Death endanger us, when death having done his
worst: Christ himself then, becomes our Redeemer, giving us for a poor
Cottage, a rich Kingdom: God knows what dangers hang over our heads, and by
what means to deliver us from them.

Stay his leisure, and the LORD will content your mind with that which is most
necessary; remember how our Faith must be exercised with diverse temptations.
Though the just man dye, yet Gods blessings are extended to his posterity: and
though God suffer some just man to want temporal benefits, yet he
recompenceth him with spiritual treasures: such shall be continually preserved
under GODS VVings, and have at last inward peace and rest in their minds.

The patient hope of the Godly is never in vain, but in the end has good
success, though for a time God prove them with sundry temptations: why does
God visit any one with sickness, but to put both your self and others in
mind of his chastisments for sin: desire not to be exempted from Gods rod,
but that he would so moderate his hand, that you might be able to bear it: let
prayer therefore become your refuge, yield unto God, and not to your own desire.

Let us not despair, be our torments never so great; but cry we to God with
sure trust for our deliverance: does humane means fail? wait we for the
help of God, the weaker in body, strive we with crying sighs to be stronger
in soul by Faith, to the conquering of diseases, Death, Devils, and danger:
cry still for Patience to endure the punishments and chastisements which the
Almighty sends, and entreat the Lord not to be severe against his poor
creature, neither to wrappe him up with the wicked, to be put to shame.

This know, that it is a very hard thing for the Saints themselves to keep
measure in Words, thoughts, and gesture, when Death and Despair assayles them:
though God defer help, yet must we learn to abide with Patience, till he
hear and help us, still remembering that such souls as please him, God
hasteneth to take them from wickedness.

Howsoever you feel Gods hand to lie heavy upon you, yet rest upon his
promise, and comfort your self and soul therein.

Account it Gods mercy to be touched with his fatherly hand, for each one of
us all is like an untamed Calfe, till the use of Gods rod, call us home to
Heaven. We are so rebellious by nature, that we stand in need to be
chastned every hour. It is a true trial to praise God in adversity, and that
Faith is sure, that is grounded upon Gods Word, who will undoubtedly be at
hand, when as his children be oppressed.

Know and never forget this lesson, that Gods providence does not only watch
over his Church in general; but also every member thereof in particular: So as
neither heat nor cold, nor any incommodity shall be able to destroy Gods
Church, albeit for a time they may molest it.

Be you not tired with your trials, for there is help from above, if you
faithfully cry and stay for it. Though you suffer under the Cross, least you
should embrace wickedness, yet the Cross shall not so rest upon you, as to
drive you from hope, but to Purge you from Hypocrisy, and make you zealous of
Gods testimonies and truth, and as one of the Lords People, still to depend on
Gods power: To whom all glory, and honor be given, for ever. Amen.

Thursday Meditations.
Sharp punishments that pierces even to the inward parts, are profitable to
the wicked, to bring us one by one, to amendment; we have no true trial of
our strength until troubles do assail us: what God has appointed, that shall
come to each one of us all. Keep and look unto the assured evidences, and
vndeceiuing forerunners of an happy departure.

First, see that you live with a good Conscience, so shall you be sure to dye
with great comfort.

Secondly, see that your holiness of life and conversation in this same world,
before men, be the Way and the path unto our future happiness.

Thirdly, you must labor and endeavor here to glorify God, if you desire to
be glorified with him in Heaven.

Fourthly, you must fight a good fight against Satan, which has bin our enemy
from the beginning, and then against the world, and your own corruptions: you
must faithfully fulfill your course, and perform the service unto which God
has appointed you.

Labor whilst you live, still to know the truth, keeping faith in soundness
and sincerity to the end, (or else expect you in vain) a crown of
righteousness.

Christ still dwells in his Church, and therefore will not depart from them,
but will have to help them in their troubles.

The hand of God being upon any, teaches the party to examine his life, and to
beware of our murmuring against God, who is Almighty, who may justly, for our
transgressions and iniquities, throw us down into Hell. Eccles. 11.8. We are
warned by the Preachers, to remember the days of Darkness, Affliction, and
troubles, Eccle. 11.
knowing GOD will call to an account for carnal lusts, whereunto youth is
given.

We may seek the Lord in all our troubles, and yet not be incontinently
heard, to cause us to continue and persevere in Prayer, till we feel comfort.

Whatsoever adversity, tribulation, or calamity, men or Women endure, they
must attribute it unto their own incredulity, and disobedience, and be moved
with a zeal of Gods glory.

And if any sorrows or troubles bring such sadness, the very thought of a
Messiah Christ Jesus, may greatly cheerish and comfort us, who will never
suffer his Church to be destroyed utterly. Be patient therefore in adversity,
looking for Gods help, and fearing to do any thing contrary to his Will and
Word.

God defends his Elect, and rejects all the rest. Let this be a consolation
in your troubles, that nothing can come unto you, but by the will of the Lord.

As you are Gods Children, so of whom should you, I, or any other seek
succor, but only of him? Refuse not to be taught of the Ministers of GOD, who
now are his mouth. When GOD punishes his people, his plagues must continue,
till sinners begin to feel them. The intention of GODS chastizing, is for
our amendment, but the Devils malice aymeth only at our destruction

GOD will chasten his own people, begin at his own House, and when he has
do^e, burn the rod.

The end of Gods plagues to his Children, is to bring them to trust in
himself, and to forsake all confidence and trust in others.

Gods rods and corrections do ever bring forth some fruit, causing his to
turn from their sins and transgressions, and to humble themselves in his
sight with contrition. There is no power so high and mighty, but the Lord will
visit him with his rod, and again so comfort him in his troubles, that the
shining of the Moon and Sun shall be darkness in comparison, of the joy and
eternal happiness thereof. Again, the arrogant and proud that will not know
GOD, are by his Wand and correcting rod, brought to fear GODS wrath, and for
to glorify his holy name.

Be comforted all yea that are grieved, for the time of your deliverance is at
hand, the defense and protection of the Almighty shall be sufficient for you.
Think not much of your present captiuities, as of your happy return to the
Heavenly Jerusalem: Know what God has decreed, it cannot be altered, no power
so high that can let him of his project: Endeavor we therefore constantly to
endure and abide all manner of adversities, where with God afflicts us, well
knowing thereby that if we learn to fear God, and to be bettred, are evident
signs of Gods grace, and especial favor.

The Lord moves you by his rod and chastisement, to pray, cry, and call
earnestly unto him, for your deliverance.

Be you comforted, my faithful and afflicted brethren, knowing that even in
Death, you shall have Life, and may assuredly rise to glory: remember how
Herbs dye in the winter, and yet flourish again, by the rain, in the Spring
time: So they that lie in the Dust shall rise up to joy, when they feel the
dew of GODS grace and Heavenly power: Strive we all therefore, as faithful
ones, to be patient in all our troubles and afflictions, to wait upon Gods
work, until by his mighty and all-sufficient power, he call us into his
Presence, to dwell with him in Paradise. Afflictions which God lays upon us,
are much like unto a storm, which comes and goes: wherein God will not
leave you or forsake you, but deliver you rather (by miracle) then you shall
be overcome, or utterly perish.

Our God will not suffer us to be destroyed to the contempt of his Name, but
magnify still his Divine Majesty for ever, by delivering us out of so many
eminent dangers, that all praises for our enfranchizement may be rendered,
through Christ Jesus unto our God.

Though Death were even now ready to destroy, yet has the Lord Power enough to
deliver and succor you, as need requires. There is nothing that more
strengthens our Faith, then our remembrance and calling to mind Gods
deliverance in times past.

Know this, that Satan will tempt you to murmur against God, but depend you
still upon the LORDS promise, bearing your Cross patiently, and you shall
undoubtedly inherit the Kingdom of glory. Give your self now wholly unto God,
by putting away all things that are contrary unto his Commandments: so where
the wicked feel Gods power, you and I, being godly, shall find his mercies.
Desire we God to be our sufficiency, above physic, meat, or drink.

Are we in the depth of misery, let us contemplate his Power and glory, as if
we were in his Sanctuary assured of his Spirit. Afflictions dwells with the
best of Gods servants, who have no leisure to swallow down their spittle: Such
is the estate of the poor members of Christ Jesus, that oftentimes they be
soar groaning under the Cross of tribulation: yet suffers not our Savior
any of his, to pass from under his shadow, till our heavy and oppressed
hearts comforted and fully refreshed. Our heavenly Fathers scourge is
undoubtedly a forerunner of Gods gracious favor and blessing, and the only
way to salvation.

Cry and call faithfully, and God will still hear thee, what time the storm
falls on thee: It is our Heavenly Fathers favor, to open our ears by his
correction, thereby keeping back our souls from the pit, and our lives from
passing by the Sword: He strikes us with sorrows upon our beds, making our
souls to loath and abhor even the daintiest meats.

By careful Crosses, God opens our ears, so as neither health may hurt us,
nor Prosperity undo us: The cause why God sends us sundry afflictions, is to
beat down our pride, and to turn us from evil and impiety. Our gracious GOD
withdraws not his eyes from the righteous, neither will he still be
fettering us with the cords of afflictions.

But he will be opening our ears to Discipline, and commanding us to return
from iniquity. My GOD and Heavenly Father, so move your and every one of our
hearts, to the feeling and seeing of all our sins and iniquities, that we may
all come to him by repentance (as did Manasses) at the last. Assure, we shall,
our souls of this, that to the afflicted God shows Grace. The scourge of the
Lord is upon us, we ought the more humbly to pray unto our God, that he hide
not his face from us. But rather to indue us with his Spirit, as still resting
in misery and afflictions, we might be driven from man to God: As was the
Prophet David, When his Friends forsook him, and all his Acquaintance hid
themselves from him. Then gat David unto God most humbly, with these words. Oh
Lord hear my Prayer: O let my cry come unto thee: Hide not thy face from me,
in time of my trouble; but incline thine Ears unto me, that do mingle my
drink (every morning) with my Weeping.

Learn we each one, neither to have fellowship with the deceitefull, nor yet
to stay with the ungodly, but to wash our hands in innocence, and so to go unto
the Lords Altar.

See you never forget the love of our Savior Christ to mankind, who was
content for to become a Redeemer to mankind, and not for the Angels which fell,
as did both man and woman: For the ground of our Redemption is the special love
of Christ, not the foreseen works of our faith, in the eternal Counsel of
God. But like as the Israelites got not Canaan by their own sword and power:
No more can we gain Heaven, but by Gods favoring us in Christ Jesus his
Son. The faithful are chastened ere they be Crowned: yea checked and advised
for to leave their bad manners, and particular vices, and to follow and
practice holy and religious duties in faith, fear, and feeling, with holy
Obedience both to God and man.

Both Paul and Barnabas teach us this Lesson, that we must through many
tribulation, Enter into the kingdom of God.

Few things came into the Host of Israel, but such as were purified either by
fire or water: How much more ought the sinful souls of men, to be purged, ere
they come to their Heavenly heritage. Number 31.23
Number. 31.23.24. As Hester was first purified six months with Myrrh, after
that with sweet Odours, and then come unto Ahashuerus: So bitter trials and
travails must touch our hearts, ere we can lodge with the LORD of Life,
under whom King Ahashuerus lived, but as a Lieutenant: It is the Privilege of
Christ's members to be troubled and afflicted, but not for ever to be fined as
silver in the furnace of affliction, and tribulation.

What was once spoken unto the old Jews, I do now understand it as applied
to the Elect, whose privileges in this life, are pangs and pains, troubles and
tortures, calamities, and crosses, so that it is now grown to a Proverb,
Athemata mathemata passionis documenta; The Lords lashes are lessons to lead
us a long the right and straight way to Christ, the true Sanctefier of our
souls, to all that believe in him.

David penning his sweetest and harmonious Psalm, in his bitterest
afflictions, teaches us every one to profit by Gods Rod; because that
afflictions Brings home the Prodigal Son. Luke 15. Luke. 15.
And makes Nebuchadnezzer lift up his eyes to Heaven, honoring him that
lives for ever. As many as rest sons, must be scourged of their father: we
just ones knowing God, but must look for messengers to salute them, with
shriking sounds of sorrowful news. For our learning, it pleases God
oftentimes to conclude the best peoples lives with very fearful evils. As we
see in the death of Jesus Christ his best Apostles; Jonathan, Lazarus, and the
LORDS two VVitnesses. Revel. 11.7. Who having finished their Testimonies, are
killed for so doing, and their Corpses thrown into the streets of the great
City; the Gentiles in their courses three days and a half, not suffering
their Carcasses to be put in their Graves: See how the Lord scourges deeply
where he loves most dearly; stay but the LORDS leisure, and he will
undoubtedly comfort your distressed heart and mind, if you will patiently
abide, seek, and wait for him in the Way of sincerity and truth.

Remember we should all, that Isreal's portion is not passed into by following
of vain and unlawful pleasures; not by embracing the Earth in our arms, or
sending out our Children by flocks, to dance after music: Til the Lords Vae
mane surgentibus; Esaias 5.
seize upon us: Isreal's portion is not so easily come unto: There is no other
way to the Crown, but by the cross; we must suffer our afflictions as the
good soldiers of Christ, before the Lord will receive us into Eternal Glory.
Learn we all therefore, that the Cross of Christ is the best Schoole-maister,
to bring us to Christ. As Naaman did wash ere he could be whole, so must good
Christians be content to suffer trials.

Whilst God threatens afflictions to our flesh, he would have us to prepare
Faith and Patience in our hearts, to entertayne the LORDS chastisements with
tears. The rod of God to man, is as the press to the Grape; the fan to the
Corn, and the fire to the Gold.

How was good Jacob troubled? first to have his only brother (as it were) to
swear his death; then to leave his father and mother, house and home, Country
and friends, and to seek for services in the world abroad. Remember still Gods
spy, (your conscience in your bosom) see you, and we are his secret
intelligencer (our conscience, that will be undoubtedly) most true and faithful
unto God, and intelligencer against Achitophell, Haman, Shebnah, and others,
yea against thine own self, if thy soul be unsanctified: you must hunger
after Heaven, ere it will be had. Our heavenly Fathers correcting still whom he
loves and likes; teaches us not to despair of his fatherly favors, and
friendly affections; but rather that he nurtureth us for our Salvation, fining
us as the Silver, and choosing us in the fire, as the purest gold: Mark Christ's
dealing with his chosen members, by conuincing their faults, when he
chastneth us to break us of our evil ways, and thereby he brings us to
reformation, correcting all of us according to the quality of our offense: The
hardlier we are broken from our sins, the heavier judgments will he lay on
us, to work our deeper humiliation and repentance.

Fears shall make us to understand that which exhortations and gentleness
could not bring us unto: We must be first humbled, ere we can be advanced, and
have fainting souls on earth before we can feel, the high, Holy, and helping
hand of GOD from on high, to stay and heave us out of our distresses: Rely we
still on God, and he will not forsake us in our dangers. But give us still
such pledges of his never failing mercies, as may assure our hearts of greater
in Heaven, where more joys are prepared, then we can either ask or once
think of. It is well that you think sin to be the ground of your afflictions,
and your offenses the cause of Gods displeasure: wherefore he sends crosses
and curses upon sinners.

Consider we first, how we have fallen by wantonness of life, and ungodly
conversation, our neglecting Gods word and will, has brought the cup of Gods
indignation upon us, to reclaim our feet from folly, and our souls from
sin.

Not to acknowledge our selves to have deserved Gods judgments (because we yet
feel them not) is Pride of heart, and a state most perilous until we be
humbled.

God therefore pulled David down (though he were a chosen Vessel) when he saw
him walk awry. God corrects us to reform us, making his judgments as
messengers, to recall us from sin, before he enter into judgment with us.
Beware of grudging at thy crosses or afflictions, for our Heavenly father uses
them to amend us, being unwilling the death of any sinner.

We having all sinned, stand in need of this Physic of correction, to
reclaim us from straying from our heavenly fathers dwelling: beware of being
ashamed of our fathers visitation, neither love we the pleasures of this
World, more then the joys of heaven.

Be we never ashamed of GODS rod, for David confesses, and says, thy Rod thy
Staff does comfort me: Psalm 23.
the rod to correct, when I am out of the way, and the staff to comfort and
uphold me, when I am in the way: But intertain we his correction as a benefit
and blessing sent from on high, profitable for our souls, and no way hurtful
to our hearts: and still more and more fit you for the company of Gods Children.

The more sorrowful and sick you are, the more like you are unto our elder
brother Christ Jesus, who finished our Redemption through the Cross, and made
the way, to the joys of heaven, through tribulations. Which way, whosoever is
a shamed to follow, can neither come to his Kingdom, nor set foot in the
palace of Gods most joyful inheritance. If you are now wounded without in your
body, be careful to see, to the soars of your souls.

I fear not but that the seeds of Faith lies still in your heart, although
the fruit thereof do not yet plainly appear: I do persuade my heart, that
though your eyes wax dim, yet the Holy Ghost will still give unto you, the
true illumination of your heart, soul, and several senses.

If our Sons and Daughters have been dear unto us, how much more dearly
has Christ our Redeemer once bought with his blood, both our souls and our
bodies. I beseech you hold it a joy to dye, and to be out of this sinful
World, and to be delivered from the thraldom of this sorrowful life.

Death is our refuge, the help of our souls to Heaven, there we live
eternally, where is no pain, but all pleasure, no sorrow but solace, no
sighing but singing, no fear of death, but assurance of everlasting Life. It
is good for your children to be afflicted, that they may not stray from Gods
house, but keep his Word, and to learn and observe his Divine statutes.

Though we have been long chastned of the Lord, but it is that we should not
be condemned of the Lord. Gods punishing us does withold us from Hell,
stirring us daily and earnestly to desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ our Savior in glory.

Consider I beseech you, that when the earthly House of this Tabernacle shall be
dissolved, we have a building of GOD, an house not made with hands, but
eternal in the Heavens: which who so inheriteth shall be eternally saved.

I entreat and advise every one, to be more careful of their souls, then of
their bodies, still comforting their hearts in their afflictions, knowing that
the sender thereof is God, and the causer thereof, our sins: the longer we be
and languish in sin, the more appears Gods love in our sickness, for the
which think God to be the sender, and likewise our deliverer in danger and
adversity.

As the Husbandman does not put the sickle into the Corn until it be ripe:
So does not God inflict his grievous judgments upon us, until our sins do
call down vengeance for the same.

Art thou desirous to avoid contagious diseases, see thou fear more thy sin
then the infected City: Can thou remove thy transgressions from the face of
the Lord: The Cities contagion shall not hurt thee; but if our sins remain
unrepented, all the wholesome air in all the Country cannot help thee, or
comfort thee.

In this world, we can see but Gods backe-parts, as Moses did: that is but a
little of the favor of God: but after this Life is ended, we shall see God,
face to face, having the full fruition of him: as we therefore wish the salvation
of our souls, let us all beware of security, or to defer our repentance,
least we be cast into Hell fire, having no lease of our uncertain lives.

Labor we all to have the Candle of Faith burn in the Lamps of our hearts,
still nourished with the oil of love and good works.

It may not a little comfort us in the time of our afflictions and troubles,
that our heavenly Father has showed such love unto us, that we should be
called the sons and Daughters of God. O what a comfort it is to my heart and
soul, that I pray not to an inexorable Judge, but to a most merciful Father,
who can deny me nothing. As I most comfortably read. Matthew. 3.9.10.11. Math.
3.9.
It is no impudency to call upon the LORD, we have his promise. Eze. Eze.
36.28.
36.28. that we shall be his people, and he will be our GOD for evermore.

We have Christ's warrant when we pray, to have the Holy Ghosts instructions,
whereby we may Cry Abba Father: fearing God as our master, and more
reuerencing him, then our parents. We that are Gods children should so esteem
of our trials, as always tending to his own glory, and our salvation: the
matter of temptation (I mean mine own concupiscence) is in my self; the Devil
brings his bellows to this fire, and it is forthwith Kindled: But craving Grace
to repel this power, we are not swallowed up of them, but freely delivered
from the slavery of sin and Satan. Saint Augustine asks, What our life is?
He answers himself, saying, Saint Augustines resolution.
Arming to death, our Life while it increases, decreaseth; and when our Life
is dying, our Death is living. This Life is the time wherein we must be
admitted into the Kingdom of Grace, if ever we look hereafter, in the
Kingdom of glory and happiness.

All Gods Children must in this World be tempted, that being tempted, they may
resist, resisting, they may overcome, and ouer-comming they may be Crowned: Be
not weary of painful walking to the Kingdom of Heaven; fix your eyes on
Christ Jesus, and never leave running until you come to him; neither fear you
any Foe rising up against you, for the professing of Gods truth, so long as
we may win Christ Jesus for our reward. Think not your self to be a fit
stone for the LORDS building, unless you be hewn with the Axe of afflictions,
and then slit through the heart with a Saw of correction.

Whosoever will hereafter taste the sweet joys of Paradise, must first on
earth (with Christ Jesus) taste of the cup of salt tears and afflictions with
David: here he wattered his bed, and have thou none to bedew thy Couch with?
God would not afflict thee, but to weane thee from wickedness, he would not
have the weeds to ouer-grow the good Corn, nor the flesh to domineere over the
Spirit: therefore by afflictions are we often brought to hate, that which
before we did love, and to embrace what before we did loath.

Tribulation does upon the ears of the heart, which worldly prosperity does
oftentimes shut: 1 Cor. 11
the Lord in mercy often chasteneth here, that we might not be proud, nor
condemned with the world. 1. Cor. 11.32. God wounds us, not to make us worse,
but wiser, that we might weep each one for our several sins and
wickedness, which we have committed against our good God. Oh remember that
the afflictions of the body, is wholesome physic for the Soul, it kills
the flesh, but cures the Spirit.

One compares afflictions to the Goldsmiths Forge, which tries the pure gold
from the dross: or as Physic expelling corrupt humors from the body: Or as
a Shepherds crook whereby God brings again his wandering sheep unto the
fold: Sickness and sorrows are as a watchful rod to make us vigilant, that
are in our selves naturally both sleepy and sluggish. You know this that by
afflictions are the Children of God, and the sons of Belial discerned and
taken notice of. We are often therefore inthralled, that our Faith might be
tried, hope, love, and obedience exercised, and our Crosses cheerfully
welcomed; sent of God for our good, learning in affliction to abase thy self
in the sight of God Almighty, acknowledging and confessing that earthly
scourges are but as flea-bitings in respect of the torments of Hell, which by
our lewd lives, for ever, we have deserved.

Do you ask me why God afflicts you in this world? I answer. That the
greatness of his power, and the infiniteness of his mercies might be showed
in the delivery of us, you, and such others.

There is no surer sign of the Lords VVriting your names in the Book of Life,
then this, that the LORD humbles before he exalts, and shows us our
damnable estate, through sin by the Law, before ever he signifies unto us,
that he is our Salvation. And why deals God thus with his own Children?

First, until we be humbled, we

A second reason is, that our Redemption

From the Spanish Navy in 88 From the Gunpowder treson. From the last great
sickness. And many particular dangers.
Thirdly, that Gods mercy in our deliverance, might be prised in his kind, the
Redeemer in Heaven; for this especial cause, extol the Lord and the Lamb
with a perpetual Haleluiah, for an everlasting Redemption, from an everlasting
damnation, requires an everlasting glorification.

This general truth is confirmed by a particular example, when the poor
Iaylour was most grievously tormented through the horrors of the Law: before
ever he can find his soul recovered by the salvation of the Gospel: He
cries, Sirs, what must I do to be Saved? Perhaps Paul and Sylas told him what
to do: Even believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be Saved, and
thine household.

It is no ill sign to be humbled as the servant of God, wounded in
Conscience, or pricked in heart, not knowing what to do. Nineveh was humbled,
before he sought to God. Thus does the Law prepare us unto Christ, salvation
and eternal bliss belonging to none but to the humble. Esaias 66.2.
All Gods Children must go through the Hell of a wounded conscience, before
they can taste of any heavenly refreshing, even as Merchants wax must be
softened with a Candle before it can take an impression; the terror of our sin
must languish our souls, before we can come to the remission of them.

The coming of GOD into the Souls of the Faithful and chosen, is notably
resembled by his appearance unto Eliah. 1 Reg. 19.11.12. First, 1 Reg. 19.11.12.
there came a mighty strong Wind, that rent the Mountains, and brake the
Rocks, but the Lord was not in the wind: After the wind came an Earthquake,
but the Lord was not in the Earthquake: after the Earthquake came fire, but
the Lord was not in the fire, at last came a soft and still voice.

So the Lord appears to his Redeemed ones, by the VVinde of his wrath,
breaking their hearts. Secondly by the earthquak of his anger, shakes God our
souls. Thirdly, by the fire of displeasure smoaketh he our Consciences; but in
the end, by the still voice of his mercies, he refreshes our souls, were they
never so sinful. As the Iaylour had an Earthquake in his Castle, so must each
Christian in his Conscience, before ever he perceive his Election and
Salvation. The saying is as true as ancient, We must go by the gates of Hell
to Heaven; we must after a sort, be in Hell before ever we can be capable of
Heaven above. That is in the Hell of an ashamed countenance, and a confounded
conscience, before ever the Lord will say unto our souls, that he is our
Salvation and Redemption.

Our humiliation by the Law, must first preceed the salvation of the Gospel,
so then they are not converted, that more or less are never humbled. To be
troubled and amazed for our sins, is to be fitted for Heaven; and first we
must be lost, ere we can be found, and must be condemned before we can be
reprieued or saved. We must be ashamed of our sins, affrighted at our
follies, and confounded in our consciences, before the Lord will once say to our
souls, I am thy Redemption. Are you amazed at your sins? be not disparaged, so
far you are in this your Hell, from Hell, as you are composed thereby and
made fitter for Heaven, which is the throne of the Everliving Lord GOD.

Again, we must labor to have the spirit of Bondage become the Spirit of
Adoption to our souls; and we must acknowledge our several diseases, before
Christ will heal us.

As every one can rest content to have Cstrist our Jesus, so must we rest
content to have him our Lord and be conformable unto him in bearing the Cross,
if ever we mean or look to be glorified with him, in Heaven: We must needs
feel our sickness, ere we befit for Righteousness; soul afflictions must
not fright you from Almighty God, but make you rather run unto him for
defense, as the Chickens do from the Kite to their Hen, 2 Cor. 12.17, 18.

The more you trust in God, the sooner will he support you; and the more
earnestly you cry and crave for justice, the sweeter will be your end, and the
more joyful your deliverance.

Forget not to be thankful for the least measure of Faith and Grace, well
knowing that the want of these, soon works man's ouer-throw. Understand I
beseech you, that though Death be the deliverer of every faithful man and
woman, from the body and prison of sin, to Eternal Felicity: Our Savior by
his Death and Passion, having killed the sting of death in us; and a though
Paul, once ravished with an high Contemplation, Wished to be dissolved, and to
be with Christ. Philip. 1.23. Yet have we no warrant every man to pray for the
hasting of his own death, being to every Faithful particular man (the same
thing) that the general transmutation will be at the latter day, to the whole
body of the just and Elect, except that the Elect after the general
dissolution, attain to a greater degree of Glory.

Christ came not to Call the Righteous but Sinners to Repentance: To seek the
lost Sheep; to find the lost Great; and reclayme the lost Son, or meet
with the lost treasure. Submit your desires to GODS will, and leave your
endeavors with patience to be ordered by the Lords providence, earnestly
desiring preservation from Death, you patiently submitting your self unto GODS
pleasure, either for Life or Death. For the best and surest way to find Favor
in the Eyes of the LORD Almighty: is to desire him to do with us what he
seems or thinks good, for referring our selves to his Divine providence,
he will ever deal most graciously and lovingly with us.

God is our GOD willing to show us grace and mercy, he will turn to us and be
favorable, (...) he takes away our manifold iniquities, and cast our sins in
the depth of the Sea.

Again Psalm 103.8.9.10. The Lord is full of Compassion, and mercy, long
suffering, and of great goodness: He will not be always chiding, neither
keeps he his anger for ever: He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor
rewards according to our iniquities. But look how high the Heaven is in
comparison of the Earth; so great is his mercy toward them that fear him.
Look how wide also the East is from the West, so far has he set our sins
from us. Yea like as a Father pittieth his own children; even so is the Lord
pitiful to them that fear him: For he knows whereof we be made; he
remembers that we are but dust. Psalm. 145.8. Joel. 2.13. Mat. 26.11 2. Cor.
1.3 Ephe, 2.4. 2 Timothy 1.13


Of the great mercies of God toward us sinners, read at your leisure. Psalm
145.8.9.147.8.10, and in Joel 2.13. Math. 26.11. 2 Cor. 1.3. Ephesians. 2.4. 1 Timothy
1.13. unto 18. verse: All these places yield words of rare comfort pronounced
by the Eternal Verity it self, and therefore not to be mistrusted or
dispayred of: Let us not abuse GODS mercies, making them a cloak to cover our
sins: presume we not saying, Eccles. 5.6. Eccle. 5.6
The mercy of our God is great, he will forgive my manifold sins, for mercy
and wrath come from him. Forget not that golden saying of St. Paul, Romans 8.28.
All things work together for the best, to them which fear God. Romans 5.4


Yea, the afflictions and troubles of Gods children, are so sanctified unto
them by Gods spirit, that by the same they are made partakers of Gods
holiness. Hebr. 1.12. Heb. 1.12.
By the same they enjoy the quiet Fruit of Righteousness; by it likewise they
attain to a greater measure of joy in the Holy Ghost. Again, Hereby is the
world crucified unto you, and you unto it. Romans 8.8
Hereby are we made conformable to the death of Christ: by this are we kept
from the condemnation of this World; and by the same likewise learn we
experience, patience, Hope, etc.

I beseech you all to ponder, weigh, and consider how your crosses are mercy,
your losses gains, your afflictions schooling, and each adversity as a Lesson:
receive your Crosses as coming from Christ, written both for thy Learning and
Comfort, manifesting by these tokens that he loves you, meaning thereby to
draw you even into his Bosom: hereby we are assured of our heavenly Fathers
good will toward us. We may not in our miseries still look for Gods, but
likewise at his ineffable mercy: (our Parents disobedience in eating the
forbidden Fruit) did banish them out of the most pleasant place of the World:
yet showed GOD his fatherly Kindness unto them, before he drove them out, for
he made them Coats to arm them against all weather.

More then that, he comforted them with the promise of the blessed Seed, Jesus
Christ, which should restore that Salvation unto mankind, which they had lost,
by yielding to the Serpents intisements.

Lo here the most loving and Kind dealing of GOD with Man, he will make us
smart a little for our sins: here is his Justice, but yet so, that he will
not utterly forsake us, or give us over for ever, here is loving mercy.

Avoid therefore Satan once, I say again avoid, cease to suggest or ingest
into any man's heart, that he should think because that God does cross and
afflict him; therefore GOD does hate, forsake, and utterly cast him off, those
with whom he so now deals,

It is true that Christ Jesus has taught us to call upon him, by the name of
a Father, who now loves us more then our mothers did: First us till our bones
do crack, yet with a fatherly true affection still to bring us to amendment,
or he utterly cast us off. Our heavenly Father warns us by his rods, to walk
in his ways, and to live in his obedience, which if we despise, and refuse to
follow, then will the Lord use his scourges, poverty, sickness, diseases,
crosses in Children, stock or croppe, fire or sword, till that we humbling
our selves under Gods mighty hand, shall subject our selves to his government,
suffering in our selves a holy reformation of manners, and amendment of life:
Learn we also to rejoice in the midst of our troubles and afflictions with
contented minds and sanctified affections, no Parents so loving to their
Children as is our heavenly Father for our safety in our sufferings, cling we
therefore the faster and the more faithfully unto God in our troubles God has
turned heretofore the penury and the captivity of his people unto their good by
greatest crosses, working his people their greatest comforts: God does
oftentimes make our sicknesses and sorrowful diseases as purgations to
euacuate our pride, vayne-glory, hypocrisy, and the corruptions of our
putrified souls. And sometimes for preservatives, to keep us from falling
into those, or the like sins; And sometimes God uses them as Cordials, to
strengthen our decaying graces, and to animate us unto holy duties: to pray,
Read, and hear the more attentively; to bear the Rod of God more patiently,
and to perform each holy duty with the more cheerefulnes.

Be not ignorant of that Lesson which David teaches us all; Psalm 119
It is good for us that we have bin afflicted. For the learning of Gods
Statutes and Keeping of his word and testimonies, withold us from going a
stray in ill ways: so that each one of us may truly say of our troubles,
sorrows and sicknesses, that we have suffered them, and have learned to love
God more, and our own deserts the less: let us all learn to make holy
medicines for our souls, out of such calamities as do often befall us in the
World; and so shall we have no cause to vex our selves with cures for the
sanctified crosses that do us much good: we grieve at the untimely death of our
Children, which we hoped should have been the staff of our old Age, inherit
our houses, and keep still our name: but we mind not how many children (of as
good hope as ours) have proved parents crosses, and some mothers upon their
knees have wished, they had never been borne, or that they had then carried
them to their graves, when they had them to weane: Sure it is, that God for the
most time, does lay such afflictions upon us, either because he will procure us
some good, or prevent some Evil by them.

Which things, if we commonly see them come to pass, why mourn we so that
which tends unto our welfare, and greater comfort?

There is nothing in the world, but still works for the best to the children of
God, as well the stratagems of Satan, as the imaginations of men, are for the
Weal of Gods children. Yea, out of one of the most poisonfull things (as sin
and death) does the Lord draw healthful and medicinal preservatives to them
that love him, still strengthening their Faith, whilst they give glory unto God.

Care you not what outward punishment you endure, so that you may feel the
guilt of your sins washed out of your Conscience, and the loving countenance
of our heavenly Father in Christ Jesus, to wipe your trespasses clean away.

Let the goodly sorrows of our several wounded consciences drive us to GOD,
who has undoubtedly physic for our sickly and sinful souls: Are you
weak, and sick, sad and confounded in mind, desire the LORD so to stamp the
impression of his sacred spirit into your hearts, as washing your selves in the
water of Repentance, you wallow no more in the mire of former filthiness: the
Lord so kill and clarify your flesh, as the life of Grace may assure your
souls of election to glory. Remember what Queen Esther did being in danger of
death, Chap. 14.1. She resorted unto the Lord, she laid away her glorious
apparel, and put on the garments of sighing and mourning, instead of precious
ointment scattering ashes and Earth upon her Head, humbling her body greatly
with fasting: filling all the places of her joy with the hair she plucked
from her Head. It is very good for GODS Children that this world, now and then,
much discourageth them, and that we and they likewise rest seldom free from
one calamity or another: to make us to cry (with Christ) in our troubles unto
God, that he may pitch his Tents about us, so as we finally miscarry not, nor
go astray from the Kingdom of God: apply our hearts wholly unto Christ and
cleave we all still unto him with sure purpose of soul, to rest thoroughly
sanctified. Beware of temporary faith which is lame of one hand, only able to
take Christ, but not to give himself to Christ: This is to offer the same
offering without the burnt offering; have thou Hope against Hope, feel thou
Hell in thy Conscience, yet here must thou apprehend Heaven, and with Jonas (in
the Whales belly) call upon GOD in faith, for faith is the subsistence of
things that are not, much more then of things that in deed are, though not in
appearance. Be of good cheer, for Christ has fastened Satan, Sin and Death
to his Cross. Now amidst thy bitterest torments and tortures, remember how
Christ drunk the most bitter and sharp Cup of his Fathers wrath in our name.
Remember that Peter suffering for the truth of God, returned from the Council
with joy and gladness, when he had been whipped, and had heard, that he
should dye a violent death, through which conflict and repugnance he strove
still with violence, not for other peoples pleasure, but for his own
salvation. There is no Christian but he must fight before he can triumph: and
be daily calling, yea earnest by praying and craving for help at Gods hands,
remembering that against the ignomy of the Cross, we have to set the decree
and purpose of God, foretold by the Prophets of Christ: How that first of all
he should be crucified here upon Earth: And then he should appear from
Heaven, the Judge and Restorer of all things: that all Believers might be
saved, and all unbelievers utterly perish.

Understand and Know this, that God uses to wrappe up his Church with the
wicked, in his scourges and plagues which he sends upon the Earth: and yet
notwithstanding he provides for it conveniently, though he does most commonly
grant but a short time of Truce, unto his Church and children, to be at rest
and quiet in.

Learn we all to set the glory of Christ his Resurrection, against the shame
of the Cross and grave; seeing seeing it may as well be proved by witness
which saw it, as by testimony of the Prophets; learn we all therefore to go
forward in one way, in our vocation, through a thousand death.

Gods providence takes not away the causes which God uses as means, but
rather orders and disposes them to their right use, even then when he
opens an extraordinary issue: for then, and not till then came we to the
promised and sure salvation, through the midst of tempest and death it self.
Then are perplexities most to be looked for, when the Port and Haven is
nearest. The godlier you be, the more sure shall you be to have danger upon
danger; but always most sure to have a glorious issue.

What, though adversity be the punishment of sin, yet God in punishing does
not always respect sin they judge too rashly which either do not wait for
the Lord, or do judge and esteem all men according to prosperity or
adversity: let this be still your comfort, the Lord never afflicts his above
their strength: what though now we behold miseries and calamities in a Church;
yet is the hope of felicity harbored in our hearts, as if we presently enjoyed
it.

Know this, that it is of the Lords mercy that you are either helped or healed,
Wis. 18. It is the power of righteousness that Saints receive good and evil
in like manner, singing praises for the one as well as for the other.

It is not wisdoms care to walk with ease by crooked paths, and to bring us
into fear and dread, and to torment us with her discipline, until she has
tried our souls, and proved us by her judgments, then will she comfort us,
and show us her secrets, and heap upon us the understanding of righteousness.

The Lord now and then sends us away weeping and mourning: but with joy and
perpetual gladness will he bring us again unto himself.

Remember that Sion may be in Captivity, and yet see her Salvation from God to
come with great glory and everlasting brightness: suffer we therefore as
Children the wrath of God patiently, hoping at last to tread upon the necks of
our foes, and ever hereafter to rejoice, though now for a time we mourn. Who
would not make haste to the Kingdom of GOD living uprightly, and be of a good
and honest conversation, as Christ once offered himself willingly to be taken,
that we might be delivered.

Remember in your present misery, how Christ being innocent, was condemned of
the High Priest for that wickedness whereof we are guilty.

Christ our Savior found no comfort (any where) that in him we might be
fulfilled with Celestial joys and solace every where, he was made a curse,
that in him we might be blessed, he was spoiled of his Garments that we
might be enriched with his Righteousness: Christ healing the manifold
miseries of mankind, shows that he came to make clean and wipe away the
sins of the world with his touching hand from Heaven. Fear we not any
accusers before God, seeing that GOD himself absolueth us as just, much less
need we fear damnation, seeing that we rest upon the death and
resurrection, yea the Almighty power and defense of Jesus Christ. Therefore
what can there be so weighty in this life, or of so great force and power, that
might now fear us, although we might fall from the fear of God wherewith he
loves us in Christ: Surely nothing; it is in it lelfe most constant and sure,
and also in us conformed by steadfast faith by Christ that loves us: we are
perfectly just, and through him are we conquerours over miseries and
calamities, although we seem as broken in pieces with the woeful weight of
woeful dangers, yet as good Christians let us grow more and more courageous,
that the ways and wills of GOD may be thoroughly known in this world.
Remember that the matter of our salvation is Christ, in whom only we are
endued with spiritual blessings unto salvation. Oh persuade your own souls
that God has chosen us from the beginning in his Son, the end of afflictions
being true joy, and that through the virtue of the Spirit of Christ which he
gives to them which ask it. We ought not to be discouraged, but rather to be
encouraged by the persecutions which the enemies of the Gospel imagine and
practice against us, seeing that they are certain witnesses from GOD himself
both of our salvation and of the destruction of our enemies that hate us.
Persecution is a sign of our salvation, because it is a gift of God to suffer
for Christ which gift he renders to his own, as he does the gift of faith.
Grieve not for your great afflictions, no not although you should dye to make
pefect your oblation with your blood as with a drinke-offering.

The way to eternal salvation is, to follow Christ his steps by afflictions
and persecutions, until we come to Christ himself, who is our mark whereat
we shoot, and receive the reward whereunto God calls us to him. Therefore
be not disquieted through impatiency, seeing that God is at hand to give you
remedy against all your miseries, neither be you careful for any thing, but
with sure confidence give God thanks, and crave of him whatsoever you have
need of, that with a quiet conscience you may wholly and withal your heart
submit your self to him, that you may with David begin with tears and end
with thanks.

The afflictions of the Church may be said to be Christ's afflictions, by reason
of that fellowship and knitting together, that the body and the head have one
with the other, not that there is any more need to have the Church redeemed,
but that Christ shows his power in the daily weakness of his members, and
that for the comfort of the whole, and holding of his Childrens hearts
together, whose assured comfort is, to enter by afflictions into the Kingdom of
Glory.

Know this that our God being just will punish the unjust, and will do away the
miseries of his own people. Remember always to set the invisible power of
Gods Spirit, which God has given you, against those storms which may or will
come upon you. I pray remember that the gift of Gods Spirit, is as it were, a
certain live flame kindled in our hearts, which the flesh and the Devil seek
to put out: And therefore you and I (on the contrary side) must labor as much
as we can, to foster and keep it burning, and not to be pierced thorough, as
people whom the Lord will destroy.

Doubt we not, but that our Salvation does hang upon Christ, who was exhibited
in our days, and suffered far more grievous things then we can: Oh that we
would consider the profits that come unto us by our heavenly Fathers
chastisements.

As many as will become the godly followers of Christ, must (as it were) go
out of the world, bearing their several Crosses: be not fainthearted knowing
this, that your faith must be tried through manifold afflictions whether it be
pure as it ought to be; we may not despise the Cross of Christ, which our
heavenly Father uses as an Instrument to polish and fine us: where we are to
consider, that the effect of afflictions is to polish and fit us for the
perfecting us in Christ, each several moment of man's life depending
undoubtedly upon God. The knowledge of whose will does not only nothing at all
profit, unless the life be answerable unto it, but rather makes the sinner
far more grievous.

Forget not to be patient, still expecting a most happy end of all your
troubles, because God is a most bountiful Father, never forsaking his
servants. Consider I beseech you by what way we come to eternal glory: is it
not by all kind of afflictions? wherein notwithstanding faith makes us so
secure, that we are not only not overcome with sorrow, but also through the
beholding of GOD himself with the eyes of Faith are unspeakably joyful,
because all such things as they, are but for a time; so are they not applied
unto us to destroy us, but as it were, by fire, purge us, and to make us
perfect, that at the length we may obtain salvation. Art thou afflicted,
Christ goes before in example and Virtue, as one that suffered most grievous
torments even unto Death, although but in one part only of him, to wit, in the
flesh or man's Nature, but yet became conqueror by the Virtue of his Divinity.

Know this, that GOD keeps measure in his greatest severity, be not offended
therefore, neither stumble at the vain shadow of the felicity of the wicked,
as though God were not the governor of the world, nor think that the Wicked
are in good case, and the godly in Evil; for we may perceive an by Argument of
comparison of them together in their last end: That God who spares not his
own (but nurtureth them under the Cross) will at length in his time, handle
the rebellious and wicked far otherwise, whom he has appointed to utter
destruction.

Although that life be said to be sweet, yet is it chayned to a thousand
miseries, and the only salve to cure affliction is to make use of the ancient
History, Luke 13.3. Except you amend your lives, you shall all likewse perish:
Thy sins deserving scourges, the just hand of the Almighty strikes thee,
pray that thou may benefit thereby. Christ healing of the sick and
diseased: shows that Christ we recover, through Faith, whatsoever we had lost
by our frailty. Let us ever esteem our diseases as whips, wherewith GOD
scourges us for our sins, for the bettering of our wills, words, and ways.
Affliction does good unto the Godly, discerning at the length, true
godliness, from feigned fashood, and filthy flattery. In thy greatest
weakness, rejoice in remembering Christ power over sin, Death, and Hell.

We have no cause to promise our selves rest, peace and quietness in the
world, seeing they themselves which seemed to fawn upon Christ, do shortly
after crucify him: Be of good cheer being weak and sick, for Christ is come
to deliver us from the bonds of Satan, who though once he had bound a woman
as in Chains for 10. years space, so that she could not so much as hold up
her head: Yet come Christ at the last, saying: Woman, thou art loosed from thy
infirmities. Luke 13.12.
Luke 13.12. Mark and consider how that Christ makes death acceptable unto
us, by ouercomming in our name all the terrors of death which had joined with
them the curse of God, and the fearful Judgments of an angry Father: For
Christ our Redeemer took the burden of our sins upon himself, and was
willingly betrayed and taken; that by his obedience he might deliver us, which
were guilty for the betraying of Gods glory. Remember and forget not what you
are, a piece of work made of the slime of the Earth, sauouring of nothing but
corruption, ignorance, dullness and death. Forget we not how Christ left the
proud Pharisees, and communicated the treasures of everlasting life with a
poor sinful woman and stranger, refelling the gross errors of the
Samarians, and defending the true worship of God, delivered to the Jews; yet
so that he calls both of them back to himself, as one whom only all the
Fathers, and also whom all the Ceremonies of the Law had respect unto. We must
all have an eye to this high and sovereign power of God, which governs all
things, insomuch that he has power of life and death, so that we live and dye
at the pleasure of God and not of men. Therefore this one thing remains, that
we go forward constantly in our vocation to Gods praise, and our own peace.
God seems now and then to linger in helping us, which he does for his own
glory and for our salvation, John 11
as he did once in raising up Lazarus, Ioh. 11.

He believes in God, that believes in Christ, and there is no other way to
confirm our minds in our greatest distresses, but that Christ is not gone
away from us, to the end to forsake us, but rather that he might at length
take us up with him into Heaven.

It is a miserable thing to be subject unto sin, which of it own nature,
makes us guilty of Death. But we must cry to the Lord who will by Death it
self, at length make us conquerours: As we are already in Jesus Christ,
wearied we may be with continual conflicts, yet recover our selves again,
resting in our Redeemer, who is the true perfection of our souls: You are in
Christ, doubt nothing of the happy success of your combat, because the Spirit
of grace and Fruits of Righteousness, and Seeds of Life remain in you, for
you having the self-same Spirit which Christ has, all infirmities laid aside
and Death overcome, you shall be clothed with Heavenly Glory. You have
already received the Grace of the Gospel, wherein God shows himself not [as
before the publishing of the Law] terrible and fearful: But a most benign
and loving Father in Christ, so that with great boldness, we call him Father;
the Holy Ghost sealing his Adoption in our hearts by Faith.

Remember we all the great Glory which we look for, a thousand times
sur-mounting the misery of our afflictions. You Know well that this whole World
looks for a restoring groaning as it were for it, and that not in vain: Let
it not grieve us therefore, to sigh for our Saviors coming, being now
certainly persuaded of our Redemption at hand, especially we having the first
Fruits of the Spirit.

Call to mind how it was imputed unto Abraham for Righteousness, in this, that
he was found Faithful in Temptation. It is Joseph's commendation, that in time
of trouble, he kept the Commandment, and was made Lord of Egypt. Forget not
that Elias, for his zealous Feruency in the Law, was taken up into Heaven: And
the Children, by Faith, delivered out of the flame. Trust still in God and you
cannot want strength: as for the glory of man, it is but dung and Worms; to
day Dust, to morrow nothing.

Show your self willing to change your life manfully, and such a one as your
Education and your years now requires. The Lord God Almighty so moderate our
troubles and torments, that we may dye holily, put our whole trust and affiance
in him. O remember how Christ was tempted all manner of ways, and did
overcome, that we through his Virtue might likewise be Conquerours.

Esteem not the joy and Felicity, commodities, and pleasures of this life, to
be any ways better then vexing perplexities; the way to Heaven is straight
and narrow; we must pass through the rough way, suffering to be thrust and
thronged before we can enter into Life: And although Christ seem sometimes to
neglect his in most extreme dangers; yet in time convenient he asswageth all
tempests, and brings them to the haven they hope for. Who knows not our
sins to be the causes of our afflictions, and Christ only to forgive them:
then when we believe, the children of God are to sail thorough many tempests,
but Christ will never forsake them, so that they still aim at the mark which
God commands them: Strive we all by Faith to tread under our feet all our
troubles and afflictions, by the virtue of Christ's power.

Let all know this, that it is Christ which heals the sick, and from him must
we all seek remedy, for our spiritual diseases: to whom we are all bound not
only to turn and run our selves, but to bring others to him also, preparing
our minds more and more, against the offenses of the Cross, that with patience
may endure, for to gain Christ, to whom be all glory. Amen.

Friday Meditations.
GOD having given us his only begotten Son, how shall he not with him, give us
all things else. We are taught in Holy Scriptures, that the Church shall have a
continual conflict, with infinite miseries and offenses, and that more is,
with false Prophets, until the day of victory and triumph comes: Let not
your soul be discouraged with any sorrow, for Christ has made full
satisfaction for us all: First, in suffering, and then in ouercomming, not
only the torments of the body, but also the most horrible tortures of the
mind. Be not dismayed for any sorrows that assail you, but remember that
Heaven it self was darkened, for very horror, when Jesus cried in the
bitterness of his sufferings; and in the mean time was mocked in the midst
of his miseries.

Neglect not the Doctrine of the Gospel, by the which Satan is driven out of
the World; neither do you forget that Christ, by his healing of diverse
Diseases, shows that he has brought true life into the world, for all
believers.

The Faithful servants of GOD in their few labors on Earth, must still be
crying unto Christ, so to moderate their miseries, as after all our Earthly
tossing tempests, bring us to the happy Haven of Heaven, that we so long sigh
for.

The true Disciples of Christ must bear stoutly, what burden soever the Lord
lays upon them, still seeking to subdue the affections of the flesh. The
glory of Christ was abased upon the Cross, yet avouched by Visible signs,
that he was the God which upon that Good Friday for us dyed unjustly, and
being upon the Cross cried out, It is finished, it is finished, meaning the
work of our Redemption. Labor therefore with Faith to become proficient
Scholars in the School of Christ: we must be seasoned by Gods Word, that we
may be acceptable sacrifices to God; and also being knit together, may comfort
one another, with the sovereign and most wholesome medicines of Divine
Scripture.

Christ healing the Disease of Symons wives mother with his Word only,
proves that he is God Almighty, sent from Heaven for our salvation. Do we
not read Luke 5. how Christ healing a Leaper by his only touch, Luke 5.
and sending him to the priests, by faith he was cured, yea was pure and
clean. Verse 18.

The true followers of Christ, must at once both build and fight: And
therefore be ready and prepared to suffer all kind of miseries: Christ's
Disciples must be wise, both for themselves, and for others; otherwise they
become the foolishest of al. Despair we not of any, which are gone out of the
way, but according to the example of Christ, we must take great pains about
them.

Well knowing this, that GOD will never utterly be lacking unto the godly,
although he be not so presently with them as they would, and then in these
difficulties which cannot be overcome, by man's reason, power, or providence:
when dangers do most daunt us, then GOD beats down the blows, so that we
rest humble hearted, and put no confidence in our own Righteousness. Be not
discouraged with any sickness or sorrows, for as sure and certain as
persecution is, so sure is the glory which remains for the conquerors. The
more stops and lets Satan lays in your way, so much more courageous ought
you to be, and stoutly to go forward in the Way of Righteousness: This
shall be then the end of your troubles and afflictions; they shall be as
witnesses both before GOD and man, as well of the treacherous and cruel
dealings of your enemies, as also of your Constancy after diverse tempests, the
Lord will at length deliver his Church, day and night: Let us be sober and
watch for the Lords coming, that we be not taken unawares; but still remember
that as many as are pertakers of the afflictions of Christ, shall also be
pertakers of his Kingdom, whereinto Lord admit me in thy mercies:

If we will continue still wise unto salvation, we may none of us forget, how
good Gold is purged in the fire, and shines clearly in the water.

Do not think that any temptation has taken you, but such as appertain to
man, and GOD is faithful which will not suffer you to be tempted above that
you be able, but will even give issues with the tentation, that you may be
able to bear it. 1. Cor. 10.13. Forget not David, Ps. 39 I sought the Lord and
he heard me, yea and delivered me out of all my fears: put your trust still in
the Lord and mercy shall embrace you on every side. Psalm. 31.11.

Let this true comfort raise you and me up as we are the members of Christ,
that in our deepest misery and afflictions, the Lord is able first to free us
from it, or else to deliver out of it. There is neither panges, nor any one fit
in your sickness, but it is from God the manner of it, the measure of it, the
time of it, the matter of it, is of God which gives us good assurance and
affiance, that God will be merciful and gracious unto us, seeing he strikes
us that is our Father, and in the stroke be it never so sharp, he never
forgets his former compassion, but makes each thing fall out to our future
salvation, puts our tears in his bottle, and most lovingly lays his hand
under our head that aketh.

Seek we therefore to God for health, who as he smites me, so he will
heal me; and as he wounds me, so likewise he restores me.

God therefore brings down to the grave, that he may raise us up again, and
puts us in mind of death by Gods Sergeant aresting us, to bring us before him.
God of his goodness behold your tears, hearken unto your prayers, and
mercifully remove your heavy affliction from you. It pleases the wisdom of
God (now and then to confound your pride by weakness, and to free us from
former sins, by furnishing us with most delectable services of assured
sanctification. Afflictions change their nature, when they befall the man
endued with Gods Spirit, all things working together for the best for the love
of all such as fear the God, and are called according to his purpose: Let none
of us so forget the safety of our souls, as not evermore still to remember
Christ Jesus, how he went as willingly to the Desert to be humbled, as unto
Jordan to be exalted.

Think not your self to be forsaken of God, when you are tempted of Satan,
for herein you are resembled to the Son of God, who being baptized, was
presently tempted by Satan's subtilties.

Afflictions soften our hearts when we apprehend Gods mercies in them, and can
receive them, as the wounds of a friend with the melting of our hearts, sent in
love unto us to better our behauiours. Know I beseech thee thou languishing
person, that the deeper the sense of misery is, the sweeter is the sense of
mercy.

It Is the saying of St. Bernard, Deus non infundit oleum misericordiae nisi in
vas contritum, God powers not the oil of his mercies save into a broken
vessel: For indeed whole vessels are full enough, and would run over, if
powered into them, and so be spilt on the ground. The Lord scourges us to make
us more pliable to his holy will: an vnhumbled sinner is unfit for Gods
Instruction, and like an unbroken Colte for the Saddle. The deeper your descent
in humiliation, the higher your ascent in consolation. Therefore does now even
rottenness enter into your bones, that having a while trembled, you may
henceforth rest in the day of trouble; remembering how after greatest tempests
come the stillest calmes, sanctified winds making the trees of Gods Garden to
take the deeper rooting. It is the manner of our heavenly Father, to gain
glory to himself by working by contraries, when he brings joy out of fears,
light out of darkness, and Heaven out of Hell.

God wrestled with Jacob and lamed him, ere he blessed him; Joseph's legs were
laden with irons and bolts in Pharaohs Dungeon, ere he could wear a golden
Chain, and have dominion in Egypt: The wounds that our God gives, are not
mortal, but medicinable; our God is such a Chyrurgeon that he first wounds,
but then heales: It is Gods accustomed manner to bring first down to Hell, and
then up again into the bosom of Abraham. Fear not to fall into the Lords
Dungeon, which will rebound you safely into Heaven, his Palace of privilege:
forget not how repenting Jonas was thrown into the Sea, and humbled. Glut not
your selves with any pleasures of this life, neither spend your precious time
in fleeting vanities, keep rather your best dainties in the vinegar of godly
sorrow; allay your strong wine with water, eat your meat as the Jews did
their Passover, with sower herbs. Imitate godly King David, who caused his
bed every night to swim, oftentimes watering his Couch with his tears, Psalm.
6.6. Forget not good Bradford that usually at his dinner, shed tears on his
trencher: art thou sick and sinful? stand not reasoning with thine own
distrustful heart, but hear what God says by Esaias, 1.18. If you will wash
and cleanse your selves by repentance, though your sins were as red as Crimson,
yet then shall they be as white as Snow. Oh but my sins pass the sins of all
others in greatness, so much the more haste to repent: the more dangerous thy
disease is, the more physic must thou use; if thy sins be so great as thou
complainest, why meanest thou to make it greater by thy not repenting?
Repentance makes sin less, Impenitency is the condemning sin.

Remember that Christ is our Physician, and Repentance is his Physic, Math. 9.
In death Satan's temptations, and our Consciences accusations will be
strongest, therefore our preparation against them should be more then ordinary.

We may not once despair of our heavenly Fathers providence, but call to mind
how lovingly the father entertained his son, after he had misbehaued
himself in rude and riotous courses.

As our heavenly Father is often showing us many favors, so now and then he
pincheth us with too too heavy crosses, because we should not be ouer-ioyed
with any of Gods favors, but prepare for some following after-claps, being as
content to endure the one, as cheerfully to receive the other, with him shall
we reign: we shall hereafter for ever live with him in glory; with whom now
we are in misery: if we now take up our cross, following him with sanctified
contentation, we rest then assuredly happy when we bear each affliction with
joy in the Spirit, submitting our selves to the yoke of our God, then
contented with our states, then we wear our chains, and weep shedding many
tears.

Our sufferings are no arguments of Righteousness, but our Righteousness an
ornament unto our sufferings: Are we in troubles? lie we in troubles? fly we
unto Christ our Lord and Master for aid, who in mercy will hear us, and
deliver us by the strength of his mighty power; be our state never so
desperate, he can help it; and we are never past help, so long as we desire
to be helped: The greatness of our peril can be no stop to our deliverance,
because the power of our deliverance is infinite. Tribulations are the way to
the kingdom of Heaven, through stormy tempests are we brought to the Kingdom
of Heaven, being the Haven that all hunger for.

Be of good courage, for all the devils in hell cannot damn up the way between
us and the Kingdom of Heaven. Through the strait way have all Gods Children
passed before, fear we not therefore to follow after them: Christ himself is
gone before by a far harder passage then his meaning is to lead any of us
by. Think it no strange thing for the perfect to suffer, neither be you
discomforted or dismayed at it, knowing that afflictions happen by heaps to
all Gods Children in this world. Learn both you and I to suffer patiently with
Christ, then shall we be sure to be crown gloriously with him. When you are
tempted most with fierce adversaries, mighty enemies; the Devil with his lost
and forsaken train. The world is full of bayts and allurements unto Evil, the
flesh ever ready and greedy to take them. What though you be heavy laden for a
while, yet comfort your self, knowing that your anguishes, griefs and
molestations shall have an end, your tears shall be wiped away, and dried up;
but the joys that shall be given you are everlasting. Those seede-teares which
you sow now, are nothing to that Harvest of joy which hereafter shall be
reaped. Consider I beseech you well, that nothing comes unto us by hap or
chance, but all is disposed by the will and providence of Almighty God. It is
the mere love and absolute righteousness of God that we are corrected: it is
not for our harm but to our good, either for the trial of our faith, or for
the reformation of our life. So that either man, or woman fearing God, walking
uprightly in his sight, (having the testimony of a good conscience) cannot want
matter of consolation, having still (in the Lord) whereof to be comforted: make
we not our hearts heavy and our lives most uncomfortable, shake we off rather
our causeless tears, and we shall find matter enough for glorious and
unspeakable joys.

Am I regenerate? God is my father, Christ rests my elder brother; Heaven my
house and habitation, and the Glory thereof mine inheritance: none can be
poor, that have Heaven for their portion, neither any dejected much, that have
the comfortes thereof belonging to them. Whilst God gives us assurance of a
better Life, what matter is it if he shall deprive us of this? If Angels and
Saints be with us, what care we though sinners be against us? Do people on
earth seek to make you ignominous, we are not in their power, but in Gods, who
will make us glorious.

Your comfort may be departed, and yet not utterly lost; we may fear we are
cut of, and yet not perish, for therein the power of God is seen in our
weakness and imperfection: Lord pity our soars and sickness, rather then
proceed in severity against us. The assurance of the sufferings of Christ in
his death for us, should take away the horror of death from us: For he is that
Lamb of GOD which takes away the sins of the world: Which now is our
advocate with his father: to whom be all glory. Amen.

Saturday Meditations.
IT being evident that the greatest part of good people, are most of all and
oftnest afflicted grievously, yea many times slain by wicked and seditious
Tyrants: this dealing of God thus with his Children, assures us that he
reserueth us some Port of safety for his children, where, after their troubles
here, they may arrive at some Haven, of perpetual rest, after their Death.

No happier then such Christians, as will suffer no sins to wrestle in their
souls, nor Viper like vices to dwell or continue in their hearts. Neither do
I suppose the Lord to love any better, then those whom he most scourges and
corrects, making the end of our sorrow to be as the beginning of another:
like the drops of Rain distilling from the top of the house, as soon as one
is gone, another follows; or a ship at the Sea, never safe till we come into
the Haven and harbor of Heaven, by the death and bloodshedding of Jesus
Christ are we sanctified and cleansed from our sins.

Our heavenly Father is both pacified and pleased with us through the death of
Christ, who forgiving and pardoning our sins, imputes unto us his own
righteousness: so that through believing in the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be
saved, and have life everlasting, and shall never come into condemnation.

Through the name of our Redeemer, are the inestimable benefits of Christ
wrought in us, and brought unto us; for by faith only in Christ, without any
works of our own, (either concurring or furthering) we are freely justified.

No punishment discharged, but by that perfect man Christ Jesus, who has
vanquished death, and swallowed up the paires of Hell, yea, satisfied the
severity of Gods everlasting Judgment. Look we all upon the Sunset of our
several ages, and we may soon behold how the rotten house wherein our soul
dwells, rests even ready to fall upon our head. We dwell as in a ship that
most dangerously leaketh, very like to drown us ere we get to the shore,
which still causes us to long for the house and haven of our everlasting
security. Although death be a sting to the wicked, piercing them to the heart;
yet to the Elect deaths sting is pulled out, and they are freed from terror by
the death of our Savior. The death of a faithful friend yields rather cause
of comfort then of sorrow, of mirth then of mourning, of rejoicing rather then
of weeping and lamenting: death is to the godly, like sleep, whereby we are
refreshed. Unfit is it therefore to celebrate the funerals of the faithful
with weeping and wayling, when we do well know our friends have lived
religiously and dyed virtuously. Let your passed misery yield your selves some
soulerellish to future joy.

What is our Inheritance on Earth, but months of vanity, and paynefulnes, as
our allotted parts and portions here. Who is he that knows not, Job. 17.13
That the grave shall be his house, and how he shall make his bed in the dark.
Our hearts must pity those, whom the hand of GOD touches. Do not think but
that God is able to defend and carry you free from danger, yea to keep you in
the time of the greatest suffering. It is none but God that keeps the Keys
of the prison, that open and shuts when he pleases. It is the LORD that
makes whole, and makes sick; the issues of Life and Death do belong to him.
We rise daily against sin, as did Joshua against the Cananites; not because
we are able to overcome sin of our selves, but in assurance that our heavenly
Father will not fail us, but give us ability to vanquish it in our mortal
bodies.

Forget not Jesus Christ to be your shield and buckler of defense, whose
promise is to free us all from our streights and extreamities: Lay we hold by
Faith on Gods promises, and as a child sucketh milk from his mothers breast:
So when we are ready to faint, we must suck the milk of consolation out of
the promises of God in his Word that rest full of comfort. Art thou even at
Deaths door, there rests milk of consolation enough, if thou will take
pains, with a sacred soul, to suck it. The best of Gods children are most of
all Exercised with manifold afflictions, heavy hearts, and wounded Spirits, yet
rests their sickness but as a medicine in the hands of our heavenly Physician,
Christ Jesus, to heal, comfort, and still do us good.

No sanctified Christian so sound, but that he may be exercised with many
afflictions, diseases, and grieueances, being heavy on our hearts, and
wounding our Spirits. A Rod in our heavenly Fathers hand, does after enable us
to keep his Covenant, the other being as a medicine in the hand of the
Physician to heal, and still to do good: Satan himself cannot hurt Gods
Children, but in spite of his heart does them good; humbling them, and making
them better by their crosses, that after their Champion-like and valerous
striving and fighting, their hearts may hope to enjoy the everlasting
Knighthood of Immortality in the Heavens.

We are each one in this life, to consider how our time on earth is a time of
striving, running and suffering crosses, as Prae-ambles to the Crown of glory,
and most comfortable Immortality, that our life has been long, and so your
troubles therefore many.

To assure your very soul that the time of this life rests no other thing then
the time of striving and wrestling for winning the prize, and obtaining the
victory over all our insulting and most malicious foes.

Jacob had many troubles with Laban, yea, troubles with the Sheronites, and
troubles with his own Sons, yet the latter end was peace, he died in honor,
full of riches and full of days.

When professing the Gospel, we feel no afflictions, then may we fear that
we are out of the way, seeing the afflictions of Gods children are notes of his
favor: God whipping us often for diverse causes best known to himself,
sometimes to increase their Job, David, Paul. Secondly, to keep virtue in the
soul, as in Paul; who suffered many troubles, thereby to correct and beat
down our sins: and thirdly to Antiochus, Herod and Pharaoh. Fifthly, to
Lazarus, the blind man, and others. You have heard how Agabus prophesied Paul's
bonds which worthy Champion of Christ, was prepared not only for bonds, but
death. The kingdom of God is gotten by violence. Mat. 11.12. and gone into
through fire and water. Esd. 7.7.

Though Abraham were the Father of the faithful, yet was he often afflicted:
Though Jacob were a beloved one, yet was he feign to fly for fear of the
hatred of his brother Esau. Oftentimes (in danger) was David of his life,
pursued and persecuted by furious Saul, before he was advanced unto his
Kingdom: Forget we not the many miseries and bitter afflictions, which tumbled
in heaps upon Job, and others, yea on all Gods Faithful servants.

Learn we every one in patience, to value the turbulent motions of our
repining minds: arm we our hearts with a confident steadfast resolution, never
to sleep nor slumber, till we rid out of perils our selves, and our people.

Affliction is the best hope that Gods children may expect in this World, to
try whether the anchor of our hope takes sure hold on Gods promises, in the
days and hours of our miseries and tribulation.

Hear Lord from Heaven, the sighing souls of thy afflicted servants, Lord
cause them to drink a deep draught of the fountain of thy mercies, to the
comforting of their weak bodies and hearts, in their miseries. The Lord God
refresh us with the water of life, and guide us through all dangers, into the
most heavenly Canaan, before the entering whereof, we must drink of the cup of
most bitter afflictions. There is no coming to Gods Kingdom, but by many
miseries: The Lord free us from all most unsupportable and grievous calamities,
the wine of true devotion, the Myrrh of Mortification, and the Oil of hearty
contrition, let these rest still sanctified steps to our sober and distressed
souls. Let no dread of danger throw down the Fort of our Hope, neither any
Tempests of persecution shake the Foundation of our Faith.

Let no waves of affliction quench the flames of our love toward Christ our
Savior: But let the Oil of his All-sufficient and saving Grace, so strengthen
the sinews of our Faith, as when it waxes feeble, our hearts may never
quail, nor our courage quake when we are molested with any affliction, either
of body or of mind.

But still faithfully to be persuaded, that no calamity can betide us without
Gods will, nor any danger come near our dwelling, without Gods pleasure and
permission. This is full of comfort and consolation, that in my greatest misery
I may commend my soul into the custody and safe harbor of eternal
tranquillity, never any more obnoxious to vanity.

So long as you have a tongue to speak, a voice to call upon God, with an
heart to lift up unto him, eftsoons pouring out many sanctified meditations in
his sight. Be of good comfort, and assure your soul you cannot be finally
forsaken, although you see no comfort for the present now and then. If we can
call upon God our heavenly Father in Christ Jesus, in our several Agonies, and
most dangerous distresses, though no man or woman should pity us; yet our
heavenly Father would not leave us or forsake us in our dangers and dreadful
troubles.

It is Almighty God which holds our souls in life, and that suffers not
our feet to slip: It is his pleasure now and then to prove us, as the Gold
and Silver is tried in the fire. It is the saying of the Psalmist, that the
Lord will try us, bring us into the snare, and lay trouble upon our loins,
suffer our Enemies to ride over our heads, before he will bring us into any
place of pleasure.

God will suffer us to feel afflictions, and enemies to make long furrows
upon our backs, but still for our Salvation: Our afflictions oftentimes
causing unto us a far more excellent and eternal weight of Glory and
happiness, which God grant us all.

For a while you may be forsaken, but with great compassion will God our
merciful Father gather you unto himself.

Cry to the Lord and he will deliver you and save you out of Troubles, as he
did Joseph, Job, and his children in Egypt.

Look on David and Daniel, the servant of the true GOD, consider and see what
shame they endured and reproaches under the Cross.

Yet as a Father, God returned to them, when the time of refreshment came from
Gods Divine presence. Howsoever Gods children groan for grief for a time, the
Lord leaves not them destitue of help, but delivers them out of all their
troubles. God teaches us to depend upon him our most gracious and heavenly
Father, when peoples compassion fails toward us: For Psalm 56.9.10. verses.
The Lord our God puts our Tears in his Bottles, and writes them in his
Book. Psalm 56.9


GOD the Horn of our Salvation, sees and yet suffers, and he bears with us
repenting; and pardons us returning, we deferring our Repentance, he expects
us: He gives us when we ask, opens to us when we knock, and eft-soones is
then found, when we do seek. It is the Nightingall delights herself with
her quauering and trebling notes: So should, all we, faithful ones, declare
abroad Gods mercy. The work of our Salvation, which we had no power to begin;
our Savior wrought it for us, yea finished the same on our behalf. So as now
you may look boldly to the Throne of Grace; and upon the truth of our
Repentance and Faith, know only Peace and Joy: Christi passio adiutore non
leguit: Says Saint Ambrose, Christ's passion needs no help at all.

Christ was mocked and spitted on to wash us from wickedness: His garments
pulled off, that our sins might be covered; he whipped to deliver our souls
from perpetual scourges: Christ thirsted that our Souls might be satiate and
satisfied: Christ bare his fathers wrath, that we might bear none; yielded
unto death that we might never taste it.

In sense was Christ our Savior forsaken for a time, when he cried out, my God
my God, why have thou forsaken me; this was that we might be received for ever
into glory. Let my soul dye if Christ cannot save it. Oh thou languishing
soul of mine, there is not one of thy sins, but it is prayed for, in the
bitterness of my Redeemers death Christ Jesus: Not any one of thy debts in the
scroule of God, but it is crossed; not any one farthing of that infinite ransom
left unpaid for us. Does your soul cry in bitterness I have sinned: Oh thou
preserver of men! what shall I do unto thee? what should thou do? Turn and
believe and thou have done enough.

Christ side was opened (even unto the heart) to receive us in thither, if we
will enter in at the open door: Christ's feet were nailed, to make us know,
that he departs not from us, till we depart from him. O cast thy burden upon
the Lord, and he shall nourish thee, and not suffer thee to fall for ever. The
deadness of our hearts and dullness of our Spirits; was it not enough for
Christ to call us gently, to allure us kindly, to teach us daily, to heal us
lovingly, and to feed us sweetly: But he must be feign, by a most dreadful
death, to pull and hale us, to draw and drag us to the true feeling of his
dear love toward us, to cause us by strong hand, and by force to become
obedient to our heavenly Father and Master. This are we all to know, and still
to keep warm in our hearts and remembrance, that there is no want of our
Salvation in Jesus Christ, but in our selves, in that we believe not, and that
we repent not.

There is no want of finishing thy Salvation, so that thou continue still to
go forward in Grace, and still imply Goodness: But whilst people delight in
sin, God therefore strikes and will not hear; which is contrary unto Gods
honor: For ^ee desires not the death of a sinner; but rather that he should be
converted, and live amidst the Assembly of Saints.

Do not think such people to be sure and safe, as are never touched with
sorrows and sickness, for such as the Lord best loves, he chasteneth: when
we rejoice in sin, he scourges us till we shrike, sigh, and cry: as when
Epaphroditus was sick and very near unto death, and yet was Paul's
fellow-souldier in Christ. Phil. 2.27.

It is the Lord which sets up on high them that be low, that the sorrowful
might be exalted to salvation, remember that you have heretofore seen the
blossoms of Trees promise abundance of Fruit, which notwithstanding have
never came to any growth, by reason of the storms. So in health and
prosperity, many have followed Christ; which in adversity have been blown
quite out of sight. Remember we now, that the Captains courage is not known
till the war begin; no more is a Christians constancy till the persecutions
rage. A Bird in the Cage is surer from the Hawke and Fowler, then abroad,
although they think not so; and think your sick bed to be the best place to
serve God on. Our heavenly father would have us to serve him on our beds, still
chastning our bodies, whilst we cheerish our souls; Pining the one, and
pampering the other, pulling you as through a prison to a place of happiness
and pleasure: wherefore let no darkness daunt you, but let your own life be as
a Lamp to lighten your soul, and delight others.

The best children march cheerfully toward Heaven, as St. Paul did toward
Jerusalem, not well-knowing what should befall him, before he returned back
from that famous City, so God deals with us in this world; to call us out we
know not whither, nor to what end or purpose, or what may befall us in our way
We may not be sloathful followers of Christ our Lord and Master; but most
courageous soldiers, fighting to obtain the Crown of Glory, and the
inheritance of a celestial and immortal life; Fear not the judgment of death,
but remember them that have been before, and those that are to come after:
This is the ordinance of all flesh; why should we then be against the Most
High, whether it be ten or a hundred, or a thousand years, there is no
defense of life against the grave. Matthew. 19. The woman's bloody issue was not
cured, till she came to Christ; Mark, I beseech you, where and of whom health
does come: no absolute Physician of Souls, but Jesus Christ only.

The Prophet Joel may much comfort our hearts: When he says, My people shall
never be ashamed. Again, Abide still, O my people, and rest; for your
quietness shall come. Be not you weary for when the day of trouble and
heaviness comes; others shall weep and be sorrowful, but thou shall be
merry, and have abundance. GODS hand shall cover thee, and all shall prosper
which thou take in hand. Lord prepare and open my poor heart, and strengthen
my weak faith, to prepare my soul for thy holy Sabbath, which is the great
day of thy rest, and the day likewise that thou have commanded us to hear and
receive thy Holy and Heavenly word: which at the last must be a cordial to
our dying hearts: And that I may taste and draw of that water of Life, while I
live, that I may never thirst agaynes Lord also prepare me to drink my last
draught of Christ's cup with comfort, even for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, the
Son of thy love, and my only Savior. Amen.

Sunday Meditations.
WHen we are most tempted with grieuances, whether outward or inward, seek
succor from above, never despise Physic, nor yet the Physician, for they are
needful and necessary in fit time and season; the Lord has ordained
medicines for healing, and gives Knowledge to the Physician, to the lifting
upon his head amongst great men, and to admiration of his healing medicines.

Pray we, and God will prosper physic that he gives for ease, and the
prolonging of our lives, mourn we for our friends as if we suffered great
harm our selves.

Cover we their bodies, and lament we them as they are worthy; pouring out our
tears over them, as if we had suffered much harm our selves in our bodies,
souls, senses and substances.

When the dead is once at rest, let his remembrance rest, and comfort we
ourselves again for him, when his spirit is departed from him: desire your
most heavenly Father to make you ready for himself, and fit to atchiue his
Kingdom for the only sufferings of his Son. There is not one of Gods
Children, but must prepare their souls unto diverse temptations.

Resolve we our selves ever in this life to live and remain, as in a
continual rough battle and fight, where no truce is to be looked for, but
perpetual combats and raging assaults.

From our birth to our death, it is now no new thing to be tempted and troubled
with diseases in body, or discomforts of mind: praise we God for our lot, be
your molestations short or lingering, welcome be Gods wande; be it for wealth,
cross or comfort: he first has suffered more for you, then he will inflict
upon you; in your troubles still call on him, and under his wings shall you be
safely covered.

The Almighty so strengthen your faith, as you may stand fast to the end, still
believing the Lord our God in all his promises. Learn we all to show forth the
fruits of our faith, obedience, love, charity, and hearts purified from sin,
and still more and more prepare we to Christ Jesus our heavenly Bridegroom, at
his coming with more alacrity and joy triumphant, then either mouth, or man
can conceive or utter.

Christ by the sacrifice of his death will take away all our sins, where
there is neither sighing nor sorrow, but triumphant joys in the highest
Heavens.

Though the Lord send afflictions, yet will he not forsake us for ever, what
though he afflict to day, yet will he have compassion upon thee to morrow,
according to the multitude of his mercies.

God does seldom punish willingly the Children of Men, for his compassions are
many, and his fatherly loving kindnesses are so many and so multiplied, that
we cannot number them: Maintain Lord, the cause of my soul, for thou have
redeemed my life from the evil imaginations of the wicked, and vengeance of
the vile. If you were dead and buried, yet can God revive you, and by his great
mercy free you from all iniquity, and still keep you in the number of the
faithful.

The Almighty so exercise your contrite heart, as both it sole senses may be
laudably employed in the Lords service.

Sickness to the servants of God does bring infinite joy, and much goodness;
it is a purgation and cleansing of our sins, the mother of fortitude and
spiritual strength against our frailty, and sure defense against all worldly
troubles. A purchasing of grace and pardon, a medicine of life, and a
comfortable guide to reduce us from hell, and bring us all to the Celestial
Paradise. I beseech you to remember what troubles and calamities are, a
purchasing of grace and pardon, a merry time of life, and a continual
remembrance of Christ's own blessed life, death and passion. We are all duly
to consider, how that our humane bodies are as dark and filthy prisons of our
souls, living as in exile, banishment, and misery.

The Almighty deliver you from hell, sin and eternal death for ever. The
Lord comfort you, and are you from sin, and strengthen your weak heart against
Satan, who still stands against you to seduce you; but remember you Gods
Angels, that are ready pressed for to aid you, his grace for to guide you, and
his favor for to feed you. Arm Lord thy Servants heart with perpetual peace
and patience, give thy weak Creature grace most joyfully to bear the burden
of the Cross: As Heaven is incomparably greater then the Earth, so the Mercy
of our heavenly Father rests incomparably greater then the seas of our sins.

Lord free you from bitter sorrows all sins and grieuances whatsoever they
be. The Almighty of his mercy renew your Repentance, and unburden you of the
weight of all your great bonds, most grievous sins, lay we fast hold on Christ
his mercy, death and passion. Ioh. 3.16. The life of each one of us being but a
vital Laborinth, and a confused Chaos, affoording us naught but fraud, folly,
and fleshly sensuality and troubles to try us, and sundry adversities to
disquiet us from the King in his throne, to the Captives in the chains. All
must taste of miseries, discontentments and sorrows, before our souls by death
be delivered from their terrestrial burden. Although it be an happy thing to
die in Jesus Christ, yet such rests the foolishness of our corrupt flesh, that
we are loath to remove from bad to better, from Sinners to Saints and
heavenly Associats, we lose nothing in our changing our bad place for a better.

But one thing, we that are Gods Children, must still be most careful of (to
dread furious foes) dangers.

Comfort we our hearts in our deepest distresses, acknowledging God to be more
able to defend us, then all foes to confound us; not any Gods Children but
burdned with calamities, Nebuchadnezar King of Babell was turned out a grazing
seven years.

Gods Children are more afflicted then others, Luke 13.16. The daughter of
Abraham was for 18 years. bound of Satan, likewise the man whom our Savior
cured, had been diseased 38. years. Comfort your heart in your afflictions,
knowing God to be the sender of afflictions by reason of our sins. It Is the
Lord who kills and makes alive, bringing to the grave, and raising up
again. 1. Sam. 2.6.

If Christ had not been the Son of God, Satan would never have so much
assaulted him and his Members, for his sanctifying and saving of innumerable
Saints and Souls.

Labor we all for the Word and Gospel of Truth, whatsoever our temptations
are, let us all and every one, weep for our own sins, and not once
stubbornely defend the perpitrating of the least of any vile and corrupt sins
and offenses.

Almighty God so moderate your greatest crosses and grieuances, as your soul
may ever sing with Saints.

Our most gracious father deferreth his help, not that he will not help us,
but to exercise our Faith, and stir up in us, the calling upon his name, and
still being acquainted with Gods mercies, rejoice Night and day in his
Everlasting favors: would you have peace, none but Christ can give it you, and
he will give to none but to the penient, to none but the Faithful.

Set we our Lord Jesus Christ between GOD and our sins; let it rest our
desire to spend our selves in sighs and tears of true Repentance, and then
raise up our humble Souls to a lively Confidence, in our only Savior, and
All-sufficient Redeemer; by whose Righteousness we are discharged of
transgressions; besides Christ our Redeemer, there is no other Savior. Hosea
13. ver. 4. Dearly beloved brethren, we are all by vicinity and cohabitation,
but Christ's by Faith, and hope our Habitation is, by Christ, in Heaven: He is
the guide of our loves in the true love and fear of Almighty GOD, in whose
love, if our hearts be guided, fear we not for the waiting and last coming
of Christ: we are now (each one of us) to learn to separate and withdraw our
selves from still walking inordinately, seek we all to become ensamples to be
followed for sanctified lives, and not of sloth and idleness: ask your
souls my Christian brethren, with what price, and from what misery, you are
now Redeemed and ransomed: not others, but thou and I also, must warn our
selves from each loath-some and heinous sin, and carefully all our lives
hereafter, weane our souls and senses, both from each former sin and
transgression, and future sense alike.

So separate thy self from sin, that of a sinner thou may become a a Saint,
and a true servant of the living GOD.

Admit a King take to Wife a woman of a low estate and birth, making her Queen
of all his Dominions, will not he both look and command of her, to cast off
her old attire, and to leave her former (both company and behavior) composing
her self to a most Court-like carriage: Now tell me, has not the King both of
Heaven and Earth (Jesus Christ) married our souls unto himself, in Truth and
Righteousness: Many have in their hope, health, and happiness, and in a night
all quite vanished before morning: we poor miserable and despised wretches,
must all consider this, that our goodness reaches not GOD, but his Goodnesses
reach and extend unto us, in that our hearts are raised to have still our
confidence and only trust in our Redemer and All-sufficient Savior Christ
Jesus, without whom we have neither safety, nor sure comfort, nor confidence:
GOD must have, keep, and still retain in his own custody Government and
prerogative, in keeping each thing in its due order and nature, both small and
great.

Our goodness reaches not unto God, but his loving kindness to us, and
Fatherly compassions, do far exceed the drops of water in the Sea, or the
minutes of time.

Be still doing good in your lives, that you may have comfort in your very end,
and point of Death, and a glorious Crown of Eternal glory: peace and comfort
be this day and ever with us, who are the Children and chosen ones of GOD.
Lord be merciful unto us, in our Afflictions, and let it not be thine holy
will to destroy us: But look upon us that still cry unto thee in our manifold
afflictions.

Let your assurance of Heavenly things, make you the more willing to part with
Earthly trash: Why should we fear or doubt in our selves, when Almighty God
sends for us, to take possession of a Kingdom. Pass we chearefully through
the black gates of Death, who although he look grim, on us, at the first, yet
will help us pass cheerfully through the black Gates, unto our glory. God
had not loved you, if he had not made you poor: To some it is advantage to
loose, and to have rather eyes full of tears, then purses full of gold.

A Christian may not think it enough to endure the thought of death with
patience, but when it is obtruded upon him, by necessity, then must he call it
into his mind with joy, still waiting until it come. It can be none but a
Divine power that can uphold the mind of man or woman, against the rage of
many afflictions: we must not account the best things of this life, any other
things, then chains and burdens, to as many as have them, still acknowledging
that the greatest on earth, are but Tennants at will, to day living, by and by
dead: Think we often on Christ Jesus, which suffered for us all, he paid all,
he did it for us in love: Where shall we begin to admire and wonder but at
Christ Jesus, our Divine and Eternal Peacemaker, the Savior of men, the
Anointed of GOD, the Mediator between GOD and Man, in whom there is nothing
that does not exceed, not only the conceit, but the wonder of Angels, who saw
thee in thy Humiliation, with silence adore thee in thy Glory, with perpetual
praises and rejoicing. Sooner would be no Summer, if Winter did not lead it in
and follow it.

We may not either hope or strive to escape all Crosses, some we may, that we
cannot fly from; and what we cannot allay and mittigate in crosses
Universally, let this be thy rule, make thy self none, escape some, bear the
rest, sweeten all. We must consider whence afflictions come, and by whose
providence they are guided and tempered with our Heavenly Fathers love.

All our miseries are stinted, good things challenging more then bare
contentment: Our crosses come commonly for our good: we must all of us resolve
to fight stoutly for our Heaven, that after all sighs and sorrows we may
resolve to perfect in suffering till we overcome, and be Crowned in Glory, and
a few groanings upon earth end our afflictions, be they never so many, tedious
or troublesome, choose rather to mourn for a while, then for ever.

Christ our Savior tasting a bitter portion, teaches us to smart ere we
reign. It is no matter how vile you seem now, be content to be called to the
Cup, (now of trial) pledge we our Redeemer in drinking Vinegar and Gall, for
so shall we drink new Wine with him in the Kingdom of glory, honor, and
eternal happiness.

Lord season your wills and sanctify each one of all our hearts, so as we may
spend our days and strength to glorify our Redeemer.

Acquaint your self with GOD now in your life time, entreat him with tears
to become the Guardian of your souls in your death, and days of your
carefullest calamities: So walk in true holiness as you still may rest in
everlasting felicity.

If you would not have GOD to despise your souls upon your deathbed, then
must you in the days of your health, fit and fyle your soul with divine
grace. Inure your self to be furnished with the Gospel of Grace, so need you
not fear the malice of any mortal man, not raging Creature. Set Christ Jesus
between God and your sins, and God cannot see our debt: Let Sin, Satan,
Hell and Death, with the world and her worst Enemies do what they can. Christ
having risen and become our Surety, his blood rests for satisfaction.

Remember we all how we have God the Father for our Governor, and his Word
for our Guide: who would live that knows his Master died, and in his life
suffered so many bitterstormes and temptations.

Temptations are the common maladies of the best Servants of GOD. You may read
how Satan came to Christ, and tempted him in a high manner saying, if thou be
Christ, if thou be the Son of God, do this and this: even when he was at the
weakest, having fasted so long; to have stones made Bread, and if he would
have any, he must make it himself too; a hard crust, bread out of stones. And
if he durst appear to him who was the Son of God, how may he venture upon
us, and tempt us; and cause us to be discouraged and despair of our souls:
therefore my beloved, have no conceit, or despair of hope in God, though the
Devil tempt us, and we endure many other crosses in this world which man is
subject unto: Though ye were in the famine of Samaria, where the people did
eat their Pigeons dung. Or as Josephus relates of the miseries of Jerusalem
when it was besieged, how that the Mothers were forced to eat their own
children, to satisfy their stomachs: though all these, and many more should
happen unto us, yet let us trust in GOD with a strong faith and hope, for he is
able to deliver us out of all our afflictions. What a comfort it is when we
have Christ and his Disciples to take our parts, and but to suffer as they have
done: If the envy of the world, or malice of the Devil be such, that I am
deprived of my Lands or Livings, then have I Job for an example; If I be
exiled or banished from my Country, then have I John the Evangelist for my
comfort: If I be put in Prison, then have I Joseph, and if I be put in the
inward Prison and in the Stocks, then Paul and Sylas, and the Apostle James for
my Companions. If I am beheaded, then have I John the Baptist for my pattern,
or if I be stoned to death, then have I the happy Martyr St. Stephen; or if I
have been accused wrongfully, then have I our Savior Christ Jesus for my
comfort It is he that has wrought that great work of our Redemption. The
faithful and the thankful shall continually receive Gods word and blessings,
they shall have in abundance, and not abundance only, but shall have it with
sweetness, for abundance without sweetness is a clogging or cloying of the
stomach, and sweetness without abundance, is a begetting of an appetite or
stomach; but they shall have showred down upon them in a plentiful manner,
that nothing may be wanting to them that are patient and of long suffering; the
floodgates of the Lord shall be open unto them that truly believe; they be
those which shall have grace, mercy and plenty of all earthly treasures. It is
Gods mercy in giving us this day to hear his divine Precepts declared, it is
his mercy that he spares us, which might for our sins be justly punished,
and be made an example to all people, like Herod; in that we have not given
thee that due praise and honor which thou desire of us thy Creatures. We
must exhort one another, for it is Gods command to examine every one himself,
whether he has faith or no; And likewise every Master his Servant in his
family, to know whether they trust in the Lord, and serve him as Abraham did:
Choose who will serve the Lord, for I and my house shall serve the Lord; for we
shall one day be examined how we have bestowed our time, and how we have made
use of our Talent; for ignorance then must be no excuse to any man.

Let no man therefore which desires Gods love be negligent in hearing of the
Word upon the Sabbath day, for there is in it both a hardness of the heart,
and also a neglect of the duty; which is a very dangerous act, to reject Gods
precepts, and to fall as it were from the living God. Wherefore let reason
follow our faith, not faith our reason; earnestly craving of God that he would
be pleased to open our hearts at the hearing of his holy Commandments, as he
did his Servant Lydia, Paul, Mary Magdalen. None are exempted from coming to
hear Gods Word, for the Lord says, behold, I will power out my Spirit upon
you, and your sons and your daughters; I will put my fear into their hearts,
and I will write my Law in their minds, and they shall never depart from me
who am the living God.

Our Souls must be like the Sun, not like Ioshuahs Sun, to stand still;
nor like Hezekiahs Sun, to go backwards, but we must be like David's Sun, which
comes out and appears like a Bridegroom, or like a Giant ready to run his
course; and strive we by all means to strengthen and go forwards in Faith and
good works, for we have no desert of our own to save our souls at the last
day, but must say and confess as Saint Augustine did, O Lord, what is my merit
but thy mercy, thy mercy but my merit in CHRIST JESUS.

FINIS.

