THE FLORENTINE History.

WRITTEN IN THE ITALIAN TONGVE, BY NICHOLO MACCHIAVELLI.

CITIZEN AND Secretary of Florence.

And translated into English, By T. B. Esquire.

LONDON Printed by T. C. for VV. P. 1595.

NON TIBI SPIRO



bookplate Sr. Richard Newdigate of Arbury in the County of Warwick Baronet 1709


royal blazon or coat of arms
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR CHRISTOPHER HATTON, KNIGHT OF THE ORDER, ONE OF
HER MAJESTY'S PRIVY COUNCIL, AND LORD Chancellor of England.
MY VERY GOOD LORD, It has been (and yet I think is) an use allowable, to
present those whom we honor or love, with such things as either for their
value be profitable, or for their novelty pleasing. Wanting power to perform
the one, I make bold to do the other: and according to my promise) send you
this old History newly translated. Which albeit your L. has heretofore read
in the Italian tongue, yet may it be, that (for varieties sake) you will again
vouchsafe to peruse it in our English: written by him that is all yours. Sure I
am (and by reading hereof, your L. shall be assured) that neither I have fully
expressed the Authors conceit, nor the writer well performed his duty.
Notwithstanding, since both those wants may be supplied by your judgment, I
adventure the Book into your L. hand, whom I dare trust with any pardonable
error. For as I have taken in hand this labor, more to enterteine my self,
(not otherwise occupied) then thereby to merit your thanks, or the commendation
of others: so do I recommend the same to your L. rather to be looked on at
leisure, then as a thing of perfection worthy to be studied. Yet do I think
(and so do others of more judgment) that this History does equal or excel
the most part that have bin written: not so much for the order and argument of
the matter, as the iuditiall discourses and observations of the Author.
Wherein be discovered the causes of foreign and domestical discords, the
commodities and discommodities of treaties, and the secret humors of Princes:
with diverse other things very considerable, chiefly of such as be called to
consultation of public affairs and government. And as the end of all
Histories ought be to move men unto virtue, and discourage them from vice, so
do I think, there is not any that contains more examples to that purpose,
then this writer: who leaving aside all partiality, and the custom of those
that study to flatter whom they favor, and misreport whom they love not, does
seem greatly to follow the truth, and sets forth rather the causes and
effects of every action, then overmuch extol or disgrace the persons of
whom the story entreats. But (as of all other things) so hereof your L. can
best judge. Wherefore most humbly reaccommending to your good favor, this
poor Present, and my faithful service, I take leave. At the Court, this eight
of April, 1588.

Your L. most humble and assured to command, Thomas Bedingfeld.

The Proeme of the Author.
MY meaning was, at such time as I determined to write the Actions of the
Florentine people, both within and without the City, to begin my Narration
from the year of the Christian Religion, 1444. at which time the house of
Medici through the merits of Cosimo and Giouanni his father, aspired to more
reputation then any other in Florence. For I thought that Leonardo of Arezzo
and Poggio (two excellent Historiographers) had particulerly set down all
things that till those days had happened. But having afterward diligently read
their writings, to see with what order and means they proceeded (to the end
that following the same, our History might be by the Readers better allowed) I
found that in their description of the wars made by the Florentines, both
against Princes and other foreign States, they had used exceeding great
diligence: but of the civil discords and inward enimities, and of the effects
by them brought forth, they had utterly omitted one part, and so briefly
described the other, as the Readers could not thereby gather any profit or
pleasure at all: which I think they did either because they judged those
matters so mean as were not worthy the writing, or else, feared to offend the
posterity of some persons who should thereby have been evil reported. Which
two respects (be it spoken without offense) seem to me, utterly unworthy men
of great reputation. For if there be any thing in Histories that delights or
teaches, it is that, which makes particular description. Or if any reading be
profitable for men that govern in Commonweals, it is that, which shows the
occasions of hate and faction: to the end that being warned by harm of others,
they may become wise, and continue themselves united. Also if every example of
Commonweals do move the mind, those we read of our Country do move most, and
be most profitable. Moreover, if the divisions of any Commonweal have ever
been notable, the divisions of Florence are of all others most notable. For the
most part of other Commonweals (to us known) were content with one only
division, and thereby, according to the accidents sometimes increased, and
sometimes ruined their Cities. But Florence not content with one, had many
divisions. In Rome (as every man knows) after the Kings were expulsed,
division grew between the nobility and the multitude: which continued till
the ruin thereof: the like happened in Athens, and all other Commonweals which
in those days flourished. But in Florence, first the noble men became divided
among themselves. Then the nobility and the people. And at last the people and
the multitude. Yea many times it happened, that one of these being victorious,
divided it self into two. Of which divisions, followed so many murders, so
many banishments, and so many subuersions of Families, as never chanced within
any City, that can be remembered. And surely it seems to me, there is
nothing that witnesses so well the greatness of our City, as that which
depends upon these divisions, being of force sufficient to subvert any City
of what greatness or power so ever. Notwithstanding our state still increased.
For so great was the virtue of those Citizens, by their wisdom and courage to
work the advancement of themselves and their country, as they that happened to
escape so manifold mischiefs, could by their virtue procure more increase to
the City, then the displeasure of those accidents which wrought the decaie,
could decrease it. And withouc all doubc, if Florence had bin so happy, as it
might upon the delivery thereof from the Empire, have taken some form of
government, which would have holden the state united, I know not what
Commonweal either ancient or modern, that for virtue of Arms and
industry, before it could have been preferred. For most true it is, that after
the Ghibilini were banished in so great numbers that all Toscana and Lombardy
was full of them, the Guelfi with the rest that remained at the war against
Arezzo one year before the journey of Compaldino, drew out of their own
City of Citizens only 1200. men of Arms, and 12000. footmen. After that
time, in the war against Filippo Visconti Duke of Milan, having rather to
prove industry, then their own proper Arms (for at that time they were
decayed) we see in five years, which that war continued, the Florentines
spent three Milions and five hundredth thousand Florins. And that war being
ended (as not pleased with peace) to show more of their greatness, they
besieged the City of Lucca. I cannot therefore conceive any cause why these
divisions should not be particulerly written. And if those notable writers
before named, were withholden by fear, to offend the posterity of such as
they should have made mention of, they greatly deceived themselves, and seem
to know little the ambition of men, with the desire they have to make the names
of their Ancestors and themselves to continue perpetual. Neither do they
remember, that many men wanting occasion to win themselves fame, by some
laudable deed, by some impious act, have labored to aspire thereunto. And
they considered not, that the actions of men which have in them greatness, as
governments and authorities, howsoever they be handled, or what end soever they
have, do seem always to give men more honor then blame. Which I having
thought upon, did determine to change my meaning, and resolved to begin my
History at the beginning of our City. And since my intent is not to vsurp the
place of others, I will particulerly set down what chanced only within the
City till the year 1334. and of such things as happened without, I will not
say more then that, which for the understanding of the other shall be
necessary. The year 1434. being passed, I will particulerly write the one and
the other. Moreover, to the end this History may be the better understood,
before I entreat of Florence, I shall discourse by what means Italy became
subject to such Potentates as in those days there governed. The first Book
shall briefly recite all accidents happened in Italy from the declination of the
Romayne Empire, till the year 1434. The second will show what things happened
from the beginning of Florence, till the war which the Florentines made
against the Pope, after expulcion of the Duke of Athene. The third does end
with the death of King Ladislao of Naples, Anno 1434. In the fourth Book we
will entreat what other things chanced till the year abouesaid. And from
thencefoorth discourse particulerly of such accidents as befell within
Florence, till this our time.

royal blazon or coat of arms
To the Reader.
NOT by my suite, though by my consent, this History is now become public.
The translation thereof was diverse years past desired by an honorable
personage, not now living; yet for loyalty to his Prince, love to his
Country, and virtuous deserving of all men, worthy a longer life: had not God
in his divine providence otherwise ordained. Loath I was to meddle with matter of
so much weight, in regard of mine own insufficiency, being neither learned,
nor making profession of learning: and lother it should be published, for that
the Author (in some other his works) has not (as is thought) written with due
respect to piety. Howsoever that be, in this Book (being a mere relation of
the Florentines fortune, when they were governed Aristocraticallie) appears
not any thing unfit to be known, or that may receive evil construction.

The first part, shows the occasions of ruin in the Roman Empire; The
subject of this History.
and how the Provinces of Italy became divided into diverse governments: with
their often variations. Secondly, by what means the Pope, the Venetians, the
King of Naples, and the Duke of Milan, possessed the greatest parts of Italy.
Lastly, how that the Florentines, abandoning obedience to the Emperor, lived
(almost continually) in faction and civil partiality, until the house of
Medici, by the great virtue of Giouanni, Cosimo, Piero, and Lorenzo, atteyned
to a singular reputation in that State; where now (and some years past) they
govern as Princes, with great honor, justice, and integrity: which happiness
they could not find in their Aristocraticall policy. Yet diverse notable
Politicians and wise lawmakers, have not only allowed, but also highly
commended it above others: Affirming, Mediocritie the scope of Aristocracie.
that as mediocritie is in all things most praiseable, and extremities
reproueable, so the Aristocracie (being the mean between the multitude and
one Prince) is specially to be preferred. Also for that the authority to
command, is due to the most worthy, and worthiness consists either in
honor, in virtue, in riches, or in them altogether, the state Aristocraticall
must needs be most allowed, because the noble, the rich, and virtuous men are
in all places the fewest number, and they only in that kind of government
have authority. They allege also how the rich men only, as they that have
most interest in the State, do bestow most in public services, and therefore
to them the Government ought be allotted: so was it in Rome after the Kings
were deposed, likewise in Athens, in Carthage, and at this day in Venice,
Genoua, and Lucca.

For answer of these reasons in favor of Aristocracie, Government
Aristocracie imperfit.
wherein mediocritie seems to be specially sought for, who so shall duly
examine thereof, may find, that to divide things in the midst, and thereby to
mark out the virtue (which consists in reason) were impossible, as all
Philosophers have determined. True it is, that the mean between all, and one
is perfect, yet no where to be found: since in some Cities there are not one
thousand Citizens, and in some other more then an hundredth thousand: which
makes the Aristocracie always incertaine by the incertaintie of the numbers.
And where the Governors be many, there are also factions many, the resolutions
slow, and the secrets of State often discovered. For by experience is seen,
how those Aristocracies which have in them fewest Governors, are most durable:
As that of the Lacedaemonians, governed by thirty persons, and that of the
Pharsalians by twenty. It is not therefore the mean between one and all,
which causes mediocritie.

Now for bestowing Sovereignty upon the most worthy, true it is, so it ought
be, yet that argument makes more for the Monarchy. For among the noble, rich,
and wise, some one does ever excel the rest, and to him (by that reason) the
authority ought be given, seeing it is not possible to find all those things
equally in all men. If it be alleged, that among the greatest number are found
most virtuous and good men, that reason serves not, either in that state or
the Democracie: seeing in them both (as in all Corporations) the most voices
are preferred before the wise and better. To conclude, I say that in all
States, wherein are most Governors, there are fewest resolutions, and most
disputations. The Venetians therefore (to meet with those inconuenients) do
commit the mannaging of their ordinary affairs to the Senate, which
consists of seven persons only, as knowing that the fewer be made privy,
the more secretly they shall be handled: and no Aristocracie have had so long
continuance. Thus much touching Aristocraticall government, of which kind, was
that whereof this History largely discourses.

Equality the scope of Democracie.
The State Populer, do likewise boast of the excellency thereof, as that which
observes equality without exception of persons, and reduces the
constitutions civil unto the law of nature: For as nature has not given
riches, offices, or honor to one man more then to another, so the Government
Populer, tends to have all men equal, without privilege or prerogative
whatsoever. For by such mean (they say) that avarice in those that be rich,
and insolency in them that be great, shall be taken away, which are the most
perilous inconuenients that can happen to any Commonweal; and consequently
all thefts, oppressions, partialities, and factions, are removed: adding, that
human society cannot be nourished without amity, and the nourisher of
amity is equality, and no equality can be found but only in States Populer:
it follows therefore, that is the best and most commendable government,
because each man enjoys liberty, natural and equal justice, without fear
of tyranny or oppression. These, and some other reasons are framed in
commendation of Government Populer.

Democracie imperfit.
Whereunto I say, that this order of commanding, which chiefly respects
equality, is not, nor has been in any Commonweal, because no such equality
of goods and honors could be observed. And he who takes upon him to bestow
them equally, shall proceed contrary to nature. For as she has made some men
more wise and advised then others, so has she framed them to command, and
others to obey. Some have wisdom and aptness to direct, others have strength
of body, and fitness to execute what is commanded. And touching liberty
natural (whereof Populer States do glory much) were that such as is supposed,
how could there be either Magistrate, law, or form of government: for where
Magistracy is, there can be no general equality. Besides that, all wise and
learned writers have misliked that kind of government. Plato calls it a
market, where all things are to be sold. Aristotle allows not thereof, nor
of the Aristocracie. Seneca says, it is impossible for any man to please the
people, that takes pleasure in virtue. And how can a multitude (as a monster
of many heads) void of reason and judgment, determine any thing good or
profitable? Also to ask counsel of the people, as was anciently used in
States Populer, is (as it were) that wise men should seek to be informed by
mad folks. Which moved Anacarsis to say (seeing the Magistrates to propound
matters, and the people to resolve) that in Athens wise men moved questions,
and fools determined what should be done. If any man produce the Populer
Government of the Suisses, continued more then three hundredth years: Thereunto
may be answered, that the nature of that people is apt to be so governed.
Besides that, the most mutenous sort of them are commonly from home in service
of the war under foreign Princes, and the rest more tractable, do not care
much how the State is handled. And among themselves there is no diffidence, by
reason the Nobility of those Countries were slain, first at the battle of
Sampac, and after at Basil, the rest willingly banished themselves.

By this which has been briefly said, Monarchy, the most excellent Government.
appears how both the optimacie and Populer governments are subject to
mutation, disorder and utter ruin, and consequently how fortunate those people
are, whom God has destined to live in the obedience of a successiue royal
Monarchy: where the Prince submits himself no less to the laws of
nature, then he desires the subjects should be obedient unto him, leaving to
every one liberty of life, and property in that he possesses. Succession
argues Gods providence, and government natural, planteth a certain reciproke
love between the Prince and the people. One other reason of nature appears,
in that the Monarke is alone in sovereignty: for as God only rules the whole
world, and as the sun alone gives light to all creatures, so the people of
one land do most naturally yield obedience to one head and commander. Yea, all
nations were first so governed, as the Assirians, Persians, Egiptians, Jews,
Grecians, Scithians, Turks, Tartars, Englishmen, Frenchmen, Spaniards,
Polonians, Danes, etc. and in the Indias were found no other government.
Neither do the sacred Histories make mention of other Rulers then Kings only.
And to confirm what has been said of royal government, read the opinions of
Plato, Homer, Herodotus, Xenophon, S. Ciprian, S. Jerome, with other as well
divine, as philosophical writers. Finally, it seems, that Sovereignty in
one only person is more honorable and magnificent, then if the same were
divided among a few Lords (as is used in the Aristocracie) or among the whole
multitude, as in Populer Governments. And experience has proved, that for
direction and commandment in the war, plurality of Governors have almost
ever received prejudice and dishonor. Which moved the Romans (at such
occations) to make a Dictator. The like was done by the Lacedemonia^s, and is
(at this time) used of the Venetians, whom they call gran Proueditore. By
these reasons and examples (omitting many other) appears, that the Monarchy
royal, is a government most reasonable, most natural, most honorable, and
most necessary. And such is the happiness of our fortune, that by divine
providence, there lives not in any land a more perfect pattern of an excellent
Prince, then is our present Sovereign, who fears God rightly, and governs
her subjects justly: prudent in counsel, and valorous in execution. In
prosperity modest, in adversity constant; faithful to friends, and feared of
enemies; affable to the good, and effroyable to the evil: under whose sacred
protection, our peace, our plenty, and our security, has many years
prospered.

T. B.

The Contents of many principal things worthy note, contained in this work.
In the first Book.
THe occasion how the Roman Empire became destroyed. Diverse incurtions of
barbarous people into Italy. The ruin, repair, and building, of sundry noble
Cities. The acts of Belisario. The acts of Narcete. Of Comondo and Rosmonda. Of
Clefi King of Gotti. The means whereby the Bishops of Rome aspired to
greatness. And how they at diverse times have been the ruin of Italy. How long
the Lombardy possessed Italy. How Pope Urban, determined the enterprise of Asia
against the Sarafins. The original of Venice. The war between the Venetians
and Genou^is. Of other wars in Italy. What famous Captains in those days
served the Princes of Italy.
In the second Book.
THe original of Florence. The first division of the Florentines. Of the
factions, Guelfi and Ghibilini. The order and form of the Florentine
Commonweal. Manfredi chief of the Ghibilines: and the war which happened
between those sides. The return of the Guelfi, into Florence. New ordinances
in the City. The City reduced into quarters. Of Giano della Bella.: and new
tumults in Florence. Bertaccio causes the hand of one Lore to be cut off. Of
the enimitie which arose between the Cherchi and Donati. Florence accursed by
the Pope. The coming of Carlo de Valloys, the French kings brother into
Florence. Of M. Corso with certain banished men enters the City. How the
Lucchesi settled the state in Florence. Florence both by fire and sword
tormented. Of a place called le Stinche, in the vale of Grieve. Vguccione chief
of the faction Ghibilina and Bianca. The Ghibilini banished, and among them the
Poet Dante. Of great misery in Florence. New reformation in Florence.
Castruccio of Lucca. The order of casting Lots: and how it begun in Florence.
How the great Citizens increased their authority by two means. Conspiracy
against Giacopo de Agobio. League between the Florentines and Venetians. The
Duke of Athene, made Lord of Florence. Proclamation of banishment made by that
Duke: and murder of some Citizens. The Oration of certain chief Citizens,
before the Duke. The Dukes Palace sacked. Conspiracy against the Duke. The
Duke assaulted, and vanquished. The Duke dismissed out of Florence: his life
and condition. Andrea Strozzi entendeth to usurp the state of Florence. At
what time the great plague happened in that City: whereof Boccatio has at large
written.
In the third Book.
HOw the discord which grows of ambition, are the occasion of division in
Cities. The partialities of the Albizi and Rizzi. How M. di Riale of Prouenza,
came to Florence. A law made against the Ghibilini. How the word Ammoniti,
arose in Florence: and what it means. An Oration of one Citizen, to the
Lords. The occasion of the corruption of Italy. The chief of the faction of
Guelfi. New tumults in Florence. The Oration of Luigi Guicciardini
Gonfaloniere. New reformation of the City. One Simone, discovers a conspiracy
against the state. Michiele di Lando, an artificer, by his courage, aspired to
be chosen Gonfaloniere di Giustitia. New reformation in Florence. A
commendation of Michiele di Lando. An accusation of many Citizens, for their
return being banished. The insolency of Georgio Scali. The death of that
Georgio. Exile and slaughter in Florence. The speech of Benedetto Alberti to
his companions. Of the manner of creation of the Balia in Florence. Of John
Galeazzo Visconti. The words of Very di Medici. What quality the Florentines
required to be in him that occupied the place of Gonfaloniere. Giacopo
Acciaiuoli. The death of certain Citizens.
In the fourth Book.
FIlippo Visconti Duke of Milan, intends to become Lord of Genoa. Georgio
Ordilaffi, Lord of Furli. The Duke of Milan makes war against the
Florentines. Giouanni de Medici. New league between the Florentines and
Venetians. Of an Imposition among the Florentines, called Catasto. Carmignuolo
General of the war in Lombardy. Peace taken with the Duke of Mylan and the
League: and what Cities remained to the Venetians. The death of Giouanni de
Medici: and his commendation. Of Cosimo his son. Volterra rebelleth from the
Florentines. The enterprise of the Florentines against Lucca. The violence
offered to Sarauezesi, and the speech of one man of that place to the Senate of
Florence. Filippo Brunalesco an excellent Architector. The defeat of the
Florentine army, by Nicholo Piccinino. A consultation to expulse Cosimo di
Medici out of Florence. The answer of Nicholo Vzano. Cosimo di Medici cited
before the Senate, was imprisoned. Cosimo confined to Padoa. Cosimo returns
to his Country.
In the fifth Book.
BRaccio and Sforza, two great Captains in Italy. Nicholo Piccinino, General
for the Duke of Mylan. Gattamelata, General for the Venetians. Banishment of
many Citizens in Florence. Alfonso of Aragon makes war for Naples. The
ordinances of the City of Genoua. The speech of Rinaldo delli Albizi to the
Duke of Mylan. Rebellion of Genoua from the Duke. An Oration of an ancient
Citizen of Lucca to the people. Francesco Sforza, General of the league of
Florence and Venice. Discord between Andrea Mauroceno, and Francesco Sforza.
Cosimo di Medici, Ambassador to the Venetians. The Duke of Mylan determines to
take Romagna from the Pope. Sforza desiring to marry the Duke of Mylan his
daughter, practices by diverse indirect means. Sforza refuses to pass the
Po with his army. The speech of Neri Capponi to the Senate of Venice. The
diverse ways from Pesaro to Verona: and which of them the Earl Sforza made
choice of. The Navy of the Venetians taken by Nicholo Piccinino. The Earl
remoueth to rescue Brescia. The site of Verona. The Earl goes to Venice.
Piccinino passes to Casentino. The Castle of San Nicholo. The Earl breaks
the Dukes Navy. The overthrow of Piccinino. Alberto de Albizi setleth himself
to dwell at Ancona. The taking of Poppi: and what words the Earl owner of that
place used.
In the sixth Book.
A Description of certain lawdable customs used in ancient Commonweals. A
proud request made by Piccinino to the Duke of Mylan. The Duke marries Bianca
his daughter to the Earl Francesco Sforza: and gives her the City of
Cremona. Alfonso of Aragon beseegeth Naples. Annibal Bentiuogli breaks the
forces of Piccinino. Baldaccio de Anghiari General for the Florentines. The
Canneschi murdered Annibal Bentiuogli. The people for that fact cut the
Canneschi in pieces: and killed Battista that slew Anniball. Santo Bentiuogli
appointed to govern Bologna, until the son of Anniball came to full age.
Certain Cities yielded to the Venetians. The Earl Sforza beseegeth
Carauaggio. The taking of one Venetian Proueditor, whom the Earl set at
liberty, having first informed him of his pride. The Venetians become bond to
pay unto the Earl a certain number of Florins. Ambassadors sent from Mylan to
the Earl, and their Oration. The Milanesi made choice of that Earl for their
Duke. The Ambassadors of Venice denied audience by the Florentines. The
Venetians begun war against the Duke. Steffano Porcari determining to
surprise Rome, is discovered and put to death by the Pope. King Rinato. Pope
Calisto 3. endeuoreth to make war against the Infidels, giving crosses to the
soldiers, and therefore the enterprise was called la Crociata: but it
proceeded not. Marvelous tempest about Florence, and great harm proceeding
thereby. Giouan di Augio in the name of the French King takes possession of
Genoua. Dissension between the Fregosi and Giouanni. Giouanni vanquished.
In the seventh Book.
HOw hard it is to continue a Commonweal united. The Citizens of Florence
desire Cosimo di Medici to reform the City. Lucca Pitti. Lucca Pitti builded
magnificently. The death of Cosimo di Medici. The commendation of Cosimo. A new
enterprise against the infidels impeached. A conspiracy of certain Citizens
against Piere di Medici. Piero armeth against his enemies. The enemies of Piero
banished Florence. An Oration made by Piero in his house to the Senators. The
Duke of Milan goes to Florence. The Florentines against the Volterani.
Federigo Duke of Vrbino an excellent Captain. Bad condition of Galiazzo Duke
of Milan. Treason against that Duke. The death of the Duke. The death of the
Conspirators.
In the eight Book.
Conspiracy against Lorenzo and Giuliano di Medici. The murder of Giuliano.
The death of the Archbishop, and some other Conspirators. The death of
Francesco Pazzi. The death of Giacopo di Pazzi. The Pope and King make war upon
the Flore^tines. The death of Lorenzo di Medici. 1492.
FINIS.
AA


THE FIRST BOOK OF the Florentine History.
THE people inhabiting the North, beyond the Rivers of Reyne and Danubio, being
borne in a cold Region, yet wholesome and apt to generation, do many times
increase, and become so populous, that part of them are constrained to abandon
their native countries, and seek new places where to remain. The order of the
Northren people.
The order which those people hold in dispersing the inhabitants, is, to divide
themselves into three parts, yet so, as in every one, may be some of the
nobility, and some of the people, some of the rich and some of the poor
equally divided: which done, the one part (whose lot falls so out) leaves
that country and seeks fortune elsewhere to abide. The Northren people
oppressed the Roman Empire.
The other two parts of the people there remaining, do possess and enjoy the
lands of them that are departed. These people were those which destroyed the
Roman Empire; whereunto the Emperors themselves gave some occasion by
forsaking Rome, the ancient Imperial seat, and settling themselves at
Constantinople: For thereby the West part of the Empire became weak, less
regarded, and more easy to be harmed both of their own ministers, and others
their enemies. Surely the destruction of so great an Empire builded upon the
blood of so many virtuous men, could not be lost without the sloth of Princes,
infidelity of ministers, great forces, and much obstinacy in them, who
assaulted the same: for not only, one sort of people, but many multitudes in
that action conspired. The first enemies, which came to the destruction of the
Roman Empire after the Cimbri (vanquished by Marius the Roman) were the
Visigotti, which name in our language, may be called Gotti of the West. These
people, after some conflicts in the Empire, and through the sufferance of the
Emperors, long time continued their dwellings upon the River of Danubio. And
although at sundry occasions, and sundry times, they assaulted the provinces
belonging to the Empire, yet were they by the power of the Emperors from time
to time impeached: and at last by Theodotio gloriously vanquished. So that
thereby being brought under his obedience, they could not again make any King
over them, but contented with the Emperors pay, under his government and
ensign, they lived and served. But Theodotio being dead, and leaving Arcadio
and Honorio his sons, heirs of the Empire, (but not of his virtue and
fortune) the time, with the Prince clearly altered and changed. Theodotio
authorized unto three parts of the Empire, The Empire divided into three
governments.
three governors. In the East, Ruffino, in the West Stillicone, and in Africa
Gildonio. Every one of these, determined after the death of their Prince, not
to govern as ministers, but to possess the countries as Princes. Of these
three, Gildonio and Ruffino, were at their beginnings oppressed: but Stillicone
better dissembling his intent, sought to win himself credit with the new
Emperors, and nevertheless disturb the quietness of their state. Then to
the end he might the rather atteine the possession thereof, and procure the
Visigotti to become enemies to the Empire, he counseled the Emperor no more
to pay them. Besides that, Stillicone imagining these enemies were not of
force sufficient to disturb the Empire, found means that the Burgundi,
Fraunchi, Vandali, and Alani (all people of the North, and appointed to seek
themselves a new habitation) assailed the Roman countries. The Visigotti then
being discharged from their pay, determined (as of an injury) to be revenged:
and creating Alarico their King, Rome sacked by the Visigotti.
assaulted the Empire, destroyed Italy, and sacked Rome. After which victory,
Alarico died, and to him succeeded Ataulfo: who took to wife Placidia sister
to the Emperors, and through that alliance, agreed with them to succor France
and Spain: which countries wereby the Vandali, Burgundi, Alani, and Fraunchi,
(thereto moved by the occasions aforesaid) assailed. Whereof ensued, that the
Vandali (who had already conquered that part of Spain which is called Betica)
were sore molested by the Visigotti: and not having other help, were forced to
accept the offer of Bonifacio, Bonifacio governor of Africa.
at that time governing Africa for the Emperor: who required them to take in
hand the conquest thereof, being by his mean in Rebellion: and he fearing
least his fault should be to the Emperor detected. For these reasons
aforesaid, the Vandali most willingly took the enterprise in hand, and under
Genserico their King, possessed Africa. By this time Theodotio son to
Archadio was become Emperor, who little regarding the affairs of the Empire in
the West, gave great hope to these foreign people to enjoy those things they
had conquered. So that, the Vandali possessed Africa, the Alani and Visigotti
governed Spain: the Fraunchi and Burgundi did not only conquer Gallia, but
also unto the parts thereof, by them conquered, How Gallia became named Francia.
gave their own names, calling the one Francia, the other Burgogna. The happy
success of those, encouraged new people to the destruction of the Empire. For
at that time the people called Vnni assailed and possessed Pannonia, a province
adjoining to the River Danubio, How Hungaria became so named.
which at this day having taken the name of these Vnni, is called Vngheria.
Upon consideration of these disorders, the Emperor seeing himself on every
side assailed, to the end he might have the fewer foes, began to take truce,
sometimes with the Vandali, and sometimes with the Franchi: which did greatly
increase the reputation and power of the barbarous people, disgracing and
diminishing the credit of the Empire. Votigerio king of the Angli.
Neither was in those days, the Island of Bretagna (at this day called England)
assured from such invasion: for the Bertoni fearing these people which had
possessed France, and not finding how the Emperor could defend them, called to
aid them the Angli, a people of Germany so named. These Angli under Votigerio
their King, took the enterprise in hand, overthrew the enemy, and in the end
drove them out of the Island, How the name of England was given to that Island.
themselves there remaining and inhabiting. By the name of which Angli, that
country was, and yet is called Anglia. The inhabitants whereof, being thus
spoiled and driven from their country, became desperate, persuading themselves,
that although they could not defend their own country, yet was it possible for
them to conquer an other. Whereupon, they with their families passed the seas,
The ancient English people now inhabitants of Bretagna.
and planted them on the other side near the shore, and called that country
by their own name, Bretagna. The people called Vnni, who, (as is aforesaid)
had conquered Pannonia, assembling themselves with other people, called Zepedi,
Eruli, Turinghi, and Ostrogotti, (which word signifies in that language, Gotti
of the East) prepared themselves to seek new countries: but not being of force
sufficient to enter France (being defended by other barbarous forces) they came
unto Italy, conducted by Attila their king, who not long before, to govern
alone in his kingdom, had slain Bleda his brother. Thus Attila became
mighty, Andarico king of Zebedi, Attila his coming into Italy.
and Velamer king of the Ostrogotti, were made as it were, his subjects. Attila
being arrived in Italy, besieged Aquilegia, where without resistance, he
continued two years, and during the siege, spoiled the country thereabouts,
and dispersed the inhabitants of the same: which (as hereafter shall be declared)
was the beginning of the city of Vinegia. After the taking and ruin of
Aquilegia, and many other cities, he marched toward Rome: from the spoil
whereof, at the request of the Bishop, he refrained. The reverence and respect
which Attila did bear toward this Bishop, was such, as persuaded him to leave
Italy, and retire himself to Austria, where he died. After his death, Velamer
king of the Ostrogotti, and other the leaders of foreign nations, took Arms
against Tenrico and Eurie his sons, the one of them they slew, and
constrained the other, with the Vnni to return over Danubio, into their own
country. The Ostrogotti and the Tepedi, were settled in Pannonia, the Eruli and
Turingi upon the shore on the other side of Danubio. King Attila thus departed
from Italy, Valentiniano the Emperor in the West, imagining to repair the
country, and hoping with more commodity to defend the same from the barbarous
people, abandoned Rome, and settled himself in Rauenna. These adversities
happened to the Empire in the West, occasioned the Emperors, who then dwelt at
Constantinople, many times to grant the possession thereof to others, as a
thing full of perils and expense. And the Romans otherwhiles, The cause of the
election of an Emperor in the West.
seeing themselves abandoned, without leave created an other Emperor or some
deputy, to perform that office, (as did Massimo the Roman) after the death
of Valentiniano, who constrained Eudossa lately wife to the Emperor, to take
him to her husband. This woman being borne of Imperial blood, desirous to
revenge so great an injury, and disdaining to be married with a private
Citizen, secretly persuaded Genserico King of the Vandali and Lord of Africa,
to come into Italy, showing him the facility and profit of that enterprise.
He enticed with hope of so great a spoil came speedily thither, and finding
Rome abandoned, sacked the Town, and there remained fourteen days. He also
took and spoiled diverse other Towns in Italy: and fraughting himself and
his Army with spoil, returned into Africa. The Romans came home to Rome, and
finding Massimo dead, elected Auito a Roman, for Emperor. After the death of
diverse other Emperors, the Empire of Constantinople, came to the hands of
Zenone: and that of Rome, to Oreste and his son Augustolo, who through
subtlety had usurped that Empire. While these men thus possessed and
determined to hold the Empire by force, the Eruli and Turingi, who (as is
aforesaid) after the death of Attila remained upon the shore on the other
side of Danubio) conspired together under the conduct of their Captain
Odoacre, came into Italy, The coming of the Longobardi into Italy.
and possessed such places, as were by them left void. Then the Longobardi
(people also toward the North) entered Italy: led thither by Godolio their
King, who were, (as hereafter shall be declared) the greatest plague of that
country. Odoacre arrived in Italy, conquered the same, and near unto Pauia
slew Oreste, forcing Augustolo to fly away. After which victory (to the end
that Rome varying in government, the governor might receive a new title)
Odoacre leaving the name of the Empire, caused himself to be called King of
Rome, and was the first Captain of all the foreign people that invaded Italy
to inhabit there. Because all the others, either for fear not to enjoy that
they had gotten, or else doubting to be driven out by the Emperor in the East,
either else for some other hidden occasion, only spoiled the country: and that
done, sought to plant their habitation elsewhere. Thus we see, that in those
days the ancient Roman Empire was reduced to the government of these Princes.
Zenone remaining in Constantinople, commanded all the Empire in the East. How
the ancient Empire became divided.
The Ostrogotti governed Mesia and Pannonia. The Visigotti, Sueui, and Alani,
possessed Guascognia and Spain. The Vandoli ruled Africa. The Franchi and
Burgundi lived in France. The Eruli and Turingi remained in Italy. The kingdom
of Ostrogotti came to the hands of Theodorico, Nephewe of Velamer, being in
league with Zenone Emperor in the East, wrote unto him, that it seemed a thing
unjust to his people the Ostrogotti, that they being in virtue superiors to
all others, should be inferiors in Empire: And therefore he could not by any
means hold them within the consines of Pannonia. It seemed therefore
necessary to suffer them to take arms, and seek new Countries: But first he
thought good to let him understand thereof, to the intent he might grant them
some country, where with his good favor and their greater commodity, they
might inhabit. The Emperor Zenone, partly for fear, and partly for the
desire he had to have Odoacre driven out of Italy, granted that Theodorico
might come against Odoacre, and take the possession thereof. Then Theodorico
departed from Pannonia, leaving there the Zepedi his friends: and being arrived
in Italy, slew Odoacre, and his son; by whose example, he took unto him the
title of King of Italy, making Rauenna his royal seat, moved by the same
reasons, that induced Valentiniano there to dwell. Theodorico was a man both
for war and peace most excellent: Theodorico king of Ostrogotti a most
virtuous Prince.
for in the one, he was always victorious, and in the other generally
profited the cities and people to him subject. He divided the Ostrogotti with
their Captains into sundry towns, to the end that in the war he might
command them, and in the peace correct them: he enlarged the City of Rauenna
and restored Rome in all things (the discipline of war except) giving to the
Romans every other honor: and with his only authority kept in awe all the
barbarous Kings usurpers of the Empire. He built towns and sortresses
between the Alps, and the point of the sea Adriatico, the rather to empeach
the passage of other barbarous people that should assail Italy. And had not
his great virtue been in the end of his life blotted with some cruelties;
committed upon suspicion of his kingdom (as the death of Simmaco and Boetio,
men of most godly life) he had been in all respects worthy of honor and
memory. For the virtue and bounty of him, did not only repair Rome and Italy
of the afliction committed by the barbarous nations: but also reduced them into
an order and government most fortunate. And surely, if any times were ever in
Italy, and the other Provinces there-abouts by reason of barbarous oppression
miserable, they were those which happened from the time of Arcadio and Onorio,
till his days. For who so shall consider the great mischiefs which happen to
commonweals by the variatio^ of government, or change of the Prince, without
any dissension and division, shall find the same alone of force enough to
ruin any state or kingdom, how mighty soever. It may therefore be imagined
how great miseries the Roman Provinces endured: for they did not only alter
their government, but also their laws, their customs, their manner of life,
their religion, their tongue, their apparel, and their names. All which
things (nay any one of them considered unseen) would move the hardest heart to
compassion. At that time many cities were overthrown, many begun, and many
enlarged. Among those that were ruined, were Aquilegia, Luni, Chiusi,
Popolonia, Fiesole, and others. Of those which were buylt new, were Vinegia,
Siena, Ferrara, Aquila, and other towns and castles, which for brevity I
omit. Those which of small Cities became great, were Fiorenza, Genoua, Pisa,
Milan, Napoli, and Bologna, to the which may be joined the ruin and repair of
Rome, with diverse others Cities in like sort defaced and after amended. Among
these ruins, and these new people, there grew up new languages, since that
time used in France, Spain, and Italy, which mixed with the ancient tongues of
those Countries, and the Roman speech, have framed languages never before time
known. The names also of those Provinces, rivers, lakes, seas, and men, were
utterly changed. For France, Italy and Spain, be full of new names, from the
old far differing: as appears (omitting many others). The rivers of Po,
Garda and the Archipelago, which are names diverse from those of ancient time
used. Men likewise commonly in those days called Caesari, Pompei, and such
like: are new baptized, Peter, Matthew, and so forth. But among so many
variations, the change of Religion was not the least, for those of the ancient
faith, contending with the miracles of the new, wrought among men occasion of
great discord: but had the christian Religion been united, the disorders had
not been so great. For the Greek church, the Roman church, and the church of
Rauenna, contended one against the other. Besides them, many other differents
arose among the christian people, and into many opinions divided the world. An
example whereof was Africa, which suffered more affliction by reason of the
opinion of Arius (which the Vandoli believed) then by any other cause either of
their covetousness or natural cruelty. During the multitudes of these
miseries, every man bear (as it were) in his face, the marks of his
discontented mind. For besides the manifold mischiefs by them endured, the
greater number wanted the knowledge of God, by whom all creatures hope to be
comforted. For the most of those people being ignorant of the true God, wanting
help and hope, most miserably dyed. Thus it appears, that Theodorico
deserved no small commendation, being the first that appeased so many troubles.
For within these 28. years which he reigned in Italy, he reduced it to so
great order and honor, as the marks of misery were scantly perceived. But he
being dead, The death of Theodorico.
and leaving Atalarico for king (who was the son of Amalasciunta his
daughter) Italy in short space returned to the former disorders. For Attalarico
shortly after his graundfather died, left the government to his mother, and she
making Theodato her minister in the government, was by him betrayed. Theodato
by this mean made King, became odious to the Ostrogotti, and Iustiniano the
Emperor hoped the rather to drive him from Italy. To perform that enterprise,
he deputed Bellisario to be his Lieftenaunt, who had already conquered
Africa, and chasing from thence the Vandoli, reduced the same to obedience of
the Empire. Bellisario also conquered Sicilia, The acts of Bellisario.
and from thence passed into Italy, where he surprised Napoli, and Rome. The
Gotti receiving these overthrows, killed their king Theodato as the chief
occasion of their misaduenture. In his place was chosen Vitigete, who after a
few conflicts, was by Bellisario besieged, and in Rauenna taken. Then was
Bellisario before he had performed the whole victory by Iustiniano revoked,
and to his charge, were appointed Giouanni and Vitale, men both for virtue and
conversation far inferior: wherefore the Gotti took heart, and created a
king called Ildouado, who was at that time Governor of Verona. The acts of
Totila.
After him (being within a few days slain) Totila aspired to the kingdom,
and distressed the Emperors army, recovered Toscana and Napoli, and brought
under his obedience, well near all those states which Bellisario had gotten.
Wherefore Iustiniano thought good to send him again into Italy, who being come
thither with small forces, rather lost the reputation he had gotten before, then
increased the same. For Totila, as it were before the face of Bellisario (who
was then with his army at Hostia) besieged Rome and took it. Then considering
with him self that he could neither hold it, nor leave it without danger, he
razed the greatest part of the City, driving the people from thence, and
leading away the Senators as prisoners, which Bellisario little regarding,
marched with his army unto Calauria, to meet there with soldiers sent in his
aid from Greece. Thus Bellisario seeing Rome abandoned, determined with him
self an honorable enterprise: and entering into the ruins of Rome, (with
what speed he possibly could) repaired the walls of the city, and called home
the inhabitants. But fortune (as it seems) enemy to so laudable an atempt,
apposed her self. For Iustiniano the Emperor at the same time happened to be
assaulted by the Parthi, and for that cause called home Bellisario: he to obey
his master, lest Italy at the discretion of Tottila, who anew possessed Rome,
but not with so great cruelty as he had before time there used. For being
entreated by S. Benedetto, (of whom in those days there was holden a great
opinion of holiness) he endeavored him self rather to amend, then mar that
city. In this mean while, Iustiniano had concluded a peace with the Parthi,
and intending to send a new supply into Italy, was empeached to perform that
intent by a new people of the North called Sclaui, who having passed Danubio,
assailed Illiria and Thracia: so as by that means Tottila got into his hands
all Italy. But so soon as Iustiniano had suppressed the Sclaui, he sent
thither his army conducted by Narsete an Eunuch, who distressed the forces of
Tottila, The acts of Narsete.
and slew him, with the remain of the Gotti. After that overthrow, retired to
Pauia, where they created Teia for their King. Narsete on the other side, after
this victory, surprised Rome, and at the last fought with Teia, not far from
the city of Nocera, slew him, and vanquished his army. By mean of which
victory, the name of Gotti, in Italy was clearly extirped, having there
remained from the reign of Theodorico, unto Teia their Kings, threescore and
ten years. But so soon as Italy was delivered from the Gotti, Iustiniano
died, leaving Iustino his son to succeed him, who through counsel of Sophia
his mother, The acts of Longino.
revoked Narsete from Italy, and in his place, sent Longino his son thither.
This Longino following the order of his predecessors, inhabited Rauenna, and
settled in Italy a new form of government, appointing no Governors of
Provinces as did the Gotti, but created in every city and town of
importance a Chieftaine, whom he called Duke. In which division, he allotted
no more honor to Rome, then to other towns, because he took from thence the
Consuls and Senate, (which names till that day had been ever there maintained)
reducing all under one Duke, who was yearly sent thither from Rauenna, and his
government called the Roman Dukedom: but the general Governor, who
continually remained at Rauenna by the Emperors commandment, and governed
all Italy under him, was called Esarco. This division, made the ruin of Italy
to be more easy, and gave opportunity to the Longobardi to usurp the same.
The government of that country gotten by the virtue and blood of Narsete, thus
taken from him, The acts of Alboino.
and he being also by Sophia injured, reviled and threatened to be called home
and spinne with women, moved him so greatly to chollor and offense, that he
persuaded Alboino King of the Lombardi (who at that time reigned in Pannonia)
to come into Italy, and conquer it. The Longobardi being (as is aforesaid)
entered into those countries near Danubio, who had lately been abandoned by
the Heruli and Turingi, when by their King Odoacre they were led into Italy:
for a time they there remained. But the kingdom being come to Alboino a man
courageous and cruel, they passed the river Danubio, and fought with Comundo
King of the Zepedi, and overthrew him in Pannonia, which he then possessed.
Alboino in this victory amongst others, happened to take prisoner the daughter
of Comundo, called Rosmundo, married her, and thereby became Lord of Pannonia.
Then moved by the cruelty of his nature, he made a cup of her fathers head,
whereof in memory of the victory) he used to drink. But then called into
Italy by Narsete (with whom in the wars of the Gotti he had acquaintance
and friendship) left Pannonia to the Vuni, who after the death of Attila (as is
aforesaid) were returned into their country. Then he came again into Italy,
where finding the same into many parts divided, suddenly wan Pania, Millan,
Verona, Vicenza, all Toscana, and the more part of Flamminia, now called
Romagna. So that persuading himself through so many and so speedy successes,
to have already (as it were) gotten the victory of all Italy, he celebrated a
solemn feast in Verona, whereat, being by drinking much, become very merry,
and seeing the skull of Comundo full of wine, he caused the same to be
presented to the Queen Rosmunda, who sat over against him at the table (saying
unto her, with so loud a voice that every one might hear him) that she
should now at this feast drink with her father: which speech pierced the Lady
to the heart, and she forthwith determined to revenge the same. Then knowing
that Almachilde (a valiant young gentleman of Lombardi) loved a maiden of hers,
of whom he obtained to lie with her, and the Queen being privy to that
consent, did her self tarry in the place of their meeting, which being
without light, Almachilde came thither, and supposing to have lien with the
maiden, enjoyed the Queen her mistress, which done, the Queen discovered her
self and said unto him, that it was in his power to kill Alboino, and possess
her with her kingdom forever: but if he refused so to do, she would procure
that Alboino should kill him, as one that had abused his wife. To this motion
and murder of Alboino, Almachilde consented. After the murder performed,
finding that he could not according to his expectation enjoy the kingdom, and
fearing to be slain of the Lombardes for the love they bare to Alboino, the
Queen and he taking their princely treasure and jewels, fled to Longino at
Rauenna, who honorably there received them. During these troubles, Iustiniano
the Emperor died, and in his place was elected Tiberio, who being occupied in
the wars against the Parthi, could not go to the relief of Italy. Whereby
Longino hoped that time would well serve him, with the countenance of Rosmunda
and help of her treasure, to become King of Lombardy and all Italy. And
conferring his intent with the Queen, persuaded her to kill Almachilde, and
take him for her husband: she accepted and agreed unto that which he
persuaded, preparing a cup of wine poisoned, and with her own hand she
offered the same to Almachilde, coming from a bath hot and thriftie: he
having drunk half the wine, and finding his body thereby greatly moved,
mistrusting the poison, enforced Rosmunda to drink the rest, whereof both the
one and the other within few hours died, and Longino bereft of his
expectation to become King. The acts of Clefi.
The Longobardi in the mean while assembling themselves in Pauia, (which was
the chief City of their kingdom) elected there Clefi their King, who
reedified Imola, which had been ruinated by Narsete, he wan Rimino, and almost
every place from thence to Rome: but in the midst of these his victories, he
died. This Clefi was so cruel, not only to strangers, but also to his own
subjects the Longobardi, as they were so terrified with his kingly authority,
that after his days, they determined no more to make any King, but elected
amongst them selves thirty persons, The Lombardi refused to be governed by
Kings.
whom they called Dukes, giving them jurisdiction over the rest: which was the
cause that the Longobardi did not proceed in the conquest of all Italy, and
that their kingdom did not extend further then Beneuento, and that Rome,
Rauenna, Cremona, Mantoua, Padoua, Monselice, Parma, Bologna, Faenza, Furli,
and Cesena, some of them defended them selves a time, and some other were never
taken. Because the Lombardi wanting a King, their wars proceeded the more
slowly, and after the election of a new King (by reason of their liberty)
were less obedient and more apt to mutiny among them selves, which thing,
first hindered the victory, and in the end drove them out of Italy. The
Longobardi being come to this estate, the Romans and Longino made with them an
agreement. The effect thereof was, that every one of them should lay down
their arms, and enjoy so much as they possessed. At what time the Bishops of
Rome, aspired to authority.
In that time the Bishops of Rome began to aspire unto more authority then
they had in times past: for by mean of the holy life of S. Peter, and some
other Bishops with their godly examples, and the miracles by them done, they
became much reverenced amongst men, and greatly increased the christian
Religion. In so much as Princes were occasioned (the more easily thereby to
appease the great disorder and confusion of the world) to obey them. The
Emperor then being become a Christian and removed from Rome to
Constantinople, it came to pass (as is aforesaid) that the Roman Empire
decayed, and the Church of Rome the rather thereby increased: notwithstanding
till the coming of the Longobardi, Italy being subject either to Emperors or
Kings, the Empire still prospered: and the Bishops of Rome had no greater
authority then their learning and good life did deserve. For in all other
things, either by the Kings or by the Emperors, they were commanded, The
remove of the Imperial seat from Rome, the cause of the Popes greatness.
and as their ministers employed, and sometimes put to death. But he that made
the Bishops to become of greatest authority in Italy, was Theodorico King of
the Gotti; when he removed his royal seat to Rauenna. For thereby Rome
remaining without a Prince, the Romans were enforced to yield their obedience
to the Pope. Yet did not his authority thereby greatly increase, because he
could not procure to him self more pre-eminence, then that the Church of Rome
should have precedence before the Church of Rauenna. But the Longobardi being
come, and Italy divided into diverse parts, occasioned the Pope to take the
more upon him: for he, then being as it were chief of Rome, the Emperor of
Conctantinople and the Longobardi, did respect him so much, as the Romans by
his means, not as subjects, but as companions with the Longobardi and with
Longino, joined. Thus the Popes sometimes by the favor of the Longobardi, and
sometime with the countenance of the Grecians, The East Empire suppressed in
the reign of Eracleo.
increased their dignity. But after the destruction of the Empire in the East,
(which happened in the time of the Emperor Eracleo) because the people called
Sclaui, assaulted and conquered again Iliria, calling the same by their own
name Sclauonia, the other parts of the Empire were assailed, first by the
Persians, and after by the Sarasins, who came from Arabia, conducted by
Mahomet: and last of all by the Turks. These people amongst them, possessed
Soria, Africa, and Egypt. So that the Empire weakened, the Pope dispaired to
have succor there, in time of his necessity. On the other side, the power of
the Longobardi increasing, it behooued him to seek some new friendship, and
for the same resorted to the Kings of France. The troubles of Italy, caused by
the ambition of Popes.
So as after that time, all the wars made upon Italy by foreign people,
were by the Bishops of Rome occasioned: and all the barbarous nations, who
repaired in so great multitudes to Italy, were for the most part by them
called thither, which manner of proceeding continues in our days, and has
heretofore kept, and yet does keep Italy weak and impotent. Therefore in
discourse of such things as have happened since those, to these our days, By
what means the present Princes of Italy aspired.
more shall not be said of the destruction of the Empire, which is altogether
cast down and ruined. But we will hereafter discourse by what means the
Popes and those other Potentates which till the coming of Carlo the eight,
governed Italy, have atteined to their greatness, whereby we shall conceive, how
the Popes first by their censures, after with them, and their arms mixed with
indulgences, became terrible and venerable: and how by evil using the one and
the other, they have altogether lost the use of their arms, and in the other,
they stand at discretion. But returning to the order of our matter, I say, that
Gregorio the third, being atteined to the Papacy, and Aistulpho to the
kingdom of Lombardy, contrary to the agreement before made, surprised Rauenna,
and made war against the Pope Gregorio: who (for the occasions aforesaid) not
trusting any more to the Emperor of Constantinople being then weak, neither
reposing trust in the Longobardi, who had diverse times distressed him, fled
for aid to Pipino the second, who from being Lord of Austracia and Brabancia
was become King of France: not so much for his own virtue, as his fathers
Carlo Martello, and his graundfathers Pipino, because Carlo Martello being
Governor of that Kingdom, won that memorable victory against the Sarasins
near unto Torsci, upon the river of Era: wherein were slain two hundred
thousand Sarasins. For which cause Pipino his son, for the reputation of his
father and his own virtue, became after, king in that kingdom: unto whom
Pope Gregorio (as is beforesaid) sent for aid against the Longobardi. Pipino
answered, that he was very willing to perform his request, Gregorio tertio.
Pope Theodoro primo.
but first desired to see him, and in his presence to honor him. For which
purpose Gregorio travailed into France, and without any let, passed the towns
of the Longobardi his enemies: so great reverence was then borne to that
Religion. Gregorio arrived in France, was there greatly honored by the King,
and sent back accompanied with the Kings forces, who in Pauia besieged the
Longobardi, whereby Aistulpho was enforced to make peace with the Frenchmen:
which he did at the request of the Pope, who desired not the death of his
enemy, but that he should convert and live. In which peace Aistulpho promised
to render unto the Church all those towns thereto belonging, and by him
usurped. But the French soldiers returned home, Aistulpho observed not the
conditions of the peace, which being known to the Pope, he prayed aid a new
of Pipino, who sent again into Italy, where he overthrew the Lombardy, took
Rauenna, and contrary to the will of the Grecian Emperor, gave the same unto
the Pope, with all other towns under his Esarcato, adding also to them, the
country of Vrbino and La Marca: during the time that these towns were in
bestowing, Aistulpho died; and Desiderio a Lombard and Duke of Tuscan took
arms to usurp the kingdom, and prayed aid of the Pope, to whom he
promised his friendship: which request was granted, and the other Princes gave
place. Desiderio at the beginning kept his promise, and according to the
conditions made with Pipino, rendered the towns allotted unto the Pope, neither
did the Esarco of Constantinople, after that time come any more in Rauenna, but
all things were governed according to the pleasure and direction of the Pope.
Then died the King Pipino, to whom succeeded his son called Carlo, who for
the great and memorable exploites by him done, was called Magno. To the Papacy
was at that time aspired Theodoro Primo. He falling into contention with
Disiderio, was by Disiderio besieged in Rome, and constrained to crave aid of
Carlo, who speedily passed the mountains, besieged Desiderio in Pauia, and
took him with all his Children. And having sent them prisoners into France,
went in person to visit the Pope at Rome, where he pronounced this sentence,
That the Pope being Vicar of God, could not be judged of men. For the which,
Great honor door to the pope by Carlo magno, with indignity to the Emperors
the Pope with the people of Rome, created him Emperor. In this manner, Rome
began to have an Emperor again in the West. And where the Popes were wont
to take their instaulation from the Emperors, after this time the Emperors in
their election, would needs take their authority from the Pope: whereby the
reputation of the Empire decreased, and the Church gained the same. By these
means, the Popes grew great, and kept down the authority of temporal
Princes. The Longobardi having then been in Italy 232. years, there was of
them none other mark of strangers then the name: and Carlo being desirous to
reform that Country (in the time of Pope Leo the third) was pleased they
should inhabit those places, where they were borne, and called that province of
their name, Lombardia. But forasmuch as they had the name of Rome in great
reverence, he commanded that all the next Country to it adjoining (then in
the obedience of the Esarcato of Rauenna) should be called Romagna. Moreover,
he created Pipino his son King of Italy, the jurisdiction whereof extended to
Beneuento: the rest remained to the Emperor in Greece, with whom Carlo had
concluded a league. About this time Pascale the first was become Pope: and the
priests of the parishes in Rome, Pope Pascale 1.
by reason of their nearenesse to the Popes person, and their presence at his
election, to honor their authority, with a more venorable title began to
be called Cardinals, taking unto them great reputation, chiefly after they had
excluded the Romans from the election of the Pope, Original of Cardinals, by
Pope Pascale 1.
who (almost ever before that time) was some Citizen of Rome. Pascale being
dead, Eugenio secundo, of the order of Santa Sabina, was elected Pope. And
Italy being then in the hands of French men, did partly alter the order of
government, and the more for that the Popes had in the temporalities thereof
gained greater authority and made Earls and Marqueses, as before time,
Longino Esarco of Rauenna had created Dukes. After a few other Bishops,
Osporco a Roman, aspired to the Papacy; who for the homeliness of his name,
The first occasion why the Popes did take new names at there election.
caused himself to be called Sergio: which was the beginning why the names of
Popes was changed at their elections. By this time Carlo the Emperor was
dead, to whom succeeded Lodouico his son. After his death, there grew so
great contention amongst his sons, that in the time of his graund-children,
the Empire was taken from the house of France, and brought into Germany, At
what time the Empire was taken from the house of France.
where the first Emperor of that nation was called Ainolfo: and by means of
these disorders, the family of Carlo, did loose not only the Empire, but also
the kingdom of Italy, because the Lombardi recovered their strength and
offended the Pope and Romans so much, as the Pope not knowing how to be
helped, for necessity gave the Kingdom of Italy to Berengario Duke of
Erieoli. The kingdom of Italy, given to Beringario.
These accidents encouraged the Vnni, who then remained in Pannonia to assault
Italy. But being come to trial of battle with Berengario, they were
vanquished, and forced to return into Pannonia, now called Vngaria: which
country has ever since retained their name. At that time Romano Chieftaine of
the Imperial Army, deposed his master Constantino, and made himself
Emperor in Greece. By reason whereof, Puglia and Calauria rebelled from the
obedience of the Empire, and suffered the Sarasins to come thither: who being
there, and possessing the Countries, attempted to besiege Rome. But the
Romans, (because Beringario was occupied in the wars against the Vnni) made
Albarigo Duke of Tuscan their Captain, by whose virtue, Rome was saved from
the Sarasins. They being departed from the siege, builded a Castle upon the
mountain called Gargano, and from thence they commanded Puglia and Calauria,
and disturbed the rest of Italy. Thus in those days Italy was maruellously
afflicted: toward the Alps, assaulted by the Vnni, and toward Naples, by
the Sarasins. In these miseries Italy many years remained, under three Kings
of the Beringarii, one succeeding an other. In which time, the Pope and the
Church were continually molested; and by means of division of the princes in
the West, and the weakness of the Emperor in the East, knew not where to
be succored. The City of Genoua, with all the Rivers thereto belonging,
werein those days by the Sarasins destroyed: whereof came the greatness of
the City of Pisa, for thither many people fled for refuge. This happened in
the year of the Christian religion, nine hundredth thirty and one. But Ottone
son of Enrico and Matilda Duke of Saxony (a man exceeding wise and of great
reputation) being become Emperor, Agabito then Pope, How Italy was governed.
Anno. 931.
prayed him to come into Italy, and save him from the tyranny of the
Berengarii. The states of Italy were in those days thus disposed. Lombardy was
under Berengario the third, and his son Alberto. Toscana and Romagna, were
governed by the deputies of the Emperor in the West. Puglia and Calauria,
partly to the Emperor in Greece, and partly to the Sarasins obeyed. In Rome
were elected yearly of the nobility two Consuls, who according to the ancient
custom ruled that City. Under them was appointed a Judge to minister justice
to the people. There was also a council of twelve men, which gave governors
to the towns subject unto Rome. The Pope had in Rome more or less authority,
according to the favor he found with the Emperors, or others, that were
there most mighty. Then came the Emperor Ottone into Italy, and took the
kingdom thereof from the Berengarii: who therein had reigned, fifty five
years, and therewith had restored the Pope to his dignity. This Emperor had
one son, and one nephew, both also named Ottoni, the one and the other of
them succeeded in the Empire. In the reign of Ottone the third, Pope Gregorio
quinto, was by the Romans driven out, and Ottone came into Italy, to put him
again into the possession of Rome. The Pope then to be revenged of the Romans,
The election of the Emperor given to the Germans. Ann. 1002.
took from them the authority of creation of the Emperor, and gave the same
to the Germans, appointing three Bishops of Maguntia, Treueri, and Colonia:
and three secular Princes; the Marquis of Brandenburge, the Earl Palatine of
the Rhein, and the Duke of Sassonia to be electors, which constitution was made
in the year 1002. After the death of Ottone the third, Enrico Duke of Bauiera,
was by these electors, made Emperor, and after twelve years, by Pope Stephano
the eight crowned. This Enrico and Simionda his wife, were persons of most
godly life, as appears by diverse churches by them builded and endowed.
Amongst which number was the temple of S. Miniato, near to the City of
Florence: Enrico died in the year 1023. After whom reigned Currado of Sueuia,
and after him Enrico the second, who came into Italy, and the church the^ being
in schism, found there, three Popes: all whom he deposed, and caused Clemente
secundo to be elected, Three Popes deposed by Enrico 2.
and of him was he crowned Emperor. In those days Italy was governed, partly
by the people, partly by the Princes, and partly by the ministers of the
Emperor: of who^, the chief was called Chancellor. Among the Princes Gotfredi,
and the Countess Matilda his wife, borne of Beatrice sister to Enrico the
second, were most potent: for she and her husband possessed Lucca, Parma,
Reggio, and Mantoua, with all that country at this day called Patrimonio. The
ambition of the people of Rome, did at that time make much war with the
Popes: for they, having helped the Pope to drive out the Emperors, and reformed
the City as to them seemed good, sodeinly became enemies to him. And the
Popes received more injuries at their hands, The Romans ancient enemies to the
Pope.
the^ at any other Christian Princes. And even in those days when the censure
of the Popes made all the West of the world to tremble, yet even then, the
people of Rome rebelled. And both the Popes, and the people studied for nothing
so much, as how one of them, might overthrow the authority and estimation of
the other. Nicholao secundo being aspired to the Papacy, took from the Romans
the creation of the Pope, The creation of the Pope taken from the Romans.
as his predecessor Gregorio quinto, had before taken from them, the election
of the Emperor, he made also a constitution that the election of the Popes
should from thencefoorth appertain to the Cardinals. Neither was he so
contented, but compounding with some Princes that then governed Calauria and
Puglia (for such reasons as shall be hereafter declared) constrained all the
officers appointed by the Romans, to yield their obedience to the Popes, and
removed some of them from their offices. After the death of Nicholao, there
happened a schism in the church, because the Clergy of Lombardy would not
obey Alexander the second, elected at Rome, but created Gadalo of Parma
Antipope. Enrico, hating the greatness of these Bishops, sent unto the Pope
Alessandro, requiring him to resign the Papacy, and command the Cardinals to
go into Germany, there to elect a new Pope. This Enrico was the first Prince
that felt the force of spiritual displeasure. The original of the Guelfi, and
Gibellini. An. 1080.
For the Pope called a new counsel in Rome, whereat he deprived him from the
empire and kingdom. After that time, some people of Italy followed the Pope,
and some the Emperor, which was the beginning of the factions who called
themselves Guelfi and Gibellini. Thus Italy delivered from foreign invasion,
by civil discord began to be tormented. Enrico being excommunicate, was by his
own people constrained to come to Rome on barefoote, and kneel to the Pope
for pardon. Which happened in the year 1080. Notwithstanding shortly after,
there happened a new discord betwixt the Pope and Enrico. Whereupon the Pope
again did excommunicate the Emperor, who sent forthwith his son (also called
Enrico) with an army to Rome. He with the help of the Romans (who hated the
Pope) besieged him in his castle, till Roberto Guiscardo came from Puglia to
the rescue. Enrico tarried not his coming, but returned alone into Germany.
The Romans persisted in their obstinacy: Rome sacked.
so that Rome was again by Roberto sacked and brought unto the former ruin,
notwithstanding it had been lately by diverse Popes repaired. And because of
this Roberto the kings of Naples be descended, it seems not superfluous
particulerly to set down his actions and descent. After the disunion happened
among the heirs of Carlo Magno, (as have been before declared) the same
occasioned a new people of the North, called Normandi to assail France, and
conquered that country, which is called of them, Normandia: of those people,
some part came into Italy, in the time that the Berengarii, Saraseni and Vnni
troubled the same. They also took some towns in Romagna, which wars, they
virtuously performed. Of those Normaine princes, one called Tancredi, begot
diverse sons: amongst whom was Guglielmo surnamed Terabar, The descent of the
kings of Napoli.
and Roberto called Guiscardo. The principality being come to Guglielmo, and
the tumults of Italy somewhat ceased, the Saraseni did notwithstanding still
hold Sicilia, and continually made rodes upon the land of Italy. For which
cause, Guglielmo agreed with the prince of Capoua and Salerno, and with Melorco
the Greek, (who governed Puglia and Calauria for the Emperor of Greece) to
assault Sicilia, and after victory, it was condescended amongst them, to
divide the places victored, by four parts. This enterprise had fortunate
success, and the Saraseni driven out, they possessed Sicilia. After which
victory Melorco secretly caused men to come from Grecia, and for the Emperor
took possession of the whole Island, not dividing the spoil, but took all to
his own share, wherewith Guglielmo became discontented, yet hiding his offense
till a time more convenient, departed from Sicilia with the princes of Salerno,
and Capoua: who being departed upon the way homewards, Guglielmo returned not
to Romagna, but with his soldiers marched toward Puglia, where he won
Melfi. And shortly after (notwithstanding the forces of the Grecian Emperor)
he possessed well near all Puglia and Calauria. In which provinces, he
governed in the time of Nicholao secundo. Roberto Guiscardo his brother, having
many differents with his nephews, for the inheritance of land, used the
authority of the Pope, to compound them. And the Pope did willingly favor
him, being desirous to have the friendship of Roberto, to the end that against
the Emperors of Germany, and the people of Rome, he might be defended, as in
effect, it fell after out, and has been already declared, how at the request
of Gregorio septimo, he drove Enrico from the siege of Rome, and subdued the
people therein. To Roberto succeeded Ruggeri and Guglielmo, his sons. To
their possessions he annexed Napoli, and all those lands which lie between
Napoli and Rome. He gave also Sicilia unto Ruggero. But Guglielmo going
afterward to Constantinople to marry the Emperors daughter, was by Ruggero
deprived of his Country. Ruggero after this victory became insolent, and
called himself king of Italy: yet after contented with the title of King of
Puglia and Sicilia, was the first that gave name and law to that kingdom,
which to this day within the ancient bounds thereof, is maintained.
Notwithstanding it has many times exchaunged both blood and Nation. Because
the race of Normandy being worn out, the Kingdom came to the hands of the
Germans, from them, to the French men, from the French to the Aragonesi, and
at this day it is possessed by the Flemmings. Now was Vrbano the second, Pope
Vrbano. 2.
become Pope, who being hated in Rome, and fearing through the disuniting of
Italy, he could not in security there remain: determined a glorious
enterprise. First he went into France, accompanied with all his Clergy, and
in the city of Anuersa, he assembled many people: to whom he made a solemn
Oration, wherein he persuaded an enterprise against the Saraseni, which took so
great effect, as the people were desirous to perform the same; which
enterprise (with all others to that purpose) were called Crociata. For all
those men that went in that journey, La Crociata.
wear upon their Armours and garments, a red Cross. The princes and chief
leaders of that enterprise, were Gotfredi Eustachio, and Alduino di Bulgo,
Earl of Bologna, with one Pietro an Hermit: who for his godly life and
wisdom was greatly respected. To this journey, many Kings contributed
treasure, and many private men without pay, therein personally served. So
great effects did the religion work in those days, to persuade the minds of
men, moved with the example of such as were their heads. This enterprise had in
the beginning glorious success: for all Asia minor, Soria, and part of Egypt,
were therein conquered by the Christians. At which time began the order of
Knighthood of Jerusalem, The original of knights of Jerusalem.
which to this day continues, and is the chief obstacle to the Turks. About
that time also grew the order of the Knights, Templarii: which for their evil
life was shortly after suppressed. In diverse times following, diverse
accidents happened: wherein many nations and many particular men were advanced.
For the furnishing of this enterprise, the Kings of France and England, the
Pisani, Venetians, and Genouesi, passed the sea, and gained great reputation,
fighting in fortune variable, till the time of Saladino the Sarasine: whose
virtue (the rather through discord of the Christians) did in the end recover
all, that before had been gotten. So were the Christians after four scorce and
ten years driven out of those Countries, which with great honor and
happiness they had won and defended. After the death of Vrbano, Pascale
secundo was created Pope: Pope Pascale 2.
and Enrico the fourth became Emperor, who went to Rome, pretending friendship
to the Pope, but being arrived there, by force he took the Pope prisoner,
and put him with all his Clergy in prison: from whence they could not be
discharged, till the Pope had granted, that the Emperor might dispose of the
Churches in Germany as himself thought good. Then died the Countess Matilda,
and made the Church heir of all her Country. After the death of Pascale and
Enrico the fourth succeeded diverse Popes, and diverse Emperors, till at
length, to the Papacy was elected Alissandro tertio, and to the Empire, Pope
Alessandro. 3.
Federigo Sueuo called Barbarossa. The popes in that time had many quarrelles
with the people of Rome, and the Emperors: which were increased in the reign
of Barbarossa. Federigo was a man of war most excellent, but therewith so
haughty of mind and courage, as he disdained to give place to the pope,
notwithstanding, he came to Rome to be Crowned Emperor, and peaceably
returned into Germany: though he remained there not very long contented. For
shortly after, he came again into Italy to reform some Towns in Lombardy,
which would not obey him. At that time it happened, the Cardinal of S. Clement,
by Nation a Roman, divided himself from the Pope Alissandro, and found means
(by favor of some Cardinals) to be also chosen Pope. At that instant,
Federigo the Emperor was with his Army before the City of Crema: to whom
Alissandro complained of the Antipope; the Emperor answered, that both he and
the Antipope should come unto him, and then he would decide their controversy,
and judge which of them were true Pope. This answer displeased Alissandro, who
conceauing thereby, that the Emperor was inclined to favor the Antipope, did
excommunicate him, and fled to Phillip King of France. Federigo in the mean
while, proceeding in the Wars of Lombardy, took Millan, and razed it: which
was the cause, that Verona, Padoua, and Vicenza (by common consent) determined
to resist him. Then died the Antipope, in whose place Federigo created Guido of
Cremona. The Romans by means of the Popes absence, and the business of the
Emperor in Lombardy, had recovered a little authority in Rome, and began to
command some Towns under them* and because the Tusculani would not yield to
their authority, they went popularly to assail them; who being aided by
Federigo, the Romans were overthrown with so great slaughter, as after that
Overthrow Rome was never well peopled, nor rich. In this mean space, Pope
Alissandro was returned to Rome, persuading himself that through the enmity
of the Romans and Federigo, he might there safely remain: and the rather, by
reason of the Enemies which the Emperor had in Lombardy. Nevertheless, Federigo
(setting aside all respects) besieged Rome: where Alissandro tarried not his
coming, but fled to Gulielmo King of Puglia, who after the death of Ruggiero
remained Heir of that Kingdom. Federigo driven thence by the Plague, left the
Siege, and returned into Germany. The Towns of Lombardy which were rebelled,
to the end they might the rather recover Pauia and Tortona, (which stood for
the Emperor) built a new City, to be the refuge of that War, calling the
same Alissandria, in honor of the Pope Alissandro, and in despite of the
Emperor Federigo. Then died Guidone Antipope: in whose place Giouanni of Fermo
was created. He, through the favor of the Emperors Faction in Montefiascone,
there dwelled: Pope Alissandro in the mean time was gone into Tuscolo, called
thither by that People; hoping that with his authority he might defend them
from the Romans. Thither came Ambassadors from Enrico King of England, to
declare unto the Pope, that their King was not culpable in the murder of
Thomas Bishop of Canterbury, as he had been publicly slandered. For trial
whereof, the Pope sent two Cardinals into England, to examine the truth of that
matter: who found the King not guilty. Nevertheless, in respect of the infamy,
and that he had not honored that holy Man according to his desert; they
enjoined the King for penance to assemble his Nobility, and in their presence
to swear and protest his innocence: The King of England put to penance by
Pope Alissandro.
and was moreover commanded, that with all speed, he should at his proper
charge send two hundred Soldiers to Jerusalem, and there pay them for one
year; and himself within three years to go thither in person, and lead with
him an Army the greatest that he could possibly make: besides that, he
should disanull all things done within his Kingdom, to the prejudice of the
Liberty Ecclesiastical, and consent, that all and every Subject of his might
appeal to Rome. All which things Enrico granted: and notwithstanding he were
a mighty King, submitted himself to that Judgment, which (at this day)
every private man would be ashamed to yield unto. But notwithstanding the
Popes great power over Princes far off, yet could he not make himself obeyed
of the Romans: by whom he was not suffered to dwell at Rome, though he
promised not to intermeddle in any thing, save only the Ecclesiastical
government. Hereby may be noted, that things which seem to be, and be not,
are dreaded more far of, then feared near at hand. By this time, Federigo
was returned to Italy, and being prepared to make new vvarres with the Pope,
all his prelates and Barons gave him to understand, that they intended to leave
him, unless he reconciled himself to the church: whereby this Emperor was
constrained to go unto Venice, and there to adore the pope; whereof ensued a
full pacification. In this peace the pope deprived the Emperor of all his
authority in Rome, and named Gulielmo king of Sicilia and Puglia for his
confederate. Federigo not content to live in peace, but loving the wars,
determined to enterprise Asia, and so gain glory against Mahomet, which against
the Pope he could not. But being arrived at the river Cidno, enticed with the
excellency of that water, The death of Federigo the Emperor.
he washed himself therein, and suddenly died. Whereby may be imagined that water
did more good to the Mahumetans, then the popes exco^municatio^ to the
Christians: because the exco^municatio^ did only allay the Emperors ambition,
but this water did utterly quench it. Federigo being dead, it remained only
for the pope to reform the disobedience of the Romans: and after many
disputations touching the creation of the Consuls, it was agreed, that
(according to the ancient custom) they should be elected by the Romans: yet
before they took their office upon them, they should swear fidelity to the
church; which agreement, caused Giouanni the Antipope to fly to Monte Albano,
where shortly after he died. Then died also Gulielmo king of Napoli, who
having one only son called Tancredi, the pope determined to take that
kingdom from him, but the nobility thereof would not consent to the pope,
resolving to yield their obedience to Tancredi. At that time Celestino tertio
was pope, Pope Celestino 3.
who desirous to take the kingdom from Tancredi, sought means that Enrico
son of Federigo should be made Emperor, and promised him the kingdom of
Naples, upon condition that he should restore unto the church all those towns
thereunto belonging. And to make that action the more easy, he took out of a
monastery, Gostanza an old woman, daughter of Gulielmo, and married her unto
Federigo. Thus passed the kingdom of Naples to the Germans from the
Normands, who were the ancient founders thereof. So soon as Enrico the
Emperor had settled all things in Germany, he came into Italy, accompanied
with Gostanza his wife, and his son, but four years old, called Federigo.
Where, with some difficulty (because Tancredi was dead, leaving only a little
son called Rogeri) he possessed the kingdom. Within a small time after in
Sicilia died Enrico, to whom Federigo succeeded in the kingdom, and to the
Empire was elected Ottone Duke of Sassonia, through favor of pope Innocentio
quarto. But so soon as he was crowned Emperor, Pope Innocentio 4.
contrary to all expectation, he became enemy to the pope, surprised Romagna,
and prepared to assault the kingdom. For which doing, the pope did
excommunicate him, all other men left him, and the electors created Federigo
king of Napoli. Then came Federigo to Rome for the crown, but the pope fearing
his greatness, denied him, and sought to remove him out of Italy, as he had
done before to Ottone. Therewith Federigo offended, went into Germany, and made
much war against Ottone, and at length ouerthrevv him. In the mean while
died Innocentio, who (besides other his notable works) builded the Hospital
of Santo spirito in Rome. Pope Honorio 3. erector of the order of S. Francisco
Anno 1218.
After him succeeded Honorio tertio, in whose time, began the orders of
Santo Dominico and Francisco, the year 1218. This pope crowned Federigo, unto
whom Giouanni descended of Bauldouino king of Jerusalem, who (with the
remain of the Christians in Asia still possessed that title) gave his kingdom
to his daughter in marriage. Hereof it comes, that who so ever is King of
Napoli, is also entitled king of Jerusalem. Italy in those days was thus
governed. The Romans made no more Consuls in Rome, but in steed of them, they
created (with the same authority) sometimes one, and sometime more Senators.
The league which the cities of Lombardy had made against Federigo Barbarossa,
still continued. The Cities confedered against the Emperor, were Milano,
Brescia, Mantoua, with the greater part of Romagna: and with them Verona,
Vicenza, Padoua, and Treuigi. On the Emperors part, were Cremona, Bargamo,
Parma, Reggio, Modena, and Trento. The other Cities and Castles of Lombardy,
Romagna, and La Marca Treuigiana, according to their necessity, favored
sometimes the one, and sometimes the other part. In the time of Ottone the
third, came into Italy a man called Ezelino, Ezelino.
of whom remained one son, who likewise begot an other Ezelino, he being rich
and mighty, followed Federigo the second, who was (as has been before said)
enemy to the Pope. This Emperor brought into Italy, by the favor of Ezelino,
took Verona and Mantoua, razed Vicenza, surprised Padoua, and vanquished the
army of the towns confederate: and in the end, marched toward Toscana.
Ezelino in the mean time, surprised La Marca Triuigiana, but he could not take
Ferrara, being defended by Azone of Este, and other soldiers sent by the Pope
from Lombardy. Azone de Este first Duke of Farrara.
The siege then levied, the Pope gave that city in Feudo to Azone of Este, of
whom be descended all those princes, that till this day have there governed.
Federigo stayed at Pisa, and being desirous to become Lord of Toscana, the
rather to possess the same, and discover those that favored him, from the
other that were his enemies, practiced division among the people of the
country, which was afterward the ruin of all Italy. Because then the factions
of Guelfi and Ghibellini increased, calling them Guelfi that followed the Pope,
and Ghibellini that followed the Emperor. In Pistoia, these names of faction,
were first begun. Federigo leaving Pisa, by many means assaulted and spoiled
the towns belonging to the church: Insomuch, that the Pope not having other
remedy, proclaimed his Crociata against him, as did his predecessors against
the Saraseni. The Emperor forced to entertain Sarasins.
Federigo then fearing to be abandoned by his soldiers (as Federigo Barbarossa
and other Emperors had been) enterteined great numbers of Sarasins, and to
make them more willing to serve (knowing that they feared not the Popes curses)
he gave them the city of Nocera in the kingdom: persuading himself, that
they having that refuge, Pope Innocent 4.
might serve him with the more security. Innocentio quarto became Pope, and
mistrusting Federigo, went to Genoua, and from thence into France: and called a
Council at the city of Lions. Whereunto Federigo determined to go, but was
withholden by the rebellion of Parma: from which enterprise repulsed, he went
into Toscana, and thence, into Sicilia, where he died, leaving in Sucuia his
eldest son Corrado, and in Puglia his other son, (being base borne) called
Manfredi, whom he had made Duke of Beneuento. Corrado being come for
possession of the kingdom, arrived at Napoli, and there died, leaving one
little son called Curradino: who at that time remained in Germany. Then
Manfredi first as governor to Curradino, and after reporting that Curradino
was dead) against the Popes will, and the Neapolitans also (whom he forced to
consent) made himself king. During these troubles in the kingdom, happened
many quarrels between the factions of Guelfi and Ghibilini, the one being
favored by the Popes Legate, and the other by Ezelino, who possessed welneare
all Lombardy, on the other side of the river Po. And because in this war, The
death of Ezelino.
the city of Padoua rebelled, Ezelino put to death twelve thousand Citizens
thereof, and he himself before the end of the war, being then thirty years
of age, was slain. After his death, all the towns by him possessed became
free. Manfredi king of Napoli, according to the custom of his ancestors,
continued enemy to the church, Pope Vrbano 4.
holding the Pope (called Vrbano quarto) in continual distress: in so much as
the Pope proclaimed the Crociata against him; which done, he went unto
Perugia, where he remained, aspecting his soldiers. Who (coming thither
slowly and in small numbers) thought that to vanquish Manfredi, those forces
were not sufficient. He therefore prayed aid in France, of Carlo Duke of
Angio, brother to king Lodouico, creating him king of Sicilia, and Napoli,
desiring him to come into Italy, and take possession of those kingdoms. But
before Carlo could come to Rome, that Pope died, and Clemente quarto elected.
In whose time, Pope Clement 4.
Carlo with thirty galleys came to Ostia, appointing the rest of his army to
march thither by land. During his abode in Rome, the Romans to honor him,
made him a Senator of Rome, and the Pope invested him in the kingdom, with
condition he should pay yearly fifty thousand florines to the church. The
Pope also decreed, that neither Carlo, nor none of his successors in that
kingdom, should ever be elected Emperors. Carlo then went on in his iourny
against Manfredi, whom he vanquished and slew, near to Beneuento, whereby he
possessed Sicilia, and the kingdom. Notwithstanding Curradino, to whom by
testament of his father that kingdom apperteined, assembling great forces in
Germany, came into Italy against Carlo, and fought with him at Tagliacozzo,
where he was overthrown; and being disguised, fled: yet afterward was taken,
and slain. Italy then continued quiet, Pope Adriano 5.
till the reign of Adriano quinto, at which time, Carlo dwelling in Rome, and
governing there by the office of Senator, the Pope could not endure his
authority, and therefore went to inhabit at Viterbo: from thence he sent unto
Ridolpho the Emperor, desiring him to come into Italy against Carlo. Thus the
Popes sometimes for love of religion, The ambition of Popes, a ruin to Italy.
and sometimes for their own ambition, ceased not to call into Italy new men,
and stir up new wars. For so soon as any prince was by them made mighty,
repenting the same, they practiced his overthrow. Neither would they suffer
that any should possess that Country, which themselves (through their
weakness) could not. Yet did the Princes always fear them, because either
by fighting or flying, they prevailed: if they were not by some practice
oppressed, as was Bonifacio octauo, and some others who were taken by color of
friendship, which the Emperors to them pretended. Ridolpho came not into
Italy, being withholden with his wars against the King of Bohemia. In the
mean time died Adriano, and in his place was created Nicholao tertio,
descended of the house of Orsini, Pope Adriano 3.
a man very bold and ambitious. He by all means possible sought to diminish
the authority of Carlo: and devised that Ridolpho the Emperor should
complain, that Carlo maintained a governor in Toscana in favor of the
Guelfi. Carlo gave credit unto the Emperor, and revoked thence his governor.
And the Pope forthwith sent thither one of his nephews a Cardinal, to be
governor for the Empire. So that the Emperor for this honor done unto him by
the Pope, restored Romagna unto the Church, which by his ancestors had been
taken away. The Pope then created Bertoldo Orsino, Duke of Romagna. And
imagining himself mighty enough to show his face to Carlo, took from him
the office of Senator: and made a decree, that no man descended of royal
race, should after possess that dignity. He had also devised to take Sicilia
from Carlo, and practiced with Piero king of Aragon: which practice in the time
of his successor took effect. He intended moreover, to make two new kings of
his own house, the one in Lombardy, the other in Tuscan: whose powers might
defend the church, both from the Germans that would attempt to come into
Italy, and from the French men, who were already in Napoli. But with this
determination, he died. And was the first Pope, that openly manifested his own
ambition; practicing (under color to make the church great) to honor and
enrich his own kindred. For as before this time, no mention was made of the
advancement of Popes kinsfolks or posterity, so afterward, every history
does show, that the Popes have studied for nothing more, then how to advance
their own blood. And as heretofore they have labored to make them princes, so
(if it were in their power) they would now procure the Papacy to be heritable.
Yet true it is, that hitherto all principalities by them erected, have had no
long being, for so soon as that Pope (who ordained their advancement) did
fail, the honor of the person advanced, Pope Martino 3.
decayed with him. Then Martino tertio became Pope, who being a French man,
favored Carlo, and in his aid, sent soldiers unto Romagna which then
rebelled. And his camp being before Furly, Guido Bonati (a man learned in
Astrology) persuaded the people, that so soon as he gave them a token, they
should presently assault their enemies, which they did, and in that victory, all the French me^ were taken and slain. About this time, the practice of Nicolao
tertio with Piero King of Aragon, was put in execution. By means whereof, the
people of Sicilia murdered all the French men that could be found in that
Island: which done, King Piero took possession, alleging, that having married
Gostanza daughter of Manfredi, that country to him apperteined. Carlo preparing
for a new war to recover his loss, died: leaving one son called Carlo the
second. Who being taken prisoner in the war of Sicilia, and desirous of
liberty, promised to return to prison, if within three years he could not
obtain of the Pope, that the house of Aragon should be invested to the
kingdom of Sicilia. Ridolpho the Emperor, intending to have come into Italy,
and recovered the reputation of the Empire, came not, but sent thither an
Ambassador with authority to give freedom to all those cities, which would
buy the same at his hands: as many did, and with their liberty, changed also
their manner of living. Then succeeded to the Empire Adulpho of Sassonia, Pope
Celestino and Bonifacio 8.
and to the Papacy Pietro Murone, named Pope Celestino: who being an Hermit and
full of devotion, within seven months resigned the Papacy, and Bonifacio
Octauo was elected. The heavens knowing a time would come, when Italy should be
delivered, both from the French men and Almaines, and that the country might be
recovered wholly in possession of Italians, to the end the Pope failing of
strangers, might not be able to hold his reputation, caused two mighty
families to arise in Rome. The one called Orsini, the other Colonni: whose
power and nearenesse, might keep down the Popes from aspiring. The Pope
Bonifacio aware thereof, practiced to extirpate the Colonni, and did for that
purpose not only excommunicate them, but also against them published the
Crociata. Which proceeding, although it somewhat offended them, yet did it much
more offend the church: because those swords which in defense of the faith had
virtuously prevailed, being employed for private ambition against the
Christians, became blunt: and so the Popes desire to enforce the minds of
others, wrought a contrary effect, and by little and little disarmed themselves.
This Pope did also depose two Cardinals of that house of Colonna, and the
chief of them called Sciarra, disguised himself, and fled. Afterward being
taken by Pirates, was made a slave in a galley, til arrived at Marsilia, was
there by fortune known, redeemed, and sent into France to King Philippo, who
had been excommunicate, and deprived of his kingdom by Bonifacio. Philippo
considering with himself, that to make wars with the Pope, either he was not
strong enough, or should therein adventure great dangers: determined to work by
practice, and pretending to procure peace with the Pope, sent secretly Sciarra
into Italy, who being come to Anagnia, where the Pope then was, with the aid
of friends in the night took him. And albeit the people of that town did
shortly after deliver him, yet of very melancholy and sorrovv, the Pope
distraught of his wits, Pope Bonifacio inuentor of the Guibileo.
died. This Bonifacio was he that ordained the Jubilee, in the year 1300. and
commanded that every hundredth year, the same should be so solemnized. After
that time happened many troubles betvveene the factions of Guelfi and
Ghibellini. And by reason that Italy was abandoned by the Emperors, many towns
became free, and many others by tyrants possessed. Pope Benedetto restored the
Hat to the Cardinals Colonesi, and absolved Philippo the French King. Pope
Clements 5.
To him succeeded Clemente quinto, who being a French man, removed his court
into France in the year 1306. In the mean space Carlo the second King of
Napoli, died. To that kingdom succeeded Robarto his son: and to the Empire,
Arrigo of Lucemburgh: who notwithstanding the absence of the Pope from Rome,
went thither to be crowned. By mean of that journey, grevv many troubles in
Lombardy, because all those that had been banished, either Guelfi or Ghibellini
were admitted to return to their towns, and there being, made so great
quarrels among themselves, as the Emperor with all his power could not
appease. The Emperor then departed from Lombardy to Genoua, and so to Pisa,
where he practiced to take Toscana from the king Robarto. But having no
success, went on to Rome, where he remained not long, being driven out by the
Orsini, and the friends of king Robarto. Then returned he to Pisa, where he
devised (for his better proceeding in the wars of Toscana, and the rather also
to remove king Robarto from his government) that Frederigo king of Sicilia
should assault those countries. But at such time, as he hoped at one instant)
to perform both those enterprises, he died: and Lodouico of Bauiera, was
chosen Emperor. In this mean space, was created Giouanni 22. In whose days
the Emperor ceased not to persecute the Guelfi, Pope John 22.
and the church which was chiefly defended by king Robarto, and the
Florentines. Whereof grew great war in Lombardy, by the Visconti, against the
Guelfi, and in Toscana, by Castruccio of Lucca, against the Florentines. And
because the family of Visconti, was that which began the Dukedom of Milan
(one of the five principallities that governed Italy) I think good more at
large hereafter to entreat of them. After that the league of the cities of
Lombardy was concluded, (as has been beforesaid) and they resolved to defend
themselves from Federigo Barbarossa: Milan also being repaired of the ruins,
conspired with those cities of the league, to be revenged of former injuries.
Which league brideled Barbarossa, and for a time gave countenance to the
faction of the church then in Lombardy. During these vvarres, the house of
Torre grevv to great reputation, so long as the Emperors had in that country
small authority. But when Federigo the second, was come into Italy, and the
Ghibellini (through the help of Ezelino) became strong, the humor of
Ghibilini sprung up in every city, and the house of Visconti, taking part with
that faction, chased out of Milan the family of Torre: yet were they not long
out, but by mean of a peace concluded betwixt the Emperor and the Pope, he
with his Court being in France, and Arrigo of Lucimburg going to Rome for the
Crown, was received into Milan, by Maffeo Visconti, and Guido della Torre, who
at that time were chief of those houses: yet Maffeo intending by help of the
Emperor to drive Guido out of the City, and supposing that enterprise the
more likely, because Guido was in faction contrary to the Empire: he took
occasion upon the complaints of the people against the evil demeanor of the
Germains, slily persuading and encouraging every man to take Arms, and deliver
themselves from the servitude of that barbarous nation. And when all things
were made ready, A practice of Ma. Visconts against the house of Torre.
he caused a secret minister of his to move a tumult. Whereat, all the people
took Arms against the name of Germany, and Maffeo with his sons and
followers, suddeinly armed, went to Arrigo, letting him understand, that this
tumult proceeded from those of the house of Torre: who not contented to live
private in Milan, took occasion to spoil him, gratify the Guelfi of Italy,
and make themselves princes of that city. Notwithstanding, he persuaded the
Emperor to be of good cheer, for they and their followers would in every
respect save and defend him. Arrigo believed all that which Maffeo had spoken,
and joining his forces with the Visconti, assailed those Della Torre. Who
being dispersed in diverse places of the City to appease the tumult, so many
of them as could be found were slain, and the rest spoiled and sent into
Italy. Maffeo Visconti, thus made (as it were) prince of Milan, had diverse
sons, the chief of them were called Galiazzo, and Azo: and after them,
Luchino and Giouanni. Giouanni became Archbishop of that City, and of Luchino
who died before him) remained Barnabo, The mean how the Visconti aspired to be
Dukes of Milan.
and Galiazzo called Conte de Virtue. He, after the death of the Archbishop,
killed Barnabo his uncle, and so became only prince of Milan, and was the
first that had the title of Duke. Of him descended Philippo and Giouan
Mariangilo who being slain by the people of Milan, the state remained only to
Philippo, and he having no heirs male, the Dukedom was translated from the
house of Visconti to the Sforzi, as shall be hereafter declared. But to return
to our matter, Lodouico the Emperor to give reputation to his faction, and
take the Crown, came into Italy, and being arrived at Milan, to the end he
might leauy money of the Milanesi, offered to make them free, and for proof
thereof imprisoned the Visconti. Afterward, by mediation of Castruccio of
Lucca, delivered them, and went to Rome. Then the more easily to disturb
Italy, he made Piero de la Coruara, Antipope: by whose authority and the force
of Visconti, he hoped to keep down the contrary faction, both in Toscana and
Lombardy. But Castruccio then died, which was the cause of his ruin: for Pisa
and Lucca presently rebelled. And the Pisani sent the Antipope prisoner to the
Pope, the^ remaining in France. Whereupon the Emperor dispairing of his
enterprise in Italy, returned to Germany. The king of Boemia called into Italy.
So soon as he was gone, Giouanni king of Bohemia, came into Italy, called
thither by the Ghibilini of Brescia, and possessed that City, with one other
called Bergamo. And forasmuch as the coming of this king was with consent of
the Pope (although he fained the contrary) the Legate of Bologna favored
him: imagining, for that cause the Emperor would no more return into Italy,
by whose departure thence, the country was greatly altered. The Florentines and
the king Robarto, seeing that the Legate favored the enterprise of the
Ghibilini, became enemies to all those that the Legate and the king of Bohemia
favored: against whom (without respect of Guelfi or Ghibilini) many princes
joined. Among them were the Visconti, the family of La Scala Filippino Gonzaga
of Mantoua, the house of Carrara, and Este: whereupon the Pope did excommunicate
them all. The king for fear of this league, went home to assemble more forces,
and returned with the^ into Italy, and had (though hardly) the victory, and
then (though with displeasure of the Legate) returned to Bohemia, leaving only
Reggio, and Modena, manned: recommending Parma to Marsilio and Piero de Rossi,
who were in that city of most power. He being gone, Bologna revolted to the
league, and divided among them, four Cities apperteining to the church:
allotting Parma to the house of Scala, Reggio to Gonzaga, Modena to Este, and
Lucca to the Florentines. During the conquest of these Cities, grew great
wars, but they were chiefly by the Venetians, compounded. It may perhaps be
thought strange, that among so many accidents of Italy, I have omitted to
speak of the Venetians common weal, being for the order and power thereof, to
be preferred before every other principallitie. To satisfy that admiration,
the cause thereof being known, I will look backward to time long since passed:
and declare what beginning that City had. The original of Vinegia.
King Attila at such time as he besieged Aquilegia, the inhabitants of that
town (having long defended themselves, and dispairing) fled with their goods
to the rocks within the point of Mare Adriatico. The Padouani seeing the fire
at hand, and fearing that Aquilegia being won, Attila would assault them;
carried all their moueables of most value into the same sea, to a place there
called Riuoalto: whither they also sent their wives, children, and aged men,
leaving the youth to defend the city. Aquilegia being taken, Attila defaced
Padoua, Monselice, Vicenza, and Verona. The Padouani and the chief of the
others, seated themselves in the marshes about Riuoalto. Likewise all the
people of that province (which was aunciently called Venetia) were driven out
by the same misfortune, did also fly thither. Thus constrained by necessity,
they abandoned fair and fertile countries, to inhabit these steril and
paludious places void of all commodity. And yet, because great numbers of
people were at one instant come thither, they made that place not only
habitable, but also pleasant: ordeining among themselves laws and orders,
which amidst so great ruins of Italy, they observed; and within short space
increased in force and reputation. For besides the inhabitants aforesaid, many
of the cities of Lombardy (chiefly those that feared the cruelty of their king
Clefi) fled thither, which was no small increase to that city. So that in the
time of Pipino king of France, when at the request of the Pope, he came to
drive the Lombardi out of Italy, it was agreed in Capitulations, betwixt him
and the Emperor of Grecia, that the Duke of Beneuento and the Venetians,
should be subjects neither to the one nor the other, but among themselves enjoy
liberty. Moreover, considering that as necessity had driven them to dwell
within the water, so it behooved them without help of the firm land, to seek
means whereby they might procure their own liuelihood. For which purpose they
made ships and galleys, and with them sailed throughout the world, and filled
their city with sundry sorts of merchandise, whereof other men having
necessity, required free access unto them. At that time and many years
after, the Venetians thought not upon other dominions, then those where the
traffic of their merchandise might safely arrive. Then they wan diverse havens
in Grecia, Soria, and in the passages that the French men made in Asia: because
they oftentimes employing the Venetian ships, appointed unto them, (as a
reward) the I Will of Candia. While in this estate and order they lived, their
name by sea was terrible, and upon the firm land of Italy venerable. So that
in all controversies that happened, they were (for the most part) arbitrators:
as in controversies which rose in the league, by reason of those cities which
they had divided amongst them. For that controversy being recommended to the
Venetians, they ordered that Bargamo and Brescia should appertain to the
Visconti. But in process of time having conquered Padoua, Vicenza, Triuigi,
Verona, Bargamo, Brescia, with diverse cities in the kingdom, and Romagna,
(entised with desire of government) they atteined so great an opinion of power
and reputation, that not only of the princes of Italy, but also of the kings
beyond the mountains they became feared. Whereupon those princes conspiring
together, took from them in one day, all the states and countries which they
in many years, and with infinite expenses had gained. And though in these
late times they have recovered part, yet not recovering their forces and
reputation, do (like all other princes of Italy) remain at the devotion and
discretion of others. Now was Benedetto 12. come to the Papacy, who seeing
himself driven out of Italy, The decree of Pope Benedetto 12. against the
Emperor.
and fearing that the Emperor Lodouico should become Lord thereof, determined
to make all those his friends, who had usurped the towns which the Emperor
possessed. To the end, that thereby they should have cause to fear the Empire,
and join with him in the defense of Italy. For the more assurance of this
attempt, he made a decree, that all tyrants of Lombardy should by just title
possess the towns by them usurped. But the Pope presently upon this grant,
died, and Clemente sexto, elected in his place. The Emperor then seeing with
what liberality the Pope had given the towns belonging to the Empire, The
Emperors decree to the Popes prejudice.
determined to be no less liberal of the Popes goods, then the Pope had been
of his: and therefore gave freely all lands belonging to the church, which any
tyrant had usurped; and they to hold them, by authority imperial. By mean
whereof, Galiotto Malatesti and his brethren became Lords of Rimino, Pesaro,
and Fano. Anthonio di Montefeltro of la Marca and Vrbin: Gentile da Varano of
Camerino. Guido di Polenta of Rauenna. Sinibaldo Ordalaffi of Furli, and
Cesena: Giouanni Manfredi of Faenza, Lodouico Alidosi, of Imola. Besides these,
many others possessed towns belonging to the church: so as fevv remained out of
the hands of one Prince or other, which was the cause that the Church (till
the coming of Alissandro 6.) was holden down and vveake; but he with the
ruin of these Lords or their posterity, restored the same. At such time as
the Emperor made this grant, he remained at Trento, and seemed as though he
would pass from thence into Italy; whereby grevv many wars in Lombardy: and
by that occasion, the Visconti became Lords of Parma. Then died king Robarto of
Napoli; of whom remained only two grand children, women, begotten by Carlo
his Son, who long before was dead; bequeathing his kingdom to the elder of
them, called Giouanna, Giouanna Q of Naples.
whom he willed to marry with Andrea son to the K. of Vngaria his
nephew. This Andrea continued not long her husband, but was by her murdered,
and she married anew to a brother in law of his, called Lodouico prince of
Tarranto. But K. Lodouico brother to Andrea, to revenge his death, came with
Forces into Italy, and drove the Q. Giouanna with her husband out of the
kingdom. About this time happened in Rome a thing very memorable, which was,
that one called Nicholo di Lorenzo Chancellor in the Campidoll, Nicholo di
Lorenzo.
drove the Senators out of Rome, and made himself (under title of Tribuno)
chief of the Roman Common weal: reducing the same into the ancient form of
government, with so great reputation of justice and virtue, as not only the
towns nere hand, but also al Italy sent Ambassadors unto him. Whereby, the
ancient provinces, seeing Rome restored, looked up; and some of them moved
with fear, and some with hope, honored him. But Nicholo (notvvithstanding
so great authority, in the beginning of this action, abandoned himself; and
dispairing (as it seems) to perform so great an enterprise, not being
enforced by any man, secretly fled, and went to King Carlo of Bohemia: who by
order of the pope (in despite of Lodouico of Bauieria, elected Emperor)
apprehended Nicholo, and sent him to the Pope prisoner. A while after, (as it
were to imitate this Nicholo) another man called Francesco Barocegli,
Francesco Barocegli.
surprised the Tribunate, and drove thence the Senators. Upon which accident,
the Pope (the rather to repress that disorder) took Nicholo out of prison,
restored him to the Tribuneship, and sent him to Rome. Nicholo there arrived,
exercised the office, and put Francesco to death. But the Colonnesi being
enemies to Nicholo, shortly after killed him also, and restored the Senators to
their places. Q. Giouanna deposed.
In the meanetime, the King of Vngaria having deposed the Queen Giouanna,
returned to his Kingdom. The Pope liking better the neighborhood of the Queen
than of that King, found means that he was pleased to restore the Kingdom:
upon condition, that the Queens husband should content himself with the
title of Tarranto, and not be called King. The year 1350. being come, the Pope
thought good that the Giubileo erected by Pope Bonifacio octauo at the end of
every hundred year, might be reduced to fifty year, and made a Decree, that
afterward so it should be. The Romans receiving the same as a benefit, were
content the pope should send to Rome four Cardinals to reform the state of
that City, and make Senators there, those, whom himself thought good. The
Pope also proclaimed Lodouico of Tarranto King of Napoli: for which favor, the
Queen Giouanna gave unto the Church the City of Auignion, which was her
patrimony. By this time Luchino Visconti was dead, whereby Giouanni Archbishop
of Millan remained only Lord of that state, who made many wars upon Toscana,
and other countries his neighbors and thereby became exceeding mighty. After
his death succeeded Barnabo and Galiazzo his nephews: but within short space
Galiazzo died, leaving one son called Giouan Galiazzo, who divided that State
with Barnabo. At this time Carlo K. of Bohemia was Emperor, Pope Innocentio
sexto.
and Innocentio 6. Pope; who sent into Italy Cardinal Egidio, by Nation a
Spaniard, who with his virtue recovered great reputation to the Church, not
only in Romagna and Rome, but also throughout al Italy. He restored Bologna,
usurped by the Archbishop of Millan: he constrained the Romans to receive one
Stranger to be a Senator, who yearly should be sent by the Pope: he made
honorable composition with the Visconti: he vanquished and took prisoner John
Aguto an Englishman, who with four thousand of his own Nation served in
Toscana to the aid of the Ghibelini. Vrbano quinto being come to the Papacy,
Pope Vrbano. 5.
and understanding of so many Victories, determined to visit Italy and Rome:
whether also came Carlo the Emperor; who (after a few months) went to the
Kingdom, and the Pope to Auignion. Vrbano being dead, Gregorio duodecimo was
created: and because then died the Cardinal Egidio, Italy was returned to
trouble, occasioned by the Towns confederate against the Visconti. Whereupon
the Pope sent first a Legate into Italy with six thousand Britains, after in
person followed himself, and settled the Court in Rome, in the year 1376.
which had continued from thence in France 71. years. The Papal court
return^d to Rome. An. 1376.
After the death of this Pope, was created Vrbano sexto. Shortly after at
Fondi, ten Cardinals (who said Vrbano was not well chosen) elected Clemente
octauo. Then the Genouesi (who diverse years had lived under government of the
Visconti) rebelled. Betwixt them and the Venetians (for the Island called
Tenedo) grew Wars of great importance, and divided all Italy. Great artillery
first used in Italy 1376.
In these Wars was great Shot and Artillarie first seen, as Instruments then
newly devised by the Almaines. And albeit the Genouesi had for a time in this
War the advantage, and diverse months besieged Venice, yet in the end the
Venetians had the better, and by mediation of the Pope made peace, in the year
1381. Then chanced a schism in the Church, and Queen Giouanna favored the
Antipope: for which cause, Vrbano practiced an enterprise against her, and sent
Carlo Durezzo (descended of the Kings of Napoli) into the Kingdom; who there
arrived, possessed himself, and forced the Queen to fly unto ^^aunce. The
French King therewith offended, sent Lodouico de Angio into Italy, to recover
the Kingdom for the Queen, remove the Pope Vrbano, and put the Antipope into
possession: but Lodouico in the midst of this enterprice died, and his
Soldiers returned into France. The Pope in the mean while, went unto Napoli,
where he imprisoned nine Cardinals, for having followed the faction of France,
and the Antipope. That done, he quarelled with the king, for not having made a
nephew of his Prince of Capoua: yet faining not to force much thereof, desired
to have Nocera for his dwelling, where afterward he assembled great forces,
and practiced to deprive the king. (The king then marching toward him,) the
Pope tarried not, but fled to Genoua, where he executed those Cardinals whom
he had before imprisoned. From thence he went to Rome, and there to give
himself reputation, created 28. Cardinals. At this time went Carlo king of
Napoli to Vngaria, and was created king, and shortly after slain: having left
in Napoli his wife with two children, Ladislao and Giouanna. At this time
also, Giouanni Galiazzo Visconti, had murdered Barnabo his uncle, and taken
into his hands the state of Milan. And not content with the Dukedom of all
Lombardy, he sought to be also Lord of Toscana. But when he hoped to have
taken the possession, and be crowned king of Italy, died. Next unto Vrbano
sexto, succeeded Bonifacio nono. Then died also in Auignion the Antipope
Clemente septimo. And in his place was elected Benedetto 13. Pope Benedetto 13.
In these days lived in Italy many soldiers of foreign nations, English men,
Almains, and Britains: brought thither partly by those Princes who many times
had served in Italy, and partly sent by the Popes, when they remained at
Auignion. Against these people, the princes of Italy long time made war, and
at length Lodouico da Conio arose, who making a company of Italians, calling
the same S. Giorgio, their virtue and discipline took from the strangers all
reputation, and brought the same to the Italians: of whom ever after the
princes of Italy, in all their wars were served. The Pope by reason of the
controversy betwixt him and the Romans, went unto Scesi, where he remained
till the Iubileo in the year 1400. At which time, the Romans for their profit
were content he should return to Rome, and also place there one Senator at his
election: and therewith also to fortify the Castle of S. Angelo. With these
conditions the Pope returned, and the rather to enrich the Church, he ordained
that every Benefice falling void, The first fruits of Benefices taken by the
Pope.
should pay the first fruits into the treasure house. After the death of Gicuan
Galiazzo Duke of Milan, albeit he left two sons called Giouanniariangelo and
Philippo, yet his Country became divided into many parts. And in the troubles
which thereby happened, Giouanniariangelo was slain, and Philippo for a time
remained prisoner in the Castle of Pauia: yet by good fortune, and favor of
the Captain, was set at liberty. Among others that usurped the possessions of
this Duke, was Gulielmo Della Scalla: who (being a banished man) remained in
the hands of Francesco de Carrara Lord of Padoua; through whom he recovered the
State of Verona, which he enjoyed not long, because Francesco procured him to
be poisoned, and surprised the City. Thereuppon the Vicentini (having lived
quietly under the ensign of the Visconti, and fearing the greatness of
Francesco) yielded their obedience to the Venetians: who presently took arms
against the Lord of Padoua, and first deprived him of Verona, and afterward
wan the City of Padoua. In the mean space died Bonifacio, Pope Innocentio 7.
and Innocentio septimo was elected Pope: to whom the people of Rome presented
an humble request; desiring it might please his Holiness to deliver into their
hands the Fortresses, and restore them to their liberty: which suit the Pope
denied. The people then prayed aid of Ladislao King of Napoli; yet afterward
falling to agreement, the Pope returned to Rome, being fled from thence for
fear of the people, and remained at Viterbo, where he had created a nephew of
his to be Earl of La Marca; which done, he shortly after died, and Gregorio
duodecimo was created Pope: with condition, that he should resign the
Papacy, whenever the Antipope did the like. By persuasion of the Cardinals,
intending to make proof, whether the Church could be reunited or not;
Benedetto Antipope came to Porto Venere, and Gregorio to Luca: where they
practiced many matters, but nothing took effect; so that the Cardinals (both
of the one and the other Pope) did forsake them. Pope Benedetto went into
Spain, and Gregorio to Rimini. The Cardinals on the other part, with the
favor of Baldasarre Cossa Cardinal and Legate of Bologna, ordained a Council
at Pisa, K. Ladislao deposed by pope Alissandro 5.
where they created Alissandro quinto, who did excommunicate Ladislao, giving
that Kingdom to Luigi de Angio: and then with the aid of the Florentines,
Genouesi, and Venetians, together with Baldaser Cossa Legate, assaulted
Ladislao, and took from him Rome. But in the heat of this war died
Alissandro, and Baldaser Cossa was elected, calling himself Giouanni vicessimo
tertio. He, departing from Bologna (being there made Pope) went from thence to
Rome, and there met Luigi de^ Angio, come thither with a Navy from Prouenza.
Then presently they assaulted Ladislao, and overthrew him: yet through the
default of their Leaders, the victory was not followed; by means whereof,
within short space after, the King recovered an Army, and again surprised
Rome. The Pope then fled to Bologna, and Luigi to the province. The Pope
imagining how he might diminish the greatness of Ladislao, found means that
Sigismondo King of Vngaria should be chosen Emperor, persuading him to come
into Italy; which he did, and met with the Pope at Mantoua. There they agreed
to call a Council general, and therein to reunite the Church: the rather to
become able to withstand the force of their enemies. At that time were three
Popes, Gregorio, Benedetto, and Giouanni, who made the Church exceeding weak,
Three popes at one time.
and without reputation. The place elected for this Council, was Costanza a
City of Germany. But contrary to the expectation of Giouanni, the death of
Ladislao, removed the occasion of Council: notwithstanding, being already
bound by promise, he could not refuse to go thither. Being arrived at
Costanza (ouerlate knowing this error) he practiced to fly thence, but was
there stayed, put in prison, and constrained to resign the Papacy. Gregorio
also the other Antipope, by his messenger resigned. Benedetto the third
Antipope, refusing to resign, was condemned for an heriticke, and being
abandoned by his Cardinals, was in the end enforced to resign. The Council
then created Oddo Colonna, who was called Pope Martino quarto. And so the
Church, after forty years of division was united, The Curch after forty
years division, was united
having been all that time in the hands of diverse Popes. In those days, (as
has been beforesaid) Philippo Visconti, remained in the Castle of Pauia. But
Fantino Cane, who (during the troubles of Lombardy) possessed himself of
Vercelli, Allisandria, Nouara Tortona, and had also gathered great riches, then
died. And not having any heir, bequeathed his possessions to Beatrice his
wife; desiring his friends to procure she might be married to Philippo. By
which marriage, Philippo became potent, and recovered Milan, with all the state
of Lombardy. Afterward, to declare himself thankful for so great a benefit,
he accused Beatrice of adultery, and put her to death. Thus atteined to be a
Prince most mighty, he began to think upon the wars of Toscana, before
intended by his father Giouan Galiazzo. Ladislao King of Napoli, at his death,
left unto his sister Giouanna, not only the kingdom, but also a a great
Army, governed by the principal Leaders of all Italy. Among the chief of
whom, was Sforza di Contignuola, in those days a man of war, of singular
reputation. The Queen (the rather to eschew a slander by one Pandolfello a
man brought up by her self) took to husband Iacobo Della Marchia, who was
descended from the French Kings, upon condition that he would content himself
to be called Prince of Tarranto; and suffer her to enjoy the kingdom, with the
government thereof. Notwithstanding, so soon as he arrived at Naples, the
soldiers called him King, whereof great wars followed betwixt the wife and
the husband: War betwixt Queen Giouanna, and her husband.
and sometimes the one, and sometimes the other, had the upper hand. But in the
end, the Queen remained governor of the state, and afterward became enemy
to the Pope. Thereupon Sforza intending to drive her to a disadvantage, and
enforce her to be glad of him, contrary to all expectation gave up his
enterteinment; by which means she remained utterly disarmed, and not having
other, fled for aid to Alfonso King of Arragon and Sicilia, adopting him her
son, and enterteined Braccio di Montone: who was in Arms no less esteemed,
then was Sforza, and therwithall enemy to the Pope, for having surprised
Perugia, with some other towns belonging to the church. Afterward a peace was
taken between her and the Pope. Then the King Alfonso doubting least she would
entreat him as she had entreated her husband) sought secretly to possess the
Fortresses. But she being subtle, fortified her self in the Castle of Napoli.
Suspicions thus growing in the minds of the one and the other, they came to
fight, and the Queen with the help of Sforza (who was returned to her
service) vanquished Alfonso: drove him out of Naples, Lodouico de Angio adopted
king of Naples.
deprived him of his adoption, and adopted Lodouico de Angio; whereof grew a
great war betwixt Braccio who had followed Alfonso, and Sforza that favored
the Queen. In the proceeding of these wars, Sforza occasioned to pass the
river of Pescara, was there drowned: whereby the Queen became again disarmed,
and should have been driven out of the kingdom, if Philippo Visconti Duke of
Mila^ had not enforced Alfonso (proceeding on in his journey against the Queen)
to be stayed. For having besieged Aquila, the Pope (supposing the greatness of
Braccio not to be good for the church) enterteined Fra^cesco the son of
Sforza, against Braccio, and at Aquila slew him, and overthrew his army. On the
part of Braccio, Oddo his son was saved, from who^ the Pope took Perugia, and
left to him Montone: yet shortly after, fighting for the Florentines in
Romagna, was there slain. So then, of all these that served with Braccio,
Nicholo Piccinino, remained of most reputation. Now because we are come with
our history near to that time which I determined (and that the rest which
remains unspoken, imports for the most part nothing else but the wars which
the Florentines and Venetians had with Philippo Duke of Milan, which shall also
be discoursed hereafter, when particulerly we entreat of Florence) I will not
speak more thereof, but briefly reduce to memory in what terms Italy with the
Princes and the soldiers of those days remained. Among the principal states,
Queen Giouanni 2. held the kingdom of Napoli; La Marca, Patrimonio and
Romagna. How Italy was governed and divided.
Part of the towns to these belonging, obeyed the church, and part of them
were usurped by tirants, or their ministers: as Farrara, Modena, and Reggio by
the house of Este. Faenza by Manfredi; Imola by the Alidosi; Furli by the
Ordelaffi: Rimino and Pesaro by the Malatesti; and Camerino by the house of
Varano. The Provinces of Lombardy, were partly governed by Philippo Duke of
Milan, and partly by the Venetians. For all those that had therein any
particular states, were extirped (except the house of Gonzaga) which governed
still at Mantoua. In Toscana, the greatest princes that governed, were the
Florentines: only Lucca and Siena, lived with their laws. Lucca under
Guinici, Siena as absolutely free. The Genouesi, sometimes in liberty, and
sometime in servitude to the house of France, or Visconti, were without
reputation, and among the meaner Potentates accounted. For all the principal
Lords and Potentates, were at that time of their own subjects utterly
disarmed. The Duke Philippo living at home, and not suffering himself to be
seen, his wars were altogether directed by ministers. The Venetians, so
soon as they began to make wars by land, lost all that glory which before
upon the sea they had gotten. And (following the custom of other Italians) by
the direction of strangers governed their wars. The Pope being a man of
religion, and the Queen Giouanna a woman, did lay by their Arms: doing that
for necessity which others had done by election. The Florentines also, to like
necessity yielded: for their sundry civil divisions among themselves, had
clearly extirped the Nobility, and left the Common weal to be governed by
those that had been brought up in merchandise, and were thereby enforced to
abide the fortune of others. The discipline of war then remained, only in the
poor Princes, and Gentlemen that wanted living; and they not moved by any
desire of glory, but rather to become rich and assured, armed themselves. They
then being well practiced in the wars (not having any other trade to live)
sought by the wars to make themselves strong and honorable. Among this number
for their value, most renowned, were Carmignuola, Fra^cesco Sforza, Nicholo
Piccinino, brought up by Braccio, Agnolo della Pergola, Lorenzo, and
Michelletto Attenduly: Tartaglia, Giacopaccio Cecolino da Parugia, Nicholo di
Tolentino, Guido Torello, Antonio dal Ponte ad Hera, and others. Besides them
were those great Lords of whom I have already spoken. And with them, may be
numbered the Orsini, and Calonnesi, Barrons of Rome, with some other Gentlemen
of the kingdom, and of Lombardy: who making a mystery or art of the war,
had among themselves a secret league and intelligence, whereby they protracted
the service for their profit. And so, the Princes for whom they served, were on
both sides loosers. In conclusion, the wars became so cowardly, that any
ordinary Captain, having in him but a shadow of the ancient virtue, might
(to the admiration of all Italy) have vanquished those soldiers: who through
small wisdom, and want of judgment) were much honored. Of these idle
Princes, and of these most base and cowardly soldiers, this my History shall
at large entreat. But first (as in the beginning I promised) it seems
necessary for me to return back, and tell the original of Florence, letting
every man to understand fully, what was the state of that City in those
days* and by what means amongst so many troubles happened in Italy (during
the space of a thousand years) the same has still continued.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK.
AMONG other great and marvelous orders of the ancient commonweals, and
principallities (at this time decayed) was that whereby new Towns and Cities
were from time to time builded. For there is nothing more worthy an excellent
Prince, or well gouerued common weal, nor more profitable to any Country, then
the building up of new Towns, where men may with commodity, for defense and
tilladge, assemble themselves: which thing those people might easily do, having
in custom to send dwellers into such Countries as were either unpeopled, or
conquered; which people, were in those days called Collonies. For besides,
that this order occasioned new Towns to be built, the same also did make the
Country conquered, to be more assured to the Conquerers thereof. It also
replenished the void places, and maintained the people in such orders as they
were planted: which wrought this effect, that men most commodiously inhabiting,
did most multiply. They were also in the offense of others the more ready, and
in defense of themselves more assured. That custom (being through negligence
of commonweals and Princes of this time, discontinued) does occasion the
weakness and ruin of their Countries, because that only makes every
government assured, and every Country (as is beforesaid) plentifully inhabited.
The assurance grows, because Collonies planted in any province newly
conquered, is (as it were) a castle and guard, to hold the same in obedience.
Besides that, no country well inhabited, can maintain the inhabitants thereof,
nor continue them as they be planted, without that rule and order: for all
places are not plentiful or wholesome, which is the cause that the people in
the one do abound, and want in the other. So as if no mean be, to take away
where is abundance, and supply where want is, that Country in short space must
of force be ruined; because the one part thereof, through the small number of
inhabitants becomes desolate, and the other being ouercharged, oppressed with
poverty. And for that nature could not reform this disorder, it is
necessary, that industry should do it. For unwholesome Countries planted full
of people, coming thither all together, do make the same healthful, by reason
that the tilling of the earth does alter the soil; and the fires, do greatly
purge the air; which things nature by her self could not. The experience
thereof is seen by the City of Venice, seated in a place paludious, and
unwholesome. Notwithstanding, the assembly of many inhabitants come thither at
one instant, did make the same healthy enough. Pisa likewise, through the
contagion of the air, was never replenished, but when Genoua, and the rivers
thereto belonging, were by the Sarasins destroyed, it enforced the people
(driven from their native country) to fly thither, and make that place well
inhabited, and strong. This custom of sending Collonies being discontinued, is
the occasion that countries conquered, are holden with more difficulty; those
that be empty are not supplied, and countries over full are not disburthened,
whereby, many parts of the world, and chiefly Italy, in respect of the ancient
times, are become deserts. The reason thereof is, that there has not been, nor
is not in Princes, any desire of true glory, nor in Commonweals any
ordinance that meriteth commendation. In the old time we see, that through
virtue of these Collonies, Cities were often made new, and some others
(already begun) increased: of which number was the City of Florence, begun
by the people of Fiesole, and enlarged by Collonies. A thing most true it is
(as Dante and John Villano have written) that the City of Fiesole being set
on the top of a mountain, to occasion their markets to be the more
frequented, and give commodity to those that with their merchandise would
resort thither, did give order that they should not clime up the hill, but stay
in the plain, betwixt the foot of the mountain, and the river Arno. These
markets (as I judge) were occasion of the first building in that place. The
merchants also being desirous to have storehouses commodious for the receiving
of wares, made buildings there, which in time became houses of habitation.
Afterward, when the Romans (having vanquished the Carthaginesi) had made
Italy from foreign wars secure, in great numbers there they multiplied; for
me^ do never seek the defense of themselves, if by necessity they are not
encouraged: and, as fear of war does constrain them willingly to inhabit
barren places and strong, so that fear removed, (allured with commodity)
more willingly they covet to dwell in Countries pleasant and profitable. The
security which grew in Italy by reputation of the Roman commonweal, might
occasion the number of the inhabitants to be so great, as made this place to
become (as it were) in form of a Town, and was at the beginning called
Arnina. After that time, civil wars happened in Rome, first between Mario
and Silla, then betwixt Cesare and Pompeio, and at last between the murderers
of Caesar, and those which sought to revenge his death. It seems therefore,
that first by Silla, and next by those three Citizens of Rome (that after the
revenge made for Caesar) divided the Empire, Collonies were sent to Fiesole,
who either all, or part, did plant their dwellings in the plain near unto the
Town already begun: insomuch, as the same was much enlarged, and so well
replenished with buildings, men, and other things necessary for civil life,
as it became to be numbered among the Cities of Italy. Yet whence this name
Firenze should be derived, Whereof the name of Florence is derived.
diverse men do diversely hold opinion. Some suppose it so called of Florino, one
of the chief of the Colloni. Others would not consent that it was called
Florentia at the beginning, but Fluentia, because it was near the river of
Arno, which flows. And they allege the authority of Plinny, where he says,
that the people Fluentini be near unto Arno: which may be false, because
Plinny makes demo^stration where the Florentines were seated, not how they
were called. And that word Fluentini must needs be corrupted, because Frontino
and Cornelio Tacito (who wrote almost in the time of Plinny) do call the Town
Florentia, and the people Florentini; for that long since in the time of
Tiberio, they were governed according to the custom of other Cities in Italy.
Cornelio reports also, that the Florentines had sent Ambassadors to the
Emperor, praying, that the waters of Chiane might not descend upon their
Country; neither is it reasonable, that the City should have in one time two
names. I believe therefore it was always called Florentia. For what cause
soever it was so named, or for what cause soever it had the beginning, most
sure it is, that under the Empire of Rome, it had the foundation, and in the
reign of the first Emperors, Writers did make mention thereof. Moreover, at
such time as the barbarous people did persecute the Empire, Florence was by
Tottila King of the Ostragotti defaced, and after 250. years by Carlo Magno
reedified: from which time, till the years after Christ 1215. it continued
under that fortune which others did, who then commanded in Italy. In which
time, first governed there the posterity of Carlo, then Barengarii, and last
of all the Emperors of Germany, as has been in our universal discourse
before declared. The Florentines could not in those times increase or do any
thing worthy memory, for the authority of them, unto whom it was subject:
notwithstanding, in the year 1010. and the day of S. Romolo, (a solemn Feast
with the Fiesolane) they surprised Fiesole, and demolished the same; which they
did, either with consent of the Emperors, or else at such times as one Emperor
being dead, the other was not elected, whereby every man (for the present)
remained at liberty. But since the Popes took unto themselves more authority
in Italy, and the Germane Emperors grew weak, every Town in that Province
with less reverence to their Prince, was governed. Insomuch, as in the year
1080. in the time of Arrigo the third, Italy was openly divided into faction
betwixt him and the Church: notwithstanding the Florentines maintained
themselves united, all the year 1215. yelding to the victorious, without
aspiring farther tha^ to save themselves. But as to the bodies of men, the
longer they be healthie, the more dangerous and mortal are the sicknesses,
when they happen: so Florence the more slowly it followed the factions, the
more speedily and grievously it was by them afterward afflicted. The first
occasion of division in that City, is most publicly known, because it has
been written by Dante and diverse others: nevertheless I think good briefly to
speak thereof. There was in Fiorence (among others) of the mighty Families,
The first division of Florence.
Buondelmonti, and Vberti; next unto them were the Amidei and Donati. In the
house of Donati was a Gentlewoman, a widow and rich, who having one only
daughter, a maiden of much beauty, whom within her self, she determined to
marry unto Buondelmonti a young Gentleman, and the chief of his house. This
her intent, either through negligence or delay of time (none being made privy
thereof) was deferred so long, that Buondelmonti was contracted to the daughter
of Amidei: wherewith she greatly discontented, and supposing it were possible
with the beauty of her daughter to stay the marriage, before the same should
be solemnized: one day, seeing Buondelmonti coming toward her house, came
down, her daughter following; and meeting him at the gate, said, I am very
glad that you are now become married, yet was it my meaning you should have had
this my daughter, and with those words (she opened the gate) and showed her
unto him. The Gentleman beholding the beauty of the maiden (which indeed was
rare) and therewith considering that her parentage and portion was not
inferior to hers, whom he had already taken, became exceedingly desirous to
have her. Then, not respecting his faith already given, nor the injury he did
in breaking the same, nor yet the inconvenience that might ensue thereof, said:
Since it has pleased you to reserve your daughter for me, I should be
unthankful (being yet all in time) to refuse her. After the speaking of these
words (without farther delay) he married her. This marriage being known,
highly offended all the Family of Amidei, and Vbarti: who were by his first
marriage, allied. Then assembling themselves, and consulting together, in the
end concluded, that such an injury might not be borne without shame; nor the
revenge thereunto due, could be other than the death of Buondelmonti. And
albeit some did forecast the inconveniences that might follow such an Action:
yet Moscha Lamberti said, that who so ever casts all doubts, should never
resolve any thing; alleging the ancient Proverb, A thing once done, is
past remedy. Then gave they the charge of this murder to be performed by
Moscha, Stiatta, Vberti, Lambertuccio, Amidei, Odorigo Fifanti. These men in
the morning of Easter day, at the hour of Resurrection, assembled themselves
in the houses of the Amidei; by which street, Buondelmonti passed the bridge
upon a white horse: and supposing (as it seems) that it had been a thing as
easy to forget an injury, as renounce a marriage, was at the foot of the
bridge under an Image of Mars (which there is standing) assaulted, and slain.
This murder divided the whole City, the one half took part with
Buondelmonti, the other with Vberti. These Families, by reason they were strong
in houses, towers, and men, fought many years, before the one could chase the
other out of the City: till at length (without any firm peace made) a truce
was taken, which according unto occasion, was sometimes kept, and sometimes
broken. Florence continued in these troubles, till the time of Federigo the
second: who being also King of Napoli, was persuaded he might increase his
dominion against the Church. And to make his authority more assured in
Toscana, he favored the Vberti and their followers, who thereby drove out the
Buondelmonti: By what means the factio^s of Guelfi and Ghibilini arose in
Florence.
and so our City (like unto all other Towns of Italy) became divided into
Guelfi and Ghibilini. And it seems not superfluous to make mention of the
Families that depended of the one and the other. Those that followed the
faction of Guelfi, were Buondelmonti, Narli, Rossi, Frescobaldi, Mozzi, Baldi,
Pulci, Gherardini, Faraboschi, Bagnesi, Guidalotti, Sachetti, Manieri,
Lucardesi, Chiaramonti, Compiobbesi, Caualcanti, Giandonati, Gianfigliazzi,
Scali, Gualerotti, Importuni, Bostichi, Tornaquinci, Vecchietti, Tosinghi,
Arregucci, Agli, Sitii, Adimari, Visdomini, Donati, Pazzi, della Bella,
Ardinghi, Tebaldi, Cherchi. For the Ghibilini, were Vberti, Mannelli, Vbriachi,
Fifanti, Amidei, Infanganti, Malespini, Scolari, Guidi, Galli, Capardi,
Lamberti, Soldanieri, Capriani, Toschi, Ameri, Palermini, Migliorelli, Pigli,
Baruchi, Cattani, Agollanti, Brunelleschi, Caponsachi, Elisei, Abbati,
Tedaldini, Giuochi, Caligai. Besides these noble houses, many popular families
joined in that action: so that welneare all the City became corrupted with
this division. But the Guelfi being driven out, retired themselves into Towns
of the Vale of Arno, where their chief places of strength were, and (the best
they could) against the fury of their enemies defended themselves. Federigo
then dying, such as remained in Florence and were men neuterall, having also
credit with the people, thought better to reunite the City, than holding it
in division, utterly to overthrow it. They therefore found means, that the
Guelfi (setting all injury aside) should return, and the Ghibilini (without
suspicion) receive them. They thus united, it seemed to them, that the time
would well serve to frame an order for the liberty of the City, before the
new Emperor should grow strong. For which purpose, they divided the City
into six parts, and chose twelve Citizens for every part to govern the
same, An union and policy, settled in Florence.
whom they called Antiani, and were changed every year. Also to remove all
offenses, that might arise by Judges, they elected two Strangers to that
office, calling the one Captain of the people, and the other Podesta: who were
authorized to judge all causes that happened in the City, either civil or
criminal. Also, because no order is assured without defenders thereof, they
appointed in the City twenty Ensigns, and threescore and sixteen in the
Country; under which all the youth was mustred, and commanded they should be
ready armed, every man under the ensign whereto he belonged, whenever he
were either by the Captain or the Antiani called. And as the ensigns which
those soldiers were appointed unto were diverse, so were the weapons diversely
divided: for the crosbowes had their private ensign, and the holberdiers
theirs. Also at every feast of Penticost, with great pomp they erected new
ensigns, and appointed new Captains, and trained the soldiers to such
perfection, as every man knew in what order he should march, retire, and
charge the enemy. Then they caused a great chariot covered with read, and
drawn by two Oxen, to carry their chief ensign, of color white and read.
Whenever they intended to assemble all their forces, they commanded this
Chariot to be brought into the market place, and with great ceremony give
charge thereof to the chief Captains of the people. They had also for the
magnificence of their enterprise, a greatbell called Martinella, which was rung
continually one whole month before their Army was brought into the field: to
the end that the enemy might prepare for his defense. So great was the virtue
of men in those days, and so honorably they proceeded in their actions: where
at this present to assail the enemy sodeinly and without warning, is thought
to be a wise and honorable thing, in those days the same was holden cowardly,
and dishonourably. This Bell was also carried with the Army, and by the sound
thereof the watches and other orders of the Camp were commanded. Upon these
martial ordinances and civil rules, the Florentines laid the foundation of
their liberty. Neither can it be imagined how great authority and force that
City in short space atteined unto. So that it became not only chief of
Toscana, but also was accounted amongst the best Cities of Italy, and should
have so continued, had not the often and new divisions disturbed the same:
under this government the Florentines lived ten years, within which time
they enforced the Pistoiesi, Aretini, and Senesi, to make league with them.
Returning from Sienna with their Army, they surprised Volterra, and demolished
some castles, leading the inhabitants of them to Florence. All which
enterprises were performed by counsel of the Guelfi, who could do much more
then the Ghibilini, because they for their insolency during the reign of
Federigo were hated of the people. The faction of the church also much more
loved, then the faction of the Emperor: because the Florentines hoped thereby
to preserve their liberty, but being under the Emperor they feared to loose
it. The Ghibilini then seeing themselves bereft of authority, could not live
contented, but still aspecting occasion to recover the government, and seeing
Manfredi son of Federigo, possessed of the kingdom of Napoli, who had also
discomforted the forces of the church, thought the time come to serve their
purpose. Secretly then they practiced with him to take their authority upon
him, but their practice was not so cunningly handled, but that the same was
discovered to the Antiani, who presently sent for the Vbarti. They not only
refused to appear, but also took Arms, and fortified themselves in their
houses: wherewith the people offended, likewise took Arms, and ayding the
Guelfi, enforced them and all the rest of the Ghibilini to abandon Florence,
and go unto Siena. King Manfredi, a chief of the Ghibilini.
From whom they prayed aid of Manfredi king of Napoli, and by the industry of
Farrinata Vberti, the Guelfi upon the river Arbia, received so great an
overthrow and slaughter, as those that were saved, returned not to Florence;
but supposing their City lost, fled into Lucca. The chief Captain of those
soldiers sent by Manfredi, was Earl Giordano, a man of war in that time
greatly esteemed. He, after the victory, went with the Ghibilini to Florence,
reducing the city wholly to the obedience of Manfredi, deposing the
magistrates, and altering every other order, whereby might appear any form
of liberty. Which injury with small wisdom committed, was generally of the
people taken in great disdain, and of friends to the Ghibilini, they became
mortal enemies, whereof, with time, grew their utter ruin. The Earl Giordano,
having occasion to return to Napoli for the service of that kingdom, left in
Florence as deputy for the king, the Earl Guido Nouella, Lord of Casentino,
who at Empoli assembled a Council of Ghibilini, it was necessary to raze
Florence, as apt (by reason the people were Guelfi) to recover force for the
aid of the church. To this so cruel a sentence in prejudice of that noble
city, there was no citizen nor friend ( Farinata Vbarti excepted) that apposed
himself. He openly and without respect spoke in favor thereof, and laid, that
he had not labored nor adventured himself in so many perils, but to the end
he might inhabit his native country; and would not loose that he had so long
sought, nor shun that which fortune had laid upon him. Yea, being no less
enemy to them that should so determine, then he had been to the Guelfi, he would
not refuse to favor his country, Farinata Vberti.
hoping that his virtue which had chased out the Guelfi from Florence, should
also defend the same. Farinata was a man of great courage, excellent in the
wars, chief of the Ghibilini, and greatly esteemed of Manfredi: his opinion
therefore prevailed, and new means were thought upon how to preserve the state.
The Guelfi (before fled to Lucca for fear of the Earls threatening) were sent
away from thence, and went to Bologna: from whence they were called by the
Guelfi of Parma, to go with them to an enterprise against the Ghibilini, wherein
by their virtue the enemies were vanquished, and they recovered their own
possessions. The Duke of Angio, called into Italy by the Pope.
So that increasing in riches and honor, knowing also that Pope Clemente had
sent for Carlo of Angio, to take the kingdom from Manfredi, by Ambassaders
they offered him their service: and the Pope did not only receive them for his
friends, but also gave them his Ensign; which ever sithence the Guelfi have
carried in their wars; and is that, which at this day is used in Florence.
King Manfre. dislaine.
Then was Manfredi by Carlo dispossessed of his kingdom and slain. In which
enterprise, the Guelfi of Florence happening to be present, their faction
gained reputation, and the Ghibilini became the weaker. Whereupon, those that
governed with the Earl Guido at Florence, thought it mere by some benefit to
win the love of the people, which with many injuries had before that time
been lost. For those remedies which before this time of necessity would have
prevailed, using them now without order, and out of time, did not only hurt,
but also hasten their ruin. They then thought good to make the people friends
and partakers of such honors and authority, as had been taken from them: and
elected thirty six Citizens Commoners, who with two Gentlemen (called from
Bologna) should reform the state of the City. They thus assembled, presently
divided the City into Arts or Mysteries: New ordinances in Florence.
over every one of which Mysteries, they appointed one Magistrate to do justice
to all those within his government. They ordained also an Ensign to every
Mystery: to the end, that all men might repair thereunto armed, whenever
occasion did serve. These Mysteries, were in the beginning twelve, seven great,
and fiuelesse. Afterward, the less Mysteries increased to fourteen, so then
the number was, (as at this present it is) twenty one. The thirty six men
appointed for reformation, practiced many things for the benefit of the people.
The Earl Guido for the paying of the soldiers imposed a Subsidy upon the
Citizens: whom he found so unwilling therewith. as he durst not enforce them
to pay those sums that were imposed. And supposing to have lost the state,
he joined himself with the chief of the Ghibilini; which done, determined to
take that from the people by force, which they for want of judgment had
granted. For that purpose assembling the soldiers Armed, and accompanied with
the thirty six Reformers, he made an Alarm, and forthwith the Reformers
retired themselves to their houses, and the Ensigns of the Mysteries came
forth, followed by many Armed men, who understanding that the Earl Cuido with
his followers, were at Saint Giouanni, they made head at Saint Trinita, and
there elected Giouanni Sodarini, their Captain. The Earl on the other side,
hearing where the people were, marched toward them, who fled not, but as soon
as the Earl drew near, charged him near unto the place called Loggio delli
Tornaquinci. There they forced the Earl to retire with the slaughter, and
loss of many his soldiers. The Earl fearing that his enemy (seeing his
soldiers maimed and weary) would assault him, and in the night kill him:
determined forthwith to fly, and so save himself. So as contrary to the
counsel of the governors and others of his faction, he presently fled with
his men to the City of Prato. So soon as he came thither, finding himself
out of fear, being in a place of security, remembered how great an error he
had committed: and desirous to amend the same, the next morning early, marched
with his men toward Florence: offering to enter the City by force, which by
cowardice he had abandoned, but that attempt took no success, for the people
which with difficulty might have driven him away, with facility could hold
him out. So that with great sorrow and shame, he went unto Casentino, and the
Ghibilini to their vilages. Thus the people remained with victory, and for the
comfort of those which loved the common wealth, determined to reunite the
city, and call home all citizens as well Ghibilini as Guelfi: by means
whereof, the Guelfi after six years absence from the city were returned. And
the Ghibilini (notwithstanding the memory of their late injury) were pardoned
and put in their country: yet much hated both of the people and the Guelfi; for
these could not forget their exile, and those remembered too much the tyranny
which was used during their authority: which things, caused that neither the
one nor the other were contented. While in this form the Florentines lived, it
was reported, that Corradino nephew to Manfredi, should come with forces from
Germany to the conquest of Napoli. Whereupon the Ghibilini took heart and
hope, thereby to recover their authority. And the Guelfi began to think how
they might assure themselves of their enemies: for which purpose, they prayed
king Carlo to defend them in the time of Corradino his passage. The soldiers
of Carlo being in march, made the Guelfi insolent, and amazed the Ghibilini so
much, that two days before they arrived (without any violence offered) they
fled. The Ghibilini thus departed, the Florentines reordeined the state of
their city, and elected twelve chief men to be magistrates, and govern their
city for two months, New ordinances in Florence by the Guelfi.
whom they called not Antiani, but Buoni Homini. Next unto them, they appointed
a Council of fourscore Citizens, which they called La Credenza. After them,
were an hundredth and fourscore Commoners, who with the Credenza and the twelve
Buoni Homini, were called the Council general. They ordained moreover one
other Council of a hundredth and twenty Citizens, of the Comonaltie and
Nobility mixed, which should give perfection, and confirmation to al things
determined in the other Councels. This government thus settled, the faction of
the Guelfi, together with the Magistrates fortified the city, to the end they
might the better defend themselves from the Ghibilini, whose goods they divided
into three parts: the one, they employed to public uses: the second was given
to the Captains; the third divided amongst the Guelfi, in recompense of their
losses. The pope also to maintain the Guelfi in Toscana, ordained the King
Carlo to be Lieftenant Imperial of that country. The Florentines thus
holding themselves in reputation, by virtue of these new orders, governed all
things well, with their laws at home, and with their arms abroad. Then died
the Pope, and after long disputation, in the end of two years, Gregorio decimo
was elected: who having been long time in Soria (and was at the time of his
election) did not make so great account of the factions, as his predecessors
had done. But returning home toward France, being arrived at Florence, to
perform the office of a good Pastor, sought to unite that city: wherein he
prevailed so far with the Florentines, as they were content that
Commissioners for the Ghibilini might be received into Florence, to solicit the
return of their faction, which was concluded. Notwithstanding, the Ghibilini
were so terrified, as they durst not come home. The Pope laid the fault thereof
to the city, F^orence excomunicate.
and being offended, did excommunicate the same. In which displeasure, the
Florentines continued all the life of that Pope: but after his death the city
was absolved by Pope Innocentio quinto; to whom succeeded Nicholao tertio, The
Pope ever suspicious.
descended of the house of Orsini. And because the Popes had always in
suspicion those that aspired to greatness in Italy, (although by the favor of
the church they were thereunto atteined) sought always to put them back.
Thereof grew many tumults and often variations, for the fear of him that was
become strong, occasioned the advancement of an other that was weak, who
being likewise grown up, was forthwith feared, and being feared, cast down.
This was the cause, that ocsioned the kingdom to be taken from Manfredi, and
given to Carlo. This was also that which caused the Pope to mistrust Carlo, and
seek his destruction. Nicholao tertio then, for the reasons beforesaid, sound
means through the help of the Emperor, that the government of Toscana was
taken from Carlo: and in his place he sent thither Latino his Legate. At that
time Florence remained in very hard estate; because the Nobility of the
Guelfi were become insolent, and feared not the Magistrates: so as every of
them committed murders, and other violences without any justice or punishment
of those that committed the same; because they were always by one or other
great person favored. To bridle this great insolency, it was by the chief of
the people thought good to revoke such as were banished: which gave
opportunity to the Legate, New ordinances in Florence.
to reunite the city; and the Ghibilini returned home. In the place of twelve
governors, there were fourteen made, for every part seven, to govern the
city during one year: and they to be elected by the Pope. Florence continued
in this order of government two years. Then Pope Martino aspired to the
Papacy, who being a French man, restored unto king Carlo, all that authority
which the Pope Nicholao had taken from him: whereby the factions in Toscana were
suddeinly revived. For the Florentines took Arms against the Emperors
Governor, to deprive the Ghibilini of the government: therewith also to hold
the great men in awe, they ordained a new form of government. The year 1282.
being come, the companies of the Mysteries having received their Magistrates
and Ensigns, became greatly esteemed. Florence reformed.
They among themselves, elected in the place of the fourteen, three Citizens
to remain two months governors of the commonweal, and called them Priori:
who might be either Commoners or Gentlemen, so that they were Merchants of some
Mystery. Afterward the chief Magistracy was reduced to six men, so as in
every part of the city there might be one: which order continued till the
year 1342. At which time the city was divided into quarters, and the number
of Priori increased to nine, and diverse times in that mean while (by reason
of some accident) they were in number twelve. This Office was the mean (as
shall hereafter appear) that the Nobility was ruined; for then by many
occasions they were excluded, and afterward without respect oppressed;
whereunto the Nobility at the beginning consented: for they unwilling to be
united with the people, and desiring to have all the state into their hands,
and the people having like desire, became both loosers. Then they appointed a
palace for their office, where by ancient custom, the Magistrates and
Counselors assembled, who were in honorable fort by Serieants and other
Ministers there attended, albeit at the erection of this office, Priori.
the officers were called Priori: yet afterward (for more magnificence) was
joined thereunto the name of Signory. The Florentines for a space, among
themselves remained quiet, during which time they made war upon the Aretini,
because they had banished the Guelfi: and in Campaldino most fortunately won
the victory. The city then increasing in men and riches, thought good to
increase also the walls thereof, and therefore enlarged the circuit of the same
to that compass, which now we see: for before that time the Diametre thereof,
was only that space which is from the old bridge, to S. Lorenzo. The wars
abroad, and peace at home, Discord between the nobility and the people.
had (as it were) worn out of Florence the factions of Guelfi and Ghibilini.
Then remained only those humors (which naturally were wont to be in every
city) betwixt the Nobility and the people. For the people desirous to live
according to law, and the great men studying to command them, becomes a thing
impossible they should accord together. This humor, so long as the Ghibilini
held the city in awe, was not discovered; but so soon as they were
vanquished, it showed the force thereof: for every day some popular man was
injured, and Magistrates knew not by what means to punish the same, because
every Gentleman with the force of his friends defended himself. The
Magistrates of the mystery, studying to remedy so great a mischief, provided
that every Senate in the beginning of their authority should create one
Gonfaloniere di Giustitia, a man elected in the number of Commoners, unto whom
was appointed one thousand men, under twenty Ensigns ready at all occasions
to maintain justice, whenever they were by their Gonfalone or their Captain
commanded. The first chosen was Vbaldo Ruffoli, he drew forth the Gonfalone,
and razed the houses of the Galetti: because one of that Family had in France
slain a popular man. It was an easy thing for the mysteries to make this
order, by reason of the great hatred among the Nobility, who considered not of
any provision against them, till such time as they felt the bitter execution
thereof; which, at the first gave them great terror: nevertheless afterward,
they returned to their wonted insolency. For always some one of the Nobility
being an Officer, had thereby means to hinder the Gonfaloniere, in execution of
his office. Moreover, for that every accuser must produce his witness to
prove the offense offered, and no man for fear of the Nobility durst give
witness, the city in short space returned to the former discord: and the
people injured in the same sort as they were wont to be; because judgment was
slow, and execution thereof wanted. The populer sort then not knowing what
course to take, Giano della Bella, a Gentleman of ancient race (yet therewith
one that loved the liberty of his Country) encouraged the chief of the
mysteries to reform the disorders of the city. New ordinances in favor of
the people.
By this Council it was ordained that the Gonfaloniere should remain with the
Priori, and have four thousand men at his commandment. They likewise made all
the Nobility incapable of the Senate, and every man that was accessarie in
any offense, to be as subject to punishment as the principal. They decreed
moreover, that public fame should suffice to receive condemnation by the
laws, which they called Ordinamenti della Giustitia. By this mean the people
gained great reputation, and Giano della Bella much hated: because thereby he
became evil thought of by the Nobility, and reputed one that oppressed their
authority. The rich Commoners did also envy him, for that they imagined his
credit overmuch, which at the first occasion was so proved. For it shortly
after happened, that in a fraie, one of the people chanced to be slain; at
which conflict diverse Gentlemen were present; and among the rest, Corso
Donati: unto whom (as the most quarrelsome of the company) the fault was laid,
and by the Captain of the people apprehended. Howsoever it were, either that
Corso had not offended, or that the Captain feared to commit him, he was
presently set at liberty. Which delivery so greatly offended the people, that
they took Arms and ran to the house of Giano della Bella, Giano della Bella.
desiring him to be a mean that those laws might be observed, whereof he had
been the inuentor. Giano willing that Corso should be punished, did not (as
many thought he would do) cause the people to lay down their Arms, but
persuaded them to go unto the Senate, and pray them to look unto the matter.
The people, in the mean while much moved, and supposing the Captain to have
offered injury, and also that Giano had forsaken them; went not to the Senate,
but unto the Captains palace, which they took and sacked. That fact greatly
displeased all the Citizens, and those that desired the fall of Giano accused
him, laying all the fault to his charge. Amongst the Lords of the Senate, one
of his enemies happened to be: who accused him to the Captain, for having
stirred the people to sedition. During the time that this cause was in
debating, the people armed, went again to the house of Giano, and offered him
defense against the Senators his enemies. But Giano would neither make proof
of this populer favor, nor yet commit his life to the Magistrates, because he
feared the lewdness of these, and the inconstancy of those, so as to take
occasion from his foes to offend him, and from his friends to harm their
country, he determined to depart, and so giving place to envy, and to deliver
the Citizens from that fear they had of him, went into voluntary exile:
notwithstanding he had with his great peril, delivered the city from
servitude of the Nobility. After his departure, the Nobility hoped greatly to
recover their dignities, and judging that all their evil was by his mean
procured, they assembled themselves together, and sent two of them to the
Senate (which they thought did favor them much) to entreat that by the same,
the severe laws made to their prejudice, might in something be quallified:
which request being known, troubled much the people, Division betwixt the
Nobility and people.
fearing that the Senators would grant the same: Insomuch as the desire of the
Nobility, and the suspision of the people, drew them to the sword. The
Nobility made head in three places, at S. Giouanni, in the new market place,
and in the Piazza di Mozzi. Their Captains were, Forese Adimari, Vanni di
Mozzi, and Geri Spini. The people on the other side, with their Ensign, in
great numbers assembled at the Senators palace, who at that time dwelt near
unto S. Bruocolo: and because the people had that Senate in suspicion, they
joined with them six Citizens for the government. While the one and the other
part prepared themselves to fight, some of the people, and some of the
Nobility, Persuasions to the Nobility to lay down arms.
together with certain religious men of good fame, came between them and
persuaded a peace: Letting the Nobility understand, that the cause why the
honors from them was taken, and the laws against them made, proceeded of
their own pride and evil government. And because they had before that time,
taken Arms to recover that which through their own division and evil
behavior had been taken from them, it would not do other then occasion the
ruin of their country, and hinder themselves. It was moreover said unto them,
that the people, in number, riches and malice, was much their superior: and
that these noble men by whom they thought to oppress others, would not fight,
but went their ways, so soon as the fight began. It was therefore a folly for
them, against so great a multitude to contend. Persuasions used to the people.
They persuaded the people on the other side, that it was no wisdom to seek
their will by way of extremity, and that it was no part of judgment to drive
men into desperation: for whosoever hops of no good, fears no evil. They
ought also to remember, that the Noble men were those, which in the wars had
honored the city: therefore it was no reason nor just occasion, why they should
be so greatly hated. And moreover, although the Nobility could be content not
to possess the supreme offices, yet would they not endure to be driven out of
their Country. It were therefore well done to lay Arms aside and grow to
agreement, not trusting to the multitude of the people: for it has been often
seen, that the greater number have by the less been vanquished. Upon these
speeches grew diverse opinions among the people: many would have fought, as a
thing that of force at one time or other must be; and therefore was better to
do the same now, then afterward when their enemies were become stronger. And
though it were believed that by mittigation of the laws, the Nobility would
become contented, yet the pride of them was such, as without enforcement would
never rest. Others of the people, wiser, better advised, and of more quiet
disposition, thought that the mitigation of the laws was no great matter: but
to fight one part against the other, was a thing of great importance. So in the
end, this opinion prevailed, and it was provided, that no accusation against
any of the Nobility, should be received without witnesses. The Arms of the
one and the other side, thus laid aside, either of them continued full of
suspicion: fortifying themselves in their houses, and preparing weapons anew.
Then the people reordeined the government, restraining the same into a small
number, moved thereto, because that Signoria had been favored of the
Nobility: of whom, the chief were, Mancini, Magalotti, Altouiti, Peruzzi, and
Gerrettani. The state thus settled, for more magnificence, and security of the
Senate, New reformation in Florence 1298.
in the year 1298. they builded their Palace, and made a Court before it, of
that place where the houses of the Vberti sometimes were. At this very time
were also the common prisons begun, and within few years after, finished.
For in those days, our city was in as great and happy estate, as at any
time it has been: being full of men and reputation. The number of Citizens
fit for the wars, were numbered at thirty thousand: and the people of the
Country able for that purpose, amounted to threescore and ten thousand. All
Toscana, either as subjects or friends obeyed us. And albeit betwixt the
Nobility and people, some indignation and suspision were, yet no evil effect
thereof followed, but every man neighborly and peaceably lived. And had not
this peace been by new enimitie within the city disturbed, no foreign
disorder could have molested the state: because the city stood in such
terms that it neither feared the Empire, nor those that were banished. And
against all the states of Italy, it was of force sufficient to defend it self.
That injury therefore, New division of the Bianchi
which external forces could not do, by inward discord was performed. There
were in Florence two families, one called Circhi, the other Donati; in riches,
Nobility, and men mighty. Between them (being both in Florence, and the
Country near neighbors) there grew displeasure, yet not so great, as to
occasion the use of arms: neither would there perhaps thereof have grown any
great matter, had not the same been by some new occasions increased. Among the
chief houses of Pistoia, is that of Cancellieri. It happened that Lore son
of Guglielmo, and Geri son of Bertaccio (both of that family) playing
together, fell into quarrel, and Geri of Lore was lightly hurt. This chance
grieved Guglielmo much: and thinking with courtesy to amend the matter, made
the same much worse. For he commanded his son to go unto the house, where the
father of the hurt man dwelled, and there ask pardon. The young man obeyed his
father. Notwithstanding, that humble act, did no whit decrease the bitter
disposition of Bertaccio, who caused Lore to be taken and holden by his
servants, till his hand were cut off; saying unto him, return home unto thy
father, and tell him that wounds be cured with steel, and not with words. The
cruelty of this fact so greatly offended Guglielmo, that he armed his friends
to revenge it. Bertaccio on the other side armed, to defend himself. Whereby,
not only these families, but all the city of Pistoia was divided. And
because these Cancellieri, were descended from one of that name, who had two
wives: the one named Biancha, the one party being descended of that woman,
called their faction Biancha: the other party to take a name contrary) was
called Nera. Betwixt them, at diverse times diverse conflicts and slaughters of
men followed. At length both parties growing weary, and yet not knowing how to
be reconciled, did desire, either to make an end of their discord, or else to
draw others into quarrels with them, and so increase their faction. For which
purpose they come to Florence. And the Neri having familiar acquaintance with
the Donati, were by Corso (chief of that house) favored: which the Bianchi
understanding, to make themselves strong and able to resist the Donati,
resorted to Very dei Circhi: a man in every condition no whit inferior to
Corso. This humor come from Pistoia, increased the old hate between the
Circhi and Donati: and was already so apparent, that the Priori and other good
Citizens feared every hour, least some slaughter would thereof ensue: and the
whole city be divided. For preventing whereof, they resorted unto the Pope,
desiring him, that with his authority he would take order for these quarrels,
which they themselves could not. The Pope sent for Very, and pressed him to
make peace with the Donati, whereat Very seemed to marvel, and said, he had no
quarrel unto them, and because every peace presupposes war, since no war was
between them, he knew not why any peace should be required. Then Very returned
from Rome without other conclusion. These humors so increased, that every
small accident (as often it happens) was like to bring great disturbance. In
the month of May, (at which time the youth of Florence on feastiuall days do
disport themselves publicly in the streets) it happened certain young men
of the Donati, with their friends, to come on horseback to behold the women
dancing, near unto S. Trinita, where staying awhile, thither chanced to come
certain Gentlemen of the house of Circhi: they also bringing with them some of
their friends. They not knowing that the Donati were there (who stood before
them) desirous to see the dance, pressed forward with their horses, and
shouldred them. Wherewith the Donati finding themselves offended, drew their
swords: and the Circhi as bravely prepared themselves to answer the assault.
After many hurts given and taken, every man departed his way. This disorder
happened in a very unhappy hour, because the whole City upon that occasion
was divided: as well the people, as the great men, and the parties took name
of Bianchi and Neri. The chief of the faction Bianchi, were the Circhi, and
with them joined Adimari Abbati, some of the Tosinghi, Bardi, Rossi,
Frescobaldi, Nerli, Mannelli, all the Mozzi, Scali, Gherardini, Caualcanti,
Malespini, Bostechi, Giandonati, Vecchietti, and Ariguzzi. They were also
followed by many populer families, and all the Ghibilini that were in Florence.
So that through the great number that took part with them, they had welneare
all the sway of the City. The Donati on the other side, were chief of the
party Nera, and with them the rest of those families before named, that joined
not with the Bianchi: and besides them, all the Pazzi, Spini, Buondelmonti,
Gianfiliazzi, and Brunelleschi. This humor did not only infect the City, but
also divided the whole country. Whereupon the Captains of mysteries, with
every other of the Guelfi that loved the Common weal, did fear, least the
division should with time, ruin the city, and revive the Ghibilini.
Wherefore they sent again to Pope Bonifacio, to the end he should devise
mean to save that city, which had been always a shield of the church: and
now likely either to be destroyed, or become subject to the Ghibilini. The Pope
sent then unto Florence a Legate called Mattheo de Acqua Sparta, a Cardinal of
Portugal, who finding difficulty in the Bianchi (which part as he thought
was the greater) feared the less, and departing from Florence offended, did
excommunicate the city: whereby it became in worse estate then before his
coming. Then the minds of all men being full of offense, it happened that
many of the Circhi and Donati, meeting at a burial, fell to words, and from
words, to swords. Whereof for that time followed nothing but tumult and
disorder, and so every man returned home. The Circhi then determined to
assault the Donati, with great numbers of people went to seek them. But by the
virtue of Corso they were put back, and many of them also very sore wounded.
All the City was up in Arms, the Signori, and the Laws were trodden down
with fury of great men. The wisest and best Citizens lived full of
suspicion. The Donati and their partakers feared most, because they could do
least. Thereuppon Corso, and the other heads of the Neri, together with the
Captains of the mysteries, resolved to entreat the Pope, to send unto
Florence some one of the blood royal, hoping by his means to oppress the
Bianchi. This assembly and resolution was notified to the Priori, and of the
adverse part complained upon, as a conspiracy against the liberty of the
City. Both the factions being at that time in Arms, the Senators (of whom
Dante happened to be one) by his counsel and wisdom, took courage and
Armed the people, with whom also joined many of the Country. And so
enforcing the heads of the factions to lay down their Arms, banished Corso
Donati, with the others of the part Nera. Moreover, the Senators seeming to be
indifferent in this judgment, confined some of the Bianchi: who shortly after
under color of honest occasions returned home. Corso and his friends imagining
themselves favored by the Pope, went unto Rome, and with their presence
persuaded the Pope unto that, which before they had written. Carlo di valloys,
made Governor of Horence.
It happened at the same time that Carlo de Vallois the French Kings brother
was in the Popes Court, called into Italy by the King of Napoli, to go into
Sicilia. The Pope thought good (being desired thereunto by the banished men of
Florence) to send him to remain at Florence, till such time as the season of
the year better served to pass the seas. Then went Carlo to Florence, and
although the Bianchi who then governed, had him in suspicion, yet because he
was chief of the Guelfi and sent by the Pope, they durst not gainsay his
coming, but to make him their friend, they gave him authority to dispose of
the City according to his own discretion. Carlo having received this power,
armed all his friends and followers: which gave the people great suspicion that
he intended to usurp the liberty. For preventing of which mischief, order
was given, that every Citizen should arm himself, and stand with weapon at
his own door, to be ready, if Carlo should at his entry happen to
enterprise any thing. The Circhi and other heads of the faction Biancha (having
been a while chief of the Common weal, and borne themselves in their offices
proudly) were come into universal hatred, which encouraged Corso and others,
banished men of the faction Nera, to come to Florence; knowing that Carlo with
the Captains of companies would favor them. When the City through the
mistrust of Carlo was armed, Corso with the banished men and many others that
followed him, came unto Florence: and without let, entered the City. And
though Very de Circhi, was persuaded to have encountered him, yet would he not,
saying that the people of Florence (against whom he came) and not he should
punish him. But the contrary came to pass, for he was by the people received,
and not punished. And it behooved Very for his own safety to fly. For Corso
having entered the gate called Pinti, made head at S. Pietro Maggiore, near to
his own house, whither many friends and many people desirous of novelty,
came. And first delivered all the prisoners that had been either for public
or private cause committed. Then they enforced the Senators to return to their
houses as private persons: and elected in their places populer men of the
faction Nera. For five days also they sacked those that were the chief of the
part of Biancha. The Circhi and other Princes of that faction were gone out of
the City, and retired to their places of force. And not seeing Carlo to
entermedle, the greater part of the people became their enemies. Whereupon
though they would not before follow the Council of the Pope, now they were
enforced to pray his aid, letting him understand, that Carlo was come to
disunite, and not to unite the City. Then the Pope sent again his Legate,
Mattheo d'Acqua Sparta, who persuaded a peace between the Circhi and the
Donati, confirming the same with new alliances and marriages. He also labored
that the Bianchi might be partakers of the Offices in government: whereto the
Neri (mistrusting the state should receive thereby some hinderance) would not
consent. The Legate thereuppon grew offended, and departed from thence as
discontented, as he had been the time before, leaving the City disobedient
and cursed. Thus remained the one and the other part evil satisfied. The Neri
seeing their adversaries at hand, feared least with their ruin, they should
recover the authority by them lost. And the Bianchi seeing themselves deprived
of authority and honor, therewith being had in disdain and suspicion, were
offered new injuries. Nicholo de Circhi, accompanied with diverse his friends,
and going toward his possessions, passing the bridge Affrico, was there
assaulted by Simone son of Corso Donati. This conflict was great, and of
either side very bloody: for Nicholo was slain, and Simone so hurt, as the
next night he died. This chance troubled all the City anew, and albeit the
part Nera was therein most culpable, yet by those that governed, they were
defended. Also, before judgment given, was discovered, that the Bianchi had
entered a conspiracy with Pietro Feranti, a Barron belonging to Carlo. In
which treason, they practiced to place themselves again in the government.
This matter came to light, by Letters which the Circhi had written to the
Barron: yet some men held opinion that those Letters were not true, but forged
by the Donati, to shadow the infamy, that by the death of Nicholo they had
incurred. Thereuppon all the Circhi were confined, with all their followers of
the part Biancha: amongst whom was Dante the Poet. Their goods were sold,
and their houses razed. These banished men, joined with many Ghibilini,
disposed them selves into many places, and hoping with new travails and
troubles to find new fortune, and Carlo having done that in Florence for which
he came, departed and returned to the Pope, to go on his enterprise of
Sicilia: wherein he showed himself no wiser, nor better then he was in
Florence. So that with the loss of many of his, he returned into France
dishonored. After the departure of Carlo, the City continued quiet. New
troubles by Corso Donati.
Corso only was inclined to trouble, because he thought himself not in that
authority that he ought to be, but saw the government in the hands of
populer men, far his inferiors. He then moved with these passions, thought
to perform a dishonest intent, by an honest occasion, slaundering many
Citizens, who had the custody of the public treasure: saying that they had
employed the same to their private commodities, and therefore it were well done
to examine their doings and punish them for the same. This his evil opinion
was allowed by many that were men of the like disposition: with whom also
many others, through ignorance joined: because they thought Corso had been
indeed moved thereunto with the love of his Country. On the other side the
Citizens slaundered, having love borne them of the people, defended
themselves. In so much, as this diversity of opinions, after civil
disputation brought them to Arms. On the one part was Corso Donati and
Lottieri, Bishop of Florence: with many great men, and some Commoners. On
the other part, was the Senate, with the greater number of the people: so that
the most part of the Citizens did fight. The Senators seeing the danger
wherein they were to be great, prayed aid of the Lucchesi, and suddeinly all
the people of Lucca were in Florence: by whose authority, for that time, all
things were composed. These tumultes appeased and assuaged, the people
continued in their authority, and the liberty preserved, without any other
punishment of him that moved the slander. The Pope understanding the troubles
of Florence, to pacify the same, sent thither his Legate called Nicholao de
Prato, who being a man for degree, learning, and good behavior, greatly
reputed, obtained easily so much favor, as to have authority to dispose of
the state as himself thought good; and for that he was in faction a Ghibilin,
he intended to call home those that were banished: yet first thought good to
win favor of the people. To that end he renewed the ancient companies, which
greatly strengthened him, and weakened the Nobility. The Legate then
(persuaded that the people were become all his) practiced to call home those
that had been banished. For the compassing whereof he proved many means, which
did not only take evil success, but also made himself thereby so much
suspected among those that governed, as he was thereby enforced to depart, and
return home to the Pope, leaving Florence full of confusion, and
excommunicate. In the city at that time remained not only one humor, but
many, to the disturbance thereof: being there in the displeasure betwixt the
people and the Nobility, the Ghibilini and the Guelfi, the Bianchi and Neri.
All the city took Arms, because many Citizens who desired the return of
the banished men, were evil content with the Legates departure. The chief of
those that moved the quarrel, were the Medici and Guigni, Medici and Guini.
who together with the Legate were discovered to favor the Rebels: In sundry
parts of the city the people fought. To which disorder, there happened a fire,
first in Orto Sante Michele, at the houses of the Abati: from whence it passed
to the houses of the Caponsacci and burnt them; with the houses of Mazzi,
Amieri, Toschi, Cipriani, Lamberti, and Caualcanti, and all the new market.
From thence it passed to the gate of S. Maria, and burnt all that, returning
about Ponte Vecchio, and consumed the houses of Gherardini, Pulci, Amidei, and
Luccardesi, with many others, that the number amounted to 1700. or more. Some
were of opinion that this fire happened by chance in the fury of the conflict.
Others affirm, that one Neri Abbati Prior of S. Pietro Scaragio, a man
dissolute and desirous of mischief, kindled the same. For seeing every man
occupied in the conflict, knew he might do that displeasure, which no other
could remedy. And to the end it might the rather have success, he set fire
in the houses of his own companions. It was the year 1304. in the month of
July, when the city of Florence was with fire and sword in this sort
afflicted. Corso Donati was he, that of all others in these tumults armed not
himself, because he hoped the rather to be Judge and Vmpire betwixt the
parties: when being weary of fight, they should be content to be persuaded.
Notwithstanding, weapons were laid down rather for very weariness and
necessity, then through any pacification or persuasion of peace. For this
only followed thereof, that the Rebels should not return, and the faction
that favored them remained with disadvantage. The Legate returning to Rome,
and hearing the troubles that were begun in Florence, persuaded the Pope,
that for the uniting of that City, it was necessary for him to send thither
for twelve principal Citizens, whereby the root of the mischief removed, it
should be the more easy to quench the same. This Council was by the Pope
allowed, and the Citizens sent for, appeared. Amongst whom was Corso Donati.
When these Citizens were absent, the Legate wrote unto the Rebels, that the
chief of the Citizens were from home, and therefore the time served well for
them to return unto Florence. Which encouragement being received, they
assembled their forces and came to the City, entering where the walls were
not fully finished: and passed forward, till they came to the Piazza di Saint
Giouanni. It was a thing notable, to see how those citizens, who had lately
fought for the Rebels, so long as disarmed they desired reuocation, being
now armed, and forcing the city, became their enemies, and took arms against
them. So much the common good was by those Citizens esteemed and preferred
before private friendship. Wherefore they uniting themselves with all the
people, enforced the rebels to depart and return from whence they came. This
enterprise had no success, both because the banished men had left part of
their forces at Lastria: and for not having tarried the coming of Tolosetto
Vbarti, who should have come from Pistoia with three hundredth men. But they
imagined, that expedition should have prevailed more then force (as often in
like cases it so happens) that delays do hinder occasion: and haste wants
force. The Rebels being gone back, Florence returned to the wonted divisions.
Then to take authority from the house of Caualcanti, the people by force
removed them from possession of the Castle called Le Stinche, seated in the
vale of Grieve aunciently belonging thereto. And because the soldiers therein
taken, were the first that were put into that prison newly builded, that prison
ever after, was called Le Stinche, by the name of the Castle from whence the
prisoners came. Also those that were chief of the Commonweal, New
reformation in Florence.
renewed the companies of the people, and gave them Ensigns as had been before
ordered: making Gonfalonieri of the mysteries, calling them Colleggio di
Signori. They ordained also, that the Senate should reform all disorders, in
time of war, by Arms, and in time of peace, by Counsel. They joined unto
the two old Rettori one Essecutore, who, together with the Gonfalonieri, should
reform the insolency of the great men. In the mean time died the Pope, and
Corso with other Citizens was returned from Rome. The City should then have
continued quiet, had it not been with the unquietness of Corso anew disturbed.
He, to gain himself reputation, ever used to hold opinion contrary to men of
most authority: and whereunto he found the people inclined (to gain their
favor) that way he directed his authority. Whereby he made himself head of
all new opinions, and to him resorted all those who sought to obtain any thing
by extraordinary mean. For that cause many great Citizens did hate him, which
hatred increased so much, Corso Donati.
as the faction of Neri came to open division, because Corso employed private
forces, and such as were enemies to the state. Notwithstanding, so great was
the authority of his person and presence, that every man feared him: yet to
win from him the populer favor (as by such kind of means might easily be
done) a brute was put forth, that he went about to tyrannize the city: which
was easily believed, because his manner of living did in troth surpass the
charge of civil expense. That opinion was increased greatly, after he took to
wife the daughter of Vguccione della Faggiola, chief of the faction Ghibilini
and Bianca, in Toscana most mighty. This alliance come to knowledge, the
adverse part took Arms; and the people for the same occasion refused to
defend him: the chiefest of them joining with his enemies. The greatest of his
adversaries were Rosso della Tosa, Pazzino de Pazzi, Geri Spini, and Berto
Brunelleschi: they with their followers, and the greater part of the people,
assembled themselves armed at the foot of the Palace, of the Signori. By
whose order an accusation was preferred to Piero Brancha (Captain of the
people) against Corso Donati, for that he, with the aid of Vguccione, sought
to make himself a tyrant. Corso condemned.
Then was he cited to appear, and after for contumacie judged a Rebel.
Betwixt his accusation and the judgment pronounced, was not longer time then
two hours. This sentence given, the companies of the people under their
Ensigns, marched toward him. Corso on the other side was not dismayed,
(though he were abandoned by many his friends) nor for the sentence pronounced,
nor yet with the authority of the Senators, nor the multitude of his enemies:
but fortified his house, hoping there to defend himself, till he were rescued
by Vguccione, for whom he had sent. All his houses, and all the ways unto
them, were fortified and made close: and within, many of his faction to defend
them. So that, the people (though in great numbers come thither) could not
enter. The conflict was great, many slain, and many hurt of either side. And
the people seeing that by those ways they could not prevail, brake the houses
of his neighbors, and by that devise not mistrusted, did enter. Corso then
seeing himself beset with enemies, and no longer trusting to the help of
Vguccione, resolved to see what mean he could find to save himself, since of
victory he utterly dispaired. Then with Gherardo Bondini, and many others his
most valiant and faithful friends, he charged his enemies with so great fury,
as he brake them, and made way to pass through to the gate of the City, where
they got out. Yet were they still pursued, Gherardo upon the bridge Affrico,
was by Bocaccio Cauicciuoli slain. Corso also was taken at Bouezano, by
certain horsemen belonging to the Senate. Notwithstanding being brought
toward Florence, hating the sight of his enemies, and the glory of their
victory, he fell from his horse, The death of Corso Donati 1308.
and was by one of them which led him, there murdered. The body was after
taken up by the Monks of S. Salui, and (without any honor) by them buried.
This was the end of Corso Donati, unto whom, his country, and the faction of
Neri, for many deeds both good and bad, must acknowledge it self beholding.
But had his disposition and mind been more quiet, the memory of him had
deserved great honor. For indeed he was a Citizen so rare, as had at any time
before been seen in our city. Yet true it is, that his factious mind bereft
him of that honor which by his country and confederates was due: and in the
end, procured his own death, with many other misaduentures. Vguccione coming
to the rescue of his son in law, and arrived at Remoli, heard there that
Corso was by the people taken. Whereupon, knowing that he could by no means then
help him, for not hurting himself, returned back. Corso thus ending his life
(which happened in the year 1308. was the cause that all tumults ceased, and
the city continued quiet, till such time as intelligence was given, The
Emperor Arrigo called into Italy. 1312.
that Arrigo the Emperor (who favored by the Florentine Rebels) was come
into Italy, followed by them, and intending to put them again in possession of
their country. For preventing of which mischief, the Magistrates of the city
thought good to call home all those that had not been by special name
banished: whereby the number of their enemies should be the less. The greater
number that remained in exile were Ghibilini, and some few of the faction
Bianca, among whom were Dante Alighieri, the sons of Very de Cerchi, and
Giano della Bella. They sent also for aid to Roberto King of Napoli, which not
obtained at his hand as their friend: they were enforced to give him the city
for five years; to the end, he might defend them as his subjects. Then the
Emperor passed into Italy, and by the way of Pisa, went to Rome, there to be
crowned, in the year 1312. Afterward, determining to reform Florence, he
returned thither by Perugia and Arezzo: and lodged his Camp at the Monastery
of S. Salui, distant one mile from the city; where he remained fifty days,
without any good done, and therefore as desperate of success, removed to Pisa;
where he agreed with Federigo King of Sicilia, to assault the kingdom of
Napoli. Being with his Army there arrived, in great hope of victory, and the
King Roberto in great fear of his destruction, at Buouconuento he died. It
happened shortly after, that Vguccione di Faggiola, The death of Arrigo.
became Prince of Pisa, and not long after of Lucca: brought thither by the
faction of Ghibilini, with whose aid he greatly injured his neighbors.
Amongst whom, the Florentines to be delivered, gave unto the brother of King
Roberto, the government of their Army. Vguccione on the other side, for the
increasing of his power, labored continually, till by force and subtlety he
had gotten many Castles in the vale of Arno and Nieuole. Then marching toward
Monte Catini, with intent to besiege the same, the Florentines thought it
necessary to rescue that place, least the loss thereof might disturb the
whole country. Then assembling a great Army, they passed into the vale
Nieuole, where they fought with Vguccione, and in the end of their battle,
two thousand or more of their men were slain, with Piero the Kings brother
their General; whose body afterward was never found: neither was this
victory without loss to Vguccione, whose son was also killed, with many
Captains and Leaders of his Army. The Florentines after this overthrow,
fortified the towns about them, New diuition, in Florence.
and the King Roberto sent them a new General called Andrea Earl Nouello. By
whose government, (or rather by the natural inclination of the Florentines,
discontented with every state, and divided by every accident) notwithstanding
the wars they lately had with Vguccione, fell to faction. The one part
whereof, called themselves the Kings friends, the other the Kings enemies. The
chief of the Kings enemies, were Simon della Tosa, the house of Magalotti,
with certain other populer men, in whom rested the chief of the government.
These men found means to send into France and Germany, to leauie Captains and
soldiers to remove the Earl Andrea Governor for the King. But their fortune
was such, as could not bring to pass that they desired: yet did they not
abandon the enterprise, but being disappointed both by France and Germany,
they found out a Governor in Agobio, and before his coming, Lando de Agebio,
made Governor of Florence.
removed Andrea. Lando de Agobio being come, was made their minister, or rather
their hangman, having received absolute authority ouerall the citizens. He,
being a man covetous and cruel, accompanied with his soldiers (all armed)
visited every street, murdering every man, whom those that elected him,
would require. Yea, (such was his insolency) that he caused false money to be
quoined with the stamp of Florence, and no man durst gainsay the doing thereof:
so great was the authority whereunto the discord of the city had brought him.
Great and lamentable was the estate of this town, which neither the memory of
passed division, neither the fear of Vguccione, nor the authority of the King
could reform. In most miserable plight it then remained, when the country
abroad was spoiled by Vguccione, and the city within by Lando of Agobio
sacked. The Kings friends were all contrary to Lando and his followers.
Likewise all Noble houses, the chief of the people, and all the Guelfi.
Notwithstanding, because the adverse party had the government, they could not
without peril to themselves be discovered. Yet resolving to be delivered from
so dishonest a tyranny, they wrote secretly unto the King Roberto, to make the
Earl Guido Buttifolle his Lieftenant in Florence: which the King presently
did, and the adverse part (notwithstanding that the Senators were contrary to
the King) durst not for the respect they bare to the Earl, find fault. But
the Earl had not thereby much authority, because the Senators and the
Gonfaloniere were by Lando and his party favored. During the continuance of
these troubles in Florence, the daughter of King Alberto coming from Germany,
passed that way in her iourny toward Carlo, the son of Roberto her husband.
She was greatly honored by the Kings friends, and they imparted unto her the
state of the city, and the tyranny of Lando with his followers. In so much as
by the favor of her, before her departure the city was pacified, Lando
removed from his authority, and with riches, blood, and spoil, sent home to
Agobio. The government also of the King over the city, for three years was
continued. And whereas there had been before seven Senators elected by Lando,
six more were chosen for the King, so the Magistrates were for a time
thirteen. After, they were reduced to the ancient number of seven. About this
time Vguccione was deprived of his authority in Lucca and Pisa; and Castruccio
Castracani, Castruccio castracani.
from a private Citizen, aspired to be Lord of Lucca: for he being a young
man of great courage, and in every enterprise fortunate, became in short space
the principal Leader of all the Chibilini in Toscana. For which respect, the
Florentines setting aside private discord, devised with themselves by what
means Castruccio might be kept down: and how his forces already grown might
be resisted. And to the end that the Senators might with better counsel be
advised, and with more authority execute the same, they elected twelve
Citizens, whom they called Boni Homini: without whose consent and counsel,
the Senators might not do any thing of importance. In this mean while, the
government of king Roberto was expired, and the city became Prince over it
self, with the ancient Magistrates and governors thereof. Also the great fear
they had of Castruccio, did hold the same united, he having done many things
against the Lords of Lunigiana, and assembled Prato. The Florentines hearing
those news, resolved: and determining to rescue that town, shut up their
shops and went confusedly together, to the number of twenty thousand footmen,
and fifteen hundredth horse. Also to diminish the strength of Castruccio, and
increase their own, the Senators by proclamation gave notice, that whatsoever
Rebel of the faction of Guelfi, would come to the rescue of Prato, should be
after the enterprise restored to his country. Upon this proclamation more then
four thousand Rebels came presently thither. This great Army in haste
conducted to Prato, so much terrified Castruccio, that without trial of his
fortune by fight, he retired to Lucca. Then grew great controversy within the
Camp of the Florentines, betwixt the Nobility and the people: for these would
have followed the enemy, hoping by fight to have overthrown him; and those
would return back, saying, it sufficed that they had hazarded Florence to
succor Prato. Which was well done, being constrained by necessity, but since
the cause was now removed, no wisdom would (where little was to be gotten and
much to be lost) that fortune should be further tempted. This matter (the
people not agreeing) was referred to the Senators, who found among themselves
the same diversity of opinions that was between the people and the Nobility:
which being known, much company assembled in the Market place, using great
words of threatenings to the Nobility; In so much that they for fear, gave
place to the will of the people: but all too late, because in the mean while
the enemy was with safety retired to Lucca. This disorder brought the people
into so great indignation of the Nobility, that the Senators would not
perform the promise, by their consent given to the Rebels: which the Rebels
understanding, and hoping to prevent the Senate before the Camp arrived at
Florence, offered to enter the gates. But their intent being discovered by
those in the City, were repulsed. Then they sought to compass that by
persuasion, which by force they could not, and sent eight Ambassadors to put
the Senators in remembrance of their promise, and the peril they had under the
same adventured, hoping of that reward which was by them offered. The Nobility
thereby put in mind, and knowing themselves by promise bound, labored greatly
in the favor of the Rebels. Notwithstanding, by reason the people were
offended, for not following the enterprise of Castruccio, nothing was obtained:
which afterward proved the great shame and dishonor of the city. For many of
the Nobility therewith displeased, did assaie to win that by force, which by
entreatie they could not. For which purpose, they conspired with the rebels
to enter the City armed, and they would take arms also for their aid. This
appointment before the day of execution, was discovered: whereby the banished
men at their coming found the city armed, and order given to apprehend them
abroad, and keep down those that were within. Thus this enterprise was in
every respect without success. After the departure of the rebels, the
citizens desired to punish those by whose means they did come thither. And
albeit every man knew who were the offenders, yet no man durst name them, much
less accuse them. Therefore to understand the troth without respect, it was
ordered, that secretly the names of the offenders should be written, and
privily delivered to the Captain. In this accusation were named Amerigo
Donati, Teghiaio, Frescobaldi, and Lotteringo Gerardini: who having Judges more
favorable, then perhaps they deserved, were only condemned in pecuniall
punishment. The tumults which grew in Florence by coming of the Rebels to the
gate, made trial that one Chieftaine for all the companies of the people did
not suffice: and therefore they required after, that to every company might be
appointed three or four Leaders; and to every Gonfaloniere two or three
others, whom they would have called Pennonieri. To the end, that in time of
necessity all the company not assembling, part of them, under one head might
be employed. Moreover (as it happens in all commonweals after any accident)
some old laws be disanulled, and some others are made new: so the Senate
before appointed from time to time, the Senators with the Collegii which then
were (to the end their force might be the greater) had authority given them and
their successors, to continue in office during the space of forty months. And
because many Citizens feared their names not to be put into the bag, they
procured a new Imborsation. Of this beginning, grew the election of
Magistrates, as well within, as without the City: which election was in those
days called Imborsation. Afterward the same was called Squittini. And for
that every three, or at the most five years, this order was taken, the
occasion of tumults in the City, at the choice of Magistrates, was removed,
yet were they ignorant of such discommodities, as under this small commodity
was hidden. The year 1315. being come, and Castruccio having surprised
Pistoia, was grown to that greatness, that the Florentines fearing the same,
determined before such time as he was settled in his Principallitie, to assault
him, and bring him under their obedience. For which purpose they levied twenty
thousand foot men, and three thousand horse. With these forces they besieged
Altopassio, in hope by having of that Town, to impeach the passage of those
that would come to the succor of Pistoia. The Florentines prevailed in this
enterprise, and having taken the place, marched toward Lucca, spoiling the
country where they went. Notwithstanding, through the small wisdom of the
General, or rather his infidelity, little good ensued thereof. Ramondo di
Cardona, General for the Florents.
This Captain was called Ramondo de Cardona. He, seeing the Florentines to
have been liberal of their liberty, giving the same sometimes to Kings, and
sometimes to the Legates of Popes, and men of mean quality: thought it
possible to bring himself to be a Prince; if first he could lead them into
some great necessity. He gave them therefore to understand, that for his
better reputation, it was meet for him to have the same authority within the
City, that he had in the Army: otherwise he should not have that obedience of
his soldiers which belonged unto a General. Whereto the Florentines not
consenting, the Army proceeded slowly, or rather every day losing somewhat:
and Castruccio continually gained. Because, by that time were come unto him
diverse supplies sent by the Visconti, and other tirants of Lombardy.
Castruccio by this mean grown strong, and Ramondo having neglected his
service: The Florentines overthrown by Castruccio.
as for want of fidelity he did not prosper at the first, so he could not
after save himself: for whilst he lingered with his Camp, Castruccio did
assault him, and overthrew him, near unto Altopassio. In which conflict many
Citizens were slain, and with them Ramondo himself: who thereby found the
punishment of fortune, which his infidelity and evil service to the
Florentines deserved. The displeasures which Castruccio did after the victory,
by spoiling, distroying, burning, imprisoning, and killing, cannot be told.
Because without any resistance he rode up and down in the country, where
himself listed, spoiling, and committing what cruelties he thought good. The
Florentines scantly able, after so great an overthrow, to defend the city: yet
were they not so greatly dismayed, but that they made much provision, both of
men and money: sending also to their friends, to have their aid. All which
sufficed not to bridle the fury of so mighty an enemy. Wherefore as
constrained, they made choice of Carlo Duke of Calauria, son to King Roberto,
to be their Prince: offering him, not their friendship, but their obedience,
and prayed him to defend their City. But Carlo being occupied in the wars of
Sicilia (and therefore not at leisure to come in person, sent thither
Gualtieri, by Nation a French man, The Duke of Athene, Governor of Florence.
and Duke of Athene. He as deputy for his master, took possession of the
City, and placed officers according to his own discretion. Notwithstanding,
his behavior was so modest, and contrary to his own nature; that every man
loved him. Carlo having ended the wars of Sicilia, being followed with a
thousand horse men came to Florence, and made his entry in the year 1326.
whose coming stayed Castruccio from spoiling of the Florentines country. But
that relief which was found abroad, was lost within, and those displeasures
which the enemies could not, were by friends performed. Because the Senators
did nothing without the Dukes consent: who within the space of one year,
levied in the City four thousand Florins, notwithstanding that by the
capitulation with him taken, it was agreed, he should have but two thousand.
So great impositions were daily by him or his exacted. To these displeasures
new suspicions, and new enemies were discovered. For the Ghibilini of Lombardy
suspected so much the coming of Carlo into Toscana, that Galiazzo Visconti and
other tyrants of Lombardy, by money and promises, The Emperor Lodouico called
into Italy.
procured Lodouico di Bauiera Emperor elected, against the Popes will to come
into Italy: who being arrived in Lombardy, marched toward Toscana, where with
the help of Castruccio he became Lord of Pisa. And being relieved with money,
he went toward Rome: which caused Carlo to leave Florence, and return to the
kingdom, leaving Philippo de Sagginetto his Lieftenant. Castruccio, after the
Emperors departure possessed Pisa, and the Florentines took from him by
practice, Pistoia, which Castruccio after besieged, with so great virtue and
resolution, that although the Florentines many times assaied to rescue the
Town, sometimes assailing the Army, and sometimes disturbing the Country: yet
could they never either by force or industry, remove him from that enterprise.
So greatly he thirsted to chastise the Pistoiesi, and offend the Florentines.
By means whereof, the Pistoiesi were constrained to receive him for their
Prince: which thing, albeit were greatly to his glory, proved in the end his
disadvantage. For being returned to Lucca, there he died. And because that one
good or evil hap, The death of castruccio and carlo Duke of calauria.
comes sildome unaccompanied, with the like: also at the same time died Carlo
Duke of Calauria Prince of Florence, as it were, to the end that the
Florentines beyond all expectation might be delivered from the government of
the one, and the fear of the other. They thus become free, reformed the
city, disanulled all orders of the old Councelles, and created two new
Councelles: the one having in it three hundredth Citizens Commoners, and the
other two hundredth and fifty Gentlemen, and Commoners, mixed. The first of
these, New reformation in Florence.
was called the Council of the people, the other the common Council. The
Emperor being arrived at Rome, created an Antipope, and ordered many things
in prejudice of the church, and many other things also he attempted without
effect. And therefore with this honor he removed from Rome to Pisa; where,
either of melancholy, or for want of money to pay eight hundred Almaine
horsemen, who were rebelled, and at Montechiaro had fortified themselves, died.
They, The death of Lodouico.
so soon as the Emperor departed from Pisa to go unto Lombardy, surprised
Lucca, and drove out of that city Francesco Castracani, left there by the
Emperor. Then being possessed of that city, and intending to make profit
thereof, offered to sell it to the Florentines, for threescore thousand
Florins, and was refused by the Council of Simon della Tosa. This refusal
would have been to our city most profitable, if the Florentines had ever
continued in that mind: but because shortly after they changed opinion, it was
greatly to our loss. For if at that time for so small price, they might so
peaceably have had it, and would not, afterward desiring it, and offering much
more then was required, they could not obtain it: which was the occasion, that
Florence many times with great prejudice has changed the government. Lucca
being thus by the Florentines refused, was by Gerardino Spinola of Genoua, for
thirty thousand Florins bought. And because men be more slow to lay hold of
that which they may come by, then to desire that they cannot attain unto: so
soon as this bargain made with Gerardino was known, and how small a sum of
money he paid; the people of Florence became greatly desirous to have it,
repenting themselves, and blaming those that were the cause that the bargain
proceeded not. Then sought they to get that by force, which for money was
refused. For obteining whereof, they sent their soldiers to spoil the country
belonging to Lucca. The troubles and war in Florence all ceased.
In this mean time, the Emperor was gone out of Italy, and the Antipope by
order of the Pisani, sent prisoner into France. The Florentines then, from the
death of Castruccio (which happened in the year 1328. til the year 1340.
continued quiet within, and attended their matters of state abroad. They also
made many wars in Lombardy, for the coming thither of king John of Bohemia,
and in Toscana, touching the state of Lucca. They likewise ornefied their
city with new buildings. For in that time, the Tower of S. Reparata,
according to the direction of Giotto (an excellent Painter), was builded. And
because, in the year 1333. by means of a marvelous flood, the River of Arno
into many places ouerflowed the city, more then 12. cubits; many bridges and
buildings were thereby decayed, which with great care and expense were now
restored. But the year 1340. being come, new occasions of alteration were
grown up. The citizens of most power, had two means to increase and maintain
their greatness. The one, by restraining the number of those that should be
elected Magistrates, whereby the offices of authority came either unto them,
or their friends. The other, because themselves being chief at the election of
the Rettori, they were by them in their offices the more favored. And this
second cause they esteemed so much, that to these two ordinary Rettori, they
also joined a third: whom they in those days brought in extraordinary, under
the title of Captain of the Guard, and placed therein Iacamo Gabrieli de
Agobio, giving him absolute authority over the citizens. He, day by day,
before the face of them that governed, committed many injuries, and among those
that were injured, was Piero de Bardi, and Bardo Frescobaldi. Conspiracy
against Iacomo Gabrieli of Agobio.
They, being gent. and naturally proud, could not endure that a stranger
wrongfully, and in the presence of some Magistrates had done them injury:
which, both against him, and those that governed, they conspired to revenge.
Into that conspiracy, entered many Noble families, and some of the people;
whom the tyranny of him that governed, did offend. The order of execution
agreed upon, was, that every man should assemble into his house as many armed
men as he could, and in the morning of All Saints day, when every body was in
the church, to take arms, and kill the Captain. Which done, they determined
to place new Senators, and with new orders to reform the state. But because
enterprises of peril, the more they be thought upon, the more unwillingly be
performed. It always happens, that co^spiracies not suddenly executed, are
for the most part discovered. There was among the conspirators one called
Andrea de Bardi, (in whom the consideration of punishment could do more, then
the hope of revenge) revealed all to Iacamo Alberti his brother in law. Then
Iacamo informed the Priori, and the Priori informed the Governors. And because
the day of danger grew near (which was the feast of All Saints) many citizens
consulted in the Palace, and thinking it dangerous to defer the time, judged
it best that the Senators should cause the bell to be rung, and thereby call
the people to arms. Taldo Valori was Gonfaloniere, and Francesco Saluiati,
Taldo Valori.
one of the Senate. They being to the Bardi kinsmen, would not have the Bell
rung, saying it were not well done, upon every light occasion to arm the
people. For authority being given to a loose multitude, could work no good
effect. It was also easy to move tumults, but to appease them, hard. It were
therefore much better, first to examine the troth of the cause, and punish the
same by law, the^ correct it disorderly with ruin of the city; which words
were not willingly heard. For the Senators with many injurious and presumptuous
speeches, were enforced to ring the Bell: upon hearing whereof, all the people
ran sodeinly into the market place, armed. On the other side, the Bardi and
Frescobaldi, seeing themselves discovered, intending to win their purpose
with glory, or die without shame, took arms: hoping to defend that part of
the city where their own houses were: and on the other side of the river
fortified the bridges, trusting to be succored by the nobility of the country,
and other their friends. Which purpose was disappointed by the people that
inhabited where their houses were, who took arms in favor of the Senate: so
that finding themselves disapointed, they aba^doned the bridges, and retired to
the street where the Bardi dwelt, as a place of more strength then any other,
and that very valiantly they defended. Iacobo de Agobio knowing all this
conspiracy to be against him, fearful of death, and amazed, at the palace of
the Senators in the midst of the armed men, placed himself. But there was more
courage in the Rettori, who had less offended: and most of all in the Podesta,
called Maffeo de Maradi. For he presented himself to those that fought, Maffeo
de Maradi.
and as a man senceles, and without al fear, passing the bridge Rubaconte,
entered in among the swords of the Bardi, making signs to speak with the^.
Whereupon they considering the reueuerence of the man, his virtue, and other his
good, and great qualities, stayed their weapons, and quietly heard him. He then
with modest and grave words blamed their co^spiracy, laying before them the
perils whereto they were subject, if they gave not over this populer enterprise:
giving the^ also hope, that they should be favorably heard, and mercifully
judged. And promised moreover, to be the mean whereby their reasonable offenses
should find compassion. Then he returned back to the Senators, and persuaded
the^ not to be victorious with the blood of their own citizens, neither to
judge before the cause were heard. And his persuasion prevailed so much, as by
consent of the Senate the Bardi and Frescobaldi with their friends, were
suffered to abando^ the city and return to their castles. They being gone, and
the people disarmed, the Senators proceeded only against the families of Bardi
and Frescobaldi, The Bardi and Frescobaldi condemned.
who had taken arms. And to spoil them of some part of their power, they
bought of the Bardi, the Castle of Mangona, and the Castle of Varina, and made
a law, that no Citizen might possess a Castle within twenty miles of
Florence. Within few months after, Stiatta Frescobaldi was beheaded, and
many others of that family proclaimed Rebels. It sufficed not the Governors
to have oppressed the Bardi, and Frescobaldi, but they did (as men commonly
do) the more authority they have, the worse they use it, and the more
insolent they become: so, where was before one Captain of the Guard who
oppressed the Citizens within Florence, they also chose an other in the
Country, to the end, that men to them suspected, should neither within the
City nor without, have any dwelling. So earnestly were they bent against the
Nobility, that they forced not to sell the City to be revenged: aspecting
only occasion, which came well, and they better used the same. By means of
many troubles which happened in Lombardy and Toscana, the possession of the city
of Lucca was come into the hands of Mastino della Scalla, Lord of Verona, who
(notwithstanding he was bound to deliver the same to the Florentines) did
not, because he thought himself able to hold it, the rather, by being Lord of
Parma, and therefore of his promise he made none account at all, which moved
the Florentines to offense. For revenge whereof, they joined against him with
the Venetians, and made so hot wars upon him, as thereby he was enforced
almost to abandon his country. Notwithstanding thereof followed nothing, but
some satisfaction of mind, to have oppressed Mastino. For the Venetians (as all
other do that join in league with such as be weaker then themselves) after
they had surprised Triuigi and Vuensa, without respect of the Florentines made
peace with Mastino. Shortly after, the Visconti Princes of Milan, having taken
Parma from Mastino, and he fearing for that cause, that Lucca could not be
kept, determined to sell it. Those that desired to buy that city, were the
Florentines and the Pisani. In beating the bargain, the Pisani perceived that
the Florentines richer then they, would obtain it. Therefore they sought to
win it by force, and with the aid of Visconti besieged it. The Florentines
notwithstanding proceeded, and bargained with Mastino, paying part of the money
in hand, and for payment of the rest, delivered hostages, Naldo Ruccelai,
Giouanni the son of Barnardino de Medici, and Rosso de Rici: and then by
order of Mastino, the possession of the City was delivered. The Pisani
notwithstanding pursued their enterprise, and by all means possible labored
to get the City by force: yet went the Florentines to rescue the City, and
remove the siege. But after a long war, the Florentines were forced with
loss of their money and honor to depart: and the Pisani became Lords of the
City. The loss of this Town (as in like cases it ever happens) made the
people of Florence greatly offended with those that governed, whom in every
Market place they defamed, accusing them of covetousness and unadvised
counsel. At the beginning of this war, the authority thereof, was given to
twenty Citizens, who elected Malatesta of Rimini for their General. He
governed the same with small courage, and less wisdom. The Duke of Athene.
They also prayed aid of Roberto King of Napoli, who sent unto them Gualtieri
Duke of Athene: and (as fortune would, prepairing all things for future
mischief) arrived in Florence, at the same instant when the enterprise of
Lucca was utterly lost. Whereupon the twenty, seeing the people displeased,
thought by choosing a new Captain, to bring them into new hope. And to the end
that the Duke of Athene might with more authority defend them, they created
him first their Defender, and after gave him the title of Captain General,
over their men at Arms. The great Citizens, who for the occasions beforesaid,
lived discontent, and many of them having also acquaintance with Gualtieri, at
such time as they governed Florence in the name of Carlo Duke of Calauria,
thought the time was come to alter the state, and oppress the people, who had
so long oppressed the^. For the bringing of that to pass, they thought good to
reduce the government under one Prince, who knowing their virtue, and the
insolency of the people, might reward the one and punish the other. They might
also hope the more of the Princes favor, if he by their means, aspired to
that dignity. To compass this intention, they many times met in secret, and
persuaded the Duke to take the government, offering to aid him to the
uttermost of their powers. With these Gentlemen, joined some populer families,
as the Perussi, Acciaiuoli, Antellesi, and Buonacorsi, who being greatly
indebted, and not able to pay of their own, desired with the servitude of
their country, and the goods of others to deliver themselves from the danger
of their creditors. Those persuasions moved the ambitious mind of the Duke,
to great desire of government, and the rather to make himself beloved, and
accounted upright, therewith also to win the favor of the people, he
persecuted those that had governed the wars of Lucca, and put to death,
Giouan de Medici, Naddo Ruccellati, and Guglielmo Altouiti: many also were
banished, and many in money condemned. These executions amazed much those of
the mean sort, only the Gentlemen and basest people were therewith
satisfied. These, because their nature is to rejoice at evil, and those for
that thereby their injuries received of the people, were revenged. When so ever
the Duke passed the streets, his favorers would publicly speak to his
honor, and wish that the fraud of the Citizens might be by him examined and
punished. The office of the twenty thus became disesteemed, the reputation of
the Duke grown great, and all men for fear, or affection, seemed to honor
him. And in token thereof, set the Dukes Arms upon their houses. In so much,
as this Duke wanted nothing that belonged to absolute authority, saving the
title of Prince. Then he persuaded himself, that whatsoever he attempted might
be safely done, and therefore sent unto the Senators, letting them understand,
that for the better government of the city, it behooved him to have the full
absolute authority and government: and seeing that all the rest of the
Citizens were thereto consenting, he desired that therewith they would be also
pleased. The Senators albeit that long before they had foreseen the ruin of
their Country, yet were they all with this request greatly troubled. And
though they knew also the peril, yet not to omit the duty to their Country,
they boldly denied the Duke. This Duke to make himself be thought the more
religious, and well disposed, did choose for his dwelling, the Monastery of
Saint Croce: and being desirous to execute his evil intent, he caused to be
published by proclamation, that his pleasure was the people should resort unto
him, at the gate of the said Monastery. This proclamation amazed the Senate
much more then the message, delivered them by word. Wherefore they thought good
to join with those Citizens, whom they knew to be lovers of their Country.
Neither did they think (knowing the Dukes forces) that there was other
remedy, to divert the Duke from the enterprise, then to entreat him: and so
make proof what effect fair words might work, to persuade him to use
himself in the government more mildly. Then went certain of the Senators unto
the Duke, and one of them spoke as follows. My Lord, we are come hither,
first moved by your Graces request, and next by your commandment to assemble
the people. For it seems a thing certain, that you intend to obtain that
extraordinarily, whereunto by ordinary means we have not consented. Our
meaning is, not by force to hinder your designs, but only lay before you,
how grievous a burden you put upon us, and how perilous an action you take in
hand. To the end you may hereafter remember our Councels, and weigh the same
with theirs, who not for your profit, but for the execution of their own
fury, have counseled you. You labor to bring this city in bondage, which
has ever lived in liberty. For that authority which we have granted to the
Princes of Napoli, was company, and not subjection. Have you considered of
what importance and how joyful a thing the name of liberty is, in every
City like unto this? The virtue whereof, no force can subdue, no time can
consume, nor no merit can deserve. Consider (my Lord) how great forces it
behooves you to have, to hold so great a City in servitude. Those strangers,
whom you have enterteined, be not of force sufficient: and these that be
within the walls, are not to be trusted. For such as be now your friends, and
have counseled you to this enterprise, so soon as they have with your
authority beaten down their enemies, will seek also by what means they may to
oppress you, and make themselves Princes. The base multitude also in whom you
trust, upon every accident, (be it never so little) do change their opinion. So
that in short time, you may look to find this city your foe, which shall be
the ruin thereof, and yours also. Neither can you find remedy for such a
mischief, since those Princes only can govern securely, who have few enemies:
because those few, either by death or exile may easily be removed. But against
universal hatred, no assurance can be found: because you know not where the
mischief grows. And who so fears every man, cannot assure himself of any
man. Also, if you seek to be assured of others, you enuiron your self with
perils: because those that remain, do hate you the more, and are the more
ready to revenge. A thing most certain it is, that no time can wear out the
desire of liberty. For we know, where the same has been in a city revived by
those, who never tasted thereof, save only by the memory of this name
liberty, which their ancestors by tradition did leave them. Therefore having
recovered it, with all obstinacy and resolution they will defend it, and if our
ancestors had never left any sign of liberty, yet should we be put in mind
thereof, by these public Palaces, by these places made for Magistrates, and
these badges of freedom and liberty: which things be publicly known, and
with great desire every citizen studieth to know them. What can you do, or what
can by any means be done, to counteruaile the sweetness of life in liberty,
or make the people forget the commodities thereof? Yea though you could join
all Toscana to the dominion of this state, or might every day return to the
city, triumphing over your enemies, yet all should not suffice. Because that
glory should not be yours, but ours. And our citizens should co^quer no
subjects, but increase companions in servitude. Albeit your manners were godly,
your behavior courteous, and your judgments just: yet were they not of force
enough to make you be loved. If you would believe, they did suffice; you therein
should deceive your self. For to men accustomed to a life in liberty, the
lightest clog seems heavy, and the losest bands do pinch. A thing impossible
it is for any state by violence gotten, to be by a good Prince maintained:
because of force he must become like unto his government, otherwise the one and
the other will perish. You must therefore think either to hold the city with
extreme violence, as castles, garrisons of men, and foreign friends (and yet
many times they suffice not) or else be content, with that authority, which we
have given you. We therefore persuade you, and pray you to remember, that such
obedience is durable, as is also voluntary. And labor not (being blinded with
some ambition) to set your self where you neither can stand nor clime higher
without your great prejudice and ours, and so be forced to fall. These words
moved not at all the hardened heart of the Duke, The Dukes answer to the
Senate.
saying, his intention was not to take away, but restore the liberty of the
city. For cities disunited were not free, but those that were united. And if
Florence by reason of factions, ambition, and enmity, had lost the liberty,
he would restore it. Saying moreover, that not his own ambition, but the suit
of many Citizens, brought him to take this burden: and therefore they should
do well to be content with that, wherewith others were contented. As touching
those perils which he might by this occasion incur, he feared them not at
all. For it was the office of no good man, to leave the good, for fear of
evil, and the property of a coward, for fear of good success, to abandon a
glorious enterprise. Also he hoped so to bear himself, as they should have
cause in short space, to confess that they trusted him too little, and feared
him too much. The Senate then seeing no more good to be done, agreed that the
next morning with their authority to give the government unto the Duke for one
year, with the same conditions, it was given to Carlo Duke of Calauria. It was
the eight day of September 1342. when the Duke accompanied by Giouan della
Tosa, with all his followers, and many Citizens, came into the Market place,
and there in presence of the Senators, ascended up to the Ringiera (for so they
called that place of the stairs belonging to the Palace) where the conditions
between the Senate, and the Duke were read. And when the Reader pronounced
those words, which gave the Duke authority for one year: the people cried for
his life. Then Francesco Rusticheli (one of the Senate) rose up to speak, and
appease the tumult: but his words, were, with shouting of the people
interrupted. So as by consent of the multitude he was created Prince, not for
one year only, but for ever: and being carried by the multitude about the
market place, his name was proclaimed. It is the custom, that whosoever is
appointed to the Guard of the Palace, shall in absence of the Senators be shut
up therein. To which office at that time was Rinieri di Giotto appointed: he
being corrupted by the Dukes friends, without any violence offered, received
the Duke into the Palace. And the Senators therewith amazed, and dishonored,
went home to their own houses. Then was the Palace by the Dukes servants
sacked. The Gonfaloni del Populo thrust out, and the Dukes Arms set upon the
Palace, to the great and inestimable grief and sorrow of all good men, and
the great content of those, who either for ignorance, or wicked mind thereunto
consented. The Duke having gotten the government, intending to take all
authority from those that were wont to defend the liberty of the City,
did forbid the Senators to assemble any more in the Palace, Ordinances made
by the Duke of Athene in Florence.
and appointed them a private house. He took also the Ensigns from the
Gonfalonieri of companies. He removed the order of justice against the
Nobility, and delivered the prisoners that had been committed. He called home
the Bardi, and Frescobaldi, who had been banished, and gave general
commandment that no man should wear weapon. Also for his better defense
within the City, he wanne himself foreign friends, and for that purpose
pleasured the Aretini, and all others under the Florentine government. He made
peace with the Pisani, notwithstanding he were created Prince purposely to
make war with them. He took the obligations from those merchants, that in
the war of Lucca had lent money to the state. He increased the old Imposts,
and erected new: taking all authority from the Senators. The Rettori by him
appointed, were Raglione da Perugia, and Guglielmo da Scesi: with whom he
joined, Cerrettieri Bisdomini; and those three men were his only Council. The
taxes which he imposed upon the Citizens were extreme, his judgments unjust,
and that gravity and courtesy which he had before fained, was converted into
pride, and cruelty. For many citizens both wealthy and noble were condemned,
and diverse also by new invented tortures, tormented. Moreover to show his
authority in like sort abroad, as it was in the city, he authorized six
Rettori for the country, who oppressed and spoiled the rural people. He had
the great men in suspicion, although by them he had been pleasured: and that
some of them by his means had been restored to their Country. For he
imagined that such Noble minds as commonly are in Gentlemen, could not be
contented with his government. He sought therefore to win the good will of
the people, hoping with their love, and the aid of strangers, to defend his
tyranny. Then the month of May being come, at which time the people were
accustomed to make sport and triumph, he caused the companies of the Common
people, and basest sort to have Ensigns, and money, with honorable titles to
be given them. Whereupon the one part of them, went from place to place
feasting and triumphing: and the other part with great pomp received the
triumphers. When fame had dispersed abroad the new principallitie of the Duke,
many of the French Nation came unto him. And he to every one of them (as men
most to be trusted) gave countenance and enterteinment. So that Florence within
short space was not only subject to the French men, but also to their factions
and apparel. Because both men and women, without respect of shame, did
follow them. But above all things that displeased, was the violence which he
and his, without respect, used to the women. The Citizens lived then with great
indignation, seeing the majesty of their state ruined, their ordinances
broken, their laws disanulled, honest life corrupted, and all civil modesty
extinguished. For the Citizens, not accustomed to see any regal pomp, could
not without sorrow behold the Duke amidst his guardes of armed men, both on
foot and horseback: for so with their own shame, they were forced to honor
him, whom they most hated. Whereunto might be joined, the fear and death of
many Citizens, and the continual exactions, wherewith he impouerished, and
consumed the city. All which indignations and fears, were well enough known
to the Duke, yet would he not be thought to mistrust any thing, but show
himself as though he were beloved of all men. For it happened that Matteo di
Moroso, either to gratify him, or acquit himself of danger, revealed a
conspiracy practiced by the house of Medici, and some others. The Duke
informed thereof, Matteo di Moroso.
did not only not examine the cause, but also caused Matteo most miserably to
be put to death. By which doing, he took courage from all those that would
tell him any thing for his good, and encouraged others that went about his
ruin. He caused also with great cruelty, the tongue of Bettone Cini to be cut
off, who after, thereof died. And this punishment was done, because Bettone had
found fault with the exactions laid upon the Citizens. These cruelties
increased offense in the people with their hatred to the Duke, because that
city which was accustomed freely to do and speak all things, could not endure
to have their hands tied, and their mouths closed. These offenses and this
hatred grew to that ripeness, as moved not only the Florentines, (who could
neither maintain their freedom nor suffer servitude) but even the most
servile people of the world, to recover liberty. And thereupon many citizens of
all estates resolved, with the loss of their lives to recover their liberty
lost. Conspiracy against the Duke of Athene.
Then practiced they three sorts of conspiracies, the one among the Nobility,
the second among the people, the third among the artificers. These
conspiracies, besides the general respect, were for particular reasons
willingly taken in hand. The great men desired to recover authority. The
people were sorrowful for having lost the government. And the Artificers found
their trades and earning of money to be decayed. At that time Agnolo
Acciaiuoli, was Archbishop of Florence, who in his Sermons and otherwise, had
extolled the actions of the Duke, and done him great favor among the people.
But afterward seeing him Prince, and knowing his tyrannous proceedings, knew
how much he had deceived his country: and therefore to make amends of that
fault, determined, that the hand which had made the wound, should also cure
it. Wherefore he became head of the first and greatest conspiracy: wherein
were the Bardi, Rossi, Frescobaldi, Scali, Altouiti, Malagotti, Strozzi, and
Mancini. The chief of the second conspiracy, were Manno and Corso Donati, and
with them the Pazzi, Cauicciulli, Cherchi, and Albici. The principal of the
third conspiracy, was Antonio Adimari, and with him the Medici, Bordini,
Ruccelai, and Aldobrandini: whose intent was to have slain the Duke in the
house of Albezi, whither (as they thought) he intended to go upon Midsomer day,
to behold the running of horses. But thither he went not, and therefore that
enterprise became frustrate. Then they meant to assault him walking in the
city; but that seemed hand to do, because he was well accompanied, and always
armed, therewith also every day changed his walk, so as they knew not in what
place certain to wait for him. It was likewise the opinion of some, that the
best were to kill him in the Council: and yet that were hazardous; for though
he were slain, the conspirators should be at the discretion of his forces.
During that the conspirators communed of these matters, Anthonio Adimari,
discovered the matter to some of his friends of Siena, whose aid he hoped of,
and told them the names of some conspirators, saying that the whole City was
bent to recover liberty. Then one of them imparted his knowledge to Francesco
Brunelleschi, not with intent the practice should be laid open, but supposing
that he also had been of the same conspiracy. Francesco either for fear of
himself, or for the hatred he bare toward some other, revealed all to the
Duke: and presently Pagolo del Mazecchia, and Simon da Mantezappoli were
apprehended; Who detecting the quality and quantity of the conspirators, did
thereby much amaze the Duke, and was therefore counseled rather to send for
them, then arrest them: For if they fled, then he might without his own
dishonor, by their banishment assure himself. The Duke therefore caused
Antonio Adimari to be called, who trusting to his companions, presently
appeared. Adimari being stayed, the Duke was advised by Francescho
Brunelleschi, and Vguccione Buondelmonti, to search the City, and kill so many
as could be taken. But that the Duke thought not good, supposing his forces not
sufficient to encounter so many enemies, and therefore proceeded an other way,
which having taken effect, should both have assured him of the enemies, and
also gained him strength. The Duke was accustomed at occasions, to assemble the
Citizens, and to take their counsel. Having therefore sent out to assemble the
people, he made a bill of three hundredth Citizens names; and caused his
Serieants under color of councelling with them, to warn them to appear: and
being appeared, he intended either to kill them, or imprison them. The
apprehension of Antonio Adimari, and the sending for other Citizens (which
could not be secretly done) did greatly dismay every man: but most of all,
those that knew themselves guilty. Insomuch as men of greatest courage would
not obey him. And because many had read the bill, wherein one saw an others
name, the one encouraged the other to take arms, and chose rather to die like
men, then as Calves to be led to the butchery. By this means within an hour,
all the three conspiracies became known one unto the other: and determined the
day following (which was the twenty sixth of July, in the year 1343.) to raise
a tumult in the old Market place: there to arm themselves, and call the
people to liberty. The next day, about high noone, according to appointment,
every man took arms, and all the people hearing the name of liberty, armed
themselves, and every man in his quarter prepared him under the Ensign of the
peoples arms, which the conspirators had secretly caused to be made. And the
chief, as well of the Noble houses, as of the populer families, came forth and
swear both their own defense, and the Dukes death, (excepting some of the
Buondelmonti and Caualcanti, with those four families of the people, which
procured him to be made Prince. They, together with the Butchers, and people of
basest condition, came armed to the Market place in defense of the Duke. At
this vproare, the Duke armed all his Court, and his servants in sundry places
lodged, mounted on horseback to come to the Market place. But in many streets
they were beaten down and slain, and only three hundred horses came unto
him. The Duke in the mean while stood doubtful, whether he were better to come
out and fight with his enemies, or defend himself within the Palace. On the
other side, the Medici, Cauicculi, Ruccellai, and other families most injured,
did fear that if the Duke would come out, many that had taken arms against
him, might happily become his friends. And therefore to remove the occasion of
his coming forth, and increasing his forces, made head, and went up to the
market place. At whose arriual, those populer families, that stood there for
the Duke, seeing the Citizens courageously to charge them, changed their
minds. After the Duke had thus altered his fortune, and every man revolted to
the Citizens, saving Vguccione Buondelmonti, who went into the Palace: and
Giannozzo Caualcanti with part of his men, retired unto the new Market, and
there stood up, desiring the people to arm themselves to defend the Duke. Also
the rather to terrify the people, he threatened them, that if obstinately they
followed the enterprise against the Prince, they should be all slain. But
finding no man to follow him, nor yet any that pursued him, and seeing himself
to have labored in vain, tempting fortune no further, retired unto his own
house. The conflict in the mean while (betwixt the people and the Dukes
soldiers) was great, and though the Dukes forces defended the Palace, yet
were they in the end vanquished: some of them yielded to their enemies, and
some leaving their horses, followed into the Palace. While in the Market place
the fight continued, Corso and Amerigo Donati, with part of the people brake
the prisons, burnt the Records of the Podesta, and of the public chamber:
sacked the Rettori and their houses; and slew all the officers of the Duke,
that they could lay hand upon. The Duke on the other side, seeing the Market
place lost, and all the city against him, not hoping of any help, made
proof, whether by any curtuous act the people might be appeased. Therefore he
called unto him the prisoners, and with gentle words delivered the^, and made
Antonio Adimari (though nothing to his own contentment) a Knight. He caused
also his own arms to be rased out of the Palace, and set the peoples arms
in the same place. Which things being done too late and out of time, by
enforcement, and without order, helped little. Thus as a man discontented and
besieged, he remained in the Palace; and found by experience, that by coveting
too much, he lost all: and therefore looked within few days, either to die by
famine or sword. The Citizens intending some form of government, assembled
themselves in Santa Reparata: and created there fourteen Citizens, half of
them great, and the other half populer, who with the Bishop, should have full
authority to reform the state of Florence. They chused also six to have the
authority of the Podesta, till he were come. There were in Florence at that
time, diverse strangers come thither to aid the people: amongst whom, were
some Sanesi sent from Siena, with six Ambassadors, men in their country much
honored. They betwixt the people and the Duke practiced reconsiliation, but
the people refused to common of any agreement, until Guglielmo da Scesi, and
his son, with Cirretieri Bisdomini were delivered into their hands. The Duke
would not thereunto consent, till being threatened by those that were shut in
with him, suffered himself to be enforced. Certainly the fury is greater, and
the harms more, when liberty is in recovering, then when the same is
recovered. This Guglielmo and his son, being brought among thousands of
enemies, (the young man not being eighteen years of age) could neither by his
youth nor innocence be saved from the fury of the multitude. And those that
could not strike him alive, would needs wound him being dead. Yea not being
satisfied by cutting him in pieces with swords, with their nails and teeth,
they also tare his flesh. And to the end al their senses might have part in the
revenge, having already heard him lament, seen his wounds, and touched their
torn flesh, would also that their taste should take part, so that all senses
both without and within might be pleased. This terrible fury though it were
grievous to Guglielmo and his son, yet was it profitable to Cirretieri.
Because the multitude, being weary with the cruelty executed upon those two,
did clearly forget him, remaining still within the Palace not called for.
Then, the night following, by certain of his friends, he was conveyed away
and saved. The multitude being appeased with blood of these two: The Duke of
Athene banished by the Florentines.
A conclusion was made, wherein was let down, that the Duke and his, should
safely depart with bag and baggage, and renounce all his authority over
Florence. And afterward, so soon as he should come to Casentino upon the
confines, ratify the same. After this composition, the sixth day of August he
departed from Florence, accompanied with many Citizens. And arrived in
Casentino, he ratified (though unwillingly) the resignation of his authority:
for had he not been by the Earl Simone threatened to be brought back to
Florence, he would not have performed his promise. This Duke (as his
proceedings do show) was covetous and cruel, Description of the Duke and his
disposition.
no willing hearer of complaints, and in his answers, haughty; he looked for
service of all men, and esteemed the love of no man: yet desired he to be
beloved, more then feared. His person and presence did deserve to be hated, no
less then his conditions; his body was small, his face black and hard
favored, his beard long and thin; so as both in appearance and being, he
merited the love of no man. Thus within the term of ten months, his evil
behavior lost him that government, which foolish Council of others had given
him. These accidents being happened within the city, gave encouragement to all
the towns which had been subject to the Florentines, to return also to their
liberty: whereby Arezzo, Castiglione, Pistoia Volterra, Colle, and S.
Gimignano, rebelled. After the Duke was thus driven away, the fourteen
Citizens, together with the Bishop, thought better to please their subjects
with peace, then make them enemies by war. And therefore seemed as much
content with the liberty of them, as with their own. Then sent they
Ambassadors to Arezzo, to renounce all their government and interest in that
city, and make a league with the Citizens there. To this end, that since they
could not have their aid as subjects, yet they might have it as friends: with
other towns they likewise practiced to continue them in friendship. This
counsel wisely taken, had happy success: because Arezzo after a few years
returned under the government of Florence, and the other towns within a few
months came to their ancient obedience. Whereof may be conceived, that many
times things fled or not desired, are with less peril and smaller charge
obtained, then if the same had been by extreme travel and great force
followed. All things thus settled abroad, they turned their study to deal with
matters within: and after some disputations between the great and populer
Citizens, they agreed that the great men should have a third part in the
Senate, and in the there offices the half. The city (as has been beforesaid)
was divided into six parts, so that one of the Senators was appointed to every
sixth part, unless upon some accident twelve or thirteen were created: but
shortly after they were reduced again to the number of six. It was therefore
thought good to reform the government in this point, as well for the evil
distribution of the parts, as because they intended to deliver charge of the
gates to the great Citizens; it was necessary to increase the number of the
Senators. Therefore the city was again divided, into quarters: allotting to
every quarter three Senators, leaving out the Gonfaloniere Della Iustitia,
Florence again reformed.
and the Gonfalonieri of companies. And in lieu of the twelve Buoni Homini they
created eight Councillors, of either sort four. This government with this
order settled, would have continued quiet, if the great citizens had been
content to live with that modesty, that to a civil life apperteined: but they
followed a course clean contrary. For when they were private, they would no
companions; and being in authority ruled as Lords. So as every day some
proof of their insolency and pride was seen, which thing greatly displeased
the people, supposing that in place of one tyrant sent away, there was grown
up a thousand. The insolency of the one part, The people of Florence offended
with the nobility.
and the offense of the other, grew to that greatness, that the heads of the
people did expostulate unto the Bishop the dishonestie of the great men, who
were not by any means content to live like companions and neighbors. And
therefore persuaded him to find means that the great Citizens might be
contented with the mean offices: and that the Magistracy of the Senate should
be only left to them. The Bishop was naturally good, but easily persuaded to
alter opinion: which was the cause, that by persuasion of his companions, he
first favored the Duke of Athene, and shortly after by the counsel of other
Citizens conspired against him. So now he seemed in reformation of the state,
first to favor the great men, and after to allow better of the people, moved
by those reasons, which the populer Citizens had told him. He therefore
supposing to find as small constancy in others, as in himself, persuaded
betwixt them a composition. Then he assembled the fourteen, who yet continued
in their authority, and persuaded them to yield the office of Senate to the
people, alleging that would be the quiet of the city, and the denial, the
ruin thereof. These words did greatly change the minds of the great men, and
Ridolpho de Bardi, with bitter words reproved the Bishop, calling him a man not
to be trusted: laying before him the friendship which he entered with the Duke
unadvisedly, and how he banished him afterward, traitorously. And in
conclusion he said, that those honors which they with their peril had gotten,
with their peril should be defended. Thus being divided from the Bishop, he
and his company took leave, and went unto others of their consort, imparting
the matter to all the Noble houses in the City. The people likewise brake
their minds to such as were men of their condition. While the great men
prepared themselves to the defense of their Senators, the people thought good
to be also ready, and suddeinly ran unto the Palace armed: crying aloud,
and requiring that the great Citizens should renounce the Magistracy. The
rumor and tumult was great, and the Senators found themselves abandoned:
because all the people being armed, the great Citizens durst not take arms,
but every one remained in his own house. By mean whereof, the new Senators
appointed by the people, The authority of the nobility, taken from them.
first appeased the tumult, and then gave knowledge thereof: saying that their
companions were modest and good men, and that they were feign, for avoiding a
worse inconvenience to take this course, and so sent home the other Senators
safe to their houses. The great Citizens thus removed from the Palace, the
office was also taken away from the four great Counselors. In whose place,
they appointed twelve of the people, with the eight Senators that remained.
They created one Gonfaloniere de Iustitia, and sixteen Gonfalonieri of the
people. They also reformed the Councels, so as, all the government remained at
the discretion of the people. At such time as these things happened, there was
great dearth in the city: by means whereof, both great Citizens and the
basest sort of people became discontented. These, for hunger, and those for
having lost their authority: which occasion made Andrea Strozzi to imagine,
that it were possible for him to usurp the liberty of the city. Andrea
Strozzi.
He persuaded with that imagination, sold his corn much better cheap then
others: by means whereof, many people resorted unto his house. And one morning
he mounted on horseback, being followed by some of them, took courage to
call the people to arms: which done, within less then one hour four
thousand people were assembled; with whom he went to the Senate, desiring the
Palace might be opened for him. But the Senators with threatenings and force,
sent him from thence, and after with proclamations so terrified him, that by
little and little every man returned to his house. So as Andrea being left
alone, could scantly fly and save himself from the Magistrates. This attempt,
although it were unadvised, and had such success, as commonly all others like
thereunto have, yet did the same give hope unto the Nobility, that they might
easily oppress the people, seeing the poorest sort misliked them. The
nobility assaie to recover their honors.
For not loosing this opportunity, they determined to arm themselves with all
sorts of aid, and recover that reasonably, which unjustly and by force, had
been taken from them. The assured hope they had conceived of success in this
enterprise, grew so great, that openly they provided arms, fortified their
houses, and sent to their friends in Lombardy. The people on the other side,
together with the Senate, made their provision, and arming them, sent to the
Sanesi and Perugini for aid. The assistaunce of the one, and the other being
come, The People armed against the nobility.
all the City was in Arms, and the Nobility made head on this side Arno in
three places. At the houses of Cauicciulli near to S. Giouanni: at the houses
of the Pazzi and Donati, in S. Piero Maggiore: and at the houses of the
Caualcanti in the new Market. The others beyond Arno, fortified the bridges
and streets next to their houses. The Nerli at the bridge Caraia; The
Frescobaldi and Mannelli, at S. Trinita. The Rossi and Bardi, at the old
bridge; and the bridge Rubaconte defended themselves. The people on the other
part, under the Gonfaloniere della Iustitia, and the Ensigns of companies
assembled themselves. Being thus prepared, the people thought good no longer to
delaie the fight. The first that gave the charge were the Medici and the
Rondinegli, who assaulted the Cauicciulli, in that way which leads from the
Court before S. Giouanni to their houses. There the conflict was great, by
reason that from the Towers stones were cast down to the harm of many, and
below others with Crosse-bowes were sore hurt. This fight continued three
hours, and still the people increased. Then the Cauicciulli seeing themselves
by the multitude ouermatched, and wanting aid, yielded to the people: who
saved their houses and their goods, and took from them only their weapons,
commanding them to divide themselves, and remain in the houses of such
Commoners as were their kinsfolks and friends. This first troop vanquished the
Donati and the Pazzi, who being of less force were easily subdued. Then
remained only on this side Arno, the Caualcanti, who by men and the seat of the
place were strong. Nevertheless seeing all the Gonfalonieri against them, and
knowing the others to have been by three Gonfaloni vanquished without any great
resistance yielded. Thus were three parts of the City in the hands of the
people, one part more remained to the Nobility: which was hard to be won, by
reason of the strength of them which defended it, and the seat of the place, it
being so fortified with the river of Arno, that the bridges must first of force
be surprised, which were defended in that sort as is beforesaid. The people
then knowing that there they labored in vain, assaied to pass the bridge
Rubaconte: where finding the like difficulty, they left for guard of those two
bridges, four Gonfaloni; and with the rest assaulted the bridge Caraia. Where
albeit the Nerli manfully defended themselves, yet could they not withstand the
fury of the people. Both because the bridge wanting towers of defense, was
weak, and the Capponi with other populer families also assailed them. In so
much as being on every side distressed, they retired and gave place to the
people; who forthwith likewise vanquished the Rosci: by reason that all the
people on the far side of Arno joined with the victorious. Then the Bardi
were only left, whom neither the overthrow of others, nor the uniting of the
people against them, (nor the small hope they had of rescue) could any whit
amaze: for they did choose rather to die fighting, see their houses burnt, and
their goods spoiled, then voluntarily submit themselves to the mercy of their
enemies. They therefore defended themselves with so great resolution, that the
people many times in vain assaulted them, both upon the old bridge, and upon
Rubaconte: and were with death of many, and the hurting of more, repulsed.
There was in times past a lane, whereby men passed from the way that leads
toward Rome, by the house of the Pitti, to go unto S. Giorgio. By this way
the people sent six Gonfalonieri, with commandment to assault the back side of
the house of Bardi. That assault made the Bardi to loose their hope, and
occasioned the people to assure themselves of victory: for so soon as those
who defended the streets knew their houses were assaulted, they abandoned the
fight, and ran to save them. This was the cause that the chain of the old
bridge was lost, and that the Bardi on every side fled: who were by the
Quaratesi Panzanesi, and Mozzi encountered. The people in the mean while
(chiefly those of basest quality) being greedy of spoil, sacked their
houses, razed their Towers and burned them, with so great fury, that even he
that is most foe to the Florentine name, would have been ashamed to behold so
great a cruelty. The Nobility oppressed.
The Nobility thus oppressed, the people ordained a government. And because
the Citizens were divided into three sorts, that is to say, great men, mean
men, and base men. It was ordered that of the great men there should be two
Senators, of the mean men three, and of the basest men three. Also the
Gonfalonieri should sometime be of the one, and sometime of the other sort.
Moreover the ordinances of Justice, against the Nobility were confirmed. And
to make the Nobility weaker, they took some of that number, and mixed them
with the populer multitude. This ruin of the Nobility was great, and so much
weakened their faction, as after that time they durst never take arms against
the people: but continually remained poor and abject of mind; which was the
occasion that Florence became spoiled, not only of arms, but also of all
generositie. After this ruin, the city continued quiet, till the year 1353.
In which time, happened that memorable plague (whereof Giouan Boccacio with
great eloquence) has written. Of which died in Florence, 96. thousand persons.
The Florentines made then the first war with the Visconti, occasioned by the
ambition of the Archbishop, then Prince of Milan. That war being ended,
began suddeinly new factions within the City. And albeit the Nobility was
destroyed, yet fortune found means to raise up new divisions, and new troubles.

The end of the second Book.
royal blazon or coat of arms
THE THIRD BOOK.
THE grievous and natural enimities betwixt the people, and Nobility, through
desire of the one to command, and the other, not to obey: are causes of all
evils, which happen in every city. For of the diversity of these humors,
all other things which disturb Commonweals do take their nutriment. This
was that which held Rome disunited. And this (if we may compare small matters
to great) was that which continued Florence divided. Notwithstanding, in those
two cities, the divisions, did bring forth two sundry effects. For the
enimitie of the people and Nobility in Rome, was at the beginning ended by
disputation: but the division of the people and Nobility of Florence, was with
sword and slaughter determined. That of Rome by law; but that of Florence by
exile, and death of many Citizens was ended. That of Rome did always increase
the virtue military, but that of Florence, utterly extinguished the same. That
of Rome, from an equality of the Citizens, to a great disequalitie, reduced
the city: but that of Florence, from disequalitie, to a marvelous equality
was changed. Which diversity of effects, must of force be occasioned, by the
diverse ends, which these two people had. For the people of Rome, desired not
more, then to participate the sovereign honors with the Nobility, but they
of Florence would be alone, and govern all without company of the Nobility.
And for as much as the desire of the Roman people was more reasonable, the
offenses done to the Nobility became the more tolerable. By mean whereof,
that Nobility, without resistance gave place: and after some disputation, a
law was made to the peoples satisfaction, they being content that the
Nobility should continue their dignities. On the other side, the desire of the
Florentine people was injurious and unjust; by reason whereof, the Nobility
prepared themselves for defense, and without banishment and blood of the
Citizens, their contentions were not ended. Also those laws which were
afterward made, not for the common commodity, but altogether in favor of the
people, were ordained. Thereof proceeded likewise, that by victories of the
people, the city of Rome became more virtuous. Also the people having sometime
authority in the wars, and commandment in government with the Nobility,
were endowed with like virtue, and caused that city by increase of virtue in
men, to increase also in power. But in Florence, the people having victory,
the Nobility were deprived of Magistracy, and being desirous to recover it,
it behooved them by their behavior and manner of life, to endeavor themselves,
not only to seem, but also to be men populer. Hereof, came the alteration of
Ensigns, and the change of titles, which the Nobility (to seem common
people) were constrained to make. So as that virtue in arms and generositie of
mind, which had been in the Nobility, was extinguished; and could not be
revived in the people, where it was not: which is the cause that Florence ever
after becam the more abject. And as Rome knowing the virtue of it self grew to
such pride, as without a Prince could not be maintained: so Florence was
reduced to such terms, as every wise law maker might have brought the same to
any order or form of government: as by reading of the former book may partly
be perceived. Now having already showed the beginning of Florence, and the
original of the liberty therein, with the occasions of division: and how the
factions of the nobility and of the people, with the tyranny of the Duke of
Athene, did end: and lastly how the Nobility were destroyed. It remains to
discourse the enimitie betwixt the people and the multitude, The enimitie
between the people and the multitude.
with such accidents as of those divisions proceeded. So soon as the
authority of the Nobility was oppressed, and the war with the Archduke of
Milan finished; it seemed that no occasion of displeasure or offense, remained
in Florence. But the froward fortune of our City, and the evil orders
thereof, caused new dissension to arise, betwixt the families of Albizi and
Ricci: which divided Florence, as by the Buondelmonti and the Vberti, and as by
the Donati and Circhi it had before been divided. The Popes, who at that time
remained in France, and the Emperors in Germany, to maintain their
reputation in Italy, sent thither at sundry times, sundry multitudes of
soldiers, English men, Germans, and Britains. They, (the wars ended)
being without pay and entertainment, sometime under the Ensign of one
Prince, and sometimes under an other, spoiled the Country. In the year 1353.
one of those companies came into Toscana, under the conduct of Monsigneur
Reale, whose coming amazed all the Cities of that Province. And the
Florentines did not only in that respect publicly levy forces, but also
diverse private Citizens. The faction or division of Albizi and Ricci.
Amongst whom, the Albizi and Ricci, for their own defense, Armed
themselves. These two houses hating one the other, studied how they might one
oppress the other: yet were they not come to Arms, but only contended in the
government, and in Council. The City then upon this occasion armed, there
happened by chance a quarrel in the old Market: whither many people (as is
at like occasions the custom) resorted. During the brunt of this brute, news
were brought to the Ricci, that the Albizi assailed them. And in like manner it
was told to the Albizi, that the Ricci sought for them. Upon these rumors,
all the city arose, and the Magistrates could with difficulty hold back the
one and the other of these families, from doing of that violence, which
without any fault or intent of theirs, was occasioned. This chance (though of
no importance) somewhat kindled the minds of those gentlemen, and every of them
were the rather desirous to allure partakers. And forasmuch as by the ruin of
the nobility, the Citizens were reduced to such an equality, that the
magistrates had more reverence then they were wont, either of them determined
by ordinary mean, and without private violence to oppress his adversary. We
have already told, how after the victory of Carlo the first, the Guelfi were
created Magistrates, and to them great authority given over the Ghibilini.
Notwithstanding through tract of time and new divisions, that law became so
much neglected, that many descended of Ghibilini, A new law against the
Ghibilini occationed by a privy respect.
aspired to the most principal offices. Vguccione de Ricci then chief of his
family, found mean, that the law against the Ghibilini was revived: of which
faction (as some thought) the Albizi were, who many years past did come from
Arezzo to inhabit Florence. Upon reviving of this law, Vguccione hoped to
deprive the Albizi of authority, because thereby it was ordained, that
whosoever was descended of the Ghibilini, should not in any wise bear office
in the state. This practice of Vguccione was discovered to Piero son of
Philippo degli Albizi, who determined to favor it, least doing the contrary,
he should declare himself a Ghibilino. This law although renewed by ambition
of the Ricci, yet did it not diminish, but increase the reputation of the
Albizi, and was the original of many mischiefs. Neither can any law be made
more prejudicial to a Common weal, then that which has relation to time,
long since passed. Piero having thus consented to the law, that, which his
enemies had devised for a let, was the high way to lead him to his greatness.
For being made as chief of this new ordinance, he still increased in
reputation, and became more favored of the Guelfi, then any other. And for as
much as there was no Magistrate appointed for discovery of the Ghibilini, the
law already made, served to small purpose. It was therefore provided that
authority should be given to the Captains, to detect those that were of
faction Ghibilini, and finding them, to give admonishment that they should not
take upon them any office in the state: Or if they should disobey the said
admonishment, then to be condemned. Hereof it comes, that since that time,
all those that be disabled to bear office in Florence, Ammoniti.
be called Ammoniti. The captains the^ by this authority grew to be so
insolent, as they did not only admonish those that deserved admonition, but
also every man, whomsoever it pleased them, being thereto moved by any cause
whatsoever, either of covetousness or ambition. So that, from the year 1357.
(at which time this ordinance was made) til the year 1366. more then two
hundredth Citizens were admonished. By this mean, the Captains, and faction of
Guelfi were become mighty, because every man fearing to be admonished,
honored them. The chief of them were, Piero delli Albizi, Lapo d^
Castiglionichio, and Piero Strozzi. And albeit this insolent order of
proceeding displeased many, yet the Ricci were of all other most discontented.
For they supposing themselves to be the occasion of this disorder, saw the
common weal ruined, and the Albizi their enemies, contrary to expectation,
become of most authority. Wherefore Vguccione de Ricci, being one of the
Senate, desired to stay this mischief, whereof he and his friends were the
beginners: and by a new law he provided, that the six captains should be
increased to the number of nine, of whom, two should be of the small mysteries.
And ordained moreover, that the detection of the Ghibilini, should be by 24.
Citizens of the sect of Guelfi confirmed. This ordinance for the time,
qualified the authority of the Captains, so as the admonishment grew cold.
And if any happened to be admonished, they were not many. Notwithstanding,
the factions of Albizi and Ricci, continued: and the leagues, practices, and
resolutions, devised in hatred one of the other, did proceed. In this
unquietness, the city lived from the year 1366. till 1371. In which time the
Guelfi recovered their forces. There was in the family of Buondelmonti, one
Gentleman called Benchi, who for his merit, in the war against the Pisani,
was made one of the people, and thereby become capable of the office of the
Senate. And when he looked to be chosen to that honor, a law was made, that
no Gentleman become one of the people, might exercise the office of the Senate.
This greatly offended Benchi, wherefore consulting with Piero delli Albizi,
determined with the admonition to oppress the meaner sort of the people, and
the rest alone to enjoy the government. Then through the favor which Benchi
had with the old Nobility, and through the affection of many of most
mighty people borne to Piero, the faction of Guelfi recovered some force: and
with new reformation, they handled the matter so, that they might both of the
Captains and the twenty four Citizens, dispose as themselves thought good.
Whereupon they returned to admonish more boldly then they were wont and the
house of Albizi, as head of this sect, still increased. On the other side, the
Ricci failed not by their own force and friends to hinder their enterprises
all they were able, so that all men lived in suspicion, and every one
mistrusted his own ruin. For which cause, many Citizens moved with the
love of their Country, assembled themselves in Saint Pietro Sceraggio, and
reasoning of these disorders, went to the Senators: unto whom one of most
authority spoke thus. The Oration of the citizens touching factions.
We have (my Lords) doubted (although for a public occasion) to assemble
our selves by private consent, fearing to be noted for presumptuous, or
condemned as ambitious. Yet considering that every day (without respect) many
Citizens confer both in the streets and in their houses, not for any
common commodity, but their own ambition: we do hope, that as they have come
togithers for the ruin of the Common weal, so it shall not be offensive, that
we consult by what mean the same might be preserved: Neither is there cause
why we should regard them, seeing they of us, make none estimation at all. The
love (my Lords) which we bear to our Country, did first bring us together,
and the same also has led us hither to entreat of these inconveniences,
which are now great, and daily increase in this our Common weal. In the
redress whereof, we offer our selves to assist you. And (albeit the enterprise
do seem hard) yet may it be performed, if it shall like your Lordships to lay
by all private respects, and with public forces employ your authorities. The
common corruption of other Cities of Italy, does also corrupt ours. For since
this Province was drawn under the Empire, all Cities (wanting Governors able
to rule them) have governed themselves: not as free, but as towns into sects
and faction, divided. Out of this, be sprung up al other discords that are to
be found. First, among the Citizens, there is neither union, nor friendship,
but only among such, as have against their country or private persons,
conspired some lewd enterprise. Also, because religion and fear of God is in
every man almost extinguished, oaths and faith given, are none obligations
equal to profit, which all men covet. Yet do they still use both promising and
oaths, not to observe them, but the rather to deceive those, that trust them.
And the more easily and safely they can deceive, the more they account their
praise and glory. For this reason, hurtful men be commended as industrious,
and good men blamed as foolish. Yea, I assure my self, that all corruption, or
that can corrupt others, is to be found in the cities of Italy. The young men
are idle, old men wanton, every sects, and every age full of lewd conditions:
which good laws, being evil used, do not amend. Hereof the covetousness which
we see in Citizens, and the desire, not of true glory, but of shameful honors,
do proceed: whereupon depend hatred, enmity, displeasures, and sects. Also of
them do follow murders, banishments, persecution of the good, and advancement
of the evil. For good men trusting in their own innocence do not (as evil
men) seek extraordinary defense. Whereby vnsupported and dishonored, they are
suffered to sink. This example occasioneth love of the factions, and their
forces: because the worst sort for covetousness and ambition, and the best for
necessity, do follow them. It is also worthy consideration (as that which is
more perilous) to see how the leaders of these enterprises do color their
lewdness with some honest or godly term. For (albeit they are all enemies to
liberty) yet under the word Ottimacy, or popularitie, they cloak their evil
intent. Because the reward which they aspect of victory, is not glory, by
having delivered the City, but the satisfaction they take to be victorious,
and usurp the government thereof. Wherewith allured, there is nothing so
iniust, nothing so cruel, or covetous, that they leave unattempted. Hereof it
proceeds, that laws, and statutes, not for the common, but the private
profit, be made. Hereof it proceeds, that war, peace, and leagues, not for
public glory, but for the pleasure of a few, are contracted. And albeit some
other Cities be touched with these disorders, yet none so fowly infected as
ours. Because the laws, the statutes, and civil ordinances, not according to a
life in liberty, but according to desire of the faction victorious, have been,
and yet are, ordained; which is the cause that ever one faction driven out, or
one division extinquished, sodeinly arises an other. For that city which is
maintained more by faction, then law, so soon as any faction has gotten the
over hand, and is without opposition: it must of force be, that the same
becomes in it self divided. For by those private means which were made for
preservation thereof, it cannot be defended: which to be true, the ancient, and
modern divisions of our city do make trial. Every man thought that the
Ghibilini extirped, the Guelfi should ever have continued in honor.
Notwithstanding within short time, the Bianchi and Neri arose. The Bianchi
vanquished, our city continued not long without parts, but was sometimes
troubled with favoring those that were banished, and sometimes with the enmity
betwixt the people, and nobility. Yea, at length (giving that to others, which
by accord either we would not or could not possess our selves) sometimes to
the King Roberto, sometimes to his brother, and last of all to the Duke of
Athene, we yielded our liberty. And in troth we never settled our selves in any
estate, as men, that could not consent to live free, nor be willing to obey:
neither feared we living under a King (so greatly are our orders disposed to
division) to prefer before his majesty, a man of most base condition, born
in Agobio. The Duke of Athene may not without shame of this city be remembered:
whose bitter and cruel mind might make us wise, and instruct us how to live.
But he being sent away, we suddeinly took arms in hand, and with more malice
and fury, fought among our selves, til all our ancient nobility were
oppressed and left at the peoples discretion. Then was it thought by many, that
never for any occasion it were possible to stir up new troubles or factions in
Florence, they being cast down, whose pride and unsupportable ambition was the
cause thereof. Yet is it now seen by experience, how easily the opinion of men
is deceived. For the ambition and pride of the nobility was not quenched, but
removed into the people: who now (according to the custom of ambitious men)
hope to aspire to the most sovereign offices. And not wanting other mean to
usurp the same, they moved new discords, and new divisions in the city,
raising up the name of Guelfi and Ghibilini, which, (had they never been
known) should have made our country the more happy. Besides that, (to the end
in this world should be nothing in continuance or quietness) Fortune has
provided, that in every state, there should be certain fatal families, borne,
and destined, to the destruction thereof. Of these, our Common weal has been
more then any other, replenished. For not one, but many of them have disturbed
the quiet thereof. As, first of all the Buondelmonti and Vberti; then the Donati
and Circhi. And even now (a shameful and ridiculous matter) the Ricci and
Albizi do trouble and divide our City. We have not remembered you of those
corrupt customs, and our continual division, to dismay you, but call to your
minds the occasions of them, and inform you, that the example of those, should
not make you to despair the reformation of these. Because the power of these
ancient houses was so great, and the favor that Princes did bear toward
them so much, that the laws and civil ordinances were not of force sufficient
to hold them in quiet and due obedience. But now the Empire having no force,
the Pope not feared, and that all Italy, and this City also, is reduced to so
great equality, as may by it self be governed, the difficulty cannot be much.
And this our common weal (notwithstanding the ancient examples to the
contrary) may not only be brought to vnio^, but also in good customs and civil
orders be reformed, if your lordships be disposed to do it. Whereunto, we moved
with the love of our country, and no private passion, do persuade you. And
albeit the corruption thereof be great, yet allaie that disease which
infecteth, that fury which consumes, that poison that kills: and impute the
ancient disorders not to the nature of men, but the time: which being changed,
it may hope, that by mean of new orders, new fortune will follow, whose
frowardness may be by wisdom governed, in putting a bridle upon the
ambitious, disanulling such ordinances, as were nourishers of factions, and
using those that to a civil life and liberty, are agreeable. Be ye also
pleased to do this by virtue of law, rather now, then defer the same, till
such time, as by arms you shall be enforced thereunto. The Senators moved with
these reasons, which themselves had before considered, and thereunto adding the
authority, and comfort of the men, gave commission to fifty six Citizens, to
provide for the safety of the Common weal. True it is, that the counsel of
many is more fit to conserve a good order, then to invent it. These Citizens
then studied rather to extirpate the present factions, then take away the
occasion of future division. In so much, as neither the one or the other, was
brought to pass: because not removing the occasions of new division, and the
one part of those sects which were present, being of greater force then the
other, New reformation in Florence.
became the more perilous to the state. Wherefore, out of every office
(excepting those that were in the hands of the Guelfi) for three years they
deprived three men of the families of Albizi, and three of the house of Ricci:
amongst whom, were Piero delli Albizi, and Vguccione dei Ricci. They prohibited
all Citizens to come into the Palace, saving at such times as the Magistrates
sat there. They provided, that who ever was stricken, or let to possess his
own, might call his adversary to the Counsels, and protest him for one of the
Nobility. These ordinances discouraged the Ricci, and encouraged the Albizi.
For although they were equally noted, yet the Ricci were the more injured. And
albeit the Palace of the Senate was forbidden to Piero, yet the counsel house
of the Guelfi (where he had great authority) was open for him. Therefore if he
and his followers were at the first earnest in admonishing, now after this
injury, they became much more earnest: and to that evil disposition, Pope
Gregorio.
new occasions were joined. At this time Gregorio 11. was aspired to the
Papacy, who living at Auignion, did (as his predecessors) govern Italy by
Legates. They being men inclined to pride and covetousness, had thereby
greatly afflicted many Cities. One of these Legates being in Bologna, taking
occasion of the dearth which happened that year in Florence, determined to
make himself Lord of Toscana. And therefore he not only withheld from the
Florentines, present relief, (but also to remove all hope of future provision)
at the beginning of the next spring, with a great Army, entered their Country:
imagining the people (disarmed and famished) might be easily conquered. And
happily the enterprise had taken effect, if the soldiers that served him, had
been faithful and not corruptible. For the Florentines not having other
remedy, gave unto them 130. thousand Florins, and for that money the soldiers
abandoned the enterprise. To begin a war, is in the power of every man, but
to end a war, no man can, when himself so likes. This war by the ambition
of the Legate begun, was by the offense of the Florentines followed. For the
better execution thereof, A new Commission for the government of war.
they made league with Barnabo, and with all the cities enemies to the church;
and elected eight Citizens to govern the said war: unto whom authority was
given, to proceed without appeal, and spend without account. This war begun
against the Pope (notwithstanding the death of Vgucciono) encouraged those that
followed the faction of Ricci, and had against the Albizi always favored
Barnabo, and disfauoured the church: and the more, for that the eight were all
foes to the faction of Guelfi: which was the reason that Piero delli Albizi,
Lapo di Castiglionichio, Carlo Strozzi, and the rest, diverse times joined, to
the offense of the adversary. And while the eight made war, and they
admonished, the war continued three years, and by death of the Pope was
ended. This war was with so universal satisfaction, and so great virtue
governed, that the office of the eight, was from year to year continued in
those men, and they were called Santi, notwithstanding they little regarded the
Popes curses, spoiled churches, and forced the Clergy. Thus without respect,
they preferred the service of their country before the Popes indignation. And
thereby taught the church, that as being friend thereunto, they had defended
it, so being enemy, they were able to annoy it, having procured all Romagna,
La Marca, and Perugia, to rebel. But notwithstanding all these wars made by
the Florentines against the Pope, yet could they not defend themselves from
the Captains of their own factions and their followers. For, the envy which
the Guelfi bare unto the eight, made them to become insolent, and though they
spared the rest of the Nobility, yet rested they not to iniure the eight. Also
the Captains of factions, were grown up to so great arrogancy, as they were
more favored then the Senators, and men with more reverence resorted to their
houses, then to the Palace. In so much as every Ambassador that came to
Florence, brought with him some commission or instruction to entreat with
these Captains. Then died Pope Gregorio, whereby the city being delivered of
foreign war, presently begun great confusion at home. For on the one side,
the insolency of the Guelfi was insupportable, New tumults in Florence.
and on the other side, no mean could be devised to oppress them. Only this
hope was left, that every man should take arms, and so make trial whether
party should prevail. On the part of the Guelfi, were all the old Nobility,
with the greater number of the mightiest people: of whom (as has been
declared) Lapo, Piero, and Carlo were the chief. On the other side, were all
the people of least reputation, who had for Leaders, the eight Governors of
war, Georgio Scali, Tomazo Strozzi, and with them the Ricci, Alberti, and
Medici. The rest of the multitude (as in like cases it ever happens) joined
to the party discontented. It seemed then to the Guelfi, that the forces of
their adversaries were great, and therefore themselves in much danger,
whenever any unfriendly Senate should happen to be chosen. Therefore thought
good for the preventing of that mischief, to assemble themselves in some place
convenient, where they might consult of the state of that City. For it seemed
that the Citizens admonished, being in number grown great, the most part of
the City were their foes. Whereto they could not devise other remedy, but as
they had taken from them the honors, so also to banish them the City, take
the Palace by force, and reduce all the state, to the order whereunto it was by
the ancient Guelfi reduced: who lived not secure for any other reason, but
only because they had driven out all their adversaries. To this plot every
man consented, but of the time of execution, they discented. The year 1378.
being come, in the month of April, Lapo thought good not to defer the time
saying, there was nothing that hindered time so much, as time: and then
specially because in the next Senate, Saluestro de Medici was likely to be
chosen Gonfaloniere, whom to their faction they knew most contrary. Piero delli
Albizi thought otherwise, for his opinion was it should be deserred, because
the execution of their intent required forces, which without publishing of the
matter could not beleuied, and if the matter were discovered, they should
thereby incur manifest danger. His opinion therefore was, it should be
delaied till the feast of S. John (then at hand:) at which time, many people
would resort to the town, among whom they might convey in unknown, as many
friends as they thought good. Moreover, to find means how to prevent the
election of Saluestro, it was thought fit to admonish him: and if that devise
seemed not good, then to put into the election an other also of the same
quarter. So as, it might fall out, that instead of him, some other of his
companions should be chosen. This cause was set down as a resolution,
(notwithstanding that Lapo unwillingly thereunto, consented) judging, delaie
was dangerous, and that no time can be in every respect fit for execution. For
whosoever tarrieth all opportunities, either he shall never perform anything,
The Conspiracy revealed.
or if he does, the same (for the most part) falls out to his disadvantage.
The College was warned, and Saluestro not repulsed, but chosen Gonfaloniere:
for the eight having discovered the practice, found means to prevent that
which was looked for. Thus Saluestro son of Alemanno di Medici, who being of
a very noble populer house, could not endure that the people should be by a
few great men oppressed. And having devised how to end their insolency, seeing
the people favored that enterprise, he did communicate his intent to Benedetto
Alberti, Tomazo Strezzi, and Georgio Scali: and they promised to bring him all
the aid they possibly could. The^ was there a law secretly established, whereby
the ordinances of justice against the great men were renewed: and the
authority of Captains was diminished. The same also, restored power to the
admonished, to have restitution of their dignities. And because (as it were at
one instant) they intended both to propound and obtain, having first to pass
the College, and after to determine in the Councels, finding Saluestro
President (which place in those days, for the time being, made him be placed
as Prince of the City) they caused the College and Council in one self
morning to be assembled. And first to the College only, they propounded the
law made, which as a new thing was by that small number rejected. Whereby
Saluestro, seeing his wings clipped, wherewith he hoped to ascend to his
desire, fained for his necessity to depart the place; and contrary to
expectation, went to the Council: and standing up where he might be both seen
and heard of every man, said. He thought himself made Gonfaloniere, The
speech of Saluestro di Medici.
not to determine of private causes, (which have their ordinary Judges) but to
attend the state, correct the insolency of the great men, and qualify the
rigor of those laws, which were found by proof to hinder the Common weal.
And albeit he had with diligence traveled in these matters, and to his power
prevented all inconveniences, yet the sinister disposition of men, so greatly
opposed it self to his just endeavor, that the way of well doing was stopped:
and their intent was altered, not only from determining well, but also from
hearing thereof. Wherefore, seeing that he could not do aniething more for the
state, or the common commodity, he knew not to what end he should continue
longer in that office, which either he deserved not, or (as it was thought of
others) he would not hereafter deserve. For these respects he intended to
retire home, to the end the people might put in his room, some other of more
virtue, or greater fortune. This speech ended, he departed from the Council
toward his house, such as were in the Council his friends, with some others
also desirous of Innovation, began to murmr. Then the Senators and Colleges
drew near, and finding their Gonfalone departing, by entreatie, and authority
stayed him, and into the Council, (being full of tumult) persuaded him to
return, where many noble Citizens were with words most injurious, threatened.
Among whom, Carlo Strozzi, was by an Artificer taken by the bozome, and had
been slain, if the standers by had not saved him. But that which stirred the
greatest tumult, and put the city in arms, was the motion of Benedetto
Alberti, who from the window of the Palace, cried aloude to the people to take
arms. Whereupon sodeinly all the Court was full of armed men. By that mean, the
Colleges were forced by threatenings and fear, to do that which being desired
they would not. In the mean time, the Captains of the factions had assembled
many Citizens, and consulted how to defend them against the order of the
Senators. But so soon as they heard the rumor appeased, and understood what
was by the Council resolved, every man fled to his own house. For there is
no man that moves any alteration in a City, that knows how either to work
it at his own will, or suppress it, at his pleasure. It was the intent of
Saluestro to create a law, and appease the City: but the matter fell out
contrary. For the humors moved, had changed every man so much, that the
shoppes were shut up, Citizens were assailed at their houses, many conveyed
their goods to Monasteries, and hid them in Churches, as though every one
looked for some misery at hand. The companies of mysteries assembled, and
every mystery elected a Sindaco. Then the Priori called their Colleges, and
the Sindachi consulted with them, how the City might be made quiet, but their
opinions being diverse, nothing was determined. The next day following, the
mysteries drew forth their Ensigns, which the Senators knowing, and doubting
that which happened; called the Councels to put order: but ere they were all
assembled, a tumult was begun, and presently the Ensigns were come out,
followed by armed men to the Palace. Thereupon the Council to give hope of
contentation to the mysteries and the people, and take from them the occasion
of suspicion, gave general authority to the Senate, the Colleges, the Eight,
the Captains of parts, and the Sindachi, to reform the City, for common
commodity thereof. While these matters were in hand, certain of the Ensigns
of mysteries, with others of less quality (thereby moved by some that desired
revenge of the last injuries received of the Guelfi) shrunk away from the
rest, and went unto the house of Lapo di Castiglionichio, sacking and burning
the same. He hearing that the Senate had done an enterprise contrary to order
taken by the Guelfi, and seeing the people in arms, having no other remedy,
but either hide himself or fly; first hid him in Santa Croce, and after in
the habit of a Friar fled into Casentino: where he was heard complain of
himself, for consenting to Piero delli Albizi; and of Piero, for that he would
needs defer to assure the state, till the feast of S. Giouanni. But Piero and
Carlo Strozzi, at the beginning of the uproar hid themselves, thinking that the
brunt past, their friends and kinsfolks were of force sufficient to continue
them secure in Florence. The house of Lapo being sacked (because mischiefs are
hardly begun, and easily increased) many other houses (some for hate
universal, and others by private displeasure) were also spoiled and burned.
And the ministers of these mischiefs, to make their company the more
forcible, for the spoiling of other men's goods, brake the Gayles, and let forth
the prisoners. They also sacked the Monastery of Agnoli and S. Spirito, where
many Citizens had bestowed their goods. Neither had the public chamber of
Florence escaped the hands of these disordered spoylers, if one of the Senators
had not taken upon him the defense thereof; who on horseback followed with
some armed men, resisted the fury of the multitude. This populer madness,
partly by mediation of the Senate, and partly for that the night drew on, was
appeased. New reformation in Florence.
The next day, the Balia restored favor to the Citizens admonished, with
condition that within the next three years, they should not be capable to
exercise any office. They also disanulled the laws made by the Guelfi, in
prejudice of the Citizens. They proclaimed Lapo di Castiglionichio, and his
companions Rebels, and with them diverse others hated of the multitude. After
these resolutions, they published new Senators, among whom Luigi Guicciardini
was Gonfaloniere: whereby hope was conceived, that all tumults would cease,
because they were holden quiet men and lovers of peace. Notwithstanding the
shops were kept shut, the Citizens still armed, and great watches throughout
the city charged. For which cause the Senators received not their office
without the Palace with the pomp accustomed, but within, not using any
ceremony at all. These Senators thought nothing so necessary to be done at
their entry into office, as to procure a peace in the city, and therefore
caused al arms to be laid down, the shops to be opened, and the people of
the country (called thither in the favor of Citizens) to be dispatched away.
They ordained Guards in many places of the city; so as if the Citizens
admonished, could have lived content, the people had been quiet. But they not
willing to abide three years from honor, did find mean, that for their
satisfaction, the mysteries again assembled, and demanded of the Senate, that
for the good of the city and quiet thereof, no Citizen might any more be
admonished as a Ghibilino, either by the Senators, the College, Captain, or
Consul. Moreover, they required new Imborsation to be made of the Guelfi, and
the old to be burned. These demands were presently accepted, both by the
Senate, and all other Councels: because thereupon it was supposed, all new
tumults would cease. But man's nature does not only content it self with his
own, but will also covet other men's, and be revenged. Those that hoped in the
disorder, declared to the mysteries that they should never be assured, unless
many of their enemies were driven out, and oppressed. Which request being
presented, the Senators called before them, the officers of mysteries, and the
Sindachi, to whom Luigi Guicciardini Gonfaloniere spoke in manner following.
The Oration of Luigi Guicciardini.
If these Lords, and I also, had not known the fortune of this city, the
custom whereof is, that so soon as it has made peace abroad, the war
within begins: we would have more marvelled at the tumuls passed, and
therewith have been more grieved. But because things accustomed, do bring with
them less sorrow, we have endured these troubles with great patience, and the
rather, for that they were begun, without any our default, and shall (we hope)
end, as all others before have done, since we have already, in so many, and so
great demands, satisfied you. Nevertheless perceiving that you never rest
contented, but still with new injuries seek to disturb your Citizens, and
condemn them to new banishments: of your dishonest dealings, our grievous
sorrow grows. And truly, if we had thought, that within the term of our
government, this city should have been so troubled, we would either by
voluntary or violent exile, have shunned these honors. But hoping to deal with
men, in whom remained courtesy and love to their country, we willingly received
these offices, believing our clemency, should have suppressed your ambition.
But, we now see by experience, that the more mildly we bear our selves toward
you, the more proud ye are, and the more dishonest requests ye demand at our
hands. This plainness of speech we use, not to offend you, but to remember
you, for our meaning is, that others shall speak that which pleases you, and
we that which is best for you. Tell us (we pray you) what is that, you can
honestly more require at our hands? You required that the authority should be
taken from the captains of factions, and so it was. You desired the
Imborsations should be burnt and new reformation made, to that we consented.
You demanded the restitutio^ of the admonished Citizens to their honors; and
they were restored. We have also at your entreatie pardoned those that burned
houses, and robbed the churches. Yea for your satisfaction, we have sent into
exile, many honorable and mighty Citizens. The great men also by your means
are with new laws brideled. What end will those your demands have? Or how long
will you abuse your liberty? See ye not that we with more patience did endure
to be victored, then you to be victorious? Whither will these misdemeanors
draw this your city? Do ye not remember that by like disunion, Castruccio a
poor Citizen of Lucca, did oppress it? And the Duke of Athene, a private
Captain of your own, did conquer it? So long as it lived in union, the power
of an Archbishop of Milan, and a Pope, could not prevail against it: but
after, a war continued diverse years, abandoned the enterprise with shame.
Why would ye then, that your own discord, should in peace bring this city in
bondage, which so many mighty enemies have (notwithstanding their war) left
free? What profit shall you look for by your division, other then servitude?
Or what commodity will rise of the goods you have robbed, other then poverty?
For they are those, that by our industry have fed the city: whereof being
spoiled, it can no longer be nourished. And they that shall usurp them, will
(as of things evil gotten) not know how to keep them. Whereof shall follow famine
and poverty. I, and these Lords command ye, and (if without indignity we so
may) earnestly pray you to stay your minds, and rest contented with those
things which by us are ordained. And whenever you desire any new suit at our
hands, seek the same ciuilly, and strive not with tumult and arms to obtain
it. For whatsoever you reasonably ask, will be granted, and men evil
disposed shall want occasion to oppress our city to your shame, and the ruin
thereof. These words (because they were true) greatly moved the citizens, and
much they thanked the Gonfaloniere, for having performed the office of a good
Lord and citizen, offering to obey, wherein so ever it should please him to
command them. The Senators also, to give the occasion, did authorize two
citizens of every principal office, together with the Sindachi, to practice a
reformation, to the common quiet, and report their doings to the Senate. While
these matters were in hand, an other tumult arose, New tumult in Florence.
which troubled the state more then the former. For the greater part, of the
burning and spoiling in times past, were done by the basest sort of people, who
notwithstanding that being altogether, they were audatious, yet they ever
feared that the fury once past and appeased, they should receive punishment
for their defaults, or (as it often happened) be abandoned by those that
encouraged them to the performance of the disorder. Whereunto was joined a
hatred of the base people, toward the rich Citizens and heads of the
mysteries, judging themselves not so well paid for their labors, as they had
deserved. Because at such time as the city was first by Carlo divided into
mysteries, and every mystery a head thereunto appointed, it was enacted that
the subjects of every mystery should be in all civil matters judged by the
head thereof. These mysteries (as we said before) were at the beginning twelve,
afterward increased to 21. and they became of so great power, as in few
years they had all the government of the City. Also to the end there should
be difference betwixt those that were more, or less honorable, they were
divided, and seven of them were called great mysteries, and fourteen named
the less mysteries. By these divisions, and some other occasions before
recited, grew the insolency of the Captains of factions. Because those
Citizens which aunciently were Guelfi (under whose government that office
continued) did ever favor the people of the great mysteries: and persecuted
the less mysteries with their protectors. Whereupon followed all the tumults
that we have rehearsed. And for that in ordering the bodies of the mysteries,
many occupations exercised by diverse of the base people, and common multitude
had no place of their own in the body of the mysteries: they were referred
and put under some other mysteries like unto theirs. Whereof followed, that
they either were not satisfied for their labors, or by their masters
oppressed, and so forced to complain to the Magistrates, of those mysteries
who governed them: at whose hands (as they thought) they received not that
justice that to them belonged. Also that mystery which had in it the greatest
number, was the mystery of wool, which being of most force and authority,
did nourish and entertain the greatest part of the multitude, and base people.
The multitude then as well of the mystery of wool as others (for the cause
before said) was full of offense: therewith remembering the burning and spoils
by them committed, diverse times assembled in the night, and reasoning of
matters past, every man told other the danger wherein they stood. The one
of them, a man of most audacitie and experience, to animate the rest, spoke to
this effect. A seditious persuation of one of the multitude.
If we were now to consult whether it be best to take arms, rob the
Citizens, and spoil the churches, my self would think it a matter
considerable, and happily should prefer a quiet poverty, before a perilous
profit. But since arms be already taken, and many displeasures done, me
thinks, it behooves us not to let go the advantage, but seek mean how to
assure our selves. I certainly think, that if no man would therein advise us,
yet necessity alone might counsel us. You see all this city full of
displeasure and hatred against us. The Citizens do often assemble, and the
Senate is always accompanied with officers. You see they lay snares to entrap
us, and prepare new forces to oppress us. Therefore it stands us upon to
procure two things, and in our Councels to have two ends. The one, that for
your late doings we may not be punished, the other, that we may live with more
liberty and satisfaction, then heretofore we have done. It behooves therefore
(as I think) that to obtain pardon of all former faults, our best mean is to
commit some new: doubling all our misdeeds, by burning, robbing, and spoiling,
and therein to make many companions. For where many offend, none are punished,
and small faults are chastised, but great and grievous offenses be rewarded.
Also where many are injured, few do seek revenge. Because universal
displeasures, are with more patience, then particular wrongs endured. Therefore
the multiplying of mischiefs is the readiest way to forgiveness, and the best
mean to obtain those things, which for our liberty are desired. Surely it
seems, we go now to a certain victory: for as much as those, that should
impeach us, be disunited and rich. Their disunion shall give us victory, and
their riches (being made ours) shall maintain it. Let not the antiquity of
their blood (whereof they so much boast) dismaie you: for all men having one
beginning be equally ancient, and are by nature made all after one manner.
Behold them naked, you shall find them like to us, and let us be clad with
their garments, and they with ours; we shall assuredly seem noble, and they of
base condition: because only poverty and riches are those things, which make
the disequalitie. It greeueth me to think, that many of you do in conscience
repent things done, and intend to refrain doing the like. Surely it is true,
that you are not those men, I thought you to be: for indeed, conscience, nor
infamy ought to fear you, since he that wins victory, in what manner so
ever it be, does never receive shame thereof. As for conscience, none account
is thereof to be made. For who so stands in fear of famine and prison, as
you do, should not be daunted with dread of death and hell. And if we consider
the manner of men's proceedings, we shall find, that all those who have gained
great riches or glory, either by fraud or force are aspired. And those
things, which they have either by craft or violence obtained, (to cloak the
infamy of their theft, and make it seem honest) do call the same purchase.
Yea, whosoever for want of wit, or rather plain folly, does not follow this
course, either sinketh in servitude, or perishes in poverty. For in troth
faithful subjects are slaves, and good men be still plagued with want. Such as
escape bondage, be the most faithless, and audatious; and they that shun
lack, be only covetous persons, or crafty. For God and nature have laid
fortune before all men; of whom we see more inclined to robbery then industry:
and more to the bad, then to good actions disposed. Hereof it comes, that one
man eats an other, and he that can do least, must suffer most. You ought
therefore to use force when occasion is offered: which can be at no time more
then now. The Citizens are divided, the Senate fearful, and the Magistrates
dismayed. So that before they can be united, and resolved, it is most easy for
us to oppress them. By which oppression, we shall either become wholly Princes
of the city, or at the least, owners of so much, as we shall thereby, not
only have pardon of passed errors, but also authority to threaten new. I
confess this resolution is bold and dangerous, but where necessity pincheth,
desperation is judged wisdom. And in great enterprises, valiant men account
not of peril: because those attempts which begin with danger, do end with
glory. Also from one danger men do not escape, but by hazarding an other. I
likewise think that since we see the prisons, torments, and death prepared for
us, we ought rather fear to stand still, then seek to assure our selves: for
by the one, the mischief is certain, by the other doubtful. How often have I
heard you complain upon the covetousness of your superiors, and the injustice
of your Magistrates? Now is the time not only to be delivered from them, but
also to become so much their superiors, as they shall have more occasion to
fear you, then you them. The opportunity which this occasion offers, does
pass, and being past, cannot be called again. You see the prepare of your
adversaries, let us prevent their intention. For which so ever of us do first
take arms, shall no doubt be victorious, with ruin of the enemy, and
advancement of himself. Thus may many of us gain glory, and every man enjoy
security. These persuasions greatly kindled their minds, already warmed with
desire of mischief. In so much as they resolved to take arms, and the rather,
having drawn unto them more companions of their disposition: whom by oath
they bound to help them when any should happen by the Magistrates to be
oppressed. While these men prepared to surprise the state, their intent was
discovered to the Senators, who had in hand one called Simone, of whom they
understood all the conspiracy, and that the next day they meant to make a
tumult: which peril perceived, the Colleges did assemble, and with the
Sindachi practiced to unite the city, but before every man was come, the
night drew on. Then were the Senators advised to send for the Consuls of
mysteries, who being together, agreed that all men of war within Florence
should be warned to appear: and the Gonfaloniere, the morning following with
their companies to be armed in the Market place. At such time as Simone was
tormented, and the Citizens assembling, one called Nicholo da San Friano, kept
the clock of the Palace, who being aware of that business in hand, began
to spread rumors among his neighbors, so as suddeinly in the Market place of
Santo Spirito, more then a thousand armed men were assembled. These news came
to the ears of the other conspirators, and San Piero Maggiore, and San Lorenzo
(places by them appointed) were full of men armed. By that time day appeared,
which was the twenty one of July. At which hour, came not to the Market place
in favor of the Senate, above eighty men of arms, and of the Gonfaloniere,
not one: for they hearing the City was all in Arms, feared to leave their
houses. The first of the multitude that came to the Market place, were those
that assembled at San Piero Maggiore: for whose coming the men of Arms
removed not. Then the rest of the multitude came, and finding no resistance,
with a terrible cry demanded of the Senate to enlarge the prisoners, and not
seeing them delivered upon that threatening, sought by force to have them, and
set fire on the house of Luigi Guicciardini. Whereupon the Senate, for avoiding
a worse inconvenience, delivered the prisoners. Having obtained this demand,
they removed the Gonfalone della Giustitia from the Esecutore, and under him
burned the houses of many Citizens, persecuting those, that either for public
or private occasion was hated. Also many Citizens to revenge private
injuries, brought them to the houses of their enemies. For it sufficed that
any one man cried, let us go to such a place, or holding the Gonfalone by the
hand, looked that way. They likewise burned all the writings belonging to the
mystery of wool. Thus having committed many euilles, to accompany them with
some lawdable deed: they made Saluestro de Medici, and diverse other Knights,
to the number of three score and four. Among whom, were Benedetto and Antonio
degli Alberti, Tomazo Strozz, and such others their trusty friends, yet were
some of them enforced thereto. In which accident, more the^ any other thing, it
is to be noted, that some of them whose houses they burned, were in the same
day (so near was the benefit to the injury) made knights: which experience
was seen in Luigi Gonfaloniere della Giustitia. The Senators amidst these
tumults, finding themselves abandoned by the men of arms, grew doubtful of the
heads of the mysteries, and their Gonfalonieri: for none of them according to
order given, came to the rescue. And of sixteen Gonfaloni, only the Ensign
of the golden Lion, and that of the Cow and Calfe, with Giouanni Cambini,
appeared. And they also tarried not long in the Market place, because they were
not followed by the rest. On the other side, the Citizens seeing the fury of
the unbridled multitude, and the Palace abandoned, some remained in their
houses, others followed the troops of armed men, hoping the rather to save
their own houses and defend their friends. By mean whereof the power of the
people increased, and the forces of the Senate diminished. This tumult
continued all that day, and the night being come, at the Palace of Stephano
behind the Church of S. Barnabo, it stayed. The number of these men passed
six thousand. And before the day appeared, the next morning they caused by
threatening the mysteries to send for their Ensigns. Then came forth the
Gonfalone della Giustitia, and accompanied with the Ensigns of the mysteries,
went to the Palace of the Podesta: who denying to yield the possession of
that house, they fought with him, and at length wanne that place. The Senate
desirous to make composition with them, since by force they could not appease
them, called three of their Colleges, and sent them to the Palace of the
Podesta, to understand the intent of the people: who found, that the heads of
the multitude with the Sindachi of the mysteries, and some other Citizens, had
determined what should be required of the Senate. So as, they accompanied with
four of the people specially appointed, returned with these demaundes.
Demands of the People.
First that the mystery of wool, might not from that time forth have any
stranger for their Judge. That three new corporations of mysteries should be
erected: one to contain the Carders and Diars; the second to contain the
Barbars, Hosiers, and some other mechanical Arts; and the third, for the
poor people. Also, that of these three new mysteries, there should be two of
the Senate: and of the fourteen less mysteries, three. That the Senate
should provide houses for the meetings and assemblies of these new
corporations. That no man within these bodies corporate, should within two
years, be constrained to pay any debt of less sum then two ducats. That
the banckes should take no prejudice, but the principal only to be restored.
That all men banished or condemned, should be called home. That all the
Citizens admonished, should be admitted to their honors. Many other things in
the favor of their private friends they demanded: and likewise the contrary,
that many their enemies might be confined and admonished. All which demaundes
notwithstanding they were dishonest and unfit for the state: yet for fear of
worse, were by the Senators, Colleges, and people granted. Also to the end
they might receive full perfection, it behooved to have them allowed by the
common Council. And (because in one day two Councels could not be assembled)
that co^sultation of force was deferred til the next day. In the mean time, it
was thought good, that the mysteries and people should rest content and
satisfied, they promising, that so soon as the law were in perfection, all
tumults should cease. The next morning while the common counsel debated the
matter, the multitude impatie^t and voluble, under their ensigns went to the
market place, shouting and crying so terribly, that all the Council and the
Senate were dismayed. Whereupon Gueriante Marignuolo, one of the Senators (moved
rather with fear then any other private passion) under color to keep the
gate, went down and fled to his house: yet could he not so secretly pass, but
was by the multitude known. Otherwise they did him no injury, then cry out
saying, that the Senate would all abandon the Palace, unless their children
were slain, and their houses burnt. In the mean space, the law was made, and
the Senators returned to their chambers. Also the Council came down and
stayed in the Galleries and Courts without going further, as men dispairing of
the city, either because they perceived so great dishonestie and frowardness
in the multitude, or so great cowardice in others, who had power to oppress,
or at the least, to allaie the rage of these tumults. The Senators were also
amazed, and dispairing of their country, beheld one of their company fled, and
no other Citizen that would either assist them with force or counsel.
Therefore they resolved of that they could, being incertaine what else they
should do. Tomazo Strozzi, and Benedetto Alberti, either moved with private
ambition, desiring to be only Lords of the Palace, or else because they so
thought best, persuaded the others to give place to this populer fury, and as
private men return home to their houses. This counsel given by those that
were heads of the tumult (notwithstanding that the rest gave place) made
Alamanno Acciaiuoli, and Nicholo del Been, (two of the Senate) to become
offended. Yet after being come to themselves, they said; that if other men
would depart, they could not let them: but for themselves, they would not go,
till their time appointed, unless that with their authority they did also
loose their lives. These contrarieties of opinion, doubled the despair of the
Senate, and the peoples offense. In so much as, the Gonfaloniere, desiring
rather to end his office with shame, then peril, resigned the same to Tomazo
Strozzi, wholed him from the Palace, and conducted him to his house. The other
Senators in like manner, one after an other, went home. Then Alamanno and
Nicholo, to show no more courage the^ wisdom, seeing themselves left alone,
departed also: whereby the Palace remained in the hand of the multitude and
the eight governors for the war, The Government gained by the multitude.

Michele Lando.


who had not given up their offices. At such time as the people entered the
Palace, one Michele di Lando, a Carder of wool, bare the Ensign of the
Gonfaloniere Giustitia, he being bare legged and raggedly apparrelled,
followed with the multitude, went up the stairs, and being come to the
presence of the Senators, stayed, and turned himself to the multitude, saying;
Do you not see that this Palace and this city is yours, and in your hands?
what do you now think good to do? Whereto every man answered, that he
should be Gonfaloniere, and Lord to dispose, and govern the city as
himself thought good, Michele accepted his authority, for he was indeed a
man very witty, and more bound to Nature, then Fortune. Then he determined
to appease the city, and stay the tumults: also to hold the people occupied,
and win himself time to give order, commanded one Sir Nuto, to be searched
out, who had been by Lapo Castiglionichio, appointed a Serieant. To the
execution of which service, the greater number of those that were present did
go. Then to begin that government with justice, which by favor of the
multitude was given him, he commanded by proclamation, that no man should
steal or take iniustly from another. And the rather to terrify all men,
Ordinances of Michele Lando.
he erected a Gibbet in the Market place, he displaced the Sindachi of
mysteries, and made new; he deprived the Senate and Colleges, and burned the
Borsi. In the mean time Sir Nuto was by the multitude brought into the market
place and there hanged by one soote. Every man with his sword cut him in
pieces, til at length there remained not any thing but his foot. On the other
side, the eight governors for the war (supposing themselves by the departure
of the Senators to be only Lords of the city, appointed new Senators: which
Michele knowing, sent one to tell them, they should presently depart the
Palace, because he would let all men understand, that he alone without their
counsel could govern Florence. That done, he caused the Sindachi of mysteries
to assemble, and created four Senators of the base multitude, two of the great
mysteries, and two of the less. Moreover he made new Squittini; dividing the
state into three parts, commanding that the one should belong to the new
mysteries, the second to the lesser, and the third to the great mysteries. He
gave unto Saluestro de Medici, the rentes of the houses upon the old bridge.
To himself the Podesteria of Empoli: and on many other his friends of the
multitude, he bestowed benefits: many others at his hand received pleasure and
were restored to their own, not so much for their good as that he might the
rather be by them, from the envy of time defended. Then it seemed to the poor
multitude, that in this reformation of the state, the better sort of people
were too much partakers thereof: and they not to have therein so much
authority as to defend themselves, if need should require. The multitud
offended with Michele Lando his laws.
Wherefore set on with their accustomed boldness, they took arms again, and
uniting themselves under their Ensigns came anew into the Market, demanding
of the Senators to come down to the Ringhiera, and consult of new matters
concerning their security and good. Michele seeing their arrogancy, (yet not
to move them to more offense, without asking what they would) blamed the manner
of their demanding, and persuaded them to lay down arms, saying, that
should be granted unto them, which with the gravity of the Senate through
force, might not be granted. The multitude with that offended, assembled near
the Palace of S. Maria Nouella, where among themselves they appointed eight
heads with their ministers and orders, which gave them reverence and
reputation. So as, the city had two places of state, and was by two diverse
officers governed. These heads determined among them, that ever eight, named by
the body of the Mysteries, should dwell in the Palace with the Senate, and
whatsoever the Senators should determine, must be by them confirmed. They took
from Saluestro de Medici and Michele, all that, which in their former Councels
was given them. They appointed many new officers, and allowances for their
degrees. These appointments taken, to make them the more assured, they sent two
of them to the Senate, to require their consent, intending, that if that were
not granted, that then by force they would have it. Those messengers, with
great audacitie and more presumption, declared their Commission to the Senate:
and told the Gonfalone what honor and authority they had given him, and with
what ingratitude and small respect at his hand, they were reacquited. At length
falling from words to threatenings, Michele could no longer endure such
arrogance. But remembering more the place he occupied, then the baseness of
his late estate, thought meet by extraordinary mean, to bridle an
extraordinary insolency; and drawing forth the sword he ware, hurt one of these
messengers and after caused him to be bound and imprisoned. This being known,
greatly offended the multitude, and hoping to win that by force, which
unarmed they could not, presently took arms with great fury, and marched
toward the Senators, with intent to compel them. Michele on the other side,
doubting that which followed, determined to prevent them, and imagining it more
for his glory to assault others, then tarry within and be assaulted, and so
like to his predecessors be forced with shame of the Palace to fly away: did
assemble a great number of Citizens, who (having well advised themselves of
their errors) mounted on horseback, and being followed by many armed men,
went to Santa Maria Nouella, to fight with the enemy. The people having (as we
before declared) made the like determination, almost at the same time marched
to the Marketplace: but it happened that the one passed by one street, and the
other by an other, so as by the way they met not. Michele being returned back,
found the Market place taken, and the Palace assaulted: Michele Lando
victorious.
he therefore suddeinly charged the enemies and overthrew them. Some were
forced to fly, others cast down their weapons, and others hid themselves.
This victory gotten, the tumult was appeased, only through the virtue of the
Gonfaloniere, who for courage, wisdom, and integrity, excelled all the
Citizens of that time, and is to be numbered among those few that have profitted
their country. For had he been of evil disposition or ambitious, the common
weal had utterly lost the liberty thereof, and should have fallen into a
greater tyranny then that of the Duke of Athene: but the bounty of Lando was
such, as suffered no thought to enter his mind that might be prejudicial to the
universal quiet. His wisdom directed all things, so as many of his fellowship
gave him place, and his adversaries by force of arms were oppressed. Which
manner of proceeding, caused the multitude to stand dismayed, and the better
sort of Artificers to look about them, and think how great their shame was,
having oppressed the great men's pride, to endure the populer dregs. At such
time as Michele obtained this victory against the multitude, a new Senate was
chosen, wherein were two men of so vile and unworthy condition, as every man
desired to be acquit of that great infamy. When these officers were created
(which was the first day of September) the Market place was full of armed men.
So soon as the old Senators came out of the Palace, there was a brute given
out among the armed men, that they would not, that any of the base people
should be of the number of Senators. Whereupon the Senate for their
satisfaction deprived two, the one called Tira, the other Baroccio, in whose
rooms, they placed Georgio Scali, and Francesco di Michele. They also deposed
the mysteries of the base people, and all officers, excepting Michele-Lando,
Lorenzo di Puccio, and a few others of the better sort. They divided the
honors into two parts, allotting the one, to the greater mysteries, the other
to the less. Of the Senate, they willed there should be ever five of the less
mysteries, and four of the great. And the Gonfaloniere to be chosen sometimes
of the one, and sometimes of the other. The state thus ordained for the
present, appeased the city. And albeit the government was taken away from the
base people, yet the Artificers of meanest condition, remained more mighty
then the populer Nobility, who were forced to give place, to win from the
base people the favor of the mysteries, and content them: which was also
favored, by such as desired that those should be oppressed, who under the name
of Guelfi, had with great insolency injured many Citizens. Among others that
allowed this manner of government, Georgio Scali, Benedetto Alberti, Saluestro
di Medici, and Tomazo Strozzi were made as Princes of the city. These matters
thus proceeding and handled, the division already begun betwixt the populer
Nobility, and the mean Artificers, through ambition of Ricci and Albizi,
became confirmed. Whereof (because afterward followed grievous effects, and
of them we shall be often occasioned to speak) we will call the one populer,
the other plebeiall. The state continued thus three years, full of banishments
and murders. New division in Florence.
For they that governed, knowing there were both within and abroad, many
evil contented, did live in great suspicion. The Citizens within
discontented, either they continually attempted some new practice, or devised
with themselves how they might do it. And those that lived without, having no
bridle, by mean of some Prince or some Common weal, here and there, sowed
sedition. At this time Giannozzo di Salerno, Lieutenant to Durazzo, descended
of the Kings of Napoli, happened to be at Bologna, intending to assault the
kingdom, and take the same from Queen Giouanna. At the same time also were in
Bologna many banished Florentines, who with the Pope and with Carlo, practiced
diverse things: which was the cause, that they who governed in Florence did
live in great suspicion, and gave credit easily to the slanders of those
Citizens that were suspected. During this doubtful time, it was revealed to
the Magistrates, that Giannozzo of Salerno, should with the banished men
present himself before Florence, and that many within would take arms and
deliver the city to his hand. Diverse great Citizens accused.
Upon this report many were accused, the chief of whom, were Piero delli
Albizi, and Carlo Strozzi: and next to them the Cipriani Giaccomo Sacchetti,
Donati Barbadori, Filippo Strozzi, and Giouanni Anselini: who were all taken,
saving Carlo Strozzi, that fled. And the Senate, to the end none should take
arms in their favor, appointed Tomazo Strozzi, and Benedetto Alberti, with
many armed men to guard the city. These Citizens were apprehended and
examined, but the accusation and their answer conferred together, no fault was
in them found: Insomuch that the Captain not willing to condemn them, their
enemies in the mean space moved the people to mutiny, and by force they were
judged to death. Neither was Piero degli Albizi any whit favored, either for
the greatness of his house, or for that long time he had in the city more
reputation then any other, and had been there more honored and feared. During
his prosperity, some friend of his, either to persuade him to courtesy in his
greatness, or else some enemy to threaten him with the inconstancy of
fortune: at such time as he made a solemn banquet to diverse Citizens, sent
him a silver dish full of Comfits, and in those Comfits was hidden a nail;
which being found and seen of diverse his guestes, it was imagined, that
thereby he should remember to stay the wheel: because fortune having set him
on the height thereof (the wheel keeping course) must needs cast him down.
Which interpretation, was first by his decaie, and after by his death verified.
After this execution, the city remained full of confusion, because both the
victored, and the victorious stood in fear: but the worst of all was, that the
governors themselves lived in continual suspicion. For every accident were
it never so little, made them to do new injuries to the factions, condemning,
admonishing, and sending the Citizens into exile. Whereunto they joined new
laws, and new orders, many times made, only to fortify their authority. All
which was done to the injury of them who were to their faction suspected. And
they created forty six men, who with the Senate should discover men suspected
to the state. These officers admonished thirty nine Citizens, making many
populer persons great men, and many great men, populer. Also, the rather to
withstand all external forces, they enterteined John Aguto, an English Captain,
who, in those days, was accounted of great experience in the war, and had long
served the Pope and others in Italy. The suspicion abroad proceeded of
intelligence given, how certain companies of men at arms belonging to Carlo
Durazzo, were put in readiness, to assault the kingdom. Among whom, (as was
reported) were many banished Florentines. For the meeting with those perils,
besides the ordinary forces, a sum of money was provided. Carlo arrived in
Arezzo, received of the Florentines forty thousand Ducats, promising not to
molest them. After that time, he atchiued his enterprise, and happily surprised
the kingdom of Napoli, The Queen of Napoli taken prisoner.
took the Queen Giouanna, and sent her prisoner into Hungary. Which victory
increased a new suspicion of those that in Florence feared the state. Because
they could not believe that their money should do more with the King, then the
ancient friendship, which that house had with the Guelfi, who with manifold
injury, had been by him oppressed. These suspicions increasing, increased also
the injuries, which did not decrease, but multiply them. By means whereof, the
greater number of them lived much discontented, which discontent grew the
greater by the insolency of Georgio Scali, and Tomazo Strozzi; whose authority
prevailed more then the Magistrates: and every man feared, least they being
followed with the people, would oppress them. In so much as, that, not only
the good men, but also the seditious sort, accounted that government
tyrannical and violent. But to the end, that the insolency of Georgio should
at length take end) it fortuned that he became accused of one Giouanii Cambio,
his companion: having (as he said) practiced diverse ways against the state:
yet upon examination, was found guiltless by the Captain. So as the^, the
Judge went about to punish the accuser with that punishment, which the party
accused should have suffered, had he been found faulty. And Georgio, neither
with suit nor authority, able to save him, went with Tomazo Strozzi, and the
multitude armed to deliver him by force. At which time, they sacked the
Captains Palace, and forced him (for safety of his person) to hide himself,
which action filled the city with so much hatred toward him, that thereby his
enemies hoped to overthrow him, and take the city both from him, and the
plebeyall people also: who through presumption, had usurped the same three
years. Thereof also the Captain gave great occasion; for he (the tumult
ceased) went to the Senate, and said, that as he had willingly taken upon him,
that, whereto their Lordships had elected him, because therein he hoped to
serve just men, ready to take arms, in the favor, not in the prejudice of
justice: so seeing he had seen and knew the government of the city, and the
manner of life therein; that office which he willingly took in hand for his
profit and honor, as willingly there he would yield the same up to shun the
peril, and loss that might thereof follow. The Captain was by the Senators
comforted, and promised reparation of former losses and future security. Then
certain of them, together with some Citizens, who were holden lovers of the
Common weal, and men least suspected, concluded that a good opportunity was
offered to take the city from Georgio, and the multitude. By reason, that
through that his late insolency, the Citizens were greatly alienated from him:
and was therefore good to execute that intent, before the offended minds of
the multitude were reconciled. For well they knew, that the favor of the
multitude upon every trifling accident is gotten and lost. Judging moreover,
that for the bringing this enterprise to effect, it behooved them to win the
good will of Benedetto Alberti, without whose consent the action seemed
dangerous. This Benedetto was a man exceeding rich, Benedetto Alberti.
courteous, grave, a lover of the liberty of his country, and such a one, as
much misliked the tyrannous proceedings of the time. By mean whereof, it was
easy both to appease him, and also persuade him to the destruction of Georgio.
For, the occasions, which made him enemy to the populer Nobility and Guelfi,
and friend to the multitude, was their insolency, and their tyrannous manner of
government. And, seeing that the heads of the multitude, were become of like
insolency, he would likewise leave them, as one that would not consent to the
injuries by them done to many Citizens. So in conclusion, those reasons which
induced him to take part with the people, did also persuade him to leave them.
Benedetto and the heads of the Arts thus drawn to favor the populer
Nobility, took arms, apprehended Georgio, and Tomazo fled away. The next day
after, Georgio was beheaded, to so great terror of his party, as no man moved
in his favor, though every man went to behold his ruin. Georgio Scali
beheaded.
He being brought to die, complained of those people, that lately had adored
him, and lamented his own hard fortune, and the malignitie of the Citizens, who
having wrongfully injured him, were forced to favor, and honor the
multitude, wherein was neither trust nor grautuitie. And knowing Benedetto
Alberti among the rest, of the armed men, said unto him; And thou Benedetto
do consent to see me here so injured, as if I were where thou art, I would
not suffer thee: but I do prognosticate, that as this day is the end of my
misery, so is the same the beginning of thy destruction. He complained
moreover of himself, for having too much trusted to the people, whom every
voice, every action, and every supition moves and corrupts. With these
lamentations he ended his life, amidst his enemies armed, and rejoicing at his
death. Shortly after, certain other his nearest friends were slain, and
drawn in the streets by the people. The death of this Citizen troubled all
the city; for at the execution thereof, many took arms in favor of the
Senate and Captain of the people. Many other, either for their own ambition,
or suspicion, did the like. Also the city being full of diverse humors, every
man had his diverse intent: which he desired to execute before arms were laid
down. The old Nobility (called great men) could not endure to see themselves
deprived of the public honors: and therefore with all study labored to
recover them, liking well that authority should be restored to the Captains
of factions. To the populer Nobility, and the greater mysteries it was
offensive, that the state was participated with the less mysteries, and base
people. On the other side, the less mysteries desired rather to increase then
diminish their dignities. And the poor people, feared to forgo their
Colleges. Which diversity of minds, made continually in Florence tumults to
arise, for the space of one year. Sometimes the great men, sometimes the
chief mysteries, sometimes the less, together with the multitude, and
sometimes altogithers, at one instant in diverse places were armed. Whereof
ensued among themselves, and with the soldiers of the Palace, diverse
conflicts. The Senate, sometimes by giving place, and sometimes by fighting,
sought all they could to remedy that mischief. Insomuch as, in the end, and
after two consultations, and two Balie, for reformation of the city, and after
many harms, many travels, and many great perils, a government was settled: New
reformation in Florence.
whereby were revoked, all those that before, and since Saluestro de Medici was
Gonfaloniere, had been confined. All privileges and provisions, were taken
away from those to whom they had been given by the Balia of 78. All honors
were restored to the Guelfi. The two new mysteries were discorporated, and
every of those remitted under the ancient mysteries. The Gonfaloniere di
Guistitia, was taken away from the less mysteries, and they reduced to be
partakers of half the third part of the honors, and of those the best were
taken from them. So that, the faction of populer Nobility and Guelfi,
recovered the government, and the multitude lost their authority, which they
had holden from the year 1378. til 81. at which time, this alteration
happened: neither was this government less injurious toward the Citizens, nor
more mild, then was that of the multitude. For so many of the populer Nobility
were confined, as had been noted to be defenders thereof, together with a great
number of the principal men of the multitude. And among them, Michele Lando
confined.
Michele Lando; whose former authority and good deserts, could not in this
time of populer fury, save him. His country therefore, for many good merits,
was to him unthankful. Into which error, because many Princes and Commonweals do fall, is the cause, that men upon like examples terrified, before
they feel the smart of their gournours ingratitude, do first offend them.
These exilements and these slaughters did displease, and ever had displeased
Benedetto Alberti, and he both publicly, and privately, blamed them. For
which cause, the Lords of the state feared him, as chief friend to the
multitude, and thought him consenting to the death of Georgio Scali: not
because his doings did offend him, but to be alone in the government. Besides
that, his words and works did increase the suspicion, which made that side
which governed, to keep eye upon him, and watch opportunity to oppress him.
The city living in these terms, the actions abroad were of no great
importance. For if any thing were done, it proceeded of fear, by reason that
Lodouico di Angio came then into Italy, Carlo di Angio, come into Italy.
to restore the kingdom of Napoli to the Queen Giouanna, and remove Carlo
Durazzo. The passage of this Prince, greatly amazed the Florentines; for Carlo
(according to the custom of old friends) demanded of them aid, and Lodouico
(like unto him that seeks new friends) desired them to stand neutrall.
Whereupon the Florentines to seem willing to content Lodouico, and aid Carlo,
discharged Giouanni Aguto, and procured Pope Vrbano to entertain him: which
subtlety was easily by Lodouico discovered, and for the same held himself
much injured by the Florentines. During the war betwixt Lodouico and Carlo in
Puglia, new forces came from France in the favor of Lodouico, who arrived in
Toscana, were by the banished men of Arezzo brought into that city: where they
removed the faction, which governed for Carlo: intending also to have changed
the state of Florence, as they had altered Arezzo. Then died Lodouico, whereby
the affairs of Puglia and Toscana varied Fortune. For Carlo assured himself
on the kingdom, which was well near lost. And the Florentines mistrusting the
defense of Florence, recovered Arezzo and bought it, of those soldiers which
kept it, for Lodouico. Carlo then being assured of Puglia, went to take
possession of Hungheria, which was by inheritance descended unto him, leaving
his wife in Puglia, with Ladislao and Giouanna his children, being but babes,
as hereafter shall be declared. Carlo possessed Hungheria, but shortly after
there died. For this conquest, much triumph was made in Florence, The death of
Carlo di Angio.
and the magnificence thereof was no less both for public and private
expense, then if the occasion thereof had been their own. For many families
kept open feasts: and the house of Alberti for pomp and magnificence exceeded
the rest. The expenses and charge of Armor that the Alberti used, were not
only fit for private persons of the best degree, but for the greatest Princes:
which gained them no small envy. Whereto adding the suspicion which the state
had of Benedetto, was the cause of his ruin; Benedetto Alberti suspected and
envied.
because those that governed, could not endure him: fearing every hour it
might come to pass, that through favor of his faction, he might recover
reputation, and drive them from the city. These doubts remaining, it happened,
that he being Gonfaloniere of companies, Philippo Malagotti his son in law,
was chosen Gonfaloniere di Giustitia: which doubled the mistrust of the
Governors, imagining that Benedetto increased over fast in force, and the
state thereby in much peril. For prevention of which inconveniences without
tumult, they encouraged Bese Magalotti, his companion, to signify to the
Senate, that Philippo having passed his turn, could not, nor ought not,
exercise that office. The cause was by the Senate examined, some of them for
hate, some to take away occasion of slander, judged Philippo not capable of
that dignity, and elected in his place Bardo Mancini, a man to the plebeyan
faction contrary, and mortal enemy to Benedetto. In so much as, he being
placed in office, called a Balia for reformation of the state, and therein
confined Benedetto Alberti, and admonished the rest of that family, only
Antonio Alberti, excepted. Benedetto being ready to depart, called unto him
all his friends, and seeing them sad, The speech of Benedetto Alberti, at his
banishment.
said; you see (my good fathers and Lords) in what sort Fortune has oppressed
me, and threatened you: whereof I marvel not, neither ought you to marvel.
Because it ever comes to pass, that who so ever will be good among many
evil, or does seek to hold up that which many labor to pull down, must of
force perish. The love of my Country made me to join with Saluestro di
Medici, and after to depart from Georgio Scali. The same did likewise persuade
me, to hate the manners of those that now govern: who as they have not had any
to punish them, so do they desire, that none should find fault with them. For
my part I am content with my banishment to acquit them of that fear which
they had, not of me only, but of every other man, that knows their
tyrannous and wicked dealings. My punishment therefore does threaten others; of
my self I take no pity: for those honors which my country being free has
given me, now brought unto servitude, cannot take from me. And the memory of
my passed life shall always more comfort me, then mine hard fortune which
brought mine exile, shall discourage me. It greeueth me much, that my country
should become a spoil for a few, and be subject to their pride and
covetousness. I am also right sorry to think, that those evils which now end
in me, will begin in you. And I fear, least those miseries will persecute you
with more hinderance, then they have persecuted me. I would therefore counsel
you, to prepare your minds against all misfortunes, and bear your selves so,
as what adversity so ever happen (for many will happen) every man may know you
are faultlesse, and that without your guilt they be happened. After this leave
taken, to give as great a testimony of his bounty abroad, The death of
Benedetto Alberti.
as he had done in Florence: he traveled to the Sepulcher of Christ, from
whence returning, in the I Will of Roda he died. His boanes were brought to
Florence, and therewith great honor buried, by those, who in his life, with
all slander and injury did molest him. During these troubles, the house of
Alberti was not only oppressed, but many other Citizens also admonished and
confined. Among whom, were Piero Benini, Mattheo Alderotti, Giouanni, and
Francesco del Been, Giouanni Benci, Andrea Adimari, and with them, a great
number of the less mysteries. Among the admonished were the Couoni, the
Benini, the Rinucci, the Formiconi, the Corbozi, the Manegli, and the
Alderotti. It was the custom to create the Balia for time certain, but those
Citizens having it in their hands, being placed by honest mean,
notwithstanding their time were not expired, did yield up their offices: which
being known, many ran armed to the Palace, desiring that before the
officers departed, more Citizens might be confined, and admonished. Which
request greatly offended the Senate, who with fair promises enterteined them,
til forces were made ready, and then wrought so, as fear enforced them to
lay down those arms, which fury caused them to take in hand. Yet somewhat
to feed so fierce an humor, and notwithstanding take away more authority from
the plebeyall Artizans: it was ordered, that where they had the third of the
offices, they should now have only the fourth part. Also, to the end that two
of the most trusty Citizens might be always of the Senate, they gave
authority to the Gonfaloniere di Giustitia, and four other Citizens, to make
a Borza of chosen men: out of which number at every Senate should be elected
two. The state thus settled after six years (which was in the year 1381.
G^ouan Galiazzo become prince of Lombardy. 1393.
) the city lived quiet within, till the year 1393. In which time, Giouan
Galiazza Visconti, called Conte di Virtue, took prisoner his uncle Barnabo, and
by that mean, became Prince of all Lombardy. This Giouan Galiazzo hoped by
force to be made king of Italy, as by craft he was atteined to be Lord of
Milan. And in the year 1390. he began a brave war against the Florentines:
wherein Fortune became so variable, as many times the Duke was in no less
danger to lose all then the Florentines, who indeed had lost all, if the Duke
had longer lived. Yet the resistance by them made, was so courageous and
marvelous, as might be by any Common weal; and the end no less perilous,
then the war had been terrible. For when the Duke had taken Bologna, Pisa,
Perugia, and Siena, and prepared a Crown to be set on his head in Florence, as
king of Italy, The death of Galiazzo.
he died. Which death suffered him not to taste the sweet of his passed
victories, nor the Florentines to feel the perils at hand. While this war
with the Duke continued, Masso de gli Albizi was made Confaloniere di
Giustitia, whom the death of Piero had made enemy to the Alberti. And for that
the humor of the factions continued, Maso notwithstanding that Benedetto was
dead in exile) did hope before that Senate ended, to be revenged upon the rest
of that family: and took occasion, by one that was upon certain practices
with the Rebels examined, who named Alberto and Andrea delli Alberti.
Whereupon, both they were apprehended, and the city wholly changed. In so
much as the Senate took arms, assembled the people, created a new Balia, and
by virtue thereof, many Citizens were confined, and new Imborsations of
officers made. Among those that were confined, were almost all the Alberti,
many Citizens also admonished, and some put to death. Upon occasion of so great
injuries, the mysteries and the base people took arms, thinking their honor
and lives were in hazard. One part of them came into the Market place, an other
ran to the house of Very di Medici: Very di Medici.
who after the death of Saluestro remained as chief of that family. To deceive
those that came into the Market place, the Senate appointed Captains, and gave
the Ensign of the faction Guelfa, delivering the same into the hands of
Rinaldo Gianfigliazzi, and Donato Acciaiuioli, as men of the populer number,
more then any other acceptable to the multitude. Those that went to the house
of Very, desired him to take the government, and deliver them from such as were
enemies to good men, and good orders. All such writers as have left memory of
the proceedings of that time, do affirm, that if Very had not been more
honest, then ambitious, he might without any let, have aspired to the
principallitie of that city. Because the exceeding great injuries done to the
mysteries, some justly and some unjustly, had so kindled their minds to
revenge, as nothing wanted for the performance of their desires, but a Captain
to lead them. Neither wanted those, that would put Very in remembrance what he
might do. For Antonio di Medici (who had before time been long for private
respects, his enemy) did persuade him to take in hand the government of the
state. To whom he answered, as thy threatenings (being mine enemy) made me not
to fear thee; so thy Council being my friend, shall not abuse me. Having
uttered these words, he turned himself to the multitude, and persuading them
to be of good courage, promised to be their defender, so that they would be
content to be by him directed. The speech of Very di Medici to the Senate of
Florence.
Then in the midst of them he went to the Market place, and from thence up to
the Palace, and being come to the presence of the Senate, said. That he was
not sorry to have so lived, that the people of Florence did love him: but yet
sorry he was, that they had not such opinion of him, as his passed life did
deserve. For since he had not showed any sign of sedition or ambition, he could
not conceive why he was thought a mainteiner of sedition (or as ambitious) a
man that studied to usurp his country. Therefore he humbly besought their
Lordships, that the ignorance of the multitude might not be imputed his fault:
because so much as in him was, he submitted himself unto them. He moreover
put them in mind to use their fortune modestly, and be content to take rather
half a victory with saving the city, then a whole conquest with the ruin
thereof. The Senators greatly commended Very, and required him to persuade,
that arms might be laid down, and then they would not fail to do that,
which he and other Citizens should counsel them. After these speeches, Very
returned to the Market place, and joining his followers, to those that were
conducted by Rinaldo and Donato, said unto them all, that he had found in the
Senators a very good disposition toward them, to whom he had also said much,
albeit by means of the short time, and absence of the officers, nothing was
concluded. Wherefore he prayed them to lay their weapons down, and obey the
Senate: thereby to declare that courtesy, rather then pride, entreatie, more
then threatening, might move them: and that they should not lack means and
security, so long as they were by him governed. Thus upon his word every man
was content to return to his own house. The multitude having upon this
persuasion disarmed themselves, the Senate first caused a guard to be set in
the Market place: then they mustered two thousand Citizens, men assured to the
state, equally dividing them under Gonfaloni, whom they commanded to be ready
whenever that they were called. Also commandment was given, that no man
whose name was not taken nor warned, should for any cause be armed. This
preparation made, they confined and slew many of those Artificers which had in
the late tumult showed themselves most seditious and violent. And to the end
that the Gonfaloniere de Giustitia, might have more reputation and dignity: it
was ordered and thought necessary, that whosoever did exercise that office,
should be of 45. years. For confirmation of the state, many other provisions
were devised. These ordinances made, the Senators were insupportable, and to
the good Citizens (even of their own faction) they became odious. For they
could not judge any state good or secure, which had need with so great violence
to be defended. So that this manner of proceeding, did not only offend those of
the family of Alberti, which yet remained in the city: and the Medici, who
thought them to have abused the people, but many others also were with so great
violence displeased. But the first that opposed himself was Donato son to
Giacopo Acciaiuoli. Donati Acciaiuoli.
He being in the city great, and rather superior, then equal, to Masso degli
Alberti (who for the great service done, when he governed as Gonfaloniere was
accounted as head of the Commonaltie) could not among so many discontentations
live contented: nor (as the most men do) prefer private profit, before common
commodity. And therefore, thought he would assaie to restore those that had
been banished, or at the least, set the admonished into their offices. For
compassing whereof, he whispered h^^ intent in the ear of this and that
Citizen, showing that otherwise he could not please the people, nor stay their
offense. And concluding said, he only stayed to be of the Senate, and then to
put the matter in execution. Yet because in the actions of men, delaie brings
weariness, and haste is accompanied with peril: to shun weariness, he
resolved to adventure with peril. Amongst the Senators, Michele Acciaiuoli his
companion, and Nicholo Riconori his friend, were elected: whereby Donato
imagined a fit opportunity to be offered, and desired them to propound a law
to the Councels, wherein should be contained the restoration of the Citizens.
They being by him persuaded, commoned with their fellows, who answered, that
they would attempt no new matters, since the obteining of them was doubtful,
and the peril certain. Then Donato having in vain made proof of every
mean, in great choler let them understand, that seeing upon good occasion
offered, they did not reform the city, he would with force of arms do it.
Which words being greatly offensive, and the matter debated among the chief
Governors, Donato was cited, and appearing, was by witness of him to whom he
committed the message, Donati Acciaiuoli with others confined.
convinced: and in the end confined to Barletta. Also Antonio de Medici with
all the rest descended of Alamanno, together with many base Artizans (yet such
as had credit with the people) were banished: which things happened after two
years, that Masso had taken in hand the government. The city thus standing,
many were discontented within, and many without banished. Of which number
remained at Bologna, Picchio, Cauicciulli, Tomazo de Ricci, Antonio de Medici,
Benedetto degli Spini, Antonio Girolami, Christofano di Carlone, with two
others of vile condition: but all young men aduenturours, and disposed to
hazard any fortune for their country. To these men, secret intelligence was
given by Piggiello, and Baroccio Cauicciulli (who as men admonished lived in
Florence) that if they did come to the city disguised, they would receive them
into their houses. From whence they might go and kill Masso degli Albizi, and
call the people to arms, Conspiracy in Florence against Masso Deili Albizi
and others.
who (being discontent) would easily move, and the rather, because they should
be followed by the Ricci, Adimari, Medici, Manegli, and many other families.
They then encouraged with this hope, the fourth of August 1397. came to
Florence, and entering secretly as they were appointed, sent to know where Masso
was, intending with his death to raise the tumult. At that time, Masso was come
from his house, and stayed in an Appothecaries shop, near San Pietro Maggiore.
The messenger sent to await him, ran to tell the conspirators thereof; who
taking arms and coming to the place found him gone: yet not dismayed that this
appointment sped not, returned toward the old Market, and there killed one of
the contrary faction. Then the larum began, and the people cried arms,
liberty, and kill these tyrants: which done, they returned toward the new
Market, and at the end of Calimara, they slew an other. And with like showte,
following their way, and no man taking arms, at the Loggia Nighitiosa, they
stayed. Then they climed up to a high place, and a great multitude drew near,
rather to behold them then help them, and with a loud voice they persuaded men
to take arms, and acquit themselves of that servitude which they so greatly
hated; alleging, that the lamentation of the evil contented persons in the
city, more then their own injuries moved them to seek mean to be
delivered. And that they knew, many did pray God to grant them occasion to be
revenged: which they would perform, whenever they might find a head to lead
them. And now occasion being come, and Captains ready to lead them, every man
looked one upon an other, and stood as men amazed. So that, their resolution
was in vain, and the Citizens still with bondage burdened. Also they much
marvelled, that they (who for every small injury were wont to take arms)
would not now be moved, but suffer so many their Citizens to be banished and
admonished: yet was it in their power to restore the banished to their
country, and the admonished to their offices. Which words (though true) moved
not the multitude at all, either for fear, or else because the death of those
two had made the murderers odious. So that the mouers of the tumult, seeing
that neither words nor deeds had force to encourage any man, (too late aware
how dangerous a thing it is to labor the liberty of a people, that will in
any wise be subject) dispairing of the enterprise, into the temple of Santa
Reparata, retired themselves: and there not to save their lives, but delaie
their death, they shut themselves up. The Senators at the beginning of the
tumult were armed and shut the Palace gate, till after the case was
understood, and the men known that moved the rumor, being before locked up,
took courage, and commanded the Captain to call his soldiers to apprehend
the offenders. In so much that with small force the doors of the Temple were
broken: part of them within were slain, in defense of the place, and the rest
take. They being examined, confessed none to be culpable but Barocco and
Piggiello Cauicciulli, with others that were slain. After this accident, there
happened one other of more importance. At this time (as has been beforesaid)
the city had war with the Duke of Milan, who finding that to oppress it,
his forces sufficed not, determined to work with wiles, and by aid of the
banished Florentines (of whom Lombardy was full) practiced that enterprise,
whereto also many within the town were made privy. Concluding that upon a
certain day, many of those banished men, apt for arms, Conspiracy by the Duke
of Milan against Florence.
should go to places near Florence, and by the river Arno pass into the
city, and there with friends enter the houses of the chief governors, and
sleying them, reform the government as themselves thought good. Among the
conspirators within, was one of the house of Ricci named Samminiato, but (as in
conspiracies for the most part it happens) that a few are not of force
enough, and many will not keep counsel: Samminiato seeking companions, found
an accuser. This man imparted the matter to Saluestro Cauicciulli, whom the
injuries done to his kinsfolk and himself, ought have made trusty. But he
regarding more the fear at hand, then the future hope, suddeinly bewrayed the
practice to the Senators, and they apprehending Samminiato, constrained him to
confess all the conspirators: yet was there no man apprehended, saving Tomazo
Duuisi, who coming from Bologna, and not hearing what happened in Florence,
was by the way intercepted. All the rest after the apprehension of Samminiato
for fear, fled. Then Samminiato and Tomazo, being according to their merits
punished: authority was given to diverse Citizens to find out more
offenders, and assure the state. They then discovered for Rebels, six of the
family of Ricci, six of the Alberti, three of the Medici, three of the Scali,
two of the Strozzi, Bindo Altouiti, Barnardo Adimari, with many of the meaner
sort. They admonished all the family of Alberti, Ricci, and Medici, for ten
years (a few of them excepted). Among the Alberti was one called Antonio, who
being accounted a quiet and peaceable man, was in that respect not admonished.
It chanced after the suspicion of the conspiracy not quenched, there was a
Monk taken, who had been seen diverse times during the conspiracy, to go
from Bologna to Florence. This Monk confessed that he had brought diverse
letters to Antonio, who denied the matter, yet being auowed by the Monk, The
famely of Alberti confined. An. 1402.
he was condemned in money, and confined 300. miles distant from the city. Also
to the end, that the Alberti might not daily put the state in danger, all that
family above fifteen years of age, were banished. This accident happened in
the year 1402. The next year died Giouan Galiazzo, Duke of Milan: whose death
(as is beforesaid) ended the war which had continued twelve years. In this
mean space, the government became of more authority: and having few enemies
both within and without, the Florentines attempted the enterprise of Pisa, and
gloriously conquered that city. They continued then quiet within, from the
year 1400. till 33. saving that in the year 1412. the Alberti, having broken
their confines, a Balia was chosen, whereby new ordinances were made to assure
the state, and impose greater paiments upon them. The death of Ladislao king of
Naples.
In that time also, the Florentines made war to Ladislao King of Napoli, which
was ended by the death of the King: in the year 1414. In execution whereof,
the King finding himself the weaker, yielded to the Florentines the city of
Cortona, where he was Lord. Yet shortly after he revived the war, which
proved more dangerous then the former. And had the same not been, as the other,
ended by the Duke of Milans death, he had also brought the liberty of our
city into that danger, that by the Duke it had been. Neither did this war of
the Kings end, with lesser adventure then the other. For when he had surprised
Rome, Siena, La Marca, and Romagna, and that he wanted nothing, but Florence to
pass with a mighty force into Lombardy, he died. So as, death was ever more
friendly to the Florentines, then any other friend: and of more power to defend
them, then any other virtue. After the death of this King, the city continued
quiet without and within eight years. In the end of which time, with the
wars of Philippo Duke of Milan, the factions were revived: and continued til
the ruin of that state, which from 1380. had been governed, and with much
glory, enterprised many wars, and brought under the Empire thereof, Arezzo,
Piso, Cortona, Liuorno, and Monte Pulciano. And would have done greater things,
had the city continued united, and the old humors not been revived. As in the
next book shall particulerly be declared.

The end of the third Book.
royal blazon or coat of arms
THE FOVRTH BOOK.
ALL Cities (and chiefly they which be well governed under the name of
Commonweals) do often alter their state and government: not by means of
liberty and subjection (as many imagine) but by mean of servitude and
lycentiousnesse. For only the name of liberty is honored of the people, who
are the ministers of lycentiousnesse, and servitude still sought for by the
Nobility: so as either of them do study not to subject themselves, either to
laws or men. True it is, that when it happens (as sildome it does) that by
good fortune of some City, there rises up therein, a wise, good, and mighty
Citizen, of whom such laws be made, as these humors of the Nobility, and of
the people, be kept quiet (or at the least so restrained as they cannot do
evil) then may that City be called free, and that state firm and stable.
For being builded upon good laws, and good orders, it needs not afterward
the virtue of any man to uphold it. Of such laws and orders, many ancient
Commonweals (whose estates continued long) were endowed. Such orders and
laws, those states wanted, and do want, which have often times changed their
government from states tyrannical, to licentious, and from licentious, to
tyrannical. And in them by mean of their mighty enemies, there is not, nor
cannot be any stabilitie at all: because the one pleases not the good men,
and the other offends the wise men. The one may do evil with facility, the
other can do good with difficulty. In the one insolent men, in the other,
fools have too much authority. And therefore, it behooves, that both the one
and the other, by the virtue and fortune of some excellent man be maintained:
who either by death may be taken away, or by adversity prove unprofitable. I
say therefore, that government which had the beginning in Florence by the death
of Georgio Scali, in the year 1381. proceeded first from the virtue of Masso
delli Albizi, and after was by Nicholo di Vzano continued. The City lived
quiet from the year 1314. till the 22. At which time, the King Ladislao was
dead, and the state of Lombardy into parts divided. So that neither without
nor within, there was any thing that could breed diffidence or mistrust. Next
to Nicholo di Vzano, the Citizens of most authority, were Bartolomeo Valori,
Nerome di Nigi, Rinaldo de gli Albizi, Neridi Guio, and Lapo Nicolini. The
factions which grew, by the discord of the Albizi and Ricci, and after with
great troubles by Saluestro di Medici revived, were never quenched. And albeit
the party most favored of the multitude, reigned not above 3. years, and in
the year 1381. the same was oppressed: yet that humor having infected the
greater number of the people, could not be utterly quenched. True it is, that
the often contentions, and persecutions of the chief captains from the 1381.
til the 1400. brought the factions well near to nothing. The families most
persecuted were the Albizi, Ricci, and Medici. Those houses were diverse times
spoiled, both of their men and substance, and if any of them remained in the
city, their honors and offices were taken from them. Which oppression made
that part base minded, and (as it were) utterly trodden down. Notwithstanding,
there remained in many men, a certain memory of injuries received, and a
desire to revenge them. Yet wanting power to perform their will, they kept
that desire within their breasts, secretly hidden. Those of the populer
Nobility, who peaceably governed the city, committed two errors, Error
committed by the populer nobility.
which were the causes of their ruin. The one through their insolency, which
grew by continual authority and being in office. The other, through envy
among themselves, and the long holding the state in their hands, they did not
prevent those that might offend them: but daily renewing the universal hatred
by their sinister proceedings, not remoouing the matter that might hurt and was
to be feared, were the causes that the house of Medici recovered authority.
The first of them that begun to stand up, was Giouanni, the son of Bicci. He,
become exceeding rich, and being of nature courteous, and affable, was with the
allowance of those that governed, ascended to the highest office. Whereat the
multitude so greatly rejoiced (supposing to have gotten a protector) that the
wiser sort conceived some just cause of suspicion: Advice of Nicolo Vzano
against the Medici.
because thereby they found all the old humors begun to arise. And Nicholo di
Vsano failed not to advertise the other Citizens, how dangerous a thing it was
to advance one, who had among the multitude, so much reputation: saying, it was
easy to oppress any inconvenience at the first, but letting it grow, the
remedy was hardly found. For he knew well, that in Giouanni, there were many
more excellent parts, then in Saluestro. Nicholo could not be heard of his
companions: because they envied his reputation, and sought for assistance to
oppress him. Men thus living in Florence, beset with contrary humors, (which
secretly began to boil within their breasts) Philippo Visconti second son of
Giouan Galiazzo, being by the death of his brother, become Lord of all
Lombardy, and devising upon some enterprise, desired greatly to be again owner
of Genoua, which at that present under Tomazo Frogolo lived in liberty. Yet
feared he could neither compass that nor any other thing, unless first he
published a new accord with the Florentines: the reputation whereof, (as he
thought) might bring him to satisfaction. For which purpose, he sent
Ambassadors to Florence: who being there, and persuading the league, it was
by many Citizens thought unfit to join with him, and yet they wished that the
peace which had many years continued, should still endure. For they knew what
favor and reputation the league would do him, and how small profit the city
should receive thereof. To others it was thought good, that the league should
be made, thereby to procure the Duke to enter conditions and bonds, which if
he passed, every man might discover his evil intent, and should (if he brake
the peace) the more justly make war upon him. Leage betwixt the Florentins
and the Duke of Milan.
Thus (the matter being thoroughly debated) the peace was concluded. Wherein
Philippo promised, that he would not entermedle with any thing on this side
the Rivers of Magra and Panaro. After this conclusion Philippo surprised
Brescia, and shortly after Genoua, contrary to the opinion of those that had
persuaded the peace. For they believed that Brescia had been defended by the
Venetians, and Genoua could have defended it self. And because in the league
which Philippo had made with the Doge of Genoua, he had reserved Serezana, and
other Towns on this sides Magra, with condition that if he sold them, he
then to sell them to the Genouesi, the league was broken. Besides this, he
made peace with the Legate of Bologna. Which things, altered the minds of our
Citizens, and made them (doubting new mischiefs) to look for new remedies.
These suspicions come to the ear of Filippo, either to gratify, or feel the
disposition of the Florentines, or else to abuse them, sent Ambassadors unto
Florence, and by them signified, how he marvelled much at the suspicion
conceived, and therewith offered to renounce every thing by him done, whereof
any mistrust might grow: which Ambassadors wrought none other effect, then
division of the city. For the one part, (and those that were most reputed in
the government) thought good to arm, and prevent the enemy. Notwithstanding
if Filippo stood quiet, there should be no war at all, and in the mean time,
that provision was an occasion of peace. Many others, either envying those that
governed, or fearing the war, judged that it was no wisdom, lightly to
become suspicious: neither were things by Philippo done, worthy to be
suspected. But they knew well, that to elect the Ten, and to hire soldiers,
promised war: which being taken in hand against so great a Prince, should be
the ruin of the city, without hope of any profit. For of his victories
(having Romagna in the midst) we could not receive good, nor become Princes of
that country. And of Romagna it self (by reason of the neernesse of the church)
they could not think to become owners. Notwithstanding, the authority of those
that would make preparation for war, prevailed before the other, that desired
peace. And therefore they created the Ten, hired soldiers, and imposed
Subsidies. Which proceedings (because they burdened more the less, then
greater Citizens) filled the city with sorrow, and every man blamed the
ambition and authority of the great men, accusing them; that to fulfill their
appetites, and oppress the people, they would make a war not necessary. Yet
was not the Duke come to manifest breach, but every thing was full of
suspicion. For Philippo, at the request of the Legate of Bologna (who feared
Antonio Bentiuogli banished, and remaining at the Castle Bolognese) had sent
men to that city: which being near the dominion of Florence, held the state
in mistrust. But that which most amazed every man, and gave much cause to
discover the war, was the enterprise of the Duke at Furli. Georgio Ordilaffi,
was Lord of Furli, who dying, left Tibaldo his son, under protection of
Philippo. And albeit the mother supposing the Duke to be a Tutor unfit, and
therefore sent her child to Lodouico Alidossi her father, Lord of Imola) yet
was she forced by the people to observe her husbands testament, and commit him
to the Dukes hands. Then Philippo to make himself the less suspected, and the
rather also to cover his intent, devised that the Marquess of Farrara should
send Guido Torello with some forces, to be his deputy, and take the government
of Furli. Thus came that town into the possession of Philippo, which being
known in Florence, together with the news of the soldiers come to Bologna,
made the resolution for the war the more speedy, notwithstanding it had before
great contradiction, and Giouan de Medici publicly spoke against it, saying,
Consultation in Florence.
that although he were certain of the Dukes evil disposition, yet were it
better that he should march first, the^ they go toward him: for so the war
should be justifiable, in the judgment of other princes: neither could we so
boldly ask aid, as we might after that his ambition was discovered. Also, me^
would with an other mind defend their own, the^ assault the goods of others. To
the contrary, was said, it were not good to tarry for the enemy at home, but
rather go seek him. And fortune was more friend to him that assaulteth, the^
to him that defends. Moreover with less loss (though with more charge) the
war is made far from home, then near at hand. In the end, this opinion
prevailed. And resolution was set down, that the Ten should devise some means
how the city of Furli might be recovered from the Duke. Philippo seeing that
the Florentines went about to surprise those things which he had taken in hand
to defend, set respects apart, and sent Agnolodella Pargola with great forces
to Imola, to the end, that prince, having occasion to defend his own, should
not think upon his grandchild. Agnolo arrived near Imola, (the forces of the
Florentines being also at Magdigliana) the weather frostie, and the town
diches frozen, in the night, by stealth, surprised the town, and sent Lodouico
prisoner to Milan. The Florentines seeing Imola lost, and the war discovered,
commanded their men to go unto Furli, and on every side besieged that city.
Also to the end that all the Dukes forces should not come to rescue it, they
hired the Earl Alberigo, who from his town Zagonara issued out, spoiling the
country even to the gates of Imola. Agnola della Pergola, finding he could not
with security succor Furli, by reason of the strength where our Camp lay,
thought good to besiege Zagonara, thinking that the Florentines would not lose
that place, and if they did relieve it, then of force they must abandon Furli,
and fight with disadvantage. The Dukes forces then enforced Alberigo to demand
composition, which was granted; he promising to yield the town at any time,
if within fifteen days, it were not rescued by the Florentines. This disorder
known in the Florentines Camp and in the City, and every man desirous to
prevent the enemy of that victory, occasioned them to have a greater. The
Florentines overthrown.
For their Camp being departed from Furli to succor Zagonara, and
entercountring the enemy was overthrown: not so much through virtue of the
adversary, as the unhappiness of the weather. For, our men having diverse
hours marched in the deep mire and rain, found the enemies fresh, and for
that reason by them were vanquished. Notwithstanding, in so great an overthrow
published through all Italy, there died no more then Lodouico degli Obizi, with
two others, who fallen from their horse were myred to death. All the city of
Florence at this overthrow, became sad: and chiefly the great Citizens who had
counseled the war. For they saw the enemy brave, their selves disarmed,
without friends, and the people against them: who murmured, and with injurious
words, complained of the great Impositions and Subsidies, they had paid to the
maintenance of the war taken in hand, without any cause or occasion. Saying
moreover, now they having created the Ten, to terrify the enemy, have
succored Furli, and taken it from the Duke. Thus do they bewraie their
Councels to what end they are: not to defend the liberty, but increase their
own power, which God justly has diminished. Neither have they only burdened
the city with this enterprise, but with many others: for like to this, was
that against King Ladislao. To whom will they now resort for aid? To Pope
Martine? who has been in their sight trodden upon by Braccio? To the Queen
Giouanna? she was by them abandoned, and forced to put her self upon the King
of Aragon. Besides these contumelies, they repeated all such injurious
reproues, as a people offended, could imagine. It was therefore thought good to
the Senators, to assemble a good number of Citizens, and with courteous speech
appease the humors moved in the multitude. Then Rinaldo degli Albizi, eldest
son of Masso, The speech of Rinaldo de Albizi to appeaze the people.
(who with his own virtue, and the memory of his father, aspired to the chief
honor of the city) declared at large: that it was no wisdom to judge
enterprises by their success. Because many things well devised, have had no
good end, and others evil devised, have good. Also, if evil counsels having
good success, should be commended, the same would encourage men to commit
errors, which would prove to great disadvantage of the Common weal: for it
ever falls out, that evil counsels be unfortunate. In like manner they erred,
to blame a wise counsel, that has no desired end: for thereby they
discouradge the Citizens to counsel the city, and say frankly, what they
knew or understood. Then he showed the necessity of that war, and how if it
had not been begun in Romagna, it should have been in Toscana. But since it
pleased God that their forces be overthrown, the loss should be the less, if
the enterprise were not abandoned. For if they would still show their faces to
Fortune, and endeavor themselves to recover that was lost, neither should they
find any loss, nor the Duke any victory. They ought also not to repine at
the charge or Impositions that should be laid upon them, because those paiments
which they had made, were reasonable, and the rest that should after be imposed
would not be so great. For less preparation is required for them that defend,
then those that will offend. In the end, he persuaded them to imitate their
ancestors, who by being in every adversity courageous, did defend themselves
against all Princes whatsoever. The Citizens encouraged with the authority of
this man, Bracc^o. Piccinino.
enterteined the Earl Oddo son of Braccio, with whom they joined Nicholo
Piccinino, brought up under Braccio; a man most esteemed of all those that
served under his Ensign, and under them they appointed other leaders. Also of
their own forces lately broken, some Captains of horse men remained. Moreover
they elected twenty Citizens to impose new Subsidies, who being encouraged
with seeing the greatest Citizens oppressed by the late overthrow, imposed upon
them without respect. This imposition much grieved the great Citizens, yet not
to declare themselves unwilling, at the first, showed no private offense: but
generally blamed the matter, giving their advise, that the Impositions might
cease; which being known to many, took no effect in the Councels: and
thereupon to occasion these repiners feel the smart of their counsel, and
make the matter more odious, they ordered, that the Imposers should proceed
with all severity, and have authority to kill any man that should withstand
the public officers. Whereof followed many foul accidents, by murdering and
hurting of the Citizens. In so much, as the factions came to blood: and every
wise man feared future mischiefs. Because, the great men (who were used to
respect) could not endure to be laid hand upon: and others were not content
that every man should equally be burdened. Many of the chief Citizens
therefore assembled themselves, and concluded, that it behooved them to take the
government into their hands: because their small diligence had given head, and
suffered the public proceedings to be reproved: allowing overmuch boldness
in those that were wont to be heads of the multitude. Having to this effect
consulted, they determined many times to meet all together; and in the church
of S. Steffano assembled more then 70. Citizens, with the license and allowance
of Lorenzo Ridolfi, and Francesco Gianfi gliazzi, who at that time were of the
Senate. To this conuention, Giouanni de Medici came not, either because he was
as a suspect, uncalled, or that he would not (being of contrary opinion)
appear. But Rinaldo delli Albizi, as mouth of that company, Rinaldo di Albizi.
discoursed the estate of the city, and how by their negligence it was come to
the hand of the multitude, from whom in the year 1381. by their ancestors it
was taken: putting them in mind of the iniquity that reigned in that state,
from the year 77. till 81. And how since that time, till this present, some had
their fathers slain, some their grandfathers, and now were returned to the
selfsame perils, and the city fallen to the like disorders; because the
multitude had already at their pleasure imposed Subsidies: and would ere long,
(if the same were not by a greater force or better order withstood) appoint the
Magistrates. Which being brought to pass, the multitude would usurp their
places, and ruin that state, which had been with much glory of the city
forty and two years continued: and Florence should be governed either
casually, under the will of the multitude (so as one part should live
lycentiously, the other daungerously) or under the commandment of some one
that shall make him self Prince of all. Wherefore he assured them, that every
man that loved his country, and his own honor, was constrained to beware: and
put them in mind of the virtue of Bardo Mancini, who with the ruin of the
Alberti: saved the city from those perils wherein it then was: and that
occasion of boldness in the multitude, proceeded of the large Squittini, which
were by their negligence made: which was the cause also that the Palace was
filled with new men and people of base condition. He therefore concluded that
the only remedy was, to yield the government to the great Citizens, and remove
the less Artificers from their authority: reducing them from 14. to 7.
companies. Which should be a mean that the multitude could have in the
Councels less authority: as well in respect, that the number of them were
diminished, as that the great men should have most power, who for the old
enmity did disfavor the multitude, affirming likewise that to know how to
employ men, according to the time was great wisdom. For as their ancestors
used the multitude to oppress the insolency of the great men (who thereby
became humble and the multitude insolent) so it were now fit to bridle the
insolency thereof, with the aid of the great men. And for compassing of these
matters they might resort either to subtlety or force. For some of them being
of the Ten, by that color might bring men secretly into the city. This
counsel given by Rinaldo, was by every man allowed. And Nicholo of Vzano among
other, said; that all things alleged by Rinaldo were true, and the remedies
good and certain, if the same might be done without manifest division of the
city: which would come to pass if Giouan de Medici, were not persuaded from
them. For he being on our side, the multitude without head and force, could
not offend. But if he would not consent, without arms it could not be. And with
arms it were dangerous, for either they should not prevail, or not enjoy the
victory. Also, modestly he reduced to their memories, his former admonitions,
and how they refused to prevent these difficulties, when they might. But now
the time served not to do it, without hazarding a greater mischief, and
therefore, as the uttermost refuge, it behooved to gain his favor. Commission
therefore was granted for Rinaldo, to go unto Giouanni, and persuade him to be
of their mind. This Gentleman performed his Commission, and with the best
reasons he was able, persuaded him to enter with them into this action, and
that he would not for the love of the multitude become insolent, to the ruin
of the state, and city. Whereto Giouanni answered, The answer of Giouanni di
Medicito Rinaldo.
that he thought it the office of a wise and good Citizen, not to alter the
accustomed orders of the city, because there was nothing that so much offended
men, as alteration, since thereby many be offended, and where many live
discontented, some evil accident is daily to be looked for. Also he thought,
that this their resolution might work two effects very dangerous. The one by
giving the honors to those, who never before having them, would not much
esteem them, and should have the less occasion to complain, if they never
had them. The other by taking the honors from those that were used to have
them, should make them unquiet till they were restored. And so shall the
injury done to the one part, be greater, then the benefit, which the other
part could thereby receive. Thus shall the author of this change, win few
friends, and many enemies: and these will be more ready to offend him, the^ the
others to defend him. For me^ are more naturally inclined to revenge an injury,
the^ be thankful for a good turn: because this brings loss, but that
promises profit and pleasure. Then turning his face toward Rinaldo, said.
And you sir, if you remember matters passed and with what subtilties men walk
within this city, your self would be more low in these resolutions. For the
giver of that counsel, so soon as with your forces he has taken away the
authority of the people, would again take the same from you, by the aid of
those, who by this mean of injury, will become your foes. And it will befall
to you as it did to Benedetto Alberti, who (through the persuasions of him that
loved him not) consented to the ruin of Georgio Scali and Tomazo Strozzi: and
shortly after, by the selfsame men that persuaded him, was sent into exile.
He therefore wished him more naturally to think upon matters, and be willing
to follow his father, who having love of the multitude, cared not to offend a
few men evil disposed. It was then ordained that whosoever had to pay half
a Florine for Subsidy, should pay it, or not: as himself pleased. And
besides all men indebted, should for the day of the council go free, with out
molestation of his creditors. In the end he concluded, that for his own part,
he would leave the city in that order and estate, it presently remained.
These matters thus handled, were understood abroad, and the same gave great
reputation to Giouanni and hatred to the other citizens. Nevertheless he
discontinued all affairs, the rather to discourage those, that under his
favor intended new practices. Also, in all his comunication, he let every
man to understand that he would not nourish, but extinguish factions. And for
himself, he desired nothing but the union of the city: yet were many that
followed him, therewith discontented. For diverse of them did persuade him to be
in those matters more quick: of which number was Alamanno de medici, who being
fierce of nature, ceased not to solicit him to persecute their enemies, and
favor friends, blaming his coldness, and slow manner of proceeding. Which was
(as he alleged) occasion that their foes without respect, practiced against
him. Which one day would take effect, with the ruin of his house and friends.
To the same effect, was he encouraged, by Cosimo his son. Yet
notwithstanding all these reasons to him revealed or prognosticated, he stood
firm in his intent, and by that means the faction became discovered, and the
city in manifest division. At that time were in the Palace two Chauncellors,
one called Ser Martino, and the other Ser Pagolo. This favored the part of
Vzano, that of Medici. Rinaldo seeing that Giouanni refused to concur with
them, thought fit to deprive Ser Martino of his office, hoping afterward to
find the Palace more fuourable. That practice foreseen by the adversaries,
Martino was defended; and Pagalo with sorrow and injury of his friends
removed: which had presently wrought bad effects, if the present war had not
been, and the city by the overthrow received at Zagonara, terrified. During
the time that these matters were managed in Florence, Agnola della Pergola had
with the Dukes forces taken all the towns which the Florentines possessed in
Romagna (Castaro and Modigliana excepted) some of them being lost by the
weakness of the place, and others by the default of those, that had them in
guarde. In the surprising of these towns, two notable things appeared. The
first, how much the virtue of men even to their enemies, is acceptable. The
other, how greatly cowardice and fainte heart, is contemned. Biagio of Milan,
was Captain of the fortress called Montepetroso. Biagio of Milan.
He being environed with fire and enemies, not finding any means how to defend
his charge, or escape with life, cast over the wall (where no fire yet burned)
certain clothes and straw, and upon the same his own two children, and said
to his enemies; Take you here those goods which fortune has given me, and you
have power to bereave me of, but my riches of mind wherein glory and my
honor lies, neither will I give them, nor you can take them from me. The
enemies ran to save the poor children, and offered him roapes and ladders to
convey himself down safe. But he refused all succors, choosing rather to die
in fire, then receive a life from the enemies of his country. An example truly
like to those, of the ancient time so highly commended. And is the more
notable, that such resolutions are but rare. The children were by the enemies
restored to all things that were theirs, and could be found: and with great
care conveyed to their friends, to whom their country also was no less kind.
For (during their lives) they were publicly relieved and maintained. The
contrary happened in Galeata, where Zanobi di Pino was Podesta. Zanobi Pino.
For he without any defense, yielded his charge to the enemy: and besides
persuaded Agnolo to abandon the Alps of Romagna, and come into the hills of
Toscana, where he might make war with less peril, and more profit. But
Agnolo could not endure the cowardice and base mind of that man, and therefore
gave him prisoner to his servants, who in contempt, and disdain allowed him no
more food, but painted cards, saying, by that means they would make him of a
Guelfo to become a Ghibellino. But within a few days, Pino pined to death. In
this mean time the Earl Oddo together with Nicholo Piccinino was entered into
the vale of Lamona, to reduce the Lord of Faenza to the friendship of the
Florentines, or at the least to empeach Agnola della Pergola in the spoil of
Romagna. Yet by reason that vale is strong, and the country people warlike, it
chanced that Oddo was slain, and Nicholo Piccinino led prisoner to Faenza.
But fortune would, that the Florentines obtained that by this loss, which if
they had won the victory should percase never have been compassed. For
Nicholo being prisoner, wrought so with the Lord of Faenza and his mother, that
they by his persuasion became friends to the Florentines. By this league
Nicholo Piccinino was delivered, but followed not that council he gave to
others. For whiles he co^moned with the cities that enterteined him, either for
that the conditions he had made seemed over mean, or that he hoped of better
elsewhere, suddeinly without leave taking, departed from Arezzo where he
lodged, and went into Lombardy, and there took pay of the Duke. Piccinino
revolted from the league.
The Florentines by this accident became fearful: and being dismayed with
their charges lost, thought they could not alone maintain the war, and
therefore sent Ambassadors to the Venetians, desiring them while the enterprise
was easy, to join against one, who being suffered to grow, might become as
dangerous to them as to the Florentines. To the same enterprise also Francesco
Carmignuola did persuade them, who was in those days accounted a man of war
most excellent, and had been sometimes a soldier under the Duke, yet at that
time, rebelled against him. The Venetians stood doubtful, not knowing how much
they might trust Carmignuola, fearing that the enmity betwixt the Duke and him
was but fained. They thus standing doubtful, it happened that the Duke
procured one of the servants of Carmignuola to poison his master: which poison
not being strong enough, killed him not, but brought him to extremity. This
being known to the Venetians, cleared all suspicion: and the Florentines
following their request, the league was made betwixt them, either party
binding himself to make war at their common charge: and that whatsoever were
gotten in Lombardy should be the Venetians, and whatsoever were possessed in
Romagna, should be the Florentines, and Carmignuola to continue General of the
league. Carmignuola general for the league.
Then was the war by mean of this league brought into Lombardy, and by
Carmignuola governed with so great virtue, that in few months he had taken
many towns from the Duke: together with the City of Brescia, the winning
whereof (in those days, and in those wars) was accounted marvelous. This
war was continued five years and the Citizens become weary of the
Impositions already past, agreed to renew them, and provided the same might be
imposed according to the value of every man's wealth. In this Imposition, it
fell out, that many mighty Citizens were sore charged. And therefore, before
the law passed, it became of them misliked. Only Giouanni di Medici openly
did commend it, by which commendation, the law passed. And because in the
excution thereof, every man's goods were charged (which the Florentines called
Accastare) the Imposition was called Catasto. This law partly bridled the
tirannie of the mightier Citizens, being thereby restrained from oppression of
their inferiors, and their threatenings and counsels could not hold them
silent, as before they might. That Imposition therefore was by the multitude
willingly, but by the mighty citizens, very unwillingly, received.
Notwithstanding (as it ever happens) that men be never satisfied; but having
the thing they wish for, desire an other: so this people not content with this
equality of Imposition by law, required that no respect should be had to time
past, but desired to examine how much the great men (according to the Catasto)
had paid too little, because they would have them to be charged as themselves
had before been; who paying more then they ought, were forced to sell their
possessions. This demand, did more terrify the great men, then the Catasto,
Catasto.
therefore they ceased not to find fault, affirming it was most iniust, that the
imposition should extend to their moueables, which many times were one day
possessed, and the next day lost. And moreover many men had money so secretly
kept, that the Catasto could not find it. Adding thereto, that for service of
the state, they omitted their private business, and therefore ought be the less
charged. For traveling in their persons, it was no reason that the city
should employ both their goods and their industry, and of other men take only
their goods. The others (to whom the Catasto contented) did answer that if the
goods moveable did vary, the Impositions might also vary, and so that
inconvenience was remedied. And for goods concealed or hidden, thereof it was
not needful to make account, for of such moneys as are not occupied to profit,
no reason would they should pay. And if they would employ them, then should
they thereby discover them. Moreover, if they liked no longer to use their
industry for the Common weal, they might at their pleasures leave those
pains, and that travel. For the state should find other good Citizens willing
to help and serve, both with their counsel and substance. Also the
government carried therewith so many commodities and honors, as the same might
suffice them that governed, without deteining their impositions. But the grief
lay not where they alleged. For it grieved them that they could not make war
without their own loss, being to contribute to the charge as others did. As
if this way had been before found, the war with King Ladislao should not have
been then, nor this war with the Duke now. Both which wars were made to
enrich the Citizens, and not for necessity. These humors stirred, were
appeased by Giouan de Medici, declaring that it was not well done, to call
again matters passed, but rather to foresee future events. And if the
Impositions before time were iniust, then ought they to thank God for that
war, whereby they were made just, and that this order might serve to reunite,
not to divide the city: as it would, if passed Impositions were called in
question, to make the present seasement: because whosoever is content with a
reasonable victory, does best, seeing they that be enforced to pay for many
pardons, do thereby become desperate. With these or like words, he appeased
the humors, and the comparing of the old Impositions, with the new. The war
with the Duke yet continued, but shortly after a peace was made at Ferrara, by
mediation of the Popes Legate. The conditions whereof, were by the Duke at the
beginning broken. So that they of the league took arms again, and joining
battle with the Duke at Maclouio, they overthrew him. After which overthrow,
the Duke moved new communication of peace, whereto the Venetians and
Florentines consented. These because they suspected the Venetians, and thought
they spent much to make others mighty. The other, for that, since the
overthrow, they perceived Carmignuola to proceed slowly, and therefore feared
to repose any trust in him. The peace therefore was concluded the year 1428
whereby the Florentines reouered the towns lost in Romagna, Peace betwixt the
League and the Duke.
and Brescia remained in the hands of the Venetians. Besides these, the Duke
gave them Bergamo with the country thereto belonging. In this war the
Florentines spent three millions and five thousand ducats. But the Venetians
gained land and force: and they poverty and division. The peace thus made
abroad, the war at home began. And the great Citizens not enduring the
Catasto, nor knowing by what mean to be free from it, devised to make the law
to have more enemies, thereby to have companions to repress it. Then they
declared to the officers of the Imposition, that the law commanded them also
to seize the Towns subject, to see, if among them remained any Florentines
goods. Thereupon all subjects were commanded within a certain time to bring
in bills of their goods. Then the inhabitants of Volterra sent unto the Senate
to complain of that matter, insomuch that the officers put xviii. of them in
prison. This made the Volterrani much offended, yet for the respect they had to
their prisoners, they rebelled not. At this time Giouanni de Medici fell sick,
and knowing his disease mortal, called unto him his sons Cosimo and Lorenzo,
and said unto them: The speech of cosimo de Medici at his death.
I think now to have lived so long, as at my birth God and nature had
appointed. I dye content, because I leave you rich, healthie, and in estate (if
you follow my footesteps) to live in Florence honorably, and favored of all
men: For, there is nothing that makes me dye so contented, as to remember,
that I have never offended any man, but rather (so far as I could) pleasured
all men. So do I persuade you (if you will live securely) to take of the State
no more then by the laws, and by men is given you, which shall never bring
with it, either envy or peril. For that which is won by violence, not that
which is given freely, does make men hated. And you shall find many coveting an
other man's, to lose their own, and before that loss, live in continual
disquiet of mind. With these rules among so many enemies, and contrarieties of
opinions, I have not only maynteyned, but also increased my reputation in this
city. Even so, if you follow my course, you shall in like sort maynteyne and
augment your credit. But when you do otherwise, look that your end shall be no
more fortunate then theirs, who have ruyned themselves, and undone their
houses. Shortly after these words pronounced, he took leave of life, and was
much lamented by the greatest number of Citizens, for so his excellent virtues
deserved. This Giouanni was charitable, and accustomed to give alms not only
to them that asked, but also many times unasked. He bestowed relief on the
poor, where need required. He loved every man, praising the good, and pitying
the evil. He never desired offices, yet had he them all, he went not at any
time to the Palace uncalled, he loved peace, and shunned war, he relieved
men in adversity, and furthered them in prosperity. He meddled not with
public extortion, but increased the common profit. He was in office courteous,
of no great eloquence, but singular wise. His complexion seemed melancholy, yet
was he in conversation pleasant and merry. He died rich in treasure, but more
rich of love, and good report: which inheritance as well in goods of fortune as
of mind, was by Cosimo not only preserved, but also enlarged. The Volterani
being weary of imprisonment, promised to condescend to that which was
demanded. They then being delivered, and returned to Volterra, found the time
come for the election of new Priori. Among whom was chosen one just man, a base
fellow, yet of credit among the multitude, and was in the number of those that
had been prisoners in Florence. Volterra rebelled.
He being moved with the injury offered both in public and private by the
Florentines, was encouraged by one Giouanni a noble man (who also sat in
office with him) to stir the people with the authority of the Priori and his
own credit, to take the town from the Florentines, and make himself Prince
thereof. By whose persuasion this Giusto (for so he was called) took arms,
ransacked the town, Giusto usurped Volterra.
imprisoned the Captain of the Florentines, and made him self by consent of
the people, Lord thereof. This new matter happened in Volterra, greatly
displeased the Florentines. Yet having lately made peace with the Duke, they
imagined a time was come to recover it. And not omitting opportunity, they
sodeinly sent thither Rinaldo de gli Albizi, and Palla Strozzi, as their
Comissaries. Giusto in the mean space, supposing the Florentines would assault
him, prayed aid of the Sanesi and Lucchesi. The Sanesi denied him, saying they
were in league with the Florentines. And Pagolo Guinigi Lord of Lucca, Pagolo
Guinigi Lord of Lucca.
to recover the favor of the Florentine people (which in the Dukes wars he
feared to have lost) did not only refuse to aid Giusto, but also sent his
messenger prisoner to Florence. These commissaries in the mean space, to come
unlooked for of the Volterani, assembled all their men of Arms, and in the
nether Valderno, and the Province of Pisa, leauyed many footmen, from whence
they marched to Volterra. Neither did Giusto for being abandoned of his
neighbors, nor the assault of the Florentines, abandon himself: but trusting
to the strength of the Site, and the greatness of the Town, prepared for
defense. There was at that time in Volterra, one called Arcolano, brother to
Giouanni, who had persuaded Giusto to take the government, a man among the
Nobility of good reputation. He, assembling his friends, declared how God by
this accident had supplied the necessity of their City. For now if they were
pleased to take arms, remove Giusto from the Senate, and restore the City to
the Florentines, they should thereby become chief of their City, and
continue their ancient privileges. These men consenting to the enterprise,
went to the Palace where this Lord Giusto remained: some of them also being
left below, Arcolano with three others went up, and finding him with some
other Citizens, drew him aside, as though he had to speak with him in some
earnest matter, so enterteyning him from chamber to chamber, till he came to
the place where the rest of the company remained. Yet were they not so
suddein, but that Giusto drew his sword, and before himself was slain, hurt
two of them. Notwithstanding, Giusto slain.
in the end unable to resist so many, was murdered, and cast out of the
Palace. Then all the rest of the conspiracy with Arcolano took Arms, and
gave the Town to the Commissaries for the Florentines, who were with Soldiers
near at hand. They, without other capitulation, entered the Town, whereby the
Volterani made their condition worse then before. For among other things,
Volterra recovered by the Florentines.
they dismembered the greater part of the Country, and was reduced to
Vicariato. Thus Volterra, as it were at one instant lost, and recovered, no
occasion of new war remained, had not the ambition of men been cause thereof.
There served long time the Florentines in their wars against the Duke of
Milan, one called Nicholo Fortibraccio, son to one of the sisters of Braccio
di Perugia. He after the peace made, was by the Florentines discharged, and at
such time as this chance happened at Volterra was lodged at Fucecchio, whereby
the Commissaries in that enterprise employed him and his Soldiers. It was
supposed that at such time as Rinaldo traveled with him in that war, he
persuaded Nicholo under some feigned quarrel to assault the Lucchesi, saying,
that if he would go against Lucca, he should be made General of the journey.
Volterra thus surprised, and Nicholo returned home to Fucecchio, either by
persuasion of Rinaldo, or of his own will, in November, the year 1429. with
300. horse, and 300. footmen, surprised Ruoti and Compito, Castles belonging
to the Lucchesi, and after came into the Country, and there made great spoil.
The news of this enterprise published at Florence, many people assembled in
diverse places of the City, and the greater number wished that Lucca might be
assaulted. The great Citizens that favored the enterprise were those of the
faction of Medici, and with them joined Rinaldo, thereto persuaded, either
because he thought the enterprise profitable to the commonweal, or else for
his own ambition, hoping to have the honor of the victory. Those that
disfauoured the attempt, were Nicholo de Vzano, and his followers. And it
seems a thing incredible, that so great contrariety should be in one City,
touching the making of a war. For those Citizens, and that people, who after
ten years of peace blamed the war against the Duke Philippo, for defense
of their liberty: now after so great expenses, and so much affliction of the
City, withal earnestly desired to make a new war against Lucca, and to
usurp the liberty of others. On the other side, those that desired the first
war, found fault with this motion, so greatly did the opinions of men alter
with time; for the multitude seems more ready to take from others, then
keep their own. Also, men are more moved with hope of winning, then fear of
losing: For this fear is not believed, till it be near at hand, but that
hope, is hoped for, although far off. The people of Florence was full of
hope, both by the victories they had obtained, and by letters sent unto
Fortebraccio from the Rettori near to Lucca. For the Deputies of Pescia and of
Vico did write, that if they might have leave to receive those Castles, they
would be delivered to them, and by that means all the Country of Lucca should
be gained. Besides these good news, the Lord of Lucca sent his Ambassador to
Florence, to complain of the spoils committed by Nicholo, desiring the
Senate, not to move war against their neighbors, and a City that had ever
been friend to the Florentines. This Ambassador was called Iacopo Viuiani. He
not long before had been kept prisoner with Pagolo for a conspiracy against
him: whereof although he were guilty, yet was his life saved. And Pagolo
supposing that Iacopo had likewise forgotten the injury, put him in trust. But
Iacopo remembering more the peril he had passed, then the benefit he received,
being arrived in Florence, secretly encouraged the Citizens to proceed in the
enterprise: which encouragement, joined to other hope, was the cause that the
Senate assembled a Council, wherein were four hundred ninety eight
Citizens, before whom, by the principal men of the City, the matter was
debated. Among the chief that persuaded the journey (as is before said) was
Rinaldo, A war against Lucca persuaded by Ri. de All^^zi.
who alleged the profit that might ensue of victory. He also declared the
occasion of the enterprise, and how the Lucchesi were abandoned by the
Venetians and the Duke. And that the Pope (being busied in the affairs of the
Kingdom) could not succor them. Thereto he remembered how easy it was to
win the City, being in subjection to one Citizen, whereby it had lost that
natural strength and ancient care to defend the liberty. So that, either by
mean of the people, who studied to drive out the Tyrant, or the Tyrants fear
of them, the success was not to be doubted. He likewise laid before them the
injuries which that Lord had done to our Commonwealth, and his evil
disposition toward the same; And how dangerous a thing it were if the Pope or
the Duke should make war, concluding, that no enterprise attempted by the
people of Florence, was ever more easy or more just. The perswation of Ni. de
Vzano to the contrary.
Against this persuasion, Nicholo de Vzano said, that Florence did never take
in hand any thing more unjust, nor more perilous, nor whereof more danger
might follow. First, they should go about to offend a City affectionate to
the Guelfi, and such a one as had ever been friend to the people of Florence,
and had with peril to it self many times received the Guelfi, when they durst
not abide in their own Country. And by the memorial of our proceedings, it
cannot be found, that Lucca being free, did ever offend Florence: but the
offense at any time done, was committed by those that usurped, as heretofore by
Castruccio, and now by this man, which defaults cannot be imputed to the
City, but the Tyrants. And therefore if the war might be made upon the
Tyrant, and not the City, the displeasure should be the less. But because
that could not be, he might not consent that a City, beforetime a friend,
should be spoiled of her substance. Yet since at this day, men live as though of
right or wrong none account is to be made, he would leave to speak thereof,
and think only upon the profit of the City. His opinion therefore was, that
those things might be called profitable, which would not lightly procure
loss. Wherefore he knew not how any man could call that enterprise
profitable, where the loss was certain, and the gain doubtful. The certain
losses were the charges it carried with it, which seemed so great, as would
terrify any peaceable City, much more ours, having been by long wars
wearied. The profit of the enterprise, was the possession of Lucca, which he
confessed to be great; Yet were they to consider the lets thereof: and they
seemed to him so great, as he thought the success impossible. Neither could
he believe that the Venetians and Philippo were therewith pleased: Because the
Venetians consent, was only to seem thankful, having lately with the
Florentines won a great Dominion. The other would be glad, that in a new war
we should spend more treasure: so as worn, and wearyed on every side, we
might after be the more easily annoyed. Also, there would not want means for
him, even in the best hope of victory, to succor the Lucchesi, either
covertly with money, or with cassing of bands, and sending soldiers as
adventurers to aid them. He therefore persuaded that the enterprise might
stay, and suffer them live with the Tyrant, whereby they should have the more
enemies. For there was no way so apt to subdue the City, as to suffer it
continue under a Tyrant, and be by him assaulted or weakened. This matter
wisely handled, the City would be brought in terms, that the Tyrant not able
to hold it, nor knowing how to govern it self, should of force fall in our
bozome. Nevertheless, seeing his words were not heard, he would prognosticate
that they would make a war, wherein much should be spent, many hazards made,
and in stead of surprising Lucca, deliver it from the Tyrant, and procure that
City which before was subject and weak, to become a town free, and full of
displeasure: yea with time, an obstacle to the honor of the Florentine
commonweal. This enterprise thus persuaded, and dissuaded, they begun (as the
custom is) to practice with men secretly for the winning of their good wills,
so as only 98. persons did speak against it. Then the resolution set down,
and the Ten elected for government of the war, The war of Lucca resolved.
they enterteyned soldiers both on horseback and foot. Astore Gianni, and
Rinaldo de gli Albizi were appointed Generals, and they agreed, that Nicholo
Fortibraccio should have the government of the Towns, if the enterprise took
success. The Generals with the Armies being arrived within the territory of
Lucca, divided their forces. Astore went into the plain, toward Ca Maggiore
and Pietrasanta: And Rinaldo, toward the Mountains, thinking, that the
Country being spoiled, the City would be easily taken. The attempt of these
men proved unfortunate, not because they surprised no Towns, but for the
dishonor committed by one of them in the service: For true it is, that Astore
Gianni gave great occasions of his own dishonor. Near unto Pietrasanta,
there is a Vale called Serauezeza, rich, and full of inhabitants, who hearing
the General was come, presented them selves: desiring him to receive them for
faithful servants to the people of Florence. Astore seemed to accept the
offer, and after caused his Soldiers to possess all the passages, and strong
places of the Vale: then commanding all the inhabitants to assemble in the
principal Church, and there willed his men to take them prisoners, sack them,
Cruelty of the Florentine General.
and spoil all the Country most cruelly: not sparing the sacred places, but
without respect, abusing as well Virgins, as married women. The manner of these
proceedings being known in Florence, offended not only the Magistrates, but
the whole City also. Some few of the Sarauezesi, who escaped the hands of
the General, ran to Florence, telling in every street, and to every man their
miseries, and were by many Citizens encouraged, either because they desired to
have the General punished, thinking him indeed an evil man, or else for that
they knew him not to favor their faction. The complaint of the Sarauezesi.
So that the Sarauezesi were brought before the ten, where one of them
stepped forth, and spoke to this effect. Sure we are (my good Lords) that our
words should find belief, and compassion, if your Lordships did know in what
sort your General has used our Country, and how we have been by him handled.
Our Vale (as we hope your memorials do make mention) did always love the
faction Guelfa, and has been many times a faithful receptacle for your
Citizens, when flying persecution of the Ghibilini, they came thither. Our
ancestors, and we also, have ever adored the name of this noble common weal,
being the head and chief of that sect. So long as the Lucchesi were Guelfi,
we willingly obeyed their government, but since they submitted themselves to a
Tyrant, (who has abandoned his old friends, and followed the Ghibilini) rather
by compulsion, then voluntarily, we have obeyed him. And God knows, how often
we have prayed for occasion, whereby to show our zeal to the ancient
faction. But alas how blind are men in their desires? that which we wished for
our help, is now become our harm. For so soon as we heard your General
marched toward us, we went, not as enemies to encounter him, but (as our
ancestors were wont) to yield into his hand our Country and fortunes: hoping
that in him, although there were not the mind of a Florentine, yet should we
find him a man. We beseech your Lordships to pardon us, for our extremity is
so much, as more may not be endured, which is the cause we make bold to speak
thus plainly. This your General has not of a man more then his presence, nor
of a Florentine any thing save the name: but may be called a mortal plague, a
cruel beast, and as horrible a monster, as by any wrighter can be described.
For he having assembled us in our Temple, under pretense to talk with us, has
made us his prisoners: spoiling the whole country, burning the houses, robbing
the inhabitants, sacking their goods, beating and murdering the men, forcing
the Virgins, yea, pulling them from the hands of their Mothers, made them the
pleasures of his soldiers. If for any injury done to the people of Florence or
him, we had deserved so great a punishment, or if we had armed our selves
against him, and been taken, then should we have had less cause to complain,
yea, we would rather have accused our selves, confessing, that either for
injury or pride, we had so merited to be handled. But being disarmed, and
freely offering ourselves, then to rob us, and with so great despite and
ignomie to spoil us, we think it strange, and are enforced before your
Lordships to lay down our grief. And albeit we might fill all Lombardy with
offense, and with reproach of this City, publish our injuries through all
Italy, yet would we not, lest thereby to blemish so honest, so honorable, and
so compassionate a common weal, with the dishonestie and cruelty of one
wicked Citizen, whose avarice before our ruin, was partly known unto us. And
we intended to strain our selves to satisfy his greedy mind, which has
neither measure nor bottom. But since our gifts come too late, we think good to
resort to your Lordships, beseeching the same to relieve the misfortune of your
subjects, to the end, that other men may not be afraid to yield them selves to
your devotion. If our infinite miseries cannot move you, yet let the fear of
Gods ire persuade you, who has seen the Churches sacked and burnt, and our
people betrayed in them. These words pronounced, they presently fell down
prostrate upon the ground, weeping, and desiring their Lordships, that their
goods and country might be restored, and that (though the women's honors could
not be recovered) yet the Wives might be delivered to their Husbands, and the
Children to their Fathers. This heavy case being before reported, and now by
the lively voice of those afflicted men confirmed, did much move the
Magistrates: and without delay, they revoked Astore, Astore condemned and
Rislandred.
who after was condemned, and admonished. Then was there Inquisition made for
the goods of the Serauezesi, and so much as could be found, was restored. For
the rest, they were in time diverse ways satisfied. Rinaldo de gli Albizi, was
likewise defamed, for having made the war, not for the profit of the people
of Florence, but his own. He was also charged that so soon as he became
General, the desire of surprising Lucca was forgotten, because he sought no
further then to spoil the country, fill his pastures with cattle, and furnish
his houses with the goods of others. Moreover, that his own share of the
booty contented him not, but he also bought the private spoils of his
soldiers. So that of a General, he was become a Merchaunt. These slanders
come to his own hearing, moved his honest and honorable mind more, then they
ought to have done. In so much, as he became therewith so amazed, that taking
offense against the Magistrates and Citizens, without delay or leave taken, he
returned to Florence, and presenting himself to the Ten, said: The speech of
Ri. in his purgation.
He knew well, how great difficulty and peril there was in serving a loose
people, and a City divided. For the one is credulous of every rumor, the
other, punishes no evil doings, rewards not the good, and blames the
indifferent; so that no man commends him that is victorious: For as much, as
his fellows for envy, and his foes for hatred, will persecute him.
Notwithstanding, himself had never for fear of undeserved blame, omitted to
perform an action that promised a certain good to his country. But true it
was, that the dishonestie of the present slanders had oppressed his patience,
and made him change nature. Wherefore he besought the Magistrates, to be from
thence-foorth more ready to defend their Citizens, to the end, they might be
likewise more ready to labor for their country. And although that in
Florence no triumph was granted, yet might they, at the least defend them
from ignominious reproach, and remember that they them selves were also
Citizens of the same town, and that to them selves every hour the like might
happen: whereby they should understand how great grief false slanders might
breed in the minds of men of integrity. The Ten as time would serve,
labored to appease him, and committed the care thereof to Neri di Gino, and to
Alamanno Saluiati: who leaving to spoil the country of Lucca, with their
Camp, approached the Town. And because the season was cold, they stayed at
Campanuole. Where it seemed to the General that time was lost: and desirous to
besiege the Town, by reason of the evil weather, the Soldiers would not
thereto consent. Notwithstanding, that the Ten did solicit them to the
siege, and would accept none excuse at all. At that time, Filippo Brunelsco.
there was in Florence an Architector, called Filippo Brunellesco, of whose
handie-worke our City is full: In so much, that after death, he deserved to
have his Image of Marble, erected in the chief Church of Florence, with
Letters, to testify his great virtue. This man declared, how Lucca
considering the site of the City, and the passage of the River Serchio,
might be drowned. And persuaded them (so far as the ten gave commission)
that this experiment should be tried, yet thereof followed nothing, but
disorder to our camp, and surety of the Lucchesi: for the Lucchesi advanced
their land, and then in the night brake the sluice of that ditch whereby the
water was conducted: so that the ground toward Lucca being mounted, the water
could not enter, and the ditch whereby the water should pass being broken,
caused the river to reuert toward the plain, by mean whereof the Camp was
forced to remove, and could not approach the town. This enterprise, by means
aforesaid prevented, the ten newly elected, sent Giouanni Guicciardini for
their General. He, with all speed possible, besieged the City. The Lord
thereof, finding himself environed with enemies, and encouraged by Anthonio
del Rosso (who there remained as Ambassador for the Sanesi) sent unto the Duke
of Milan Saluestro Trenta, and Lodouico Bonuisi. They in the behalf of their
Lord, The Lucchesi pray aid of the Duke of Milan.
desired the Dukes aid, but finding him cold, secretly desired him to grant
them soldiers, and in recompense thereof, they promised to deliver into his
hands their Lord, with the possession of their City: Assuring him, that if
he did not accept this offer, their Lord would give the Town to the
Florentines, who with great promises, required to have it at his hand.
Francesco Sforsa sent to relieve Lucca.
The fear which the Duke conceived thereof, caused him to lay aside all
respects: and gave order, that the Earl Francesco Sforza, his chief Captain,
should openly ask him leave to make a journey to the Kingdom of Napoli. Which
being obtained, he with his forces, went unto Lucca, although that he knew the
practice was mistrusted, and that the Florentines had sent to the Earl
Boccacino Alamanni their friend, to prevent it. The Earl Francesco being
arrived at Lucca, the Florentines retired their Camp to Librafatta, and the
Earl presently besieged Pescia, where Pagolo da Diacetto was Governor: who
being rather counseled by fear, then any other passion, fled unto Pistoia.
And if that town had not been by Giouanni Malauolti defended, it had been
presently lost. The Earl then after one assault retired thence, and surprised
Borgo a Buggiano, and burned Stiliano, a Castle near thereunto. The
Florentines seeing these ruins, resorted unto those helps which oftentimes
had before saved them: well knowing, that against mercinarie soldiers, when
force prevails not, corruption may: and therefore proffered unto the Earl
certain money, to the end he should not only depart, but also deliver the
town into their hands. The Earl supposing that more money could not be had of
the Lucchesi, was contented to take of those that could give it. Wherefore he
concluded with the Florentines, not to deliver them Lucca, (because with his
honesty he could not so do) but so soon as he should receive fifty thousand
ducats, he would abandon the enterprice. This bargain being made, to the end
the people of Lucca might excuse him to the Duke, he practiced with them to
drive out their Lord. At that time (as is before said) Antonio Rosso Ambassador
of Siena was at Lucca. Pagolo Lord of Lucca deposed.
He with the authority of the Earl, practiced with the Citizens the
destruction of Pagolo. The chief of this conspiracy were Piero Cennanni, and
Giouanni da Chiuizano. The Earl was lodged without the town by the River
Scirchio, and with him Lanzilao the son of Pagolo. The conspirators being in
number forty, all armed, went unto Pagolo, who seeing them, demanded the
cause of their coming. To whom Piero Cennanni answered, that they had been
governed by him till their enemies besieged them with sword and famine, and
therefore they were now determined from that time forward, to govern
themselves. Therewith they required the keys of the City, and the treasure.
Pagolo answered, that the treasure was consumed, but the keys and himself
also were at their devotion. Then he desired the^, that as his government was
begun and continued without blood, so without blood, by their favors, it might
be ended. Pagolo and his son, were by the Earl Francesco brought to the
Duke, and died in prison. The departure of the Earl, delivered Lucca from the
tyrant, and the Florentines from fear of his soldiers. So as then, the one
prepared to defend, and the other returned to offend, electing the Earl of
Vrbino to be their General: who again straightly besieging the city,
enforced the Lucchesi to resort anew unto the Duke, who (under the same color
that he had sent the Earl) did now employ in their aid Nicholo Piccinino.
He, being ready to enter into Lucca, was encountered upon the River of
Serchio, and in the passage thereof, our men received the overthrow, The
Florentines defeated
and the General with a few of our soldiers saved themselves at Pisa. This
misfortune grieved the whole city, yet because the enterprise was taken in
hand by general consent, the people not knowing whom to blame, slaundered
only them that were officers of the war, since they could not accuse those
that were the deuisers thereof. Then they revived the former fault laid upon
Rinaldo, but above al others, they charged Giouanni Guicciardini, accusing him
for not having ended the war after the departure of the Earl Francesco:
saying that he had been corrupted with money, whereof he had sent part to his
own house, and the rest he had carried with him and consumed. These rumors,
and these accusations, proceeded so far, that the Captain of the people
moved with public voices, and also by the contrary party provoked, sent for
him. Giouanni full of offense, appeared: whereupon his kinsfolks for their own
honor, labored the matter so earnestly, that the Captain did not proceed. The
Lucchesi after the victory, did not only recover their own towns, but also
surprised all others belonging to Pisa, except Bientia, Calcinaua, Liuorno, and
Librafatta. And had not a conspiracy been discovered in Pisa, the city it
self should have been lost. The Florentines repairing their forces, made
Michelletto their General, who had been trained up by Sforza. On the contrary
side, the Duke followed the victory (and the rather to molest the Florentines)
procured that the Genouesi, Sanesi, and the Lord of Piombino, joined in league
for the defense of Lucca, and that Nicholo Piccinino should be enterteined for
their General, which was the cause that the practice was laid open. Thereupon
the Venetians and Florentines renewed their league, and the war began to be
openly made both in Lombardy and Toscana. In either of which Countries, with
diverse fortune, diverse conflicts followed. So that either side weary, Peace
between the Florentines, and Lucchesi.
a peace was concluded, in the year 1343. whereby the Florentines, Lucchesi,
and Sanesi, who had surprised the Castles one of the others in the war, left
them all, and every man repossessed his own. During the time that this war
continued, the evil disposition of factious men within the city, began to
work, and Cosimo de Medici, after the death of Giouanni his father, governed
all things concerning the Common wealth, with more care of the public profit,
and more liberality toward his friends, then was by his father used. In so
much, as those that rejoiced at the death of Giouanni, seeing the virtue of
Cosimo, became sorry. This Cosimo was a man of excellent wisdom, of presence
grave and gracious, greatly liberal, courteous, and such a one as never
attempted any thing either against any faction or the state, but sought by all
means to pleasure every man, and with his liberality to gain the good will
of many Citizens. So that his good deserts defaced those that governed, and
brought himself to believe; that he might by that means live at Florence, in
sufficient strength and security. And if the ambition of his adversaries
should move any extraordinary occasion to the contrary, he hoped both by
arms and favor of friends to oppress them. The greatest instruments to
work his greatness, were Auerardo de Medici, and Puccio Pucci. Of them
Auerardo with courage, and Puccio with wisdom, procured him great reputation.
For the counsel and wisdom of Puccio, was so well known to every man, that
the faction of Cosimo was called not by his own name, but by the name of
Puccio. The city notwithstanding thus divided, the enterprise of Lucca
proceeded, whereby the humors of the factions, were rather increased then
extinguished. And although the faction of Cosimo chiefly counfelled the war,
yet many of the contrary part were appointed officers therein; as me^ most
reputed in the state: which Auerardo and others not being able to remedy,
sought by all industry and practice to slander them: and if any loss
happened (as many did) they imputed the same not to fortune or force of the
enemy, but want of wisdom in the officers. This was the cause that the
offenses of Astor Gianni were esteemed so great. This made Rinaldo delli Albizi
offended, and without license to depart from his charge. This was the occasion
that the delivery of Giouanni Guicciardini was required at the hand of the
Captain of the people. And hereof proceeded all blames that had been imputed
to the Magistrates and ministers of the war. For the true slanders were
increased, and the untrue were invented: and both the true, and not true, were
of the people that loved them, not believed. These matters and manner of
proceeding extraordinary, was well known to Nicholo di Vzano, and others of
his faction, who had many times thought upon remedy, but found no means how
to deal therein: Because it seemed to them, that the suffering thereof was
dangerous, and forcibly to help it, was not easy. Nicholo di Vzano, was the
first unto whom this extraordinary way displeased. Thus the wars continuing
without the city, and these disorders within: Persuasion of Barbadori to
Nicholo Vzano against Cosimo di Medici. Answer of Nicholo Vzano to Barbadori.
Nicholo Barbadori, desirous to bring Nicholo di Vzano to consent to the
oppression of Cosimo, went unto his house, where he found him sadly set in his
Closet, and there with the best reasons he could, persuaded him to join with
Rinaldo to drive Cosimo out of the City. Unto whom Nicholo di Vzano answered,
as follows. I think it were better for thy house and our Commonweal, that
all the rest, whose opinion thou herein followest, had their beards (as men
say) rather of silver, then gold, as thou have. For then, their counsels
proceeding from heads graie, grounded in experience, would be more advised, and
more profitable. It seems to me, that those which desire to banish Cosimo
from Florence, had need first of all to measure their forces, with his. This
our side, you have called by the name of Nobility: and the contrary part, you
have termed the plebeial party. If the truth answered to these names, in
every accident, the victory would prove doubtful, and we have more cause to
fear then to hope, moved with the example of the ancient Nobility of this
city, which has been by this plebeiall sort heretofore oppressed. But the
greatest cause of our fear is, that our side is dismembered, and our
adversaries continue whole and entyre. First you must consider, that Neri di
Gino and Nerone de Nigi (two of our principal Citizens) be not, as you know,
more friends to us, then to them. There be also many families, among themselves
divided. For diverse through envy of their brethren or their kinsmen, do
disfauor us, and favor the^. I will resite unto you the names of some few, the
rest you may the more easily remember with your self. Of the house of
Guicciardini, and among the sons of Luigi, Piero is enemy to Giouanni, and
favors our adversaries. Tomazo and Nicholo Soderini, for the hate they have
to Francesco their uncle, are openly protested our enemies. So that, if we
consider well what they are, and what we our selves be, I know not for what
reason we should call our or their party more noble. And if it be, that we call
their part plebeial, because they are by the multitude most followed, their
state therein is the better, and ours the worse. For whensoever we shall come to
arms, we cannot resist the^. Also if we stand on our dignities, they have bin
given to us by the state, and by virtue thereof, we have continued the^ these
50. veres. Yet whensoever we shall come to proof, our weakness will appear, and
we shall lose our authority. If you happily say, that the just occasion which
moves us to this enterprise, shall increase our credit, and diminish theirs?
Thereto I answer, that it behooves this just quarrel of ours to be known,
and believed of others, as well as of our selves: which falls out clean
contrary, for the occasion alleged, is altogether builded upon the suspicion
we have, that he goes about to make himself Prince of this city. This is
the mistrust we have, which others have not, but they rather accuse us of that,
we accuse him. The matters which make Cosimo suspected, are that he imployeth
his money to serve every occasion, not only to private uses, but also to the
public affairs: and that as well to the Florentines, as the Captains and
Leaders. The cause why he does favor this, and that Citizen, having need of
authority, is for that his credit with the multitude, has advanced this and
that friend, to great honors. Therefore it behooves you to allege the reasons
why he should be expulsed. Because he is charitable, friendly, liberal, and
loved of all men? And now tell me I pray you, what law inhibiteth, blames, or
condemns men for their charity, their liberality, and their love? And
albeit these be means for him to aspire, yet are they not so taken, neither
are we of credit enough to make them so to be thought. For our proceedings
have wrought our discredit, and our city (naturally disposed to division, and
living always in corruption) cannot give ear to such accusations. But admit
you could expulse him, which (having a Senate for the purpose may easily come
to pass): yet how can ye devise, that he having in the city so many friends
studying for his reurne, should not be revoked? This I think impossible,
because his friends being many, and he (having love universal) you cannot
assure him. The more of his chief friends you labor to banish, the more
enemies you win to your selves. So that within short space he shall be
returned, and you have gained thus much, that a good man he was banished, and
returned an evil man: because his nature shall be corrupted by those, that will
labor his reuocation. To whom being made beholding, he may not oppose
himself, and if you would put him to death, by order of Magistrates, you could
never procure it: because his riches, and our corruptible nature, would
assuredly save him. Yet admit he were dead, or banished never to return? I see
not what is gotten to our Common weal: for though it be thereby delivered of
Cosimo, it becomes subject to Rinaldo, and I am one of those, who wish, that
no Citizen should surpass an other in power and authority. But if any of
these two should prevail, I know not for what cause I ought to love Rinaldo
more then Cosimo. Neither will I say more, then I pray God to defend, that any
Citizen should aspire to be Prince of this city. And though our sins have
merited such a plague, yet God forbid we should obey him. Do not therefore
persuade an enterprise, which in every respect is dangerous, nor think that
you (accompanied with a few) can withstand the will of many. For all these
Citizens partly through ignorance, and partly of their lewdness, be prepared
to make sale of the Common weal: and fortune is so friendly unto them, as they
have already found a chapman. Be therefore pleased to follow my counsel:
live modestly, and so shall you find cause, as well to suspect some of our side
for enemies to the liberty, as those of the contrary: and when any troubles
happen being neutrall, you shall be to both acceptable. So shall you help your
self, and not hinder your country. These words did somewhat appease the mind
of Barbadoro: and the city continued quiet, during the war of Lucca. But the
peace made, and Nicholo da Vzano dead, the city remained both without war
and order. By mean whereof, evil humors grew, and Rinaldo thinking himself
to be only Prince, ceased not to entreat, and persuade all those Citizens
(whom he thought likely to be Genfalonieri) to arm themselves for the defense
of their country, against that man, who through the lewdness of a few, and the
ignorance of many, should of necessity bring the same to servitude. This
course holden by Rinaldo, and the contrary labored by the adverse part,
filled the city with suspicion: and at the election of every Magistrate, the
one against the other party, publicly murmured, and at the election of the
Senators, all the city was in open vproare. Every matter brought before the
Magistrates (how little soever it were) occasioned a mutiny. All secret matters
were laid open; good and evil, were favored and disfauoured: good men, and
evil men, equally molested; and no Magistrate could execute his office.
Florence remaining in this confusion, and Rinaldo laboring to oppress the
greatness of Cosimo: knowing that Barnardo Guadagni, was likely to be elected
Gonfaloniere, paid his debts, to the end, that such money as he owed to the
state, should not be a mean, to keep him from that dignity. The Senators
being chosen, (and fortune favoring our discords:) it came to pass, that
Barnardo was chosen Gonfaloniere, to sit in that office, during the two months
of September and October. Him presently Rinaldo visited, and told him how
greatly the Nobility rejoiced for his being aspired to that honor, which for
his virtue he deserved: and therefore required him, so to behave himself in the
office, that their rejoicing should not be in vain. Then he laid before him,
the perils which proceeded of faction, and that there was no other remedy to
unite the city, but the oppression of Cosimo: because he, with the love which
his exceeding riches had gained him, held others down, and aspired to make
himself Prince. It were therefore convenient, for remedy of so great a
mischief, that the people should be assembled in the Market place: And by
virtue of the Gonfaloniere the city restored to liberty. He moreover
declared, how Saluestro de Medici, could without justice bridle the greatness
of the Guelfi, unto whom by the blood of their ancestors lost in that
quarrel, the government to them apperteined. And if he iniustly could do that
against so many, then might Barnardo with justice do the same, against one
alone. Then he persuaded him not to fear any man, because his friends would be
ready armed to assist him. Of the multitude which so greatly honored Cosimo,
none account was to be made, for Cosimo should have by their favors none other
good, then had Georgio Scali. Neither should he fear his riches, for they
being come to the hands of the Senators, should be theirs. And in conclusion
said, that this action should make the state united, and him famous. To these
persuasions, Barnardo briefly answered; how he thought necessary to do
according to that counsel. And because the time was to be employed rather in
actio^, then words, he would presently prepare forces, to be ready, so soon
as his companions could be persuaded to the enterprise. Barnardo being placed
in office, and having won his companions, and counseled with Rinaldo, sent
for Cosimo: who, albeit he were otherwise advised, did appear, trusting rather
to his own innocence, then the mercy of the Senators. So soon as Cosimo was
entered the Palace, Rinaldo with many others armed, came to the Market place,
and there met with the rest of that faction. Then the Senators caused the
people to be called, and made a Balia of two hundredth men, to reform the state
of the city: which Balia, with such speed as possibly they could, consulted
upon the reformation, and also of the life and death of Cosimo. Many persuaded
he should be banished, Cosimo di Medici cited and committed.
others would have him put to death, and many also said nothing, either for the
compassion they took of the man, or for the fear of them selves. This
diversity of opinions, did procure that nothing was concluded. In a Tower of
the Palace called Albergettino, Cosimo was kept prisoner under the guard of
Federigo Malauolti. From which place, Cosimo hearing them talk, and perceiving
the noise of armed men in the Market place, together with the often ringing of
the Bell to the Balia, he stood in great suspicion of his life: and feared
also, least his particular enemies would extraordinaly murder him. For these
respects, during the space of four days, he would eat nothing, but one little
piece of bread: which Federigo perceiving, said unto him. Cosimo, I see thou
fear to be poisoned, and therefore would first famish thy self. But thou
do me great dishonor, to think that I would put my hand to so wicked a
deed. I surely believe, that thou art not to die for this matter, having so
good friends both within and without the Palace. But if it be meant, that thy
life shall be taken from thee, be sure, they should find other ministers then
me, to perform that deed. For I will not imbrew my hands in the blood of any
man, and chiefly in thine, who never offended me. Be therefore of good cheer,
eat thy meat, and preserve thy life to the comfort of thy friends and
country, and because thou shall mistrust the less, I my self will eat part
of those meats which be set before thee. These words comforted Cosimo
exceedingly, and with tears in his eyes, he embraced and kissed Federigo;
thanking him most heartily for his friendly and pitious dealing: offering to be
thankful whenever occasion should be presented. Thus Cosimo somewhat
comforted, and his cause disputed among the Citizens: It happened, that
Federigo brought with him to supper a friend of the Gonfalonieries, called
Farganaccio, a man very witty, and pleasantly disposed. The supper being
almost ended, Cosimo hoping to help himself by this man's presence (for he was
with him well acquainted) made signs to Federigo to go aside: who knowing the
occasion, fained to go for something that wanted. And leaving them alone,
Cosimo after a few friendly words spoken to Farganaccio, gave him a token, and
sent him to the Hospital of Santa Maria Nuoua, for a thousand and one hundredth
crowns: whereof one hundredth to be kept to his own use, the other to beliuered
to the Gonfaloniere. Farganaccio performed his Commission, the money was paid:
and by virtue thereof, Cosimo di Medici banished.
Barnardo became more favorable. So as, then it was ordered, that Cosimo
should be only confined to Padoa, contrary to the expectation of Rinaldo, that
desired his life. Auerardo and many others of the house of Medici were also
banished; and with them Puccio, and Giouanni Pucci. Also to terrify others
that were offended with the exile of Cosimo, they gave Commission of Balia, to
the Eight of the Guard, and the Captain of the people. After which order
taken, Cosimo upon the third of October, in the year 1433. came before the
Senators, who pronounced his banishment, and persuaded him to obey the same: Or
if he would refuse, more severity would be used, both unto his person and
goods. Cosimo with cheerful countenance received his confinement, protesting
that whither so ever the Senate should please to send him, he was most willing
to obey. Humbly desiring, that as they had preserved his life, so it might
please them to defend him: for he was given to understand of many, that watched
in the Market place to have his blood. He said moreover, that himself and his
substance should be ever at the commandment of the city, the people, and
their Lordships. The Gonfaloniere did comfort him, and kept him in the Palace
till night was come. There he supped, and after brought him to his house: which
done, caused him to be accompanied with many armed men, and by them was
co^ducted to the co^fines. Wheresoever Cosimo passed, he was honorably
received, and by the Venetians publicly visited, not as banished, but as a man
in great authority. Florence thus deprived of so worthy a Citizen, so
universally loved, every man was dismayed, and as well they that had the
victory, as those that were victored, did fear. Rinaldo mistrusting future
misaduenture, to serve his own turn and his friends, assembled many Citizens,
and said to them, that he now saw their ruin at hand, because they were with
fair words, tears, and the enemies money vanquished: forgetting that shortly
themselves should be forced to entreat and weep, when their suits shall not
be heard, and of their tears no man would take compassion. Also touching the
moneys received, the same must be repaid, with torments, death, and exile,
instead of usury. Moreover, that it had bin better for themselves to be dead,
then suffer Cosimo to pass with life; and leave his friends in Florence.
Because great personages should either not be touched, or being, must be made
sure from taking revenge. No other remedy therefore remained, but to fortify
themselves within the city: to the end, that the enemies taking knowledge
thereof (as easily they will) we may resist them with arms, since by order and
law we could not avoid them. The remedy of all this was (that which long
before had been remembered); to recover the great men, restoring and giving to
them all the honors of the city, making our selves strong with that faction:
because the adversaries were strengthened by the multitude. By this means their
party should be known of how great force, virtue, courage, and credit it
were. Alleging also, that if this last and truest refuge were not put in
proof, he saw not by what other mean, the state might be among so many
enemies preserved. And therefore he beheld at hand, a destruction of them and
their City. To answer this speech, Mariotto Baldouineti one of the company
opposed himself, and said; that the pride and insupportable nature of the
Nobility was such, that it were no wisdom to submit themselves to a tyranny
certain, to eschew the doubtful perils of the multitude. Rinaldo seeing his
counsel not heard, lamented the misfortune of himself and his friends,
imputing every thing rather to the heavens that so would have it, then to the
ignorance and blindness of men. The matter thus depending, without any
necessary provision made, a letter was found, written by Agnolo Acciaiuoli to
Cosimo, wherein he advertised the disposition of the city toward him, and
wished him to move some war, making Nero di Gino his friend. For he thought
the City had much need of money, and no way known that would supply that
want. By occasion whereof, the desire of his return, would be greatly revived in
the Citizens minds. And if Neri should fall from Rinaldo, then that side would
become so weak, as could not defend it self. This letter come to the hands of
the Magistrates, was the cause that Agnolo was taken, and sent to exile. By
this example, some part of that humor which favored Cosimo, was cooled. The
year of Cosimo his banishment expired, and the end of August at hand, in the
year 1430. Nicholo di Cocco was chosen Gonfaloniere for the two months next
following, and with him eight Senators, all friends to Cosimo. So as, that
Senate terrified Rinaldo, and all his followers. Also because the custom was,
that the Senators elected, should three days before they enter their office,
remain as private men at home: within that time, Rinaldo conferred with the
chief of his faction, and showed them their certain, and approaching peril:
the remedy whereof was, to take arms, and by force procure that Donato
Velluti (who was yet Gonfaloniere) should assemble the people in the Market
place, call a new Balia, deprive the new Senators of their office, creating a
new Senate for their purpose, and exchaunging the old Squittini, put in new,
with the names of their friends. This devise was by many thought secure and
necessary. Of others, it was holden over violent, and dangerous. Among those
that disallowed thereof, was Palla Strozzi, who being a man indeed quietly
disposed, gentle, courteous, and inclined rather to learning, then apt to
encounter a faction, or oppose himself to civil disorder: said, that
enterprises having in them either craft or courage, do seem at the beginning
easy, but afterward they prove hard in their proceeding, and in the end
dangerous. He also believed, that the fear of new wars abroad, begun by
the Duke in Romagna, near to our confines, should be a mean, that the
Senators would be more mindful of them, then of these discords at home. But if
it were seen, that they would change the government, the same could not be
with such speed, but arms might be taken, and all things done necessary for
defense of the public state. And this being performed upon necessity, and not
sooner, should be the less marvelled at of the people, and with less reproach
to themselves. For these reasons it was concluded, that the new Senators should
be suffered to enter, and heed be taken to their proceedings; to the end that
if any thing were attempted contrary to the faction, that then every man
should take Arms and resort to S. Pulinare, (a place near to the Palace)
from whence they might go to perform whatsoever should be thought necessary.
This conclusion made, every man returned home. The new Senators entered their
offices, and the Gonfaloniere (to give himself reputation, and terrify the
contrary party) condemned to prison Donato Velluti, his predecessor, for
having employed the public treasure. After these things were done, he sounded
the minds of his companions, touching the return of Cosimo: and finding them
well disposed, consulted with all those whom he thought to be chief heads of
the faction of Medici. By them he was greatly encouraged: And thereupon
commanded that Rinaldo (as principal man of the contrary faction) should be
sent for. After this commandment given, Rinaldo thought good no longer to
protract time, but came from his house followed with many armed men, and with
him joined presently Ridolpho Peruzzi, Rinaldo and his friends armed against
the Medici.
and Nicholo Barbadori. Amongst them were also diverse other Citizens, and many
soldiers, who at that time happened to be in Florence without pay. All which
company, according to the order taken, resorted to S. Pulinare, and there
stayed. Palla Strozzi had also assembled much company, but came not out: the
like did also Giouanni Guicciardini. For which so doing, Rinaldo sent to
solicit them, and reprove them of their delaie. Giouanni answered, that he
made war enough to the enemy, if by his tarrying at home, he could hold
Piero his brother from going out, to rescue the Palace. Palla after many
messages sent unto him, came on horse back to S. Pulinare, with two only
foot men, and himself, unarmed. And Rinaldo seeing him, went toward him, and
reproved him greatly of negligence, saying that he showed himself thereby a
man either of small troth, or little courage. Both which reproachful faults,
a man of that sort, whereof he was holden, ought to eschew. And if happily he
believed, for not performing his promise, that the enemy (having victory)
would pardon either his life or his exile, therein he was deceived. As for
himself, if any misfortune happened, yet this content of mind should remain,
that before the peril, he was not dismayed, and the peril being come, he was
not afraid. But he (and such others as he was) should double their own
discontentments, knowing they had three times betrayed their Country. First
when they saved Cosimo, next when they refused his counsel, and last for not
coming in Arms, according to appointment. To these speeches, Palla answered
not any thing that was heard of those that were there, but murmuring, turned
his horse, and went home. The Senators hearing that Rinaldo and his followers
were in Arms, and seeing themselves abandoned, shut the Palace gates, and as
amazed, knew not what to do. But Rinaldo delaying his going thither, attending
for forces which came not, lost the occasion of victory, and gave courage to
the Senators to make provision, and to other Citizens to go unto them, and
advise them how matters might be appeased. Then some friends to the Senators
least suspected, went unto Rinaldo, and said, that the Senate knew no cause of
these motions, and that they had no intent to offend him, or if it were for
Cosimo, there was no meaning of his reuocation. If therefore these were the
occasions of their suspicion, they might assure themselves, come to their
Palace, be welcome, and have their demands granted. These words could not
alter the resolution of Rinaldo, but said that he would make the Senators
private men, and by that means be assured: which done, reform the City to
the benefit of all men. But it ever comes to pass, that amongst those whose
authority is equal, and their opinions diverse, for the most part, nothing
is well resolved. Ridolpho Peruzzi moved with the words of those Citizens,
said, that for his own part, he sought not further, then that Cosimo might no
more return, which being granted, he thought the victory sufficient. Neither
desired he in hope of more, to fill the City with blood, and therefore he
would obey the Senate. Then went he to the Palace, where he was joyfully
received. Thus the stay of Rinaldo at S. Pullinare, the fainte heart of Palla,
and the departure of Ridolpho, had utterly overthrown the enterprise: and the
minds of those Citizens that followed Rinaldo, began to fail of their
wonted courage, whereunto the authority of the Pope was joined. For at this
time, Pope Eugenio being expulsed Rome, happened to be in Florence, where he
heard of these tumults, and thought it his office to be a mean to pacify the
City. Pope Eugenio labors a Pacificat^on in Florence.
And therefore sent Giouanni Vittelleschi, Patriarch and friend to Rinaldo, to
desire, that he would come unto him, for he intended to employ all his
credit and authority to the Senate, to make him contented and assured,
without blood or danger to the City. Rinaldo persuaded by the message of his
friend, went to Santa Maria Nouella, where the Pope lay, and was followed with
all those whom he had armed. To him the Pope declared, what credit the
Senate had given him, which was, to determine all controversies, and order all
matters as should by him be thought good. Rinaldo having made proof of the
coldness of Palla, and the inconstancy of Ridolpho Peruzzi, and wanting a
better shift, yielded himself into the Popes hands, hoping his authority
should have continued. Thereuppon the Pope caused knowledge to be given to
Nicholo Barbadori, and the rest, who attended without, that they should lay
down their Arms: because Rinaldo remained with him, for the concluding a
peace with the Senators. Which words resolved every man, and they disarmed
themselves. The Senators seeing their adversaries disarmed, practiced a peace
by mediation of the Pope, and in the mean time sent secretly to Pistoia, for
certain bands of foot men, whom (accompanied with all their men at Arms)
they suffered in the night to enter the City: and possessing the strongest
places, and calling the people to the Market place, created there a new Balia,
which at the first assembly, Cosimo revoked, and Rinaldo with others, confined.
determined the reuocation of Cosimo, with all others that were banished. And
of the contrary faction, they confined Rinaldo delli Albizi, Ridolfo Peruzzi,
Nicholo Barbadori, Palla Strozzi, and many other Citizens, that the number of
them was such, as that few Towns of Italy (and many other places also) but
were full of them. By this accident the City of Florence became deprived, not
only of honest men, but also of riches and industry. The Pope seeing the ruin
of those men, who at his request had laid down Arms, became greatly
disco^tented, lamenting with Rinaldo for the injury to him done under his
credit, persuading him to patience, The words of Rinaldo at his banishment.
and hope of better fortune. To whom Rinaldo answered; the small credit which
they gave me, who ought to have believed me, and the overmuch credit which I
have given to you, has utterly undone me, and my Country. But I complain
more of my self then any others, for believing, that you being banished your
Country, could maintain me, in mine. Of Fortunes dalliances I have had
experience enough, and since I little trusted to prosperity, mine adversity
shall the less offend me, for I know well, that (Fortune being so pleased)
can again favor me. But if she never so do, I shall ever care little, to
live in that City, where the laws are of less authority, then men. Because
that Country is to be defired, where the wealth and friends of men may be with
security enjoyed, and not that, where men's goods may be taken from them, and
their friends (for fear to loose their own) in greatest necessity forsake
them. It was also ever less grievous to good and wise men, to hear the
miseries of their Country, then with their own eyes to see them. And it is
also thought a thing more glorious, to be reputed an honorable Rebel, then a
slavish Citizen. After this speech made, being much troubled in mind, he took
leave of the Pope, finding great fault with his Councels, and the coldness of
his friends, and so went toward his exile. Cosimo on the other side, having
received knowledge of his restitution, returned to Florence, and was there
received, with no less pomp, then is used to other Citizens, who after
victory, came home in triumph. So great was the Concourse of people; so great
the demonstration of their benevolence toward him, at this his return from
banishment, as the Citizens willingly saluted him by name of the peoples
Benefactor, and Father of the Country.

The end of the fourth Book.
royal blazon or coat of arms
THE FIFTH BOOK.
ALL Countries in their alterations, do most commonly change from order to
disorder, and from disorder to order again. For nature having made all worldly
things variable, so soon as they have atteined their uttermost perfection and
height, do of force descend: and being come down so low, as lower they
cannot, of necessity must ascend. So that from good they descended to evil,
and from evil ascend to good. War begets quiet, quiet occasioneth
idleness, Idleness breeds disorder, Disorder makes ruin: Likewise of
ruin grows order, of order virtue, and of virtue, glory with good fortune.
It has been therefore by wise men observed, that learning follows Arms, and
in all Cities and Countries, Captains were before Philosophers. For good and
well governed Arms, having won victory, of that victory follows quiet.
And surely the courage of warlike minds cannot with a more honest idleness,
then the study of Letters, be corrupted; nor idleness by any greater or more
perilous craft enter Cities well governed: which Cato (at such time as
Diogenes and Carneades Philosophers, were sent Ambassadors from Athens to the
Senate) did well observe. For he seeing with what admiration the youth began
to follow them, and knowing the inconveniences which might of that honest
idleness ensue, provided that no Philosopher, might after be received into
Rome. Every country therefore by these means does come to decaie. Wherewith
men being beaten and weary of troubles, return (as is beforesaid) to order, if
by extraordinary force they be not utterly ruined. These occasions, by virtue
of the ancient Toscani and Romans did make Italy, sometimes happy, and
sometimes miserable. And albeit since that time, nothing has been builded
upon the Roman ruins comparable to the old, (as might with great glory
have been under the government of a virtuous Prince). Yet in some new Cities
so much virtue is grown up (among the Roman spoils) that although no one
has atteined such power as to command the rest, yet became they so well
ordered and lincked together, as they delivered and defended themselves from
the barbarous people. Of this number was the Florentines government, (although
of less Empire) yet in authority and power not inferior to any, but rather
by inhabiting the midst of Italy, being rich and ready to offend, either
happily they answered the wars made against them, or else gave the victory
to those in whose favor they employed their forces. By the virtue of these
principallities, although no times of quiet, and long peace were, yet were they
not by terror of war much perilous. For we cannot account that peace, where
one state oftentimes with Arms assayleth the other. Neither can that be called
war, where men be not slain, Cities not sacked, nor principallities
destroyed. For the wars of that time became so cold, as they were begun
without fear, continued without peril, and ended without loss. Insomuch, as
that virtue which in other Countries was wont by long peace to be extinguished,
was in Italy by their own cowardice quenched, as will plainly appear, by that
we will hereafter declare from the 1434. till the 94. Whereby we may see, how
at length a way was again opened for the entry of strangers, and Italy
became to them subject. And albeit the actions of our Princes both abroad and
at home, are not (as those of ancient time were) to be read and marvelled at
for their virtue and greatness: yet for some other quallities, to be with no
less admiration considered, seeing so many Noble people, were by so few and
evil trained soldiers kept in awe. And if in declaration of things happened
in this badde world, we shall not set down the courage of any soldier, the
virtue of any Captain, or the love of any Citizen toward his Country: yet
shall you find, what cunning and Art, the Princes, the Soldiers, and chief
Governors in Commonweals (to maintain the reputation they did not deserve)
have used: which percase will prove not less worthy, and profitable to be
known, then those of most ancient time. For as those do stir up Noble
minds to follow them: So these, to eschew their lewdness and lack of virtue,
will provoke us. In those days Italy was brought to such condition, by them
that there commanded: that whenever through reconciliation of the Princes a
peace was made; shortly after, (by such as had weapons in hand) it was again
disturbed. So that neither by the wars ended, was gotten glory, nor by the
peace, quiet. The peace being concluded between the Duke of Milan, and those
of the League, in the year 1433. the soldiers desiring still to exercise the
war, made an enterprise against the Church. There were at that time in Italy,
two sorts of soldiers, the one trained under Braccio, Two sorts of soldiers
in Italy. 1433.
the other under Sforza. Of these, the chief Captain was the Earl Francesco
son of Sforza. Of the other, Nicholo Piccinino, and Nicholo Fortibraccio were
the Leaders. To these two Sects, all the other Italian soldiers joined
themselves. Yet were the followers of Sforza of most reputation, as well for
the virtue of the Earl, as the promise to him made by the Duke, The Duke of
Mila^s daughter offered to Fran. Sforza.
of Bianca his natural daughter: which alliance, gained him exceeding
estimation. Both these Sects of soldiers, after the peace of Lombardy (for
diverse occasions) assaulted the Pope Eugenio. Nicholo Fortibraccio was thereto
moved by the old displeasure borne to the Church, by Braccio. And the Earl, by
his own ambition. Insomuch as Nicholo assaulted Rome: and the Earl possessed
himself, of La Marca. The Romans to eschew the wars, banished Eugenio from
Rome, who (with peril and difficulty escaped) came unto Florence. Where
considering of the danger wherein he was, and seeing himself by those Princes
abandoned, and that they refused to take arms in hand for him, by whose mean
at their own desire, they had been lately disarmed, compounded with the Earl,
and granted him the principallitie of La Marca: The Pope assaulted by Fran.
Sforza.
notwithstanding that he had not only before taken that country from him,
but also used contempt in the letters which he wrote to his Agents for the
division of the land, writing thus; Girifalco nostro Firmiano, Inuito Petro and
Paulo. Neither was he contented with the grant of these towns, but he would
be also Gonfaloniere of the Church. All which was granted: So much did Pope
Eugenio, fear more a dangerous war, then a dishonorable peace. Thus the
Earl become friend to the Pope, did persecute Nicholo Fortibraccio, and
between them in the territory of the Church, in diverse months, many accidents
happened, more to the prejudice of the Pope, and his subjects, then of them
that made the war. In so much as by the Duke of Milan, his mediation, it was
concluded, that the one, and the other of them, should remain Princes in the
Towns belonging to the Church. This war quenched at Rome, was kindled in
Romagna by Babtista Canneto, who in Bologna had slain certain of the house of
Grifoni, and driven from thence the Popes Governor, with some other enemies.
Then to hold that state by force, he desired aid of Philippo. And the Pope to
be revenged of this injury, required help of the Venetians and Florentines.
War between the Pope and the Duke of Milan.
The one and the other of them were aided. So that within short space, two
great Armies were come into Romagna. The General for Philippo, was Nicholo
Piccinino. The Venetian Forces, and the Florentines, were led by Gatamelata,
and Nicholo de Tolentino. Near unto Imola, they joined battle, wherein the
Venetians and Florentines were overthrown: and Nicholo de Tolentino sent
prisoner unto the Duke, where either by poison, or his own sorrow for the
loss received, within few days he died. The Duke after this victory,
either because he was weak; or believed that the league after this ouerthr^w
would stand quiet, followed no further his fortune; but gave the Pope and his
confederates time to unite themselves anew: Fran. S^o^za, General of the
League.
who elected for their Captain the Earl Francesco; with determination to
remove Nicholo Fortibraccio from the Towns belonging to the Church; and by
that means, and the wars which in favor of the Pope they had begun. The
Romans seeing the Pope strong in the field, sought his friendship, and
received a Governor from him. Nicholo Fortibraccio among other towns,
possessed Tibali, Montifiasconi the City of Castello and Ascesi. Into this
town Nicholo (not being able to keep the field) fled. There the Earl
besieged him, and the siege continuing long (for Nicholo manfully defended
himself) the Duke thought necessary either to impeach the League of that
victory, or else after the same, to take order for the defense of his own. He
therefore, to remove the Earl from the siege, commanded Nicholo Piccinino to
go into Toscana, by the way of Romagna. Whereupon the League judging it more
necessary to defend Toscana, then surprise Ascesi, gave order to the Earl,
not to suffer the passage of Nicholo, who was already with his Army arrived
at Furli. The Earl on the other side ma^ched with his soldiers, and came to
Secena, recommending unto Lione his brother, the war of La Marca, and his
other lands, during the time that Piccinino should pass. And while Piccinino
labored to pass, and the Earl impeached him, Nicholo Fortibraccio assaulted
Lione, with great honor took him, and spoiled his soldiers. Also following
this victory, he surprised many towns in La Marca. This proceeding greatly
grieved the Earl, and supposing all his Countries to be lost, he left part of
his army to make war upon Piccinino: with the rest he marched toward
Fortibraccio, whom he assaulted and vanquished. In that overthrow, Fortibraccio
remained a prisoner, and was so sore hurt, that thereof he died. This victory
restored unto the Pope all those towns, which by Fortibraccio had been taken
from him, and brought the Duke of Milan to demand peace, Peace between the
League and the Duke.
which by the mediation of Nicholo de Este Marquess of Farrara, was concluded.
Whereby the towns surprised by the Duke in Romagna, were restored to the
church: and the soldiers belonging to the Duke, returned to Lombardy. Also
Baptista de Canneto (as it happens to all others, who by force or virtue of
other men possess any state) so soon as the Dukes soldiers were departed
from Romagna, (his own power and virtue not being able to defend him in
Bologna) fled away. Whither Antonio Benteuogli, chief of the contrary
faction, presently returned. All these things chanced during the exile of
Cosimo: after whose return, these who had sought his reuocation, with diverse
other Citizens before injured, thought without respect, to assure themselves
of the government. And the Senate which succeeded, in the months of November
and December, not contented with that which their predecessors had done in
favor of their faction, prolonged and changed the time and places of those
that were banished, and confined many others anew. Also diverse Citizens were
in that time hindered, not only by the humor of faction, but also in respect
of their riches, their parentage, and private friendship. And if this
proscription of blood had been continued, it would have bin like unto that of
Octauiano, or Silla, being partly also imbrued in blood. For Antonio son of
Barnardo Guadagni was beheaded, and four other Citizens (among whom was
Zanoby Belfrategli, and Cosimo Barbadori. These two Citizens for having passed
their confines, and remaining at Venegia, were by the Venetians (who esteemed
more the love of Cosimo then their own honor) sent home prisoners, and were
most cruelly put to death. Which thing gave great reputation to the faction of
Cosimo, and much terror to the enemy, that so mighty a Common weal refused
not to sell their liberty to the Florentines. Which was thought to be done,
not so much to gratify Cosimo, as to exasperate the factions in Florence, and
make, by means of blood, the division of our city the more dangerous:
Because the Venetians found that there was nothing that so much hindered their
greatness, as the uniting thereof. Thus the city being acquit both of the
enemies and persons suspected to the state, the governors studying to pleasure
other people, New ordinances in Florence.
and make their own part the stronger, restored the house of Alberti with all
other Rebels. All the great Citizens (a few except) were brought into the order
of the people, and the possessions of the rebels at small prices, among them
sold. Moreover with new laws, and orders, they strengthened themselves, making
new Squittini, taking out the names of their enemies, and putting in the names
of their friends. Also being warned by the ruin of their enemies, and judging
that it sufficed not for the holding of the state, to have the Squittini full
of their friends: they also thought good, that the Magistrates of life and
death, should be chosen of the chief of their faction. It was therefore
required, that the makers of the new Squittini, together with the old Senate,
should have authority to create the new. They gave unto the Eight authority
over life and death, and provided that those that were banished, should not
(though their time were expired) return, unless of the Senate and the Colleges
being in number 37.) were thereunto consenting, or at the least, thirty four
of them. To write unto those that were confined, or receive any letters from
them, was forbidden. Also every word, every sign, and every action that
offended the Governors, was grievously punished. And if in Florence remained
any suspision, it was the Impositions lately imposed: and so having driven out
their adversaries, or brought the^ to great poverty, assured themselves of the
state. Also not to want foreign aid, but prevent such as thereby determined to
offend them, they did confederate, and make league with the Pope, the
Venetians, and the Duke of Milan. The state of Florence resting in these
terms, Giouanna Queen of Naples dyed, making by her testament Rinieri de
Angio, heir of her Kingdom. At that time Alfonso King of Aragon happened to
be in Sicilia, and having the friendship of many Barrons there, War between
Rinieri de Angio, and King Alfonso of Aragon.
prepared himself to possess that Kingdom. The Napolitanes, and many of the
Lords favored Rinieri. The Pope on the other side, would neither that Rinieri,
nor Alfonso might possess it: but desired that himself should govern it, by
a Deputy of his own. Yet Alfonso being arrived in the Kingdom, was by the
Duke of Sessa received, and there enterteined some other Princes, hoping to
surprise Capoua (which the Prince of Tarranto in the name of Alfonso possessed)
and by that mean to constrain the Napolitanes to yield to his will. For that
purpose he sent his Navy to assault Gaietta, which was holden for the
Neapolitanes. The Napolitanes then prayed aid of Philippo, who persuaded the
Genouesi to take that enterprise in hand. They not only to satisfy the Duke
their Prince, but also to save the merchandise they had in Naples and Gaietta,
armed a mighty Navy. Alfonso on the contrary side, understanding thereof,
increased his forces, and went in person to encounter the Genouesi, with whom
he fought near unto the Island of Pontio, King Alfonso taken by the Genouesi.
and there his Navy was vanquished, himself with diverse other Princes taken
and sent by the Genouesi to Philippo. This victory dismayed all the Princes of
Italy, because thereby they thought he might become owner of all. But he (so
diverse are the opinions of men) took a course, clean contrary to
expectation. This Alfonso, being a man very wise, so soon as he could come to
the speech of Philippo, told how greatly he deceived himself to favor
Rinieri, and disfavor him: because if Rinieri were King of Naples, he would
labor with all his force to bring the Dukedom of Milan to the hands of the
French King, by reason his aid was at hand, his furniture of all things
necessary, and the way open for his relief. Neither could he look for better
then his own ruin, if he made that state to become French. But the contrary
would follow, if himself might be Prince. For he not fearing any other enemy
then the French, should be enforced to love, honor and obey him, who had the
only power to open the way to his enemies. So that although the Kingdom
should rest with Alfonso, yet the authority and power thereof would remain in
the hands of Philippo. Wherefore it would much more import him then himself,
to consider the peril of the one, and the profit of the other, unless he
desired more to satisfy his fantesie, then assure the state. Because in doing
the one, he should be Prince, and free, by the other (in the midst of two
mighty enemies) either sure to lose the state utterly, live always in
suspicion, or, as a subject, obey them. King Alfonso delivered.
These words wrought so deep in the Dukes mind, that (changing his intent) he
delivered Alfonso, honorably returned him to Genoua, and from thence to the
Kingdom. There he embarked again, and being arrived at Gaietta, his delivery
was known, and that Country sodeinly surprised by certain Lords his
followers. The Genouesi seeing, that without respect to them, the Duke had
delivered the King, and that he, whom they with their charge and peril had
honored, did not make them as well partakers of the honor in the Kings
enlargement, as of the injury to him done, and his overthrow, grew greatly
offended. In the City of Genoua (when it lives in liberty) there is created
one head, whom they call Doge, not to be a Prince absolute, nor to determine
alone, but as chief to propound those matters, whereof the Magistrates and
Councels should consult. Within that Town be many noble Families, which are so
mighty, that with difficulty, they yield to the authority of Magistrates.
And of them the houses of Fregosa and Adorna be of greatest force. Fregosi and
Adorni.
From these, the divisions of that City, and the causes of civil disorders
did proceed. For they many times contending for government, not only ciuilly,
but also by arms, it falls out, that ever the one faction is afflicted, and
the other governs. It also happens many times, that those who are deposed
from authority, do pray aid of foreign arms, and yield that government to
others, which they themselves could not enjoy. Hereof it proceeds, that those
who governed in Lombardy, do for the most part command in Genoua, as it
happened at such time as Alfonso was taken. Among the chief of the Genouesi
that caused the City to be given into the hands of Philippo, Francesco
Spinola.
was Francesco Spinola, who not long after he had brought his country in
bondage (as in like cases it ever happens) became suspected to the Duke.
Wherewith he being discontent, voluntarily exiled himself to Gaietta, and
there chanced to be, at such time as the fight by sea was performed against
Alfonso. In which exploit he served so valiantly, that he persuaded himself to
have deserved so well of the Duke, as in respect of his service, he might (at
the least) live in Genoua with security. Yet perceiving the Duke to continue
in his suspicion, and fearing least he believed, that a man who had not loved
the liberty of his country, could not love him, determined to try a new
fortune, and at one instant both to deliver his country, and win himself fame
with security; Being persuaded, that by no means he might recover the good
will of the Citizens better, then to perform such an act with his own hand:
So as, the same hand which had offended, and hurt his country, should also
minister the medicine, and heal it. Then knowing the universal hatred borne
to the Duke by the delivery of the King, thought the time to serve well for
the execution of his intent. Wherefore he imparted his mind to some, whom he
knew of his own opinion: Them he persuaded and prepared to follow him. The
feast of S. John Baptist being come, Arismino (the new Governor sent by the
Duke) entered into Genoua, accompanied with Opicino the old Governor, and many
other Citizens. Francesco Spinola thought then good no longer to defer the
matter, but came out of his house with diverse others, all armed, and privy to
his determination. So soon as he came to the market place, where himself
dwelled, he proclaimed the name of liberty. And it was a thing very marvelous
to see, with how great speed the people and Citizens to that name assembled:
So as no man that loved the Duke either for his own profit, or other occasion,
had leisure to take arms, or think how to save himself. Arismino with some
other Genouesi, fled into the Castle which he kept for the Duke. Opicino
presuming that (if he fled to the Palace) having there two thousand Soldiers
at his commandment, he should either save himself, or give courage to his
friends to defend him, went thitherwards, but before he came to the market
place, was slain, cut in pieces, and drawn through every street of the
City. The Genouesi having thus reduced the City under their own
Magistrates and liberty, within few days also surprised the Castle, with the
other places of strength possessed by the Duke, The liberty of Genoua
recovered.
and so clearly cast off the yoke of Philippo. These matters thus handled, as
at the beginning, the Princes of Italy was dismayed, fearing that the Duke
should become ouermightie, so this gave them hope (seeing what end they had) to
be able to bridle him. And notwithstanding the league lately made, the
Florentines and the Venetians made peace with the Genouesi: whereupon, Rinaldo
delli Albizi, and other leaders of the Florentines banished, seeing things out
of order, and the world changed, did hope to persuade the Duke to make open
war against the Florentines. The Oration of Ri. de Albizi to the Duke of
Milan.
For which purpose they went to Milan, and Rinaldo being come to the Dukes
presence, spoke as follows. If we sometimes your enemies, do now confidently
desire aid of you for the recovery of our country, neither you, nor any
other (that consider worldly matters, how they proceed, and how variable
fortune is) ought to marvel, albeit neither of our passed or present actions,
nor of that we have long since done either to you, or to our country, or that
which now is in doing, we can render a good and reasonable excuse. There is no
good man reprooueth another for defending his Country, in what sort soever the
same is defended. Neither was it ever our meaning, to iniure you, but to defend
our own from being injured; which was sufficiently proved in the greatest
victories of our league. For so soon as we knew you inclined to a true peace,
we were thereof more desirous, then you your self, so that we need not fear
to obtain any favor at your hands. Neither can our Country find fault,
although we now persuade you to take arms against it, whom with so great
resolution we have withstood. For that country deserves to be loved of all
men, which indifferently loves them; and not that country, which disdaining
the greatest number, aduanceth a few. There is no man also that ought to
condemn men, although for some causes they take arms aagainst their country.
For albeit the Cities be bodies mixed, yet have they of bodies simple, some
resemblance. And as in these, many infirmities grow, which without fire and
force cannot be cured: so in the other, many mischiefs arise, which a godly
and good Citizen should offend to leave uncured: notwithstanding that in the
cure he does (as it behooves him) apply both fire and force. What sickness in
the body of a commonweal can be greater, then servitude? And what medicine
is more needful then this in the cure of that disease? Those wars be only
just, which be necessary, and those arms most merciful, where other hope
cannot be had, then by the^. I know not what necessity is greater then ours,
or what compassion can be more, then to deliver a Country from servitude? Most
certainly we know our cause is to be pitied and just, which ought to be both
by us and you considered. For your part, fail not to afford this justice,
since the Florentines have not been ashamed, after a peace with so great
solemnity concluded, to make league with the Genouesi your rebels: so that
though our cause move you not to compassion, yet this dishonor offered unto
your self, ought to persuade you, and the rather that you see the enterprise
easy. Let not exampls passed discourage you, having seen the power of that
people, and their obstinate defense of themselves. Which two things, might yet
reasonably be feared, were they of the same virtue, which in those days they
have been. But now you shall find all contrary. For what force can you look
for in any City, which has spoiled the greatest part of the riches, and
industry thereof. What resolution can be hoped of in a people, by so diverse
and new quarrels disunited? Which disunion, is cause, that those riches there
remaining in such sort as they were wont, be employed, because me^ do willingly
spend their patrimony, when they see the same for their own glory, their own
honor, and their own Country employed; ever hoping to recover that in peace,
which the war has consumed: and not when they see themselves both in war and
peace oppressed; having in the one to suspect the injury of enemies, and in
the other, the insolency of them that command. Also, the people are more
harmed by covetousness of our own Citizens, then the spoil of our enemies, for
of this some end may be hoped of, but of that none at all. In the wars
passed, you made war to the whole City, but now you are only to contend with
a few. Then you came to take the state from many, and those good Citizens, but
now you are to assault a few, and those but bace companions. Then you came to
take the liberty from the City, but now you come to restore it. It is not
therefore like, that in so great a contrariety of occasions, the effect that
will follow shall be like. Yea, you are rather to hope of victory certain,
which how greatly it fortifieth your State, your self may easily judge,
having thereby greatly bound Toscana to be your friend. And though at some
other time, this victory would be accounted ambitious and violent, yet upon
this occasion, is esteemed just and reasonable. Omit not therefore the present
opportunity, and think that although your other enterprises against the
City, did with their difficulty breed your expenses and infamy, yet this
with great facility shall bring you forth exceeding profit, with most
honorable report. There needed not many words to persuade the Duke to move
war against the Florentines, because he was thereunto disposed by hate
hereditarie, and blind ambition, which humors did lead and command him: and
the rather, being spurred forward by new injuries, and offense for the league
made with the Genouesi. Notwithstanding, his former charges, with the fresh
memory of perils, and losses passed, together with the vain hope of the
banished men, Genoua revolted from the Duke.
did discourage him. This Duke, so soon as he understood the rebellion of
Genoua, had sent Nicholo Piccinino with all his men of arms, and those
footmen he could hire in his journey, to recover the City, before the
Citizens had settled their minds and planted a new government, greatly trusting
unto the Castle of Genoua which was holden for him. And albeit that Nicholo had
forced the Genouesi to flee unto the mountains, and taken from them the Vale
of Pozeueri, where they fortified themselves, and also constrained them to
retire within the walls of their City: yet found he so great difficulty in
going forward, by reason of the Citizens resolute defending themselves, that
he was enforced to remove from thence. Whereupon the Duke at the persuasion of
the banished Florentines, commanded that the River on the East side should be
assaulted, approaching the confines of Pisa, and there make the greatest war
to Genoua, that possibly they could, supposing, that resolution would from time
to time inform, what course were best to be followed. Then Nicholo assaulted
and surprised Serezana, and after many displeasures done, to make the
Florentines more suspicious, he came to Lucca, and caused a report to be made,
that he intended a journey to Naples in aid of the King of Aragon. Pope
Eugenio upon these new accidents, went from Florence to Bologna, where he
practiced new composition between the Duke and the League, persuading the
Duke, that if he would not consent to the peace, he should be enforced to
deliver the Earl Francesco his confederate, at that present remaining in his
pay. But notwithstanding the Pope his great endeavor, all his designs proved
vain, because the Duke, without possession of Genoua, would not consent, and
the League would refuse, unless Genoua continued free. Every man then
dispairing of peace, prepared for the war. Nicholo Piccinino being come to
Lucca, the Florentines mistrusted no new matter, but caused Neri of Gino to go
with their Soldiers to the country of Pisa, obteining of the Pope, that the
Earl Francesco should join with him, and so with both their armies together,
make head at S. Gonda. Piccinino arrived at Lucca, desired passage to march
toward the Kingdom, and being denied, threatened to pass by force. These two
armies, were in force and virtue of the Captains equal, for which respect,
neither of them proved their fortune, being also hindered with the cold
weather, for then the month of December was begun. In which respects many
days, without one offending the other, they stayed. The first of them which
marched, was Nicholo Piccinino, who was informed, that if he would in the night
assault Vico Pisano, he might easily surprise it. Nicholo took the matter in
hand, but not prevailing, spoiled and burned the country thereabouts, together
with the Town of S. Giouanni alla Vena. This enterprise, albeit for the most
part thereof to no purpose, yet did the same encourage Nicholo to go forwards,
seeing the Earl and Neri moved not. Therefore he assaulted and possessed Santa
Maria in Castello, and Filetto. Yet for all this, the Florentine forces removed
not: not because the Earl stood in fear, but because the war (for the
reverence borne to the Pope, who entreated for peace) was not by the
Magistrates in Florence determined. And that, which the Florentines by their
own wisdom were counseled to do, was thought of the enemy to be done for
fear. Which conceit gave them courage, to take new enterprises in hand, so
that they determined to besiege Borgo, and before it presented all their
forces. This new assault, caused the Florentines to set aside all respects, and
not only to rescue Borgo, but also to assault the country of Lucca. Then the
Earl marching toward Nicholo, and fighting with him near unto Borgo,
vanquished his forces, and levied the siege. The Venetians in the mean while,
thinking that the Duke had broken the peace, sent Giouan Francesco da Gonzaga
their General, into Ghiriadada, who spoiling greatly the Dukes country,
constrained him to revoke Nicholo Piccinino from the enterprise of Toscana.
Which reuocation, together with the victory had against Nicholo, gave the
Florentines courage to assault Lucca, with hope to possess it; Wherein they
had neither fear, nor respect at all, seeing the Duke, whom they only
feared, to be assailed by the Venetians: And that the Lucchesi, having received
enemies at home, were content to be assaulted, in respect whereof they could
not at all complain. In the month of April, the year 1437. the Earl
marched with his army, but before the Florentines would assault others, desired
to recover their own, and therefore recovered again Santa Maria in Castello,
with all other places surprised by Piccinino. That done, directed a course to
the country of Lucca, assailing Ca-Maggiore. The inhabitants whereof, though
faithful to their Lord, yet because fear of the enemy near at hand, had
greater force in them, then the duty toward their friend far off, they
yielded themselves. And with like reputation was Massa, and Serezana surprised.
Which things being done about the end of the month of May, the army returned
toward Lucca, spoiling the Corn, burning the Villages, Lucca distressed.
cutting the Vines and trees, driving away the Cattle, and not fearing to
perform every outrage that soldiers were wont to do unto their enemies. The
Lucchesi on the other side, seeing themselves by the Duke abandoned, and
dispairing to defend their country, entrenched and fortified the City by all
means they possible could. And having men sufficient, hoped they might for a
time defend the same, as in former assaults of the Florentines they had done.
They only feared the mutable minds of the common people, least they being
besieged, would grow weary, esteeming more their own private peril, then the
liberty of others, and so enforce some dishonorable and dangerous composition.
Wherefore to persuade them to take courage, and be resolute in defense of the
City, one of the most ancient and wisest Citizens assembled the people in
the market place, and said unto them as follows. You ought always to
remember, that things done by necessity, The Oration of the Lucchese to the
other Citizens.
deserve neither commendation nor blame. If therefore you have found fault with
these wars which the Florentines do make upon you, and that we have gained in
receiving soldiers from the Duke, and suffered them to assault us, you greatl^
iniure your selves. Also, the ancient enimitie of the Florentines toward you
is well known: whereof, neither your injuries, nor their own fear, but our
weakness, and their ambition, has been the cause; for that, the one gives
them hope to oppress you, and the other encouragement to perform the
oppression. Do not believe that any merit of yours can remove that desire in
them, neither any injury by you done, can more increase the desire they have
to offend you. Wherefore, as they do study to take your liberty from you, so
must you labor to defend the same. And, for those things which both they and
we do to that end, every man may be sorry, but no man can marvel. Let us then
be sorry that we are assaulted, that our towns are besieged, our houses
burned, and our country spoiled. Notwithstanding, which of us is so unwise, as
to marvel thereat? For if we were able, we ourselves would do the like, or
worse to them. If they have moved this war by the coming of Nicholo, had he
not come, they would have done the like upon some other occasion. If this
mischief had been deferred, the same perhaps would have proved greater, so
that, this his coming, ought not so much to be blamed, as our evil fortune,
and their ambitious nature. For since we could not refuse to receive the Dukes
soldiers, they being come, could not refrain to make the war. You know
well, that without the aid of some mighty Prince, we could not be defended:
neither was there any of power sufficient, nor more likely to defend us both
with fidelity and force, then the Duke. He has restored our liberty, and
therefore reason would, he should defend it. He has been also enemy to all
those that were our ancient enemies. If then by not offending the Florentines,
we had incurred the Dukes displeasure, we should thereby have lost our friend,
and made the enemy more mighty, and more apt to offend us. So as it is much
better to have this war with the Dukes love, then peace with his displeasure.
And we may hope well he will deliver us from those dangers, whereunto he has
drawn us, so that we do not forsake him. You know with how great fury the
Florentines have diverse times assailed us, and with how great glory we have
often defended our selves against them, even when we had none other hope, but
of God and time, the one and the other of them preserved us. And therefore why
should we now despair to defend our selves? At that time all Italy had
abandoned us, but now, the Duke is on our side, and we may also hope that the
Venetians will not be hasty to offend us, as men that desire not to increase
the Florentines greatness. Heretofore the Florentines have been more free, they
had also more hope to be aided, of themselves, they were more mighty, and we
in every respect weaker then we now are. For at that time we defended a Tyrant,
but now we defend our selves. Then the honor of our defense was an other man's,
now it is our own. At that time when they assaulted us, they were united, but
now they assail us disunited, all Italy being full of their Rebels. But if all
these hopes were not, yet extreme necessity ought to make us resolute in our
own defense. Every enemy ought to be by us justly feared, for every of them do
seek their own glory and our destruction. But of all others, we ought most
to abhor the Florentines, because our obedience, our tribute, and the
subjection of this City do not suffice to content them, but they would also
have our bodies and wealth, to the end they might feed their cruelty with our
blood, and fill their covetous desire with our riches. Every man therefore of
what sort soever, ought to detest them. Be not therefore dismayed to behold the
fields spoiled, the Villages burned, and the Towns sacked. Yet if this City
be saved, of necessity they will be recovered; But if this City be lost,
without any our profit they should be saved: Because we continuing our
liberty, the enemy shall with difficulty possess them, but losing our
liberty, in vain we shall possess them. Take your weapons therefore in hand,
and when you fight, believe that the renown of your victory shall be not
only the safety of our common country, but also of your private houses and
children. The last words of his speech were with so great comfort of the
people received, that with one voice they promised to dye, rather then yield or
consent to any composition in prejudice of their liberty: and therefore
prepared all things necessary for defense of the City. In the mean space,
the Florentine army lost no time, but after much hurt done to the Country, by
treaty took Monte Carlo, and after removed to Vzano, to the end that the
Lucchesi environed on every side, should look for no rescue, and so by famine
force that City to yield. The Castle was very strong, and fully manned,
whereby the winning thereof, was not so easy as the others. The Lucchesi
seeing their City on every side besieged, did (as reason would) resort to the
Duke: To whom, by all manner of persuasions, The Lucchesi pray ^ide of the
Duke.
both sweet and sour, they recommended themselves. And in their speech,
sometimes they made mention of their own merits, and sometimes they laid
before him the injury done by the Florentines, and what encouragement other
his friends would take, if they were defended; or not, what fear might be
conceived thereby. But if they should lose their liberty and lives, he should
thereby lose his friends and honor, together with the love of all those, that
would at every danger adventure for him. These words were accompanied with
tears, to the end, that if his own obligation moved him not, yet the
compassion of their misery might persuade him. So that the Duke adding to his
ancient hate toward the Florentines the new desert of the Lucchesi, and above
all, desiring that the Florentines should not grow great by this victory,
resolved, to send mighty forces into Toscana, or else with much fury assault
the Venetians, so as, the Florentines should be forced to leave their
enterprise and succor them. This resolution made, was speedely advertised to
Florence, that the Duke intended to send men into Toscana, which moved the
Florentines to hope the less of victory. And to the end the Duke might be
holden occupied in Lombardy, they did solicit the Venetians to set upon him
with all their forces. But they were greatly daunted with the departure of the
Marquess of Mantoua, who had abandoned them, and was joined with the Duke. And
therefore being (as it were) disarmed, did answer, they were not only unable
to make themselves stronger, but also unfit to continue the war, unless the
Earl Francesco were sent unto them, with condition that he should in person
pass the River Po. For they would not in any wise allow of the old
Capitulations, whereby he stood bound not to pass the River Po. And moreover
they alleged, that without a Captain they could not make war, and of other
then the Earl, they had no hope. Neither could they employ him, unless he
were bound to make war in all places. It seemed to the Florentines
necessary, that the war should be made in Lombardy with great force: yet on
the other side, if the Earl were removed from the siege of Lucca, that
enterprise were to no purpose. And well they knew this request made of the
Venetians, was not so much of any need they had of the Earl, as to hinder
them of that victory. Contrary to that allegation was alleged, that the Earl
was prepared to go into Lombardy, whenever they of the League should
command him, yet would he not alter his bond, least thereby he might hinder
himself in the marriage, promised by the Duke. Thus were the Florentines
possessed with two contrary passions, the desire to win Lucca, and the fear
of the Dukes war. But (as for the most part it happens) fear prevailed,
and they content that the Earl having won Vzano, should go into Lombardy.
One other difficulty also there was, which not being in the power of the
Florentines to dispose, perplexed them more then the former. Which was, that
the Earl would not pass the Po, and the Venetians otherwise would not
enterteine him. So no mean being to accord them, but that the one must yield
to the other, the Florentines persuaded the Earl to write a letter, and
thereby promise the Senate of Florence to pass the River, which he might do
without dishonor, because that private promise should not be any breach of his
public obligation: and notwithstanding he might after make war without
passing the River, yet thereof this commodity would follow, that the war
being kindled, the Venetians should be forced to follow it, and so the humor
which they feared, would be turned another way. But the Venetians on the other
side affirmed, that his private Letter did suffice to bind him, and they were
therewith satisfied. And if the Earl might still use respects to his Father in
law, they would allow thereof: for it was neither profitable to himself, or
them, without great necessity to discover him. By this means, the passage of
the Earl into Lombardy was determined. Who having surprised Vzano, and made
some Bulwarks about Lucca, to keep the Citizens from issuing out, and
recommending the war to his Deputies, passed the Alps, and went unto Reggio.
Then the Venetians grew suspicious of his proceedings. And first of all to
prove his disposition, required him to pass the River Po, and join with
their other forces. Which the Earl utterly denied, and many injurious words
passed betwixt him and Andrea Mauroceno, Diffidence between the Venetians and
the Earl Francesco.
sent thither by the Venetians; the one of these accusing the other of much
pride, and little fidelity. The Earl affirming he was not bound to the
service, and the other protesting that no payment should be made. So in the
end, the Earl returned into Toscana, and Mauroceno to Venice. The Earl, was
by the Florentines lodged in the country of Pisa, hoping to persuade him to
renew the war against the Lucchesi. But thereunto they found him not
disposed. The Duke then understanding, that for respect and reverence borne to
him, the Earl would not pass the River, he hoped also that by this means he
might save the Lucchesi; And therefore prayed him to make peace betwixt the
Lucchesi and the Florentines, and (if he would) to include him also: Giving him
hope, that he should, whenever he pleased, be married unto his daughter.
This alliance greatly moved the Earl, because thereby he hoped, (the Duke
not having any sons) to become owner of Milan. For which cause, he ever
refused to proceed in the wars as the Florentines did require him, alleging
he would not march unless the Venetians did perform their payment and
promises. Neither was their pay sufficient: for he, being desirous to live
secure in his own Country, it behooved him to have other friends then the
Florentines. Wherefore, if by the Venetians he were abandoned, then should it
behoue him to take heed unto his own doings, and (so seemed) a little to
threaten an agreement with the Duke. These cauillations, and these subtilties,
highly offended the Florentines. For thereby they thought the enterprise of
Lucca to be lost, and doubted also of their own estate, if the Duke and the
Earl should join together. The Venetians and Florentines of diverse opinions
touching the pay of the Earl their General.
Then to persuade the Venetians to perform the pay promised unto the Earl,
Cosimo de Medici went unto Venice, hoping with his credit to persuade them.
Being there arrived, he disputed of this matter at large with the Senate, and
laid before them the state of Italy, and the danger thereof. Declaring also,
of how great forces and reputation in Arms the Duke was, concluding, that if
the Duke did join with the Earl, the Venetians should be forced to retire to
the Sea, and the Florentines be in peril of their liberty. Whereunto the
Venetians answered, that they knew their own strength, and the Italian
forces, and believed they were able enough to defend themselves. Affirming
also, they were not wont to pay Soldiers that served other men. Wherefore it
behooved the Florentines, themselves should pay the Earl, since by him they
were served: and that for the safe enjoying their estate, it was more
necessary to keep down the Earls insolency, then to pay him, because men
had no bounds wherein to stay their ambition. Also, if he were now paid
without any service done, he would shortly after make some other dishonest and
more perilous request. They therefore thought necessary to bridle his pride,
and not suffer the same to increase till it were incorrigible. If then they,
either for fear, or for any other intent would continue him a friend, it stood
then upon to pay him themselves. Thus Cosimo returned without other
conclusion. The Florentines notwithstanding labored, that the Earl should not
fall from the League, and indeed very unwilling he was to depart. Yet the
desire he had to conclude his marriage, did hold him doubtful, so that the
least occasion (as after it came to pass) might lose him. The Earl had
appointed his Towns in La Marca to be guarded by a Captain called Furlano,
one of his principal Leaders. He having been long solicited by the Duke,
discharged himself of the Earls entertainment, and went unto him: which was
the cause, that the Earl, (setting aside all respects) for fear of himself,
The Earl Francesco abandoneth the Venetians and Florentines.
made peace with the Duke. And among other conditions it was agreed, that in
the matters of Romagna, and Toscana, the Earl should not intermeddle further.
After this peace made, the Earl instantly persuaded the Florentines to agree
with the Lucchesi, and in a sort constrained them. They therefore seeing none
other remedy, yielded to composition in the month of April, 1438. In which
agreement, the Lucchesi remained in their liberty, and Monte Carlo, with some
other Castles, continued in possession of the Florentines. Afterward they
lamented throughout all Italy, that the Lucchesi could not be brought under
their government. And seldom it happens that any man has been so greatly
grieved with losing his own, as the Florentines were, for not having gotten
that which belonged to others. Although then the Florentines were occupied in
so great an enterprise, yet were they not forgetful of their neighbors, nor
failed to furnish their own City. At that time (as is before said) Nicholo
Fortibraccio (who had married the daughter of the Earl of Poppi) was dead. The
Earl at the death of Nicholo, The Earl of Poppi.
had in his possession Borgo A san Sepulcro, with the fortress of that Town,
which in the name of his son in law, during his life he governed. After his
death, as the dowry of his daughter he held the same, and refused to yield
that Castle unto the Pope, who claymed it, as land belonging to the Church. In
so much, as the Pope sent the Patriarch thither with Soldiers to recover it.
The Earl finding himself unable to resist that force, offered the Town to
the Florentines, and they refused it. Yet so soon as the Pope returned to
Florence, they traveled betwixt him, and the Earl, to make an agreement.
Wherein, finding some difficulty, the Patriarch assaulted Casentino, and
surprised Prato Vecchio, and Ramena, offering the same likewise to the
Florentines. But they would not accept it, unless the Pope did first consent,
that they might restore it to the Earl: Wherewith the Pope after much
disputation, was contented. Yet so, that the Florentines should promise to
persuade, that the Earl of Poppi, should restore unto him Borgo. The Popes
mind by this means satisfied, the Florentines thought good the Cathedral
Church of their City called Santa Reparata, (being long before begun, and now
come to such perfection, as divine Ceremonies might therein be celebrate) to
desire his holiness, that personally he would consecrate the same. Whereunto
the Pope willingly consented, and for more magnificence of the City, the
Temple, and the Pope, a Tarrace was made, from Santa Maria Nouella, where the
Pope lay, unto the Church which he should consecrate, the same being inbredth
four yards, and in height three, and of both sides it was covered with
exceeding rich cloth. Upon this Tarrace, only the Pope with his Court, and the
Citizens especially appointed to attend him did go. All the rest of the
Citizens and people stood in the streets, in their houses, and in the Temple,
to behold the same. When all ceremonies belonging to so great a consecration,
were finished, the Pope, in token of more love, honored Guiliano de Auanzati
with Knighthood, being at that present Gonfaloniere de Iustitia, and in all
times accounted a noble and notable Citizen, whereunto the Senate, to seem no
less desirous then the Pope of his advancement, gave unto him the Captaineship
of Pisa for one year. About this time, some difference grew betwixt the
Churches of Rome and Greece, touching the divine Service. And forasmuch as in
the last Council holden at Basile, much had been said in that matter by the
Prelates of the West Church, it was determined by the Emperors, that great
diligence should be used to unite them, and was concluded in the Council of
Basile, that proof should be made whether the Gretian Church might be brought
to concur with that of Rome. Albeit this resolution was contrary to the
majesty of the Gretian Emperor, and the pride of his Prelates to yield unto
the Bishop of Rome, yet the Emperor being oppressed by the Turks, and fearing
that the Gretians could not be defended by themselves, the rather also to live
in security, and be aided of others, determined to give place. Then the
Emperor accompanied with the Patriarch, the Prelates and Barons of Greece,
according to the order taken by the Council of Basile, came unto Venice. Which
City being infected with the plague, it was determined, that the matter
should be tried in the City of Florence. After many days of disputation, The
Gretian Church submits to the Church of Rome.
betwixt the Prelates of the Roman and Gretian Churches, the Gretians
submitted themselves to the Bishop of Rome. Then was the peace concluded
betwixt the Lucchesi and the Florentines. And was also hoped, that the wars
betwixt the Duke and the Earl (chiefly in Lombardy and Toscana) might easily
be pacified, because that war which was begun in the Kingdom of Naples,
betwixt Rinato de Angio, and Alfonso of Arragon, should of force take end by
the ruin of those two. And although the Pope was evil contented for the loss
of many his Towns, and that therewithal, the great ambition of the Duke and
the Venetians was apparent, yet every man supposed, that the Pope for
necessity, and the others for weariness, would lay down their arms. But the
matter came otherwise to pass, for neither the Duke, nor the Venetians, would
be quiet. By reason whereof, it fell out that they took Arms anew, New
troubles in Lombardy and Toscana.
and made war in the most places of Lombardy and Toscana. The great mind of
the Duke, could not endure that the Venetians should possess Bergamo and
Brescia: And the rather, seeing them prepared for the wars, and every day
molesting and disquieting his Country. He therefore thought, that if they
might be abandoned by the Florentines, and the Earl, he should not only
bridle them, but also recover his own. To compass that conceit, he intended
to take Romagna from the Church, judging that afterward the Pope could not
offend him. And the Florentines, seeing the fire at hand, either they would not
stir for fear, or if they did, they could not conveniently assault him. The
Duke also knew the displeasure betwixt the Florentines and the Venetians, for
the matters of Lucca, and for that cause, supposed the Florentines were the
less willing to take Arms for them. As for the Earl Francesco, he thought
that the new friendship, and hope of the marriage, should suffice to hold him
assured. Also, to fly all offense, and give the less occasion to all others
to take Arms, and chiefly, for that he was bound by the Capitulations with
the Earl, not to assault Romagna, he caused Nicholo Piccinino (as thereto
moved by his own ambition) to take that enterprise in hand. At such time as
the reco^ciliation was concluded betwixt the Duke and the Earl, Nicholo
remained in Romagna, and seemed much discontent with that new friendship made
between the said Duke and the Earl his perpetual enemy. He therefore with his
soldiers retired to Camurata (a place betwixt Furli and Rauenna) where he
fortified himself to remain, till such time as some other resolution were
taken. The fame of his anger being blown about every where, Nicholo gave the
Pope to understand of his well deserving of the Duke, and with what ingratitude
he was requited. He also alleged, that the Duke through the help of
principal Captains, had won all the soldiers of Italy to be at his
commandment. Notwithstanding, if his holiness were so pleased, he could
procure, that of these two Captains, the one should prove enemy to the Duke,
and the other improfitable. For accomplishment whereof, if money were prepared,
and the wars continued, he would so assault the Earl, who had surprised the
towns belonging to the Church, as he should have enough to defend his own,
and not be able to follow the ambition of Philippo. The Pope gave credit to
these words, seeming to him reasonable, and sent unto Nicholo five thousand
Ducats, with many fair promises, offering to give lands to him, and his
sons. And although the Pope were diverse ways advertised of this deceit,
yet he believed well, and was not content to hear any thing to the contrary.
The City of Rauenna was then governed for the Pope by Octacio de Polenta.
Nicholo thinking good, not to defer his enterprise (because his son had
already with the ignomie of the Pope sacked Spoletto) determined to assault
Rauenna: (either because he judged the enterprise easy, or that he had some
secret intelligence with Octacio) within few days he took the Town by
composition, and shortly after Bologna, Imola, and Furli, were by him
surprised. The Popes country spoiled by Ni. Piccinino.
Also (as a thing more marvelous) of twenty Castles which were in those
countries holden for the Pope, there was not one that refused to yield unto
Nicholo. Neither did it suffice him with this injury to offend the Pope, but
he would also to these deeds mock and deride him in words: Writing unto the
Pope, that upon just cause his Towns were surprised, because he had broken the
friendship betwixt the Duke and him: and written letters to many places of
Italy, signifying, that he (the Earl) had abandoned the Duke, and joined with
the Venetians. Nicholo thus possessing Romagna, left the same in charge to his
son Francesco, and himself with the greater part of his army went into
Lombardy. Where joining with the remain of the Dukes forces, he assailed the
Country of Brescia, which in short space he took, and besieged the City.
The Duke, who desired that the Venetians should be left for him as a pray,
excused himself to the Pope, to the Florentines, and to the Earl: declaring,
that those things which had been done in Romagna by Nicholo, if they were
contrary to the Capitulations, they were likewise contrary to his will.
Moreover, by secret messengers he gave them to understand, that for his
disobedience (as occasion and time should suffer) he would find means to have
him punished. The Florentines and the Earl gave no credit thereunto, but
believed (as in deed the truth was) that these wars were made to hold them
occupied, till such time as he might oppress the Venetians: who, being full of
pride, and believing they could by themselves resist the Dukes forces, did not
vouchsafe to demand aid of any man, Gatamelata General for the Venetia^s.
but with Gatamelata their Captain, made war alone. The Earl Francesco with
the favor of the Florentines, intended to have gone to the aid of King
Rinato, if the accidents of Romagna and Lombardy had not withholden him. And
the Florentines would also willingly have favored that enterprise, for the
ancient friendship between them, and the house of France. But the one and
the other of those, being occupied in the wars near at hand, refrained to
attempt any enterprise further off. The Florentines then seeing Romagna
surprised by the Dukes forces, and the Venetians assaulted (as those that by
the ruin of others did fear their own) desired the Earl to come into
Toscana, there to consider what was to be done to encounter the forces of the
Duke, which were greater then ever they had been. Affirming, that if his
insolency were not by some means bridled, every man that governed any part of
Italy, should within short space be oppressed. The Earl knew well that the
Florentines had reason to fear. Notwithstanding, the desire he had to proceed
in the marriage with the Dukes daughter, did make him suspected. And the Duke
knowing his desire, gave him great hope thereof, if he would refuse to take
arms against him. And because the Dukes daughter was already marriageable,
the matter was brought to this ripeness, that all things for the purpose were
prepared. Notwithstanding, with diverse cauillations, the marriage day was
delayed, yet by words to hold the Earl in hope, some deeds were performed: and
to that end thirty thousand Florins (according to the Articles agreed upon for
the marriage) were sent unto him, notwithstanding the war of Lombardy
increased, and the Venetians every day lost some Town or other. Also, all the
vessels for the wars, which they sent into the Rivers, were by the Dukes
Soldiers taken. The Countries of Verona, and Brescia, were all spoiled: and
both those Cities so straightly besieged, as in the common opinion, it was
hard for them to be many days defended. The Marquess of Mantoua, who had been
many years General for that State, beyond all expectation had abandoned them,
and was joined with the Duke, so as that which in the beginning of the wars
their pride suffered not, afterward fear enforced them to do. For knowing
none other remedy but the friendship of the Florentines, and the Earl, they
began to speak them fair, though shamefully, and with suspicion, because they
feared least the Florentines would make them the same answer, which they at
the enterprise of Lucca, and in the Earls cause had received at their hands.
Nevertheless, they found the Florentines more easily entreated, then either
they hoped, or their deserts did merit. For greater was the Florentines hate to
a friend become a foe, then the displeasure they bare to an old and ancient
enemy. Persuasions of the Venetians and Florentines to the Earl not to abandon
them.
They having long before known the necessity whereunto the Venetians would
fall, declared to the Earl, that their ruin would be also his: and that he
deceived himself, if he believed the Duke Philippo would esteem him so much
in his good, as his evil fortune. For the occasion why the Duke offered his
daughter unto him, was the fear wherein he stood: and since things promised by
necessity, are never performed without necessity, it behooved him still to
hold the Duke distressed, which without the greatness of the Venetians, could
not be done. Therefore, he ought to think, that if the Venetians were forced
to abandon their Country upon the firm land, he should not only want those
commodities which he received by them, but also all others, which of other men
for fear of them he might attain unto. And if he considered well the other
states of Italy, he should find some of them poor, and some others his
enemies. Neither were the Florentines alone (as he had often said) of force
sufficient to maintain him. So as, on every side it appeared, that for him it
was necessary, to maintain the Venetians mighty upon the land. These
persuasions joined with the hate which the Earl had conceived of the Duke, for
being mocked in the marriage, caused him consent to the composition, yet would
he not at that time be bound to pass the River of Po. These compositions were
made in the month of February, the year 1438. Wherein, the Venetians did
covenant to defraie two thirds, and the Florentines one third of the charge.
And both of them together at their common charge, entered obligation to defend
the lands which the Earl had won in La Marca. Neither was this League
contented with these forces, but unto them they joined the Lord of Faenza, the
sons of Pandolfo Malatesta of Rimini, and Pietro Giampagolo Orsino. And
although with great promises they had persuaded the Marquess of Mantoua, yet
could they not remove him from the friendship and pay of the Duke. Also the
Lord of Faenza, after that the League was settled, finding a better bargain,
revolted to the Duke, which deprived the League of hope, to be able to perform
the enterprises intended in Romagna. In these days, Lombardy remained thus
troubled, Brescia was besieged with the Dukes forces, so straightly as every
day was feared that for famine it should be forced to yield. And Verona became
so environed with enemies, that it doubted the like end, and if any of these
two Cities were lost, every man judged all the other preparation for the wars
would be to no effect, and the charges till that time made, utterly lost.
Neither was there found any other certain remedy, then to procure, that the
Earl Francesco might pass into Lombardy: Wherein were three difficulties, the
one in persuading the Earl to pass the River of Po, and make war in all
places. The second, that the Florentines seemed to be at the discretion of the
Duke, if the Earl should go from them. The third was, what way the Earl with
his forces should take, to convey himself into the country of Padoa, where the
rest of the Venetians forces remained. Of these three difficulties, the second
which apperteined to the Florentines, was most to be doubted. Notwithstanding
they knowing the necessity, and being weary of the Venetians, who with all
importunity desired the Earl, (saying that without him, they should be
abandoned) they preferred the necessity of others before the suspicion of
themselves. There remained also one other doubt, which way they should go, and
how the same might be made assured by the Venetians. Moreover, because the
handling of this contract with the Earl, and the persuading him to pass the
River Po, was appointed to Neri, the son of Gino Capponi, the Senate thought
good to send him expressly to Venice, to make that favor the more acceptable
there, and to take order for the way, and safe passage of the Earl. Then was
Neri dispatched from Cesena, and in a Boat conveyed to Venice: where, by the
Senate he was received with more honor, then ever any Prince before that time
had been. For upon his coming, and that which by him should be determined,
they thought the welfare of their dominion depended. Neri then being brought to
presence of the Senate, spoke as follows. Most Noble Prince, The Oration of
Neri Capponi, to the Senate of Venice.
my Lords who have sent me, were hitherto ever of opinion, that the greatness
of the Duke, would be the ruin both of this state and of their own
Commonweal. So that, the well doing of these states, must be your greatness,
and ours also. If this had been by your Lordships believed, we should be now in
better condition, and your state assured from those perils, which presently do
threaten it. But because that in time convenient, you have neither given us
aid, nor countenance, we could not readily procure remedy for your harms, nor
you, speedily demand it: as men which both in adversity and prosperity knew
not how to behave your selves; forgetting that we are of such disposition, as
whom we once love, we will love ever; and whom we hate, we will hate ever. The
good will which we have ever borne to this most Noble Senate, your selves do
know, and have oftentimes seen, by the aid we have given you both in money and
men. The displeasure which we have borne to Philippo, is such, as we will
always bear toward his house, and so the world knows. Neither is it
possible that ancient hatred, can be either by new deserts or new
displeasures cancelled. We were and are assured, that in this war, we might
with great honor have stood indifferent to the Duke, and with no great danger
to our selves. For though he had been by your ruin become Lord of Lombardy,
yet had there remained so much force in Italy, as we need not to have dispaired
of our well doing, because he increasing in state and power, the enmity, and
envy toward him would have also increased. Of which two things, war and
displeasure be engendered. We knew also how great charges by eschuing this war,
we should have avoided, how eminent perils we should have escaped: and how this
war, by our means might be removed from Lombardy into Toscana.
Notwithstanding all these suspicions have been, by our ancient affection borne
to your state, cancelled: and we have determined to aid you, with the same
ready good will, wherewith we will defend our own, if the same should be
assaulted. Wherefore my Lords, judging it before all other things most
necessary, to succor Verona and Brescia, and thinking also that without the
Earl the same could not be, they have sent me hither, first to persuade him to
come into Lombardy, and make war in all places: he being heretofore (as you
know) bound not to pass the River of Po. Therefore I used with him those
reasons, wherewith we our selves be moved. And he, (as he seems) by Arms
invincible, will not be overcome with courtesy. And that liberallitie which he
saw us use toward you, he has been pleased to surpass the same. For knowing
well in how great perils, after his departure, Toscana remained, and seeing
that we have more regarded your peril, then our own well doing; is also
content to prefer the same, before his own. I am therefore now come here, to
offer you the Earl with seven thousand horse, and two thousand foot men;
ready to assault the enemy in what place soever he may find him. I beseech
you then, (and my Lords also do entreat you) that as the number of his
soldiers is greater then his obligation, whereby he bound himself to serve, so
it may please you, that your liberallitie toward him may be likewise enlarged.
To the end, that neither he shall repent his coming to your service, nor we be
sorry to have persuaded him thereunto. This speech pronounced by Neri, was with
no less attention heard of the Senate, then if from the mouth of some Oracle,
the same had proceeded. For by his words all the audience was so moved, that
they would not suffer the Prince (as is the custom) to make any answer: But
every man stood up, and many of them weeping for joy, held up their hands,
thanking the Florentines for so friendly an offer, and him, for having with so
great diligence and speed performed the same. Promising moreover, never to
forget that favor, nor that any time, either in themselves or in their
posterie, should cancel the memory of this merit. And that their
Commonweal, should be as much at the Florentines commandment, as their own.
These courtesies and congratulations ended, they consulted what way the Earl
might martch, to the end, that the bridges and passages should be prepared.
Four ways were then thought upon whereby he might pass. The one from
Rauenna, by the sea side: which being narrow and full of marshes, was not
liked. An other was by the direct way, which being impeached by a Fortress
called Vccellino, kept for the Duke, the same ought to be surprised before the
Army should march further; which was heard to do in so short a time, unless
the occasion of the enterprise were omitted, the same requiring great diligence
and speed. The third was by the wood of Lago, where because the River of Po
was ouerflowed, to pass that way, seemed not only hard, but also impossible.
The fourth was by the Champion of Bologna, from thence to Ponte Pulidrano, to
Cento, through Finale, and Bondeno, and so to Farrara: From whence by water and
land, they might be conveyed into Padouana, there to join with the Venetian
forces. In this way, albeit there was many difficulties, and might by the
enemy, in some places be impeached: yet was it thought the best of all others.
Whereof the Earl advertised, with great speed began his journey, and on the
twentieth of June, arrived in Padouana. The coming of this Captain into
Lombardy, made Venice, and all the country thereto belonging, in great hope.
For as they seemed before to despair, now they began to hope, not only to
hold their own, but also to win from others. The Earl first of all went to
the rescue of Verona, and the rather to meet with Nicholo, and his Army he
marched to Soaue, a Castle builded betwixt Vicentino and Veronesi, and
environed by a diche: which reached from Soaue to the marish of Adice. The
Earl seeing his passage by the plain stopped, thought to pass by the
mountains, and by that way to come near to Verona; Supposing Nicholo did not
think, that he would take that way being unpleasant and mountanous: or if he
did, he could not in time come thither to impeach him. Wherefore being provided
of victuals for eight days, he and his men passed the mountain and arrived
under Soaue, in the plain. Where, albeit some bulwarks had been made by
Nicholo, yet were they not such as stayed his passage. Nicholo then seeing the
enemy above his expectation come thither, fearing to fight upon disadvantage,
retired himself on the other side of Adice: and the Earl without any
obstacle, entered into Verona. Thus the Earl having performed the first
enterprise, which was to remove the siege, the second yet remained, to rescue
Brescia. This City is so seated upon the river of Garda, the site whereof is
such, that though it be besieged by land, yet may it be victualled by water:
which was the cause, why the Duke put so great forces upon that Lage, and in
the beginning of his victories, had surprised all those towns which by the
Lage could relieve Brescia. The Venetians had also Galleys upon the Lage, but
they were not of power enough to fight with the Dukes forces. The Earl
therefore thought fit with some more soldiers to strengthen the Navy, and win
those towns which with held the vittails from Brescia. He therefore brought his
Camp before Bandolino, a Castle upon the Lage, hoping if that were won, the
rest would presently yield. In that enterprise fortune disfauoured the Earl,
for the greatest number of his men fell sick: so as, leaving the enterprise,
he went unto Zeno, a castle belonging to Verona, where the country is
plentiful, and the air wholesome. Nicholo seeing the Earl retired: not to
omit occasion to possess himself of the Lage, left his Camp at Vegatio, and
with some choice men went unto the Lage. There, with great fury, he assaulted
the Venetian Army, and took welneare all their Galleys. After this victory,
almost all the Castles upon the Lage, yielded unto Nicholo. The Venetians
dismayed at this his loss, and fearing thereby, that they of Brescia would yield
also, solicited the Earl, both by Letters and Messengers, to make speed to
succor it. But the Earl seeing that by the Lage there was no hope to relieve
it, and by land it was impossible, by reason of ditches, bulwarks, and
trenches, made by Nicholo, so as, whosoever should enter, must go to present
destruction; determined to prove the way of the mountains: whereby, as he had
before saved Verona, so he hoped perhaps to rescue Brescia. The Earl for the
atchiuing thereof, departed from Zeno, and by the Vale of Acrine, marched to
the Lage of S. Andrea, and came to Torboli, and Penda, upon the Lage of Garda.
From thence he went to Tenna, and there pitched his Camp: because, to pass
from thence to Brescia, it behooued him to surprise that Castle. Nicholo
understanding the intent of the Earl, brought his Army to Pischiera: and
after with the Marquess of Mantoua, and some of his own choice soldiers,
marched toward the Earl, and fighting together, Nicholo was overthrown. The
Camp of Nicholo Piccinino defeated.
Some part of his men were taken prisoners, an other part, retired to the
Army, and the third part, fled to the Navy. Nicholo then, retired himself
into Tenna, and the night being come, imagined he could not escape from thence,
if he tarried til the next day. Wherefore to eschew that peril certain, he
adventured a danger doubtful. Nicholo had amongst many his servants one
Almaine, a man of great strength, and to him above others, ever most faithful.
Nicholo persuaded this man, that if he would put him into a sack, he might
upon his shoulders (as though he were some other thing) carry him to some
place, from whence he might escape. At this time the Camp yet remained about
Tenna. Nevertheless, by means of the victory the day before, no great order
or watch was taken, so that this Almaine, the more easily might convey his
master. Wherefore taking him upon his shoulders, (as though he were some other
burden, himself being apparelled like a Porter) he passed through the Camp
without any let, and so saved his master. This victory, if it had been well
used, as it was happily won, had much better relieved Brescia: and the
Venetians thereby should have proved more happy. But the same being evil
used, the joy thereof was the less; and Brescia remained in the same distress
that it was before. For Nicholo having recovered soldiers, Nicholo Piccinino,
desirous to recover his honor.
determined with them some new victory, to blot out the dishonor of the late
loss, and take from the Venetians the mean whereby they should rescue
Brescia. He having intelligence from some prisoners taken in that war, that the
Cittadell of Verona was weakly manned and guarded; so as, easily it might be
surprised: thought that Fortune thereby had offered an occasion to recover his
honor; and that the new joy of his enemy, for the late victory, should now
for a later loss, be converted into sorrow. The City of Verona is in
Lombardy, seated at the foot of those mountains which divide Italy from
Germany: and is so builded, as it partaketh both of the mountains and the
plain. The River of Adice springs out of the Vale of Trento, and in the
course thereof to Italy, it descends not straight into the plain, but
turns on the left hand, and passes by the midst of that City. Yet the one
part of the City toward the plain, is greater then the other part toward
the mountains. Upon these be built two Fortresses, the one called S. Piero,
and the other S. Felice; which seem more strong by nature of the seat, then
the thickness of the wall. For being set high, they command the whole City.
In the plain on this side the Adice, are joining to the wall of the town, two
other Fortresses, the one distant from the other a thousand paces, one of them
is named the new Cittadella, and the other the old Cittadella. From the one of
these within, there passes a wall to the other, and is in respect of the
compass, as it were a string to a bow. All this space betwixt the one wall
and the other is inhabited, and called Borgo di San Zeno. These Fortresses, and
this Borgo, Nicholo Piccinino intended to surprise, thinking the same easy, as
well for the negligence of the guard therein, as the small care had thereof, by
means of the late victory. For he knew well, that in the war there is no
enterprise so easily performed, as is that, which the enemy fears not. He
therefore making choice of his men, being acquainted with the Marquess of
Mantoua, in the night marched to Verona, and not being there looked for, scaled
the walls, and wanne the new Cittadell. From thence he sent his men into the
town, who brake the gate of S. Antonio* and thereby all his horsemen entered.
Those that for the Venetians kept the old Cittadell, hearing first a noise when
the guard of the first Cittadell was slain, and after when the gates were
broken open: knew well that enemies were come, made Alarm, rung Belles, and
stirred up the people. Whereof the Citizens taking knowledge, came out in a
confused sort: those that were of most courage, took Arms and went unto the
Palace of the Rettore. In the mean while, Nicholo had sacked Borgo of S.
Zeno. Then going forward, the Citizens knowing that the Dukes soldiers were
within the town, and seeing no way to resist them, persuaded the Venetians
Rettore to flee to the Fortress, thereby to save their persons, and the town:
saying it was better to preserve their lives, and the riches of the city, till
a time more fortunate; then for the encountering of the present fury, to die
themselves, and utterly impouerish the city. Verona surprised by Nicholo
Piccinino.
Then the Rettore, and all other Venetians whatsoever, fled into the Fortress
of S. Felice. Which done, many of the chief Citizens came to Nicholo and to
the Marquess of Mantoua, beseeching, that it would please them, to take that
city with honor, as it was rich, rather then with their shame, to suffer it
to be made poor and spoiled. And the rather, because they had neither deserved
well of their chief Lords, nor in defense of the town merited any malice of
Nicholo or the Marquess. Then were they, both by Nicholo and the Marquess
comforted, and (as much as in fury of the war might possibly be) defended
from the spoil. Nicholo thinking assuredly, that the Earl would come to
recover the Town, labored by every mean to get into his hands all the
strong places; and those which he could not get, with trenches and ditches
were divided from the Town: to the end, that the enemy should pass in with
more difficulty. The Earl Francesco was with his men at Tenna, and hearing
those news, at the first thought the same untrue, but after being better
advertised of the troth, thought good by speedy proceeding, to amend his
former negligence. And albeit his chief Captains of the Camp, did counsel
him to leave the enterprise of Verona and Brescia, and go to Vicenza, for not
being besieged of the enemy during his abode there; yet would he not be
persuaded by them, but in any wise try his fortune to recover that city: and
in the midst of these doubtful imaginations, promised the Proueditore of
Venice, and Barnardo de Medici, the Florentine General, certainly to recover
the city, if any of the Fortresses did remain untaken till he came thither.
Then giving order for his journey, he with his soldiers in great haste marched
toward Verona. Whom, Nicholo seeing, thought good, as he had been counseled
by his Captains, to go to Vicenza. Yet finding that the enemies marched
toward the Town, directing their course to S. Felice, he determined to defend
that Fort: but all too late, because the trenches about the Castle were not
finished, and the soldiers (for covetousness of the spoil) were divided
among themselves, so that he could not come thither soon enough. For the
Earls soldiers had before approached the Fortress, Verona recovered by the
Earl Francesco.
and from thence with good success and dishonor of Nicholo, recovered the
city. Who together with the Marquess of Mantoua fled first to the Cittadell,
and from thence, to Mantoua. Where assembling the remain of their saved
soldiers, they joined with the others, that besieged Brescia. Thus was Verona
in four days by the Dukes Army, both won and lost. The Earl after this
victory (being at that time winter, and the cold great) had with much
difficulty victualled Brescia, and went to remain in Verona: giving order,
that certain Galleys should tarry that winter at Torbali, to the end, that at
the spring of the next year, he might be strong both by sea and land for the
rescue of Brescia. The Duke seeing the war for that time stayed, and his hope
to surprise Verona and Brescia removed, whereof the Council, and the money of
the Florentines was the occasion, and that they could not be altered from the
love of the Venetians, for any injury they had received of them, nor for any
promise he could make them; determined (to the end they should shortly reap
fruit of those seeds they had sown) to assault Toscana: being thereto
encouraged by the banished men of Florence, and by Nicholo. Nicholo was thereto
moved with the desire he had to win the possessions of Braccio, and drive the
Earl out of La Marca. The Duke persuaded by Nicholo and the banished
Florentines* to assault Toscana.
And the Florentines desired to return to their Country. So either of these,
with reasons according to their own desire, persuaded the Duke. Nicholo told
him, that himself might be sent into Toscana, and Brescia might nevertheless
be still besieged; for the Duke was Lord of the Lage, and had the strong
places belonging to the Town well furnished: the Captains there remaining,
and men enough to encounter the Earl whenever he should attempt any other
enterprise; which without the rescue of Brescia he could not, and to rescue
it, was impossible. So that he might make war in Toscana, and yet not leave the
enterprise in Lombardy. He told him moreover, that the Florentines were
enforced so soon as he came into Toscana, to revoke the Earl, or else lose
it: so that if any of these two things came to pass, the victory would
follow. The banished men alleged, that if Nicholo with his Army did draw
near to Florence, it was impossible but that the people (being weary of
charges, and the insolency of the great men) would take Arms against the
Governors. They showed also how easy it was to approach Florence, promising
to make the way open through Casentino, by means of the friendship which
Rinaldo had with that Earl. Thus the Duke, first disposed of himself, and
after confirmed by persuasions of these men, resolved upon this enterprise. The
Venetians on the other part, notwithstanding the bitterness of the winter,
failed not to call upon the Earl with all his forces to succor Brescia. Which
the Earl answered could not be in that time done, but of force it must tarry
the spring of the year: and in the mean time prepare an Army by water, so as
both by water and land it might at time convenient be relieved. Hereupon the
Venetians became sorry and slow in all their provisions, which was the cause
that in their Army many people died. Of all these things the Florentines being
advertised, began to mistrust: seeing the war at hand, and no great good done
in Lombardy. The suspicion also which they had of the Popes soldiers, did
greatly perplex them: not because the Pope was their enemy, but for that they
saw those soldiers more obedient to the Patriarch, their mortal foe, more
then to the Pope himself. Giouanni Vittelleschi Cornetano, was first Notarie
Apostolical, The Patriarch of Alessandria General for the Pope.
after Bishop of Ricanati, then Patriark of Alessandria, and at length after
all these dignities, become Cardinal, and was called the Cardinal of
Florence. This Cardinal being a man both courageous and crafty, and such a
one, as was by the Pope so greatly beloved, as thereby he became General of
all the forces belonging to the Church: and was Captain in all enterprises
that the Pope took in hand, either in Toscana, Romagna, the Kingdom, or the
City of Rome. Whereby he won such reputation among the people, and so great
authority under the Pope, that the Pope himself stood in doubt how to
command him, and the people did only obey him, and no other. At such time as
the news came, that Nicholo would pass into Toscana, this Cardinal with his
company happened to be at Rome: whereby the Florentines fear was doubled,
because that Cardinal after the banishment of Rinaldo, had ever been enemy to
Florence: for that the pacification among the factions of Florence made by his
means, were not observed, but all things done to the prejudice of Rinaldo, The
Pa. friend to Rinaldo de Albizi.
who had been the occasion that Arms were laid down, which gave his enemies
good means to banish him. Then the Governors of the state, imagined the time
come to restore Rinaldo of his losses, if with Nicholo (being come into
Toscana) they joined their forces: but thereof they doubted the more by the
untimely departure of Nicholo from Lombardy, who left there an enterprise half
won, to begin an other more doubtful: which he would not do, without some
new intelligence, and secret subtlety. Of this their mistrust they had
informed the Pope, who knew his own error in giving to an other overmuch
authority. But when the Florentines stood thus doubtful what to do, Fortune
found then a mean, whereby to assure the Patriarch. That state, in those times
maintained diligent espials, to discover what Letters were brought too and fro,
and thereby conceived, if any thing were practiced to the prejudice thereof. It
happened that at Monte Pulliciano, some Letters were taken, which the Patriarch
without consent of the Pope, wrote unto Nicholo Piccinino. Those Letters by the
General of the war, were presently sent unto the Pope; And although they
were written in Carects unused, so as no certain sense could be made of them:
yet this obscurity, together with the practice of the enemy, The pope seeks
to depose the Patriarch.
bred so great suspicion in the Pope, as he determined to assure himself. The
charge of this action he committed to Antonio Rido of Padoua, being then
Captain of the Castle in Rome. Rido having received this Commission, was
ready to obey the Popes commandment, aspecting an opportunity to perform
the same. The Patriarch being determined to go into Toscana, and minding the
next day to depart from Rome, desired the Captain Rido to attend for him in
the morning upon the Castle Bridge, at such time as he should pass that way.
Antonio Rido thought then a good occasion was presented: and gave order to his
men what to do, tarrying for the coming of the Patriarch, upon the Bridge,
which way of necessity he must pass, hard by the Castle. So soon as he was
arrived upon that part, which used to be drawn up, Rido gave his men a sign
to draw the Bridge and shut the Patriarch into the Castle, which was
performed. So as of a General to the Army, the Patriarch was become a
prisoner in the Castle. The people that followed him, at the first murmured,
but understanding the Popes pleasure, The Patriarch made prisoner
pacified themselves. The Captain did comfort him with courteous words, and
persuaded him to hope well. To whom the Patriarch answered, that great
personages were not wont first to be apprehended, and after set at liberty.
For those that deserve imprisonment, did not merit to be enlarged, and so
shortly after died in prison. After his death, the Pope appointed General of
his Army, Lodouico Patriarch of Aquilea. Who albeit before that time would not
intermeddle with the war, betwixt the League and the Duke; yet was then
content to take the same in hand: promising to be ready to defend Toscana
with four thousand Horse, and two thousand footmen. The Florentines
delivered of this fear, stood yet in doubt of Nicholo, and mistrusted the
confusion of matters in Lombardy, by reason of the diversity of opinions
betwixt the Venetians and the Earl. Wherefore, to be more fully advertised,
of their minds, they sent Neri the son of Gino Capponi, and Guiliano de
Auanzati, to Venice. Whom they gave in Commission, to determine in what sort
the War should be made the next year following. Commanding Neri, that so
soon as he understood the minds and opinions of the Venetians, he should
go unto the Earl, to know his; and persuade him to those things, which for
the welfare of the League should be thought meet and necessary. These
Ambassadors being in their journey not so far as Farrara, had intelligence,
that Nicholo Piccinino with six thousand horse was passed the Po. Which news
moved them to make the more speed. Being arrived at Venice, they found the
Senate fully determined, that Brescia without any delaie should be rescued,
because, that City, could neither tarry vnreleeued till the next Spring, nor
till the Navy by water were prepared; but should be enforced for want of aid,
to yield unto the enemy: which would make the Duke victorious, and occasion
the loss of all their state, upon the firm land. Neri therefore went from
thence to Verona, to hear what the Earl could allege to the contrary. Who by
many reasons declared, that for the present, it were no furtherance, but rather
an impeachment of the enterprise to march toward Brescia. For, considering the
season of the year, and the seat of the City, no good could be done, but
great disorder, and to the soldiers great trouble would follow thereof. So
that, when the Spring should be come, and the season fit for the action, the
Army must be enforced to return to Verona, for provision of those things,
which the winter had consumed. By reason whereof, all the time fit for war,
should be spent in going and returning. There was sent to Verona with the Earl
for the consultation of these matters, Orsato Giustiniani, and Giouan Pisani.
With these Commissioners after much disputation, it was concluded, Resolution
of the League, against the Duke.
that the Venetians should give unto the Earl for the next year to come,
fourscore thousand Duckettes, and to every one of his soldiers, forty. And
that they should solicit the Earl to march with his whole Army, and assault
the Duke. To the end, that he, for fear of his own country should be
forced to revoke Nicholo into Lombardy. After which conclusion, the
Ambassadors returned to Venice. Nicholo Piccinino in this mean space
proceeded in his journey, and was arrived at Romagna: where he persuaded so far
with the sons of Pandolpho Malatesta, that they abandoned the Venetians, and
joined with the Duke. These news were displeasant to the Venetians, and much
more displeasant to the Florentines, because they hoped by that way to have
resisted Nicholo. But seeing the Malatesti rebelled, they were thereat amazed,
and the more, for the fear they had that Giampagolo Orsino, their Captain,
(who at that time was in the country of Malatesti) should be defeated, and
they so disarmed. These occurrents also dismayed the Earl, fearing to lose La
Marca, The speech of the Earl Fra^cesco to the Senate of Venice.
if Nicholo passed into Toscana. And intending to go unto the rescue of his
own, came first to Venice, where he declared unto the Prince, that his coming
into Toscana, was improfitable for the League. Because the war was ever to be
made, where the Army and General of the enemy is, and not where their Towns
are, or their private Garrisons. For if the Army be overthrown the war is
ended: but though the Towns be won, and the Army be left whole, the wars
for the most part becomes more lively. Then he informed him, that La Marca
and Toscana were lost, if good resistaunce were not made against Nicholo. Of
which loss, Lombardy had no remedy. Or if it had, he meaned not to abandon
his own subjects and friends. For, being come a Lord into Lombardy, he
would not depart thence, as a private Captain. The Venetians answer to the
Earl.
Heereunto the Prince answered, it was a thing most manifest, that if he did
go from Lombardy, and with his Army repasse the Po, that all their state
upon the firm land, should be lost, and that they would not spend any more
upon the defense thereof. For it were folly, to defend a thing, which by no
mean could be holden. And less dishonor it were to lose the countries only,
then to lose the country and their money also. But if it should so fall out,
that these things were lost, it should thereby appear how greatly it stood the
Venetians upon, to defend Toscana and Romagna. They were therefore altogether
contrary to his opinion, for they believed that whosoever were victorious in
Lombardy, could also have victory in all other places. And it was easy to
have the victory, because the Duke and his country was become weak by the
departure of Nicholo: so as he might be oppressed, before that either he
could revoke Nicholo, or be provided of other remedy. Moreover, who so wisely
considers all things, should see, that the Duke had sent Nicholo into
Toscana, to no other end, then to remove the Earl from those enterprises, and
make that war in other places, which he now had at home. So that in pursuing
him (if before he found no extreme necessity) he should execute that which
he had in hand, and be owner of his intent. But if the men of war were still
employed both in Lombardy and in Toscana, howsoever it came to pass, he
should ouerlate find his oversight, and in time see that without remedy he
had lost Lombardy, and gained nothing in Toscana. Thus every one having said
and replied according to his opinion, Resolution of the Venetians with the
Earl Francesco.
it was concluded, that a stay for a few days should be made, to see what
effect the agreement betwixt the Malatesti and Nicholo would bring forth: and
whether the Florentines could employ Giampagolo: and whether the Pope did
faithfully deal with the League, as he had promised. This conclusion made,
shortly after they were advertised, that the Malatesti had condescended to the
agreement, rather for fear, then any evil intent: and that Pietro Giampagolo
with his soldiers, were marched toward Toscana, and the Pope was more
willing to aid the League, then before time he had been. These aduertisements
satisfied the Earls mind. So as he became contented that himself might
remain in Lombardy: and Nery Capponi should return to Florence, with a
thousand of his Horse, and five hundredth others And if it did so fall out in
Toscana, that the presence of the Earl were there needful and necessary,
that then he should write unto him, and the Earl (without any respect) be
dispatched thither. Neri with his forces arrived at Florence, in the month of
April. And the same day, Giampagolo came thither. In the mean time Nicholo
Piccinino having settled all things in Romagna, determined to come into Toscana,
and desiring to pass by the Alps of S. Benedetto, and the Vale of Montone,
found those places by the virtue of Nicholo de Pisa, so well defended, that he
thought all his power too little. Moreover, because the Florentines were not
well furnished either of Captains or soldiers, for this suddeine assault,
they had sent diverse Citizens to the passages of those Alps, with footmen
levied in haste, for that purpose. Amongst whom was Bartholomeo Orlandini: and
to him was appointed the keeping of the Castle of Marradi, with the passage of
those Alps. Nicholo Piccinino supposing he could not go by S. Benedetto for
the virtue of him that defended that way, yet thought he it easy to pass by
the other which Bartholomeo kept: persuaded thereto by the cowardice of that
Captain. Marradi is a Castle built at the foot of those Alps, which divide
Toscana from Romagna. But on that side which is toward Romagna, in the
beginning of the Vale of Lamona, although it be without walls, yet the River,
the Mountain, and the inhabitaunts of the country do make it strong. For the
men be warlike and faithful. The River has also worn into the land, and
made so deep caves and places, as it is impossible to approach it by that
Vale, so long as one little Bridge be defended. And on that side toward the
Mountains, the shore is so steep as makes it most assured. Notwithstanding,
the cowardice of Bartholomeo was such, as made those people become base minded,
and the seat to seem of no force at all. For so soon as the noise of the
enemy was heard, he abandoned his charge, and with his soldiers fled away,
never staying till he came to Borgo S. Lorenzo. Nicholo entered into the
places abandoned, much maruelling that they were not better defended. And being
glad of that he had gotten, came down into Mugello, where he surprised some
Castles; and at Puliciano he lodged his Camp. From thence he spoiled all the
Country, to the Mountains of Fiesole. He was also so bold, as he doubted
not to pass the River of Arno, forraging and spoiling every place within
three miles of the City of Florence. The Florentines on the other side were
not dismayed, but before all other things settled the government. Whereof they
could not much doubt, as well for the good will the people bare unto Cosimo; as
because the chief Offices, were reduced into the hands of a few mighty
Citizens, who with their severity handled the matter so, that they assured
themselves of every man, that showed themselves discontented, or desirous of
Innouasion. They knew also by the contract made in Lombardy, with what Forces
Neri returned, and they looked also for other soldiers, to come from the Pope,
which till the coming of Neri, made them hope well. But Neri finding the
City in these disorders, and fears, determined to go into the field,
somewhat to bridle the fury of Nicholo, that he should not so much at his
pleasure spoil the country. Then making a band of certain footmen, the
people with all the horses they had went out, and recovered Remole, which the
enemies had taken. There they encamped themselves, empeaching Nicholo to
proceed in his spoil, and gave hope to the Citizens to vanquish the enemy.
Nicholo seeing that the enemies having lost their soldiers, moved not: and
understanding also, with what security they lived in that city, determined
not to lose time, but enterprise some other things. To the end that the
Florentines might have occasion to send out their Forces and fight with him.
And if the victory proved his, then he hoped that all other matters should
prosperously follow. In the Camp of Nicholo, Francesco Earl of Poppi happened
to be. He in that time (that the enemies were in Mugello) rebelled from the
Florentines, The Earl of Poppi rebelled from the Florentines.
with whom he had been before in League. And albeit the Florentines before
mistrusted that he would so do, yet thought they to have bound him with
benefits, and to that end increased his entertainment, and made him Governor
over all their Towns near unto him. All which notwithstanding (so great
strength had the love which he bare to the contrary faction) that no benefit
nor no fear, could force him to forget, the affection he bare to Rinaldo, and
the others that governed in times past. In so much, as when he understood that
Nicholo drew near, suddeinly he joined with him, and persuaded him with all
earnestie to go from the City, and pass into Casentino: showing him the
strength of that country, and with what security, he might from thence
distress the enemy. Nicholo was well content to be advised by his counsel,
and come into Casentino, surprised Romana and Bibiena, and after lodged his
Camp at the Castle S. Nicholo. This Castle is seated at the foot of those
mountains which divide Casentino from the Vale of Arno, and by reason the
seat thereof is high, and the place well manned, the taking thereof proved
hard: notwithstanding that Nicholo did with his Artillarie continually make the
battery. This siege had continued more then twenty days. In which time, the
Florentines assembled their Forces at Figghini, to the number of four
thousand horse; under the conduct of Pietro Giampagolo, the General, Neri
Caponi, and Barnardo de Medici Commissaries. To them four Messengers were sent
from the Castle of Saint Nicholo to desire their aid. Those Commissaries
having considered the seat of that place, found they could not rescue it any
other way, then by the Alps, which come from the Vale of Arno, and the tops of
them might be possessed by the enemy, before they could come thither, as well
for that they were nearer, as that they could not go unknown. So as, they
should attempt a thing to no purpose, and hazard the ruin of their soldiers.
Thereuppon the Captains commending their fidelity, commanded them, that if
they were not able any longer to defend themselves, that then they should
yield. Thus Nicholo prevailed in that enterprise, and possessed this Castle in
the end of thirty two days, after he and his Camp had besieged it. And for
so great a loss of time, obtained this small victory, which was the greatest
occasion whereby a greater enterprise was not performed. For if he had still
continued with his Camp before Florence, he had forced those that governed, to
levy money amongst the Citizens, prepare Forces, and make every other
provision, with more difficulty, the enemy being so near at hand, many of
the Citizens would also have been desirous of peace, to assure themselves from
Nicholo, Nicholo evil counseled by the Earl of Poppi.
seeing the war likely to continue. But the desire which the Earl of Poppi
had to be revenged of some Captains of Castles, who had been long his
enemies, did lead him to give that counsel: And Nicholo for his
satisfaction, followed the same; which was the destruction both of the one and
the other. Whereof may be conceived, that for the most part, the particular
passions of men, do hinder the public commodity. Nicholo following the
victory, surprised Rassina and Chiusi. In these places, the Earl of Poppi,
persuaded him to tarry, declaring that he might disperse his Forces into
Chiusi, Caprese, and Pieue: by that means to become Lord of the mountains,
and at his pleasure descend from thence, into Casentino, into the Vale of
Arno, to the Vale of Chiana, and the Vale of Teueri, and be also ready, so
answer to any motion whatsoever, that the Enemy could make. But Nicholo
considering the barreinnesse of those places, answered, that his Horses, did
not eat stones, and so went to the Borgo of S. Sepulchro, where he was
friendly received. From thence he practiced to win the favor of the
inhabitants, of the City called Castello: who being friends to the
Florentines, refused him. Also desiring to have the Perugini at his devotion,
he went with forty horse unto Perugia: and was received (being there a
Citizen borne) very lovingly, yet within few days after he became
suspected. For albeit both with the Governor and the Citizens, he practiced
many things, yet nothing was brought to pass. But receiving of them eight
thousand Ducats he returned to the Camp. Then he devised how to take Cortona
from the Florentines, Practice to surprise Cortona.
which being discovered before the time of execution, that devise came not to
effect. Among the chief Citizens of that Town, was Bartholomeo di Senso, who
one evening going by commandment of the Captain to take the Guard of one of
the gates, was by a Country man his friend, advised not to go thither,
unless he were content there to be slain. Bartholomeo desirous to understand
the bottom of that matter, found there were some practice made with Nicholo:
which Bartholomeo by authority of the Captain revealed, and made sure the
chief of the conspiracy. Then doubling the Guarde of the Gate, tarried there
till Nicholo did come. Who at his arrival, understanding the matter was
discovered, returned to his Camp. During that things were in Toscana thus
handled, and that the Dukes soldiers had gained little: Lombardy grew
unquiet, with loss and disaduanntage of the Duke. Because the Earl Francesco,
so soon as the season of the year suffered, came forth with his Army to the
field, and for that the Venetians had supplied their Forces upon the Lake, the
Earl thought good first to make himself Lord of the Water, and then drive
the Duke from the Lake: (which done) all other things would be easily brought
to pass. Then with the Navy of the Venetians, he assaulted the Dukes Galleys,
and had the victory. He also took those Castles which were holden of the
Duke. In so much, as the Dukes other soldiers who besieged Brescia by land,
understanding this overthrow, retired. In this sort was Brescia after three
years siege delivered. This victory had, the Earl marched toward his
enemies, The siere of Brescia removed.
who were come to Soncino, a Castle upon the River of Ogglio, where he
dislodged them, and forced them remove to Cremona. There the Duke made head,
and on that side defended his Countries. But the Earl day by day drawing
nearer, and the Duke fearing to lose either all or part of his Country, found
how unadvisedly he had done to send Nicholo into Toscana. And to amend that
error he wrote unto Nicholo in what terms he stood: praying him, with what
speed he possibly might, to leave Toscana, and return into Lombardy. The
Florentines in this mean space, by order of their Generalles, had joined their
soldiers with the Popes Forces, and made head at Anghiari, a Castle at the
foot of the mountains, which divided the Vale of Teuere, from the Vale of
Chiana, four miles from S. Sepulchro, where the fields be large to receive
Horse men, and fit for all actions of war. And because they had intelligence
of the Earls victory, and the reuocation of Nicholo, they thought that
without the sword, or more labor, the war was ended. Therefore wrote unto
their Generals not to fight, for that Nicholo could not many days remain in
Toscana. This Commission became known to Nicholo, who seeing that of
necessity he must depart: to leave nothing unattempted, he determined to
fight, supposing to find the enemy altogether unprovided, and not looking for
any Battle at all. Whereunto he was also animated and encouraged by
Rinaldo, the Earl of Poppi, and diverse other banished men of Florence, who
knew their own destruction to be certain, if Nicholo did remove thence: but
by fighting they hoped either to win the victory, or lose it with honor.
This resolution made, the Army marched from the place where it was, till it
came between the Cities of Castello and Borgo, and being come to Borgo, before
that the enemies knew thereof, levied from the Town two thousand men, who
trusting to the virtue of the Captain and his promises, being desirous of
spoil, followed him. Then Nicholo with his Army, marched in Battle-wise
toward Anghiari, and was within two miles of the enemy or less, when by
Micheletto Attendulo was seen a great dust, who knowing the enemies to be
there, warned every man to prepare himself. The noise in the Florentine Camp
was great; because that Army encamped for the most part without Discipline, and
supposed the enemy to be far off, so all the Florentines were more ready to
fly then fight. For every man was far from his own lodging, and disarmed,
either to refresh himself in that hot season, or to take some other delight.
Yet so great was the diligence of the Governors and the Captain, that before
the enemies approached, The battle of Anghiari.
they were on horseback, and prepared to resist the charge. And as Micheletto
was the first to discover the enemies, so was he also the first that charged
them, and with his soldiers made speed to win the Bridge which crosses the
way not far from Anghiari. And because before the coming of the enemy,
Pietro Giampagolo had caused the ditches to be cast down, which are on either
side the way: Micheletto standing against the Bridge, Simoncino the Popes
Coronell, together with the Legate, stayed on the right hand, and on the left
hand stood the Commissaries for Florence, and the foot men placed along the
River. Then had the enemy no other way open whereby he might charge, but by
the Bridge. Neither had the Florentines to fight but only upon the Bridge,
saving that they commanded their footmen, that if the footmen of the enemy
did go toward the men of Arms; that then they with their Crossebowes should
charge them: to the end that the Florentine horsemen in passing the Bridge,
should not be hurt on the side. So that they that gave the first charge were
by Micheletto bravely resisted: but afterward Astore and Francesco Piccinino
with their choice bands, so furiously charged Micheletto, as they took from
him the Bridge, and drove him to the foot of the hill, which leads up to
Anghiari. After that they were put back by him, and forced to retire beyond
the Bridge, and he also charged them upon the side. This fight continued two
hours, for sometime Nicholo, and sometimes the Florentines, were Lords of the
Bridge. And although upon the Bridge they were of equal force, yet both on
that, and this side of the Bridge, Nicholo fought with great disadvantage.
Because when the soldiers of Nicholo had passed the Bridge, they found the
enemies strong upon that straight, and could not with like advantage be
charged: and those that were weary, might easily be, by fresh men supplied.
But when the Florentines happened to pass, Nicholo could not so commodiously
relieve his wearied men, being straightned and holden in, with ditches and
trenches: So as, though many times Nicholo had won the Bridge, yet by the
supply of fresh enemies, he was ever driven back. But when the Bridge was by
the Florentines assuredly won, and that their forces were entered into the
way, Nicholo wanted time, through the fury of the enemy, and the
incommoditie of the place, to supply his soldiers. For they of the Vangarde
were forced to mixed themselves, with the Rearewarde: and so the one disordering
the other, all the whole Army was forced to fly, and every man without any
respect ran toward the Town. Nicholo Piccintino defeated.
Then the Florentine soldiers began to spoil: which spoil of prisoners,
armor, and horses, was great. For with Nicholo there was not saved above one
thousand horses. They of the Borgo, who in hope of spoil had followed Nicholo,
were of spoilers, become a spoil, because they were all taken and put to
ransom. Their ensigns and carriages were lost, and the victory was much more
profitable for Toscana, then prejudicial for the Duke. For if the Florentines
had lost the battle, Toscana had been his, but he losing the battle, lost no
other thing but the armor and horses of his Army, which with plenty of money
might be recovered. Neither could any war be made in the country of another
less dangerous, then was the war of those days. For in so great an
overthrow, and so long a fight (which continued from twenty to four and
twenty of the clock) more were not slain then one man, and he also not hurt
by the virtue of any other, but being fallen from his horse, was trodden upon
with horses, and so died: with so great security men fought in that age. The
reason thereof is, that for the most part the soldiers fought on horseback,
and covered with armor, they were defended from death till they yielded. And
therefore finding themselves able to fight, they so did, and being not longer
able, they yielded. This conflict (for matters which happened both in and after
the fight) was a sign of the great unhappiness of those wars, because the
enemies being vanquished, and Nicholo returned into Borgo, the Governors of
the Florentines would have followed, and besieged him there to have the
victory sullie. But some soldiers, and some Captains also, refused to obey
them, saying they would first carry away the spoil, and cure the hurt men.
Also (a thing more notable) the next day at high noone, Want of discipline in
the Florentines Camp.
without leave or respect either of the Governors or of the General, the
soldiers went unto Arezzo, and there bestowed their spoil (which done) they
returned to Anghiari. A thing so much against all order Military and
Discipline of war, that the remain of any Army well ordered, might and would
easily and deseruingly have recovered that victory, which the Florentines
undeservedly had gotten. Besides this, the Governors commanding that all
soldiers taken, should be stayed, to the end, that the enemy might not grow
and sodeinly recover strength, yet were they presently delivered. All which
things are greatly to be meruailed at. First, how in such an Army, there should
be virtue sufficient to win victory: And then, how there could be in any enemy
so little value, as would be of so disordered a people oppressed. But while the
Florentines went, and returned from Arezzo, Nicholo gained time to go with his
soldiers from Borgo, and marched toward Romagna, with whom also fled the
Florentine Rebels, who seeing all hope failed for their return to Florence,
they divided themselves, and every man took his own way, some remaining in
Italy, and some without, as they could find mean to bestow themselves. Of
which number was Rinaldo, who made his habitation at Ancona: from whence (the
rather to gain himself a celestial country) having lost his dwelling upon
earth, he went unto the Sepulcher of Christ, and being returned home, at the
marriage of one of his daughters sitting at the table, The death of Rinaldo de
A^b^zi.
sodeinly died: wherein fortune did favor him, that in the day of his last
sorrow she called him away. A man in every fortune honorable, and would have
been much more honorable, had he been borne in a City undivided. Because
many times those his virtues which in a factious City did hinder him, in a
City united would have advanced him. The Commissaries then seeing the
soldiers returned from Arezzo, and Nicholo departed, presented themselves
before Borgo. The Borghesi offered to yield to the Florentines, but they
refused to receive them. And in compounding this agreement, the Popes Legate
grew suspicious of the Commissaries, fearing they intended to take that Town
from the Church: in so much, as they grew to words of offense, and some
disorder would have followed betwixt the Florentine and the Popes soldiers, if
the matter had been more spoken of. But because every thing passed according to
the Legates desire, all anger was pacified. While this assault of Borgo
continued, aduertisements were given, that Nicholo Piccinino was gone toward
Rome, and (as others said) toward La Marca. Whereupon the Legate, and the rest
thought good to march toward Perugia, to succor La Marca or Rome, if Nicholo
directed his course to any of them. Barnardo de Medici followed, and Neri with
the Florentines marched to surprise Casentino. This resolution made, Neri
encamped before Russina, and surprised it with the like fury, that he had
taken Bihiena, Prato, Vecchio, Poppi besieged.
and Romena. From thence, he went to Poppi, and there lodged the Army, dividing
it into two parts, the one upon the plain of Certomondo, the other upon the
hill that reaches to Fronzoli. The Earl seeing himself both of God and men
abandoned, shut himself up in Poppi, not hoping of any aid, but the rather to
procure a composition least to his disadvantage. Neri there besieging him, was
desired to accept composition. The conditions whereof were such, as thereby he
might hope to save himself, his children and goods portable, yielding the
Town and his state to the Florentines. When these capitulations were in
making, the Earl came down to the bridge of Arno, which passes by the town,
and there with great sorrow spoke thus. The speech of the Earl of Poppi to the
Florentines commissaries.
If I had well measured my fortune with your power, I should now have come as a
friend to rejoice at your victory, and not as an enemy, entreat you, that my
misery might be pitied. This present chance, as it is to you honorable, and
pleasant, so is the same to me lamentable and grievous. I was owner of weapon,
horses, subjects and riches, who can therefore marvel though with grief of
mind I leave them? If you will, and can command all Toscana, of necessity we
must all obey you: and if I had not committed this error, neither should my
fortune have been known, nor your liberality appeared. For if at this time
you favor me, you shall thereby give to the world a testimony of your mercy.
Let therefore the virtue of your compassion, exceed the greatness of mine
offense: and be pleased that at the least this only house may descend to
those, of whom your ancestors have received benefits. The Earl answered by
N. Capponi.
To whom Neri answered, that as he had hoped overmuch in those that could do
little, so had he thereby in such sort offended the state of Florence, as his
fault joined with the conditions of the present time, must of necessity take
from him all his wealth, and be enforced to abandon that country, as enemy to
the Florentines, which as their friend he would not possess. For he had made
so evil a trial of himself, as he might not in any wise be suffered to
remain there, where at every change of fortune he might be ready to offend
the Florentine common wealth, for it was not him, but his country whom they
feared. But if he were pleased to repair into Germany, he might there remain
a Prince, since those Cities did desire him, and the Florentines for the love
of those his ancestors whom he alleged, would be also therewith contented.
Hereto the Earl in great collor replied, saying, that he would see the
Florentines a great way further from him. So leaving all friendly
communication, the poor Earl despairing of other remedy, yielded his Town
to the Florentines. That done, taking his goods, his wife, and children,
departed, weeping and lamenting for the loss of that Country, which his
ancestors by the space of 900. years had possessed. These victories being
known in Florence, were by the Governors of that State and the people with
marvelous joy received, and because that Barnardo de Medici knew that Nicholo
was to no purpose marched toward La Marca or Rome, he and his soldiers
returned to Neri, and from thence they went together to Florence, where they
were welcomed with all the greatest honors that by order of that City might
be given to victorious Citizens. And were in triumphant wise saluted by the
Senators, the Captains, and the whole City.

The end of the fifth Book.
royal blazon or coat of arms
THE SIXTH BOOK.
IT has been, and by good reason ought to be the intent of all those that make
war, to enrich themselves, and impouerish their enemy. Neither is victory
for other occasion sought, nor the possessions of the enemy to other end
desired, then thereby to make thy self mighty, and thy adversary weak. It
follows therefore, that so often as thy victory does impouerish thee, or thy
gains do weaken thee, either thou pass or come short of the mark, whereunto
the war is directed. That Prince, and that State, is by the victories of
war enriched, which extirpeth the enemies, and becomes Lord of the spoils,
and ransomes. And that Prince or Commonweal is impouerished, who cannot
(though he be victorious) extirpate the enemy, or has not to his own use, the
spoils and ransomes, but leaves them to his soldiers. Such a Prince in his
losses is unhappy, and in his victories most unfortunate, because in losing he
suffers all injuries which the enemy can do him, and in winning, must abide
the offenses of friends: which as they are less reasonable, so are they also
less tolerable, seeing that by impositions, and new exactions, he is again
to burden his own subjects. That Prince then, in whom is any generositie of
mind, cannot rejoice at such a victory whereat all his subjects be
constrained to lament. The ancient and well ordered Commonweals were wont by
conquests to fill their Treasuries with gold and silver, to give rewards to the
people, to forgive tributes, and to make triumphs and public feastings. But
the States of whom we write, first emptied their treasure houses, and after
impouerished the people, without assuring themselves of their enemies. All
which grew by their disorderly proceeding in the wars. For when they took
any prisoners, not holding them nor slaying them, the revenge was no longer
deferred, then the leaders of the enemy were furnished anew with horse and
weapon. Besides that, the spoils and raunsoms being given to the soldiers,
the Princes victorious could not employ the same in the next war, but were
forced to draw their provision from the bowels of their own people. Neither
did that victory bring forth other benefit, then make the Prince greedy,
and with less respect to burden them. For the soldiers had brought the war
to such a pass (as both the victorious and the victored, if they would
command their own men) had like need of money, because the one was to arm
them a new, the other to reward them. And as they vnmounted could not fight, so
these without new rewards, would not. Whereby it followed, that the one inioyed
not much of the victory, the other felt little of the loss, seeing the
victored was speedily repaired, and the victorious could not in time pursue the
victory. This disorder, and this perverse proceeding in war, caused that
Nicholo Piccinino was again set on horseback, before his overthrow was known
through all Italy, and made after greater war then before he had done. This
was the cause, that after the discomfit at Tenna, he could surprise Verona.
This was the cause, that after the slaughter of his soldiers at Verona, he
could recover a greater Army, and come into Toscana. This was the cause, that
being overthrown at Anghiari, before he arrived in Romagna, he was more
mighty in the field, then before he had been: and might thereby put the Duke
of Milan in hope to defend Lombardy, which by his absence was supposed to be
welneare lost. For when Nicholo had filled Lombardy with troubles, the Duke was
brought to such pass, as he began to doubt of his own estate. And fearing his
ruin might follow before the coming of Nicholo, (for whom he had sent) to
bridle the Earls fury, and with industry to temper fortune, (which with
force he could not) he resorted to those remedies which in like cases had
before time helped him. The Duke desires peace.
He therefore sent Nicholo da Este Prince of Farrara unto Pischiera (where the
Earl was) to practice a peace, and persuade that war not to be for his
advantage. Because, if the Duke were brought to that weakness, that he could
not maintain his own reputation, he should be the rather esteemed. And for
more assurance that indeed he desired peace, he offered him conclusion of the
marriage, and would send his daughter to Farrara, she promising (the peace
made) to yield her self into his hands. The Earl answered, that if the Duke
did faithfully desire peace, with ease he might find it; as a thing both by
the Florentines and Venetians wished for. Yet did he mistrust the same much,
knowing that before time, he had never made peace, but for necessity, which
being passed, he would always return to his old mind, and make war.
Neither could he believe, that the Duke intended the marriage, having been
before at his hand so many times mocked: Notwithstanding, if the peace were
concluded, he would after deal in the marriage as by friends he should be
advised. The Venetians who without reason were suspicious of their own
soldiers, The Venetia^s mistrust the Earl Francesco their General.
of those entertainements reasonably conceived mistrust. Which the Earl being
careful to remove, followed the war with greater fury. Notwithstanding, his
mind was still so tempered with ambition, and the Venetians were so infected
with suspicion, as the rest of that summer was passed without any enterprise of
importance. In so much as Nicholo Piccinino being returned into Lombardy, and
the winter begun, all the soldiers repaired to their lodgings: the Earl to
Verona, the Duke to Cremona, the Florentines to Toscana, and the Popes forces
to Romagna. After the victory at Anghiari, they assaulted Furli, and Bologna,
with intent to take them from Francesco Piccinino, who in the name of his
father kept them. But that enterprise took none effect, yet their coming
thither did so much terrify the people of Rauenna, that with the consent of
Ostacio di Polenta, they abandoned the Pope, and yielded their obedience to the
Venetians, who in recompense of the town (and to the end that Ostacio should
never recover that from them by force, Ingratitude of the Venetians.
which for want of wit he had given them) sent him and his son to die in
Candia. In which enterprises, notwithstanding the victory of Anghiari, the
Pope wanting money, sold the Castle of Borgo Saint Sepulcro for twenty five
thousand Florins. In this estate all things being, in respect of the winter,
every man supposed himself in safety, and therefore of peace thought not at
all: chiefly the Duke, held himself by Nicholo, and the winter season
assured. For that consideration, the parle of peace with the Earl was broken,
and Nicholo with all diligence was set on horseback, with every other furniture
for a future war necessary. Hereof the Earl being advertised, went unto
Venice, to consult with the Senators what was to be done the year following.
Nicholo on the other side was ready, and seeing the enemy unprepared, tarried
not for the Spring, but in the depth of winter passed Adda, and entered
Bresciano, possessing himself of all that Country (Adula and Acri excepted)
and there spoiling and taking prisoners two thousand of the Dukes horses, who
unawares were there assaulted. But that which more displeased the Earl and
Venetians, was, the revolt of Ciarpellone, one of his chief Captains. The
Earl receiving these news, went sodeinly from Venice, and being arrived at
Brescia, found that Nicholo had done those displeasures, and was returned to
his lodging, so as he thought not good to kindle the war again, being in
that sort quenched. And since the enemy and time did give opportunity, thought
good to prepare himself, hoping the rather with the new year to be revenged
of old injuries. He therefore procured that the Venetians should call back
their forces, which served the Florentines in Toscana: and commanded, that the
place of Gattamelata being dead, should by Micheletto be supplied. The Spring
being come, Micheletto General for the League.
Nicholo Piccinino was the first that marched to the field, and besieged
Cignano, a Castle distant from Brescia twelve miles. To the rescue whereof came
the Earl, and betwixt these two Captains, according to their custom the
war was made. The Earl standing in doubt of Bergamo, besieged Martinengo,
which Castle being easily won, the succor of Bergamo could not be hard. That
City being by Nicholo greatly distressed, and having provided so, as it could
not receive harm, but by the way of Martinengo, they manned it so fully, as
behooved the Earl to go unto the siege thereof with all forces. Whereupon
Nicholo with his whole Army placed himself where he might impeach the Earl of
his victual, and was with trenches and bulwarks so fortified, as the Earl
without his apparent danger could not assault him, and brought the matter to
that pass, that the besieger was in more peril then the people of Martinengo
who were besieged; in so much as the Earl for want of victual, could neither
continue the siege, nor for the peril he was in, depart thence. Thus the Dukes
victory was thought assured, and the Venetians and Earls overthrow seemed
apparent. But fortune, (who never fails of mean, to favor her friends, and
disfavor her foes) made Nicholo Piccinino with hope of this victory to become
so ambitious and insolent, as without respect to the Duke (and himself also)
by a messenger signified unto him, A proud request of Nicholo.
that he had long time served under his ensign, and yet had not gained so much
land as he could therein bury himself: and was therefore desirous to know
wherewith his service should be rewarded, since now it was in his power to make
him Lord of Lombardy, and oppress all his enemies. And to the end that of
certain victory he might aspect a certain recompense, desired to have of his
gift the City of Piacenza, where being weary of long travel, he might
sometimes repose himself: and in conclusion somewhat threatened to abandon the
enterprise, if the Duke refused to satisfy his demand. This presumptuous and
insolent suit, so highly offended the Duke, as he made choice rather to lose
the victory, then consent thereunto. And that which so many dangers and
threatenings of enemies could not compass, the insolent behavior of friends
brought to pass, and the Duke resolved to make a peace with the Earl. Peace
between the League and Duke, and his daughter married to the Harle Francesco.
To whom he sent Antonio Guidobuono of Tortona, and by him offered his
daughter with the conditions of peace: which offer, was by the Earl, and all
his Collegats greedily accepted, and the particularities betwixt them secretly
concluded. The Duke then sent unto Nicholo, willing him to take a truce with
the Earl for one year, alleging he had been so sore burdened with charges,
as he could not refuse a certain peace for a doubtful victory. Nicholo
meruailed much at this resolution, as one that knew not what might move the
Duke to shun a victory so certain: and could not believe that for want of
good will to reward friends, he would save his enemies. Wherefore in the best
manner he could, opposed himself to this determination. In so much as the Duke
was constrained to threaten him, that if he were not conformable, he would give
him either as a prisoner to the enemy, or as a spoil to his own soldiers.
Then Nicholo obeyed, but with no other mind, then he that by force abandoneth
his friends and country: complaining his hap to be hard, since sometimes
fortune, and sometimes the Duke, had taken from him the victory over his
enemies. This peace made, the marriage betwixt the Lady Bianca and the Earl,
was solemnized, and to her was allotted for dowry the City of Cremona. Which
done, the peace was ratified in November, the year 1441. where, for the
Venetians, Francesco Barbarigo, and Pagolo Trono, and for the Florentines,
Agnolo Acciaiuolo, were Commissioners. In this contract, the Venetians gained
Peschiera, Asola, and Lonato, a Castle belonging to the Marquess of Mantoua.
The war thus stayed in Lombardy, it remained to take order for the troubles
in the kingdom, which not being pacified, would be an occasion to renew the
wars in Lombardy. The King Rinato during the wars in Lombardy, had been
spoiled by Alfonso of Arragon of all his Kingdom, save only the City of
Naples, so that Alfonso thinking to have victory in his own hand, determined
during the siege of Naples, to take from the Earl Beneuento; and other his
Countries thereabouts: for he thought the same without peril might be done by
the Earls absence, and his employment in the wars of Lombardy. The war
between King Rinato and Alfonso revived.
This enterprise was by Alfonso easily performed, and with small travel he
surprised all those Towns. But the news of the peace in Lombardy being come,
Alfonso feared that the Earl, the rather for that his towns were taken from
him, would join with Rinato, and Rinato hoped for the same occasion that he
would so do. Rinato then sent unto the Earl, desiring him to come to the aid
of his friend, and the revenge of his enemy. On the other side, Alfonso
entreated Philippo, that for the good will betwixt them, he would cause the
Earl to be so much set a work, as to attend greater matters, he might be
inforded to let this alone. Philippo granted this request, not thinking what
disturbed that peace, which he, not long since, had made to his disadvantage.
Then he gave the Pope Eugenio to understand, that the time was now come, to
recover those Towns which the Earl had taken from the Church. And for
performance of that enterprise, he offered him Nicholo Piccinino paid, so long
as the wars continued. For (the peace now made) he remained with his
soldiers in Romagna. Eugenio greedily entertained this counsel, as well for
the displeasure he bare to the Earl, as the desire he had to recover his own.
And though before time, he had been with the same hope by Nicholo deceived, yet
now the Duke undertaking the action, he mistrusted no more deceit, but
presently joined his forces with Nicholo, and assaulted La Marca. The Earl
being so sodeinly set upon, ordered his soldiers, and marched toward the
enemy. In this mean while, the King Alfonso won Naples, The City of Naples
won by Alfonso.
whereby all that Kingdom (excepting Castle Nuouo) was at his devotion. Then
Rinato leaving that Castle well guarded, went from thence to Florence, where he
was most honorably received, and there remaining a few days, finding he could
not make war any longer, went unto Marsilia. Alfonso in the mean while had
taken the Castle Nuouo, and the Earl remained in La Marca, in strength
inferior to the Pope and Nicholo, and therefore prayed the Venetians and
Florentines to aid him with men and money. Letting them to understand, it was
necessary to bridle the Pope and the King, during the time he was able: for
otherwise they were to look for little good, seeing the Pope and King would
join themselves with Philippo, and divide all Italy betwixt them. The
Florentines and Venetians for a time stood doubtful what to do, as well because
they knew not whether it were their best to be enemies to the Pope and King, as
for that they were occupied with the matters of Bologna. Anibale Bentiuogli had
driven out of that City Francesco Piccinino. And the rather to defend the
same from the Duke, (who favored Francesco) he sent for aid to the
Florentines and Venetians, and they did not deny him: so as being occupied in
these matters, they could not resolve to assist the Earl. But Annibale having
overthrown Francesco Piccinino, and those matters settled, the Florentines
determined to aid the Earl: yet first to be assured of the Duke, they renewed
the league with him, which the Duke refused not, having consented that the
war should be made upon the Earl, so long as the King Rinato was in Arms.
But seeing him vanquished, and utterly deprived of his Kingdom, he was not
pleased that the Earl should then be bereft of his Country. And therefore he
not only consented to aid the Earl, but also wrote unto Alfonso, desiring
him to be pleased to return to the Kingdom, and make no longer war.
Whereunto, albeit Alfonso was unwilling, yet being beholding to the Duke,
determined to content him, and retired himself with his Army to the other side
of Tronto. While matters were thus handled in Romagna, the Florentines within
themselves became disquiet. Among the Citizens of most reputation and
authority in Florence, was Neri, the son of Gino Capponi, whose greatness,
Neri Capponi. Cosimo de Medici.
Cosimo de Medici above all others feared. For besides his great credit in the
City, he was also greatly honored of the soldiers, having been many times
General of the Florentine Armies, and with his victory, virtue, and well
deserving, had gained their love. Besides that, the memory of victories won
by him and Gino his father, the one having surprised Pisa, and the other
overthrown Nicholo Piccinino at Anghiari, made him beloved of many, and feared
of those who desired no company in the government. Among many other of the
chief Captains in the Florentine Army, Baldaccio General of the Florentine
footmen.
was Baldaccio of Anghiari, a man of war most excellent. For in those days,
there was not any in Italy, that for virtue, person, and courage, could excel
him, and had among the footmen (for of those he was ever a leader) so much
reputation, as all that sort of soldiers in every enterprise, and whenever
he pleased, would willingly follow him. This Baldaccio loved Neri exceeding
much, as a man whose virtue (whereof he was a witness) so deserved, which bred
in the other Citizens great suspicion. And they judging to suffer him, was
perilous, and to restrain him was most danger of all: determined to dispatch
him utterly, which intent fortune greatly favored. Bartholomeo Orlandini was
Gonfaloniere de Giuslitia. He being (as is before said) Captain of Marradi, at
such time as Ni. Piccinino passed into Toscana, cowardly fled and aba^doned
that passage, which by nature almost defended it self. This cowardice at that
time greatly offended Baldaccio, who with words of reproof and letters, made
the same euerywhere known. Whereat Bartholomeo ashamed and offended, did
greatly study to be revenged, hoping by the death of the accusor, to cancel
the fame of his infamy. This desire of Bartholomeo being known to other
citizens, with small labor he persuaded them to the oppression of Baldaccio,
whereby in one act he might revenge his private injury, and deliver the state
from that man, whom they must of force enterteine with peril, or discharge with
disadvantage. Therefore Bartholomeo being fully determined to kill him, conveyed
into his chamber many young men armed. Then the Gonfalone seeing Baldaccio come
into the market place (whither he resorted daily to confer with the Magistrates
of his charge) sent for him, and he obeyed. Being come, the Gonfaloniere met
him, enterteining him with speech touching his business from chamber to
chamber, till he came near to that place where the armed men were hidden, and
when he thought good, called them forth. Baldaccio being disarmed, Baldaccio
murd^red by B^rtholomeo Orlandini.
was presently slain, and thrown out of the window. From thence, he was
carried to the market place, had his head cut off, and made a spectacle for the
people all that day. Of him there remained one son by his wife called
Annalena, who within few years after died. This Annalena having buried her
son and husband, determined no more to marry, but making her house a
Monastery, shut her self up therein* with many other noble women, where they
very holily lived and died. Her house in memory of her, was after made a
Monastery, by the name of S. Annalena (as at this present it is) and ever
shall be. This action somewhat decreased the power of Neri, and took from him
reputation and friends. Neither did that only content the Citizens in
authority. For the ten years of their office being passed, and their
authority in the Balia ended, diverse men both by word and deeds took
courage to complain against the continuance of those officers: and therefore
the Governors thought for the holding of their authority, it was necessary to
have their offices prolonged, giving new commission to friends, and oppressing
their foes. For which consideration, Florence reformed.
in the year 1444. by their councels a new Balia was created, which
reestablished officers, giving authority to a few, to create the Senate,
reviving the Chancelorship of reformation: removing Ser. Philippo Peruzzi, and
in his place appointing one other to govern, according to the pleasure of the
great men: putting in prison Giouan the son of Simone Vespucci. The
government thus settled, and the offices of state taken anew, they turned their
minds to matters abroad. Nicholo Piccinino being (as has been beforesaid)
abandoned by the King Alfonso, and the Earl, with the help he had of the
Flore^tines, became strong, assailed Nicholo near unto Fermo, and there gave
him so great an overthrow, that Nicholo lost wel-neare all his soldiers, Ni.
Piccinino discomfited.
and with a few fled into Montecchio. Nicholo tarried there all the winter to
increase his army, and therein was helped by the Pope, and king Alfonso. In so
much as the spring time being come, and the other Captains returned to the
field, Nicholo was the stronger, and the Earl brought to extreme necessity,
and had been utterly defeated, if the intent of Nicholo had not been by the
Duke altered. Philippo sent for Nicholo, prete^ding to have occasion by mouth
to impart unto him matters of great importance. Which Nicholo being desirous to
hear, abandoned a certain victory, for an incertaine pleasure, and leaving
Francesco his son to govern the army, went unto Milan. The Earl
understanding of his departure from the Camp, would not lose the opportunity
to fight in the absence of Nicholo: and assaulting the army of Nicholo near
unto the Castle of Monte Loro, overthrew it, and took Francesco prisoner.
Nicholo at his arrival in Milan, seeing himself abused by Philippo, and
understanding his camp to be broken, and his son prisoner, with sorrow died, the
year 1445. being of the age of 64. years, Death of Ni. Piccinino.
having been a Captain more virtuous then happy. Of him there remained two
sons, Francesco, and Giacopo, who as they were of less virtue then the
father, so had they worse fortune. By which mean, the soldiers bred by
Braccio, were almost worn out, and the discipline of Sforza (always helped by
fortune) became more glorious. The Pope seeing the army of Nicholo suppressed,
and him dead, nor much hoping in the aid of Arragon, sought to make peace with
the Earl, which by mediation of the Florentines was concluded. The peace made
in La Marca, all Italy had lived in quiet, if the Bolognesi had not disturbed
the same. Trouble in Bologna.
There was in Bologna two mighty Families, Channeschi, and Bentiuogli, of the
one Annibale, and of the other Battista was chief. These (to be the rather
assured one of the others friendship) contracted a marriage. But between men
which aspire to one greatness, though alliance may easily be made, yet
friendship cannot. Bolognia was in league with the Florentines and Venetians,
which league had been concluded by mean of Annibale Bentiuogli, after they had
driven out Francesco Piccinino. Battista knowing that the Duke desired greatly
to have the favor of that City, practiced with him to kill Annibale, and
bring that City under his ensign. The order of this murder agreed upon, the
24* of June 1445. Battista with his men assaulted Annibale and slew him: which
done, he proclaimed the Dukes name throughout the town. At that time, the
Commissaries for the Venetians and the Florentines, were in Bologna; and at the
first rumor retired unto their houses, but afterward perceiving that the
murderers were not favored by the people (who were in great numbers armed,
and assembled, lamenting the death of Annibale) they took courage, went
toward them, and assailed the Canneschi, whom in less then one hour they
overthrew; slaying some, and forcing the rest to fly the City. Battista not
fleeing in time nor slain, remained at his house and hid himself in a vessel
made for the keeping of corn. His enemies having all the day sought him, and
assured he was not gone out of the town, threatened his servants so much, as
one of them at length discovered where he was. From thence he was taken out*
and slain, then drawn through the streets, and at last burned: so as the
victory of the Duke, was of force sufficient to persuade Annibale to the
enterprise, but not of power enough to save him from death. Thus by the death
of Battista, and the fleeing of the Canneschi, these tumuls were appeased. The
Bolognesi remained in great confusion, because there was not left of the house
of Bentiuogli any man fit for government. And for that there remained one son
only of Annibale but six years old (who was called Giouanni) the Bolognesi
feared least among the friends of the Bentiuogli some division would grow,
which might perhaps occasion the return of the Canneschi, with the ruin of
their country and faction. While the Bolognesi continued in this doubtful
imagination, Francesco late Earl of Poppi being in Bologna, informed the
chief Citizens, that if they had desire to be governed by one descended of
the blood of Annibale, he could inform them of such a one. Declaring that
about 20. years past, Hercole the Cosen of Annibale happened to be at Poppi,
and had there carnal knowledge of a young woman in that Castle, who was after
delivered of a son called Santi, Santi Bentiuogli.
whom Hercole diverse times affirmed to be his. And it seemed to be a thing
likely, for that the child so much resembled Hercole, as liker it could not be.
His words were believed by those Citizens, and they deserred no time to send
unto Florence, to find out the young man, and persuade with Cosimo di Medici,
and Neri Capponi, that they might have him. The supposed father of this Santi
was dead, and the young man lived under the tuition of an Uncle of his called
Antonio Cascese. This Antonio was rich, without children, and friend to Neri.
The matter being understood, Neri thought fit, neither to reject the motion,
nor embrace it, but commanded that Santi in the presence of Cosimo, and those
that were sent from Bologna, should speak with him. Then order being taken for
their meeting, Santi was by the Bolognesi not only honored, but also (as it
were) adored. Then Cosimo calling Santi aside, said unto him, there is none
that in this matter can better counsel thee, then thy self, for thou art to
take that choice whereto thine own mind is inclined. If thou be the son of
Hercole Bentiuogli, thou will dispose thy self to such actions as be worthy
of thy father and his house, but if thou art the son of Agnolo Cascese, thou
shall remain in Florence, and employ thy life basely in the art of
clothmaking. These words much encouraged the young man, for where he had before
refused to take the matter upon him, he said now that he would be directed in
all by Cosimo and Neri. Then they resolved with the messengers of Bologna to
apparel him, horse him, and man him, and so in honorable wise convey him to
the City, there to take the government: where he after governed with so great
wisdom, that notwithstanding the greater part of his predecessors had been by
their enemies slain, yet he peaceably and honorably lived and died. After the
death of Nicholo Piccinino, and the peace made in La Marca, Philippo desired to
entertain a Captain to govern his Army, and secretly practiced with
Ciarpellone, one of the Earls chief Leaders, and grew with him to
composition. Ciarpellone prayed leave of the Earl to go to Milan, to take
possession of certain Castles, which in the late war were by Philippo given
him. The Earl mistrusting that which was, (and to the end the Duke should not
be served to his disadvantage) first stayed him, and shortly after put him to
death, alleging he had been by him abused. Therewith Philippo was exceedingly
angry, and the Florentines and Venetians much pleased, as they that feared
least the Earls forces and the Dukes power joined in friendship. This anger
was occasion to resuscitate new war in La Marca. In Rimini, Gismondo
Malatesti was Lord, who being son in law to the Earl, hoped to have possession
of Pesaro: notwithstanding the Earl having surprised it, gave it to Alessandro
his brother. Wherewith Gismondo grew greatly offended, and the more because
Federigo di Montefeltro his enemy, by the Earls favor, had usurped Vrbino.
This was the cause that Gismondo joined with the Duke, and solicited the Pope
and King to make war upon the Earl. Who to the end Gismondo should feel the
first fruits of that war which he desired, thought to prevent him, and
sodeinly assailed him. Whereupon Rome and La Marca were on the soden brought
into tumult, because Philippo, the king, and the Pope, sent great aid to
Gismondo: and the Venetians and Florentines furnished the Earl, though with no
men, yet with plenty of money. Neither was Philippo content to make war in
Romagna, but he also determined to take from the Earl Cremona and Pontremoli:
yet was Pontremoli by the Florentines, and Cremona by the Venetians defended.
New wars in Lombardy.
So that by these means the war in Lombardy was renewed, and therein
somewhat done in Cremonese. Francesco Piccinino General for the Duke, was by
Micheletto, and the Venetian forces at Casale defeated. By which victory, the
Venetians hoped to take the Dukes state from him, and sent their Commissarie to
Cremona, assailing Ghiraadada, and possessed all saving Cremona. Afterward
they passed Adda, spoiling the country hard to the gates of Milan. Thereupon
the Duke desired aid of Alfonso, declaring what peril would ensue to the
kingdom, if Lombardy were in the Venetians hand. Alfonso promised to send him
soldiers, who without consent of the Earl could with difficulty pass. Then
Philippo entreated the Earl not to abandon his father in law being aged and
blind. The Earl sound himself offended with the Duke for having moved the
war against him. On the other side he misliked the greatness of the
Venetians, The Earl his friendship desired both by the Duke and Venetians.
his money grew low, and the same was scarcely supplied by the Lords of the
League. For the Florentines feared no more the Duke, which was the cause they
esteemed the Earl, and the Venetians desired his ruin, judging that the state
of Lombardy could not be taken from them but by the Earl. Notwithstanding,
while Philippo sought to draw him into his pay, offering him the commandment
of all his soldiers, so that he would forsake the Venetians and restore La
Marca to the Pope. They also sent Ambassadors unto him, promising him the
possession of Milan, if they could win it, and the perpetuity in the
government of their men of war, if he would still follow the war in La
Marca, and impeach the coming of aid from Alfonso into Lombardy. Thus were
the promises of the Venetians great, and their deserts of him greater, having
begun that war, to save Cremona for the Earl. On the other part, the
injuries done by the Duke were fresh, his promises not faithful nor great. Yet
did the Earl much doubt what resolution to make. For of the one side, the
obligation of the league, their well deserving of him, and their promises of
pleasures to come, did move him. On the other, the entreaty of his Father in
law, and chiefly the poison which he feared to be hidden under the great
promises of the Venetians, did stay him; suspecting least their promise of that
state, if he should hap to win it, might not be performed: having none other
hold, but their bare promise, whereunto no wise Prince, unless it were for
great necessity, had ever trusted. These difficulties of the Earls
resolution, were removed by the ambition of the Venetians, who hoping to
surprise Cremona by means of some intelligence they had within the City,
under another pretense caused their soldiers to march near unto it. But that
enterprise was discovered by those that guarded the town for the Earl,
whereby the treason took no effect, and they thereby wan not Cremona, but
utterly lost the love of the Earl, who presently thereupon laying all respects
apart, joined himself with the Duke. Now was Pope Eugenio dead, and in his
place succeeded Nicholao quinto. The Earl had his whole Army at Cotigniola,
ready to pass into Lombardy. Thither came news, aduertising the death of
Philippo, which was the last of August, Death of Duke Philippo of Milan.
in the year 1447. These news grieved the Earl exceedingly, because he
thought his army not fully paid, would be unready, and feared least the
Venetians being in arms, would become his enemies. For having abandoned them
and joined with the Duke, he feared Alfonso his continual enemy, not trusting
either the Pope, or the Florentines. These, because they were in league with
the Venetians, and the other, for that he did possess some towns belonging to
the Church. Notwithstanding, he determined to show his face to fortune, and
according to the chances thereof to proceed. For many times by doing somewhat,
secrets are discovered, which by standing still could not be known. Great hope
he conceived in thinking, that if the Milanesi would be defended from the
ambition of the Venetians, that of force they must employ him and his
soldiers. Thereof taking courage, he marched into the country of Bologna, and
from thence to Modena and Regio, staying with his forces at Lenza, from whence
he sent unto Milan to offer his service. Some of the Milanesi having buried
their Duke, desired to live in liberty, and some others were contented to
receive a Prince. Of those which desired a Prince, some would have the Earl,
and some the King Alfonso, whereby those that loved liberty, being more
united, became the stronger part, and framed after their faction a state and
government, which was nevertheless disobeyed by many Cities of the Dukedom,
imagining that they might also (as Milan did) enjoy their liberty. And others
also, which aspired not thereunto, did likewise refuse to yield unto the
Milanesi. The Cities of Lodi and Piacenza gave themselves to the Venetians.
Pauia and Parma would be free. The Earl understanding these confusions, went
unto Cremona, whither his Ambassadors and the Ambassadors of Milan came with
this co^clusio^, that he should remain Captain general of the Milanesi, The
Earl made General for the Milanesi.
with those conditions last set down by the Duke Philippo, adding thereunto
that the Earl should have Brescia, till he surprised Verona. And being
possessed thereof, to yield up Brescia. Before the death of this Duke, Pope
Nicholo at his assumptio^ sought to make peace amongst all the Italian Princes.
For the compassing whereof, by Ambassadors he practiced, that the Florentines
should send unto him at the time of his creation, desiring him to appoint a
Parliament at Farrara, to procure therein either a long truce, or a perfect
peace. Upon which occasion in that City assembled the Popes Legate, the
Ambassadors for the Venetians, Ambassadors for the Duke, and Ambassadors for
the Florentines. But those which were looked for from King Alfonso, appeared
not. This King was then at Tiboli, accompanied with many men of war, both on
foot and horseback. From thence he gave countenance to the Duke, and it was
thought that so soon as they had drawn the Earl to their side, they would
openly assault the Venetians and Florentines. In the mean time, the Earls
soldiers should remain in Lombardy, and the peace to be enterteined at
Farrara, whither the King sent not, saying he would ratify all things the Duke
would assent unto. This peace was many days consulted upon, and after much
disputation concluded, that either it should be perpetual peace, or a truce
for 5. years, at the election of the Duke, whose Ambassadors being returned to
Milan to understand his pleasure, at their coming thither found him dead. The
Milanesi notwithstanding his death, would needs have the conclusion of peace
allowed. But the Venetians did not consent, hoping greatly to usurp that
state. And the rather, because Lodi and Piacenza sodeinly after the Dukes death
were yielded unto them: The Venetians aspire to usurp the Duchy of Milan.
whereby they hoped, either by force or composition within short space to
become Lords of all the territory of Milan, and in the end so distress the
City, as it should also be forced to yield before any man could rescue it.
And the rather they thus persuaded themselves, for that they saw the
Florentines busied in war with King Alfonso. That King being at Tiboli, and
intending to follow the enterprise of Toscana, as he had determined with
Philippo, thinking therewith that the war already begun in Lombardy, would
give him time and commodity desired, to have one foot into the state of
Florence, before such time as he would openly make the war, King Alfonso
assaulteth the Florentines.
and for that purpose practiced to win the Castle Cennina in the upper vale of
Arno, and wan it. The Florentines stricken with this unlooked for accide^t, and
seeing the King ready to march to their offense, hired soldiers, created the
ten Magistrates, and according to their custom, prepared all things for the
war. By this time the King with his Army was come to the country of Siena,
laboring by all means to bring that City to favor him. Notwithstanding,
the Citizens there stood firm in their friendship to the Florentines, and
refused to receive the King, either into Siena, or any other of their towns:
yet did they provide him victual, whereof the importunity of the King, and
the force of the enemy might excuse them. The King then thought not good to
enter by the way of the vale of Arno, as he first determined, as well for that
he had spoiled Cennina, as because the Florentines were partly furnished with
soldiers, and therefore marched toward Volterra, surprised many Castles in
the country thereto belonging. From thence, he marched into the country of
Pisa, where, by the favor of Arrigo and Fatio, Earls of Chirardesca, he took
some Castles, and assaulted Campilia, which being defended by the Florentines
and the cold winter, he could not surprise. Then the King leaving certain of
his own soldiers to guard the towns by him taken, and to defend the
country, retired with the rest of his Army to his lodgings in the country of
Siena. The Florentines favored by that season of the year, carefully labored
to provide soldiers. Their chief leaders were Federigo Lord of Vrbino, and
Gismondo Malatesta of Rimino. And albeit there was betwixt them two some
disagreement, yet by the wisdom of Neri, and Barnardetto di Medici,
(Commissaries for the Florentines) they agreed so well, that notwithstanding
the hard winter continuing, they marched, and recovered those towns which were
lost in the country of Pisa, and the Ripomerancie in the territory of
Volterra. They also bridled the Kings soldiers, who before had spoiled the sea
coast, so as with difficulty they might defend the towns committed to their
guard. But the Spring time being come, the Commissaries drew forth all their
soldiers, to the number of 5000. horse, and 2000. footmen. And the King came
with his, to the number of welneare fifteen thousand, besides 3000. at
Campiglia. And when he intended to return to the siege of that town, he went
to Piombino, hoping easily to win it, because the town was not well furnished,
he thought the having thereof profitable for him, and disaduantagious for the
Florentines; because, from thence he might protract the wars, and consume
them, having mean to victual himself by sea, and disturb the whole country
of Pisa. This assault greatly displeased the Florentines, and co^sulting upon
the matter, thought that if they might with their Army remain in the bounds of
Campiglia, that the King should thereby be enforced to depart either broken or
dishonored. For which purpose they armed four small Galleys at Liuorno, and
with them put into the town of Piombino three hundred footmen, placing them
at the Galdani, a place where with difficulty they might be assaulted. For if
they were lodged in the plain upon the Confines, the same was thought
dangerous. The Florentines received their victuals from the Towns thereabouts,
which being but few and not much inhabited, did scarcely furnish them. So as
the Army suffered penury, and most chiefly of wine: Because none being there
made, nor brought thither from other places, it was impossible for every man
to have so much as should suffice him. But the King, notwithstanding he were by
the Florentines straightly holden in, yet had he abundance almost of every
provision, by reason he received it from the sea. The Florentines therefore
thought good; likewise to make proof, if they might be by sea relieved: and
for that purpose loaded their Galleys with victual, and sent them thither. But
in their passage they were encountered with seven of the Kings Galleys, which
took two of them, and suncke the others. This loss bereft the Florentine
soldiers, of hope to be reuictualled. Thereupon two hundredth or more Pyoners
for want of drink fled unto the Kings Camp: the rest of the soldiers
mutined, complaining that in those hot places they could not remain without
wine, because water was there most unwholesome. So that the Commissaries
determined to abandon that place, and employ their forces to recover certain
Castles which remained in the Kings hand. Who on the other side, although he
wanted not victual, being in force the stronger, yet was his Camp afflicted
with sickness, bred there, by the infection of the air, nere unto the sea: by
mean whereof, almost every man was infected, and many of them also died. These
occasions ministered communication of peace, wherein the King demanded fifty
thousand Florins, and Piombino to be left at his discretion. The matter being
debated at Florence, by many desirous of peace, the demands were thought
reasonable. For they were persuaded a war so chargeable as that was, could not
without great expense be maintained. Notwithstanding Neri Capponi went unto
Florence, and there with such reasons as he made, altered their minds.
Dissuading them utterly to accept those conditions: and the Florentines
received the Lord of Piombino as recommended; promising both intime of war
and peace to defend him, if he would, (as hitherto he had) fight courageously
in defense of his own City. The King understanding this resolution, and
seeing his own Camp afflicted with sickness, brake up, and retired with the
rest into the country of Siena; leaving behind him two thousand dead bodies.
From thence he marched toward the kingdom, and being exceedingly offended
with the Florentines, threatened the next Spring to make upon them a new war.
While matters were thus handled in Toscana, the Earl Francesco became General
of the Milanesi, and before any thing done, obtained the friendship of
Francesco Piccinino, who had likewise served them, which he did, to the end
that his enterprises might be the more favored, and by Piccinino the less
impeached. Then marched he with his Army to the field, whereby the Citizens of
Pauia, fearing they could not defend themselves, and being on the other side,
unwilling to obey the Milanesi, offered him the Town, with condition that he
should not deliver it to them. The Earl greatly desired the possession of that
City, thinking that the having thereof would be a good beginning to color his
intent, being neither detained with fear, nor abashed to break his faith. For
great men do call loss, a thing dishonorable, but to compass their desire by
craft, is accounted no shame at all. Notwithstanding he doubted, least his
taking of the Town in this sort, would so offend the Milanesi, as for that
cause, they would yield themselves to the Venetians: and if it were not taken
by him, then he feared the Duke of Sauoia, to whom many of the Citizens were
willing to give it. So as by every of those means, he thought himself
bereft of the dominion of Lombardy: yet supposing it less peril, to take the
City for himself then leave it to an other, determined to accept it, being
persuaded it was notwithstanding possible to content the Milanesi: whom he
informed of those perils whereunto they should fall, if he accepted not the
City of Pauia. For that City (if it were by him refused) would yield to the
Venetians or the Duke of Sauoia, in either of which cases, their country
should be lost, and therefore thought rather be contented to have him their
neighbor and friend, The Milanesi iealious of the Earl.
then any other that were more mighty, and their enemy. The Milanesi were
much troubled with this matter, imagining that the Earl had thereby discovered
his ambition, and the end whereunto he tended. Yet thought they not good, to
take knowledge thereof, because leaving the Earl, they saw not whither to
address themselves, unless it were to the Venetians, whose pride and hard
dealing they mistrusted. Wherefore they resolved, not to shake off the Earl,
but for the present, by him to be be delivered of those inconveniences, hoping
after to be also delivered of himself. For they were not only assaulted by
the Venetians, but also by the Genouesi and the Duke of Sauoia, who made war
in the name of Carlo of Orliens, son to the sister of Philippo. But the Earl
easily withstood their malice. Then were the Venetians his only enemies, who
with a mighty Army determined to surprise that state, and had already
possessed Lodi, and Piacenza, whereunto the Earl brought his camp: and after a
long siege sacked that City. Which done, (because the winter was already
come) he retired his men to their lodgings, and went himself to Cremona; where
with his wife he rested all that winter. But the spring being come, the Armies
of the Venetians and Milanesi, returned to the field. The Milanesi desired to
surprise Lodi, and after make peace with the Venetians. Because the charges of
war did burden them, and the fidelity of their General was suspected. For
these reasons they wished a peace, as well to repose themselves, as to be
assured of the Earl. Then they resolved, their Army should besiege
Carrauaggio, hoping that Lodi would yield, so soon as the Castle could be
taken from the enemy. The Earl obeyed the Milanesi, although his intent was
to have passed Adda, and assault the country of Brescia. The siege being laid
to the Castle of Carrauaggio, he trenched and fortified his Camp, least
happily the Venetians would assail him. The Venetians on the other side,
conducted by Micheletto their General, marched within two bows shot off the
Earls Camp, where diverse days both the Armies remained, the one many times
offending the other. Notwithstanding, the Earl still besieged the castle, and
did so straightly distress it, as it was ready to yield: which greatly
displeased the Venetians; fearing that the loss thereof would be the ruin of
all the enterprise. Great disputation arose among their Captains, by what
means it might be succored. But no other way could be devised, then to
assault the enemies in their trenches, which was exceeding dangerous.
Notwithstanding so greatly they esteemed the loss of that Castle, as the
Senate of Venice (being naturally fearful to meddle with any matter either
doubtful or dangerous) did choose rather to hazard all, then with the loss of
that, to lose the enterprise. They resolved therefore by all means to assault
the Earl, and one morning early charged him on that side where they thought
he was weakest. At the first charge (as it happens in those assaults which be
not looked for) all the Army was dismayed. Notwithstanding, the Earl sodeinly
repaired the disorders, and had handled the matter so, that notwithstanding
many assaults, the enemies were forced in the end, The Venetians defeated by
the Earl Francefco.
not only to retire, but also were so pursued: that of their Camp (which was
twelve thousand horse) not one thousand was saved. All their goods were
spoiled, and their carriages taken. So as never before that time the Venetians
received any overthrow greater, or more terrible. Among the spoils and
prisoners taken in this conflict, was the Venetian Proueditor, who before that
skirmish, and after during the wars, had used diverse opprobrious words of the
Earl, calling him Bastard and Coward. But being become prisoner, remembering
what he had deserved, and brought to the Earls presence: according to the
nature of proud and cowardly men (which is to be in prosperity insolent, and
in adversity abject and vile) kneeled down before him, weeping, and desiring
pardon of his offenses. The Earl took him up by the arm, comforted him, and
willed him to be of good cheer. And afterward said, that he marvelled much
how a man of his wisdom and gravity, could commit so great an error, as to
speak evil of them that had not so deserved. And touching the matter of
slander, he knew not in what sort Sforza his father, had used his mother
Maddonna Lucia, because he was not there present. So as of that which was done
by them he could receive neither blame nor commendation. But for his own
doings, he knew well, that nothing was by any man to be reproved: and thereof
both he and his Senate could fully and truly witness with him. Whereof he
wished him afterward to be more modest in speech, and in his proceedings more
discreet. After this victory, the Earl with his tryumphant Camp, marched to
the territory of Brescia, and possessing all that country, settled his Camp
within two miles of the City. The Venetians on the other side, having received
this overthrow, feared, (as it came to pass) that Brescia would be first
assaulted, speedily as they might, made provision, and with all diligence,
levied forces, joining them to those that remained of the old Camp. Therewith
also by virtue of the League, desired aid of the Florentines. Who being free
from the war of King Alfonso, sent unto them one thousand footmen, and two
thousand horse. The Venetians by having these soldiers, gained time to
entreat of peace. It has been long time a thing fatal to the Venetian state,
The Venetians fortunate.
to lose by war, and recover the loss by composition. And those things which
by the wars are taken from them, by the peace many times be restored double.
The Venetians knew well, that the Milanesi mistrusted the Earl, and that he
desired not to be their Captain, but aspired to the principallitie of Milan.
Also that it was in their choice to make peace with either of them: the one
desiring it for ambition, the other for fear. Then they chose to make peace
with the Earl, Peace between the Earl and Venetian^, without consent of the
Milanesi.
and deferred their aid for that enterprise: being persuaded, that if the
Milanesi found themselves deceived by the Earl, they might grow so offended,
as they would give themselves rather to any other, then to him. Being then
brought to this pass that they could not defend themselves, nor would trust
unto the Earl, they should be enforced, (not having other refuge) to trust
unto the Venetians. This resolution made, they sounded the disposition of the
Earl, and found him greatly disposed to the peace: as desirous that the
victory of Carrauaggio might be his, and not the Milanieses. Then was there a
composition concluded, wherein the Venetians bound themselves to pay unto the
Earl, so long as he deferred the taking of Milan, thirteen thousand Florines
for every month: and during the rest of the war, to aid him with four
thousand horse, and two thousand footmen. And the Earl for his part did bind
himself to restore to the Venetians, all Towns, prisoners, and every other
thing by him taken, and rest contented with those Towns only, which the Duke
Philippo at his death possessed. This agreement being known in Milan, did
bring much more sorrow to that City, then the victory of Carrauaggio had
given gladness. The chief Magistrates lamented, the people were sorrowful,
the women and children wept, and all with one voice, called the Earl disloyal
and traitor. For although they believed not, either by entreaty or promises,
to divert him from his unthankful intent, yet sent they Ambassadors to see with
what face, and with what words, he would maintain his wickedness. Who being
come to the presence of the Earl, The Oration of the Milanesi to the Earl.
one of them spoke to this effect. Those that desire to obtain any thing of
others, were wont by entreatie, gifts, or threatenings, to persuade them. So
that, either by compassion, by profit, or fear, they might compass the thing
which they desired. But of cruel men, and covetous, being in their own
opinion mighty (those three means not prevailing) nothing is obtained: so as
whosoever does trust by entreatie to make them pitiful, or by gifts to win
them, or by threatenings to fear them, deceives himself. We therefore now
knowing (though all too late) thy cruelty, thy ambition, and thy pride, are
come unto thee, not requiring any thing, nor hoping (though we had such desire)
to obtain it, but to put thee in remembrance what benefits thou have received
of the Milanesi, and lay before thee, with what ingratitude thou do requite
them. To the end, that among so many injuries by us endured, we may take this
only pleasure, to reprove thee. Thou oughtst to remember well, what thy state
and condition was, after the death of Duke Philippo. Thou were enemy to the
Pope and the King. Thou were abandoned by the Florentines and Venetians, who
either justly offended with thee, or having no more need of thee, were become
as their enemy. Thou were weary of the war which thou had made with the
church; Thou had few men, few friends, little money, and bereft of all hope
to be able to hold thine own country, and thy ancient reputation: which
should easily have been taken from thee, had not our simplicity helped. For we
only received thee, persuaded with the reverence we bare to the happy memory
of our Duke, unto whom thou (being allied) did make us believe, that his love
would have continued in his heirs. And since to his benefits, we joined ours,
that favor and friendship ought to have been, not only firm, but also
inseparable. In respect whereof, to the ancient composition, we joined Verona
and Brescia. What could we more give thee or promise thee? And what could
thou either of us or any others, in those days either have or desire more?
Thou have received of us a pleasure unlooked for, and we for recompense, have
received of thee, a displeasure not deserved. Neither have thou deferred thus
long to show thy pride. For thou were no sooner General of our Army, but
contrary to justice thou did receive Pauia: which ought to have warned us, to
what end thy friendship tended. Which injury we bare, supposing that victory
with the greatness thereof, would have satisfied thy ambition. But (alas)
those who desire all, cannot with enough be contented. Thou did promise that
we should enjoy all things after that time by thee won. For thou knew
well, that which thou gave at many times, thou might resume at once: as it
came to pass after the victory of Carrauaggio; which being begun with blood
and money, was after followed with our destruction. O how unhappy are those
Cities which be constrained to defend their liberties: against the ambition of
all those that would oppress them: but much more unhappy be they that are
enforced to employ in their defense, mercinarie and disloyal soldiers, such
as thou art. God grant that this our example may be a warning to others
hereafter: since that of Thebe and Philip of Macidon, has not warned us. Who
having won victory of their enemies, became of their own Captain, first
their enemy, and after their Prince. We may not therefore be blamed of other
fault, then to have trusted too much in thee, whom we ought not to have trusted
at all. For thy former life, and thy insatiable mind, not contented with any
honor or estate, might have forewarned us. Neither ought we to have reposed
any trust in thee, who had betrayed the Lord of Lucca, fleesed the Florentines
and Venetians, little esteemed the Duke, nor regarded the King, and above all,
with many injuries offended God and his Church. Neither ought we ever to have
believed, that so many Princes had less power of Francesco Sforza, then the
Milanesi; or that he would keep his faith to us, which to so many others he had
broken. But this our small wisdom which we do blame in our selves, does not
excuse thy breach of faith, nor purge thee of those infamies, which our just
complaints shall disperse throughout the world. Neither can it be, but that the
prick of thine own conscience will persecute thee. For those Arms which were
prepared by us, to assault others, must now by thy means offend our selves: so
as thou will judge thy self worthy of that punishment which murderers have
deserved. If ambition has blinded thee, all the world being witness of thy
wickedness, will force thee to open thine eyes. God also will cause thee to
behold thy periuries, thy faith broken, and thy treasons. Which things so
greatly displease him, that although hitherto, for some hidden good, he has
not punished, yet will he never favor men so impiously disposed. Do not
therefore promise thy self a victory certain, since the just ire of God will
impeach it, and we are determined with loss of liberty to lose our lives.
Which if we be not able to defend, then have we rather to submit our selves to
any other Prince then to thy self. For if our sins be such, as against our
wills we must fall into thy hands, be assured, a dominion begun with craft
and infamy, shall either in thee or thy children, end with dishonor and
shame. The Earl notwithstanding he felt himself by the Milanesi many ways
touched, yet showed he no extraordinary change, either by word or Iesture:
but answered he was content to bear their chollor, The Earls answer.
and the great injury of their unwise words. Whereunto he would answer
particulerly, if they were before a Judge indifferent to determine the
controversy. For it should appear that he had not offended the Milanesi, but
provided that they should not injury him. And well he knew, after the victory
of Carrauaggio what they had done: when in stead of rewarding him with Verona
or Brescia, they sought to make peace with the Venetians. To the end, that upon
him only the displeasure should be laid: and they to enjoy the profit of the
victory, with the honor of the peace, and all the commodity reaped by the
war. So as they had no cause to complain, though he had made that
composition which they practiced to bring to pass. Which resolution being
deferred, they were as much to blame their own ingratitude, as find fault with
him: and whether this were true or not, that God (whom they had called to
revenge their injuries) would by the end of the war show whom he most favored,
or which party did fight with most justice. The Ambassadors being departed,
the Earl prepared to assail the Milanesi, and they made ready for defense.
Then with the virtue of Francesco and Giacopo Piccinino (who for the ancient
hatred the Braccheschi bare to the Sforzeschi, had been to the Milanesi
faithful) they hoped to defend their liberty: at the least, till such time as
they might disunite the Venetians and the Earl, who they thought would not be
long his friends nor faithful. On the other side, the Earl knowing thereof,
supposed it was wisdom, to bind the Venetians by reward, which would hold
sure, though the bond of friendship were too weak. And therefore in giving
order for the war, he was content that they should assault Crema, and he with
other forces would set upon the rest of that country. This composition laid
before the Venetians, was the occasion that they continued so long in the
Earls friendship, till he had surprised all the dominion of the Milanesi, and
distressed the Town so near, as the dwellers therein could not make provision
of things necessary. In so much, as dispairing of all other aid, they sent
Ambassadors to Venice, desiring the Senate to have compassion of their estate,
Expostulation of the Florentines, to the Senate of Venice.
and be pleased, (according to the custom of Commonweals) to favor
liberty, and disfauor a Tyrant. Who prevailing and become Lord of Milan, could
not be by the Venetians easily brideled. For they believed not, that he was
content with the ancient conditions of the state, but aspired further. The
Venetians not having yet the possession of Crema (which before they changed
countenance, they determined to have) answered publicly, that in respect of
the contract made with the Earl, they might not help the Milanesi, yet
privately they enterteined the Ambassadors with hope, that a composition was
likely to be made, and then, they should assure their Senate to trust unto
them. The Earl with his men was already so near Milan, as they assaulted the
suburbs, and the Venetians having taken Crema, thought good no longer to
defer the aiding of the Milanesi with whom they compounded. Among the first
Articles, they promised by all means to defend their liberty. This new
contract made, The Venetians desirous to abandon the Earl.
they commanded that all their soldiers serving under the Earl, should
depart from him, and retire themselves to the Venetians Camp. They also
signified unto the Earl, the peace concluded with the Milanesi, to whom they
had given twenty days space to accept it. The Earl marvelled not at this
resolution taken by the Venetians, because that long before he had foreseen
it, and looked the same should every day come to pass. Yet could he not but
be sorry, and feel the same offense, which the Milanesi did, when he abandoned
them. For answering of the Ambassadors sent from Venice to declare the League,
he took the leisure of two days. During which time, he determined to
enterteine the Venetians, and not abandon the enterprise. And therefore
publicly said, he would allow the peace, and sent Ambassadors to Venice, with
a large Commission to ratify the same: yet secretly he commanded them, not to
conclude, but with delays and cauillations, to defer the conclusion. And to
make the Venetians the rather believe, that which he spoke, he made truce
with the Milanesi for one month: retyring his Camp far from the City, and
dividing his forces into other places near hand, which he had lately won.
This practice was occasion of his victory, for the Venetians trusting to the
peace, were more slow in preparation to the war, and the Milanesi seeing the
truce made, the enemy far off, and the Venetians their friends, believed
assuredly that the Earl would abandon the enterprise. Which determination, by
two means hindered them. The first was, because they neglected to prepare for
their own defense. The other, for that they laid the country open to the
enemy. For the time then being fit to till the earth, they sowed great store
of corn: by mean whereof, the Earl might the more easily famish them. To the
Earl on the other side, all those things helped, which hindered the enemy:
and besides the delaie gave him commodity to take breath, and provide for
aid. In all this war of Lombardy, the Florentines were not discovered to be
of any side, nor to have favored the Earl, either when he defended the
Milanesi, nor after. For the Earl having had no need, did not very earnestly
seek it. Only after the overthrow of Carrauaggio, by virtue of their
Obligation in the League, they sent aid to the Venetians. But the Earl
Francesco being alone, and wanting other refuge, was enforced instantly to
pray aid of the Florentines, Cosimo de Medici, friend to the Earl Francesco.
both of the state publicly, and of his friends privately: chiefly of Cosimo
de Medici, with whom he had ever been in great familiarity, and was by him in
all his actions faithfully counseled, and liberally supplied. Neither did
Cosimo in this so great a necessity forsake him: for as a private man he
bountifully relieved him, and to follow the enterprise encouraged him. He also
entreated the City publicly to assist him where need required. At that time
lived in Florence, Neri the son of Gino Capponi, a Citizen of great power,
who thought it not good for the City, that the Earl should possess Milan,
supposing it more profitable for Italy, that he should ratify the peace, Neri
Capponi against the Earl.
then prosecute the war. First he doubted least the Milanesi for the
displeasure they bare to the Earl, would yield wholly to the Venetians, which
would be the ruin of every man. Then he judged if the Earl should happen to
surprise Milan, that so great forces and countries joined together, were to be
feared. And if he were insupportable, being an Earl, aspired to the title of
Duke, no man should endure his pride. Wherefore, he thought better both for the
Commonweal of Florence, and all Italy, that the Earl should continue with
his reputation in Arms, and Lombardy to be divided into two commonweals,
which would never join in the offense of an other, and one of them alone,
could not offend: and for bringing this to pass, he saw no better mean, then
not to aid the Earl, and maintain the old league with the Venetians. These
reasons were not of the friends of Cosimo accepted: because they thought that
Neri did make them, not because he thought them good for the commonweal, but
for that he would not, that the Earl being friend to Cosimo, should aspire to
be Duke. Fearing least by that means, Cosimo should become over mighty: and
Cosimo contrariwise proved, that aiding of the Earl, was both for Italy and
that commonweal most profitable. And that it was no wise conceit, to think
that the Milanesi could continue free, because the quality of their city,
their manner of life, and the factions inueterated there, were contrary to the
form of all civil government: so as, it behooved that the Earl should become
Duke, or else the Venetians would possess it. And in that choice, there was no
man so witless, that knew not whether it were better to have at hand a mighty
neighbor, or a more mighty enemy. Neither could he think it to be doubted,
that the Milanesi (for having war with the Earl) would yield their obedience
to the Venetians. For the Earl having a faction in Milan, and not they,
whensoever they could not defend themselves as free, they would rather yield to
the Earl, then to the Venetians. These diversities of opinions held the city
doubtful what to determine. Nevertheless in the end was concluded: that
Ambassadors should be sent to the Earl to entertein a peace, and if they found
him strong or likely to have the victory, then to conclude: or not, to use
cauillations and delays. These Ambassadors were at Reggio, before they
understood that the Earl was become Lord of Mila^. For the Earl so soon as
the time of truce was ended, environed the city with soldiers, hoping within
short space, in despite of the Venetia^s, to surprise it: because they were
not able to succor it, saving on that side toward Adda: which passage, might
easily be impeached, and it was not feared, (the winter being come) that the
Venetians would encamp there. Also the Earl hoped, before the winter should
pass, to have the victory, and the rather by the death of Francesco Piccinino,
who had only left Giacopo his brother to govern the Milanesi. The Venetians
had sent an Ambassador to Milan, to encourage those Citizens to stand to their
own defense, promising them great and speedy supply. During that winter, some
light skirmishes happened betwixt the Venetians and the Earl. But so soon as
the season suffered, the Venetians under the conduct of Pandolfo Malatesta,
brought their Army to Adda: where they consulted, whether it was best to
assault the Earl, The Venetians aid the M^lanesi against the Earl.
and thereby try their fortune. Pandolfo their Captain, thought not good to
make that trial, in respect of the Earls virtue, and the sufficiency of his
army: but hoped it was possible without fighting more safely to oppress him:
because the Earl at that present, was with the lack of corn greatly
distressed. His advise therefore was, that the camp should not dislodge,
whereby the Milanesi might still hope of aid, and not by despair yield them to
the Earl. This opinion was by the Venetians allowed, as well in respect of
security, as that they thought the Milanesi, being in so great necessity,
should be enforced to yield to their dominion, persuaded that they would never
give themselves to the Earl, by who^ they had bin many ways injured. In this
mean space the Milanesi were brought almost into extreme misery, and in that
city (naturally abou^ding with poor people) many died of famine, whereat the
inhabitants murmured and complained. The magistrates thereby grew afraid, and
carefully provided that the people should not gather together. For although the
multitude does not hastily dispose it self to mischief, yet when it happen to
be fully bent, every little accide^t does move it. It happened that 2. men of mean
co^ditio^, were near to the new gate, talking of the calamities of the city,
and their misery, devising what means might be wroght for redres thereof. Others
drew unto them, till they were a good number. Thereby a brute was blown through
Milan, that the inhabitants near to the new gate were already in Arms. Then
all the multitude (which aspected only occasion) took Arms and created
Gasparo da Vicomercato their Captain, and went to the place where the
magistrates were assembled: whom they so terrified, that so many as could, did
flee, the rest were slain. Among whom Leonardo Veniero, the Venetian Ambassador
was murdered: who had before that time rejoiced at their misery, and was
thought to have been the occasion of the mischief and famine. Thus the
multitude (as Lords of the City) among themselves consulted, what was to be
done, to deliver them from so manifold sorrows, wherinto they were entered. And
every man thought good to yield the city (since the liberty could not be
preserved) to some Prince that were able to defend it. Some said to the king
Alfonso, some to the Duke of Sauoia, and some to the French king. Of the Earl
no man made mention, so great was yet the offense of the people toward him.
Gasparo Vicomercato his counsel.
Notwithstanding seeing they could not resolve upon any, Gasparo Vicomercato
was the first that named the Earl: declaring at large, that if they would be
discharged of the war, there was no other way but to choose him; because the
people of Milan had necessity of certain and present peace, and could not
tarry long in hope of future relief. Moreover he excused the actions of the
Earl, accusing the Venetians, and all the other Princes of Italy, because they
would not, some for ambition, and some for couetise, that Milan should continue
free. And therefore being forced to depart with liberty, it was best to yield
to such a one, as could and would defend it. So as by that servitude, they
might at the least gain peace without further loss, or war more dangerous.
This speech was with great attentio^ hearkened unto, and every man with one
voice consented that the Earl should be chosen, and Gasparo was made
Ambassador to call him: who by commandment of the people, went unto the Earl
to present him this pleasant and happy news. The Earl willingly accepted the
same and entered into Milan as Prince, The Earl Francesco become Duke of
Milan. 1450.
the 26. of February, in the year 1450. And was there with exceeding gladness
received, eue^ by those who not long before had hated and defamed him. The
news of this victory being brought to Florence, order was taken with the
Ambassadors sent from thence (and were already upon the way toward the Earl)
that in stead of entreaty of peace with him as Earl, they should co^gratulate
the victory as Duke. These Ambassadors were by the Duke honorably received, and
bountifully enterteined. For he knew well that against the power of the
Venetians, he could not find in all Italy, more faithful nor more mighty
friends, then the Florentins. Who having removed fear of the Visconti, thought
they should be forced to fight with Aragon and Venice. Because the house of
Aragon then Kings of Naples, was their enemy in respect of the friendship by
them borne to the house of France: and the Venetians knew that the ancient
fear of the Visconti, was fresh, and that carefully they had persecuted them;
wherefore doubting the like persecution, sought their ruin. These matters were
the occasion that the new Duke was easily induced to friend the Florentines,
and that the Venetians and the King Alfonso, League betwixt King Alfonso and
the Venetians.
agreed to join against their common enemy: binding themselves at one self
time, to take arms; and that the King should assault the Florentines, and the
Venetians set upon the Duke. Who being new in the state, was not (as they
thought) neither able with his own forces to withstand them, nor with the aid
of others could be defended. Yet because the league betwixt the Florentines and
Venetians continued, and that the King after the wars of Piombino had made
peace with them, they thought not good to break that peace, Ambassadors from
Venice to Florence.
till such time as they had some color to make war. Wherefore both the one
and the other, sent Ambassadors to Florence, to signify in the behalf of their
Lords, that the league was made not to offend any man, but to defend their
Countries. And moreover the Venetians complained, that the Florentines had
given passage to Alisandro, brother to the Duke of Lunigiana, whereby he with
his forces passed into Lombardy: and that they were also the Authors and
Councillors, to make the agreement betwixt the Duke and the Marquess of
Mantoua. All which things (they said) were prejudicial to their state, and the
friendship betwixt them. Wheresore friendly wished the^ to remember, that who
so offends an other wrongfully, does give occasion to him that is offended,
justly to seek revenge: and he that breaks the peace, must ever look to find
war. The Ambassador answered.
The answer of this Embassage was by the Senate committed to Cosimo: who in a
long and wise Oration, laid before them all the benifits which his city had
bestowed upon the Venetian commonweal. Declaring how great dominion they had
won by means of the money, the men, and counsel, of the Florentines. And
assured them, that since the Florentines did occasion the friendship, no cause
of war should ever proceed from them. For they having been ever lovers of
peace, commended greatly the agreement betwixt them, so as for peace, and not
for war the same were made. But he marvelled much of the Venetian complaints,
and that of so small and vain matters, so great a commonweal would make
account. But if they had been worthy consideration, yet was it known to the
world, that the Florentine country was free, and open to all men, and the Duke
was such a one as to win friendship with Mantoua, had no need, either of
counsel or favor. Wherefore he doubted, that these complaints, had under them
hidden, some secret poison not yet perceived. Which so being, every man should
easily understand, that as the Florentines friendship did profit them, so their
displeasure could hinder them. Thus for that time the matter was lightly passed
over, and the Ambassadors seemed to depart well enough contented.
Notwithstanding, the league being made, the manner of the Venetians and the
Kings proceedings, did occasion the Florentines and the Duke, rather to look
for some new war, then hope of firm peace. League between the Florentines and
Duke.
Therefore the Florentines joined in league with the Duke, and in the mean
while, the evil disposition of the Venetians was discovered: because they made
league with the Sanesi, and banished all the Florentines, with every other
person subject to the state of Florence. Shortly after, the king Alfonso did
the like, without any respect to the peace made the year before, and without
just cause or colored occasion. The Venetians labored to gain the possession
of Bologna and for that purpose aided the banished men of that City, who with
many others, found means in the night to enter the town. They were no sooner
within the walls, but themselves made an Alarm. Whereat Santi Bentiuogli
suddeinly start up, and knowing that the City was surprised by Rebels:
(although he were by many friends counseled, by fleeing to save his life)
yet would he in any wise show his face to Fortune, take arms, and encourage
others to do the like. He therefore with some others, made head and assaulted
part of the Rebels, and brake them, sleying many, and forcing the rest to flee
the City. Whereupon every man judged, that he had made good proof to be of
the right race of Bentiuogli. These actions, Preparation for war in Florence.
brought unto Florence a firm belief of the future war. Therefore the
Florentines resorting to their ancient orders, created the ten Magistrates for
the war, entertained new Captains, sent Ambassadors to Rome, to Naples, to
Venice, and to Siena, procure aid of their friends, discover suspects, gain
the good will of those that were neutrall, and sound the determination of
enemies. Of the Pope they could get nothing but general words, courtesy, and
persuasion to peace. Of the King they understood only his vain excuses for
discharging the Florentines, and offered to give safe conduct to every man
that desired it. And albeit he went about by all means, to conceal the
intention of the new war, yet the Ambassadors knew well his evil meaning,
and detected many dealinges of his, to the disaduauntage of their
Commonweal. With the Duke they renewed the League, fortifying the same with
sundry Obligations: and by his means gained the good will of the Genouesi:
cancelling all former quarrels. Notwithstanding that the Venetians had labored
many ways, to impeach that composition, and entreated the Emperor of
Constantinople to banish from his countries all the Florentine Nation. So
greatly they grew into hate by this war, and so great force had their desire of
government, as without respect, they sought to oppress those who were the
cause of their greatness. Nevertheless by that Emperor they were not
hearkened unto. The Ambassadors for the Florentines, were by the Venetian
Senate forbidden to enter into their Country: alleging that they being in
league with the King, might not (without his priuitie) give them audience. The
Sanesi enterteined the Ambassadors with courteous words, fearing to be
surprised before the league could defend them: and therefore thought good not
to stir those Arms, which they were not able to resist. The Venetians and
the King (as was then coniectured) would have sent Ambassadors to Florence, to
justify the war. But the Ambassador for the Venetians, would not enter into
the Florentines dominion, and the Kings Ambassador durst not alone execute that
message. Whereby the Embassage was not performed. And the Venetians by means
thereof, knew that they were little esteemed of the Florentines, they (a few
months past) esteemed not much. During the fear of these motions, who^ the
Emperor Federigo the third, The Emperor Federigo in Florence.
came into Italy to be crowned, the thirty day of January, in the year 1451.
And entering into Florence with a thousand five hundred horses, was by that
City, most honorably received and enterteined, till the sixth of February. At
which time he took his journey from thence toward his Coronation at Rome,
where he was solemnly Crowned and married to the Empress, being come thither
by sea. These ceremonies performed, the Emperor returned toward Germany, and
came again to Florence in the month of May: where he was used with the same
honors he had there before received. Also in his return, having been
pleasured by the Marquess of Farrara, for recompense the Emperor granted unto
him the Cities of Modina and Reggio. During all these doings, the Florentines
omitted not their preparation for the war, giving themselves reputation, and
the enemy terror. They and the Duke joined league with the French King, for
defense of all their countries in general. Which league with great
magnificence and rejoicing, they published throughout all Italy. By this time
was come the year 1452. when in May, the Venetians thought good no longer to
defer the war against the Duke. The Duke of Milan assaulted.
Wherefore with sixteen thousand horse, and six thousand footmen, they
assaulted him toward Lodi: and at the same time the Marquess of Monferato,
either provoked by his own ambition, or by the Venetians request, assaulted
him on the other side, toward Alessandria. The Duke on the contrary part, had
assembled eighteen thousand horse, and three thousand footmen. And having
furnished Alessandria and Lodi, he likewise fortified all those places which
the enemy might offend. Then with his soldiers he assaulted the country of
Brescia, where he greatly damaged the Venetians, spoiling that country, and
sacking those towns which were not strong. But the Marquess of Monferato
being broken by the Dukes forces at Alessandria, the Duke might with the more
strength encounter the Venetians, and assault their country. Thus the war of
Lombardy proceeding, and therein sundry accidents (not worthy memory) happening:
it came to pass, that the like war begun in Toscana betwixt the King Alfonso,
and the Florentines: which was performed with no more virtue, nor more peril,
Foiano assaulted by Ferrando.
the^ that of Lo^bardy. Ferra^do the bastard son of Alfonso, came into Italy,
with 12000. soldiers, conducted by Federigo Lord of Vrbino. Their first
enterprise was to assault Foiano in the vale of Chiana: for having friendship of
the Sanesi, they might that way enter into the territory of Florence. That
Castle was weakly walled, and of small receipt, therefore with no great number
defended, yet those few in the Castle were accounted at that time valiant and
loyal soldiers. The number sent by the Senate to guard that Castle, were 200.
This Castle in that sort prepared, was by Ferrando besieged: and the virtue of
those within so great, and so little the value of them without, that till the
end of 36. days it was not won. The protract of which time, gave the City
commodity to provide to defend other places of more moment, to assemble their
forces, and put them in readiness. The enemy having taken this Castle, passed
into Chianti, where they set upon two small towns belonging to private men, and
could not win them; but marched from thence, and besieged Castellina, a
fortress seated upon the confines of Chianti, within ten miles of Siena; which
place both by Art and Nature is exceeding weak: notwithstanding (so base was
the courage of this Camp) as it could not conquer that Castle of no force at
all. For after they had besieged it 44. days, they departed thence with shame.
So small terror was in those armies, and so little peril in those wars, as those
towns which at this day are abandoned as impossible to be kept, at that time,
as places impregnable, were defended. During that Ferrando remained with his
Camp in Chianti, he made many roades into the Florentines country, spoiling
that Province within six miles of the City, to the great loss and terror of
the Florentine subjects. Who having by that time prepared forces to the number
of eight thousand, under the conduct of Astore di Faenza, and Gismondo
Malatesti, held the enemy aloof toward the Castle of Colle, fearing always
they should be forced to fight, and thought, that if they lost not that day,
they could not lose the war. Because the small Castles being lost, might be
recovered by peace, and the great towns were assured, by reason the enemy was
not able to assail them. The King had also upon the sea near to Pisa, twenty
sail of Galleys and Foysts. And while La Castellina was assaulted, that Navy
battered the fortress of Vade, which through the small diligence of the
Captain was taken. By mean whereof, the enemy afterward molested the
country thereabouts. Which molestation was easily removed of certain
soldiers, adventurers, sent by the Florentines: who constrained the enemy not
to retire far from the sea side. The Pope during these wars, intermedled not,
but where he hoped to make peace between the parties. For he refrained the
wars abroad, fearing greater troubles at home. Steffano Porcari.
In those days lived Steffano Porcari, a Citizen of Rome, both for birth and
learning (but much more for courage and magnanimity of mind) to be honored.
This Steffano (according to the custom of men, desirous of glory) thought to
do, or at the least to attempt some thing worthy memory. Then imagining he
could not take in hand any thing more worthy, then to deliver his country from
the subjection of the priests, and reduce it to the ancient liberty, resolved
to enterprise that action, hoping thereby (if it were brought to pass) to be
called a new founder and father of Rome. Some do suppose this Canto to be
written, not unto S. Porcari, but to Nicholo di Renzo, a gentleman Roman, by
Petrarche, who therein serves to divine, that in Rome should arise a Knight
famous thorowout all Italy.
Those things which gave him hope of happy success, were the wicked
conversation of the Prelates, with the coffeehouse of the Barrons and
people. But above all other, he was most encouraged with certain verses
written by the Poet Francesco Petrarcha, in his song, which begins thus.
Spirto gentil, che quelle membra reggi:
etc. Sopra il monte Tarpeo, Canzon Vedrai
Un Cauallier, che Italia tutta honora
Pensoso Piu d'altrui, che di se stesso.
This Steffano was persuaded, that Poettes many times were inspired with the
divine spirit of prophecy: Whereof he conceived, that fortune would
assuredly happen unto him, which Petrarcha had in his verses prophesied, and
that himself was the man, that should be the executor of so glorious an
enterprise: imagining that for eloquence, for learning, for favor, and
friends, there was no Roman to him comparable. This conceit possessing him,
he resolved to execute the same; yet could he not so secretly practice, but by
words, by conversation, and his manner of life, somewhat was discovered, and by
that mean became suspected to the Pope: who (to remove him from the commodity
of doing harm) confined him to Bologna, and commanded the Governor of that
City every day to see him. Notwithstanding, Steffano for this first disgrace,
dismayed not; but with the more endeavor followed his enterprise: and by all
secret and subtle means practiced with his friends, going to Rome, and
returning with such speed, as he might at times necessary present himself to
the Governor. And so soon as he had drawn a sufficient number of men to be
of his mind, determined without further delaie to attempt the enterprise:
giving order to his friends in Rome, that at a time prefixed, they should
prepare a solemn supper, where all the conspirators should meet, and every
man bring with him his assured friends, and he himself before the supper were
ended, would be there also. All things were done according to appointment, and
Steffano arrived at the feast. After supper, apparrelled himself in cloth of
gold, and other ornaments, which gave him Majesty and reputation. In that
sort, he came forth to the conspirators, embracing them, and persuading them
with long speech to be resolute, and ready to perform so glorious an attempt.
Then he devised the order thereof, appointing part of them, the next morning to
surprise the Popes Palace, and the rest to call the people to arms. The same
night (as some say) through infidelity of the conspirators, the matter was
revealed to the Pope. Others affirm, that it came to knowledge by those that
saw Steffano come into Rome. But howsoever it were, the same night after
supper, the Pope caused Steffano, with the most part of his companions to be
apprehended, Steffano put to death.
and according to their merits put to death. Such was the end of this his
enterprise. It may be, that some will commend his intention, yet will his
judgment of all men be reproved. Because this and such like enterprises,
although they carry with them a shadow of glory, yet in execution they bring
(almost ever) assured misaduenture. The war had now continued in Toscana almost
one whole year, and the armies were returned to the field, in the year 1454.
At which time, Alisandro Sforza was come to the Florentines, with supply of two
thousand horse. Whereby the Florentine army was well increased, and the Kings
Camp diminished. The Florentines thought good to recover some things by them
lost, and so with small labor gained the possession of certain Towns.
Afterward they encamped before Foiano, which through negligence of the
Commissaries, was sacked: and the inhabitans being dispersed, would not
willingly return thither, til such time as by privileges and rewards they were
allured. The fortress of Vada, was also recovered: For the enemies seeing they
could not defend it, did presently abandon and burn it. During the time that
these things were done by the Florentine army, the Kings soldiers fearing to
come near their enemies, retired themselves toward Siena, many times spoiling
the Florentines country, committing robberies, tumults, and exceeding great
displeasures. Nevertheless that King omitted not to devise some other way to
assault the enemies, to cut off their forces, or by new troubles and assaults
to keep them occupied. Gherardo Gambacorti was Lord in the vale of Bagno. He
and his ancestors either by friendship or by obligation, had always in times
past, either as hired, or as recommended, served the Florentines. With him the
King Alfonso practiced to have that country, and offered in recompense thereof,
an other in the kingdom. This practice was discovered at Florence, yet to
sound the disposition of Gherardo, they sent an Ambassador to remember him of
the obligation of his ancestors, and his own also, and therewith to persuade
him to continue his fidelity toward that Commonweal. Gherardo seemed to
marvel much at this message, and with great oaths protested, that never any
disloiall thought had entered his mind; and that he would come unto Florence,
and make his own person a pledge of his fidelity: nevertheless, being at
that present sick, he could not go thither, but with the Ambassador would
needs send his son to remain in Florence as an hostage. These words, and
this demo^stration brought the Florentines to believe, that Gherardo had said
troth, and his accuser being accounted a lier, was not regarded, nor the
accusation any more thought upon. Notwithstanding, Gherardo being still
solicited by the King, at length consented to the practice. And having
concluded the same, the King sent to the Vale of Bagno a Knight of Jerusalem
called Puccio, and with him diverse bands of soldiers, to take possession of
the Castles and Towns belonging to Gherardo. The Vale of Bagno revolted from
the Florentines.
But those people of Bagno being affectionate to the Florentines, very
unwillingly promised their obedience to the Kings Commissaries. Puccio having
taken possession of all that state, wanted only to possess himself of the
fortress of Corzano. When Gherardo delivered this possession, there was
present among many others, one called Antonio Gualandi of Pisa, a young man
very valiant, and such a one, as was with the treason of Gherardo greatly
discontented. He considering the site of the fortresses, and finding by the
countenance of those soldiers who guarded it, that they were likewise
displeased. While Gherardo stood at the gate to let in the Kings soldiers,
Antonio came betwixt him and the Castle, and with both his hands forcibly
thrust him out, commanding the Guard to shut the gates against so wicked a
Traitor, and keep the same to the use of the Florentines. This rumor being
heard in the Vale of Bagno, and other places near unto it, all the people
took arms against the King, and followed the Florentines ensign. This matter
advertised to Florence, the Florentines caused the son of Gherardo (remaining
with them in hostage) to be put in prison: and sent soldiers to Bagno to
defend the country for them, changing that government from a principality
into a Vicariato. But Gherardo, having thus betrayed both his Lords and his
own son, with great difficulty fled, leaving his wife, his daughter, and
his substance, at the discretion of the enemy. This accident stood the
Florentines greatly in stead: For if the King had possessed that Country, he
might with small charge, and easily have gotten the Vale of Teueri, and spoiled
Casentino, whereby he should have so much troubled the state, that the
Florentines could not have been able to encounter the forces of Arragon which
remained at Siena. The Florentines besides their own preparation in Italy, the
rather to oppress their enemies, Rinato de Angio called into Italy by the
Florentines.
had sent Agnolo Acciaiuoili Ambassador to the French King, to persuade him to
license Rinato de Angio, to come in the aid of the Duke and them. By which
means he should defend his friends, and afterward being in Italy, attend the
surprising of the Kingdom: whereunto they offered him aid both of men and
money. During the wars in Lombardy and in Toscana (as is before said) the
Ambassador concluded with King Rinato of Angio, that before the end of June, he
should come into Italy with two thousand and four hundred horse: and that at
his arrival in Alessandria, the League should give him thirty thousand
Florins ready payment: and every month after, during the wars, ten
thousand. The King then by virtue of this league, coming into Italy, was by
the Duke of Sauoia, and the Marquess of Monferato impeached: for they being
friends to the Venetians, would not permit him to pass. Whereupon the King was
persuaded by the Ambassador of Florence, to return to Prouenza with certain
of his army, and from thence to pass into Italy by sea. And on the other side,
to persuade with the French King to procure so much favor of that Duke, that
the rest of his soldiers might come through Sauoia. According to this counsel
the matter was handled, and the King Rinato went by Sea into Italy, conueying
the rest of his Army through Sauoia by the French Kings mediation. The King
Rinato was by the Duke Francesco most honorably received, and having joined the
Italian forces with the Kings, they assaulted the Venetians with so great
fury, that within short space they recovered all those Towns in Cremonesi
which they had before lost: and not so content, they surprised almost all the
country of Brescia. The Venetian army fearing to tarry in the field, retired
to the walls of Brescia. But the winter being come, the Duke thought good to
withdraw his soldiers to their lodgings, appointing for the Kings abode, the
City of Piacenza, where he remained all that winter, in the year 1453.
without any other action performed. So soon as the time of year served, and
that the Duke was going to the field, in hope to dispossess the Venetians, of
the rest of their Countries upon the firm land, the King Rinato signified unto
him, that of necessity he was to return into France. This intention of the
Kings, seemed to the Duke not only strange, but also unlooked for, and
therefore greatly offended him: and albeit he went in person presently to
dissuade him, yet neither his entreaty nor promises could take effect; but
only promised to leave behind him part of his forces, and to send his son
Giouanni to supply his place in service of the League. This resolution grieved
not the Florentines, for they having recovered their Castles, feared not the
King any longer. And on the other side, they desired that the Duke should not
recover more, then the towns in Lombrdy to him belonging. The King Rinato
being gone, sent according to promise his son into Italy, who stayed not in
Lombardy, but went presently unto Florence, where he was very honorably
received. The matter thus handled by the King, did occasion the Duke to be
content with peace, and the Venetians, Alfonso, and the Florentines, being
likewise wearied, desired the same. The Pope also by all means labored to
bring it to pass, because the same year Mahumetto the great Turk had taken
Constantinople, and made himself Lord of all Greece: which victory terrified
greatly all Christians, but chiefly the Venetians and the Pope, who thought
Italy was thereby in great danger. The Pope therefore desired the Potentates of
Italy to send Ambassadors unto him, with authority to establish an universal
peace; which commission was performed: and notwithstanding that altogether they
joined, and seemed all to allow of the motion, they found nevertheless therein
great difficulty. The King required that the Florentines should pay his
charges in the war past, and the Florentines would be paid themselves. The
Venetians demanded Cremona of the Duke, and the Duke asked of them Bergamo,
Brescia, and Crema; so that these difficulties seemed impossible to be removed:
notwithstanding, that which at Rome seemed hard to be concluded, at Milan and
Venice proved easy. For when at Rome the peace universal was practiced,
Peace between the Venetians and the Duke.
the Duke and the Venetians betwixt themselves made an agreement on the ninth
of April, in the year 1451. By virtue whereof, every of them should
repossesse those towns which were theirs before the war. And it was granted
to the Duke, that he might recover his towns taken from him by the Lords of
Monferato and Sauoia. And to the other Princes of Italy, one month was allowed
to ratify the same. The Pope, the Flore^tines, the Sanesi, and the lesser
Potentates, within the time appointed, made their ratification. Moreover,
betwixt the Florentines, the Duke, and the Venetians, a peace was concluded for
fifteen years. Only the King Alfonso among all the Italian Princes seemed
therewith discontented, because he thought it was contrary to his reputation to
be named in the contract of peace, not as a principal, but as an adherent. For
which consideration, he pawsed long, before he would lay down his resolution.
But being solicited by sundry solemn Embassages of other Princes, he was at
length content (and chiefly by the Pope) to be persuaded, and with his son
entered this league for thirty years: confirming the same with alliances and
cross marriages betwixt the Duke and the King, their sons marrying one the
others daughters. Notwithstanding, to the end that some seeds of the war
might remain in Italy, he consented not to make the peace, before such time as
those of the League would give him leave without their injury, to make wars
upon the Genouesi, Gismondo, Malatesti, and Astor Prince of Faenza. This
conclusion made, Ferrando his son then being at Siena, returned to the
Kingdom, having sithence his arrival in Toscana not gained any dominion, but
lost great numbers of soldiers. This universal peace being concluded, it was
only feared, least King Alfonso for the displeasure he bare to the Genouesi,
would disturb the common quiet: but the matter came otherwise to pass, for
the King did not openly move any disturbance, but (as it has always happened
by the ambition of mercinarie soldiers) the peace was by them interrupted. The
Venetians had (as their manner is) the wars being ended, discharged their
General Giacopo Piccinino, who taking unto him certain other Captains
(likewise discharged) went into Romagna, and from thence to the country of
Siena: where Giacopo staying, begun the war, and surprised certain Towns
belonging to the Sanesi. Troubles moved by Giacopo Piccinino, and supported by
King Alfonso.
At the beginning of these troubles in the year 1455. died Pope Nicholo, and
to him succeeded Calisto tertio. This Pope, to repress the new war,
assembled all the forces he was able, making Giouanni Ventimiglia his General;
who with certain Florentines, and other soldiers sent from the Duke for that
purpose, went against Giacopo, and fought with him near unto Bolcena: where
notwithstanding that Ventimiglia was taken prisoner, yet Giacopo had the worst,
and was forced to retire to Castalione della Piscaia, and had he not been by
Alfonso relieved with money, he should then utterly have been overthrown;
which relief, discovered that Giacopo had taken that enterprise in hand, with
the priuitie and direction of that King. Alfonso finding himself discovered,
to be reconciled to the other Princes consenting to the peace, (whose favor by
means of this weak war he had almost lost) procured that Giacopo should
restore to the Sanesi all the towns he had taken from them, and they to give
him twenty thousand Florins. And this agreement made, the King received
Giacopo with his soldiers into the Kingdom. In those days, notwithstanding
that the Pope intended to bridle Giacopo Piccinino, yet was he mindful also of
the defense of Christendom, likely to be oppressed by the Turks. For which
purpose, he sent into all Christian Countries Ambassadors and Preachers, to
persuade with Princes and people, to arm themselves for the aid of Religion,
Pope Calisto persuades a general war against the Turks.
and to give money and personal service to this enterprise, against the common
enemy. He caused also solemn processions to be made, declaring both publicly
and privately, that he himself would be among the first of the Christians that
should assist that action, with counsel, money, and men. But the heat of this
Crociata was cooled, with aduertisements that the Turk and his army being at
Bellgrado (a Castle of Hungary upon the river of Danubio) was by the Hungarians
hurt in his person, and his Camp broken, so that the Popes and Christians
fear, conceived by the loss of Constantinople, was thereby ceased, and the
preparation they made for the war proceeded coldly. In Hungary likewise by
the death of Giouanni Vaiuoda, Captain of that victory, the war was
discontinued. But returning to the matters of Italy, I say, that in the year
1456. the tumults moved by Giacopo Piccinino were ended: so that every man
having laid aside arms, it seemed as though God had taken them in hand. For
there happened in Toscana most tempestuous winds, A marvelous rempest in
Toscana.
such as never before had been heard of, nor shall be, which wrought most
marvelous and memorable effects. Upon the 24. of August, one hour before day,
there arose from the Sea toward Ancona a great and dark clowd, crossing
Italy, and entering the Sea toward Pisa, stretching two miles in compass.
This storm was furiously carried, (and whither by natural or supernatural
force) divided into many parts, as it were fighting amongst themselves. And of
those broken clouds, some were hoised up toward heaven, some violently cast
down, and some with wonderful speed were turned round; but always before
them came a wind, with lightnings and flashing of fire, so terrible, as cannot
be expressed. Of these broken and confused clouds, and of those furious winds,
and great flames, there grew so strange a noise, as moved the people to greater
fear, then any Earthquake or thunder ever had done: in so much as every man
thought the world was ended, and that the earth, the water, and the heaven,
should have returned to the old Chaos. This fearful storm, wheresoever it
passed, wrought marvelous and wonderful effects. But the most notable of all,
happened about the Castle of S. Cassiano. This Castle is builded upon the hill
which parts the Vales of Pisa and Grieve, eight miles distant from Florence.
Betwixt that said Castle, and the town of S. Andrea, builded upon the same
hill, this furious tempest passed, not coming to S. Andrea, but at S. Cassiano
threw down certain turrets and chimneys: and near thereunto subverted whole
houses even to the ground, and carried away whole roofes of the Churches of S.
Martino a Bagnolo, and S. Maria della pace; bearing them from thence unbroken,
the space of more then one mile. One man also a Carrier, was taken up, and in
the valley next unto the way, both he and his Moyles found dead. Moreover, all
the greatest oaks and strongest trees which would not bend at the fury of the
tempest, were not only broken, but also with violence borne far from the
place where they grew. Whereat, the next day, when the tempest was ceased, and
men returned to those places, they were greatly astonished, for they found the
Country desolate and spoiled, the houses and the temples overthrown, the
people lamenting and beholding their houses cast down, and under them their
goods, their cattle, and their parents slain: Which thing, both in the
beholders and hearers thereof, moved a marvelous compassion. By this mean, it
pleased God rather to threaten, then punish Toscana. For if so great a tempest
had fallen upon any City full of houses and inhabitants, as it fell upon these
oaks, trees, and small houses, one far from the other, without all doubt,
the destruction would have been greater, then the mind of man could have
conceived. But it pleased God, by that small example to revive in men's minds,
the memory of his power. But now to return to our matter. The King Alfonso (as
is before said) discontented with the peace, and seeing that the war which he
caused Giacopo Piccinino to make upon the Sanesi without any reasonable
occasion, had wrought no effect, he thought to move an other with the allowance
of the league. The Genouesi assaulted by King Alfonso.
And in the year 1456. he assaulted the Genouesi both by sea and land, as
desirous to give that state to the Adorni, and deprive the Frigosi who then
governed. Besides that, he caused Giacopo Piccinino to pass Tronto, and
assault Gismondo Malatesti, who having well manned his towns, regarded not
much the assault of Giacopo, so as the enterprise of the King on this side
took no effect at all. But that war of Genoua occasioned more war to him
and his Kingdom, then himself looked for. At that time Pietro Fregoso was
Duke of Genoua; he fearing himself to be of force unable to withstand the
Kings assault, determined to give that to an other which himself could not
hold: and yield it into the hands of such a one that would (at the least in
that respect) defend him; so might he also hope in time to come, to be
reacquited. Then sent he Ambassadors to Carlo the seventh, King of France, and
offered him the dominion of Genoua. Carlo accepted this offer, and to take
possession of that City, sent thither Giouanni de Angio son to King Rinato,
who not long before was departed from Florence, and returned into France. For
Carlo was persuaded, that Giouanni having been before employed in Italy, knew
how to govern that City better then any other: hoping also, that being
there, he might devise upon the enterprise of Naples, of which Kingdom,
Alfonso had dispossessed his father Rinato. Then went Giouanni to Genoua, and
being there, was received as Prince. Genoua in the possession of the French
King.
All the fortresses belonging to the City, with the whole government, were
delivered to his hand. This accident displeased Alfonso, thinking he had drawn
in an enemy over mighty: yet not dismayed therewith, courageously followed his
enterprise, and sailed on with his Navy, till he came under Villa Marina, at
Ponto Fino, The death of King Alfonso.
where taken with a sodeine disease, he died. By death of this King, Giouanni
and the Genouesi were delivered of the war, and Ferrando (who succeeded his
father Alfonso in the Kingdom) grew suspicious, least an enemy of so great
reputation in Italy, might happily win the favor of many his Barons, whose
fidelity he doubted, and whose minds he knew desirous of Innovation: for
which respects, they might percase be persuaded to join with the French. He
also instructed the Pope, whose ambitious mind (as he thought) aspired to take
from him this new Kingdom. His only trust was in the Duke of Milan, he being
indeed no less careful of the Kingdom, then was Ferrando: for he mistrusted,
that if the French did prevail, they would also labor to surprise his state,
which they had some color to claim, as to them apperteining. That Duke
therefore, presently upon the death of Alfonso, determined to give that Kingdom
unto Pietro Lodouico Borgia his nephew. Also (to make that enterprise seem
more honest and acceptable to the rest of the Italian Princes) he published,
that his intent was, to reduce that Kingdom under the Church of Rome:
persuading the Duke in that respect, not to favor Ferrando, offering him those
towns which of ancient time he possessed in the Kingdom. But in the midst
of these imaginations and new troubles, Pope Calisto died, The death of Pope
Calisto
and in his place was created Pio secundo, borne in Siena, and of the family of
Piccolhuomini. This Pope minding only to benefit the Christians, and honor
the Church, setting aside all private passion, at the Duke of Milans request,
crowned the King Ferrando: thinking he should better appease the wars by
mainteining of him in possession, then by favoring the French, to give them
the Kingdom; or if he should (as Calisto did) challenge it for himself. For
this benefit, Ferrando gave unto Antonio the Popes nephew, the principallitie
of Malfi: and married him unto his own base daughter. He restored also
Beneuento and Terracina to the Church. Then all men supposing that the arms of
Italy were laid down, the Pope took order to move the Christians to make
war upon the Turks, as it was before devised by Pope Calisto. At which time,
there rose great dissension betwixt the Fregosi and Giouanni de Angio Lord of
Genoua: which dissension, revived a war of more importance, then was the
other already passed. At that time, The Genouesi revolted from the french.
Pietrino Fregoso happened to be at a Castle of his in Riuiera. He not holding
himself according to his merits rewarded, by Giouanni de Angio, (who by help
of him and others of his house was made Prince) became open enemy to Giouanni.
This discord pleased Ferrando, as that, which might only be the means of his
good speed. Then sent he men and money to Pietrino, hoping by his aid to drive
Giouanni from that state. Which he knowing, sent into France to encounter
Pietrino. There finding much favor, he received a great supply, and went
against Pietrino, who was become strong also: so as Giouanni retired into the
City, where also in the night Pietrino entered, and possessed some places
thereof: but the next morning was by the soldiers of Giouanni assaulted and
slain, and all his men likewise either slain or taken. This victory
encouraged Giouanni to set upon the Kingdom: and in October 1459. with a
mighty navy he departed from Genoua. The kingdom of Naples assaulted by
Giouanni de A^gio.
And landing at Baia, marched from thence to Sessa, where he was by the Duke of
that country received. Then came unto Giouanni the Prince of Tarranto, the
Citizens of Aquila, with many other towns and Princes, in so much as that
Kingdom was almost ruined. Ferrando seeing that, desired aid of the Pope and
the Duke. Also to have the fewer foes, made peace with Gismondo Malatesti,
wherewith Giacopo Piccinino (being natural enemy to Gismondo) became so much
displeased, as he discharged himself from the service of Ferrando, and joined
with Giouanni. Ferrando also sent money to enterteine Federigo Lord of Vrbino,
and within short space he assembled (according unto that time) a great army.
Then marched he to the river of Sarni, where he found the enemy, and fought
with him: in which conflict, King Ferrando defeated.
the forces of King Ferrando were overthrown, and many of his principal
Captains taken. But notwithstanding this overthrow, the City of Naples, with
a few other towns, and some Princes, continued faithful to Ferrando, though
all the rest of the Realm, and Nobility, yielded their obedience to Giouanni.
Giacopo Piccinino persuaded Giouanni to follow the victory, and presently to
march to Naples, thereby to possess himself of the chief City of the
Kingdom; which Giouanni refused to do, saying he would first spoil all the
country, and then it would be more easy to surprise the City, which was the
cause, he failed to perform that enterprise: for he knew not, that the parts
do more willingly follow the head, then the head does follow them. After this
overthrow, the King Ferrando being fled into Naples, thither resorted unto him
diverse of his subjects, who were driven from their countries: then by all
courteous means he levied men and money to make a new Camp, sending again for
aid to the Pope and Duke. From the one and the other of whom he was aided
more speedily and abundantly then before time he had been, because they greatly
feared, he should otherwise lose his Kingdom. King Ferrando in this sort
grown strong, marched out of Naples, and having gotten some reputation,
recovered also part of his lost towns. During these wars in the Kingdom, a
chance happened, that utterly deprived Giouanni de Angio of reputation and
mean to have victory in that enterprise. The Genouesi being weary of the
French insolent and covetous government, took arms against the Kings
Governor there, and forced him to flee to the little Castle of Genoua. The
Fregosi and the Adorni were content to join in that action, and by the Duke of
Milan they became furnished of money and men, both for the winning, and keeping
the City. So that the King Rinato with his navy came to the succor of his
son, and hoping to recover Genoua, by mean of the small Castle, in landing
his soldiers, was overthrown; and forced with shame to return unto Prouenza.
These news being carried to the Kingdom of Naples, greatly dismayed Giouanni
de Angio: notwithstanding, he still followed his enterprise, and continued the
war, being served by those Barons who were rebelled, and could not look for
favor of Ferrando. In the end, after many accidents, those two royal armies
joined battle, Giouanni de Angio vanquished in battle.
wherein, near unto the City of Troia, Giouanni was vanquished, the year
1463. This overthrow did not so much hinder the success of the King Giouanni,
as did the revolt of Giacopo Piccinino, who left him, and joined with King
Ferrando: whereby being spoiled of his forces, he retired into Histria, and
from thence to France. This war continued four years, and was in the end
lost by his own negligence, for it was many times in good way of victory by
the virtue of his soldiers. Therein the Florentines intermedled not
apparently, yet were they desired by Ambassadors of the King Giouanni of
Arragon (newly come to that Kingdom by the death of Alfonso) to assist the
enterprise of Ferrando his nephew, as they had bound themselves by the league
lately made with Alfonso his father. To whom by the Florentines it was
answered, that they were not by any obligation bound to aid the son in that
war, which was begun by the father: for as the same had been without their
counsel or knowledge taken in hand, so without their assistance it should be
performed and ended. The Ambassadors being thus to the request of their King
answered, protested the execution of their band, and the Kings prejudice, so in
great displeasure with that City, departed. The Florentines during these
wars, continued in peace abroad, but within they rested not, as in the next
Book shall be particulerly declared.

The end of the sixth Book.
royal blazon or coat of arms
THE SEVENTH BOOK.
TO those that have read the former Book, it may seem in writing of Florence,
and the proceedings of the Florentines, we have overmuch spoken of such
accidents as happened in Lombardy and the Kingdom. Nevertheless, as heretofore
I have, so am I hereafter to continue with the like discourses. For albeit I
did not promise to write of matters concerning Italy, yet have I thought good
to speak of those, that were in that country most notable. For if I should
not make mention of them, our history would be with more difficulty
understood, and to the Readers less pleasing. Chiefly, because the actions of
other people and Princes of Italy, did occasion the wars, wherein the
Florentines were forced to intermeddle, as of the war of Giouanni de Angio,
and King Ferrando great enimitie grew, which was after betwixt Ferrando and the
Florentines, and particulerly with the house of Medici continued. For the King
complained, that the Florentines did not only leave him in that war vnaided,
but also that his enemies were by them favored: which anger, was the occasion
of exceeding many inconuenients, as shall be hereafter declared. And for as
much as I have written at large those matters which happened without the
City, till the year 1463. it behooves me for the declaration of such
troubles as happened in those days within, to look back many years passed.
Yet first by way of discourse (as is my custom) I say, that whosoever does
think, that any Commonweal can continue united, he greatly deceives
himself. But true it is, that some divisions be prejudicial to Commonweals,
and some others be profitable. Those be prejudicial, which are with factions
and followers accompanied. And those are profitable, which without factions and
followers be maintained. Seeing then, it is a thing impossible, for that man
who frames a Commonweal, to provide that no enimitie shall therein arise, he
ought (at the least) foresee, that no factions be permitted. It is then to be
considered, that the Citizens in every state do win reputation, either by
public or private means. Public reputation is gotten by victory in the
field, by surprising of towns, by wise and discreet performing of Embassages,
or by counsailing the State gravely and fortunately. By private means men
attain to reputation, by pleasuring particular citizens, by saving them from
punishments, by relieuing them with money, by advancing the^ unworthily to
honors and offices, and by enterteining the common people with sports and
public gifts. From these causes, faction, following, and partaking do proceed.
And as reputation thus gotten is hurtful, so the other not being intermedled
with faction, is the occasion of great good, because it is grounded upon no
private, but common commodity. And albeit among such Citizens, so great
displeasures will grow, as the wisdom of man is not able to prevent, yet
wanting partakers to follow the^ for proper profit, they cannot by any way
hinder the commonweal, but shall rather help it: for in aspiring to that they
would come unto, it behooves them to endeavor the advancement of the state, and
particularly one to respect the other, so much, as the laws and civil orders
be not infringed. The enimities of Florence were always followed with
factions, and therefore hurtful to the state, neither was any victorious
faction longer united, then the contrary part continued in force: for so soon
as the enemies were extinguished, the faction remaining no more in awe of the
enemy, nor having order to bridle it self, became divided. The faction of
Cosimo de Medici in the year 1434. remained with victory. Nevertheless,
because the party oppressed was still great, and full of mighty men, it
continued united and tolerable, so long, as among those of the faction, no
error was committed, and the people for no evil desert did hate the^: and
whenever that government had need of the people to reestablish their
authority, they found them ready to give unto the chief of the faction the
Balia, and whatsoever else they desired. Thus from the 1434. till the 55. being
21. years, they were confirmed in office 6. times, Cosimo de Medici. Neri
Capponi.
ordinarily elected by the Councels. There were in Florence (as we have diverse
times said) two most mighty Citizens, Cosimo de Medici, and Neri Capponi, of
whom, Neri had gained his reputation by public means: by season whereof, he
had many friends, but few followers. Cosimo on the other side being aspired
both by public and private ways, had not only many friends, but also many
followers. These two men continuing united, during their lives, easily obtained
of the people whatsoever they desired, because they had love mixed with
authority. But the year 1455. being come, Neri dead, and the adverse part
extinguished, Cosimo found no small difficulty to be confirmed, and his own
friends being most mighty in the state, were cause thereof: because they feared
no more the contrary faction put down, and desired to decrease the power of
Cosimo; which was the beginning of those divisions which followed after in the
year 1466. So as they unto whom the offices apperteined, in their councels,
where the public government of that state was debated, did allege it was not
convenient that the authority of Balia should be resumed, but that the order
of election ought proceed, as it was wont, by lots, and not according to the
former Squittini. Cosimo, to quallifie this humor, had to determine upon one of
these two remedies, either by force with the aid of his friends and followers
to possess himself of the State, and therewith to compel the contrary
faction, or else to suffer the matter proceed, and in time let his friends
know, that not his honor, but their reputation was by the enemy taken away. Of
these two remedies, he made choice of the last: for he knew well, that the
Squittini being fullest of his friends, himself could not incur any peril,
and might also at his pleasure resume the State. The City then determined to
create the Magistrates by lot: the greatest number thought the liberty
recovered, and that the offices should not after be allotted, according to the
will of the most mighty men, but as seemed best to themselves. Whereupon, the
followers of the great Citizens began to be disesteemed, and by the people
were in sundry places beaten down and oppressed. So as they who were wont to
have their houses full of suitors and presents, were now become empty, and
without any resort at all. They also saw themselves made equal with those who
were before time far under them, and their equals were become their
superiors. They were not regarded nor honored, but rather many times mocked and
derided. Also in the streets, the people without respect, spoke their pleasures
both of them, and of the Commonweal. Whereof was conceived, that they, and
not Cosimo, had lost the government. All which things Cosimo dissimuled, and
whenever any thing plausible to the people was propounded, he was ever the
first that allowed thereof. But that which most terrified the great men, and
made Cosimo to look about him, was the reviving of the Catasto the year 1427.
Whereby was ordained, the Imposition should proceed by the order of law, and
not the pleasure of men. This law made, and Magistrates for execution thereof
chosen, occasioned the great Citizens to assemble, go unto Cosimo, and desire
him be pleased to concur with them in their, and his own delivery from the
people: whereby he should recover reputation to the State, make himself
mighty, and them honored. Thereunto Cosimo answered, he was content, so that
the law were made orderly with consent of the people, and without force;
otherwise no speech to be thereof. Then went they about in the Councels to make
a new Balia, whereby they might create new Officers, but that intention
prevailed not: then the great Citizens returned to Cosimo, desiring him most
humbly to consent to the Parliament, which Cosimo utterly refused to do:
meaning thereby to bring to pass, that they should find the error they
committed. And because Donato Cochi, being Gonfaloniere di Giustitia, would in
any wise without his consent call the Parliament, Cosimo procured him by the
rest of the Senators, (who sat with him in office) to be so mocked and
disdeined, as thereby he became mad, and was as a man senseless, sent home to
his house. Notwithstanding, because he thought it not fit to suffer matters to
run further out of order, then that they might be at his pleasure reformed:
Lucca Pitti.
Lucca Pitti become Gonfaloniere di Giustitia (a stout and selfe-willed man)
Cosimo thought good to leave the government to his discretion, to the end, that
if any thing were misdone, the fault might be to Lucca and not to himself
imputed. Lucca then in the beginning of his Magistracy, propounded many things
to the people, touching restoration of the Balia, but not obteining his
desire, with injurious words full of pride, he threatened those of the councels:
Which threatenings, shortly after he performed indeed. For in August upon the
eve of S. Lorenzo, the year 1458. he assembled secretly within the Palace
many armed men, called the people thither, and forced the^ to consent to that,
which voluntarily they had before denied. By this means being again in
possession of the State, the Balia was created, and the chief Magistrates
according to the pleasure of a few, were appointed. Then to begin that
government with terror, which was gotten by force, Girolamo Machiauelli.
they confined Girolamo Machiauelli, with some others, and deprived many from
their offices, which Girolamo having afterward passed the bounds of
prescription, was proclaimed a Rebel. Then went he from place to place in
Italy, to persuade the Princes against his country, till at length in
Lunigiana, through the treason of one of that Senate, he was taken, brought to
Florence, and there in prison died. This form of government continuing eight
years, was violent and insupportable. For Cosimo being old, weak, vnhealthie,
and unable to be present as he was wont, at the affairs of the Commonweal, a
few Citizens at their pleasures did rob and spoil the City. Lucca Pitti
for his good service was made Knight, and he to declare himself no less
thankful to the State, then the State had been to him, caused that the
Officers called Priori delli Arti, having passed their authority, should be
called Priori della Liberta. He ordained also, that whereas the Gonfaloniere
was wont to sit on the right hand of the Rettori, that after he should be
placed in the midst of them. Moreover, to the end that God might seem
partaker of this action, they made public processions and prayers, thanking
him for the restoration of their honors. Lucca was by the Senate, and by
Cosimo richly presented. To him also every other Citizen resorted, and gave
somewhat, so that it was supposed that the sum of his presents amounted unto
twenty thousand ducats. In conclusion, he aspired to such greatness of
reputation, as Lucca, Ordinances by Lucca ^^tti.
and not Cosimo, seemed to govern the City. Thereupon he conceived so great
confidence, that he began to build two houses, the one in Florence, the other
in Rucciano, a mile distant from the City, both stately and kingly buildings.
But that in Florence was much larger then by any private Citizen had ever been
builded. For performance thereof, he spared not to use all extraordinary
means. For not only private Citizens and particular men did present him, and
help him with things necessary for his building, but the whole comminaltie and
people did put their hands to his works. Moreover, all banished men, and every
other person having committed murder, theft, or other offense, whereof he
feared public punishment (if he were abled to his service any way) might
without all danger resort thither. The other Citizens, although they builded
not like unto him, yet were they no less violent, and inclined to oppression:
so as, albeit Florence had no war abroad to hinder it, yet was it by the
Citizens within oppressed. In those days (as is before said) happened the
war in the Kingdom: and some wars were also made against the house of
Malatesti, by the Pope, being desirous to take from them Rimino and Cesena: so
that in this enterprise, and his study to move the war against the Turk,
Pope Pio consumed his Papacy. But Florence continued still in divisions and
troubles. For then began the faction of Cosimo to be divided within it self,
the year 1455. which happened by the occasions before said. Yet were they (for
that time) by his wisdom appeased. But the year 64. being come, Cosimo fell
again sick, The death of Cosimo di Medici.
and dyed. At his death, both friends and foes lamented: for they, who in
respect of the State loved him not, seeing what extortion was used by the
Citizens in his life, doubted (least Cosimo being dead whom all men
reverenced) they should be utterly ruined, and of his son Piero they hoped
not much. For albeit he were of disposition a good man, yet being sickly, and
new in the government, they thought he should be forced to respect others, who
without any bridle, would become strong and incorrigible. Every man therefore
feared to find great want of Cosimo. This Cosimo was the most esteemed, and
most famous Citizen (being no man of war) that ever had been in the memory
of man, either in Florence, or any other City, because he did not only
excel all others (of his time) in authority and riches, but also in
liberality and wisdom. For amongst other qualities which advanced him to be
chief of his Country, he was more then other men, liberal and magnificent.
Which liberality appeared much more after his death then before. For his son
Piero found by his fathers Records, that there was not any Citizen of
estimation, to whom Cosimo had not lent great sums of money: and many times
also unrequired he did lend to those Gentlemen, whom he knew to have need.
His magnificence likewise appeared by diverse his buildings. For within
Florence, he builded the Abbaies and Temples of S. Marco, S. Lorenzo, and the
Monastery of S. Verdiana. And in the Mountains of Fiesole, S. Gerolano, with
the Abbey thereunto belonging. Also in Mugello, he did not only repair the
Church for the Friars, but took it down, and builded it a new. Besides those
magnificent buildings in S. Croce, in S. Agnoli, and S. Miniato, he made
Altars, and sumptuous Chapels. All which Temples and Chapels, besides the
buildings of them, were by him paued, and thoroughly furnished with all things
necessary. With these public buildings, we may number his private houses,
whereof one within the City meet for so great a personage, and four other
without at Carriaggi, at Fiesole, at Cafaggiuolo, and at Trebio, all Palaces
fitter for Princes then private persons. And because his magnificent houses in
Italy did not in his opinion make him famous enough, he builded in Jerusalem an
Hospital to reciue poor and diseased Pilgrims. In which work, he consumed
great sums of money. And albeit these buildings, and every other his actions
were princely, and that in Florence he lived like a Prince, yet so governed by
wisdom, as he never exceeded the bounds of civil modesty. For in his
conversation, in riding, in marrying his children and kinsfolks, he was like
unto all other discreet and modest Citizens: because he well knew, that
extraordinary things which are of all men with admiration beholded, do win
more envy, then those which without ostentatio^ be honestly covered.
Whenever therefore he married his sons, he never sought to match them with
the daughters of Princes, but wedded his son Giouanni, to Cornelia
Alessandri, and Piero, to Lucretia Tornabuoni. Also of his graund children
begotten of Piero, he married Bianca to Guglielmo de Pazi, and Nannina to
Barnardo Russellai. These his proceedings caused, that in so great change of
fortune, and in so variable a City, among so inconstant Citizens, he
continued a Magistrate 31. years. For being a wise man, he discovered all
inconuenients a far, and therefore might in time prevent them, or if they did
grow, be so prepared, as they could not offend him. Whereby he did not only
suppress all domestical and civil ambition, but also bridled the insolency
of many Princes with so great happiness and wisdom, that whosoever joined in
league with him and his country, became either equal or superior to his
enemies. And whosoever opposed themselves against them, either they lost time,
money, or state. Whereof the Venetians can bear witness, who being joined
with him against the Duke Philippo, were always victorious: and being
disioyned, were first by Philippo, and after by Francesco victored and
oppressed. Also when they joined with Alfonso against the state of Florence,
Cosimo with his credit, made both Naples and Venice so scarce of money, as they
were constrained to take what peace himself was pleased with. Whatsoever
difficulty or contradiction was moved against Cosimo, either within or without
the City, the end thereof was to his glory, and the disadvantage of his
enemies. Therefore all civil discords increased his authority in Florence,
and foreign wars augmented his power abroad. He annexed to the dominion of
his Country Borgo at S. Sepolcro, Monteuoglio, Casentino, and the Vale of
Bagno. Thus his virtue and fortune, oppressed all enemies, and advanced his
friends. He was borne in the year 1389. on the feast day of S. Cosimo and
Damiano. The first part of his life was full of troubles, as appears by his
exile, his imprisonment, and his dangers of death. Also at the Council of
Constanza (whither he went with the Pope Giouanni) after the Popes oppression,
he was forced to disguise himself, and flee. But having passed the forty
year of his age, he lived most happily: in so much, as not only they which
joined with him in public actions, but all other men also that maneged his
treasure in every place of Europe, did perticipate of his felicity. Also many
excessive rich houses in Florence had their beginning from him, as Tornabuoni,
Benchi, Portinari, and Sassetti. Besides all these, every man depending upon
his counsel, and fortune, became wealthy. And albeit that his building of
Temples, and giving of alms, was known throughout the world, yet would he to
his friends many times lament, that he had not spent and bestowed so much to
the honor of God, but that he found himself still in his book a debtor. He
was of mean stature, in complexion brown, The description of Cosimo his
person, and his wit.
and of presence venerable: unlearned, yet eloquent, and full of natural
wisdom; friendly to his friends, and pitiful to the poor. In conversation
he was frugall, in counsel advised, in execution speedy, in speech and
answering, witty, and grave. Rinaldo de gli Albizi in the beginning of his
exile sent him a message, saying that the hen did sit: whereunto Cosimo
answered, that she could never hatch, being far from her nest. To other
Rebels who sent him word they slept not: he answered, that he believed the
same, because there, sleep was taken from them. Unto the Pope Pio, persuading
Princes to take Arms against the Turk, Cosimo said, An old man takes in hand
a young enterprise. To the Ambassadors of Venice, who came with the messengers
of Alfonso, to complain of the Florentines, he showed his head bare, and asked
of what color it was? they answered white. Then he replying, said, that ere it
belong, your Senators will also have white heads like unto mine. His wife, a
few hours before his death, seeing him shut his eyes, asked him for what cause
he so did? He answered, to bring them in use. Some Citizens saying unto him
after his return from exile, that he hindered the City, and offended God, in
banishing so many honest men? To them he answered, It was better to have a
City hindered, then lost; and that the State was not defended with beads in
men's hands. Which words, gave his enemies matter to speak evil of him, as a
man that loved himself more then his Country, and that esteemed more this
world, then the world to come. Many other sayings, as things not necessary, I,
omit. Cosimo was also a lover and preferrer of learned men, for he brought unto
Florence Argiropolo, a Grecian borne, and in that time of singular learning, to
the end that the youth of Florence might be by him instructed in the Greek
tongue, and other his good learnings. He enterteyned in his house Marsilio
Ficino, a second father of the Philosophy of Plato, and him he entirely loved.
Also, to the end he might with commodity exercise the study of learning, and
more aptly use his help therein, he gave him certain land near unto his house
of Careggi. This his wisdom, these his riches, this manner of life, and this
fortune, were the causes, that in Florence he was both feared and loved, and of
the Princes not only of Italy, but also of all Europe esteemed: so as he left
unto his posterity such a foundation, as they might with virtue equal him,
and in fortune far excel him. Whatsoever authority Cosimo had either in
Florence, or elsewhere in Christendom, he deserved the same: notwithstanding,
in the end of his life, he had great sorrows. For of two only sons, Pietro,
and Giouanni, the one (of whom he had most hope) dyed: the other was
continually sick, and therefore unable either for public or private function.
In so much as his son being dead, he caused him to be carried about the
house, and he following the Coarse, sighed, and said, this house is over great
for so small a family. It also offended the greatness of his mind, that he
had not (in his own opinion) enlarged the Florentine dominion with some
honorable conquest. And it grieved him the more, knowing that Francesco Sforza
had deceived him, who being but Earl, promised, that so soon as he was
possessed of Milan, he would win the City of Lucca for the Florentines.
Which was not performed, because the Earl with his fortune changed his mind,
and being become Duke, determined to enjoy that state with peace, which he had
gotten by war. Therefore he would neither keep touch with Cosimo nor any
other, neither would he after he was Duke, make any more wars then those
that for his own defense he was enforced unto. Which grieved Cosimo greatly,
finding that he had endured great pains, and spent much, to advance a man
unthankful and perfidious. Moreover by the weakness of his body, he found
himself unfit to follow either private or public affairs, whereby the one,
and the other, miscarried. Because the City was destroyed by the Citizens, and
his own substance by his confidents and children consumed. All these things in
the later end of his age, did greatly disquiet his mind: Notwithstanding he
died with glory. And all the principal Citizens, and all the Christian
Princes did condole his death with Pietro his son, and accompanied his coarse
to the Temple of S. Lorenzo, where with great pomp it was buried: and by
public consent was written upon his Tomb, Pater Patriae. If in this
discourse of Cosimo, I have imitated those, which have written the lives of
Princes, and not those which write universal histories: let no man marvel
thereat. For he being a rare man in our City, deserved I should affoard him
extraordinary commendation. In those days, that Florence and Italy stood in
the conditions aforesaid, Jews King of France, was with grievous wars
assaulted. For the Lords of his own Country, assisted by the Dukes of
Bretagne and Burgogne, made the war so great upon the King, that he had no
mean to aid the Duke Giouanni de Angio, in his enterprise of Genoua and the
kingdom. But judging that he had need of aid whatsoever, he gave the City of
Sauona (then in his hand and kept by French men) to Francesco Duke of Milan:
letting him understand, that (if he so pleased) he might also with his favor,
assault Genoua. Which offer was accepted by Francesco, and either through the
reputation of the Kings friendship, or the favor of the Adorni, he became Lord
of Genoua. The Duke of Milan, Lord of Genoua.
Then to declare himself thankful for the benefit received of the King, he
sent into France to the Kings aid, a thousand five hundredth horse, conducted
by Galiazzo his eldest son. Thus Ferrando of Aragon, and Francesco Sforza,
were become, the one Duke of Lombardy and Prince of Genoua: the other, King of
all the kingdom of Naples. And having married their children, the one, to the
other, they devised by what means they might, during their lives, maintain
their countries with security: and after their deaths, so leave the same to
their heirs. For which purpose, they thought it necessary, that the King
should assure himself of those Barons, which in the war of Giouanni de Angio,
had disobeyed him: and that the Duke should endeavor himself to extinguish
those that had been brought up in the wars by the Bracci, natural enemies to
his house, and grown up in great reputation under Giacopo Piccinino, who was
the chiefest Captain in all Italy; and such a one as every Prince ought to
beware of: chiefly the Duke who could not account his dominion assured, nor
leave the same to his sons, if Giacopo did still live. The King therefore by
all means sought to make peace with his Barons, handling the matter cunningly
to assure him self of them, which fell out very happily. Because the Barons
did think, that in continuing the war against their King, the same would be
in the end their undoubted ruin: and yielding to the peace, they should stand
at the kings discretion. But because men do most willingly eschew that evil
which is most certain, it comes to pass, that Princes may easily deceive
others of less power: and so these Lords gave credit to the King. For they
seeing the manifest danger of the war, yielded themselves into his hands, and
were upon sundry occasions by him oppressed: which greatly dismayed Giacopo
Piccinino, at that time remaining with his forces at Salmona. And to remove
occasion whereby the King might oppress him, he practiced by his friends, to
be reconciled to the Duke Francesco, who having made him great and honorable
offers, Giacopo resolved to put himself into his hands: and being accompanied
with one hundredth horse went to Milan to present himself unto the Duke.
Giacapo had long served his father, and with his brother; first for the Duke
Philippo, and after for the people of Milan. Whereby he gained great
acquaintance in that City, Giacopo Piccinino, supected to the Duke.
and the good will of the multitude, which was increased by the present
condition of the City. For the good fortune, and great power of the house of
Sforza, had kindled great envy: And Giacopo for his adversity and long
absence, was greatly by the people pitied, who desired much to see him. All
which things appeared at his coming. For welneare all the Nobility went to
meet him, and the streets were full of those which desired to see him. Besides
that, great honor was spoken of him and his soldiers. All which things, did
hasten his destruction, because they increased suspicion, and the Dukes desire
to oppress him. For the more covert performance thereof, the Duke devised,
that the marriage with his daughter Drusiana, who had been long before
contracted unto him, should now be solemnized. Then he practiced with Ferrando,
to entertain him, for General of his Army, and promised him a hundredth
thousand Florins in pressed. After this conclusion, Giacopo, accompanied with the
Dukes Ambassador, and Drusiana his wife, went unto Naples, where he was
joyfully and honorably received: and for diverse days enterteined with all
sorts of triumph and feasting. But at length desiring to go unto his Camp
(which he left at Salmona) he was by the King conuited to dinner in the Castle.
The dinner being ended, Giacopo Piccinino, murdered.
both he and his son were imprisoned, and shortly after put to death. Whereby
may be perceived, that our Italian Princes have feared that virtue in others,
which was not to be found in themselves: and did smother the same so long, as
no virtue at all being left, our country became shortly after, afflicted and
ruined. In these days the Pope Pio having settled all things in Romagna,
thought the time served well, in respect of the universal peace, to move the
Christians to make war against the Turk: according to the plot set down by
his predecessors. To the performance of this exployt, all Princes did
contribute money or men. And in particular Mathia King of Hungary, and Carlo
Duke of Borgogna, promising to go in person, were by the Pope made Captains
general of that journey. The Pope had so great hope of proceeding in this
enterprise, that he went from Rome to Ancona, where all the Army were
appointed to assemble: and the Venetians did promise to send vessels to pass
the soldiers into Schiauonia. After the Popes arriual in that City, the
concourse of people there was so great, that within few days all the victual
of that city, and that could be brought thither from other places thereabouts,
did not suffice. In so much as every man began to taste of famine. Moreover,
there wanted money to furnish the soldiers of things needful, and arm those
that were disarmed. Mathia and Carlo appeared not, and the Venetians sent
thither one only Captain with a few Galleys, rather to show their pomp,
and seem to have kept promise, then to pass the Army. So as the Pope being
old and sick, in the midst of these businesses and disorders, died. After
whose death, every man returned home. This Pope being dead, the year 1465.
Paulo secundo, borne in the City of Venice, aspired to the Papacy. About
that time, many other states of Italy changed their government. The death of
the Duke Fra^cesco.
For the same year following, died Francesco Sforza, Duke of Milan, having
usurped that Dukedom sixteen years. And Galiazzo his son, was proclaimed
Duke. The death of this Prince, was the occasion that the divisions of
Florence, Piero di Medici.
became of more force, and wrought their effects with the more speed. After the
death of Cosimo di Medici, Piero his son being left in possession of the
goods and lands of his father, called unto him, Diotisalui Neroni, a man of
great authority, among the other citizens of most reputation: and one in whom
Cosimo reposed so great trust, as at his death he willed Piero both in his
substance and state, to be by his counsel governed. Piero accordingly declared
unto Diotisalui the trust which Cosimo had in him: And because he would show
himself as obedient to his father after death, as he was in his life: he
desired Diotisalui to assist him with his counsel, both for the order of his
patrimony, and the government of the City; and to begin with his own private
business, he commanded all his Officers to resort unto him with their
accounts, and leave the same with Diotisalui, to the end that he might find
out the order and disorder of their doings, and so counsel him what was best
afterward to be done. Diotisalui promised to use diligence, and perform the
trust in him reposed. The Officers being come and examined, were found to have
committed many disorders. And thereupon (as a man that more respected his own
ambition, then the love he bare to Piero, or the benefits he had received of
Cosimo) imagined it was easy to deceive Piero of the reputation, and livings
left him by his father. Dissimulation of Diotisalui Neroni.
Diotisalui came unto Piero offering him counsel, which seemed very honest
and reasonable, yet under the same lay hidden the destruction of Piero. He
told him what disorder he found in his affairs, and how it behooved him to
provide great sums of money for the holding of his credit, and reputation in
the state; and therefore said, he could not more honestly repair his disorders
and losses, then by calling in those debtes which many strangers and Citizens
did owe unto his father. For Cosimo to gain himself followers in Florence,
and friends abroad, was exceeding liberal of his substance; and had for that
occasion lent out sums of great importance. This counsel to Piero seemed
good, and honest, supposing he should by execution thereof, without peril,
repair himself with his own. Notwithstanding so soon as he called for
these debts, the Citizens grew no less offended, then if he should have
desired their own goods, and without respect they spoke evil of him,
slaundering him to be a man unthankful and covetous. Diotisalui seeing this
common and populer disgrace, which Piero had gotten by his counsel, A
practice against Piero di Medici.
joined himself with Lucca Pitti, Agnolo Acciaiuoli, and Nicholo Soderini,
determining to take from Piero, reputation and government. These men were moved
thereunto for diverse respects. Lucca desired to succeed in the place of
Cosimo, for he was aspired to such greatness, as he disdained to await upon
Piero. Diotisalui, knowing that Lucca was not fit to be chief of the
government, thought if Piero had lost his reputation, it would in short time
fall upon himself. Nicholo Soderini, desired that the City might live more
at liberty, and that the Magistrates might govern at their discretion. Also
betwixt Agnolo and the house of Medici, remained particular displeasures. The
occasion whereof was this. Rafaello his son, had long before, Offense between
the Acciaiuoli and the Medici.
taken to wife Alessandra de Bardi, and received with her a great dowry. She,
either through her own default, or the malice of others, was by her father in
law and her husband, evil handled. Whereupon Brenzo de Illarione her kinsman,
being moved with compassion, went in the night accompanied with many armed men,
and took her out of the house of Agnolo. Agnolo and the rest of the
Acciaiuoli, complained of this injury done them, by the Bardi. The matter was
committed to the hearing of Cosimo, who judged that the Acciaiuoli should
restore the marriage money received with Alessandra, and she after to return
to her husband, or not, as her self was disposed. Agnolo thought himself in
this judgment not friendly handled by Cosimo, of whom, because he could not
be revenged, he thought to execute the revenge upon his son. These
conspirators notwithstanding the diversity of their humors, pretended all one
occasion, saying they would have the City governed by the magistrates, and not
by the counsel of a few. The displeasure toward Piero, and the evil speech
of him was increased by many merchants, who at that time became bankerout, and
laid the fault thereof upon Piero, for that he calling home his money hastily,
had hindered their credit, and forced them with the prejudice of the City to
be undone. Besides that, they did surmise, that he practiced to marry his son
with Clarise Orsini. Whereof the Citizens conceived that he did disdain to
make alliance with any Citizen: therefore prepared to usurp the state, and make
himself Prince. For whosoever disdaineth his own Citizens to be of his
kindred, desires to have them his subjects. In these respects they had no
reason to be his friends. The leaders of this sedition, persuaded themselves to
have the victory in their own hands, because the greater number of the
Citizens (deceived with the name of liberty, whereby they used to make their
enterprises, seem more honest) followed them. These humors then boiling in
the breasts of the Citizens, it was thought good to them, whom civil
disorder displeased, to assaie, if by some new found mirth or feast, the minds
of men might be settled. For most commonly the idle people be instruments for
those that desire alteration. Then to remove this idleness, and give some
occasion to alienate the minds of men from consideration of the state, the
year of Cosimo his death being passed, they took occasion to make the City
some mirth, ordeining two tryumphs more solemn then was the custom. The one
made representation how the three Magi came from the East, following the star
that led them to the place where Christ was borne: which was performed with
so great solemnity, as enterteined the City diverse months. The other was a
torniament, wherein the principal young Gentlemen of the City exercised Arms
against all the chief men of Arms in Italy. And of the Florentine youth,
Lorenzo the eldest son of Piero gained most honor: for not by favor, but in
deed by his own valor, he wanne the best prize. These triumphs being ended,
the Citizens returned to think of the state, and every man with more care
then before, studied to maintain his own opinion, whereof great diversity of
conceits, and troubles ensued. The one was, that the authority of Balia took
no effect. League between the Duke Galiiazzo and the Florentines.
The other, by the death of Francesco Duke of Milan. Whereupon the new Duke
Galiazzo sent Ambassadors to Florence, to confirm the capitulations made by
Francesco his father: wherein among other things it was concluded, that yearly
the Duke should receive from them certain sums of money. Upon this Article,
the Governors of the state, took occasion to hold opinion contrary to the
House of Medici, publicly in these Councels, inueying against that payment,
alleging that pencion to be promised, not to Galiazzo, but unto Francesco. For
Francesco being dead, there was no cause to continue it. Because in Galiazzo
there was not that virtue, which was in Francesco: and so consequently, that
good was not, nor could not be looked for at his hand, which was found at his
fathers. And although of Francesco they received not much, yet were they to
look for less of Galiazzo: and if any Cititzen would entertain him, to
maintain his own private power, that were a thing contrary to civil life,
and the liberty of the City. Piero on the contrary, alleged, that it were
not well done, through covetousness, to lose a friendship so necessary: and
that there was nothing so meet, for the Commonweal, and all Italy, as to
continue in league with the Duke. To the end that the Venetians seeing them
united, might not hope either by fained friendship or by open war, to
oppress the Dukedom. For if they should perceive, the Florentines to have
forsaken the Duke, they would presently take Arms, and the rather, knowing he
was young, newly come to the government, and without friends. Whereof they might
hope either by fraud or force to win his country, which would be also the
utter ruin of the Florentine Commonweal. These reasons were not allowed, and
secret hatred began openly to show it self. For the same night, either
party, in diverse companies assembled. The friends of the Medici, met at
Crocetta, and their adversaries in La Pieta, who studying to oppress Piero,
had gotten their enterprise subscribed with the hands of many Citizens.
Consultation to oppress the Medici.
Also, being among many other times, one night assembled, they held a
particular Council for the manner of their proceeding; when every man
consented to diminish the power of the Medici: yet in the order how to bring
the matter to pass, they concurred not. Some, that were of most modest nature,
thought that the authority of the Balia being ended, it were best to find
means, that the same might not be revived: for if the Councels and Magistrates
did govern the City, the authority of Piero would be in short space
extinguished; and with loss of his reputation in the state, he should also
lose his credit in merchandise. For being no more in place, where he might
employ the public treasure, he should of necessity grow weak; which being
brought to pass, there would not be after any cause to fear him: and all this
practice might be performed without banishment of any man, and the liberty
without blood recovered, which every good Citizen ought to desire. But if they
proceeded by force, many perils might be incurred: for whosoever is ready to
fall alone, if he be forced by others, will labor to stay himself up.
Moreover, when nothing is done extraordinarily against him, he shall not have
any occasion to Arm himself, or seek friends; or if he should, the same
would turn to his great reproach, and breed suspicion in every man: so as
his overthrow shall be the more easy, and others take occasion the rather to
oppress him. Many others of that assembly liked not this delaie: affirming the
time favored him, and not them. For if they were contented with ordinary
proceedings, Piero was in no danger at all, and they in great peril: Because
the Magistrates (notwithstanding they were his enemies,) would suffer him in
the City, and his friends, with their ruin (as it happened in the year 58.)
would make him Prince; and as the former counsel proceeded from good men, so
this was the opinion of wise men. It was therefore necessary, that while men be
displeased, to make him sure. The mean to bring the same to effect, was to be
armed both within and without, and also to enterteine the Marquess of Farrara,
to be the better defended. Which done, when a Senate happened to be for the
purpose, then to make all assured. In this resolution they stayed till the next
Senate, and proceeded according to the quallitie thereof. Among the
conspirators, was Nicholo Fedini, whom they employed as Chauncellor, he
persuaded with a hope more certain, revealed to Piero, all the practice agreed
upon by his enemies, and delivered him a note of all their names; which Piero
perused, and seeing the number and quallitie of the Citizens who had conspired
against him, took counsel of his friends, and made a note likewise of them.
Then he committed this roll of friends to be made by one whom he most trusted,
who considering thereof, found so great variety, and instabilitie, in the
minds of the Citizens, that many who had been written for his enemies, were
also enrolled among the rest, who were accounted his friends. During the space
that these matters, with these alteratio^s were handled, the time was come to
choose two supreme Officers, and Nicholo Soderini was elected Gonfaloniere de
Giustitia. It was a marvelous thing to see, with what concourse not only of
honorable Citizens, but of all sorts of people, he was accompanied to the
Palace, and passing upon the way, they set on his head a garland of Oliffe,
to show that of him depended the welfare and liberty of the Country. By this
and many like experiences, it is proved, that men should not take upon them
any Office or principallitie with extraordinary opinion. For not being able to
perform such expectation (men desiring more then can be) does in time breed
his own dishonor and infamy. Thomaso and Nicholo Soderini were brethren:
Nicholo was the bolder and more courageous, but Thomaso, the wiser, and friend
to Piero. Who knowing his brothers humor, that he desired only the liberty
of the City, and that the state might be settled without harm of any,
persuaded Nicholo to make new Squittini, whereby the Borsi might be filled with
such Citizens as loved to live in liberty. By doing whereof, the state should
be at his will settled without tumult or injury to any. Nicholo gave credit to
the counsel of his brother, and in these vain imaginations consumed the time
of his office, till by the chief of the conspirators his friends, he was
suffered to sincke: as they that would not for envy, that the government
should be with the authority of Nicholo renewed, and hoping ever they might in
time, under some other Gonfaloniere work the same effect. The end of the
magistracy of Nicholo come, and many things by him begun, but nothing ended,
he yielded up his authority with more dishonor, then with honor, he had
entered the same. This matter made the faction of Piero glad, and confirmed his
friends in the hope they had of his good success. And those that before stood
neutrall, joined with Piero, and matters being thus in a readiness, for
diverse months without other tumult, they temporized. Notwithstanding the part
of Piero still increased in strength, whereof the enemies took knowledge and
joined themselves together, to perform that by force, which by mean of the
Magistrates they might easily have done before; and so concluded to kill Piero
lying sick at Careggi: for which purpose, they sent to the Marquess of
Farrara, to come unto the City with his forces, and Piero being slain, they
determined to march armed into the Market place, and cause the Senate to settle
the government according to their will. For albeit all the Citizens were not
their friends, yet they that were their enemies would for fear give place.
Diotisalui (the rather to cloak his intent) oftentimes visited Piero, and
reasoned with him of the uniting of the City. All these practices had been
revealed to Piero, and Domenico Martegli also gave him intelligence, that
Francesco Neroni, brother to Diotisalui, had persuaded him, to be of his
conspiracy: alleging the victory was certain, and assured. Thereupon Piero
determined to be the first that should take arms, and fained an occasion upon
the practices of his enemies, with the Marquess of Farrara. He pretended
therefore to have received a Letter from Giouanni Bentiuogli, Prince in
Bologna, whereby he was advertised, that the Marquess of Farrara was with his
forces marched to the River of Albo, and (as was commonly thought) intended to
come to Florence. Upon these aduertisements Piero took arms, and with a great
multitude of men armed, came to Florence, where all others that followed him
armed themselves. The contrary party did the like: but Piero his followers
were the better prepared, because the others had not so great warning thereof.
Diotisalui dwelling near unto Piero, thought not himself assured at home, but
sometimes he went to the Palace, to persuade the Senate to cause Piero to lay
down his arms, and sometimes he resorted to Lucca, to entreat him to stand
firm to his faction. But of all others, Nicholo Soderini showed himself of
most courage; for he presently took arms, and being followed of all the common
people of his quarter, went unto the house of Lucca, Persuasions of Nicholo
Soderini against the Medici.
desiring him to mount on horseback, and come to the Market place in favor of
the Senate, which favored them, and therefore might hope of victory certain.
But if he remained in his house, he should be either by the armed men
oppressed, or by those that were disarmed shamefully deceived. Or if he should
after repent that he did not take arms, that repentance were too late. But if
he would with the war oppress Piero, he might easily do it: and after if he
liked to make peace, it was better for him to give, then to receive the
conditions thereof. These words moved not Lucca, having already settled his
mind, and promised to Piero new alliances, and new conditions. For he had
already married unto Giouanni Tornabuoni, one of his neeces, and therefore
persuaded Nicholo to lay down arms, and return to his house. For it ought
to suffice him, that the City should be governed by the Magistrates, and it
would come to pass, that every man would lay down arms: and the Senators
being the stronger party, should be Judge of the controversy. Nicholo then
seeing he could not otherwise persuade him, returned home. But first said unto
Lucca, I cannot alone work the well doing of our City, but I alone can
prognosticate the evil whereinto it is falling. This resolution you have made,
will breed loss of liberty to our country, your deprivation of government and
wealth, and my banishment. The Senate in this tumult shut up the Palace, and
the Magistrates kept themselves therein, not seeming to savor any part. The
Citizens (and chiefly those who had followed Lucca) seeing Piero armed, and his
adversaries disarmed, began to devise, not how to offend Piero, but how to
become his friends. Whereupon the chief citizens and leaders of the factions,
went to the Palace, and in the presence of the Senate, debated many things
touching the state of the City, and pacification thereof. And for that, Piero
by reason of his infirmity could not come thither, they determined by consent
to go all unto him, ( Nicholo Soderini except) who having first recommended his
children and family to Tomaso, went to his own house in the country,
aspecting there the event of these matters, accounting himself unhappy, and
for his country unfortunate. The other Citizens being come to the presence of
Piero, The speech of the Citizens to Piero di Medici.
one of them appointed to speak, complained of the tumults in the City,
declaring that they, who first took arms were most too blame: they not
knowing what Piero, (who indeed did first take arms) would do. They were come
therefore to understand what was his intent, which (being for good of the
City) they would follow the same. Whereunto Piero answered, that he who
takes arms first, The answer^ of Piero.
is not ever the cause of disorder, but he that gives first occasion: and if
they would consider what their behauiours had been toward him, they should
marvel less at that he had done for his own safety. For thereby they should
see, that their assemblies in the night, their subscriptions, and their
practices to take from him his government and life, were the occasions why he
took arms: which not used but in the defense of his own house, and not the
offense of them, sufficiently proved his intent was to defend himself, and not
to harm others. Neither would he any thing, or desired more then his own
security and quiet, nor had given cause, that they should think he sought for
other. For the authority of Balia discontinued, he never labored by
extraordinary mean to revive it; and was well content that the Magistrates
should govern the city if they so pleased: assuring them, that Cosimo and his
children could live in Florence honorably both with and without the Balia; and
that the year 58. the same had been, not by his house, but by them renewed; and
if now they would not have it more, he should also be so contented. But this
sufficed not for them: for he found that his adversaries believed, they could
not dwell in Florence, if he also there dwelled. A thing which he never thought
that the friends of his father and him would fear to live in Florence with him,
having ever born himself among them, as a quiet and peaceable man. Then
(turning his speech to Diotisalui and his brethren there present) he reproved
them with words of much gravity and offense: putting the^ in mind what
benifits they had received of Cosimo, how much he had trusted the^, and how
unthankfully they had used him. Which words wrought such effect in some that
were present, that if Piero had not stayed them, they suddenly would have stricken
Diotisalui. In conclusion, Piero said he would maintein every thing, that they
and the Senate had determined. And that he desired nothing, but to live quiet
and assured. After this speech was ended, many matters were co^moned of, yet
nothing don: but in general was concluded, that it was necessary to reunite the
city and reform the state. At that time Barnardo Lotti was Gonfaloniere
d'Giustitia, a man not trusted by Piero, wherefore thought not good to attempt
any thing during his Magistracy: but the end of his authority drawing near,
election was made by the Senators of a Gonfaloniere to sit in September and
October 1466. And they elected Roberto Lioni: who was no sooner in office, (all
other things being prepared) but he assembled the people in the Market
place, and made a new Balia, all of the faction of Piero; which shortly created
the Magistrates, The enemies of the Medici vanquished.
according to the will of the new government, which terrified the heads of the
enemies, and Agnolo Acciaiuoli fled to Naples, Diotisalui Neroni, and Nicholo
Soderini to Venice, and Lucca Pitti remained in Florence: trusting to the
promises of Piero, and the new alliance with his house. All the fugitives were
proclaimed Rebels, and all the family of Neroni dispersed. Also Giouanni
Neroni then Bishop of Florence, to avoid a worse mischief, voluntarily
confined himself to Rome. Many other likewise banished themselves to diverse
places, neither did this suffice: but a public procession was ordained to give
God thanks for the preservation, and uniting the state. In the solemnization
whereof, some citizens were apprehended and tormented. Afterward part of them
put to death, and the rest confined. In this variation of fortune, The fall of
Lucca Pitti.
there was nothing so notable, as the example of Lucca Pitti: who sodeinly saw
the difference of victory, and loss of honor, and dishonor. For his house,
whereunto was wont be great repair, became unfrequented; himself that had bin
accustomed to pass the streets followed with many friends and kinsfolks, could
neither be accompanied, nor scarcely saluted: because some of them had lost
their offices, some their goods, and all the rest threatened. His stately houses
in building, were by the workmen abandoned. Those that were wont to present
him, did now offer him injury and despite. Some who had given him presents of
great value, did now demand them again as things lent. Others that were wont
with praises to extol him to the skies, did as a person ungrateful and
violent, blame him. So that ouerlate he repented his not giving credit to
Nicholo Soderini, and that he did not with sword in hand rather die honorably,
then among his victorious enemies, live dishonored. These that were banished,
sought by sundry means to recover the City, they had lost. Yet Agnolo
Acciaiuoli being at Naples, before he attempted any thing, thought good to
feel the disposition of Piero, and what hope remained of reconciliation:
writing unto him, The letter of Agnolo Acciaiuoli, to Piero di Medici.
as follows. I smile to see, what sports fortune does make her self, and how
at her pleasure she frames of foes friends, and of friends foes. You can
remember that at the banishment of your father (esteeming more his injury then
mine own danger) I lost my country, and was like to have also lost my life.
Neither (in all his time) did I ever omit, to honor and favor your house, nor
after his death have had any intent to offend you. True it is, that your own
vnhealthie disposition, and the tender years of your children, brought me into
such fear, as I thought it behooved me to take order, that after your death,
our country should not be ruined. For which consideration I have done diverse
things, not against you, but for the good of my country. Wherein, if I have
committed error, the same ought be, for my good intent, and passed service,
pardoned. Neither can I believe other, but that (in respect of ancient love to
your house) I shall at this occasion find mercy, and my manifold merits, shall
not be, by one only fault cancelled. Piero having perused this letter,
answered thus. Your laughing there you are, The answer of Piero.
is the occasion that I weep not here where I am: for if you had laughed at
Florence, I should have wept at Naples. I deny not your well deserving of my
father, since your self will confess to have tasted his liberality: and by how
much that deeds be esteemed above words, by so much your obligation is more
the^ ours. You then recompensed for your good, may not marvel, though for your
evil, you receive deserved punishment. Let not the love of your country excuse
you: since there is no man believes, that this city has bin less loved and
profitted by the Medici, the^ the Acciaiuoli. I do therefore wish you with
dishonor to remain there, since here in honor you knew not how to lead your
life. Agnolo thus dispairing of pardon, went to Rome, and there conferred with
the Archbishop, and other banished men, of the mean whereby they might take
reputation from the house of Medici: which Piero with difficulty
(notwithstanding the aid of his friends) could prevent. Diotisalui and
Nicholo Soderini; likewise practiced to make the Senate of Venice enemy to
their country: thinking thereby, that if with any new war the Florentines
were assailed, the government being new and hated, they should not be able to
defend themselves. In those days Giouan Francesco the son of Palla Strozzi
lived in Farrara, and had been together with his father, banished in the
alteration of the state, the year 34. This Giouanni had great credit, and was
holden amongst other merchants a man of great riches. The new Rebels
declared unto him, the great facility they found to recover their country, if
the Venetians would take the enterprise in hand: which he thought they would be
easily persuaded unto, if part of their charges might be borne. Giouan
Francesco, who desired to revenge himself of the injuries received, easily
gave credit to their counsel: and promised with all his wealth, to furnish
the enterprise. Then went they all together unto the Duke, Complaint of the
banished Florentines to the Senate of Venice.
complaining of the exile whereinto they said themselves were fallen, not for
any other fault, but because they desired that their country might be
governed with the laws thereof: and that the Magistrates and not a few others
should be honored. For Piero de Medici with others his followers, accustomed
to live tyrannically, had by deceit taken arms, and by deceit caused them to
disarme themselves, and afterward by deceit expulsed them out of their City.
Neither were they so content, but they would also therein pretend devotion to
God, and by that color oppress others. For at the assembly of the Citizens,
and at public and sacred ceremonies (to the intent God should be partaker of
their treasons) they apprehended, imprisoned, and slew many Citizens: which
was an example of great impiety and wickedness. For revenge whereof, they knew
not whither to resort with more hope, then to that Senate which having ever
lived free, could not but take compassion of those, who had lost their
liberties. Then they persuaded all men that loved liberty to detest tirants:
and those that were godly, to abhor impious people. Putting them in mind,
that the house of Medici had taken from them, the dominion of Lombardy, at such
time as Cosimo (without consent of the other citizens, and the Senate) favored
and aided Francesco. So that though they had no compassion of the Florentines,
yet the revenge of the injuries done to the Venetia^s, ought to move the^. The
Florentines assaulted by the Venetians and Marquess of Farrara.
These last words moved all the Senate to determine that Bartolomeo Coglione
their General, should assault the dominion of Florence. He with all speed
possible assembled the army, and with him joined Hercole Este, sent by Borso
Marquess of Farrara. They at the first entry (the Florentines not being
prepared) burnt the Town of Dauadola, and spoiled some other places in the
country thereabout. But the Florentines (having driven out all the enemies to
Piero) made league with Galiazzo Duke of Milan, and with the King Ferrando.
Then they enterteined Federigo Earl of Vrbino, for their General; and found
themselves so friended, as they feared little the force of their enemies. For
Ferrando sent thither Alfonso his eldest son, and Duke Galiazzo came in
person: either of them leading a convenient number, and they altogether made
head at Castracaro, a Castle belonging to the Florentines: builded at the foot
of those Alps, whereby men pass from Toscana to Romagna. In the mean time the
enemies were retired toward Imola, and so between the one and the other army
(according to the custom of those days,) some light skirmishes happened, but
no towns by either of them besieged, nor any disposition in either of them to
fight with their enemy, but every man remaining within his Tent, continued
the wars with great cowardice. This manner of proceedings, greatly offended the
Governors in Florence, finding themselves charged by a war, wherein they
spent much, and could hope for little. And the Magistrates complained of those
Citizens who were made Commissaries in that enterprise. They answered, that
Duke Galiazzo was occasion thereof, for he having most authority and least
experience, knew not what was profitable, nor would not believe others of more
skill: and that it was impossible, so long as he remained in the army, that
any thing should be done with honor and commodity. Wherefore the Florentines
said unto the Duke, albeit for their profit it was best he should be
personally in their aid, because the reputation of his presence was the
fittest mean to terrify the enemy; notwithstanding for that they esteemed
more his safety, then their state, or proper commodity, they thought not fit
he should remain long from Milan, being newly come to his government, and
having there diverse strong enemies to be suspected: so that, if any of them
should practice against him, they might easily in his absence, do it. For which
respects they persuaded him to return home, and leave part of his forces for
their defense. This counsel contented Galiazzo, and without further
consideration, returned to Milan. The Florentine Captains disburthened of this
let, to declare the same was the true occasion of their slow proceeding, drew
so near to the enemy, that they joined battle: which continued one half day,
neither party yielding to other. Notwithstanding there was not any man
therein slain, but some horses hurt, and a few prisoners on either part
taken. The winter now being come, and the season of the year no longer serving
for the field, they retired to their lodgings. Bartolomeo went to Rauenna, the
Florentines into Toscana: the Kings soldiers and the Dukes, resorted home to
their masters Countries. But so soon as this assault began to be forgotten,
and no disorder made in Florence, as the Florentine Rebels promised, and the
other soldiers wanting pay, were content to entreat of peace, Peace between
the Florentines and Venetians.
which with small difficulty was concluded. The Rebels then dispairing of all
hope, to diverse places dispersed themselves. Diotisalui went to Farrara, where
he was by the Marquess Borso, received, and relieved. Nicholo Soderini fled
to Rauenna, where living long upon a poor pencion given him by the Venetians,
in the end there died. This Nicholo was accounted a man just and courageous,
yet uncertain and slow of his resolution: which was the cause that the
Gonfaloniere lost that opportunity, which being out of office, he would have
taken, but could not. The peace concluded, the Citizens who remained in
Florence with victory, thinking themselves not assured, unless they did as
well oppress those they suspected, as their apparent enemies, persuaded Bardo
Altouiti, then Gonfaloniere d'Giustitia, to remove more Citizens from their
offices, and to banish many others. Which thing greatly increased the power of
that faction, and terrified the contrary part: which power they used without
respect, and proceeded so much at their pleasure, as it seemed, that God and
fortune had consented to give that City into their hands. Of which doings,
Piero knew little, and that little, he could not (being afflicted with
sickness) remedy. For his diseases were so great) as he could not use any
member save only his tongue: wherewith he exhorted them, and prayed them to live
ciuilly, and enjoy their native country, rather entire the^ broken. And for the
comfort of the City, he determined with magnificence to celebrate the marriage
of Lorenzo his son, who was already contracted to Clarice, descended of the
house of Orsini: which marriage was performed with great pomp, as to so
magnificent a feast apperteined. For performance of these triumphs, diverse
days were consumed in feasting, dancing, and public shows. Whereunto was also
joined (for more appara^ce of greatness of the Medici) 2. marshal exercises; the
one represented a battle fought in the field; the other, of a town besieged:
which things were devised in good order, and performed with so much virtue as
might be. While these matters were doing in Florence, the rest of Italy lived
quiet, but yet in great suspision of the Turk, who proceeded still in his
enterprise against the Christians, and had won Negroponti, to the great
infamy and dishonor of the Christian name. Then died Borso Marquess of
Farrara, to whom succeeded his brother Hercule. Even then died also Gismondo da
Rimino, a perpetual enemy to the Church: who left to inherit that state,
Roberto his natural son; afterward accounted the most excellent Captain of
Italy. Then likewise died the Pope Pagolo: Pope Sisto.
in whose place was created Sisto quarto, called before his creation Francesco
da Sauona, a man of base and vile condition: yet for his virtue made General
of the order of S. Francesco, and afterward Cardinal. This Pope was the
first that began to show of what great force the Papacy was, and that many
things before time accounted faults, might be by Papal authority, covered.
This Pope had amongst many others in his house, two men, the one called Piero,
and the other Gerolamo: who (as every man thought) were his unlawful sons:
notwithstanding men called them by other names more honest. Piero being made a
Friar, was preferred to the dignity of Cardinal, and called Cardinal of S.
Sisto. To Gerolamo he gave the City of Furli, and took it by force from
Antonio Ordelaffi, whose ancestors had been long time Princes there. This
ambitious manner of proceeding, made him the more esteemed by the Princes of
Italy, and every of them sought which way to be accounted his friend. The Duke
of Milan gave his daughter Catterina in marriage to Gerolamo, and with her the
City of Imola, which by force he had taken from Taddeo Alidossi. Betwixt this
Duke, and the King Ferrando, was also made new alliance. For Elizabella
daughter to Alfonso, eldest son of the King, was married to Giouan Galiazzo,
eldest son to the Duke. Thus Italy continued quiet, and the greatest care of
the Princes was, one to honor the other: and with new alliances, friendships,
and leagues, one to assure himself of the other. But notwithstanding so great
a peace, Florence was by the Citizens thereof greatly afflicted. And Piero
being troubled with ambition of the Citizens, and his own diseases, could not
procure remedy: yet to discharge his conscience, and lay before them their
misdemeanor, he called to his presence the chief Florentines, and said unto
them as follows. The Oration of P. di Medici to the Florentines.
I never thought that any time could come, when the manner and behauior of
friends would prove such, as to make me love and desire my enemies: or that I
might wish victory to be converted to loss. Because I thought my self
accompanied with men, whose appetites were confined to measure; and that it
sufficed them to live in their country assured and honored, and (that which is
more) upon their enemies revenged. But now I know my self far deceived, as he
that knew little the ambition of men, and least of all yours. For it contenteth
you not to be Princes of so great a City, and among you a few to have the
honors, offices, and commodities, wherewith many Citizens were wont to be
honored. It contented you not to have the goods of your enemies among you
divided. It contenteth you not, to burden others with public charges, and you
free from all paiments, to take the public profit: but you will also with every
kind of injury molest them. You cease not to rob your neighbors; you fear not
to sell justice; you fly civil judgment; you oppress peaceable men, and
advance those that be insolent. Neither do I believe that there is in all
Italy, so many examples of violence and covetousness, as be in this city. But
since it has given you life, why do you take life from it? If it has made you
victorious, why should we destroy it? If it has honored us, why have we
disdained it? I promise you by that faith, which ought to be given and received
among good me^, that if you behave your selves so, as I shall repent me of my
victory, I will so do, as you shall also repent that you have abused it. Those
citizens according to the time answered resonably. Notwitsta^ding they
continued still in their insole^t doings. Inso much as Piero sent secretly to
Agnolo Acciaiuoli (who came unto him at Cafaggiuolo) and there they reasoned at
length touching the estate of the City. And surely had he not been by death
prevented, he would have called home all the banished men, to bridle the
insolency and oppression of those that lived in the City. But death suffered
him not to perform so honest an intent: for diseases of body and trouble of
mind, Death of Piero di Medici.
so grievously handled him, that he died the fifty and three year of his
age. His virtue and bounty, could not be to his Country so well known, as
they deserved: partly because his father lived (welneare as long) and partly,
for that those few years he ouerliued him, were in civil contentions and
sickness consumed. This Piero was buried in the Church of S. Lorenzo, near
unto his father: and his funeral performed with honor and pomp, worthy so
great a Citizen. Of him there remained two sons, Lorenzo and Giuliano, of
whom there was good hope, that they would prove men fit for the state: yet
their youth was such as made all men doubt thereof. Amongst other chief
Citizens in the government of Florence, there was one far excelling the
rest, Tomaso Soderini.
called Tomaso Soderini: whose wisdom and authority, not only to Florence,
but also to all the Princes in Italy was known. He, after the death of Piero,
was of all the City reverenced: and many Citizens did daily visit him, as
chief man of the state. Also diverse Princes did write unto him. Nevertheless
being wise, and knowing what fortune followed him and his house, he would
never answer the Princes Letters: and persuaded the Citizens they should not
resort to his house, but to the houses of the Medici. Also to show in deeds,
that which by words was by him persuaded, he assembled all the chief
Gentlemen of every family, at the Monastery of S. Antonio; whither he
procured that Lorenzo and Giuliano di Medici should come: and there after a
long and grave Oration by him made, they disputed the estate both of that
City, of all Italy, and of the humors of the Princes. Therein concluding,
that to continue Florence united in peace, assured from division within, and
from war without, it behooued them to honor those two young men, and
maintain the reputation of their house: Because men do not repine to do such
things as they have been accustomed unto, but new houses, as they are easily
honored, so are they quickly abandoned. For it has been ever more easy to
maintain that reputation, where length of time has extingnished envy, then to
raise a new estimation, which by many occasions may be oppressed. After him
spoke Lorenzo, who notwithstanding his youth, uttered words with so great
gravity and modesty, as gave every man hope he would become such a one, as
indeed afterward he proved. And before they departed that place, the Citizens
prayed the brethren, to receive them as children, they offering to honor them as
fathers. Giuliano and Lorenzo di Medici.
This conclusion set down, Giuliano and Lorenzo were honored as Princes of
the City, and those that were of counsel with Tomaso, did not intermeddle.
Thus the Florentines lived both within and without so peaceably, as nothing
disturbed the Common quiet, till a trouble not looked for arose, which did
prognosticate future mischief. Among other families (which Lucca Pitti ruined)
was that of Nardi. For Saluestro and his brethren being heads of that house,
were first sent into exile, and after by the war which Bartolomeo Coglione
moved, made Rebels. Of these Barnardo brother of Saluestro, was a young man of
great spirit and courage. Conspiracy of the Nardi.
He being poor could not endure banishment: and finding that the peace made
had not provided for his return, determined to make proof of somewhat,
whereby might grow occasion of war. For many times of a small beginning,
great effects do follow. Because men be more willing to prosecute, then
begin any enterprise. This Barnardo had much acquaintance in Prato, and
much more in the Country about Pistoia: chiefly with the the house of
Palandra: who albeit they were but country people, yet was their number great,
and the men (according to the manner of that country) practiced in arms, and
much used to blood. He knew likewise they lived discontented, and by reason
that some of their enemies were Magistrates in Florence, they had been evil
handled. He knew moreover the humor of the Pratesi, who accounted themselves
proudly and hardly governed, and had particular knowledge of the evil
disposition of some toward the State. All which things brought him in hope to
kindle fire in Toscana, by making Prato to rebel, whereto so many would put
hands, as they that would quench it, should not be able. Then he imparted this
matter to Diotisalui Neroni, and asked of him, what aid might be by his means
procured among the Princes, if he should happen to surprise Prato. Diotisalui
thought the enterprise dangerous, and as impossible to take effect:
notwithstanding, considering he might thereby with the peril of others make
new proof of fortune, persuaded him to proceed, and promised to bring him
assured aid from Bologna, and Farrara, so that he were able to defend Prato at
the least fifteen days. Barnardo then encouraged with this promise, and
conceiving great hope of happy proceeding, went to Prato, and there
communicating the matter to diverse, found them very willing. The like
disposition he perceived in the family of Palandra, and having agreed
togithers of the time and manner of the enterprise, Barnardo imparted all to
Diotisalui. At that time, was Cesare Petrucci, Podesta of Prato, for the
Florentines. The custom was, that the Podesta should have the keys of the
town brought unto him: And whenever any of the town (chiefly in times of
no suspicion) desired to go out or come in by night, that favor was granted.
Barnardo knowing this custom, being accompanied with those of the house of
Palandra, and 100. others armed men, in the morning when the gate toward
Pistoia should open, presented himself: and those whom he had made privy
within, did likewise arm. One of them went to the Podesta, saying, a friend of
his desired to come into the town. The Podesta not doubting any such accident,
sent with him a servant of his to carry the keys: from whom, (being a little
on the way) the keys were taken, the gates opened, and Barnardo with his
followers came in. Then they divided themselves in two parts. The one led by
Saluestro of Prato, took possession of the Cittadell. The other following
Barnardo, surprised the Palace, and committed the Podesta with all his
family, to the custody of one of his company. Which done, they walked the
streets, proclaiming the name of liberty. By that time it was day, and many
people by mean of the noise, came to the market place, where understanding
that the Cittadell and Palace were taken, the Governor also with his family
imprisoned, they meruailed much. The eight Citizens (chief Officers of the
town) assembled in their Palace, to consult what was to be done. But Barnardo
and his men, having awhile walked the town, and finding himself not well
followed, hearing where the eight were, went unto them, declaring that the
occasion of his enterprise was to deliver them and their country from bondage:
and that they should gain great glory to take arms, and accompany him in
that glorious action, whereby they should win perpetual quiet, and eternal
fame. He also laid before them the memory of their ancient liberty,
comparing it with their present condition. He likewise told them what aid they
should be assured to have of others, if they would but for a few days defend
themselves from the Florentine forces. He informed them moreover, that he had
intelligence in Florence, whereby he was advertised that City would wholly
follow him. The eight not moved with these persuasions, answered, that they
knew not whether Florence lived in liberty or bondage, as a thing they desired
not to understand. But well they knew their own desire was not to enjoy other
liberty, then to obey those Magistrates that governed in Florence: of whom,
they had not received any such injury, as might move to take arms against
them. Wherefore they persuaded him to restore the Podesta to his liberty, send
his men out of the town, and save himself speedily from that danger,
whereinto he was unadvisedly fallen. These speeches dismayed not Barnardo, for
he intended to see if fear might move the Pratesi, to that which with entreaty
could not. Therefore to terrify the Citizens, and determining to put the
Podesta to death, he took him out of prison, and commanded him to be hanged at
the Palace window. The Podesta being brought to the window, the halter upon
his neck, and seeing Barnardo to solicit his death, turned himself toward
him, and said. Barnardo, thou put me to death, hoping the rather to be
followed of the Pratesi, but the contrary will come to pass. For the
reverence which this people does bear to the Governors sent by the Florentines
is so great, that so soon as they shall see this injury done to me, they will
hate thee, so much, as the same will prove thy ruin: wherefore not my death,
but my life, may be the occasion of thy victory. For if I command them that
which thou would have done, they will more willingly obey me, then thee.
Thus I following thy direction, thou may become owner of thy desire. This
counsel seemed to Barnardo (being a man irresolute) very reasonable, and
therefore willed him at a window to command the people to yield their
obedience to Barnardo. Which being done, the Podesta was lead back to prison.
By this time, the weakness of the conspirators was discovered, and many
Florentines inhabiting that town, were assembled: among whom, was Georgio
Ginori, a Knight of Jerusalem. He being the first that took arms against the
Rebels, assaulted Barnardo in the streets, sometimes entreating, and sometimes
threatening the people to follow him, The enterprise of Barnardo defeated.
till at length by Georgio, and many others (who took arms) Barnardo was hurt
and taken. Which done, it was no hard matter to deliver the Podesta, and
vanquish the rest. For they being few, and divided into sundry parts of the
town, were welneare all taken or slain. In the mean space, the fame of this
accident was come to Florence, and reported to be much greater then it was. For
the aduertisements were, that Prato was surprised, the Podesta with his
household put to death, Pistoia in arms, and many of the Citizens of the
conspiracy, in so much as many Citizens sodeinly came to the Palace to
consult with the Senate. At that time, Roberto Sanseuerino happened to be in
Florence, who being a man of great experience in war, was sent with certain
forces to Prato, commanded, that he should approach the town, and send back
particular aduertisements in what state the same stood; and do there, what by
his wisdom should be thought good. Roberto marching on his way, and passing
the Castle of Campi, a messenger came unto him from Cesare Petrucci, declaring,
that Barnardo was taken, his companions fled, or slain, and all the tumult
pacified. Whereupon Roberto returned to Florence, and shortly after Barnardo
being brought thither a prisoner, and demanded why he took that enterprise in
hand, answered, because he determined rather to die in Florence, then live in
exile: and thought good to accompany his death with some memorable action.
This tumult begun and ended (as it were in one instant) the Citizens of
Florence returned to their wonted order of life, thinking to enjoy that state
without suspicion, which they had lately established, and settled: whereof
insued those inconveniences, which many times be engendered by peace, for the
youth became more prodigal then they were wont, spending their money in
apparel, feasting, and other like vanities, and (being idle) consumed their
substance in play, and women. Their whole study was to be bravely apparrelled,
and to seem witty, or subtle; for he that could most cunningly mock and
deride others, was holden the wisest and most esteemed. These and such like
disorders, were by the Courtiers of Milan increased. For at that time, thither
came the Duke, with his wife, and Court, The Duke of Milan in Florence.
to perform (as he said) a certain vow, and was there received with pomp,
meet for so great a Prince, and friend to the Florentines. In that time also,
was seen a thing in Florence, never before used, which was, that the Courtiers
of Milan, notwithstanding the time of Lent, did without respect of the
Ecclesiastical order, eat almost none other meat, but flesh. Albeit the Duke
found the City of Florence full of courtly delicacie, and customs contrary
to all well ordered civility, yet his coming increased the same. Wherefore
the good Citizens thought fit and necessary to bridle the excess with new
laws, for apparel, for funerals, and feastings. In the midst of this great
peace, there happened in Toscana a new and unlooked for tumult. In the Province
of Volterra, Tumults in Volterra.
certain Citizens happened to find a Mine of Alum, whereof, knowing the
commodity, to be helped with money, and defended with authority, they joined
with them some Citizens of Florence, making them partakers of such profit as
should thereof arise. This matter at the beginning (as it happens for the
most part in all new actions) was by the people of Volterra little esteemed.
But the commodity thereof afterward known, they desired too late, and
without effect, that which at the first they might easily have obtained. Then
began they to propound the matter in their councels, saying, it was not
convenient that a commodity found in the common lands, should be converted to
a private use. Thereupon, they sent unto Florence certain Ambassadors. The
cause was committed to a few Citizens, who either because they were corrupted,
or for that they so thought best, gave sentence, that the request of the people
of Volterra was not reasonable, because they desired to deprive the Citizens
of their labor and industry, and therefore judged, that those Alums
apperteined to private men, and not to the City. Yet was it convenient, that
those private persons should give yearly unto the people certain money, in
sign they acknowledged them for superiors. This answer did nothing diminish,
but augment the tumults and displeasures in Volterra, so that nothing was
spoken of so much in their councels, and in every other place in the City,
as the request of the multitude, which was, to recover that which they thought
lost. The private men on the other side, still labored to continue that which
they had gotten, and had been confirmed by judgment of the Florentines. This
matter remained so long in disputation, that one Citizen, a man of estimation
in that City, called Pecorino, with diverse others that took part with him,
was slain, their houses spoiled and burnt. In that fury also, the Rettori for
the Florentines with difficulty escaped. This first tumult being passed, they
determined in all haste to send Ambassadors to Florence, who informed the
Senators, that if they would observe their ancient conditions, they would also
continue in their ancient obedience. The answer of these messengers was long
disputed. Tomaso Soderini was of opinion, that it behooved to receive the
Volterani with what condition so ever, thinking the time served not, to kindle
a fire so near hand, that might burn their own house: for he feared the
disposition of the Pope, the power of the King, and mistrusted the Venetians
friendship and the Dukes, not knowing what fidelity was in the one, nor what
virtue in the other, alleging that proverb which says, Better a lean peace,
then a fat victory. Of a contrary mind was Lorenzo de Medici, thinking he
had now occasion to make show of his wisdom and counsel, and the rather
being thereto persuaded by those that envied the authority of Tomaso. And
therefore determined by arms to punish the insolency of the Volterani,
affirming, that if they were not corrected, as a memorable example, all others
(upon every light occasion) without reverence or respect, would dare to do the
like. This resolution made, the Volterani were answered, that they could not
require the keeping of those conditions, which they themselves had broken, and
therefore either they should refer themselves to the discretion of the
Senate, or presently look for war. The Volterani returned with this answer,
prepared for the defense of their town, and sent to all Princes of Italy for
aid, but were aided by few: for only the Sanesi, and the Lord of Piombino
did promise to help them. The Florentines on the other side, judging that the
victory would be gotten by making of speed, assembled ten thousand footmen,
and two thousand horse, whom under the conduct of Federigo, Lord of Vrbino,
they sent into the country of Volterra: all which, they easily possessed. Then
they brought their Camp before the City, which being builded upon an hill,
could not be assaulted, but on that side, where the Church of S. Alisandro
stands. The Volterani had for their defense enterteined a thousand soldiers,
or thereabouts, who seeing how bravely the Florentines assailed them, fearing
they could not defend the town, were in the service slow, but in doing
injury to the Volterani ready enough: so that those poor Citizens were by
the enemies assaulted without, and by friends oppressed within. In so much as
(dispairing to be saved) thought good to make peace, and forwant of better
mean, yielded themselves to the Florentines Commissaries: who caused them to
open the gates, and the greater part of the army being entered, they went unto
the Palace where the Priori were, whom they commanded to return to their
houses, and by the way, one of them was by a soldier reviled and robbed. Of
this beginning (for men be more ready to evil then good) grew the destruction
and sack of this City, which continued one whole day. The houses were robbed,
and the people spoiled, neither did the women and Churches escape, but all
soldiers, as well they that had cowardly defended the town, Volterra sacked.
as the others that fought, were partakers of the spoils. The news of this
victory, was with much rejoicing received at Florence, for the same was wholly
the enterprise of Lorenzo, who thereby gained great reputation. And thereupon
one of his dearest friends reproved Tomaso Soderini for his counsel, saying
unto him, What say you now, that Volterra is taken? To whom, Tomaso answered,
me thinks it is lost: for if you had taken it by composition, you might have
made profit and surety thereof; but having it by force, in time of war it
will weaken and trouble you, and in time of peace, charge and hinder you. In
those days, the Pope desiring to hold in obedience the towns belonging to the
Church, caused Spoleto to be sacked: which by mean of inward faction, had
rebelled. Castello besieged by Pope Sisto.
After, for the like offense, he besieged the City of Castello. In that
town, Nicholo Vitelli was Prince. He being in great friendship with Lorenzo de
Medici, refused not in that necessity to aid him: yet was that aid not
sufficient to defend Nicholo, but enough to sow the first seeds of enimitie
betwixt Sisto and the Medici, which afterward brought forth fruit of much
mischief: and the same should quickly have showed it self, had not the death
of Friar Piero, Cardinal of Sisto, happened. For this Cardinal, having
traveled about all Italy, went also to Venice and Milan (pretending to honor
the marriage of Hercole, Marquess of Farrara) to practice with the Princes,
and sound their disposition toward the Florentines. But being returned to
Rome, he died: not without suspicion to have been poisoned by the Venetians,
who feared the greatness of Sisto, so long as he might be counseled and
encouraged by Friar Piero. For albeit nature had made this Friar of base blood,
and was also bred up basely in a Monastery, yet so soon as he had aspired to
be Cardinal, there appeared in him so great pride and ambition, as might not
only become a Cardinal, but also seem fit enough for any Pope. For he feared
not to make a feast in Rome with so great charge, as seemed superfluous for any
King: for therein he spent more then twenty thousand Florins. Pope Sisto
bereft of this agent, prosecuted his enterprises more coldly. Notwithstanding,
the league being renewed between the Florentines, the Duke, and Venetians, and
place left for Pope Sisto, and the King, who made an other contract; therein
also, leaving places for other Princes to enter, if they would. By this mean,
Italy became divided in two factions: Italy divided into sactions.
for daily betwixt these two leagues, there grew displeasure, as it happened,
touching the I Will of Cipres, which the King Ferrando challenged, and the
Venetians usurped, whereupon, the Pope and the King became more willing one of
the others friendship. In those days, Federigo Prince of Vrbino, was accounted
the most excellent Captain of Italy, and had long served for the Florentines.
The King and the Pope (to the end our league should not have the service of
such a leader) determined to win the good will of Federigo. To that end both
the Pope and the King desired him to come unto Naples. Federigo performed their
desire, to the great admiration and displeasure of the Florentines, believing
it would become of him, as it did to Giacopo Piccinino. Yet the contrary came
to pass: for Federigo returned from Naples and Romagna with great honor, and
still General for their league. Nevertheless, the King and Pope ceased not,
to sound the disposition of the Lords in Romagna, and the Sanesi, hoping to
make them his friends, and by their means, be able to offend the Florentines,
whom they perceived by all convenient ways armed, to encounter their
ambition: and having lost Federigo of Vrbino, they enterteined Roberto of
Rimini. They also renewed the league with the Perugini, and drew thereunto the
Lord of Faenza. The Pope and King alleged, that their displeasure to the
Florentines was, because they sought to draw the Venetians from them: and the
Pope thought that the Church could not maintain the reputation thereof, nor
the Earl Girolamo his state in Romagna, if the Florentines and Venetians were
united. On the other side, the Florentines feared they would be enemies to the
Venetians, not to win their friendship, but the rather thereby to injury them:
so as Italy lived two years in these suspicions, and diversities of humors,
before any tumults were moved. But the first (although but small) happened in
Toscana. Braccio of Perugia, Trouble in Toscana.
a man (as has heretofore been often said) of great reputation in the war,
had two sons, called Oddo, and Carlo. This Carlo was a child, and Oddo was by
the inhabitants of the Vale of Lamona slain, as has been declared. Carlo
being atteined to age, and able for arms, was for the memory of his father,
and the good hope of himself enterteined by the Venetians, and made among
others, a leader for that state. The time of his conduct ended, he refused to
serve longer, determining to make proof, if with his own fame, and the
reputation of his father, he could recover his own country of Perugia.
Whereto the Venetians easily consented, as they that were wont in alterations
to increase their dominion. Carlo then came into Toscana, and found the
enterprise of Perugia hard, by reason that the Perugini were in league with the
Florentines, yet desirous that this motion might take some effect worthy
memory, he assaulted the Sanesi, alleging they were debtors of money, due to
his father, for service done to that state, whereof he required satisfaction:
and upon that demand, assaulted them with so great fury, as that dominion
became disordered. The Citizens of Siena, seeing themselves so furiously
charged (being ready to suspect the worst of the Florentines) thought all was
done by their consent. They also complained much to the Pope and the King; and
sent Ambassadors unto Florence, to expostulate the injury, and covertly
alleged, that without assistance, Carlo could not with so great security have
offended them. The Florentines excused themselves, promising in what sort the
Ambassadors thought good, they would command Carlo, no more to offend the
Sanesi. Whereof Carlo complained, that they by not aiding him, should lose a
great conquest, and he miss the mean, to aspire to much glory. For in short
space he promised them possession of that City, where he found so great
cowardice and disorder, as with possibility it could not be defended. Then
Carlo departed from thence, and returned to his old enterteinement of the
Venetians. Albeit the Sanesi were by the Florentines delivered from so great
danger, yet remained they toward them offended, and judged their obligacion
not to be any thing, having saved them from an evil, whereof they had been the
occasion. During that these matters betwixt the King and Pope were handled in
Toscana, Conspiracy against the Duke of Milan.
there happened in Lombardy an accident of much more moment, and did
prognosticate greater evils. There was in Milan a Scholemaister, called Cola of
Mantoua, a man well learned, but ambitious, and such a one, as instructed the
chief children of the City. This Cola, either because he hated the life and
manners of the Duke, or for some other occasion, in all his speeches seemed to
disdain those men that lived under an evil prince, calling others glorious
and happy, whom nature and fortune granted to be borne, and live in
commonweals. Declaring how all famous men had been brought up in
commonweals, and not under Princes. For the commonweals (said he) did
nourish virtuous men, but Princes did oppress them: for the one does cherish
virtue, the other does fear it. The young men with whom he had gained most
familiarity, were Giouandrea Lampugnano, Carlo Visconti, and Girolamo Olgeato,
with them he oftentimes reasoned of the evil nature of the Duke, and their
own misfortune, being governed under such a one: and at length he began to be
in so great confidence of these young men, that he brought them to swear, that
so soon as they atteined to man's estate, they would deliver their country
from the tirannie of that Prince. These youths persuaded to perform what they
had promised, waying therewith all the Dukes behavior, and the particular
injuries he had done, did hasten their intent to put the matter in execution.
The Duke Galiazzo was in his disposition lascivious and cruel, which two
things had made him odious: for it sufficed him not to entice Ladies to
dishonor, but he would also take pleasure in publishing the same. Neither was
he content to put men to death, but he would also execute them with some cruel
manner of torment. He was moreover slandered, or truly suspected, to have
murdered his own mother for he persuading himself not to be Prince (she
being present) found means to remove her to Cremona, which was the place of
her dowry, and in that journey she became sodeinly sick, and died: and many
men judged her son was cause of her death. This Duke, had in matter touching
women, dishonored Carlo, and Gerolamo, and denied Giouandrea to have the
possession of the Abbey of Miramondo, being granted unto him of the Pope, upon
resignation of a kinsman of his. These private injuries increased the desire of
the young men, by revenge to deliver their country of so great mischiefs:
hoping, that if they might murder the Duke, they should be not only esteemed
of the nobility, but also of the people followed. Thus determined of the
enterprise, they oftentimes met together, and by reason of their ancient
familiarity, no marvel made of their meeting. Being togithers (to make their
minds more prepared for that action) they always talked thereof, and with the
sheathes of daggers made for that purpose, one of them in the breast and belly
struck the other. Then they devised of the time and place. In the Castle they
thought it not fit to be performed. In hunting they feared it would prove
incerteine and perilous. When the Duke walked in the streets for pleasure, they
imagined it would be hard, and unlikely to be done. And at feasts, they doubted
the places would not serve. Wherefore they resolved, at some public pomp and
triumph, where they were certain of his being, to kill him, for thither they
might under diverse colors assemble their friends. They concluded also, that
if any of them upon occasion were by the officers apprehended, the rest should
with their swords in the midst of his enemies sley him. This happened in the
year 1476. The feast of Christmas then being at hand (at which time, on S.
Stephens day, the Duke was wont with great pomp to visit the Church of that
holy Martyr) they resolved that place and time would best serve for the
execution of their intent. The morning of S. Stephens day being come, they
caused certain of their most assured friends and servants to arm themselves,
saying, they would go to aid Giouandrea, who contrary to the mind of some his
evil willers, would make a conduct for water in a certain ground of his. They
being thus armed, went to the Church, pretending, that they would before their
departure, take leave of the Prince. They procured also diverse other their
friends and kinsfolks, for sundry considerations to come thither, hoping, that
the deed being done, every one would follow them to perform the rest of the
enterprise. And their intent was, (the Duke being slain) to join with those
armed, and go to that place of the City, where they might more easily raise
the people, and persuade them to arm themselves against the Duchess, and
Princes of the State; supposing the people by means of the famine wherewith
they were then grieved, would easily favor the enterprise: and unto the people
they determined to give leave to spoil the houses of Ceco Simonetta, Giouanni
Botti, and Francesco Lucani, all Magistrates of the government, whereby they
should be assured of them, and gave the people liberty. This resolution was
set down, and the execution thereof firmly agreed upon in their minds.
Giouandrea with the rest met early in the Church, and there altogithers heard
Mass; which being ended, Giouandrea turning toward the image of S. Ambrose,
said, O Ambrose, Lord of our City, thou know our intention, and the end
wherefore we will adventure our selves to so many perils: Be favorable to this
our enterprise, and by favoring of justice, show how greatly injustice does
displease thee. To the Duke on the other side, before he came to the Church,
many signs happened, to prognosticate his death at hand. For the day being
come, he put on his privy armor (as every other day for the most part he
did) yet sodeinly before he went from his house, either because he thought it
not sightly, or that it did hurt his body, he took it off. Then thought he to
have heard Mass in the Castle, but his Chapleine was gone to S. Steffano. Then
commanded he that the Bishop of Como should say the Mass, but he alleged
certain reasonable lets, so the Duke was (as it were by necessity) occasioned
to go to the Church. But first, he called for his two sons, Giouangaliazzo,
and Hermes, whom he embraced, and kissed often, as though he had no power to
depart from them: yet in the end, he determined to go; and coming out of the
Castle, betwixt the Ambassadors of Farrara and Mantoua, rode to the Temple. The
conspirators in the mean while, to give the less suspicion, and keep them
from the cold, were retired into a chamber belonging to the chief Priest of
the Church, their friend, and understanding that the Duke did come, they came
from the chamber into the Church. Giouandrea and Girolamo placed themselves on
the right hand of the Church door, and Carlo on the left hand. Then those that
went before the Duke, entered the Church door, and after the Duke himself,
environed with a great multitude of people, as it always happens, in time
of such a princely pomp. The first of the Conspirators that went toward
him, were Lampugnano, and Girolamo. They pretending to make place and room for
the Prince, came hard unto his person, and assaulted him with short and sharp
daggers, which they had hidden in their sleeves. Lampugnano gave him two
wounds, the one in the belly, the other in the throat. Girolamo likewise in
the throat, and in the breast struck him. Carlo Visconti standing near unto
the door, and the Duke past him, at such time as his companions gave the
assault, could not hurt him before, but gave him two other wounds, one on the
shoulder, the other in the back: and these six wounds were all so sodeinly and
speedily given, The Duke murdered.
that the Duke was fallen to the ground before any man knew what the matter
meaned. Neither could he do, or say any thing that was known, but in falling,
one only time he cried, O Lady help me. The Duke thus laid on the ground,
the rumor grew great, many swords were drawn out, and (as it happened in like
cases unlooked for) some fled out of the Church, and some ran thither,
without any certain knowledge, or occasion of the matter. But those who were
next unto the Duke, seeing him slain, and knowing the murderers, pursued
them. Of the conspirators, Giouandrea intending to get out of the Church, went
amongst the women, who being many, and according to their custom set on the
ground, was so troubled and stayed with their garments, that he was by a Moore
(one of the Dukes footmen) overtaken, and slain. Carlo was likewise by those
that were present, killed. But Girolamo Olgiato escaped out of the Church,
seeing his companions slain, and not knowing whither to flee, went home, where
he could be neither by his father nor brothers received. But his mother only,
having compassion of her son, did recommend him to a Priest, an ancient
friend of that house, who put him in Priestlike garments, and removed him to
his house, where he remained two days, hoping that some tumult in Milan would
arise, and thereby he might be saved. But that not coming to pass, and
fearing to be found there, he assaied to flee disguised; yet being known, was
brought before the Magistrates, and there he confessed all the order of the
conspiracy. This Girolamo was twenty three years of age, and died with no
less courage, then he had executed the enterprise. For being brought to his
death, stripped naked, and prepared for the hangman, who with his knife in hand,
stood ready to cut him in pieces, he spoke these Laten words, Mors acerba,
fama perpetua, stabit vetus memoria facti. This enterprise was by these
unhappy young men secretly practiced, and resolutely executed. The cause of
their destruction was, that they were not followed and defended of them, to
whom they trusted. Let Princes therefore learn to make themselves so much
honored and loved, as no man can hope to hurt them, and save himself. And let
all private persons know, how vain it is to think, that the multitude
(notwithstanding it be discontented) will in their perils follow or accompany
them. This accident amazed all Italy, but much more trouble proceeded of other
chances, that shortly after happened in Florence. For thereby the peace which
had continued in Italy the space of twelve years, was broken, as in the Book
following shall be declared. Which Book, as it begins with blood and
terror, so does it end with sorrow and misery.

The end of the seventh Book.
royal blazon or coat of arms
THE EIGHT BOOK.
THE beginning of this Book, placed amidst two conspiracies, the one in Milan
already declared, the other happened in Florence, and to be spoken of; it may
be thought fit, that (according to my custom) I should somewhat say, touching
the quallitie of conspiracies, and of what importance they are. Which willingly
I would do, had I not in other places discoursed thereof, or that such a matter
might be briefly passed over. But seeing it requires great consideration,
and is already spoken of, we will proceed, and tell how the Medici, having
overcome all enemies, that openly opposed themselves, being desirous their
house alone might have authority in the City, it behooved them to oppress
all others that secretly practiced against them. For so long as they contended
against other families but with equal authority, the Citizens envying their
greatness, might openly and without fear affront them. Because, the
Magistrates being free, neither party before loss of victory, had any
occasion to fear it self. But after the victory, in the year 66. the State
became so much in the hand and power of the Medici, as all men discontented,
were enforced, either patie^tly to abide the condition wherein they lived, or
else by way of conspiracy, and secret practice, to amend their fortune. But
since co^spiracies are with difficulty performed, for the most part, they
procure the ruin of the conspirators, and the greatness of him against whom
they be conspired. So that, a Prince by conspiracy assaulted, if he be not
therein slain, as was the Duke of Milan (which seldom happens) becomes
thereby the stronger, and being before good, becomes evil. Because
conspiracies do give him occasion to fear, fear counsaileth him to seek
assurance, and in seeking assurance, he does iniure others, whereby he gains
hatred, and many times procures his own destruction. So as in conclusion,
treasons do sodeinly overthrow those who attempt them, and trouble him many
times against whom they be attempted. Italy was (as has been before declared)
divided into two factions, the Pope and the King on the one side, and the
Venetians, the Duke, and Florentines on the other side. And albeit there was
not betwixt them any war moved, yet was there daily occasion given thereof,
and the Pope chiefelie in all his actions studied to offend the state of
Florence. Philippo de Medici Archbishop of Pisa, then dying, the Pope,
(contrary to the will of the Senate of Florence) gave that Bishopprick to
Francesco Saluiati, whom he knew to be enemy to the house of Medici.
Displeasure between the Pope and the Medici.
But the Senate denying to deliver possession thereof, there followed great
displeasure betwixt the Pope and the Medici. Besides that, the Pope did great
favors in Rome to the family of Pazzi, and in every act, disfauoured the
house of Medici. In those days, the house of Pazzi lived above other the
Florentine families, in most riches and glory. The chief of them was called
Giacopo, who for his riches and Nobility, was made Knight. He having no
children but one only daughter, had for heirs diverse nephews, sons of
Piero and Antonio his brethren. The chief of whom were Guglielmo, Francesco,
Rinato, and Giouanni. After them, Andrea, Nicholo, and Galeotto. Cosimo de
Medici seeing their riches and nobility, gave his niece Biancha in marriage to
Guglielmo, hoping that alliance would make those houses more united, and remove
all occasion of displeasures and suspicions, which many times happened betwixt
them. Notwithstanding (so incertaine and fallible are the expectatio^s of men)
the matter came otherwise to pass, for those that counseled Lorenzo, told
him, it was perilous, and contrary to his authority, to suffer the Citizens to
increase their riches and state: which was the cause that those degrees of
honor were not granted to Giacopo and his nephews, which (as other Citizens
thought) they deserved. Hereof grew the first displeasure of the Pazzi, and the
first fear of the Medici. Enimitie between the Pazzi, and Medici.
The increasing of the one, was cause that the other also increased: in so much
as the Pazzi in all actions, whereat other Citizens did meet, were not to the
Magistrates welcome. Also the officers of eight men, upon a like occasion
(without such respect, as was wont to be borne toward the great Citizens)
constrained Francesco de Pazzi being at Rome, to return to Florence. Whereupon
the Pazzi in all places with injurious words, and full of offense complained:
which doings, caused others to suspect, and think themselves to be injured.
Giouanni de Pazzi, had married the daughter of Giouanni Barromei a man of great
riches, which riches after his death for want of sons, should come unto her.
Nevertheless, Carlo his nephew took possession of part of those goods, and
thereby the matter being brought to trial and suit, an order was made, by
virtue whereof, the wife of Giouanni de Pazzi was disinherited, and the
possessions given to Carlo: which injury, the Pazzi did altogether impute to
the Medici. Of this matter, Giuliano de Medici did many times lament, and
complain to his brother Lorenzo, saying, he feared least they desiring too
much, should lose all. But Lorenzo being full of youth and authority, would
needs take all upon him, and make every man know, that all things were done by
him. The Pazzi being noble and rich, could not endure so great injuries, but
devised by what means they might procure revenge. The first that moved speech
against the Medici, was Francesco. He being of more courage and life then the
others, determined to get that which he wanted, or lose that which he had. And
because the government of Florence was hateful unto him, he lived for the most
part in Rome, and there (according to the custom of Florentine Merchants)
occupied great sums of money. Being also of familier acquaintance with the
Earl Girolamo, one of them often complained to the other of the Medici. In so
much as after many consultations, they concluded, that to make the one of them
assured of his lands, and the other of his City, it was necessary to alter
the government of Florence, which they thought could not be done, Conspiracy
against Giuliano, and Lorenzo di Medici.
without the death of Giuliano, and Lorenzo. They also supposed, that the Pope
and the King, would easily thereto consent, if the facility of the enterprise
were laid before them. They then thus minded, imparted all their intent to
Francesco Saluiati, Archbishop of Pisa, who being ambitious, and lately injured
by the Medici, willingly condiscended. And examining among themselves what was
to be done, they agreed (for the more speedy performing of the action) to
draw thereinto Giacopo de Pazzi, without whom, they thought nothing could be
performed. It was then supposed good, that for this purpose Francesco de Pazzi
should go to Florence, and the Archbishop and the Earl remain at Rome, to
solicit the Pope when need required. Francesco being come to Giacopo, found
him more respective, and hard to be persuaded, then they would have him, and
aduertising the same to Rome, it was thought fit to draw him with more
authority. Whereupon the Archbishop and the Earl opened all the matter to
Giouanbattista da Montesecco, one of the Popes Captains. He being a man of
war well esteemed, was also beholding to the Pope and the King.
Nevertheless, he judged the matter hard, full of danger and difficulties,
which the Archbishop labored to remove, by telling him what aid the Pope and
King would give to the enterprise. Also he alleged, that the Citizens of
Florence did hate the Medici, and the Saluiati and Pazzi would help to kill
them, which was the more easy to do, by reason they walked in the City
unaccompanied, and without suspect. Therefore if Giuliano and Lorenzo were
dead, the State might easily be changed. All which reasons, Giouanbattista
believed not, hearing many Florentines affirm the contrary. While these
matters were in consideration, it happened Carlo of Faenza fell so sick, as
every man feared his death. It was then thought good to the Archbishop and the
Earl, to take occasion to send Giouanbattista to Florence, and from thence to
Romagna, under pretense to recover certain Towns, which the Lord of Faenza
had taken from them. The Earl therefore commanded Giouanbattista to speak
with Lorenzo, and in his name desire counsel how the matters of Romagna might
be handled: after to deal with Francesco de Pazzi, and then they together, to
persuade Giacopo di Pazzi to be of their mind. And because he should carry
with him the authority of the Pope, they procured him to speak with his
holiness, who offered to further the enterprise with all his power.
Giouanbattista arrived at Florence, went unto Lorenzo, of whom he was
courteously received, and in all his demands wisely and friendly counseled.
Whereof Giouanbattista meruailed, finding him an other man, then he was
reported to be: for he perceived him to be courteous, wise, and a friend to the
Earl: notwithstanding he thought fit to talk with Francesco, but (he being
gone to Lucca) communed with Giacopo, whom at the first he found far from
the matter, yet before they parted, with the authority of the Pope somewhat
moved; and said to Giouanbattista, that he should go into Romagna, and in the
mean space Francesco would become home: and then more particulerly they would
reason how all things should be handled. Giouanbattista went and returned, and
still continued to enterteine Lorenzo with his dissimuled business for the
Earl: and after conferred with Giacopo and Francesco de Pazzi, with whom he
persuaded so far, that they consented to the enterprise. Then they reasoned
of the manner how to perform it, and Giacopo thought it impossible, both the
brethren being in Florence, and therefore thought best to tarry til Lorenzo went
to Rome, which was thought he would, and then to execute the matter. Francesco
liked well that Lorenzo should go to Rome, but if he did not go thither, yet
either at some wedding in the Church, or at the time of some sport, they might
be both slain. And touching foreign aid, he thought the Pope might assemble
forces, pretending the enterprise of the Castle of Montone, having just
occasion to take it from Carlo, because he had moved rebellion in the countries
belonging to Siena and Perugia. Yet was nothing fully concluded, but that
Francesco de Pazzi, and Giouanbattista should go to Rome, and there with the
Earl and the Pope determine all things. This matter was again practiced in
Rome, and in the end a resolution set down (the enterprise of Montone being
determined) that Ciouan Francesco da Tolentino the Popes soldier, should go
to Romagna, and Lorenzo di Castello to his country, and either of them with
their men be ready to do, whatsoever by the Archbishop Saluiati, and Francesco
de Pazzi should be commanded: who, with Giouanbattista de Montesecco should go
to Florence, and make provision of all things for the execution of the
enterprise; whereunto the king Ferrando by his Ambassador promised some aid.
The Archbishop, and Francesco de Pazzi arrived at Florence, persuaded unto the
conspiracy Giacopo di Poggio, a young man well learned, but ambitious, and
delighting in change. They persuaded also the two Giacopi Saluiati, one was
brother, the other nephew to the Archbishop. They persuaded likewise Barnardo
Bandini, and Napolione (two valiant young men borne in France) yet affectionat
to the family of Pazzi. Of strangers (besides those we have named) they
persuaded Antonio di Volterra, and one other called Steffano, a Priest, who
taught the latin tongue to the daughter of Giacopo. Rinato de Pazzi, being a
wise and grave man (and such a one as knew the inconuenients that followed like
enterprises) would not consent to the conspiracy, but by all honest means he
could, impeached the same. The Pope had in the University of Pisa, maintained
Raffaello de Riario (nephew to the Earl Girolamo) to learn the Cannon laws,
where he continued till the Pope advanced him to the dignity of Cardinal. The
conspirators thought fit to bring this Cardinal to Florence, whose coming,
should cover the conspiracy, hoping to harbor in his house those
conspirators, whom they had need of, and thereby take occasion to perform
their intent. The Cardinal being desired, came, and was by Giacopo de Pazzi
received at Montughi his town, near unto Florence. The conspirators desired
by his occasion to assemble Lorenzo and Giuliano, and so to kill them. They
found means then that they should feast the Cardinal at their town of
Fiesole, whither Giuliano either by hap or purpose came not, so as that
appointment failed. Then determined they to conuite them in Florence, whither
of necessity they must come, and so they took order to make the feast on
Sund^y the 26. of April 1478. The conspirators thus determined to murder them
at the feast, on Saturday night they met together, to take order for the
execution of the murder the next day. The day being come, Francesco was
advertised, that Giuliano would not be there. For which consideration, the
conspirators met again, and concluded, that it stood them upon to bring the
matter to execution, because it was impossible (being known to so many) but it
would be revealed, wherefore they determined to kill him in the Cathedral
Church of S. Reparata, where the Cardinal being, both the brethren (according
to their custom) would not fail to be. They ordered, that Giouanbattista
should take in hand to kill Lorenzo, and Francesco de Pazzi, with Barnardo
Bandini, should sley Giuliano. Giouanbattista, refused to perform his charge,
either because the courteous usage of Lorenzo had mollified his mind, or else
for some other occasion which moved him, said, he durst not commit so great a
sin in the Church, as to execute treason with sacrilege. Which conceit of
Giouanbattista, was the first ruin of their enterprise; for the time drawing
on, they were forced to commit that charge to Antonio of Volterra, and Steffano
the Priest: two men, both for experience and nature, far unfit for that
purpose, because there is no action which requires more resolution and
constancy of mind, then this. And it behooves him that should take such a
matter in hand, to be a man accustomed to be present at the death of others.
For it has often been seen, that some men, used to arms and blood, have
notwithstanding in like cases, let fall their courage. This determination set
down, they agreed that the time of the execution should be at the sacring time
of Mass, and in the same instant, the Archbishop Saluiati, with Giacopo,
should take possession of the public Palace, to the end that the Senators
either by consent or force (so soon as the young men were slain) should favor
the conspirators. This course being agreed of, they went to the Temple, where
they found the Cardinal, and Lorenzo de Medici. The Church was full of people,
and the service begun, but Giuliano not come. Wherefore Francesco de Pazzi, with
Barnardo (who had the charge of his death) went unto his house, and there by
entreaty and cunning, persuaded him to come to the Church. And truly it is a
thing worthy memory, to know how so great hatred would be so covertly kept
secret in the minds of Francesco and Barnardo. For both by the way going to the
Church, and in the church, they enterteined Giuliano with pleasant speech and
youthful daliance. Also Francesco under color of familier and friendly
courtesy, took Giuliano in his arms, to feel whether he had on any armor
or garment of defense. Giuliano and Lorenzo knew well enough they were not
beloved of the Pazzi, and that they desired to remove them from their
authority in the state: yet feared they not their own lives, supposing that
whenever the Pazzi would attempt any enterprise against them, they would do
it ciuilly and not by violence. Therefore not mistrusting any such measure,
they likewise feined themselves to be their friends. The murderers thus
prepared, those that were appointed for slaughter of Lorenzo, thrust in among
the multitude: where they might stand without suspicion. The others, togithers
with Giuliano, being come to the Church, at the time appointed, Barnardo
Bandini with a short dagger made for the purpose, stabbed Giuliano to the
heart, who moving a step or two, fell to the ground: and upon him went
Francesco de Pazzi wounding his body in many places so furiously, that he
struck himself also a great wound in one of his own legs. Antonio and
Steffano assaulted Lorenzo, at whom they struck diverse times, but hurt him
only a little in the throat. For either their negligence, his resistance, or
the help of those that stood by, saved him from further harm. So that the
conspirators fled, and hid themselves. But being afterward found, they were
shamefully put to death, and their bodies drawn through all the streets of
the City. Lorenzo joining with those friends he had about him, retired
himself into the vesterie of the Temple, and there shut up the doors.
Barnardo Bandini seeing Giuliano dead, slew also Francesco Nori a great friend
to the Medici, either because he hated him before, or because Francesco had
gone about to save Giuliano. Also not content with these two murders, he went
toward Lorenzo, hoping by his courage and quickness to supply that, which
others for their sloth and cowardice had left undone. But Lorenzo being in the
vestry, he could not perform his intent. In the midst of this great and
terrible accident (which was such as made all men to fear, that the Church
would have fallen down) the Cardinal retired to the altar, where he was with
great difficulty by the Priests saved, till such time (as the tumult ceased)
the Senate could convey him to his Palace, and there till his delivery, with
great fear he remained. At that time there were in Florence, certain Citizens
of Perugia, who by the factions, (enemies to their houses,) had been banished.
These Perugini being promised by the Pazzi to be restored to their country,
were also of this conspiracy. Whereupon the Archbishop Saluiati, (who was gone
to surprise the Palace accompanied with Giacopo, the two other Saluiati, and
other his friends and followers) being come thither, left certain of them
below, charging them, that so soon as they should hear any noise, to take
possession of the gate, and he with the greater part of the Perugini went up,
where he found the Senate at dinner, and was presently let in by Cesare
Petrucci Gonfaloniere di Giustitia. The Archbishop thus entered with a few,
leaving the rest without, they of their own accord went into the Chancery,
where they shut themselves in. For the lock of that door was by such devise
made, as neither within, nor without, could be but with the key opened. The
Archbishop in the mean space being with the Gonfaloniere, pretending to speak
with him of matters by the Popes commandment, began to utter some speech
fearfully, and as though he were amazed. In so much as the alteration of his
countenance and words, wrought so great suspicion in the Gonfaloniere, that
sodeinly he thrust him out of the chamber: and seeing Giacopo there also, took
him by the hair of the head, and delivered him to the hands of the Serieants.
The rest of the Senators perceiving these tumults: with those weapons which
were next hand, assaulted the others which were come up with the Archbishop.
Part of them being shut up, the rest were dismayed, all whom they sodeinly slew,
or caused alive to be cast out of the Palace window. Of this number, the
Archbishop with the other two, Saluiati and Giacopo de Poggio were hanged. The
other conspirators which were left below, had won the gate from the guard,
and gotten possession of all the lower rooms, so that the Citizens who
resorted unto the Palace upon this rumor, could neither with their counsel
nor their force assist the Senators. In the mean space, Francesco de Pazzi,
and Barnardo Bandini seeing Lorenzo escaped, and one of them in whom the chief
hope of the enterprise depended, to be sore hurt, were therewith dismayed.
Whereupon Barnardo hoping with that courage to escape, wherewith he had injured
the Medici, seeing the enterprise failed, fled away and saved himself.
Francesco being come home to his house hurt, offered to mount on horseback
(for the order was, that certain armed men should be placed about the town,
and the people called to liberty and arms) but he could not: So deep was the
wound, and so much blood had he lost. Wherefore he put off all his clothes,
and laid himself naked in bed; desiring Giacopo that he would perform that
which himself could not: albeit Giacopo were old, and unpracticed in such
tumults, yet to make the last proof of fortune, mounted on horseback,
followed with a hundredth horsemen or thereabouts (who were laid ready for the
like enterprise) and with those he went to the Market place of the Palace,
calling the people to aid him, and recover their liberty. But the people by
the fortune and liberallitie of the Medici made deaffe, gave no ear to help
him, and the Florentines had so much forgotten their liberty, as he received
no answer at all. Only the Senators (who commanded the highest place in the
Palace) saluted them with throwing down of stones, and with threatenings by
all ways they could devise, terrified them. Giacopo standing then doubtful
what to do, was met by Giouanni Saristori his brother in law, who first
reproved him and the rest, for the troubles they had begun, and then persuaded
him to return to his house, saying that the welfare of the people, and the
liberty, touched other Citizens as well as him. Thus Giacopo void of all hope,
seeing the Senators his enemies, Lorenzo alive, Francesco hurt, and himself
not followed of any, determined to flee and save his life, if possibly he
could. For which purpose, with that company which was with him in the Market
place, The event of this conspiracy.
he went out of Florence toward Romagna. In the mean time all the City were
in arms, and Lorenzo di Medici accompanied with many armed men, returned home
to his house. The Palace was recovered by the people, and all the conspirators
taken and slain. Also throughout the City, the name of Medici was proclaimed,
and the members of the dead men, either carried upon the points of swords
and lances, or drawn through the streets: moreover every man, both by words
and deeds, irefully and cruelly persecuted the Pazzi. Their houses were by the
people taken, and Francesco (naked as he lay in bed) drawn out and brought to
the Palace, where he was hanged fast by the Archbishop and others his
companions. But he would not in any wise, for any injury done unto him by the
way, or after, speak any word at all: but looked every man earnestly in the
face, and so without other lamentation took leave of life. Guglielmo di Pazzi,
brother in law to Lorenzo) by his own innocence and the help of his wife
Bianca, saved himself in his house. There was no Citizen either armed or
disarmed, but in that necessity went unto Lorenzo, offering him their service
and substance. So great was the fortune and favor, which that house, by his
wisdom and liberallitie had gained. Rinato de Pazzi, when this chance
happened, retired to his house in the country: where understanding thereof, he
disguised himself and fled. Notwithstanding, being known by the way, he was
taken and brought to Florence. Giacopo in passing the Alps was also taken. For
those mountain people hearing what had happened in Florence, and seeing him
fleeing, stayed him, and brought him back to Florence. Neither could he entreat
them to kill him by the way, although he earnestly desired them so to do.
Giacopo and Rinato were brought to their death, four days after this accident
happened: and among so many murders and executions done all those four days,
by means whereof the streets were filled with dead men; yet was there no
compassion taken of any, but only of this Rinato; because he was accounted a
wise man, honest, and free from that pride, whereof the rest of that house were
noted. And to the end that this action might proceed for an extraordinary
example, Giacopo being buried among his ancestors, was (as a man
excommunicate) taken up, and by the haulter wherewith he was hanged, drawn
naked throughout the City: and those that drew him, not voucthsauing him a
grave, threw his body into the river of Arno. A rare example of fortune, to
see a man of so great riches, and happy estate, to fall into so great
infelicitie, and be ruined with so much cruelty. Some have reported him, to be
delighted in vices, and that he took great pleasure in gaiming and swearing,
as one that was careless and desperate. These vices he covered with
liberallitie and alms: for he largely relieved many poor men, and gave money
to places of devotion. This good also may be said of him, that the night before
the Sunday appointed for the murder (to the end no friend should be partaker
of his misfortune) he paid all his debts, and delivered all the merchandise
he had of other men's to the propper owners, with marvelous care and diligence.
Giouanbattista de Montesecco, after many examinations, was beheaded. Nappolione
the Frenchman, escaped away, and by that means saved himself. Guglielmo de
Pazzi, was banished, and his brother in laws left alive, were put in prison in
the bottom of the Castle at Volterra. The tumults thus pacified, and the
conspirators punished, the funeral of Giuliano was celebrated with much
lamentation of all Citizens: because there was in him so great liberallitie and
courtesy, as might be wished in any man borne to like fortune. Of Giuliano
there remained one son, who was borne a few months after his death, and was
called Giulio: who became of that virtue and fortune, which at this present all
the world knows, and I will (when occasion shall be offered if God grant me
life) speak of him at large. Those soldiers which were conducted by Lorenzo
da Castella in the vale of Teuere, and those which served under Giouanfrancesco
da Tolentino in Romagna, were joined together to aid the Pazzi: and were
coming toward Florence. But hearing the enterprise was miscarried, they
returned back. And the alteration of the state not being brought to pass (as
the Pope and King desired) they determined to do that by open war, which by
secret conspiracy they could not. The Pope and King move war against the
Florenti^es
Then both the one and the other of them, with all possible speed, assembled
their forces to assault the state of Florence: publishing that they required
nothing of that City, but that it would remove Lorenzo de Medici, whom among
all the Florentines, they accounted their only enemy. The King his soldiers,
were already passed Tronto, and the Popes forces, arrived in the country of
Perugia. The Pope also intending to make the Florentines to taste of spiritual
affliction, did excommunicate and curse them. The Florentines seeing so great
forces coming against them, with great care prepared for defense. And Lorenzo
de Medici (because the war was said to be made only against him) desired
before all other things, to assemble in the Palace with the Senate all the
principal Citizens, to the number of three hundredth or more: unto whom he
spoke as follows. The spe^ch of Lorenzo de Medici to the Florentines.
I know not (right noble Lords and magnificent Citizens) whether I ought
lament or rejoice with you, for these matters lately happened. For when I
consider with what fraud and despite I was assaulted, and my brother slain; I
cannot but be sorry, and with all my heart and soul lament. Yet when I
remember with what readiness, what love and universal consent of all this
City, my brothers death was revenged and I defended, I must of force be glad,
and greatly esteem my self. For as experience has now taught me to know,
that I have more enemies in the City then I thought, so has it informed me,
that I had also more earnest and affectionate friends then I looked for. I am
then to condole with you for the injury of others, and rejoice with you, for
your own merits: yet must my sorrow be the more, because the injuries were
rare, never seen, and not of us deserved. Consider (right noble Citizens) to
what point froward fortune had brought our house, that among our friends, our
kinsfolks, and in the Church, it was not assured. Such as stand in fear of
their lives, were wont to resort to their friends for aid, and flee to their
kinsfolk for succor: both whom we found ready armed to our destruction. Such
as either mistrusted private or public persecution, have found refuge in
Churches: but the same having saved others, has bin made a place for our
murder. For where murderers and thieves have found refuge, the Medici have met
with ministers of their death. But God (who hitherto did never abandon our
house) has saved us, and taken upon him the defense of our just cause. For
what injury have we done, that might of any man merit so great desire of
revenge? Truly we never offended privately any of these, who have proved
themselves so much our enemies. For if we had offended them, they should not
have had so great mean to offend us. Or if they attribute to us the public
injuries (whereof I am not privy) they offend rather you then us; rather this
Palace, and majesty of government then our house: seeming that for our cause
you do undeservedly iniure them, and the rest of your Citizens, which is far
from all troth. For we, though we could, and you (though we would) did never
consent they should be done. Whosoever does look well into the truth, shall
find, that our house has been by you, with so universal consent, advanced
for nothing more, then for that it has studied to excel others in courtesy,
liberallitie, and well doing. If then we have honored strangers, how have we
injured our kinsfolk? If this motion proceeded of desire to govern (as it
seems to do, by taking the Palace and leading armed men to the Market place)
thereby appears, how evil, ambitious, and reprooueable it is. If it be done,
for the malice and envy they bear to our authority, therein they offend
you, not us to whom you have given it. For surely those authorities deserve
hate, which men usurp, not those which with courtesy, liberallitie, and
magnificence be gained. You know also that our house never ascended to any
degree of greatness, but by order of this Palace, and your universal grant.
Cosimo my graundfather, returned not from exile by force of arms or violence,
but by your allowance and consent. My father being aged and sick, could not
defend his authority against so many enemies, but you with your authority did
it. I my self after my fathers death (being as it were a child) have not
maintained the estimation of my house, but by your counsels and favor. Neither
could our house have governed this commonweal, had you not joined, and do
join in the government thereof. I cannot therefore imagine, what cause of
malice they have against us, or what just occasion to envy us. For since their
own ancestors with their pride and couetise, have lost those honors, why
should they envy us, if by contrary desert we have gained them? But admit the
injuries done them by us be great, and that they justly desired our ruin, yet
why should they offend this Palace? Why make they league with the Pope and
King against the liberty of this state? Or why do they disturb the long peace
of Italy? Hereof they have no excuse at all, for they ought to offend those,
who offended them; and not mix private displeasures, with public injuries:
which is the reason that they being extirped, our misery is the more. For by
their means the Pope and King are coming toward us in arms: and that war
(they say) to be made only against me and my house. Which would God were true,
because then the remedy is ready and certain. For I am not so bad a Citizen,
as to prefer my private welfare, before your public weldooing: but would
willingly quench your fire, with my own destruction. Yet since the injuries
which great men do, be always covered with some pretense less dishonest, they
have chosen this quarrel, to cloak their shameful enterprise. But if it so
be, that you believe the contrary, I am in your hands to be holden, or let
loose, as your selves shall think best. You are my fathers, you are my
defenders, whatsoever you command, I obey and will perform. Neither will I
ever refuse (if it shall please you) to end this war with my blood, which by
the blood of my brother has been begun. While Lorenzo thus spoke, the
Citizens could not refrain weeping: and with such compassion as they heard
him, he was by one of them, answered, saying; The City did acknowledge to
have received so much good of him and his, as he might assure himself they
would be no less ready to preserve his reputation and authority, then they
had been willing to revenge his brothers death, and save his life. And before
he should lose either the one or the other, they would hazard the loss of
their country. And to the end their deeds might be answerable to those words,
they appointed a certain number of men to guard his person from domestical
treasons: and after took order for the war, leuying both men and money by
all means convenient. Then by virtue of the league, they sent for aid to the
Duke of Milan and the Venetians. And since the Pope had showed himself a wolf
and no shepherd, fearing to be devoured, by all possible means they justified
their cause, letting all Italy know the treason practiced against their state:
declaring the wickedness of the Pope, and his injustice; who being by indirect
means aspired to the Papacy, would also with malice exercise the same. For
he had not only first sent a Prelate of his to accompany traitors, and
cut-throates to commit murder in the Temple, even in the time of divine
service, and at the instant of celebration of the Sacrament, (and so by the
death of the Citizens to change the government, and sack the City at his
pleasure) but had also excommunicated them, and with his papal curses
threatened and offended them. Notwithstanding if God were just, and that the
injuries of men were to him offensive, it could not be, but that the actions of
this Pope were to him displeasing, and would be content that men injured (not
having any other refuge) might resort unto him. Wherefore the Florentines did
not only refuse to obey this excommunication, The Florentines careless of the
Popes curse.
but also the same notwithstanding, enforce their Priests to celebrate divine
service. They also assembled a Council in Florence, whereunto all the Prelates
of Toscana repaired, and appealed from the Pope to the next Council. On the
other side, the Pope wanted not reasons to justify his cause: and therefore
alleged it was the office of a chief Bishop, to remove tyrants, oppress the
wicked, and advance the good. All which things, it behooved him by all ways to
procure. For it was not the office of seculer Princes to imprison Cardinals,
hang up Bishops, to kill, cut in pieces, and draw the Priests through the
streets, murdering both guilty and vnguiltie people, without respect.
Notwithstanding all these quarrels and accusations, the Cardinal (whom the
Florentines kept prisoner) was released, and sent home to the Pope: which was
the cause that the Pope without respect, with all his and the Kings forces, The
Pope and King assault the Florentines.
assailed them. And those two armies conducted by Alfonso, eldest son of
Ferrando Duke of Calauria, and by Federigo Earl of Vrbino) entered Chianti, by
leave of the Sanesi (who favored the enemy) and surprised Radda with diverse
other Castles, and spoiled the country: which done, they encamped at
Castellina. The Florentines seeing these assaults, were much afraid, being
without men, and slowly aided by friends. For albeit the Duke had sent a
supply, yet the Venetians denied they were bound to help them in private
causes. And the war being against private men they were not to aid them;
because private quarrels are not publicly to be defended. Wherefore the
Florentines thought good by Ambassadors to persuade the Venetians to a better
opinion: and sent Tomaso Soderini unto the Senate. In the mean space soldiers
were enterteined, and Hercole Marquess of Farrara appointed General. While
this preparation was in making, the enemy distressed Castellina, and the people
there dispairing of rescue, after forty days defense, yielded. From thence
the enemy marched toward Arezzo, and laid siege to Monte S. Souino. By this
time the Florentine army was ready, and being come within three miles, the
enemy seemed therewith perplexed. For Federigo de Vrbino desired truce for a
few days: which was granted with so great disaduauntage to the Florentines,
that they who desired it, did much marvel. For if that request had not been
obtained, they had been forced to depart with shame. But having those days to
repair them, in the end of the truce, they took that Castle, before the
faces of our men. Yet the winter at hand, the enemy to lodge himself with more
commodity, retired into the country of Siena. The Florentines likewise
bestowed themselves, where with most commodity they could. And the Marquess
of Farrara having little profitted himself, and done less good to others,
Genoua rebelled from the Duke of Milan.
returned to his own. In those days Genoua rebelled from the Duke upon these
considerations. After the death Galeazzo (having left his son young and unfit
to govern) their grew discention betwixt Lodouico, Octauiano, and Ascanio his
uncles, and the Lady Bona his mother: for every of them, desired the tuition
of the little Duke. In which contentions the Lady Bona Duchess (by counsel of
Tomaso Soderini Ambassador there for the Florentines, and Cecco Simonetti (who
had been Secretary to Galeazzo) gat the upper hand. Whereupon the Sforzi fled
from Milan. Octauiano flying, was drowned in the River Adda: and the others,
together with Roberto of Sanseuerino* were to sundry places confined; for
Roberto in those troubles had abandoned the Duches, and joined with them. After
happened some tumults in Toscana, by which new accidents, those Princes hoping
of new fortune, every of them attempted somewhat, whereby to return to his
country. The King Ferrando, who saw that the Florentines were in their
necessity, succored only by the state of Milan, to take also from them that
aid, found means that the Duchess should so be set a work in her country,
as of her, they could not be aided. And by Prospero Adorno, and the Lord
Roberto (who were rebelled) found means to make Genoua revolt from the Duke.
Nevertheless the small Castle stood firm; whereunto the Duchess sent great
forces to recover the City: but they were overthrown. Then she seeing the
danger of her son and her self, by the continuance of that war, Toscana
disordered, and the Florentines (in whom she only hoped) afflicted, determined
that since she could not hold Genoua as subject, she would recover it as a
friend. And agreed with Battistino Fregoso (enemy to Prospero Adorno,) to give
him the little Castle, and make him Prince of Genoua, upon condition, that he
would drive out Prospero, and disfavor the Sforzi. According to this
agreement, Battistino with the help of the Castle, and his faction, surprised
Genoua, and according to the custom made himself Doge. The Sforzi then, and
the Lord Roberto, being driven out of Genoua, went with their followers to
Lunigiana. Thereupon the Pope and King seeing the troubles of Lombardy
pacified, took occasion by those that were driven from Genoua, to disturb
that part of Toscana which is toward Pisa. To the end that the Florentines
dividing their forces should become weak: and took order that the winter now
past, Roberto should go with his forces from Lunigiana to assault the country
of Pisa. This Roberto then moved exceeding great tumult, surprising and sacking
many castles in that country, and spoiling hard to the walls of Pisa. At that
time arrived in Florence Ambassadors from the Emperor, the French King, and the
King of Hungary: sent by those Princes to the Pope. They persuaded the
Florentines also to send unto him, promising to make some end of the war, and
procure a good peace. The Florentines refused not to make this trial, and the
rather that thereby they should let the world know, they were desirous of peace.
These Ambassadors dispatched, returned again without any thing done. Whereupon
the Flore^tines, to honor themselves by the reputation of the French King
(being by the Italians partly offended, and partly abandoned) sent unto him
Donato Acciaiuoli, a man well learned in the Greek and Latin toongs, and one
whose ancestors had always born office in the city: but being on his way, at
Milan he died. Then the state to reward his heirs, The Florentines grateful
to their servants.
and honor the memory of him being dead, with public expense honorably buried
his body, advancing his sons, and giving portions of money to his daughters
marriages. In his place, they sent Ambassador to the King, Guidantonio
Vespucci, a man also learned in the Emperial and Papal laws. The assault of
Roberto upon the country of Pisa, troubled much the Florentines, for being
already occupied in a great war toward Siena, they saw not how to make
provision for Pisa. But to hold the Lucchesi faithful, and that they should
not relieve the enemy with money or victual, sent Ambassador unto them Piero
Capponi: who was (by reason of the ancient hate which that city bears to
the Florentines) received with so great suspicion, as he feared many times to
have been populerly slain. Insomuch as this journey did rather breed occasion
of new displeasure, then new friendship. The Florentines then revoked the
Marquess of Farrara, enterteined the Marquess of Mantoua, and with great
suit, required of the Venetians to have the Earl Carlo, son of Braccio, and
Deifebo, son of the Earl Giacopo. Which request, after many cauillations,
was by the Venetians granted. For they having made truce with the Turk, had
no color to deny them, and were ashamed to break their promise made to the
League. The Earls Carlo and Deifebo, came with a good number of men at arms,
and joining to them all other the men of arms they could spare, from the army
which served under the Marquis of Farrara, against the Duke of Calauria, went
toward Pisa to encounter Roberto: who with his men was near to the river of
Serchio. And albeit he made show to tarry for our me^, yet did he not, but
retired into Lunigiana, to those lodgings from whence he came, when he entered
into the country of Pisa. After his departure, all those towns were recovered
by the Earl Carlo, which the enemies had before taken in the country of Pisa.
The Florentines delivered of the enemy toward Pisa, caused all their forces to
be brought betwixt Colle and S. Gimiano. But by reason of the Earl Carlo his
coming, there were in that camp both the folowers, Sforza and Braccio: which
was the occasion that (moved with old envy) they began to mutiny: and was
feared, that if they had bin long together they would have come to blows. It
was therefore thought fit for eschuing a worse mischief, to divide the soldiers,
and send one part of the^ into the country of Perugia, under the Earl Carlo:
the other to stay at Piggibonzi, there to entrench themselves strong, and
procure that the enemy should not enter the Florentines land. By this actio^
they also hoped to co^strain the enemies to divide their forces: for they
thought either that the Earl Carlo should surprise Perugia, where they supposed
he had many partakers, or that the Pope should be enforced to send great forces
to defend it. They practiced moreover (to bring the pope in more necessity)
that Nicolo Vitelli (being come from the city of Castello, where Lore^zo his
enemy was chief) should with his me^ approach the town, remove his adversary, and
take it from the pope. At the beginning it seemed as though fortune would have
favored the Flore^tine attempts: because Earl Carlo proceeded well in the
country of Perugia. Nicholo Vitelli also, although he entered into Castello, yet
he and his were strongest in the field, and without any resistance, spoiled
about the City at his pleasure. Likewise the forces left at Poggibonzi, went
every day to the walls of Siena. Notwithstanding all these hopes became vain.
First died the Earl Carlo in the chief hope of his victory: whose death had
bettered the estate of the Florentines, if the victory which grew thereof, had
been well used. For so soon as the Earls death was known, sodeinly the Popes
soldiers (who were altogether at Perugia) hoped to overthrow the Florentines:
and coming forth into the field, lodged themselves upon the lage, distant
three miles from the enemy. On the other side, Giacopo Guicciardini (who was
Commissary of that camp) with the counsel of Roberto da Rimino (Chieftain after
the death of the Earl Carlo) knowing the occasion of the enemies pride,
determined to stay for them. So as, joining battle upon that lage (where in
old time Anniball gave that memorable overthrow to the Romans) the Popes
forces were broken. The Popes forces discomfired by the Florentines.
Which victory was in Florence received with commendation of the captains, and
comfort of all others. And the same had proved the honor and profit of the
enterprise, if the disorders which grew in the army at Poggibonzi had not
undone all. And thus the good success of the one camp was utterly marred by
the other. For the soldiers of that army having gotten a booty in the country
of Siena, in the division thereof, the Marquis of Farrara and Mantoua fell in
debate. Insomuch as they came to arms, either iniuring the other by all means
they could. Whereby the Florentines finding they could no more employ them
together, were pleased that the Marquis of Farrara with his men should be
discharged. That army thus weakened and left without a governor, proceeding in
every thing disorderly: the Duke of Calauria (who was with his camp near to
Siena) took courage to approach, and so did. The Florentins seeing themselves
likely to be assailed, neither trusted to their force, nor their number, which
was greater then the enemies, nor in their place where they were, being of
great force: but without respect, eue^ at sight of the enemy, and the dust,
fled; leaving the munitio^, the cariages and artillary. So beastly and cowardly
were those camps, when the charge or retire of one horse, might make the loss,
or winning of an enterprise. This disco^fit filled the kings soldiers with
spoil, and the Florentines with fear. For their city was not only afflicted
with war, but also with pestilence: which was so great, that all the Citizens
to shun death, were retired to their country houses. This overthrow was the
more terrible, because those Citizens who had land in the vales of Pisa and
Delsa, being come thither, (the overthrow performed) with all possible speed
returned to Florence, leading with them not only their children and goods, but
also their laborers. For every hour it was feared, the enemy would present
himself before the city. The officers for the war, seeing this disorder,
commanded those forces which were victorious in the country of Perugia, to
surcease their enterprise against the Perugini, and come to the vale of Delsa,
to encounter the enemy there: who after the victory, did without resistance
spoil the country. And albeit they had so greatly distressed the city of
Perugia, as they might every hour look for victory, yet the Florentines
resolved rather to defend their own, the^ take from others. Thus that army
removed from the place of happy success, was brought to S. Cassiano, a Castle
distant from Florence 8. miles: thinking they could not stay in any other
place, till such time as the broken Camp were supplied. The enemies on the
other side at Perugia being free by the departure of the Florentine soldiers,
become audacious, did daily take great booties in the countries of Arezzo and
Cortona: and the others who had victory under Alfonso Duke of Calauria at
Poggibonzi, got the possession first of Poggibonzi, and then of Vico, and
sacked Certaldo. Having won these towns, and committed these spoils, they
encamped before the castle of Colle, which in those days was accounted a place
of great strength, and the people of that country, being faithful to the
Florentines, were of force sufficient to hold the enemy off, till the army
was assembled. The Florentines then having gathered all their forces at S.
Cassiano, and the enemies furiously besieging Colle, determined to draw near
unto them, to encourage their friends to defend themselves: supposing also
that the enemy would offend with more respect, for having his adversary at hand.
This resolution set down, they removed the Camp from S. Casciano, and brought
it to S. Giminiano, within five miles of Colle: from whence with light horses
and other suddeine means, they daily molested the Dukes Camp. Notwithstanding,
this supply sufficed not those of Colle: for wanting necessary provision, on
the thirteenth day of November they yielded, to the great grief of the
Florentines, and the joy of the enemies: and chiefly of the Sanesi, who besides
their hate to the Florentines, bear also private grudge to the Collegiani. By
this time the winter was great, and the season unfit for war, so that the
Pope and King (either because they would give hope of peace, or that they
desired to enjoy the passed victory quietly) offered to the Florentines truce
for three months, and gave them ten days respite to make answer: which was
presently accepted. But as a wound when the blood therein grows cold,
grieueth the body more, then when it was received, so this small rest, caused
the Florentines to know the travails they had endured: and the Citizens
without respect accused one an other, of the errors committed in the last
war, for the charges in vain spent, and the Impositions unjustly put upon
them. Which matters were not only spoken of among private men, but the same was
also boldly propounded in the Councels. And one of them took courage, turning
his face toward Lorenzo de Medici, said unto him. This City is wearied, and
refuses to have longer war. It behooves therefore that we devise which way
to make peace. Then Lorenzo knowing the necessity, consulted with those
friends whom he knew most faithful and wise, and concluded (first perceiving
the Venetians coldness and inconstancy, the Dukes infancy and trouble of
civil wars) that it was necessary with new friends to seek new fortune.
Yet stood they doubtful whether they were best trust unto the Pope, or the
King. The matter being well examined, they preferred the Kings friendship as
most stable and sure. Because the shortness of the Popes lives, the change of
their succession, the small fear which the Church has of Pinces, and the few
respects which it uses in resolution, are the causes why a seculer Prince
cannot assuredly trust unto a Pope, nor safely pass one fortune with him. For
whosoever is friend unto the Pope in wars and dangers, shall be by him
accompanied in the victory, but in adversities left alone: because the Pope is
by spiritual power and reputation, The Florentines seek the King Ferrando his
favor.
supported and defended. This resolution made, that to gain the Kings
friendship was best: they thought the same by no mean better procured, nor
with more assurance, then by the presence of Lorenzo. For the more liberallitie
were used to him, the more they thought he would forget former displeasures.
Lorenzo determined upon this journey, reaccommended the City and state unto
Tomaso Soderini, then Gonfaloniere di Giustitia, and in the beginning of
December he departed from Florence: and being arrived at Pisa, wrote unto the
Senate the occasion of his departure; and the Senate to honor him, and that he
might with more reputation conclude the peace with the King, made him
Ambassador for the people of Florence, Lorenzo de Medici, Ambassador for the
Florentines.
with full authority to proceed, as by his discretion should be thought good.
In the mean time Roberto da San Seuerino, together with Lodouico and Ascanio
(for their third brother Octaniano Sforza was dead) assaulted again the State
of Milan, desirous to win the government thereof. And having surprised
Tortona, Milan also with the whole country was in arms. Then the Duchess
Bona was counseled to admit the Sforzi into the State, and by that mean
appease the civil discention. The chief of those Counselors, Antonio Tassino.
was Antonio Tassino of Farrara: who being bacely born, came to Milan, and was
by the Duke Gale(...)o and the Duchess received to serve in their chamber. He
either for the beauty of his person, or for some other secret virtue, after the
death of the Duke, aspired to so great favor with the Duchess, as almost
alone he governed the state: which greatly displeased Cecco, being a man both
for learning and long experience excellent. So as he both to the Duchess and
others, labored to decrease the credit of Tassino. Whereof Tassino being aware,
to be revenged, and have aid at hand to defend him from Cecco, persuaded the
Duchess to receive home the Sforzi: which she did without making Cecco privy.
But Cecco after knowing thereof, said unto her; Madame, you have made a
resolution which will take my life from me, and the state from you: As shortly
after came to pass. For Cecco was by the Lodouico put to death: and Tassino,
within a short space (being driven out of the Duchy) the Duchess took thereat
so great offense, that she went from Milan, Lodouico Sforza, Governor of the
Duke of Milan.
and renounced the government of her son unto Lodouico. Thus Lodouico become
only governor of Milan, was (as shall be declared) the occasion of the ruin
of Italy. Lorenzo de Medici was now on his way toward Naples, and the peace
betwixt the enemies in communication: when beyond all expectation Lodouico
Fregoso having practiced with some Serezanaesi, by stealth entered with armed
men into Serezana, taking possession of that Town, and imprisoned those that
governed then for the Florentines. This accident greatly offended the princes
of the Florentine state, who thought the matter was brought to pass by
direction of the king Ferrando. And complained to the Duke of Calauria (who was
at the Camp before Siena) saying they were notwithstanding the truce,
assaulted with new war. He both by Letters, Embassages, and every other
way, declared the same was done without the consent of his father. The
Florentines neuenhelesse thought themselves in hard estate, wanting money; the
chief of their Commonweal in the Kings hand: A new war moved by the
Genouesi, and without friends. For in the Venetians they trusted not: and
feared least the government of Milan was unassured. Their only hope was
upon that which Lorenzo de Medici was to conclude with the King. Lorenzo
arrived at Naples by sea, Lorenzo de Medici, arrived at Naples
was there both by the King and all that City, honorably and with great
expectation received. Because so great a war being made only to oppress
him, his enemies thereby did make him more great. For being come to the Kings
presence, he debated with him the estate of Italy, the humors of princes and
people thereof, and what might be hoped of the peace, and feared by the war.
Which the King hearing, grew into more admiration, to find in him so noble a
mind, so ready a wit, and so great a judgment, then that he could endure so
long a war. In so much as the King doubled the honors before done unto him,
and began to devise rather how he might win him for a friend, then
continue him an enemy. Notwithstanding for diverse causes he enterteined him
from December till March, not only to make the more trial of him, but also
of his City. For Lorenzo wanted not enemies in Florence, who desired that the
King would have holden him, and enterteined Giacopo Piccinino: and under color
of lamenting, they speak their minds. Also in public Councelles, they
opposed their opinions against Lorenzo. By these devises; It was bruted, that
if the King would keep Lorenzo long at Naples, the government in Florence
should be changed. Which was the only cause that the King deferred his
dispatch so long, hoping there might some tumult arise in Florence. But seeing
that all things passed quietly, on the sixth day of March, in the year 1479.
he had leave to depart, and before his departure was by the King so bountifully
presented, and lovingly used, that betwixt Lorenzo and the King their grew a
perpetual amity, and preservation of both their states. Thus Lorenzo returned
to Florence with greater reputation and honor then he went thence, and was with
so great joy of the city received, as his great virtues and new merits
deserved: having put his own life in hazard to recover peace to his country.
For within two days after his arrival, Peace and league between the King and
the Florentines.
the treaty betwixt the common weal of Florence and the King was proclaimed,
whereby they were both both bound to defend one the others country: and that the
towns taken from the Florentines in the war, should be by the King restored.
And that the Pazzi imprisoned in the town of Volterra, should be delivered. And
that money should be for a certain time paid unto the Duke of Calauria. This
peace being published, did much offend the Pope and the Venetians, because the
Pope thought he was little esteemed of the King, and the Venetians as little
regarded of the Florentines: who being their companions in the war, thought
themselves il used, not to be partakers of the peace. This indignation
understood and believed at Florence, did sodeinly breed suspicion in every
man, that of the peace would arise a greater war. Whereupon the Magistrates of
the state, determined to restrain the government, and that the affairs of
most importance should be reduced into the hands of a less number: and so
ordained a Council of 70. Citizens, with authority that they might proceed in
matters of most importance. This new ordinance stayed the minds of those that
desired innovation, and to give thereto countenance, first of all they accepted
the peace, which Lorenzo had made with the King, and sent unto the Pope Antonio
Ridolphi, and Piero Nasi. Nevertheless Alfonso Duke of Calauria, did not remove
his army from Siena, saying he was stayed by the discord of the citizens there,
which was so great, that he being lodged without the city was called in and
made judge of their differents. The Duke taking these occasions, punished many
of those citizens in money, imprisoning and banishing others, and some also were
judged to death. In so much as by this means he became suspected not only to
the Sanesi, but the Florentines also mistrusted he would make himself Prince of
that city. Whereof they knew no remedy, considering the new friendship of
Florence with the King, and the enmity of the Pope and King. Which suspicion,
not only in the people of Florence generally (who mistrustfully consider of all
things) but in the chief governors of the state, appeared: every man imagining,
that our city had never bin in so great danger to lose the liberty thereof. But
God who had ever a particular care thereof, caused an accident to happen
unlooked for, which made the King, the Pope, and the Venetians, to think of
greater matters the^ these of Toscana. The Isle of Rodi assaulted by the Turks.
Mahumetto great Turk, was with a mighty army gone to the Isle of Rodi, and had
many months assaulted it. But notwithstanding his forces were great, and his
resolution to win the town greater, yet was the virtue of those that defended
the same, greatest of all. For Mahumetto notwithstanding his furious assaults,
was forced to depart with shame. Thus the Turk being departed from Rodi, part
of his army co^ducted by Saccometto Bascia, went toward Velona, and by the
way, either for that he saw the enterprise easy, or because the Turk had so
commanded, passed by the coast of Italy, and sodeinly set 4000. men on land,
who assaulted the city of Ottranto, took it, sacked it, The Turks landed in
Italy.
and slew all the inhabitants thereof: which done, by all the best means he
could; fortified both the city, and the haven. The^ sent he for horsemen, and
with them he forraged, and spoiled the country round about. The king seeing
this assault, and knowing how great a prince had taken that enterprise in hand,
sent unto al places to signify the same, and desired aid of the^ al, against
the common enemy. Also speedily revoked the Duke of Calauria with his forces
from Siena. This assault, though it grieved the duke and the rest of Italy, yet
did the same comfort Florence and Siena. One hoping thereby to recover liberty,
the other trusting the rather to shun those perils, which made them to fear the
loss of their liberty. Which opinion was increased by the unwilling
departure, and lamentation of the Duke, at his going from Siena, accusing
fortune, that she by an unlooked for and unreasonable accident, had taken from
him the dominion of Toscana. The selfsame chance did alter the Popes mind: for
where before, he refused to give audience to all Florentines, he was now become
so courteous, as he refused not to hear any that would speak unto him of the
universal peace. Whereupon the Florentines were advertised, that if they would
desire pardon of the Pope, they might obtain it. It was then thought good, not
to omit this occasion: and 12. Ambassadors were sent to the Pope, who being
arrived at Rome, were by his holiness before they had audience, enterteined
with diverse practices. In the end it was between the parties concluded, how
either of them should afterward live, and in what sort either of them both in
peace and war, were to make contribution. After this conclusion, the
Ambassadors were admitted to present themselves at the Popes feet: and he
sitting in the midst of his Cardinals, with exceeding great pomp, The speech of
the Flore^tine Ambassadors to the Pope.
received them. These Ambassadors excused all matters passed, sometimes blaming
necessity, sometimes the evil disposition of others, sometimes the populer
fury, and the just offense thereof, saying they were most unhappy, being
forced either to fight, or die. And because all things are endured to eschew
death, they had suffered war, excommunicatio^s, and all other troubles, which
the matters passed had brought with the^. And all to the end, that their common
weal might avoid bondage, which is the death of all free Cities. Nevertheless
if any error or enforced fault were committed, they were ready to make
satisfaction: ever hoping in his goodness, (who following the examples of the
almighty Redeemer) he would receive them, The Popes answer.
rather for his mercy, then their merits. To which excuses, the Pope answered
with great pride and anger; reproving them of all things done against the
church; notwithstanding for Gods sake, he was pleased to grant them the pardon
they desired: yet therewith affirming they were to obey him, and if they shall
fail of obedience, their liberty which now should have bin lost, shall then
be justly taken from the^. For they deserve liberty, who take in hand good
actions, and not they that in evil enterprises employ themselves. Because
liberty abused, offends it self and others. Also to esteem God little, and
the church less, is not the office of good me^, but of vain persons, inclined
to evil. The correction of who^ apperteineth not only to Princes, but to every
christian: so as they were for matters passed to blame their own evil doings,
which was the first occasion of war, and by their worse doings it was norished.
But all anger was now extinguished, rather by the goodness of others, the^ their
own deserts. After publication of the peace, the Popes blessing was read.
Whereunto his holiness by word of mouth added, that if they would enjoy the
benifit of his benediction, they should during the Turks war in the kingdom,
maintein at their charge 15. galleys well paid. The Ambassadors complained much
of this burden imposed over and above the contract. Yet by no means they could
make, or by any lamentation they used, the Pope would diminish any part of that
penance. But the Ambassadors being returned to Florence, the Senate for
confirmation of this peace, sent Ambassador to the Pope, Guidantonio Vespucci,
who was lately arrived from France. He by his wisdom brought all matters unto
reasonable terms, and obtained many favors of the Pope, which was a token of
greater reconciliatio^. The Florentines having ended their business with the
Pope, and Siena with themselves being delivered from fear of the King by the
departure of the Duke of Calauria, and the Turks war continuing, constrained
the King to restore all the Castles which the Duke of Calauria at his departure
left in the hands of the Sanesi. Whereby that King hoped, that the Florentines
in so great necessity would not shrincke from him, or by moving of war
against the Sanesi, impeach the aid which he hoped of from the Pope and other
Italian Princes. And therefore was content that the Castles should be
restored, and bound the Florentines by a new obligation. So as thereby we see,
that force and necessity, but not writings or obligations, do make Princes to
observe their faith. The Castles thus received, and the new confederacy made,
Lorenzo di Medici recovered that reputation, which the war first and after
the peace (when the King was feared) had taken from him. For there wanted not
those that openly slaundered him, and said, that for saving himself, he had
sold his country, and that by the war they lost their towns, and by the
peace they should lose their liberty. But the towns recovered an honorable
peace made with the King, and the City returned to the ancient reputation.
For in Florence (a City free of speech, and therein matters judged by their
success, and not by counsel) the case was altered, and Lorenzo commended to
the skies, every man saying, that he with his wisdom had found means to
recover that by peace, which evil fortune had taken from them in war: and
that his counsel and judgment, had prevailed more then the enemies arms, or
their money. The assault of the Turks had deferred that war, which by offense
of the Pope and Venetians would have been moved. But as the beginning of that
assault was unlooked for, and occasion of much good, so was the end thereof
unlooked for, and the cause of much evil: for Mahumetto great Turk, beyond
all expectation died, and discord growing betwixt his sons, those Turks that
were in Puglia, being abandoned of their Lord, by composition yielded Ottranto
to the King. This fear removed, which held the Pope and Venetians firm, every
man doubted new tumults. On the one side, the Pope and the Venetians were in
league, and with them the Genouesi, Sanesi, New leagues in Italy.
and other less Potentates. On the other, were the Florentines, the King, and
the Duke, with whom, the Bolognesi, and many other Lords joined. The Venetians
desired to become Lords of Farrara, supposing they had reasonable occasion to
begin that enterprise, and certain hope to perform it. The occasion was,
because the Marquess affirmed, he was no longer bound to receive the Visdomine
and their salt, because the contract was, that after seauentie years, the
City should be disburthened of those charges. The Venetians to the contrary
answered, that so long as he did hold the Polesine, so long he ought to receive
the Visdomine and the salt. But the Marquess not consenting thereto, the
Venetians thought they had just occasion to take arms, and time fit for the
same, seeing the Pope much offended with the Florentines and the King, whose
favor they hoped the rather to have, because the Earl Girolamo being at
Venice, was there received most honorably: and the Venetians bestowed on him
the title of a Gentleman of that state, which is the greatest token of honor,
which they will, or can give. They had also for preparation of the wars,
imposed a new Subsidy, and chosen Roberto de Sanseuerino for their General:
who being offended with Lodouico, Governor of Milan, was fled to Tortona, and
there having made some tumults, went to Genoua; from thence he was called by
the Venetians, and made Chiefetaine of their army. These preparations and new
motions being known to those of the contrary league, was the cause that they
also prepared for the war. The Duke of Milan made Federigo Lord of Vrbino,
his General, and the Florentines Costanzo de Pesaro. Also, to sound the
disposition of the Pope, and to discover whether the Venetians with his consent
did make the war against Farrara, the King Ferrando sent Alfonso Duke of
Calauria, with his army to the river of Tronto, and there desired leave of the
Pope to pass into Lombardy to aid the Marquess, which was by the Pope
utterly denied. Whereupon, the King, and the Florentines, being resolved,
thought to constrain him by force, so as thereby he should either become their
friend, or at the least, they would so trouble him, as he could not be able to
aid the Venetians: for they were in the field, and had already begun the
war with the Marquess, spoiled his countries, and besieged Figarolo, a
Castle of much importance, for the country of that Prince. Thus the King and
the Florentines determined to assail the Pope. Alfonso Duke of Calauria
spoiled the country toward Rome, and with aid of the Colonni, who were on
his side (because the Orsini were joined with the Pope) did great damage to
that country on the other side of Rome. The Florentines on the other side
under Nicholo Vitelli, assaulted the City of Castello, surprised it, and
drove out Lorenzo, who kept that Castle for the Pope, and Nicholo remained a
Prince thereof. By these actions, the Pope was greatly distressed, because
Rome within the City was troubled with factions, and the country without
spoiled by enemies. Notwithstanding, as a man of courage, he would not give
place to the enemy, but enterteined Roberto da Rimino, and calling him to
Rome, where all his men of war were assembled, told him, how great honor he
might win, if he could against the force of a King, deliver the Church from
those troubles wherewith it was occupied: and how great obligation he should
thereby have not only of him, but also of all other Popes his successors, and
that both God and men would reacquite the same. Roberto first viewing the Popes
men of arms, and other his preparations, persuaded him to make all the footmen
he was able, which with all speed and diligence was performed. By this time the
Duke of Calauria was near unto Rome, and spoiled the country even to the
walls of the City, which offended the people so much, as many of them
voluntarily offered themselves to serve with Roberto, and recover the liberty
of Rome: who were all by that Lord thanked and received. The Duke hearing of
these preparations, retired a little from the City, thinking, that if he were
further off, Roberto would not seek him: and he also looked, that Federigo his
brother, should come with fresh men, sent from the King their father. Roberto
seeing himself equal with the Duke for men of arms, and in footmen above
him, marched out of Rome without order, and lodged his Camp within two miles of
the enemy. The Duke seeing his enemies at hand, not looking for them, thought
it stood him upon, either to fight or flee. Wherefore as constrained, and for
not doing a thing unworthy the son of a King, determined to fight, and
turning his face to the enemy, either camp put their men in order, and brought
them to battle, which continued from the morning till noone: and the same was
performed with more virtue, then any had been in Italy fifty years before;
for therein were slain on both sides more then a thousand men, The Duke of
Calauria discomfited by the Pope.
and the end was glorious to the Church. For the great multitude of the Popes
footmen, so much offended the Dukes horsemen, as they were forced to turn
their backs: and the Dukes person had been taken prisoner, had he not been
saved by many Turks, who were left at Ottranto, and served under him. Roberto
having this victory, returned to Rome with triumph: which he enjoyed not long,
for that by drinking of much water at the day of battle, he fell into a flixe,
which within few days brought him to death. His body was by the Pope, with
great honor buried. The Pope having this victory, sent the Earl presently
toward the City of Castello, to see that town restored unto Lorenzo; and
besides to prove, how the City of Rimino was inclined. For after the death
of Roberto, (who had only one young son, and the City left to the
government of his mother) the Pope imagined it was easy for him to surprise
it. And in deed it would have so come to pass, had not that woman been by the
Florentines defended, who took her part with such forces, as the enemy could
not work his will, either against Castello, or Rimino. While these matters
were a doing in Romagna and Rome, the Venetians had surprised Figarolo, and
with their men had passed the River of Po, and in the Duke of Milan his camp,
and the Marquess also, there was disorder, because Federigo, Earl of Vrbino,
being sick, caused himself to be carried to take physic at Bologna, and there
died: whereby the affairs of the Marquess proceeded slowly, and the
Venetians hoped daily more and more to surprise Farrara. On the other side,
the King and the Florentines labored to make the Pope of their side, which not
brought to pass by arms, they threatened by a General Council to make him
yield, which Council, was by the Emperors commandment, appointed at
Baselia: whereupon, by persuasion of the Emperors Ambassador at Rome, and the
chief Cardinals, who desired peace, the Pope was persuaded and constrained to
allow of peace, and the uniting of Italy. Then the Pope for fear, and also for
that he found the greatness of the Venetians to be the ruin of the Church and
all Italy, resolved to come into the league, and sent his Nuncii to Naples, New
leagues in Italy.
where a league was concluded for five years, betwixt the Pope, the King, the
Duke of Milan, and the Florentines, reserving a place for the Venetians, if
they were pleased to enter. This done, the Pope commanded the Venetians to
surcease the war of Farrara, which they not only refused to do, but also
made the preparation greater: and having already broken the Dukes and
Marquess forces at Argenta, they at Farrara were so near distressed, as the
Dukes forces were lodged in the Marquess Park. Then the League thought good no
longer to defer the aiding of that Prince, and caused the Duke of Calauria
with his and the Popes men to go to Farrara. The Florentines likewise sent all
their forces thither, and for the better ordering of the war, the League
appointed a Council to be holden at Cremona, where the Popes Legate, the Earl
Girolamo, the Duke of Calauria, the Lord Lodouico, Lorenzo de Medici, with many
other Princes of Italy met. In this Council, the Princes devised the order of
the future war. And because they judged that Farrara could not be better
relieved any way, then by some brave assault, they ordered that Lodouico should
begin a war upon the Venetians, for the countries belonging to the Duke of
Milan. But thereunto that Lord would not consent, fearing to begin a war
which he could not end at his pleasure. Wherefore it was determined they should
go with all their footmen to Farrara, and with four thousand men of arms, and
eight thousand footmen, assault the Venetians, who had two thousand and two
hundred men of arms, and six thousand footmen. And the League thought good
first to assail the navy which the Venetians had lying upon the river of Po,
and the same being assaulted, was broken at Bondeno, with the loss of two
hundred vessels, and Antonio Iustiniano, the Proueditor of the navy was taken.
Then the Venetians, seeing all Italy united against them, to win some
reputation, enterteined the Duke of the Rhene with two thousand men of arms.
But having received this overthrow of their navy, they sent this Duke with
part of their army to frunt the enemy, and commanded Roberto de Sanseuerino,
with the rest of their camp, to pass the river of Adda, and approaching to
Milan, to proclaim the name of the Duke, and of the Lady Bona his mother: for
by that means, they hoped to make some Innovation in the City, supposing
that the Lord Lodouico and his government was hated. This assault at the
beginning brought therewith some terror, and moved all the City to take
arms: but in the end, it wrought an effect contrary to the Venetians
expectation. Because Lodouico in respect of this injury, was content to allow
of that which before he would not. And therefore, leaving the Marquess of
Farrara to the defense of his own country, he with four thousand horse, and
two thousand footmen, and the Duke of Calauria with twelve thousand horse, and
five thousand footmen, entered the country of Pergamo, Brescia, and Verona,
spoiling almost all the country belonging to those three Cities, before the
Venetians knew thereof, for the Lord Roberto with his soldiers, could scarcely
defend that City. On the other side, the Marquess of Farrara had recovered a
great part of his possessions, by mean whereof, the Duke of the Rhene who came
against him, was not able to make head, having only two thousand horse, and
one thousand footmen. Thus all that summer, in the year 1483. the League
proceeded in their wars most prosperously. The next Spring being come (for
in all the winter was nothing done) the armies were again brought to the
field, and the League, (to the end it might the more speedily oppress the
Venetians) had joined all the whole army together: but if they had proceeded as
they did the year before, they should assuredly have taken from the Venetians,
all the lands in Lombardy to them belonging: for they had not left unto them,
more then six thousand horse, and five thousand footmen. And on the other
side, were twelve thousand horse, and six thousand footmen. Also the Duke of
the Rhene having ended the year of his enterteinement, was returned home.
Notwithstanding (as it often happens) where diverse Governors be of equal
authority, there grows division, and the enemy wins victory, so
Federigo Gonzaga, Marquess of Mantoua, being dead (who with his authority
continued the Duke of Calauria, and the Lord Lodouico united) betwixt them grew
diversity of opinions, and jealousy. For Giouangaliazzo Duke of Milan being
atteined to age, and ability to govern his own state, and having also
married the daughter of the Duke of Calauria, the Duke desired, that his son
in law, and not Lodouico, might govern the state. This suspicion of Lodouico
being known to the Venetians, was made by them an occasion, supposing they
might as they had ever done, recover by peace, that which they had lost by
war: and secretly they practiced a pacification betwixt them and Lodouico,
which was concluded in August, the year 1484. That being known to the other
confederates, displeased them much, chiefly when they knew, that all the
towns taken from the Venetians should be restored, and they still to enjoy
also Rouigo, and Policene, which towns they had taken from the Marquess of
Farrara. And moreover, that they should have again all those prerogatives
which in times passed they had. Every man then thought, they had made a war
with great charge, and as therein they had gained small honor, so in the end it
was compounded with shame: because the towns taken, were restored, and the
towns lost, were not recovered. Yet were the confederates forced to accept the
peace, being weary of charges, and fearing the ambition and defects of others,
would make no more trial of their fortune. While in Lombardy matters were in
this manner handled, Castello besieged by the Pope.
the Pope by mean of Lorenzo besieged the City of Castello, to drive from
thence Nicholo Vitelli, (who, to draw the Pope into the league) had forsaken
him. In this siege, those that within the town were partarkers with Nicholo,
came forth to fight with the enemies, and did vanquish them; whereupon, the
Pope revoked the Earl Girolamo from Lombardy, to repair his force at Rome:
that done, to return to his enterprise. But afterward, thinking it better to
gain the good will of Nicholo by peace, then to assail him with a new war,
grew to agreement with him, and by all means reconciled him to Lorenzo his
adversary: whereupon, he was allured rather by suspicion of new tumults, then
by the love he bare his country. For betwixt the Colonnesi and Orsini, there
appeared much displeasure: because the King of Naples in the war betwixt him
and the Pope, had taken from Orsini the Earldom of Tagliacozzo, and given it
to the Colonnesi his followers. Afterward, the peace being made betwixt the
King and the Pope, the Orsini by virtue thereof demanded restitution. The Pope
often signified to the Colonnesi, that they ought to make restitution, but
they, neither at the entreaty of the Orsini, nor for the threatening of the
Pope, would agree thereunto, but still with injuries, and spoiling of the
Orsini, did displeasure them, which the Pope could not endure: and therefore
assembled all his forces, and joining with them the Orsini, sacked all the
houses of the Colonni in Rome, slaying and taking all those that made
resistance, The Co^onn^^i opp^essed by the Pope.
and razing the most part of all their Castles: so that those tumults were
ended not by peace, but by oppressing one of the parties. Also Genoua and
Toscana were somewhat disquieted, for the Florentines did keep the Earl
Antonio de Marciano with his soldiers, upon the confines of Serezana, who
during the war of Lombardy, with foraging, and small skirmishes, molested the
Serezanesi. And in Genoua, Battistino Fregoso Duke of that City, trusting
unto Pagolo Frigoso Archbishop, was by him taken, with his wife and children,
and the Archbishop made Duke. Likewise, the Venetian navy had assaulted the
Kingdom, surprised Galipoli, and molested other places thereabouts. But the
peace of Lombardy concluded, all tumults did cease, save only in Toscana and
Rome: for the Pope within five days after the peace was proclaimed, died:
either because the end of his life was come, or for sorrow that a peace was
made to his disadvantage. This Pope at his death left Italy in peace, though
during his life he had always therein made war: and the Romans presently
after his departure took arms. The Earl Girolamo with his soldiers retired
under the Castle, and the Orsini did fear, least the Colonnesi would be
revenged of the fresh injuries done them. Then the Colonnesi demanded again
their houses and Castles. Upon these occasions, within few days there followed
many murders, robberies, and burnings in diverse parts of the City. But the
Cardinals having persuaded the Earl to yield that Castle unto the College, and
return home to his own land, and also remove his soldiers out of Rome, he
being desirous to gratify the next Pope, gave up the Castle to the College,
and went himself unto Imola. Whereupon the Cardinals delivered of this fear,
and the Barons out of hope to be aided by the Earl in their quarrels, went to
the creation of a new Pope. After some disputation, and diversity of opinions,
Giouanbattista Cibo, borne in Genoua, and Cardinal of Malfetta, was chosen
Pope, by the name of Innocentio octauo. He through the courtesy of his nature
(being a quiet and peaceable man) procured all arms to be laid down, and for
the present, pacified Rome. The Florentines after the peace, could not content
themselves with rest, being persuaded it was shame, and dishonor, that a
private Gentleman had taken from them the Castle of Serezana. And because the
capitulations were, that it was lawful to demand all things taken, and if
they were not restored, to make war against the withholder, they resolved
speedily to prepare money and men to perform that enterprise. Then Agostino
Fregoso, who had surprised Serezana, being persuaded that at his private charge
he could not maintain so great a war, gave that town to S. George. And
since we are to make mention diverse times of S. George, and the Genouesi,
The first erection of S. George in Genoua.
it seems not amiss to declare the orders and customs of that City, being
one of the principal states of Italy. The peace made betwixt the Genouesi and
Venetians (after the greatest war, that was seen in many years past) the
State not being able to pay those Citizens who had lent great sums of money,
appointed their revenues of the Dogana, to be paid unto them, till such time as
the principal debts were discharged. And for their meeting togithers, they
appointed the Palace over the Dogana. These creditors among themselves
ordained a form of government, appointing a Council of a hundred, and a
Senate of eight Citizens, which officers as heads of the City, might dispatch
all affairs. The debts were divided into parts, which they called Luoghi, and
entitled the whole corporation of S. Georgeo. This government thus
established, ever happened new necessities, whereupon they resorted to S. George
for new aid: who being rich and well ordered, could easily serve their
turns. And the communaltie on the other side, having granted the Dogana,
began for pawn of the moneys, to give their lands: yea, the matter went so
far (by reason of the common necessities and services of S. George) that
under government thereof, the greater part of the Towns, Cities, and Lands of
Genoua, do now belong to S. George, who does govern and defend them. Also
every year by public suffrage, officers be appointed without any
intermedling of the Communaltie. Hereof it proceeds, that those Citizens have
no regard of the common profit, as a thing tirannized, and set their whole care
upon S. George, as well and equally governed: whereof do arise the easy and
often alterations of the State, and that the people do otherwhiles yield their
obedience to some of their own Citizens, and sometimes to a Stranger: for not
S. George, but the Communaltie does alter in government: which was the cause
that when the Adorni and Fregosi contending for the principallitie did fight,
the communaltie only, and the greater part of the citizens stood neutrall, and
yielded to the victorious. Neither does the office of S. George other, then
whenever any man has taken the government, it swears him to observe the
laws thereof, which to this day are not changed. For S. George having in
possession the arms, the money, and the government, cannot without the danger
of a certain rebellion, be altered. A rare order surely, and not found by the
Philosophers among their imagined or visible Co^mon-weales, to see within one
circle, and among one number of Citizens, liberty, and tirannie, civil life,
and corruption, justice and licentiousnes: which order only mainteineth that
town full of ancient and venerable customs. And if it should happen (which
in time will assuredly come to pass) that S. George shall be owner of all the
City, that State will be more notable, then the Venetian Commonweal. To this
S. George, Agostino Fregoso gave Serezana, who received it willingly, and
taking in hand the defense thereof, presently prepared a navy by sea, and sent
certain forces to Pietrasanta, to impeach all those that resorted to the
Florentine Camp, then near unto Serezana. On the other side, the Florentines
desired to take Pietrasanta, as a town needful to be had for the winning of
Serezana: for being betwixt it and Pisa, they could not besiege it so long as
by the Pietrasantesi, or others therein, they were impeached in the siege of
Serezana. To bring this enterprise to pass, they sent from Pisa to the Camp, a
great quantity of munition and victual, slenderly guarded: to the end that
they of Pietrasanta should fear the less, and in hope of a good booty, to
assault them. The matter was then followed according to expectation: For the
soldiers in Pietrasanta, War between the Genou^si and the F^orentines.
seeing before their eyes so great a booty, took it, which gave the
Florentines just occasion to execute the enterprise: wherefore leaving
Serezana, they besieged Pietrasanta, which was well manned, and bravely
defended. The Florentines having their artillery in the plain, made a
bulwark upon the mountain, hoping from thence to batter it. Giacopo
Guicciardino was Commissarie of the Florentine forces. And while they besieged
Pietrasanta, the navy of Genoua took and burnt the fortress of Vada: and
setting some of their soldiers a land, spoiled the country thereabout.
Against whom, Buongianni Gianfiliazzi, was sent with certain footmen, who
partly stayed their pride, so as they durst no longer spoil at their
pleasures. Yet the navy continuing to molest the Florentines, went unto
Liuorno, and with certain instruments, approached Torre Nuoua, battering it
diverse days with artillery, but seeing nothing done to their advantage,
returned back with shame. In the mean space, Pietrasanta was coldly assaulted:
whereupon, the enemies took heart, assaulted the Bulwark, and took it: which
was so greatly to their reputation, and the Florentines fear, as they were
ready to break up the Camp. In so much as they retired four miles from the
town, and the officers of the Camp thought good, that the month of October
being come, it was time to lodge the army, and defer that siege till the next
Spring. This disorder being known in Florence, made the Magistrates much
offended, and therefore to repair the Camp in force and reputation, made
choice of new Commissaries, Antonio Pucci, and Bernardo del Nero, who with
great sums of money went unto the Camp, and declared to the Captains the
indignation of the Senate and the people, and how great a shame it should be,
unless the army did again return to the siege: for it were an infamy, so
great a Camp, to be repulsed by so small a guard, and so weak a town. They
also showed the present and future commodity that would ensue of that
victory. Which persuasion, moved the soldiers to return to the walls, and
first of all to recover the Bulwark. For the performance whereof, they knowing
how much courtesy, affability, and good usage might do to encourage the minds
of men, Antonio Pucci, by comforting, promising, and embracing the soldiers,
procured the Bulwark to be assaulted so furiously, as even in a sodeine it was
taken, Pietrasanta taken.
yet not without loss: for in that assault, the Earl Antonio de Marciano with
a piece of artillery, was slain. This victory terrified those of the town
so much, as they began to offer composition: whereupon, to the end the
conclusion might be made with the more reputation, Lorenzo di Medici thought
good to come to the Camp, and within a few days after his arrival, the Castle
was yielded. The winter now come, the Captains liked not to proceed further in
the war, but attend the Spring: and the rather, because the Autumn past, by
means of evil aires, sickness was brought into the Camp, wherewith many of the
Captains and leaders were diseased. Among whom, Antonio Pucci, and Bongianni
Gianfigliazzi, were not only sick, but also dead, to the great grief of all
the army: so great was the honor and love that Pucci had won in the exploite
of Pietrasanta. After the taking of Pietrasanta, the Lucchesi sent Ambassadors
to Florence, to demand that town, as a thing belonging to their commonweal.
For they alleged, that among other things it was contracted betwixt them, that
the town first won by any of them, should be restored to the ancient owner.
The Florentines directly denied not that covenant, but answered, that they
doubted whether in the peace made betwixt them and the Genouesi, it was meant
the town to be delivered, and therefore they could not till then determine:
and if it were restored, then the Lucchesi ought of necessity to pay the
charge, and make satisfaction, for the loss of so many great Citizens: which
if they would do, they might hope to have it again. All that winter was spent,
in the communication of this peace betwixt the Genouesi, and the Florentines.
And by reason the Pope was a doer therein, the matter was handled at Rome: but
not being concluded, the Florentines would the next Spring have assaulted
Serezana, had they not been by the sickness of Lorenzo di Medici, and the
war which grew betwixt the Pope, and the King Ferrando, impeached. For
Lorenzo was not only diseased of the gowt, which infirmity, seemed to descend
from his father, but was also so grieuouslie tormented with grief of the
stomach, that he went unto the Bathes to be cured: but the war was the chief
occasion of his sickness, and the original thereof. The City of Aquila was
subject to the King of Naples, yet the people therein lived as free. In this
City, the Earl Montorio had great reputation. Aquila rebelled from the K. of
Naples.
The Duke of Calauria with his men of arms being near unto Tronto, pretending
to pacify certain tumults among the people of that country, and intending to
reduce Aquila wholly under the Kings obedience, sent for the Earl Montorio, as
though he would employ him in those matters he made show of. The Earl without
suspicion came, and was presently by the Duke sent to Naples prisoner. These
news being advertised to Aquila, altered the mind of the City, and the
people populerly took arms, and slew Antonio Concinello, Commissarie for the
King, and with him certain other Citizens, who were known affectionate to the
King. Also, to the end the Aquilani, might have some friend to defend them in
their rebellion, they displaied the Ensign of the Church, and sent Ambassadors
to give the City to the Pope: desiring him, as his own subjects, to defend
them from the tyranny of the King. The Pope defends the rebels of Aquila.
The Pope manfully took in hand their defense, as one that both for private
and public occasion hated the King. And Roberto da Sanseuerino, enemy to the
State of Milan, happening to be out of pay, the Pope enterteined him for
General, and caused him with great expedition to come unto Rome: and besides
that, solicited all the friends and kinsmen of the Earl Montorio, to become
Rebels to the King; in so much as the Princes of Altemura, Salerno, and
Bisignano, took arms against him. The King seeing himself by so sodeine a
war assaulted, prayed aid of the Florentines, and the Duke of Milan. The
Florentines stood doubtful what to do, because it seemed hard to leave their
own enterprise for others: and to take arms against the Church, was perilous.
Notwithstanding, being in league, they preferred fidelity, before commodity
or peril, and enterteined the Orsini, and sent all their own men toward Rome
to the aid of the King, under conduct of the Earl of Pitigliano. Then the
King made two camps, and sent the one toward Rome, under the Duke of Calauria,
who with the Florentines should encounter the Popes army. The other camp
himself did lead, and marched toward the Barons that rebelled. This war
with variable fortune was managed, and at the end, the King in all places
having advantage, Peace between the K. of Naples, and the Pope. 1486.
by mediation of the Ambassadors of Spain, a peace was concluded in the month
of August 1486. whereunto the Pope (being beaten with evil fortune, and loath
to adventure more) consented. Also, all the Potentates of Italy were included
(only the Genouesi, as rebels to the State of Milan, and usurpers of the
Florentines lands) were left out. Roberto da Sanseuerino, the peace made,
having been in this war no faithful friend to the Pope, and nothing terrible
to the enemy, departed from Rome, as driven out by the Pope: and being followed
by the Dukes and Florentines soldiers, so soon as he had passed Cesena,
seeing himself not followed, fled away, and with less then one hundred horse,
came to Rauenna. Of the rest of his men, some were received by the Duke, and
some by the country people, were cut in pieces. The King having made peace,
and reconciled his Barons, put to death Giouanni Coppola, and Antonello de
Anuersa, with his sons, and those which had in the war revealed his secrets
unto the Pope. By means of this war, the Pope knew what readiness and care
the Florentines had to keep friendship: and therefore, albeit that for the
love of the Genouesi, and the aiding of the King, he before hated them, yet now
he began to love them, and show more favor unto their Ambassadors then he was
wont. Which disposition known to Lorenzo de Medici, was by all honorable
means increased: for he thought it much for his reputation, if to the favor
which the King bare him, he might also join the Popes friendship. This Pope
had one son called Francesco, and being desirous to honor him with lands and
friends, wherewith he might after his death, maintain himself, he knew not
any in Italy with whom he could more safely be matched, then with Lorenzo:
Lorenzo di Medici his daughter, married unto the Popes son.
and therefore so handled the matter, that Lorenzo married a daughter of his
unto Francesco. This marriage being made, the Pope desired that the Genouesi
might by composition deliver Serezana to the Florentines: persuading them, that
they should not hold that which Agostino had sold, nor Agostino could give unto
S. George that, which was not his. Notwithstanding, this persuasion took no
effect. But the Genouesi while these matters were practicing at Rome, armed
certain of their Ships, and before the Florentines knew any thing thereof, set
three thousand footmen a land, and assaulted the Castle of Serezanello, near
unto Serezana, The Genouesi assaulted by the Florentines.
belonging to the Florentines, spoiling and burning the Town: which done, they
planted their Artillarie against the Castle, and with all diligence battered
the same. This new assault was unlooked for of the Florentines, nevertheless
presently they assaulted their forces at Pisa, under Virginio Orsino. They also
complained unto the Pope, that whilst he practiced the peace, the Genouesi had
begun this war. They sent likewise Piero Corcini to Lucca, to continue the
amity with that City: and Pagolantonio Soderini, was sent unto Venice, to
feel the disposition of that state. They prayed aid also of the King, and of
the Lord Lodouico Sforza: but failed thereof at both their hands. For the King
said he feared the Turks Navy, and Lodouico under other cauillations
deferred to send any. Thus the Florentines (being for the most part left alone
in their wars) did not find any so ready to help them, as they were
ready to aid others. Neither were they dismayed being now abandoned by their
confederates (which was no new thing) but assembling a great army under
Giacopo Guicciardini, and Piero Vittori, sent them against the enemy, who
lodged one night upon the River Magra. In the mean time, Serezanello was
straightly distressed by the enemy, who by undermining and every other
means, besieged it. In so much as our Commissaries marched toward the
relief thereof. Yet the enemy refused not to fight, but joining battle with
the Commissaries, the Genouesi were overthrown: and Lodouico Fiesco, with many
other Captains of the enemies were taken prisoners. This victory discouraged
not so much the Serezanesi, The Genouesi discomfited.
that they would therefore yield, but with more obstinacy they prepared for
defense: and the Florentine Commissaries still continued to offend them. In so
much as that town was both manfully assaulted, and stoutly defended. This
siege continuing long, caused Lorenzo di Medici to go himself into the field.
He being come thither, greatly encouraged our soldiers, and discouraged the
Serezanesi. For they seeing the resolution of the Florentines to distress
them, and the coldness of the Genouesi to relieve them, freely, and without
conditions, yielded themselves to the Florentines hands. And were all received
to mercy, excepting a few who had bin the authors of the rebellion. Lodouico
during this siege, had sent his men of arms to Pontremoli, seeming to have
aided us. But having intelligence with some in Genoua, that faction took arms
against those that governed, and with the aid of these forces, delivered that
City to the Duke of Milan. At that time the Almanes had moved a war against
the Venetians, and Boccolino de Osimo in La Marca, caused the town of Osimo to
rebel against the Pope, and made himself Prince thereof. He, after many
accidents, at the persuasion of Lorenzo di Medici, was contented to deliver
that City again unto the Pope, and went himself to Florence, where under the
protection of Lorenzo, he lived long in great honor. After he went from thence
to Milan, where not finding the like fidelity, was by Lodouico put to death.
The Venetians broken, and their General slain.
The Venetians assaulted by the Almanes, were near unto the City of Trento
broken, and Roberto da Sanseuerino their General, slain. After which loss,
the Venetians (according to the order of their fortune) made peace with the
Almanes, not as victored, but as victorious) so honorable was the conclusion
for their state. Tumults in Romagna.
In those days also there happened in Romagna, tumults of great importance.
Francesco de Orso of Furli, was a man of great authority in that City. He
being suspected to the Earl Girolamo, was many times by the Earl threatened.
Whereupon Francesco living in great fear, was persuaded by his friends and
kinsmen, to prevent the mischief. And since he feared to be slain by the Earl,
was advised to sley him first: and so by the death of an other, escape his own
danger. This resolution made, he appointed the time for performing the
enterprise, the Market day at Furli: for many of his country friends coming
then thither, he thought to have their aid without sending for them. This
conspiracy happened in the month of May, in which time (and all the summer) the
Italians do use to sup by daylight. The conspirators thought the fittest
instant to commit this murder, should be immediately after supper, when all his
family were at meat, and he left almost alone in his chamber. Thus
determined, and that hour appointed, Francesco went unto the Earls house, and
leaving his companions in the Hall, himself went up to the Chamber, where the
Earl was, and said to one of his men, The Earl Girolamo murdered.
that he desired to speak with the Earl. Francesco being called in,
enterteined the Earl awhile with some feined speech, and so sodeinly slew him.
Then he called unto him his companions, and slew also the Earls man. By chance
the Captain of the town also came in the mean time to speak with the Earl,
and being arrived in the Hall, followed with a few, was likewise slain by
those that came to murder the Earl. These murders executed, the Earls body
was cast out of the window: and the murderers proclayming the Church and
liberty, caused all the people to arm, who hated greatly the couetise and
cruelty of the Earl. The conspirators having sacked the Earls houses, took
the Countess Caterina his wife, with all her children. Then remained only the
Castle (which being surprised) should happily finish the enterprise. But
thereunto the Captain would not consent: Nevertheless, this Countess
promised to deliver it, if she were let loose to go into the Castle, and for
hostages of her promise, she left with the enemies her children. The
conspirators believed her words, and gave her leave to depart. But so soon as
she was within the Castle, she looked over the walls, and threatened the enemies
to be revenged of her husbands death. Then they threatening to sley all her
children, answered, that she had mean to beget others. The conspirators
dismayed, seeing they were not aided by the Pope, and hearing that the Lord
Lodouico, Uncle to the Countess, did send men in her aid, taking up all the
goods they could carry away, went unto the City of Castello, whereby the
Countess recovered her state, and revenged her husbands death by all manner of
cruelties. The Earls wife revenged.
The Florentines understanding the Earls death, took occasion to repossesse
the fortress of Piancaldoli, which the Earl had before taken from them: for
sending thither their forces, they surprised it, and slew therein Ciecco, the
famous Architetture. To this tumult of Romagna, followed one other of no less
moment. Galeotto Lord of Faenza, took to wife the daughter of Giouan
Bentiuogli, Prince of Bologna. She either for jealousy, or because her husband
used her not well, either else through her own evil nature, hated him so much,
as she determined to take from him his principallitie and life. Then
dissembling a sickness, laid her self in bed, and when Galeotto should come
to visit her, she determined he should be by certain men hidden in the
Chamber, slain. Of this intent, she had made her father privy, who hoped by
the death of his son in law, to become Lord of Faenza. The time destined for
this murder being come, Galeotto repaired to his wives Chamber, as he was
wont, and having a little talked with her, the murderers came forth, and
without any mercy, Galeotto, Lord of Faenza murdered.
there presently slew him. So soon as the murder was known, great tumults
arose. His wife, with one little son, called Astore, fled to the Castle. The
people took arms, and Giouan Bentiuogli, together with a Captain of Milan,
called Bergamino, prepared for the purpose, with many armed men entered into
Faenza, where was also Antonio Bascoli, a Florentine Commissarie. All these
leaders assembled, and reasoning of the government of that town. The men of
the Vale of Lamona (who were come populerly to the rumor) assaulted Giouanni,
and Bergamino, sleying the one, and taking the other prisoner. Then they
proclaimed the name of Astore, and the Florentines, reacommending the City to
the Florentine Commisaries. This chance known at Florence, grieved every man
much: notwithstanding they caused Giouanni and his daughter to be set at
liberty, and the tuition of Astore, by consent of the people was given unto
them. Besides these diverse other tumults happened in Romagna, la Marca, and
Siena: after the wars were compounded betwixt the greater Princes; which
being of less importance, I judge superfluous to report. True it is, that the
troubles of Siena (after the departure of the Duke of Calauria in the year
88.) were more in number: and after many alterations, sometimes the people
governed, and sometimes the nobility, but in the end, the nobility was
victorious. Among whom, Pandolfo and Giacopo Petruccio, were of most
authority. The one for his wisdom, the other for courage, became as Lords of
that City. But the Florentines after the war of Serezana, till the year
1492. (at which time Lorenzo de Medici died) did live in great felicity.
Lorenzo de Medici.
For Lorenzo having by his wisdom appeased the arms of Italy, endeavored to
make himself and his City great; and married his eldest son Piero to
Alfonsina, the daughter of Cauallier Orsino: and Giouanni his second son, was
advanced to the dignity of Cardinal. Which honor was the more notable,
because at the time of his calling to that honor, he passed not the age of
fourteen years: which was the way to make his house (as after it came to
pass) to be exalted to the skies. For Giuliano his third son, by reason of
his young age, and the small time Lorenzo lived, he could not provide any
extraordinary fortune. Of his daughters he married one to Giacopo Saluiati, an
other to Francesco Cibo; the third, to Piero Ridolfi: the fourth (whom he
bestowed to hold his house united) was wedded to Giouan di Medici, but she
died. In his other private affairs, and chiefly in merchandise he was very
unfortunate. Lorenzo in merchandise infortunato.
For by the disorder of his ministers (who lived liker Princes, then private
men) a great part of his substance in sundry places was consumed: enforced
thereby to borrow great sums of his country. Afterward, not to run in
danger of like fortune, leaving merchandise, he employed himself in the
purchase of lands: as riches of more assurance. In the countries of Pisa,
Prato, and in the vale of Pesa, he compassed possessions both for profit and
magnificence of houses, more fit for a King then a private person. After that
time, he enlarged and bewtified his own City, to the end he might live
therein with the more quiet, and security. And therefore in many void places
he built new houses and streets: whereby the City became more bewtifull and
large. Also to the end he might rest the more assured at home, and encounter
his enemies far of: toward Bologna in the midsts of the Alps, he fortified
the Castle of Firenzuola. Lore^zo magnificent.
Toward Siena, he began to reedifie Poggio Imperiale, and make it exceeding
strong. Toward Genoua by winning of Pietrasanta and Serezana, he shut that
passage up against the enemies. Moreover, by giving pentions, and provisions,
he made friends, the Baglioni in Perugia, the Vitelli in the City of Castello,
and in Faenza, he had particular government. All which things were as Bulwarks
to defend Florence. In times of peace, he feasted the City, making many times
triumphs, Iusts, and public shows. For his intent was to keep the City
plentiful, the people united, and the nobility in honor. He greatly esteemed
men that excelled in any Art. He also favored learned men, as Agnolo da
Montepulciano, Christofero Landini, and Demetrio Greco, Lorenzo a lover of
learning.
can bear witness. Insomuch as the Earl Giouanni de Mirandola (a man
accounted almost divine) forsaking all other parts of Europe, which he had
traueiled, moved by the magnificence of Lorenzo, settled his habitation in
Florence. He maruellously delighted in Music, Architecture and Poetry, as many
of his own verses, and Commentaries yet extant do testify. Also to the end
that the Florentine youth might be exercised in learning, he erected an
University in Pisa, whither he brought the most excellent men of all Italy. He
likewise builded a Monastery near unto Florence, chiefly for Friar Mariano da
Chinazano, of the order of S. Austen, being accounted an excellent Preacher.
Lorenzo universally loved.
He was greatly loved both of God and fortune. All his enterprises had good
success, and his enemies misaduenture: for besides the Pazzi, Battista
Frescobaldi, and Baldinotto practiced to sley him: but either of them with
others guilty of the treason, were rewarded with the pains of their merit.
This his manner of life, this his wisdom and fortune, caused the Princes not
only of Italy, but others further of to know him: and with admiration to
esteem him. Mathia King of Hungary made many testimonies of the love he bare
him. The Sultan by his Ambassadors and presents, did visit him. The great Turk
delivered to his hand Barnardo Bandini, that murdered his brother. Lorenzo
honored of princes.
Which things made him highly honored in Italy. And that reputation was daily
by his own wisdom increased. For in discourse, he was eloquent, in council
wise, in execution quick and courageous: neither was there in him any vices to
blemish those virtues, although he were greatly delighted with love of women,
and took pleasure in jesting and taunting: and would also play at childrens
games, unseemly in so great a personage. For so much he pleasured in children,
that he was often seen to play with his sons, and little daughters. But
whosoever would consider his lightness with his gravity, should think there
were in him two persons of diverse composition, (as it were) by impossible
conjunction coupled. In the last end of his life, he lived full of sorrow,
caused by extreme sickness: for he was troubled with intolerable pains of the
stomach, The death of Lorenzo di Medici.
and died in April the year 1492. and the three and forty year of his age:
neither was there any man that died either in Florence, or elsewhere in Italy,
so famous for his wisdom, or so much lamented of his country. In so much as
the heavens made evident signs of great misaduentures that should follow.
Amongst others, the Temple of Santa Reparata, was with so much fury stricken by
thunder, that the greater part of the steeple was thrown down, to the
admiration and terror of all men. All the inhabitants of Florence, and all the
Princes of Italy lamented his death, and made manifest show thereof. For there
was not any of them, that sent not Ambassadors to condole the death of Lorenzo.
And for trial that they had just cause to lament, the effect following
proved. For Italy being deprived of his counsel, had not any man left
therein, whose wisdom could prevent or bridle the ambition of Lodouico
Sforza, Governor of the young Duke of Milan. Wherefore, Lorenzo being dead,
those evil seeds began to grow, which shortly after (wanting such a one to
root them out) did ruin, and yet does ruin all Italy.

FINIS.
LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, for William Ponsonby. 1595.


