The Art of war, written first in Italia^ by Nicholas Machiauell, and set
forth in English by Peter Whitehorne, studient at Graies Inn: with an
addicio^ of other like Marcialle feats and experimentes, as in a Table in the
end of the Book may appear.

Anno. M.D.LX. Menss. Iulij.

title page engraving

To the most high, and excellent Princes, Elizabeth, by the grace of God,
Queen of England, France, and Irelande, defender of the faith, and of the
Church of England, and Irelande, on earth next under God, the supreme
Governor.
ALthough commonly every man, most worthy and renoumed Sovereign, seeks
specially to commend and extolle the thing, where unto he feleth himself
naturally bent and inclined, yet al soche parciallitie and private affection
laid aside, it is to be thought (that for the defense, maintenance, and
aduauncemente of a Kingdom, or Common weal, or for the good and due
obseruacion of peace, and administracio^ of Justice in the same) no one thing
to be more profitable, necessary, or more honorable, then the knowledge of
service in war, and deeds of arms: because considering the ambicion of the
world, it is impossible for any realm or dominion, long to continue free in
quietness and sauegarde, where the defense of the sweard is not always in a
readiness. For like as the Greeks, being occupied about triflyng matters,
taking pleasure in resityng of Comedies, and soche other vain things,
altogether neclecting Marciall feats, gave occasion to Philip king of
Macedonia, father to Alexander the Great, to oppress and to bring them in
servitude, under his subieccion, even so undoubtedly, liberty will not be
kept, but men shall be trodden under foot, and brought to most horrible
misery and calamity, if they giuyng them selves to pastymes and pleasure,
for slake the just regard of their own defense, and sauegarde of their
country, which in temporal regimente, chiefly consists in warlike
skilfulnesse. And therefore the aunciente Capitaines and mighty Conquerours,
so long as they flourished, did devise with most great diligence, all manner
of ways, to bring their men to the perfect knowledge of what so ever thing
appertained to the war: as manifestly appears by the warlike games, which
in old time the Princes of Grecia ordained, upon the mount Olimpus, and also by
thorders and exercises, that the aunciente Romans used in sundry places, and
specially in Campo Martio, and in their wonderful sumptuous Theaters, which
chiefly they builded to that purpose. Whereby they not only made their
Soldiers so expert, that they obtained with a few, in faightyng against a
great houge multitude of enemies, soche marvelous victories, as in many
credible Histories are mentioned, but also by the same means, their unarmed and
rascalle people that followed their Camps, got soche understanding in the
feats of war, that they in the day of battle, being left destitute of
succor, were able without any other help, to set themselves in good order, for
their defense against the enemy, that would seek to hurt them, and in soche
dangerous times, have done their country so good service, that very often by
their help, the adversaries have been put to flight, and fields most happily
wo^ne. So that thantiquitie esteemed nothing more happy in a common weal, then
to have in the same many men skillful in warlike affairs: by means whereof,
their Empire continually enlarged, and most wonderfully and triumphantly
prospered. For so long as men for their valiantness, were then rewarded and
had in estimacion, glad was he that could find occasion to venture, yea, and
spend his life, to ^enefite his country: as by the manly acts that Marcus
Curcius, Oracius Cocles, and Gaius Mucius did for the sauegarde of Rome, and
also by other innumerable like examples, does plainly appear. But when
through long and continual peace, they began to be altogether given to
pleasure and delicateness, little regardyng Marciall feats, nor soche as were
expert in the practice thereof: Their dominions and estates, did not so much
before increase and prospere, as then by soche means and oversight, they
suddenly fell into decaie and utter ruin. For soche truly is the nature and
condition, both of peace and war, that where in gouernemente, there is not
had equalle consideracion of them both, the one in fine, does work and
induce, the others oblivion and utter abholicion. Wherefore, since the necessity
of the science of wars is so great, and also the necessary use thereof so
manifest, that even Lady Peace her self, does in manner from thens crave her
chief defense and preseruacion, and the worthiness moreover, and honor of
the same so great, that as by proof we see, the perfect glory thereof, cannot
easily find root, but in the hearts of most noble courageous and manlike
personages, I thought most excellent Princes, I could not either to the
specialle gratefiyng of your highness, the universal delight of all studious
gentlemen, or the common utility of the public wealth, imploie my labors
more profitablie in accomplishyng of my duty and good will, then in setting
forth some thing, that might induce to the augmentyng and increase of the
knowledge thereof: inespecially thexample of your highness most politic
gouernemente over us, giuyng plain testimony of the wonderful prudente
desire that is in you, to have your people instructed in this kind of service,
as well for the better defense of your highness, them selves, and their
country, as also to discourage thereby, and to be able to resist the
malingnitie of the enemy, who otherwise would seek peradventure, to invade
this noble realm or kingdom.

When therefore about.x. years paste, in the Emperors wars against the Mores
and certain Turks being in Barberie, at the siege and winnyng of Calibbia,
Monesterio and Africa, I had as well for my further instruction in those
affairs, as also the better to acquainte me with the Italian tongue, reduced
into English, the book called The art of War, of the famous and
excellent Nicholas Machiauell, which in times paste he being a counsailour,
and Secretary of the noble City of Florence, not without his great laud and
praise did write: and having lately again, somewhat perused the same, the which
in soche continual broiles and unquietness, was by me translated, I
determined with my self, by publishyng thereof, to bestow as great a gift
(sins greater I was not able) emongeste my country men, not expert in the
Italian tongue, as in like works I had seen before me, the Frenchemen,
Duchemen, Spaniardes, and other foreign nations, most louyngly to have
bestowed emongeste theirs: The rather undoubtedly, that as by private readyng
of the same book, I then felt my self in that knowledge marueilously helped and
increased, so by communicatyng the same to many, our Englishemen findyng out the
orderyng and disposyng of exploictes of war therein contained, the aid and
direction of these plain and brief precepts, might no less in knowledge of
wars become incomperable, then in prowes also and exercise of the same,
altogether invincible: which my translacion most gracious Sovereign, together
with soche other things, as by me has been gathered, and thought good to add
thereunto, I have presumed to dedicate unto your highness: not only because
the whole charge and furniture of warlike counsels and preparacions, being
determined by the arbitremente of Governors and Princes, the treatise also of
like effect should in like manner as of right, depend upon the protection of a
most worthy and noble Patroness, but also that the discourse it self, and
the work of a foreign aucthour, under the passeport and safeconduite of your
highness most noble name, might by special authority of the same, win
emo^gest your Majesty's subjects, much better credit and estimacion. And if
most mighty Queen, in this kind of Philosophy (if I may so term it) grave
and sage counsels, learned and witty precepts, or politic and prudente
admonicions, ought not to be accounted the least and basest jewels of weal
public. Then dare I boldly affirm, that of many strangers, which from
foreign countries, have heretofore in this your Majesty's realm arrived, there
is none in comparison to be preferred, before this worthy Florentine and
Italian, who having freely without any gain of exchange (as after some
acquaintance and familiarity will better appear) brought with him most
rich, rare and plentiful Treasure, shall deserve I trust of all good English
hearts, most lovingly and friendly to be entertained, embraced and cherished.
Whose new English apparel, how so ever it shall seem by me, after a gross
fasion, more fitly appoincted to the Camp, then in nice terms attired to the
Carpet, and in course clothyng rather put forth to battle, then in any
brave show prepared to the bankette, nevertheless my good will I trust,
shall of your grace be taken in good part, having fashioned the phraise of my
rude style, even according to the purpose of my travail, which was rather to
profit the desirous manne of war, then to delight the ears of the fine
Rethoricia^, or dainty curious scholemanne: Most humbly besechyng your
highness, so to accept my labor herein, as the first fruictes of a poor
soldiers study, who to the vttermoste of his small power, in the service of
your most gracious majesty, and of his country, will at al times, according
to his bounden duty and allegeaunce, promptlie yield him self to any labor,
travail, or danger, what so ever shall happen. Praiyng in the mean season the
almighty GOD, to give your highness in long prosperous reign, perfect health,
desired tranquillity, and against all your enemies, luckie and ioifull victory.

Your humble subject and daily orator, Peter VVhitehorne.

The Proheme of Nicholas Machiauell, Citezein and Secretary of Florence, upon
his book of the Art of war, unto Laurence Philippe Strozze, one of the
nobility of Florence.
THere have Laurence, many h^lde, and do hold this opinion, that there is no
manner of thing, which less agrees the one with the other, nor ye is so much
unlike, as the civil life to the Soldiers. Where by it is often seen, that if
any determine in thexercise of that kind of service to prevail, that
incontinent he does not only change in apparel, but also in custom and
manner, in voice, and from the facion of all civil use, he does alter: For that
he thinks not meet to clothe with ciuell apparel him, who will be ready, and
promt to all kind of violence, nor the ciuell customs, and vsages may that
man have, the which judges both those customs to be effeminate, and those
vsages not to be agreeable to his profession: Nor it semes not convenient for
him to use the civil gesture and ordinary words, who with fasing and
blasphemies, will make afraied other men: the which causes in this time,
such opinion to be most true. But if they should consider thauncient orders,
there should nothing be found more united, more confirmable, and that of
necessity ought to love so much the one the other, as these: for as much as
all the arts that are ordained in a common weal, in regard or respect of
common profit of men, all the orders made in the same, to live with ^eare of
the Law, and of God, should be vain, if by force of arms their defense were
not prepared, which well ordained, do maintain those also which be not well
ordained. And likewise to the contrary, the good orders, without the
soldiers help, no less or otherwise do disorder, then the habitacion of a
sumptuous and royal palais, although it were decte with gold and precious
stones, when without being covered, should not have wherewith to defend it
from the rain. And if in what so ever other orders of Cities and Kingdoms,
there has been used al diligence for to maintain men faithful, peaceable, and
full of the fear of God, in the service of war, it was doubled: for in what
man ought the country to seek greater faith, then in him, who must promise to
die for the same? In whom ought there to be more love of peace, then in him,
which only by the war may be hurt? In whom ought there to be more fear
of GOD, then in him, which every day commityng himself to infinite perilles,
has most need of his help? This necessity considered well, both of them
that gave the laws to Empires, and of those that to the exercise of service
we apoincted, made that the life of Soldiers, of other men was praised,
and with all study followed and imitated. But the orders of service of war,
being altogether corrupted, and a great way from the ancient manners altered,
there has grown these sinisterous opinions, which makes men to hate the
warlike service, and to fly the conversation of those that do exercise it.
Albeit I iudgeing by the same, that I have seen and read, that it is not a
thing impossible, to bring it again to the ancient manners, and to give it some
facion of the virtue passed, I have determined to the entente not to pass this
my idell time, without doing some thing, to write that which I do
understand, of the art of war, to the satisfiyng of those, who are lovers
of ancient acts. And although it be a hold thing to entreat of the same
matter, whereof otherwise I have made no profession, notwithstanding I believe it
is no error, to occupy with words a degree, the which many with greater
presumpcion with their deeds have occupied: for as much as the errors that I
may happen to make by writing, may be without harm to any man corrected: but
those the which of them be made in doing, cannot be known without the ruin
of Empires. Therefore Laurence you ought to consider the quality of this my
labor, and with your judgment to give it that blame, or that praise, as
shall seem unto you it has deserved. The which I send unto you, as well to
show my self grateful, although my ability reche not to the benefits,
which I have received of you, as also for that being the custom to honor with
like works them, who for nobility, riches, wisdom, and liberality do
shine: I know you for riches, and nobility, not to have many peers, for
wisdom few, and for liberality none.

The first book of the art of war (...) Nicholas Machiauel, citezein and
S^cretarie of Florence, unto Lauren^ Philip Strozze, one of the nobiltie of
Florence.
FOrasmuch as I believe that after death, al men may be praised without charge,
al occasion and suspecte of flattery being taken away, I shall not doubt to
praise our Cosimo Ruchellay, whose name was never remembered of me without
tears, having known in him those conditions, the which in a good friend or
in a citezien, might of his friends, or of his country, be desired: for that
I do not know what thing was so much his, not excepting any thing (saving
his soul) which for his friends willingly of him should not have been spent: I
know not what enterprise should have made him afraid, where the same should
have been known to have been for the benefit of his country. And I do painly
confess, not to have met amongst so many men, as I have known, and
practiced withal, a man, whose mind was more inflamed then his, unto great and
magnificent things. Nor he lamented not with his friends of any thing at his
death, but because he was borne to die a young manne within his own house,
before he had gotten honor, and according to his desire, helped any manne:
for that he knew, that of him could not be spoken other, saving that there
should be dead a good freende. Yet it rests not for this, that we, and what
so ever other that as we did know him, are not able to testify (seeing his
works do not appear) of his lawdable qualities. True it is, that fortune was
not for all this, so much his enemy, that it left not some brief record of the
readiness of his wit, as does declare certain of his writings, and
setting forth of amorous verses, wherein (although he were not in love) yet
for that he would not consume time in vain, til unto profounder studies fortune
should have brought him, in his youthful age he exercised himself. Whereby
most plainly may be comprehended, with how much felicity he did describe
his conceiptes, and how much for Poetry he should have been esteemed, if the
same for the end thereof, had of him ben exercised. Fortune having therefore
deprived us from the use of so great a friend, me thinks there can be found
no other remedy, then as much as is possible, to seek to enjoy the memory
of the same, and to repeat such things as has been of him either wittely
said, or wisely disputed. And for as much as there is nothing of him more
fresh, then the reasonyng, the which in his last days Signior Fabricio
Collonna, in his orchard had with him, where largely of the same gentilman were
disputed matters of war, both wittely and prudently, for the most part of
Cosimo demanded, I thought good, for that I was present there with certain
other of our friends, to bring it to memory, so that reading the same, the
friends of Cosimo, which thither came, might renew in their minds, the
remembrance of his virtue: and the other part being sorry for their absence,
might partly learn hereby many things profitable, not only to the life of
Soldiers, but also to civil men's lives, which gravely of a most wise man
was disputed. Therefore I say, that Fabricio Collonna retournyng out of
Lombardie, where long time greatly to his glory, he had served in the wars
the catholic king, he determined, passing by Florence, to rest himself certain
days in the same city, to visit the Dukes excellency, and to see certain
gentilmen, which in times paste he had been acquainted withal. For which
cause, unto Cosimo it was thought best to bid him into his orchard, not so
much to use his liberalitee, as to have occasion to talk with him at leisure,
and of him to understand and to learn diverse things, according as of such a
man may be hoped for, semyng to have accasion to spend a day in reasonyng
of such matters, which to his mind should best satisfy him. Then Fabricio
came, according to his desire, and was received of Cosimo together, with
certain of his trusty friends, amongst whom were Zanoby Buoudelmonti,
Baptiste Palla, and Luigi Allamanni, all young men loved of him, and of the
very same studies most ardente, whose good qualities, for as much as every
day, and at every hour they do praise them selves, we will omit. Fabritio
was then according to the time and place honored, of all those honors, that
they could possible devise: But the bankettyng pleasures being passed, and the
tabel taken up, and al preparacion of feastinges consumed, the which are sone
at an end in sight of great men, who to honorable studies have their minds
set, the day being long, and the heat much, Cosimo judged for to content
better his desire, that it were well done, taking occasion to avoid the heat,
to bring him into the most secret, and shadowest place of his garden. Where
they being come, and caused to sit, some upon herbs, some in the coldest
places, other upon little seats which there was ordained, under the shadow of
most high trees, Fabritio praises the place, to be delectable, How Seniour
Fabricio Collo^na and other gentilmen being togethet in a garde^^, ^nt^red
into talk of matters of war.
and particularly considering the trees, and not knowing some of them, he did
stand musinge in his mind, whereof Cosimo being a ware said, you have not
peradventure ben acquainted with some of these sorts of trees: But do not
marvel at it, for as much as there be some, that were more esteemed of the
antiquity, then they are commonly now a days: and he told him the names of
them, and how Barnardo his grau^dfather did travail in such kind of
plantyng: Fabritio replied, I thought it should be the same you say, and this
place, and this study, made me to remember certain Princes of the Kingdom of
Naples, which of these ancient tillage and shadow do delight. And staiyng
upon this talk, and somewhat standing in a studdie, said moreover, if I
thought I should not offend, I would tell my opinion, but I believe I shall
not, commonyng with friends, and to dispute of things, and not to condemn
them. How much better they should have done (be it spoken without displeasure
to any man) to have sought to been like ye antiquity in things strong, and
sharp, not in the delicate and soft: and in those that they did in the Sun,
not in the shadow: and to take the true and perfect manners of ye antiquity:
not those that are false and corrupted: for that when these studies pleased my
Romans, my country fell into ruin. Unto which Cosimo answered. But to avoid
the tediousness to repeat so many times he said, and the other answered,
there shall be only noted the names of those that speaks, without rehersing
other.

Then Cosimo said, you have opened the way of a reasoning, which I have
desired, and I pray you that you will speak without respect, for that that
I without respect will ask you, and if I demaundyng, or repliyng shall
excuse, or accuse any, it shall not be to excuse, or accuse, but to understand
of your the truth.

Fabritio. And I shall be very well contented to tell you that, which I
understand of all the same that you shall ask me, the which if it shall be
true, or no, I will report me to your judgment: and I will be glad that you
ask me, for that I am to learn, as well of you in askyng me, as you of me in
aunswerynge you: for as much as many times a wise demaunder, makes one to
consider many things, and to know many other, which without having been
demanded, he should never have known.


Cosimo. I will return to the same, that you said first, that my graundfather
and those your Princes, should have done more wisely, to have resembled the
antiquity in hard things, then in the delicate, and I will excuse my par^e,
for that, the other I shall leave to excuse for you. I do not believe that in
his time was any manne, that so much detested the living in ease, as he did,
and that so much was a lover of the same hardenesse of life, which you
praise: notwithstanding he knew not how to be able in person, nor in those
of his sons to use it, being borne in so corrupt a world, where one that
would digress from the common use, should be infamed and disdained of every
man: considering that if one in the hottest day of Summer being naked, should
wallowe himself upon the Sand, or in Winter in the most coldest months upon
the snow, as Diogenes did, he should be taken as a fool. If one (as the
Spartans were wont to do) should nourishe his children in a village, making
them to sleep in the open air, to go with hedde and feet naked, to wash them
selves in the cold water for to harden them, to be able to abide much pain,
and for to make them to love less life, and to fear less death, he should
be scorned, and sooner taken as a wild beast, then as a man. If there were
seen also one, to nourishe himself with peason and beans, and to despise gold,
as Fabricio does, he should be praised of few, and followed of none: so that
he being afraied of this present manner of living, ^e left thau^^^^^^ f^cions,
and the same, that he could with lest admiracion imitate in the antiquity, he
did.


Fabritio. You have excused it in this part most strongly: and surely you
say the truth: but I did not speak so much of this hard manner of living,
as of other manners more human, and which have with the life now a days
greater conformity. The which I do not believe, that it has been difficulte
to bring to pass unto one, who is nombred amongst Princes of a city: for the
prouyng whereof, I will never seek other, then thexample of the Romans. Whose
lives, if they were well considred, and thorders of the same common weal, there
should therein be seen many things, not impossible to induce into a cominaltie,
so that it had in her any good thing.


Cosimo. What things are those, that you would induce like unto the antiquity.


Fabricio. To honor, and to reward virtue, not to despise poverty, to esteem
the manners and orders of warfare, to constrain the citezeins to love one an
other, to live without fectes, to esteem less the private, tha^ the public,
and other like things, that easily might be with this time accompanied: the
which manners are not difficult to bring to pass, when a man should well consider
them, and enter therein by due means: for asmoche as in the same, the truth so
much appears, that every common wit, may easily perceive it: which thing,
who that ordeineth, does pla^t trees, under the shadow whereof, they abide more
happy, and more pleasantly, then under these shadows of this goodly gardeine.


Cosimo. I will not speak any thing against the same that you have said, but
I will leave it to be judged of these, whom ^asely can judge, and I will
turn my communicacion to you, that is an accusar of them, the which in
gra^^, and great doings, are not followers of the antiquity, thinkyng by
this way more easily to be in my intent satisfied. Therefore, I would know of
you whereof it grows, that of the one side you condemn those, that in their
doings resemble not the antiquity? Of the other, in the war, which is your
art, wherein you are judged excellent, it is not seen, that you have endeavored
your self, to bring the same to any soche end, or any thing at all resembled
therein the ancient manners.


Fabricio. You are happened upon the poincts, where I looked: for that my talk
deserved no other question: nor I desired other: and albeit that I could save
my self with an easy excuse, not withstandyng for my more contentacion, and
yours, seeing that the season bears it, I will enter in much longer
reasoning. Those men, which will enterprise any thing, ought first with all
diligence to prepare them selves, to be ready and apt when occasion serves,
to accomplish that, which they have determined to work: and for that when the
preparacio^s are made craftily, they are not known, there cannot be accused
any man of any negligence, if first it be not disclosed by thoccasion: in the
which working not, is after seen, either that there is not prepared so much as
suffiseth, or that there has not been of any part thereof thought upon. And for
as much as to me there is not come any occasion to be able, to show the
preparacions made of me, to reduce the seruise of war into his ancient
orders, if I have not reduced it, I cannot be of you, nor of other blamed: I
believe this excuse should suffice for answer to your accuseme^t.


Cosimo. It should suffice, when I were certain, that thoccasion were not come.


Fab. But for that I know, that you may doubt whether this occasion has been
cum, or no, I will largely (when you with patience will hear me) discourse
what preparacions are necessary first to make, what occasion must grow, what
difficulty does let, that the preparacio^s help not, and why thoccasion
cannot come, and how these things at ones, which seem contrary ends, is most
difficill, and most easy to do.


Cosimo. You cannot do both to me, and unto these other, a thing more
thankful their this. And if to you it shall not be tedious to speak, unto us
it shall never be grievous to hear: but for asmoch as this reasonyng ought to be
long, I will with your license take help of these my friends: and they, and* I
pray you of one thing, that is, that you will not be grieved, if some time
with some question of importance, we interrupte you.


Fabricio. I am most well contented, that you Cosimo with these other young
men here, do ask me: for that I believe, that youthfulnes, will make you lovers
of warlike things, and more easy to believe the same, that of me shall be said.
These other, by reason of having now their hedde white, and for having upon
their backs their blood congeled, part of them are wont to be enemies of
war, part vncorrectable, as those, whom believe, that times, and not the
naughty manners, constrain men to live thus: so that safely ask you all of
me, and without respect: the which I desire, as well, for that it may be
unto me a little ease, as also for that I shall have pleasure, not to leave in
your mind any doubt. I will begin at your words, where you said unto me,
that in the war, that is my art, I had not endeavored to bring it to any
aunciente end: whereupon I say, as this being an art, whereby men of no
manner of age can live honestly, it cannot be used for an art, but of a common
weal: or of a kingdom: and the one and the other of these, when they be well
ordained, will never consent to any their Citezeins, or Subjects, Why a good
man ought never to use the exercise of arms, as his art
to use it for any art, nor never any good manne does exercise it for his
particulare art: for as much as good he shall never be judged, whom makes
an ex^ersise thereof, where purposing always to gain thereby, it is requisite
for him to be rauenyng, deceiptfull, violente, and to have many qualities, the
which of necessity makes him not good: nor those men cannot, which use it
for an art, as well the great as the least, be made otherwise: for that
this art does not nourishe them in peace. Wherefore they ar constrained,
either to think that there is no peace, or so much to prevail in the time of
war, that in peace they may be able to keep them selves: and neither of
these two though (...) happens in a good man: for that in mindyng to do able
to find himself at all times, do grow robberies, violence, slaughters,
which soche soldiers make as well to the friends, as to the enemies: and in
mindyng not to have peace, there grows deceiptes, which the capitaines use
to those, which hire them, to the intent the war may continue, and yet
though the peace come often, it happens that the capitaines being deprived of
their stipendes, and of their licencious living, they erecte an ansigne of
adventures, and without any pity they put to sack a province. Have not you in
memory of your affairs, how that being many Soldiers in Italy without
wages, because the war was ended, they assembled together many companies, and
went taxyng the tounes, and sackyng the country, without being able to make
any remedy? Have you not red, that the Carthagenes soldiers, the first war
being ended which they had with the Romans, under Matho, and Spendio, two
capitaines, rebelliously constituted of them, made more perilous war to the
Carthaginens, then the same which they had ended with the Romans? In the time
of our fathers, Frances Sforza, to the entente to be able to live honorably
in the time of peace, not only beguiled the Millenars, whose soldier he was,
but he took from them their liberty and became their Prince. Like unto him
has been all the other soldiers of Italy, which have used warfare, for
their particulare art, and albeeit they have not through their malignitie
becomen Dukes of Milein, so much the more they deserve to be blamed: for that
although they have not gotten so much as he, they have all (if their lives were
seen) sought to bring ye like things to pass. Sforza father of Fraunces,
constrained Queen Ione, to cast her self into the arms of the king of Aragon,
having in a sudden forsaken her, and in the midst of her enemies, left her
disarmed, only to satisfy his ambicion, either in taxyng her, or in taking
from her the Kingdom. Braccio with the very same industry, sought to
possess the kingdom of Naples, and if he had not been overthrown and slain
at Aquila, he had brought it to pass. Like disorders grow not of other, then
of soche men as has been, that use the exercise of warfare, for their proper
art. Have not you a Proverb, which fortefieth my re^sons, A Prou^^be of
^^^^e and pe^ce.
which says, that war makes Thieves, and peace hangs them up? For as
much as those, which know not how to live of other exercise, and in the same
finding not enie man to sustain them, and having not so much power, to know
how to reduce them selves together, to make an open rebellion, they are
constrained of necessetie to Rob in the high ways, and Justice is enforced
to extinguishe them.


Cosimo. You have made me to esteem this art of warfare almost as nothing,
and I have supposed it the most excellentes, and most honourablesse that has
been used: so that if you declare me it not better, I cannot remain satisfied:
For that when it is the same, that you say, I know not, whereof grows the
glory of Caesar, of Pompei, of Scipio, of Marcello, and of so many Roman
Capitaines, which by fame are celebrated as Gods.


Fabricio. I have not yet made an end of disputyng al the same, that I purposed
to propounde: which were two things, the one, that a good manne could not
use this exercise for his art: the other, that a common weal or a kingdom
well governed, did never permit, that their Subjects or Citezeins should use
it for an art. About the first, I have spoken as much as has comen into my
mind: there remains in me to speak of the second, where I woll come to
answer to this your last question, and I say that Pompey and Caesar, and
almost all those Capitaines, which were at Rome, after the last Carthagenens
war, got same as valiant men, not as good, and those which lived before
them, got glory as valiaunte and good men: the which grew, for that
these took not the exercise of war for their art: and those which I named
first, as their art did use it. And so long as the common weal lived
unspotted, never any noble Citezein would presume, by the mean of soche
exercise, to avail thereby in peace, breakyng the laws, spoilyng the
Provinces, vsurpyng, and plaiyng the Tyraunte in the country, and in every
manner preuailyng: nor any of how low degree so ever they were, would go
about to violate the Religion, confederatyng them selves with private men,
not to fear the Senate, or to follow any tirannicall insolence, for to be
able to live with the art of war in all times. But those which were
Capitaines, contented with triumph, with desire did turn to their private
life, and those which were membrrs, would be more willing to lay away their
weapons, then to take them, and every manne turned to his science, whereby
they got their living: Nor there was never any, that would hope with pray,
and with this art, to be able to find them selves. Of this there may be
made concerning Citezeins, most euidente conjecture, by the ensample of Regolo
Attillio, who being Capitain of the Roman armies in Africa, and having as it
we overcome the Carthegenens, he required of the Senate, license to return
home, to keep his possessions, and told them, that they were marde of his
housbandmen. Whereby it is more clear then the Sun, that if the same manne had
used the war as his art, and by means thereof, had purposed to have made it
profitable unto him, having in pray so many Provinces, he would not have asked
license, to return to keep his feldes: for as much as every day he might
otherwise, have gotten much more, then the value of al those possessions: but
because these good men, and soche as use not the war for their art, will not
take of the same any thing then labor, perilles, and glory, when they are
sufficiently glorious, they desire to return home, and to live of their own
science. Concerning men of low degree, and common soldiers, to prove that
they kept the very fame order, it does appear that every one willingly
absented them selves from soche exercise, and when they served not in the
war, they would have desired to serve, and when they did serve, their would
have desired leave not to have served: which is well known through many
insamples, and inespecially seeing how emonge the first privileges, which the
Roman people gave to their Citezeins was, that they should not be constrained
against their wills, to serve in the wars. Therefore, Rome so long as it was
well governed, which was until the coming of Graccus, it had not any
Soldier that would take this exercise for an art, and therefore it had few
naughty, and those few were seuer^ly punished. Then a cites well governed,
ought to desire, that this study of war, be used in time of peace for
exercise, and in the time of war, for necessity and for glory: and to
suffer only the common weal to use it for an art, as Rome did, and what so
ever Citezein, that has in soche exercise other end, is not good, and what so
ever city is governed otherwise, is not well ordained.


Cosimo. I remain contented enough and satisfied of the same, which hitherto
you have told, and this conclusion pleases me very well which you have made,
and as much as is looked for touching a common wealth, I believe that it is true,
but concerning Kings, I can not tell now, for that I would believe that a
King would have about him, whom particularly should take such exercise for
his art.


Fabritio. A kingdom well ordered ought most of all to avoid the like kind
of men, for only they, are the destruction of their king, and all together
ministers of tyranny, and allege me not to the contrary any present
kingdom, for that I woll deny you all those to be kingdoms well ordered,
because the kingdoms which have good orders, give not their absolute Empire
unto their king, saving in the armies, for as much as in this place only, a
quick deliberation is necessary, and for this cause a principal power ought
to be made. In ye other affairs, he ought not to do any thing without
council, and those are to be feared, which council him, least he have some
about him which in time of peace desires to have war, because they are not
able without the same to live, but in this, I will be a little more large:
neither to seek a kingdom altogether good, but like unto those which be now
a days, where also of a king those ought to be feared, which take the war
for their art, for that the strength of armies without any doubt are the
foot men: so that if a king take not order in such wise, that his men in
time of peace may be content to return home, and to live of their own trades,
it will follow of necessity, that he ruinate: for that there is not found more
perilous me^, then those, which make the war as their art: because in such
case, a king is inforsed either always to make war, or to pay them always,
or else to be in peril, that they take not from him his kingdom. To make
war always, it is not possible: to pay them always it can not be: see that
of necessity, he runs in peril to lose the state. The Romans (as I have
said) so long as they were wise and good, would never permit, that their
Citizeins should take this exercise for their art, although they were able to
nurrishe them therein always, for that that always they made war: but to
avoid the same hurt, which this continual exercise might do them, seeing
the time did not vary, they changed the men, and from time to time took such
order with their legions, that in xv. years always, they renewed them: and so
they had their me^ in the flower of their age, that is from xviij. to xxxiij.
years, in which time the legs, the hands, and the yes answer the one the
other, nor they tarried not till there strength should decaie, and there
naghtines increase, as it did after in the corrupted times. For as much as
Octauian first, and after Tiberius, minding more there proper power, then the
public profit, began to unarm the Roman people, to be able easily to
command them, and to keep continually those same armies on the frontries of
the Empire: and because also they judged those, not sufficient to keep brideled
the people and Roman Senate, they ordained an army called Protoriano, which
lay hard by the walls of Rome, and was as a rock on the back of the same
City. And for as much as then they began freely to permit, that such men as
were apoincted in such exercises, should use the service of war for their
art, straight way the insolence of them grew, that they became fearful unto
the Senate, and hurtefull to the Emperor, whereby ensued such harm, that
many were slain thorough there insolensie: for that they gave, and took away
the Empire, to whom they thought good. And some while it happened, that in one
self time there were many Emperors, created of diverse armies, of which
things proceeded first the division of the Empire, and at last the ruin of
the same. Therefore kings ought, if they will live safely, to have there
soldiers made of me^, who when it is time to make war, willingly for his
love will go to the same, and when the peace comes after, more willingly will
return home. Which always will be, when they shall be men that know how to live
of other art then this: and so they ought to desire, peace being come, that
there Prince do turn to govern their people, the gentilmen to the tending
of there possessions, and the common soldiers to their particular art, and
every one of these, to make war to have peace, and not to seek to trouble
the peace, to have war.


Cosimo. Truly this reasonyng of yours, I think to be well considered,
notwithstanding being almost contrary to that, which till now I have
thought, my mind as yet does not rest purged of all doubt, for as much as
I see many Lords and gentelmen, to find them selves in time of peace,
thorough the studies of war, as your matches be, who have provision of there
princes, and of the cominaltie. I see also, almost all the gentelmen of arms,
remain with their provision, I see many soldiers lie in garrison of Cities
and fortresses, so that my thinks, that there is place in time of peace, for
every one.


Fabritio. I do not believe that you believe this, that in time of peace every
man may have place, because, put case that there could not be brought other
reason, the small number, that all they make, which remain in the places
alleged of you, would answer you. What proporcion have the soldiers, which
are requiset to be in the war with those, which in the peace are occupied?
For as much as the fortreses, and the cities that be warded in time of peace,
in the war are warded much more, unto whom are joined the soldiers,
which keep in the field, which are a great number, all which in the peace
be put away. And concerning the guard of states, which are a small number,
Pope July, and you have showed to every man, how much are to be feared those,
who will not learn to exercise any other art, then the war, and you have for
there insolence, deprived them from your guard, and have placed therein Swisers,
as men borne and brought up under laws, and chosen of the cominaltie,
according to the true election: so that say no more, that in peace is place
for every man. Concerning men at arms, they al remaining in peace with their
wages, makes this resolution to seem more difficulte: notwithstanding who
considers well all, shall find the answer easy, because this manner of
keeping men of arms, is a corrupted manner and not good, the occasion is, for
that they be men, who make thereof an art, and of them their should grow every
day a thousand inconueniencies in the states, where they should be, if they
were accompanied of sufficient company: but being few, and not able by them
selves to make an army, they cannot often do such grievous hurtes,
nevertheless they have done oftentimes: as I have said of Frances, and of
Sforza his father, and of Braccio of Perugia: so that this use of keeping men of
arms, I do not allow, for it is a corrupt manner, and it may make great
inconueniencies.


Cosimo. Would you live without them? or keeping them, how would you keep them?


Fabritio. By way of ordinance, not like to those of the king of France: for
as much as they be perilous, and insolent like unto ours, but I would keep
the^ like unto those of the ancient Romans, whom created their chiualry of
their own subjects, and in peace time, they sent the^ home unto their houses,
to live of their own trades, as more largely before this reasoning end, I
shall dispute. So that if now this part of an army, can live in such exercise,
as well when it is peace, it grows of the corrupt order. Concerning the
provisions, which are reserved to me, and to other capitaines, I say unto you,
that this likewise is an order most corrupted: for as much as a wise common
weal, ought not to give such stipe^des to any, but rather they ought to use
for Capitaines in the war, their Citezeins, and in time of peace to will,
that they return to their occupations. Likewise also, a wise king either ought
not to give to such, or giving any, the occasion ought to be either for
reward of some worthy deed, or else for the desire to keep such a kind of
man, as well in peace as in watre. And because you alleged me, I will make
ensample upon my self, and say that I never used the war as an art, for as
much as my art, is to govern my subjects, and to defend them, and to be
able to defend them, to love peace, and to know how to make war, and my
king not so much to reward and esteem me, for my knowledge in the war, as
for the knowledge that I have to counsel him in peace. Then a king ought not to
desire to have about him, A king that ^at^ about him any that are to much
souere of wa^^e, or to much ^ouere of peace (...) him to e^te.
any that is not of this condition if he be wise, and prudently mind to
govern: for that, that if he shall have about him either to much lovers of
peace, or to much lovers of war, they shall make him to err. I cannot in
this my first reasoning, and according to my purpose say more, and when this
suffiseth you not, it is mete, you seek of them that may satisfy you better.
You may now very well understand, how difficulte it is to bring in ure the
ancient manners in the present wars, and what preparations are mete for a
wise man to make, and what occasions ought to be looked for, to be able to
execute it. But by and by, you shall know these things better, if this
reasoning make you not werie, conferring what so ever parts of the ancient
orders has been, to the manners now present.


Cosimo. If we desired at the first to here your reason of these things, truly
the same which hitherto you have spoken, has doubled our desire: wherefore we
thank you for ye we have hard, and the rest, we crave of you to here*


Fabritio. Seeing that it is so your pleasure, I will begin to entreat of this
matter from the beginning, to the intent it may be better understood, being
able by the same mean, more largely to declare it. The end of him that will
make war, is to be able to fight with every enemy in the field, and to be
able to ouercum an army. To purpose to do this, it is convenient to ordeine
an host. To ordein an host, their must be found men, armed, ordered, and as
well in the small, as in the great orders exercised, to know how to keep
araie, and to incampe, so that after bringing them unto the enemy, either
standing or marching, they may know how to behave themselves valiantly. In
this thing consists all the industry of the war on the land, which is
the most necessary, and the most honorablest, for he that can well order a
field against the enemy, the other faults that he should make in the
affairs of war, will be borne with: but he that lacks this knowledge,
although that in other particulars he be very good, he shall never bring a
war to honor: for as much as a field that thou winnest, does cancel all
other thy evil acts: so like wise lesing it, all things well done of thee
before, remain vain. Therefore, being necessary first to find the men, it
is requiset to come to the choice of them. They which unto the war have
given rule, will that the men be chosen out of temperate countries, to the
intent they may have hardines, and prudence, for as much as the hot
country, bredes prudente men and not hardy, the cold, hardy, and not
prude^te. This rule is good to be given, to one that were prince of all the
world, because it is lawful for him to choose men out of those places, which
he shall think best. But minding to give a rule, Out of what Country is
best to choose Soldiers to make a good election.
that every one may use, it is mete to declare, that every common weal, and
every kingdom, ought to choose their soldiers out of their own country,
whether it be hot, cold, or temperate: for that it is seen by old
ensamples, how that in every country with exercise, their is made good
soldiers: because where nature lacks, the industry supplieth, the which in
this case is worth more, then nature, and taking them in other places, you
shall not have of the choice, for choice is as much to say, as the best of a
province, and to have power to choose those that will not, as well as those that
will serve. Wherefore, you must take your choice in those places, that are
subject unto you, for that you cannot take whom you list, in the countries
that are not yours, but you must take such as will go with you.


Cosimo. Yet there may be of those, that will come, taken and left, and
therefore, they may be called chosen.


Fabricio. You say the truth in a certain manner, but consider the faults,
which soche a chosen manne has in himself, for that also many times it
happens, that he is not a chosen manne. For those that are not thy subjects,
and which willyngly do serve, are not of the best, but rather of the worste
of a Province, for as much as if any be sclanderous, idell, unruly, without
Religion, fugetiue from the rule of their fathers, blasphemours, Dise plaiers,
in every condition evil brought up, be those, which will serve, whose
customs cannot be more contrary, to a true and good seruise: Albeit, when
there be offered unto you, so many of soche men, as come to above the number,
that you have appointed, you may choose them: but the matter being naught, the
choice is not possible to be good: also, many times it chances, that they be
not so many, as will make up the number, whereof you have need, so that being
constrained to take them al, it comes to pass, that they cannot then be
called chosen men, but hired Soldiers. With this disorder the armies of
Italy, are made now a days, and in other places, except in Almaine, because
there they do not hire any by commandment of the Prince, but according to
the will of them, that are disposed to serve. Then consider now, what manners of
those aunciente armies, may be brought into an army of men, put togethet by
like ways.


Cosimo. What way ought to be used then?


Fabritio. The Same way that I said, to choose them of their own subjects,
and with the authority of the Prince.


Cosimo. In the chosen, shall there be likewise brought in any ancient facion?


Fabricio. You know well enough that ye: when he that should command them,
were their Prince, or ordinary lord, whether he were made chief, or as a
Citezein, and for the same time Captain, being a common weal, otherwise it is
hard to make any thing good.


Cosimo. Why?


Fabricio. I will tell you a nane: For this time I will that this suffice you,
that it cannot be wrought well by other way.


Cosimo. Having then to make this choice of men in their own countries,
whether judge you that it be better to take them out of the city, Whether it
be better to take men out of towns or out of the country to serve.
or out of the country?


Fabritio. Those that have written of such matters, do all agree, that it is
best to choose the^ out of the country, being men accustomed to no ease,
nurished in labors, used to stand in the sun, to fly the shadow, knowing
how to occupy the spade, to make a diche, to carry a burden, and to be
without any deceit, and without malisiousnes. But in this part my opinion
should be, that being two sorts of soldiers, on foot, and on horseback,
that those on foot, should be chosen out of the country, and those on
horseback, out of the Cities.


Cosimo. Of what age would you choose them? Of what age Soldiers ought to be
chosen.



Fabricio. I would take them, when I had to make a new army, from xvij. to
xl. years: when it were made already, and I had to restore them, of xvij.
always.


Cosimo. I do not understand well this distinction.


Fabricio. I shall tell you: when I should ordain an hooste to make war,
where were no hooste already, it should be necessary to choose all those me^,
which were most fit and apt for the war, so that they were of seruisable
age, that I might be able to instruct them, as by me shall be declared: but
when I would make my choice of men in places, where a power were already
prepared, for suppliyng of the same, I would take them of xvij. years: for as
much as the other of more age, be already chosen and apoincted.


Cosimo. Then would you prepare a power like to those which is in our
country?


Fabricio. Ye truly, it is so that I would arm them, Captain them, exercise
and order them in a manner, which I cannot tell, if you have ordered them so.


Cosimo. Then do you praise the keeping of order?


Fabritio. Wherefore would you that I should dispraise it?


Cosimo. Because many wise men have always blamed it.


Fabricio. You speak against all reason, to say that a wise man blames
order, he may be well thought wise, and be nothing so.


Cosimo. The naughty proof, which it has always, makes us to have soche
opinion thereof.


Fabricio. Take heed it be not your fault, and not the keeping of order, the
which you shall know, before this reasonyng be ended.


Cosimo. You shall do a thing most thankful, yet I will say concerning
the same, that they accuse it, to the entente you may the better justify it.
They say thus, either it is unprofitable, and we trustyng on the same, shall
make us to lose our state, or it shall be verteous, and by the same mean, he
that governs may easily deprive us thereof. They allege the Romans, who by
mean of their own powers, lost their liberty. They allege the Venicians,
and the French king, which Venicians, because they will not be constrained,
to obeie one of their own Citezeins, use the power of strangers: and the
French king has disarmed his people, to be able more easily to commau^de
them, but they which like not the ordinances, fear much more the
unprofitableness, that they suppose may ensue thereby, then any thing else:
the one cause which they allege is, because they are vnexperte: The other, for
that they have to serve par force: for asmoche as they say, that the aged be
not so dissiplinable, nor apt to learn the feate of arms, and that by force,
is done never any thing good.


Fabricio. All these reasons that you have rehearsed, be of men, which knows
the thing full little, as I shall plainly declare. And first, concerning the
unprofitableness, I tell you, that there is no service used in any country
more profitable, then the service by the Subjects of the same, nor the same
service cannot be prepared, but in this manner: and for that this needs not to
be disputed of, I will not lose much time; because al thensamples of ancient
histores, make for my purpose, and for that they allege the lack of
experience, and to use constraint: I say how it is true, that the lack of
experience, causes lack of courage, and constrainte, makes evil
contentacion: but courage, and experience they are made to get, with the
manner of armyng them, By what means soldiers be made bold and expert.
exercisyng, and orderyng them, as in proceadyng of this reasonyng, you shall
hear. But concerning constrainte, you ought to understand, that the men,
which are conducted to warfare, by commandment of their Prince, they ought
to come, neither altogether forced, nor altogether willyngly, for as much as
to much willyngnesse, would make thinconueniencies, where I told before, that
he should not be a chosen manne, and those would be few that would go: and so
to much constraint, will bring forth naughty effects. Therefore, a mean
ought to be taken, where is not all constrainte, nor all willingness: but
being drawn of a respect, that they have toward their Prince, where they
fear more the displeasure of the same, then the present pain: and always it
shall happen to be a constrainte, in manner mingled with willingness, that
there cannot grow soche evil co^tentacion, that it make evil effects. Yet I
say not for all this, that it cannot be overcome, for that full many times,
were overcome the Roman armies, and the army of Aniball was overcome, so
that it is seen, that an army cannot be ordained so sure, that it cannot be
overthrown. Therefore, these your wise men, ought not to measure this
unprofitableness, for having lost ones, but to believe, that like as they
lose, so they may win, and remeadie the occasion of the loss: and when they
shall seek this, they shall find, that it has not been through fault of the
way, but of the order, which had not his perfeccion, and as I have said,
they ought to provide, not with blamyng the order, but with redressing it, the
which how it ought to be done, you shall understand, from poinct to poinct.
Concerning the doubt, lest soche ordinances, take not from thee thy state,
by mean of one, which is made hedde thereof, I answer, that the armure on the
backs of citezeins, or subjects, given by the disposicion of order and law,
did never harm, but rather always it does good, and mainteineth the city,
much longer in surety, through help of this armure, then without. Rome
continued free. CCCC. years, and was armed. Sparta.viij. C. Many other citees
have been disarmed, and have remained free, less then.xl. For as much as
citees have need of defense, and when they have no defense of their own, they
hire strangers, and the straunges defense, shall hurt much souer the common
weal, then their own: because they be much easier to be corrupted, and a
citezein that becomes mighty, may much sooner usurp, and more easily bring
his purpose to pass, where the people be disarmed, that he seeks to
oppress: besides this, a city ought to fear a great deal more, two
enemies then one. The Same city that uses strangers power, A City that uses
the seruise of strangers, fears at one instaunte the strangers, which it
hireth and the citezens of the same.
fears at one instant the stranger, which it hireth, and the Citezein: and
whether this fear ought to be, remember the same, which I rehearsed a little a
fore of Frances Sforza. That city, which uses her own proper power, fears
no man, other then only her own Citezein. But for all the reasons that may
be said, this shall serve me, that never any ordained any common weal, or
Kingdom, that would not think. that they them selves, that inhabit the same,
should with their sweardes defend it.

And if the Venicians had been so wise in this, as in all their other orders,
they should have made a new Monarchy in the world, whom so much the more
deserve blame, having been armed of their first giver of laws: for having no
dominion on the land, they were armed on the sea, where they made their war
virtuously, and with weapons in their hands, increased their country. But
when they were driven, to make war on the land, to defend Vicenza, where
they ought to have sent one of their citeze^s, to have fought on the land,
they hired for their capitain, the Marquis of Mantua: this was the same foolish
act, which cut of their legs, from climyng into heaven, and from enlargyng
their dominion: and if they did it, because they believed, that as they knew,
how to make war on the Sea, so they mistrusted them selves, to make it on
the land, it was a mistruste not wise: for as much as more easily, a capitain
of the sea, which is used to fight with the winds, with the water, and with
me^, shall become a Captain of the land, where he shall fight with men
only, then a captain of the land, to become a capitain of ye sea. The
Romans knowing how to fight on the land, and on the sea, coming to war,
with the Carthaginens, which were mighty on the sea, hired not Greeks, or
Spaniardes, accustomed to the sea, but they committed the same care, to their
Citezeins, which they sent on the land, and they overcame. If they did it, for
that one of their citezeins should not become a tiraunt, it was a fear smally
considered: for that besides the same reasons, which to this purpose, a little
before I have rehearsed, if a Citezein with the powers on the sea, was never
made a tiraunt in a city standing in the sea, so much the less he should
have been able to accomplish this with the powers of the land: whereby they
ought to se that the weapons in the hands of their Citezeins, could not make
tirantes: but the naughty orders of the government, which makes tirannie in
a city, and they having good government, they need not to fear their own
weapons: they took therefore an unwise way, the which has been occasion, to
take from the^ much glory, and much felicity. Concerning the error,
which the king of France commits not keeping instructed his people in the
war, the which those your wise men allege for ensample, there is no man,
(his particulare passions laid a side) that does not judge this fault, to be
in the same kingdom, and this negligence only to make him weak. But I have
made to great a digression, and peradventure am come out of my purpose,
albeit, I have done it to answer you, and to show you, that in no country,
there can be made sure foundation, for defense in other powers but of their
own subictes: and their own power, cannot be prepared otherwise, then by way
of an ordinance, nor by other way, to induce the facion of an army in any
place, nor by other mean to ordein an instruction of warfare. If you have red
the orders, which those first kings made in Rome, and inespecially Seruio
Tullo, you shall find that the orders of the Classi is no other, then an
ordinance, to be able at a sudden, to bring together an army, for defense
of the same city. But let us return to our choice, I say again, that having
to renew an old order, I would take them of.xvij. having to make a new
army, I would take them of all ages, between.xvij. and xl. to be able to war
straight way.


Cosimo. Would you make any difference, of what science you would choose them?


Fabritio. The aucthours, which have written of the art of war, make
difference, for that they will not, that there be taken Foulers, Fishers,
Cooks, baudes, nor none that use any science of voluptuousness. But they
will, that there be taken Plowmen, Ferrars, Smithes, Carpenters, Buchars,
Hunters, and soche like: but I would make little difference, through conjecture
of the science, Of what science soldiers ought to be chosen.
concerning the goodness of the man, notwithstanding, in as much as to be
able with more profit to use them, I would make difference, and for this
cause, the country men, which are used to till the ground, are more
profitable then any other. Next to whom be Smithes, Carpentars, Ferrars,
Masons, whereof it is profitable to have enough: for that their occupacions,
serve well in many things: being a thing very good to have a soldier, of
whom may be had double seruise.


Cosimo. Whereby do they know those, that be, or are not sufficient to serve.


Fabritio. I will speak of the manner of choosing a new ordinance, to make an
army after, for that, part of this matter, does come also to be reasoned of,
in the election, which should be made for the replenishing, or restoring of an
old ordinance. I say therefore, that the goodness of one, which thou must
choose for a Soldier, is known either by experience, thorough mean of some
of his worthy doings, or by conjecture. The proof of virtue, cannot be found
in men which are chosen of new, and which never before have been chosen, and
of these are found either few or none, in the ordinance that of new is
ordained. It is necessary therefore, lackyng this experience, to run to the
conjecture, which is taken by the years, by the occupacion, and by the
personage: of those two first, has been reasoned, there remains to speak of
the third. And therefore, I say how some have willed, that the soldier be
great, amongst who^ was Pirrus. Some other have chosen them only, by the
lustiness of the body, as Caesar did: which lustiness of body and mind, is
coniectured by the composicion of the members, and of the grace of the
countenance: and therefore, How to chose a soldier.
these that write say, that they would have the iyes lively and cherefull, the
neck full of sinowes, the breaste large, the arms full of musculles, the
fingers long, little beallie, the flanks round, the legs and feet dry:
which parts are wont always to make a man nimble and strong, which are
two things, that in a soldier are sought above al other. Regard ought to
be had above all things, to his customs, and that in him be honesty, and
shame: otherwise, there shall be chosen an instrumente of mischief, and a
beginning of corrupcion: for that let no man believe that in the dishoneste
educacion, and filthy mind, there may take any virtue, which is in any part
laudable. And I think it not superfluous, but rather I believe it to be
necessary, to the entente you may the better understand, the importance of
this chosen, to tell you the manner, that the Roman Consuls, in the beginning
of their rule, observed in the chosing of their Romain legio^s: in the which
choice of men, because the same legions were mingled with old soldiers and
new, considering the continual war they kept, they might in their choice
proceed, with the experince of the old, and with the conjecture of the new:
and this ought to be noted, that these men be chosen, either to serve
incontinently, or to exercise them incontinently, and after to serve when need
should require. But my intencion is to show you, how an army may be prepared
in the country, where there is no warlike discipline: in which country,
chosen men cannot be had, to use the^ straight way, but there, where the
custom is to levy armies, and by mean of the Prince, they may then well be
had, as the Romans observed, and as is observed at this day among the
Suisers: because in these chosen, though there be many new men, there be
also so many of the other old Soldiers, accustomed to serve in the warlike
orders, where the new mingled together with the old, make a body united and
good, notwithstanding, that themperours after, beginning the staciones of
ordinary Soldiers, had appoincted over the new soldiers, which were
called tironi, a master to exercise them, as appears in the life of Massimo
the Emperor. The which thing, while Rome was free, not only in the armies,
but in the city was ordained: and the exercises of war, being accustomed in
the same, where the young men did exercise, there grew, that being chosen after
to go into war, they were so used in the fained exercise of warfare, that
they could easily work in the true: but those Emperors having after put down
these exercises, they were constrained to use the ways, that I have showed you.
Therefore, coming to the manner of the chosen Romain, I say that after the
Romain Consulles (to who^ was appoincted the charge of the war) had taken the
rule, myndyng to ordeine their armies, for that it was the custom, that either
of the^ should have two Legions of Roman men, which was the strength of
their armies, they created.xxiiij. Tribunes of war, and they appoincted six
for every Legion, who^ did the same office, which those do now a days, that
we call Conestables: they made after to come together, all the Romain men apt
to bear weapons, and they put the Tribunes of every Legion, separate the one
from the other. Afterward, by lot they drew the Tribes, of which they had
first to make the chosen, and of the same Tribe they chose four of the best,
of which was chosen one of the Tribunes, of the first Legion, and of the other
three was chosen, one of the Tribunes of the second Legio^, of the other two
there was chosen one of the Tribunes of the third, and the same last fell to
the fowerth Legion. After these.iiij, they chose other four, of which, first
one was chosen of the Tribunes of the second Legion, the second of those of
the third, the third of those of the fowerth, the fowerth remained to the
first. After, they chose other four, the first chose the third, the second
the fowerth, the third the fiueth, the fowerth remained to the second: and
thus they varied successively, this manner of chosyng, so that the election came
to be equal, and the Legions were gathered together: and as before we said,
this choice might be made to use straighte way, for that they made them of
men, of whom a good part were experiensed in the very warfare in deed, and
all in the fained exercised, and they might make this choice by conjecture, and
by experience. But where a power must be ordained of new, and for this to
choose them out of hand, this chosen cannot be made, saving by conjecture,
which is taken by considering their ages and their likelinesse.


Cosimo. I believe all to be true, as much as of you has been spoken: but
before yt you proceed to other reasonyng, I woll ask of you one thing, which
you have made me to remember: saying that the chosen, that is to be made where
men were not used to war, ought to be made by conjecture: for asmoche as I
have heard some men, in many places dispraise our ordinance, and in especially
concerning the number, for that many say, that there ought to be taken less
number, whereof is gotten this profit, that they shall be better and better
chosen, and men shall not be so much diseased, so that there may be given
them some reward, whereby they may be more contented, and better be
commanded, whereof I would understand in this part your opinion, and whether
you love better the great number, then the little, and what way you would
take to choose them ^n the one, and in the other number.


Fabricio. Without doubt it is better, and more necessary, the great number,
then the little: but to speak more plainly, where there cannot be ordained a
great number of men, there cannot be ordained a perfect ordinance: and I will
easily confute all the reasons of the^ propounded. I say therefore first,
that the less number where is many people, as is for ensample. Tusca^e, makes
not that you have better, nor that the chosen be more excellent, for that
myndyng in chosing the men, to judge them by experience, there shall be
found in the same country most few, whom experience should make prouable,
both for that few has been in war, as also for that of those, most few
have made trial, whereby they might deserve to be chosen before the other: so
that he which ought in like places to choose, it is mete he leave a part the
experience, and take the^ by conjecture. Then being brought likewise into soche
necessity, I would understand, if there come before me twenty young men of
good stature, with what rule I ought to take, or to leave any: where without
doubt, I believe that every man will confess, how it is less error to take
them al, to arm them and exercise them, being not able to know, which of
them is best, and to reserve to make after more certain chosen, when in
practisyng them with exercise, there shall be known those of most spirit,
and of most life: which considered, the choosing in this case a few, to have
them better, is altogether naught.

Concerning diseasing less the country, and men, I say that the ordinance,
either evil or little that it be, causes not any disease, for that this
order does not take men from any of their business, it binds them not,
that they cannot go to do any of their affairs* for that it binds them
only in the idell days, to assemble together, to exercise them, the which
thing does not hurt, neither to the country, nor to the men, but rather to
young men, it shall bring delight: For that where wi^^ on the holy days, they
stand idell (...) ^pplyng houses, they will go for pleasure to those
exercises, for that the handlyng of weapons, as it is a goodly spectacle, so
unto young men it is pleasant. Concerning to be able to pay the least
number, and for this to keep them more obediente, and more contented, I
answer, how there cannot be made an ordinance of so few, which may be in
manner continually paid, where the same payment of theirs may satisfy them. As
for ensample, if there were ordained a power of.v. thousand men, for to pay
them after soche sort, that it might be thought sufficient, to content them,
it shall be convenient to give them at least, ten thousaunde crounes the
month: first, this number of men are not able to make an army, this pay is
intolerable to a state, and of the other side, it is not sufficient to keep
men contented, and bound to be able to serve at al times: so that in doing
this, there shall be spent much, and a small power kept, which shall not be
sufficient to defend thee, or to do any enterprise of thine. If thou should
give them more, or should take more, so much more impossibility it should
be, for thee to pay them: if thou should give them less, or should take
less, so much the less contentacion should be sit the^, or so much the
less profit that shall bring thee. Therefore, those that reason of making an
ordinance, and whilst they tarry at home to pa^e them, they reason of a thing
either impossible, or unprofitable, but it is necessary to pay them, when
they are taken up to be led to the war: albe^^, though soche order should
somewhat disease those, in time of peace, that are appointted in the same,
which I se not how, there is for recompense all those benefits, which a power
brynges, that is, ordained in a country: for that without the same, there is
nothing sure. I conclude, that he that will have the little number, to be able
to pay them, or for any of the other causes alleged of you, does not
understand, for that also it makes for my opinion, that every number shall
deminishe in thy hands, through infinite impedimentes, which men have: so
that the little number shall turn to nothing: again having thordinaunce
great, thou may at thy pleasure use few of many, besides this, it must
serve thee in deed, and in reputacion, and always the great number shall give
thee most reputacion. More over, making the ordinance to keep men
exercised, if thou appoincte a few number of men in many countries, the bands
of men be so far a sonder, the one from the other, that thou can not
without their most grievous loss, gather them together to exercise them, and
without this exercise, the ordinance is unprofitable, as hereafter shall be
declared.


Cosimo. It suffiseth upon this my demand, that which you have sai^^: but I
desire now, that you declare me an other doubt. They say, that soche a
multitude of armed men, will make confusion, discension and disorder in the
country where they are.


Fabritio. This is an other vain opinion, the cause whereof, I shall tell you*
soche as are ordained to serve in the wars, may cause disorder in two
manners, either between them selves, or against other, which things most
easily may be withstode, where the order of it self, should notwithstande it:
for that concerning the discord among theimselues, this order takes it way,
and does not n^^rishe it, for that in ordery^s them, you give them armor and
capitaines. If the country where you ordein them, be so (...) for the war,
that there are not armours among the men of the same, and that that be so
united, that they have no heddes, this order makes them much s^^rser against
the stranger, but it makes them not any thing the more disunited; for that
men well ordered, fear the law being armed, as well as unarmed, nor they can
never alter, if the capitaines, which you give them, cause not the alteracion,
and the way to make this, shall be told now: but if the country where you
ordein them, be warlike and disunited; this order only shall be occasion to
unite them: because this order g^ueth them armours profitable for the w^rre,
and h^ddes, extinguishers of discencion: where their own armours be
unprofitable for the wars, and their heddes nourishe us of discord. For that
so sone as any in the same country is offended, he resorteth by and by to his
capitain to make complaint* who for to maintain his reputacion, comfort him
to reuengement not to peace. To the contrary does the public head, so that by
this means, thoccasion of discord is taken away, and the occasion of union
is prepared, and the provinces united and effeminated, get utility, and
maintain union: the disunited and discencious, do agree, and the same their
fearsnesse, which is wont disordinately to work, is turned into public
utility. To mind to have them, to do no hurt against other, How to prouid
against soche inconveniences as soldiers may ^^use.
it ought to be considered, that they cannot do this, except by mean of the
heddes, which govern them. To will that the heddes make no disorder, it is
necessary to have care, that they get not over them to much authority. And
you must consider that this authority, is gotten either by nature, or by
accidente: and as to nature, it behooves to provide, that he which is boren in
one place, be not apoincted to the men billed in the same, but be made hedde of
those places, where he has not any natural aquaintance: and as to the
accident, the thing ought to be ordained in such manner, that every year the
heddes may be changed from government to government: for as much as the
continual authority over one sort of men, breeds among them so much
union, that it may turn easily to the prejudice of the Prince: which
permutations how profitable they be to those who have used them, and
hurtefull to them that have not observed them, it is well known by the
kingdom of the Assirians, and by the Empire of the Romans* where is seen,
that the same kingdom endured a M. years without tumulte, and without any
Civil war: which proceeded not of other, then of the permutations, which
from place to place every year the same Capitaines made, unto whom were
apoincted the charge of the Armies. The occasion of civil ^^^re among the
Romans.
Nor for any other occasion in the Roman Empire, after the blood of Caesar was
extinguished, there grew so many civil wars, between the Capitaines of the
hosts, and so many conspiracies of the forsaied capitaines against the
Emperors, but only for keeping continually still those capitaines always in
one government. And if in some of those first Emperors, and of those after,
whom held the Empire with reputacion, as Adriane, Marcus, Seuerus, and soche
like, there had been so much foresight, that they had brought this custom of
chaungyng the capitaines in the same Empire, without doubt it should have made
them more quiet, and more durable: For that the Capitaines should have had
less occasion to make tumultes, the Emperors less cause to fear, and the
senate in the lackes of the successions, should have had in the election of the
Emperor, more authority, and by consequence should have been better: but the
naughty custom, either for ignorance, or through the little diligence of
men, neither for the wicked, nor good ensamples, can be taken away.


Cosimo I cannot tell, if with my questionyng, I have as it were led you out of
your order, because from the chusyng of men, we be entered into an other matter,
and if I had not been a little before excused, I should think to deserve some
reprehension.


Fabritio. Let not this disquiete you, for that all this reasonyng was
necessary, myndyng to reason of the ordinance, the which being blamed of many,
it was requsite to excuse it, willing to have this first part of chusyng men
to be allowed. But now before I descend to the other parts, I will reason of
the choice of men on horse back. Of the antiquity, these were made of the
most richeste, having regard both to the years, and to the quality of the
man, The number of horsemen, that the Romans chose for a Legion, and for a
Cons^lles army.
and they chose.CCC. for a Legion, so that the Romain horse, in every Consulles
army, passed not the number of.vi.C.


Cosimo. Would you make an ordinance of horse, to exercise them at home, and to
use their service when need requires?


Fabricio. It is most necessary, and it cannot be done otherwise, mindyng to
have the power, that it be the own proper, and not to purpose to take of
those, which make thereof an art.


Cosimo. How would you choose them?


Fabricio. I would imitate the Romans, The choosyng and orderyng of horsemen,
that is to be observed at this present.
I would take of the richest, I would give them heddes or chieftaines, in
the same manner, as now a days to other is given, and I would arm them and
exercise them.


Cosimo. To these should it be well to give some provision?


Fabricio. Ye Marie, but so much only as is necessary, to keep the horse, for
as much as bringyng to thy subjects expenses, they might justly complain of
thee, therefore it should be necessary, to pay them their charges of their
horse.


Cosimo. What number would you make? and how would you arm them?


Fabricio. You pass into an other matter. I will tell you in convenient place,
which shall be when I have told you, how foot men ought to be armed, and
how a power of men is prepared, for a day of battle.


The second book of the art of war, of Nicholas Machiauell, Citezeine and
Secretary of Florence, unto Laurence Philip Strozze.
I Believe that it is necessary, men being found, to arm them, and mindyng
to do this, I suppose that it is a needful thing to examine, what armoure
the antiquity used, and of the same to chose the best. The Romans divided
their foot men in heavy and light armed: Those that were light armed, they
called by the name of veliti: Under this name were understood all those that
threw with Slinges, shot with Crossebowes, cast Darts, and they used the
most part of them for their defense, to wear on their hedde a Murion, How
the Romans armed their soldiers and what weapons they used
with a Targaet on their arm: they fought out of thorders, and far of from
the heavy armed, which did wear a hedde piece, that came down to their
shoulders, a Corselet, which with the tases came down to the knees, and they
had the legs and the arms, covered with greaues, and vambraces, with a
targaet on the left arm, a yard and a half long, and three quarters of a
yard broad: which had a hoope of Iron upon it, to be able to sustain a
blow, and an other under, to the intent, that it being driven to the earth,
it should not break: for to offend, they had girte on their left flancke a
sword, the length of a yard and a nail, on their right side, a Dagger: they
had a darte in every one of their hands, the which they called Pilo, and in
the beginning of the fight, they threw those at the enemy. This was the
orderyng, and importance of tharmoures of the Romans, by the which they
possessed all the world. And although some of these ancient writers gave them,
besides the forsaid weapons, a staff in their hand like unto a Partesen, I
cannot tell how a heuie staff, may of him that holds a Targaet he occupied:
for that to handell it with both hands, the Targaet should be an impediment,
and to occupy the same with one hand, there can be done no good therewith, by
reason of the weightinesse thereof: besides this, to faight in ye thro^g, and in
thorders with soche long kind of weapon, it is unprofitable, except in the
first front, where they have space enough, to thrust out all the staff, which
in thorders within, cannot be done, for that the nature of the battle (as in
the order of the same, I shall tell you) is continually to throng together,
which although it be an inconvenience, yet in so doing they fear less, the^
to stand wide, where the peril is most evident, so that all the weapons,
which pass in length a yard and a half, in the throng, be unprofitable: for
that, if a man have the Partesan, and will occupy it with both hands, put
case that the Targaet let him not, he cannot hurt with the same an enemy,
who^ is upon him, if he take it with one hand, to the intent to occupy also the
Targaet, being not able to take it, but in the midst, there remains so
much of the staff behind, that those which are behind him, shall let him
to welde it. And whether it were true, either that ye Romans had not this
Partase^, or that having it, did little good withal, read all the battles,
in the history thereof, celebrated of Titus Liuius, and you shall se in
the same, most seldom times made mention of Partasens, but rather always he
says, that the Darts being thrown, they laid their hands on their
sweardes. Therefore I will leave this staff, and observe, concerning the
Romans, the sword for to hurt, and for defense the Targaet, with the other
armours aforesaied.

How the Greeks did arm them selves, and what weapons they used against their
enemies.
The Greeks did not arm them selves so heavily, for their defense, as the
Romans did: but for to offend the enemies, they grounded more on their
staves, then on their swerdes, and in especially the Fallangy of Macedonia,
which used staves, that they called Sarisse, seven yardes and a half long,
with the which they opened the ranks of their enemies, and they kept thorders
in their Fallange. And although some writers say, that they had also the
Targaet, I cannot tell (by the reasons aforesaied) how the Sarrisse and they
could stand together. Besides this, in the battle that Paulus Emilius made,
with Persa king of Macedonia, I do not remember, that there is made any
mention of Targaettes, but only of the Sarisse, and of the difficulty that
the Roman army had, to overcome them: so that I conjecture, that a
Macedonicall Fallange, was no otherwise, then is now a days a battle of
Suizzers, the which in their pikes have al their force, and all their power.
The Romans did garnishe (besides the armours) the footmen with feathers: A
brave, and a terrible thing to the enemies.
the which things makes the sight of an army to the friends goodly, to the
enemies terrible.

How the Romans armed their horsemen in old time.
The armor of the horsemen, in the same first Roman antiquity, was a round
Targaette, and they had their hedde armed, and the rest unarmed: They had a
swearde and a staff, with an Iron hedde only before, long and small: whereby
it happened, that they were not able to stay the Targaette, and the staff in
the incountryng broke, and they through being unarmed, were subject to hurtes:
after, in process of time, they armed them as the footmen, albeit they used
the Targaette much shorter, square, and the staff more stiff: and with two
heddes, to the intent, that breakyng one of the heddes, they might prevail
with the other. With these armours as well on foot, as on horseback, the
Romans conquered all the world, and it is to be believed, by the fruict
thereof, which is seen, that they were the best appoincted armies, that ever
were: and Titus Liuius in his history, does testify very often, where
coming to comparison with the enemies armies, he says: But the Romans, by
virtue, by the kind of their armours, and practice in the service of war,
were superiors: and therefore I have more particularly reasoned, of the
armoures of conquerours, then of the conquered. But now me thinks good, to
reason only of the manner of armyng me^ at this present. Footmen have for
their defense, The manner of armyng men now a days.
a breaste plate, and for to offend, a Lance, six yardes and three quarters
long, which is called a Pike, with a sweard on their side, rather round at the
poinct, then sharp. This is the ordinary armyng of foot men now a days,
for that few there be, which have their legs armed, and their arms, the
hedde none, and those few, hear instead of a Pike, a Halberde, the staff
whereof as you know, is two yardes and a quarter long, and it has the Iron
made like an axe. Between them, they have Harkebutters, the which with the
violence of the fire, do the same office, which in old time the stingers did,
and the Crossebowe ^^^ters. This manner of armyng, The invention of Pikes.
was found out by the Duchemenne, in especially of Suizzers, whom being poor,
and desirous to live free, they were, and be constrained to faighte, with the
ambition of the Princes of Almain, who being rich, were able to keep h^^se,
the which the same people could not do for poverty. Whereby it grew, that
being on foot, mynding to defend them selves from the enemies, that were on
horseback, it behooves them to seek of the aunciente orders, and to find
weapons, which from the fury of horses, should defend them: This necessity
has made either to be maintained, or to be found of them the aunciente
orders, without which, as every prudente man affirms, the footmen is
altogether unprofitable. Therefore, they took for their weapon the Pike, a
most profitable weapon, not only to withstand horses, but to overcome them:
and the Duchemenne have by virtue of these weapons, and of these orders, taken
soche boldness, that.xv. or.xx. thousand of them, will assault the greatest
number of horse that may be: and of this, there has been seen experience
enough, within this.xxv. years. And the insamples of their virtue has been so
mighty, grounded upon these weapons, and these orders, that sense king Charles
passed into Italy, every nation has imitated them: so that the Spanishe
armies, are become into most great reparacion.

Cosimo. Which manner of armyng, do you praise most, either these Duchmennes,
or the ancient Romans?


Fabricio. Whether the Romans manner in armyng of men, be better then the
armyng of men, that is used now a days.
The Romain without doubt, and I will tell you the commodity, and the
discommoditie of the one, and the other. The D^che foot men, are able to
withstand, and overcome the horses: they be most spedie to march, and to
be set in araie, being not laden with armours* of the other part, they be
subject to all blows, both far of, and (...) hand: because they be
unarmed, they be unprofitable unto the battle on the land, and to every
faighte, where is strong resistaunce. But the Romans withstode, and overcame
the horses, as well as the Duchemen, there were safe from blows (...) hand,
and farr^ of, being ^^uere^ with armours: they w^^ also better able to charge,
and better able to sustain charges, having Targaettes: they might more aptly in
the ^re^e might with the swerd, then these with the P^^e, and though the
Duchemen (...) likewise sw^^^des, (...) Targaettes, they became in soche ^ase
unprofitable* The Romans might safely assault to^nes, having their bodies
clean covered with armor, and being better able to coue^ them selves with
their Targaettes: So that they had a^ other inco^^^^^tie, the (...) waights
(...) of their armours, and the pain to carry the^: the which things they
overcame, with accustomyng the body to diseases, and with hardenyng it, to be
able to endure labor. And you know, how that in things accustomed, men
suffer no grief. And you have to understand this, that the footmen may be
constrained, to faight with footmen, and with horse, and always those be
unprofitable, which cannot either sustain the horses, or being able to sustain
them, have notwithstanding need to fear the footmen, which be better armed,
and better ordained then they. Now if you consider the Duchemen, and the
Romans, you shall find in the Duchemen actiuitie (as we have said) to
overcome the horses, but great dissauauntage, when they faighte with men,
ordained as they them selves are, and armed as the Romans were: so that there
shall be this advantage more of the one, then of the other, that the Romans
could overcome the men, and the horses, the Duchemen only the horses.


Cosimo. I would desire, that you would come to some more particulare insample,
whereby we may better understand.


Fabricio. I say thus, that you shall find in many places of our histories,
the Romain footmen to have overcome innumerable horses, and you shall never
find, that they have been overcome of men on foot, for default that they have
had in their armor, or through the vantage that the enemy has had in the
armours: For that if the manner of their armyng, should have had defaulte, it
had been necessary, that there should follow, the one of these two things,
either that findyng soche, as should arm them better then they, they should
not have gone still forwards, with their conquestes, or that they should have
taken the strangers manners, and should have left their own, and for that it
followed not in the one thing, nor in the other, there grows that there may be
easily co^iectured, that the manner of their armyng, was better then the same of
any other. It is not yet thus happened to the Duchemen, for that naughty
proof, has been seen made them, when soever they have chaunsed to faight with
men on foot prepared, and as obstinate as they, the which is grown of the
vau^tage, which the same have incountred in thenemies armours. An ensample
which proves that horsemen with staves, cannot prevail against footeme^ with
Pikes, and what great advantage the armed have, against the unarmed.
Philip Vicecounte of Milaine, being assaulted of.xviij. thousand Suizzers,
sent against them the Count Carminuola, which then was his captain. He
with six thousand horse, and a few footmen, went to mete with them, and
incounteryng them, he was repulsed with his most great loss: whereby
Carminuola as a prudente man, knew straight way the puisaunce of the enemies
weapons, and how much against the horses they prevailed, and the debilitie of
the horses, against those on foot so appoincted: and gatheryng his men
together again, he went to find the Suizzers, and so sone as he was nere them,
he made his men of arms, to a light from their horse, The victory of
Carminuola against the Duchemen.
and in the same manner faightyng with them, he slew them all, except three
thousand: the which seeing them selves to consume, with out having reamedy,
castyng their weapons to the ground, yielded.


Cosimo. Whereof comes so much disauauntage?


Fabricio. I have a little before told you, but seeing that you have not
understood it, I will rehearse it again. The Duchemen (as a little before I
said unto you) as it were unarmed, to defend themselves, have to offend, the
Pike and the swearde: they come with these weapons, and with their orders to
find the enemies, whom if they be well armed, to defend them selves, as
were the men of arms of Carminuola, which made them a light on foot,
they come with the sweard, and in their orders to find them, and have no other
difficulty, then to come nere to the Suizzers, so that they may reche them
with the sweard, for that so sone as they have gotten unto the^, they faight
safely: for asmoche as the Duch man, cannot strike thenemie with the Pike, who^
is upon him, for the length of the staff, wherefore it is conueniente for him,
to put the hand to the sweard, the which to him is unprofitable, he being
unarmed, and having against him an enemy, that is all armed. Whereby he that
considers the vantage, and the disauantage of the one, and of the other,
shall see, how the unarmed, shall have no manner of remeady, and the ouercommyng
of the first faight, and to pass the first poinctes of the Pikes, is not
much difficulte, he that faighteth being well armed: The battles when they
^^e a faightyng, do thro^g together.
for that the battles go (as you shall better understand, when I have showed
you, how they are set together) and incounteryng the one the other, of
necessity they thrust together, after soche sort, that they take the one
the other by the bosom, and though by the Pikes some be slain, or overthrown,
those that remain on their feet, be so many, that they suffice to obtain the
victory. Hereof it grew, that Carminuola overcame them, with so great
slaughter of the Suizzers, and with little loss of his.


Cosimo. Consider that those of Carminuola, were men of arms, whom although
they were on foot, they were covered all with stele, and therefore they were
able to make the proof they did: so that me thinks, that a power ought to be
armed as they, mindyng to make the very same proof.


Fabricio. If you should remember, how I told you the Romans were armed, you
would not think so^ for as much as a man, that has the hedde covered with
Iron, the breaste defended of a Corselet, and of a Targaet, the arms and the
legs armed, is much more apt to defend himself from the Pike, and to enter
among them, then a man of arms on foot. I will give you a little of a late
ensample. There were come out of Cicelie, into the kingdom of Naples, a power
of Spaniardes, for to go to find Consaluo, who was besieged in Barlet, of the
Frenchemen: there made against them Mounsier de Vhigni, with his men of
arms, and with about four thousand Duchemen on foot: The Duchemen
incountered with their Pikes low, and they opened the power of the Spaniardes:
but those being holp, by mean of their bucklers and of the agiletie of their
bodies, mingled togethers with the Duchemen, so that they might reche the with
the swearde, whereby happened the death, almost of all them, and the victory
to the Spaniardes. Every man knows, how many Duchemen were slain in the
battle of Rauenna, the which happened by the very same occasion: for that
the Spanishe soldiers, got them within a swerdes length of the Duche
soldiers, and they had destroyed them all, if of the French horsemen, the
Duchemen on foot, had not been succored: notwithstanding, the Spaniardes close
together, brought themselves into a safe place. I conclude therefore, that a
good power ought not only to be able, to withstand the horses, but also not
to have fear of men on foot, the which (as I have many times said)
proceeds of the armours, and of the order.


Cosimo. Tell therefore, how you would arm the^?


Fabricio. How to arm men, and what weapons to appoincte them, after the
Roman manner, and Duche ta^ion.
I would take of the Roman armours, and of the Duchemennes weapons, and I
would that the one haulfe, should be appoincted like the Romans, and the
other haulfe like the Duchemen: for that if in six thousand footmen (as I
shall tell you a little hereafter) I should have three thousand men with
Targaettes, after the Romain manner, and two thousand Pikes, and a thousand
Harkebutters, after the Duche facion, they should suffice me: for that I would
place the Pikes, either in the front of the battle, or where I should fear
most the horses, and those with the Targaetes and sweardes, shall serve me to
make a back to the Pikes, and to win the battle, as I shall show you: so
that I believe, that a power thus ordained, should ouercum at this day, any
other power.


Cosimo. This which has been said, suffiseth concerning footmen, but
concerning horsemen, we desire to understand, which you think more stronger
armed, either owers, or the antiquity?


Fabricio. I believe that in these days, having respect to the Saddelles
bolstered, and to the stiroppes not used of thantiquitie, they stand more
strongly on horseback, then in the old time: I think also they arm them
more sure: so that at this day, a band of men of arms, paisyng very much,
comes to be with more difficulty withstoode, then were the horsemen of old
time: notwithstanding for all this, I judge, that there ought not to be made
more account of horses, then in old time was made, for that (as before is said)
many times in our days, they have with the footmen received shame, and shall
receive always, where they encounter, with a power of footmen armed, and
ordered, as above has been declared. The victory of Lucullo, against Tigrane
king of Armenia.
Tigrane king of Armenia, had against the army of the Romans, whereof was
capitain Lucullo, Cl. thousand horsemen, emongeste the which, were many
armed, like unto our men of arms, which they called Catatratti, and of the
other part, the Romans were about six thousand, with.xxv. thousand
footmen: so that Tigrane seeing the army of the enemies, said: these be
horses enough for an imbassage: notwithstanding, incounteryng together, he was
overthrown: and he that writes of the same fight, dispraiseth those
Catafratti, declaryng them to be unprofitable: for that he says, because
they had their faces covered, they had much ado to see, and to offend the
enemy, and they falling, being laden with armor, could not rise up again,
nor welde the^ selves in any manner to prevail. I say therefore, that those
people or kingdoms, which shall esteem more the power of horses, then the
power of footmen be always weak, and subject to all ruin, as by Italy has
been seen in our time, the which has been taken, ruinated, and over run with
strangers, through no other fault, then for having taken little care, of the
seruise on foot, and being brought the soldiers thereof, al on horseback.
Yet there ought to be had horses, but for second, and not for first foundation
of an army: for that to make a discovery, For what purpose horsemen be most
requi^^^e.
to over run, and to destroy the enemies country, and to keep troubled and
disquieted, the army of the same, and in their armours always, to let them of
their victualles, they are necessary, and most profitable: but concerning for
the day of battle, and for the faight in the field, which is the
importance of the war, and the end, for which the armies are ordained,
they are more meter to follow the enemy being discomfited, then to do any
other thing, which in the same is to be done, and they be in comparison, to
the footmen, much inferior.


Cosimo. There is happened unto me two doubts, the one, where I know, that
the Parthians did not use in the war, other the^ horses, and yet they divided
the world with the Romans: the other is, that I would that you should show,
how the horsemen ca^ be withstoode of footmen, and whereof grows the
strength of these, and the debilitie of those?


Fabritio. Either I have told you, or I minded to tell you, how that my
reasoning of the affairs of war, ought not to pass the bounds of Europe:
when thus it is, I am not bound unto you, to make accoumpt of the same, which
is used in Asia, yet I must say unto you thus, that the warring of the
Parthians, was altogether contrary, to the same of the Romans: for as much as
the Parthians, warred all on horseback, and in the faight, they proceeded
confusedly, and scattered, and it was a manner of faight unstable, and full of
uncertainty. The Romans were (it may be said) almost al on foot, and
they fought close together and sure, and they overcame diversely, the one the
other, according to the largeness, or straightness of the situacion: for that
in this the Romans were superiors, in the same the Parthians, whom might make
great proof, with the same manner of warryng, considering the region, which
they had to defend, the which was most large: for as much as it has the sea
coaste, distant a thousand miles, the rivers the one from the other, two or three
days journey, the tounes in like manner and the inhabitauntes few: so that a
Roman army heavy and slow, by means of their armoures, and their orders,
could not over run it, without their grievous hurt (those that defended it,
being on horseback most expedite) so that they were to day in one place,
and to morrow distaunt fifty miles. Hereof it grew, that the Parthians might
prevail with their c^^ualrie only, both to the ruin of the army of
Crassus, and to the peril of the same, of Marcus Antonius: but I (as I have
told you) do not intend in this my reasonyng, to speak of the warfare out of
Europe, therefore I will stand upon the same, which in times past, the Romans
ordained, and the Greeks, and as the Duchemen do now adays. But let us se to
the other question of yours, where you desire to understand, what order, or
what natural virtue makes, that the footmen overcome the horsemen. And I say
unto you first that the horses cannot go, The reason why footmen are able to
ouerc^^^ horsemen.
as the footmen in every place: They are slower then the footmen to obeie,
when it is requisite to alter the order: for as much, as if it be needful,
either going forward, to turn backwarde, or tournyng backwarde, to go
forward, or to move themselves standing still, or going to stand still, without
doubt, the horsemen cannot do it so redilie as the footement: the horsemen
cannot, being of some violence, disordained, return in their orders, but with
difficulty, although the same violence cease, the which the footmen do
most easily and quickly. Besides this, it happens many times, that a hardy
manne shall be upon a vile horse, and a coward upon a good, whereby it
follows, that this evil matchyng of stomachs, makes disorder. Nor no man
does marvel, that a band of footemenne, susteineth all violence of horses:
for that a horse is a beast, that has sense, and knows the perilies, and
with an ill will, will enter in them: and if you consider, what force makes
them go forward, and what holds them backwarde, you shall se without doubt,
the same to be greater, which keeps the^ back, then that which makes them
go forwards: For that the spur makes them go forward, and of the other
side, either the swearde, or the Pike, keeps them back: so that it has been
seen by the old, and by the late experience, a band of footmen to be most
safe, ye, inuinsible for horses. And if you should argue to this, that the
heat, with which they come, makes them more furious to encounter, who that
would withstand them, and less to regard the Pike, then the spur: I say,
that if the horse so disposed, begin to see, that he must run upon the poincte
of the Pike, either of himself, he will refrain the course so that so sone as he
shall feel himself pricked, he will stand still atones, or being come to
them, he will turn on the right, or on the left hand. Whereof if you will
make experience prove to run a horse against a wall: you shall find few,
with what so ever fury he come withal, will strike against it. Caesar having
in France, to faighte with the Suizzers, a lighted, and made every manne a
light on foot, and to avoid from the arms, the horses, as a thing more meet
to ^le, then to faight. But notwithstanding these natural impedimentes, which
horses have, the same Captain, How footmen may save them selves from horsemen.
which leads the footmen, ought to choose ways, which have for horse, the
most impedime^tes that may be, and seldom times it happens, but that a man may save himself, by the quality of the country: for that if thou
march on the hills, ye situacion does save thee from the same fury, whereof
you doubt, yt they go withal in the plain, few plains be, which through the
tillage, or by means of the woddes, do not assure thee: for that every
hillocke, every ba^cke, although it be but small, takes away the same heat,
and every culture where be Vines, and other trees, lettes the horses: and if
thou come to battle, the very same lettes happens, that chances in
marchyng: for as much as every little impedemente, that the horse has,
abateth his fury. One thing notwithstanding, I will not forgette to tell you,
how the Romans esteemed so much their orders, and trusted so much to their
weapons, that if they should have had, to choose either so rough a place to save
them selves from horses, where they should not have been able, to rau^ge their
orders, or a place where they should have need, to fear more of horses, but
ben able to destende their battle, always they took this, and left that: but
because it is time, to pass to the army, having armed these soldiers,
according to the aunciente and new use, let us see what exercises the Romans
caused them make, before the men were brought to the battle. Although they
be well chosen, and better armed, they ought with most great study be
exercised, for that without this exercise, there was never any soldier good:
these exercises ought to be divided into three parts, the one, The exercise of
Soldiers, ought to be divided into three parts.
for to harden the body, and to make it apt to take pains, and to be more
swifter and more readier, the other, to teach the^, how to handell their
weapons, the third, for to learn them to keep the orders in the army, as well
in marchyng, as in faightyng, and in the incampyng: The which be three
principal acts, that an army does: for asmoche, as if an army march,
incampe, and faight with order, and expertly, the Captain leseth not his
honor, although the battle should have no good end. Therefore, all
thauncient commonweals, provided these exercises in manner, by custom, and by
law, that there should not be left behind any part thereof. They exercised
then their youth, What exercises the ancient common weale^ used to exercise
their youth in, and what commodity insued thereby.
for to make the^ swift, in runnyng, to make them ready, in leapyng, for to
make them strong, in throwyng the bar, or in wrestlyng: and these three
qualities, be as it were necessary in soldiers. For that swiftness, makes
them apt to possess places, before the enemy, and to come to them unlooked
for, and at unawares to pursue them, when they are discomfaicted: the
readiness, makes them apt to avoid a blow, to leap over a diche, to
win a bank: strength, makes them the better able to bear their armours, to
encounter the enemy, to withstand a violence. And above all, to make the
body the more apt to take pains, they used to bear great burdens, the
which custom is necessary: for that in difficulte expedicions, it is
requisite many times, that the soldier beside his armours, bear vitualles
for many days, and if he were not accustomed to this labor, he could not do
it: and without this, there can neither be avoided a peril, nor a victory
gotten with fame. Concerning to learn how to handell the weapons, How the
antiquity, learned their young soldiers, to handell their we^pons.
they exercised them, in this manner: they would have the young men, to put on
armor, which should way twice as much, as their field armor, and instead
of a swearde, they gave them a cudgel leaded, which in comparison of a very
swearde in deed, was most heavy: they made for every one of them, a post to
be set up in the ground, which should be in height two yardes and a quarter,
and in soche manner, and so strong, that the blows should not stur nor hurl it
down, against the which post, the young man with a targaet, and with the
cudgel, as against an enemy did exercise, and some whiles he stroke, as
though he would hurt the hedde, or the face, somewhile he retired back, an
other while he made for^warde: and they had in this exercise, this
aduertisme^t, to make them apt to cover them selves, and to hurt the enemy:
and having the counterfaight armours most heavy, their ordinary armours seemed
after unto the^ more lighter. The Romans, would that their soldiers should
hurt with the prick, and not with the cut, as well because the prick is
more mortalle, and has less defense, as also to thentent, that he that should
hurt, might lie the less open, and be more apt to redouble it, then with
cuttes. Do not marvel that these ancient men, should think on these small
things, for that where the incounteryng of men is reasoned of, you shall
perceive, that every little vauntage, is of great importance: and I remember
you the same, which the writers of this declare, rather then I to teach you.
What (...) mos^^ (...) in a common weal.
The antiquity esteemed nothing more happy, in a common weal, then to be in
the same, many men exercised in arms: because not the shining of precious
stones and of gold, makes that the enemies submit themselves unto thee, but
only the fear of the weapons: afterward, the errors which are made in other
things, may sometimes be corrected, but those which are dooen in the war,
the pain straight way coming on, cannot be amended. Besides that, the
knowledge to faight, makes men more bold, because no man fears to do that
thing, which he thinks to have learned to do. The antiquity would
therefore, that their Citezeins should exercise themselves, in all marcial
feats, and they made them to throw against the same post, darts much heuier
then the ordinary: the which exercise, besides the making men expert in
throwyng, makes also the arm more nimble, and much stronger. They taught
them also to shote in ye long bow, to whorle with the sting: Monster Masters,
for thexe^cisyng of young men vnexpecte.
and to all these things, they appoincted masters, in soche manner, that after
when they were chosen for to go to the war, they were now with mind and
disposicion, soldiers. Nor there remained the^ to learn other, then to go in
the orders, and to maintain them selves in those, either marchyng, or
faightyng: The which most easily they learned, mingeling themselves with
those, which had long time served, whereby they kn^we how to stand in the
orders.


Cosimo. What exercises would you cause them to make at this present?


Fabricio. The exercises that soldiers ought to make in these days.
A good many of those, which have been declared, as runnyng, and wrestlyng,
making them to leap, making them to labor in armours, much heavier then
the ordinary, making them shoot with Cross bows, and long bows, whereunto
I would join the harkabus, a new instrument (as you know) very necessary,
and to these exercises I would use, all the youth of my state, but with greater
industry, and more sollicitatenesse the same part, which I should have
already appoincted to serve, and always in the idell days, The exercise of
swimmyng.
they should be exercised. I would also that they should learn to swim, the
which is a thing very profitable: for that there be not always, bridges over
rivers, hoates be not always ready: so that thy army not knowing how to
swime, remains deprived of many commodities: and many occasions to work
well, is taken away. The Romans for none other cause had ordained, that the
young men should exercise them selves in Campus Martius, then only, for that
having Tiber at hand, Tiber, is a ^i^ r cunnyng through Rome the water whereof
will never corrupt.
they might, being weried with the exercise on land, refreshe them selves in
the water, and partly in swimmyng, to exercise them selves. I would make also,
as the antiquity, those which should serve on horseback to exercise, the
which is most necessary, for that besides to know how to ride, they must
know how on horseback, Thexercise of dautyng, and the commodity thereof.
they may prevail of the^ selves. And for this they had ordained horses of
wood, upon the which they practiced, to leap up armed, and unarmed, without
any help, and on every hand: the which made, that atones, and at a b^ck of a
capitain, the horsemen were on foot, and likewise at a token, they mounted on
horseback. And soche exercises, both on foot and on horseback, as they were
then easy to be done, so now they should not be difficult to the same common
weal, or to the same prince, which would cause them to be put in practice of
their young men. As by experience is seen, in certain citees of the Weste
country, where is kept a live like manners with this order. An order that is
taken in certain countries, concerning exercises of war.
They divide all their inhabiters into diverse parts: and every part they name
of the kind of those weapons, that they use in the war. And for that they
use Pikes, Halbardes, Bows, and Harkebuses, they call them Pike men,
Halberders, Harkebutters, and Archars: Therefore, it is mete for all the
inhabiters to declare, in what orders they will be appoincted in. And for that
all men, either for age, or for other impedimentes, be not fit for the war,
every order makes a choice of men, and they call them the sworen, whom in
idell days, be bound to exercise themselves in those weapons, whereof they be
named: and every manne has his place appoincted him of the cominaltie, where
soche exercise ought to be made: and those which be of the same order, but not
of the sworen, are contributaries with their money, to the same expenses, which
in soche exercises be necessary: therefore the same that they do, we may do.
But our small prudence does not suffer us, to take any good way. Of these
exercises there grew, that the antiquity had good souldious, and that now
those of the Weste, be better men then ours: for as much as the antiquity
exercised them, either at home (as those commonweals do) or in the armies,
as those Emperors did, for thoccasions aforesaied: but we, at home will not
exercise them, in Camp we cannot, because they are not our subjects, and for
that we are not able to bind the^ to other exercises then they them selves
list to do: the which occacion has made, that first the armies be
neclected, and after, the orders, and that the kingdoms, and the commonweals, in especially Italians, live in soche debilitie. But let us turn to
our order, and following this matter of exercises, I say, how it suffiseth not
to make good armies, for having hardened the men, made them strong, swift, and
handsome, where it is needful also, What knowledge a Soldier ought to have.
that they learn to stand in the orders, to obeie to signs, to soundes, and
to the voice of the capitain: to know, standing, to retire the^ selves, going
forwards, both faightyng, and marchyng to maintain those: because without
this knowledge, withal serious diligence observed, and practiced, there was
never army good: and without doubt, the fierce and disordered men, be much
more weaker, then the fearful that are ordered, for that thorder drives away
from men fear, the disorder abateth fierceness. And to the entente you may
the better perceive that, which here following shall be declared, you have to
understand, how every nation, in the orderyng of their men to the war, have
made in their host, or in their army, a principal member, the which though
they have varied with the name, they have little varied with the number of the
men: for that they all have made it, between six and.viij.M. men. This
number of men was called of the Romans, a Legion, of Greeks a Fallange, of
Frenchemen Caterna: this very same in our time of the Suizzers, whom only of
the ancient warfare, keep some shadow, is called in their tongue that, which
in ours signifies the maine battle. True it is, that every one of them, has
after divided it, according to their purposes. Therefore me thinks best, that
we ground our talk, upon this name most known, and after, according to the
aunciente, and to the orders now adays, the best that is possible to ordain
it: and because the Romans divided their Legion, A Co^^^^e (...) hand c^m^^.
which was made between five and six thousand men, in ten Cohortes, I will
that we divide our maine battle, into ten battles, Of what ^^oe^ and of
what ^an^ of armou^^ and weapons, ^ maine batt^il^ ought to be, and the
distributing and appoinctyng of the same.
and that we make it of six thousand men on foot, and we will give to
every battle.CCCCl. men, of which shall be.CCCC. armed with heavy armor,
and.L. with light armor: the heavy armed, shall be.CCC. Targettes with
sweardes, and shall be called Target men: and.C. with Pikes, which shall be called
ordinary Pikes: the light armed shall be.L. men armed with Harkabuses, Cross
bows, and Partisans, and small Targaettes, and these by an aunciente name, were
called ordinary Veliti: all the ten battles therefore, Veliti are lig^^
armed men.
comes to have three thousand Targaet men, a thousand ordinary Pikes.CCCC.
ordinary Veliti, all which make the number of four thousand and five
hundred men. And we said, that we would make the maine battle of six
thousand: therefore there must be added an other thousand, five hundred men,
of the which I will appoinct a thousand with Pikes, who^ I will call
extraordinary Pikes, and five hundred light armed, whom I will call
extraordinary Veliti: and thus my men should come (as a little before I have
said) to be made half of Targaetes, and half of Pikes and other weapons. I
would appoincte to every battle, or band of men, a Conestable, The
capitaines that are appoincted to every hand of (...).
four Centurions, and fouretie peticapitaines, and moreover a hedde to the
ordinary Veliti, with five peticapitaines: I would give to the thousand
extraordinary Pikes, three Conestabelles, ten Centurions, and a hundred
peticapitaines: to thextraordinarie Veliti, two Conestabelles, v. Centurions,
and.l. peticapitaines: I would then apoinct a general head, over all the main
battle: I would that every Conestable should have an Ansigne, and a Drum.
Thus there should be made a maine battle of ten battles, of three thousand
Targaet men, of a thousand ordinary Pikes, of a thousand extraordinary, of
five hundred ordinary Veliti, of five hundred extraordinary, so there should
come to be six thousand men, emongeste the which there should be M.D.
peticapitaines, and moreover.xv. Conestables, with.xv. Drums, and.xv.
Ansignes, lv. Centurions, x. heddes of the ordinary Veliti, and a Captain
over all the maine battle, with his Ansigne and Drume: and I have of purpose
repeated this order the oftener, to the intent, that after when I shall show
you, the manners of orderyng the battles, and tharmies, you should not be
confounded: I say therefore, how that, that king, or that common weal, which
intends to ordeine their subjects to arms, ought to appoincte them with
these armoures and weapons, and with these parts, and to make in their
country so many maine battles, as it were able: and when they should have
ordained them, according to the forsaid distribucion, minding to exercise them
in the orders, it should suffice to exercise every battle by it self: and
although the number of the men, of every one of them: cannot by it self, make
the facion of a just army, notwithstanding, every man may learn to do
the same, which particularly appertains unto him: Two orders observed in an
army.
for that in the armies, two orders is observed, the one, the same that the men
ought to do in every battle, and the other that, which the battle ought
to do after, when it is with the other in an army. And those men, which do
well the first, most easily may observe the second: But without knowing
the same, they can never come to the knowledge of the second. Then (as I have
said) every one of these battles, may by them selves, learn to keep the
orders of the arai^s, in every quality of mouyng, and of place, and after
learn to put them selves togethers, to understand the soundes, by means
whereof in the faight they are commanded, to learn to know by that, as the
Galleys by the whistell, what ought to be done, either to stand still, or to
turn forward, or to turn backwarde, or which way to turn the weapons,
and the face: so that knowing how to keep well the araie, after soche sort,
that neither place nor mouyng may disorder them, understanding well the
commandments of their heddes, by means of the sound, and knowing quickly,
how to return into their place, these battles may after easly (as I have
said) being brought many together, learn to do that, which all the body
together, with the other battles in a just army, is bound to do. And
because soche universal practice, is also not to be esteemed a little, ones or
twice a year, when there is peace, all the main battle may be brought
together, to give it the facio^ of an whole army, some days exercisyng them,
as though they should faight a field, setting the front, and the sides with
their succors in their places. And because a captain ordeineth his host to
the field, either for coumpte of the enemy he sees, or for that, of which
without seeing he doubts, he ought to exercise his army in the one manner, and
in the other, and to instruct them in soche sort, How a captain must
inst^^^^ his soldiers how they ought to govern the^ selves in (...) battle.
that they may know how to march, and to faight, when need should require,
showing to his soldiers, how they should govern them selves, when they
should happen to be assaulted of this, or of that side: and where he ought to
instruct them how to faight against the enemy, whom they should see, he
must show them also, how the faight is begun, and where they ought to retire:
being overthrown, who has to succeade in their places, to what signs, to
what soundes, to what voices, they ought to obeie, and to practice the^ in
soche wise in the battle, and with fained assaults, that they may desire the
very thing in deed. For that an army is not made coragious, because in
the same be hardy men, but by reason the orders thereof be well appoincted:
For as much as if I be one of the first faighters, and do know, being
overcome, where I may retire, and who has to succeade in my place, I shall
always faight with boldness, seeing my succor at hand. If I shall be one of the
second faighters, the first being driven back, and overthrown, I shall not
be afraied, for that I shall have presuposed that I may be, and I shall have
desire to be the same, which may give the victory to my master, and not to
be any of the other. These exercises be most necessary, where an army is
made of new, and where the old army is, they be also necessary* for that it
is also seen, how the Romans knew from their infancy, thorder of their
armies, notwithstanding, those capitaines before they should come to thenemie,
continually did exercise them in those. And Josephus in his history says,
that the continual exercises of the Roman armies, made that all the same
multitude, which follow the camp for gain, was in the day of battle
profitable: because they all knew, how to stand in the orders, and to faight
keeping the same: but in the armies of new men, whether thou have put them
together, to faight straight way, or that thou make a power to faight, when
need requires, without these exercises, as well of the battles severally by
themselves, as of all the army, is made nothing: wherefore the orders being
necessary, it is conueniente with double industry and labor, to show them
unto soche as knows the^ not, and for to teach it, many excellent capitaines
have travailed, without any respect.


Cosimo. My thinks that this reasoning, has sumwhat transported you: for
asmoche, as having not yet declared the ways, with the which the battles
be exercised, you have reasoned of the whole army, and of the day of
battle.


Fabricio. You say truth, but surely thoccasion has been the affection,
which I bear to these orders, and the grief that I feel, seeing they be not
put in ure: notwithstanding, doubt not but that I will turn to the purpose:
as I have said, The chi^f importance in the exercisyng of bands of m^n
the chief importance that is in thexercise of the battles, is to know how
to keep well the arraies: and because I told you that one of these battles,
ought to be made of four hundred men heavy armed, I will stay my self upon
this number. They ought then to be brought into.lxxx. ranks, and five to a
rank: afterward going fast, or softly, to knit them together, and to lose
them: the which how it is dooen, may be showed better with deeds, then with
words. Which needs not greatly to be taught, for that every manne, whom is
practiced in seruise of war, knows how this order proceeds, which is good
for no other, then to use the soldiers to keep the raie: but let us come to
put together one of these battles, I say, Three principal facions for
thorderyng of men into battle ^a^e.
that there is given them three facio^s principally, the first, and the most
profitablest is, to make al massiue, and to give it the facion of two squares,
the second is, to make it square with the front horned, the third is, to make
it with a void space in the midst: the manner to put men together in the
first facion, may be of two sorts, the one is to double the ranks, The manner
how to bring a hand of m^n into batta^l^ ^e^e afte^ (...) square f^c^^^^.
that is, to make the second rank enter into the first, the.iiij. into the
third, the sixth into the fifth, and so forth, so that where there was.lxxx.
ranks, five ^o a rank, they may become.xl. ranks.x. to a rank. Afterward
cause them to double ones more in the same manner, setting the one rank into an
other, and so there shall remain twenty ranks, twenty men to a rank: this
makes two squares about, for as much as albeit that there be as many men
the one way, as in the other, notwithstanding toward the hedde, they join
together, that the one side touches the other: but by the other way, they be
distant the one from the other, at least a yard and a haulfe, after soche
sort, that the square is much longer, from the back to the front, then from
the one side to the other: and because we have at this present, to speak often
of the parts before, of behind, and of the sides of these battles, and of
all the army together, know you, that when I say either hedde or front, I
mean the part before, when I shall say back, the part behind, when I shall
say fla^kes, the parts on the sides. The fifty ordinary veliti of the
battle, must not mingle with the other ranks, but so sone as the battle
is facioned, they shall be set a long by the flanks thereof. The other way to
set together the battle is this, and because it is better then the first, I
will set it before your iyes just, how it ought to be ordained. I believe that
you remember of what number of men, of what heddes it is made, and of what
armours they are armed: The better way for the ordring of a band of men in
battle ra^e, after the first facion.
then the facion, that this battle ought to have, is (as I have said) of
twenty ranks, twenty men to a rank, five ranks of Pikes in the front, and
fiftene ranks of Targaettes on the back, two Centurions standing in the
front, two behind on the back, who shall execute the office of those,
which the antiquity called Tergiductori. The Conestable with the Ansigne, and
with the Drum, shall stand in the same space, that is between the five ranks
of the Pikes, and the fiftene of the Targaettes. Of the Peticapitaines, there
shall stand one upon every side of the ranckes, so that every one, may have
on his side his men, those peticapitaines, which shall be on the left hand, to
have their men on the right hand, those Peticapitaines, which shall be on the
right hand, to have their men on the left hand: The fifty Veliti, must
stand a long the flanks, and on the back of the battle. To mind now, that
this battle may be set together in this facion, the men going ordinarily, it
is convenient to order them thus. Make the men to be brought into.lxxx. ranks,
five to a rank, as a little before we have said, leauyng the Veliti either at
the hedde, or at the tail, so that they stand out of this order: and it ought
to be ordained, that every Ce^turion have behind his back twenty ranks, and
to be next behind every Centurion, five ranks of Pikes, and the rest
Targaettes. The Conestable shall stand with the Drum, and the Ansigne, in
the same space, which is between the Pikes, and the Targaettes of the second
Centurion, and to occupy the places of three Targaette men. Of the
Peticapitaines, twenty shall stand on the sides of the ranks, of the first
Centurion, on the left hand, and twenty shall stand on the sides of the
ranks, of the last Centurion on the right hand. And you must understand,
that the Peticapitaine, which has to lead the Pikes, ought to have a Pike,
and those that lead the Targaettes, ought to have like weapons. Then the
ranks being brought into this order, and mindyng in marchyng, to bring the^
into battle, for to make the hedde, the first Centurion must be caused to
stand still, with the first twenty ranks, and the second to proceade
marchyng, and tournyng on the right hand, he must go a long the sides of the
twenty ranks that stand still, till he come to be even with the other
Centurion, where he must also stand still, and the third Centurion to proceed
marchyng, likewise tournyng on the right hand* and a long the sides of the
ranks that stand still, must go so far, that he be even with the other two
Centurions, and he also standing still, the other Centurion must follow with
his ranks, likewise tournyng on the right hand, a long the sides of the
ranks that stand still, so far that be come to the head of the other, and
then to stand still, and straight way two Centurions only, shall depart from
the front, and go to the back of the battle, the which comes to be made
in the same manner, and with the same order just, as a little before I have showed
you. The Veliti must stand along, by the flanks of the same, according as is
disposed in the ^^r^ way, which way is called redoublyng by right line, this
is called redoublyng by flank: the first way is more easy, this is with
better order, and comes better to pass, and you may better correct it,
after your own manner, for that in redoublyng by right line, you must be
ruled by the number, because five makes ten, ten twenty, twenty forty, so
that with redoublyng by right line, you cannot make a hedde of fiftene, nor of
five and twenty, nor of thirty, nor of five and thirty, but you must go
where the same number will lead you. And yet it happens every day in
particulare affairs, that it is convenient to make the forward with six
hundred, or eight hundred men, so that to redouble by right line, should
disorder you: therefore this likes me better: that difficulty that is, ought
most with practice, and with exercise to be made easy. Therefore I say unto
you, how it imports more then any thing, to have the soldiers to know how
to set themselves in araie quickly, and it is necessary to keep them in this
battle, to exercise them therein, and to make them to go apace, either
forward or backward, to pass through difficulte places, without troublyng
thorder: for asmoche as the soldiers, which can do this well, be expect
soldiers, and although they have never seen enemies in the face, they may be
called old soldiers, and contrariwise, those which cannot keep these
orders, though they have been in a thousand wars, they ought always to be
reputed new soldiers. This is, concerning setting them together, when they
are marching in small ranks: but being set, and after being broken by some
accident or chance, which grows either of the situacion, or of the enemy,
to make that in a sudden, they may come into order again, this is the
importance and the difficulty, and where is needful much exercise, and
much practice, and wherein the antiquity bestowed much study. Therefore, it
is necessary to do two things, first to have this battle full of
countersignes, the other, to keep always this order, how to exercise men, and
to take soche order, whereby a band of me^ that were by what soever chance
disordred may straighte wai be b^ought into order again.
that those same men may stand always in ye rank, which they were first
placed in: as for insample, if one have begone to stand in the second, that he
stand after alwaie in that, and not only in that self same rank, but in
that self same place: for the obseruyng whereof (as I have said) be
necessary many countersignes. In especially it is requisite, that the Ansigne
be after soche sort countersigned, that companyng with the other battles,
it may be known from them, according as the Conestable, and the Centurions
have plumes of feathers in their heddes differente, and easy to be known, and
that which imports most, is to ordain that the peticapitaines he known.
Whereunto the antiquity had so much care, that they would have nothing else
written in their hedde pieces, but the number that they were named by, calling
them first, second, third, and fourth. etc. And yet they were not contented
with this, but made every soldier to have written in his Targaet, the number
of the rank, and the number of the place, in which rank he was appoincted.
Then the men being countersigned thus, and used to stand between these
limits, it is an easy thing, they being disordered, to fettt them all again
quickly into order: considering, that the Ansigne standing still, the
Centurions, and the Peticapitaines may guess their places by the iye, and
being brought the left of the left, the right of the right, with their
accustomed distance, the soldiers led by their rule, and by the differences
of the cognisances, may be quickly in their proper places, no otherwise, then
as if the boordes of a tun should be taken a sunder, which being first
marked, most easily may be set together again, where the same being not
countersigned, were impossible to bring into order any more. These things,
with diligence and with exercise, are quickly taught, and quickly learned, and
being learned, with difficulty are forgotten: for that the new men, be led
of the old, and with time, a Province with these exercises, may become
thoroughly practiced in the war. It is also necessary to teach them, to
turn them selves all at ones, and when need requires, to make of the
flanks, and of the back, the front, and of the front, flanks, or back,
which is most easy: because it suffiseth that every manne do turn his
body, toward the same part that he is commanded, and where they turn
their faces, there the front comes to be. True it is, that when they turn
to any of the flanckes, the orders turn out of their proporcion: for that
from the breast to the back, there is little difference, and from the one
flancke to the other, there is very much distance, the which is al contrary
to the ordinary order of the battle: therefore it is convenient, that
practice, and discrecion, do place the^ as they ought to be: but this is small
disorder, for that most easily by themselves, they may remedy it. But that
which imports more, and where is requisite more practice, is when a battle
would turn all at ones, as though it were a whole body, here is meet to
have great practice, and great discrecion: because mindyng to turn, What
advertisement ought to be used in tourning about a whole band of men, after
soche sort, as though it were but one body.
as for insample on the left hand, the left corner must stand still, and
those that be next to him that stands still, must march so softly, that
they that be in the right corner, need not to run: otherwise all thing
should be confounded. But because it happens always, when an army marches
from place to place, that the battles, which are not placed in the front,
shall be driven to faight not by hedde, but either by flanck^, or by back, so
that a battle must in a s^daine make of flancke, or of back, hedde: and
mindyng that like battles in soche race, may have their Proporcion, as above
is declared, it is necessary, that they have the Pikes on the same flancke,
that ought to be h^dde, and the Pe^icapitaines, Centurions, and Conestables, to
resort accordyngly to their places. Therefore to mind to do this, How to
o^^er a band o^ ^^nne after soc^^ (...) that (...) make the^ (...) against^
(...) of which flank the^ ^^st.
in plasyng them together, you must ordeine the fowerskore ranks, of fine in a
rank, thus: Set all the Pikes in the first twenty ranks, and place the
Peticapitaines thereof, five in the first places, and five in the last: the
other three score ranks, which come after, be all of Targaettes, which come
to be three Centuries. Therefore, the first and the last rank of every
Centurio^, would be Peticapitaines, the Conestable with the Ansigne, and with
the Drum, must stand in the midst of the first Centurie of Targaettes,
and the Centurions in the head of every Centurie. The band thus ordained, when
you would have the Pikes to come on the left flancke, you must redouble
Centurie by Centurie, on the right flancke: if you would have them to come on
the right flancke, you must redouble them on the left. And so this battle
tourneth with the Pikes upon a flancke, and the Conestable in the middeste: the
which facion it has marchyng: but the enemy coming, and the time that it
would make of flancke hedde, it needs not but to make every m^n to turn his
face, toward the same flancke, where the Pikes be, and then the battle
tourneth with the ranks, and with the heddes in the same manner, as is
aforesaied: for that every man is in his place, except the Centurions, and the
Centurions straight way, and without difficulty, place themselves: How a band
of men ought to be order^^, when in marchyng they should be constrained to
faight on their backs.
But when they in marchyng, should be driven to faight on the back, it is
convenient to ordein the ranks after soch sort, that setting them in
battle, the Pikes may come behind, and to do this, there is to be kept
no other order, then where in orderyng the battle, by the ordinary, every
Centurie has five ranks of Pikes before, to cause that they may have them
behind, and in all the other parts to observe thorder, which I declared
first.


Cosimo. You have told (if I do well remember me) that this manner of
exercise, is to be able to bring these battles together into an army, and
that this practice, serves to be able to order them selves in the same: But
if it should happen, that these.CCCCL. men, should have to do an act
separate, how would you order them?


Fabricio. He that leads them, ought then to judge, where he will place the
Pikes, and there to put them, the which does not repugne in any part to the
order above written: for that also, though the same be the manner, that is
observed to faighte a field, together with the other battles, notwithstanding
it is a rule, which serves to all those ways, wherein a band of men should
happen to have to do: but in showing you the other two ways of me
propounded, of ordering the battles* I shall also satisfy you more to your
question: for that either they are never used, or they are used when a battle
is a lone, and not in company of other, and to come to the way of ordering
them, with two horns, How a battle to made with two horns.
I say, that thou oughteste to order the lxxx. ranks, five to a rank, in
this manner. Place in the midst, one Centurion, and after him.xxv. ranks,
which must be with two Pikes on the left hand, and with three Targaettes
on the right, and after the first five, there must be put in the twenty
following, twenty Peticapitaines, all between the pikes, and the Targaettes,
except those which bear the Pike, who^ may stand with the Pikes: after
these xxv. ra^kes thus ordered, there is to be placed an other Centurion, and
behind him fiftene ranks of Targaettes: after these, the Conestable between
the Dru^ and the Ansigne, who also must have after him, other fiftene ranks of
Targaettes: after this, the third Centurion must be placed, and behind him,
xxv. ra^kes, in every one of which, ought to be three Targaettes on the left
flancke, and two Pikes on the right, and after the five first ranks, there
must be.xx. Peticapitaines placed between the Pikes, and the Targaettes: after
these ranks, the towerth Centurion must follow. Intendyng therefore, of these
ranks thus ordered, to make a battle with two horns, the first Centurion
must stand still, with the.xxv ranks which be behind him, after the second
Centurion must move, with the fiftene ranks of Targaettes, that be behind
him, and to turn on the right hand, and up by the right flancke of the.xxv.
ranks, to go so far, that he arrive to the.xv. rank, and there to stand
still: after, the Conestable must move, with the fiftene ranks of Targaettes,
which be behind him, and tournyng likewise on the right hand, up by the
right flancke of the fiftene ranks, that were first moved, must march so
far, that he come to their heddes, and there to stand still: after, the third
Centurion must move with the xxv. ranks, and with the fowerth Centurion,
which was behind, and turnyng up straight, must go a long by the right flanck
of the fiftene last ranks of the Targaettes, and not to stand still when he
is at the heddes of them, but to follow marchyng so far, that the last
rank of the.xxv. may come to be even with the ranks behind. And this dooen,
the Centurion, which was bed of the first fiftene ranks of Targaettes,
must go away from thens where he stood, and go to the back in the left
corner: and thus a battle shall be made of.xxv. ranks, after twenty men to
a rank, with two horns, upon every side of the fro^t, one horn, and every one,
shall have ten ranks, five to a rank, and there shall remain a space between
the two horns, as much as contains ten men, which turn their sides, the
one to the other. Between the two horns, the capitain shall stand, and on every
poinct of a horn, a Centurion: There shall be also behind, on every corner,
a Centurion: there shall be two ranks of Pikes, and.xx. Peticapitaines on every
flancke. These two horns, serve to keep between them the artillery, when
this battle should have any with it, and the cariages: The Veliti must
stand along the flanks, The orderyng (...) battle (...) a void sp^^^ in
the middest^.
under the Pikes. But mindyng to bring this horned battle, with a void space
in the middeste, there ought no other to be done, then of fiftene ranks, of
twenty to a rank, to take eight ranks, and to place them on the poinctes of
the two horns, which then of horns, become back of the void space. In
this place, the cariages are kept, the capitain stands, and the Ansigne, but
never the Artillery, the which is placed either in the front, or a long the
flanks. These be the ways, that a battle may use when it is constrained to
pass alone through suspected places: notwithstanding, the massiue battle
without horns, and without any soche void place is better, yet purposyng to
assure the disarmed, the same horned battle is necessary. The Suizzers make
also many facions of battles, among which, they make one like unto a cross:
because in the spaces that is between the arms thereof, they keep safe their
Harkebuters from the danger of the enemies: but because soche battles be
good to faight by them selves, and my intent is to show, how many battles
united, do faight with thenemie, I will not labor further in describing the^.


Cosimo. My thinks I have very well comprehended the way, that ought to be
kept to exercise the me^ in these battles: But (if I remember me well) you
have said, how that besides the ten battles, you join to the maine
battle, a thousand extraordinary Pikes, and five hundred extraordinary
Veliti: will you not appoincte these to be exercised.


Fabritio. I would have them to be exercised, and that with most great
diligence: and the Pikes I would exercise, at least Ansigne after Ansigne, in
the orders of the battles, as the other: For as much as these should do me
more seruise, To what purpose the Pikes and Velite extraordinary must se^^e.
then the ordinary battles, in all particulare affairs: as to make guides,
to get b^^ties, and to do like things: but the Veliti, I would exercise at
home, without bringing them together, for that their office being to faight a
sonder, it is not m^te, that they should company with other in the common
exercises: for that it shall suffice, to exercise them well in the particular
exercises. They ought then (as I first told you, nor now me thynkes no labor
to rehearse it again) to cause their men to exercise them selves in these
battles, whereby they may know how to keep the raie, to know their
places, to turn quickly, when either enemy, or situacion troubles them: for
that, when they know how to do this, the place is after easily learned, which
a battle has to keep, and what is the office thereof in the army: and when
a Prince, or a common weal, will take the pain, and will use their diligence
in these orders, and in these exercisyng, it shall always happen, that in
their country, there shall be good soldiers, and they to be superiors to
their neighbors, and shall be those, which shall give, and not receive the
laws of other men: but (as I have said) the disorder wherein they live,
makes that they neclecte, and do not esteem those things, and therefore our
armies be not good: and yet though there were either head, or member naturally
virtuous, they cannot show it.


Cosimo. What carriages would you, that every one of these battles should
have? Neither Centurion nor P^ticapitaine, ought not to ride. What carriages
the Capitaines ought to have, and the member of c^^tages requi^^e to every
band^ of m^^ne.



Fabritio. First, I would that neither Centurion, nor Peticapitain, should be
suffered to ride: and if the Con^stable would needs ride, I would that he
should have a Mule, and not a horse, I would allow him two carriages, and one
to every Centurion, and two to every three Peticapitaines, for that so many
we lodge in a lodgyng, as in the place thereof we shall tell you: So that every
battle will come to have.xxxvi. carriages, the which I would should carry
of necessity the tents, the vessels to sees meat, axes, bars of Iron,
sufficient to make the lodynges, and then if they can carry any other thing,
they may do it at their pleasure.


Cosimo. I believe that the heddes of you, ordained in every one of these
battles, be necessary: albeit, I would doubt, (...) that so many
commanders, should confound all.


Fabritio. That should be, when it were not referred to one man, but referryng
it, they cause order, ye and without them, it is impossible to govern an
army: Without many capitaines, an army cannot be governed.
for that a wall, which ^n every part encl^neth, requires rather to have
many proppes, and thick, although not so strong, then few, though they were
strong: because the virtue of one alone, does not remedy the ^uin^ a far
of. And therefore in tharmies, and among every ten men, it is convenient that
there be o^e, of more (...), of more heart, or at least wise of more
authority, who with stomach, with words, and with example, may keep them
constante, and disposed to faight, and these things of me declared, be
necessary in an army, as the H^ddes, the Ansignes, and the Drums, is seen
that we have them all in our armies, but none does his office. First to
mind that the Peticapitaines do the same, for which they are ordained, it is
necessary (as I have said) that there (...) differente, between every one of
them and their me^, and that they long together, doing their duties, standing
in thorder with them: for that they placed in their places, be a rule and a
temperaunce, to maintain the r^ies straight and steddie, and it is impossible
that th^^ disorder, or disor^eryng, do not r^duc^ themselves quickly into
their places. But we now adays, do not use them to other purpose, then to
give them more wages, then to other men, and to cause that they do some
particulare feate: The very same happens of the Ansigne bearers, for that
they are kept rather to make a fair muster, then for any other warlike use:
but the antiquity used them for guides, To what purpose Ansignes ought to
ser^^.
and to bring them selves again into order: for that every man, so sone as
the Ansigne stood still, knew the place, that be kept nere to his Ansigne,
whereunto he returned always: they knew also, how that the same mouyng, or
standing, they should stay, or move: therefore it is necessary in an army,
that there be many bodies, and every band of men to have his Ansigne, and
his guide: wherefore having this, it is mete that they have stomachs enough,
and by consequence life enough. Then the men ought to march, according to
the Ansigne: and the Ansigne to move, according to the Drum, For what purpose
Drums ought to be used.
the which Drum well ordered, commands to the army, the which going
with paces, that answers the time of the same, will come to keep easily
thorders: for which cause the antiquity had Shalmes, Flutes, and soundes
perfectly tymed: For as much as like as he that daunseth, proceadeth with the
time of the Music, and going with the same does not err, even so an army
obeiyng, in mouyng it self to the same sound, does not disorder: and
therefore, they varied the sound, according as they would vary the mocion,
and according as they would inflame, or quiet, or stay the minds of men: and
like as the soundes were diverse, so diversely they named them: the sound
Dorico, The property that sou^des of instruments have in men^ minds.
ingendered constancy, the sound Frigio, fury: whereby they say, that
Alexander being at the Table, and one soundyng the sound Frigio, it kendled so
much his mind, that he laid hand on his weapons. All these manners should be
necessary to find again: and when this should be difficulte, at least there
would not be left behind those that teach the Soldier to obeie, the which
every man may vary, and ordeine after his own facion, so that with practice,
he accustom the ears of his soldiers to know it: But now adays of this
sound, there is no other fruicte taken for the most part, then to make a
rumor.


Cosimo. I would desire to understand of you, if ever with your self you have
discourced, whereof grows so much vileness, and so much disorder, and so
much necligence in these days of this exercise?


Fabritio. A notable discourse of the aucthour, declaryng whereof grows so
much vileness disorder and necligence in these days, concerning the exer^^ses
of war.
With a good will I will tell you the same, that I think. You know how that of
the excellent men of war, there has been named many in Europe, few in
Affric, and less in Asia: this grew, for that these two last parts of the
world, have had not pass one kingdom, or two, and few commonweals, but
Europe only, has had many kingdoms, and infinite commonweals, where men
became excellent, and did show their virtue, according as they were set a
work, and brought before their Prince, or common weal, or king that he be:
it follows therefore, that where be many dominions, there rise many valiant
men, and where be few, few. In Asia is found Ninus, Cirus, Artasereses,
Mithridates: and very few other, that to these may be compared. In Africa,
is named (lettyng stand the same ancient Egypt) Massinissa, Iugurta, and those
Capitaines, which of the Carthaginens common weal were nourished, whom also
in respect to those of Europe, are most fewer because in Europe, be
excellent men without number, and so many more should be, if together with
those should be named the other, that be through the malignitie of time
extincte: for that the world has been mo^^e virtuous, where has been most
states, which have favored virtue of necessity, or for other human
passion. There rose therefore in Asia, few excellent men: because the same
Province, was all under one kingdom, in the which for the greatness thereof,
the same standing for the most part of time well, th^re could not grew men in
doings excellent. To Afric there happened the very same, yet there were
nourished more then in Asia, by reason of the Carthagine^s common weal: for
that in commonweals, there grow more excellent men, then in kingdoms:
because in commonweals for he most part, virtue is honored, in Kingdoms it
is held back: whereby grows, that in the one, virtuous men are nourished, in
the other they are extincte. Therefore he that shall consider the parts of
Europe, shall find it to have been full of commonweals, and of princedomes,
the which for fear, that the one had of the other, they were constrained to
keep lively the warlike orders, and to honor them, which in those most
prevailed: for that in Greece, besides the kingdom of the Macedonians, there
were many commonweals, and in every one of them, were bred most excellent
men. In Italy, were the Romans, the Sannites, the Toscanes, the Gallie
Cisalpini* France, and Almainie, were full of commonweals and princedomes.
Spain likewise: and although in comparison of the Romans, there are named
few other, it grows through the malignitie of the writers, whom follow
fortune, and to them for the most part it suffised, to honor the
conquerours* but it stands not with reason, that between the Sannites, and
the Toscanes, whom fought. CL. years with the Roman people, before they were
overcome, there should not grow exceadyng many excellent men. And so
likewise in France, and in Spain: but that virtue, which the writers did not
celebrate in particular men, they celebrated generally in the people, where
they exalte to the stars, the obstinatenesse that was in them, to defend
their liberty. Being then true, that where be most dominions, there rises
most valiant men, it follows of necessity, that extinguishyng those,
virtue is extincte straighte way, the occasion decaiyng, which makes men
virtuous. Therefore, the Roman Empire being after increased, and having
extingushed all the commonweals, and Princedomes of Europe, and of Afrike,
and for the most part those of Asia, it left not any way to virtue, except
Rome: whereby grew, that virtuous men began to be as few in Europe, as in
Asia: the which virtue, came after to the last cast: For as much, as all
the virtue being reduced to Room, so sone as the same was corrupted, almost
all the world came to be corrupted: and the Scithian people, were able to
come to spoil the same Empire, the which had extinglished the virtue of other,
and knew not how to maintain their own: and after, although through the
inundacion of those barberous nations, the same Empire was divided into many
parts, this virtue is not renewed: The one cause is, The causes why the
aunciente orders are neclected.
for that it greueth them much, to take again the orders when they are
marde, the other, because the manner of living now adays, having respect to the
Christian religion, commands not the same necessity to men, to defend
themselves, which in old time was: for that then, the men overcome in
war, either were killed, or remained perpetual slaves, where they led their
lives most miserably: The tounes overcome, either were rased, or the
inhabiters thereof driven out, their goods taken away, sent dispersed through
the world: so that the vanquished in war, suffered all extreme misery: of
this fear, men being made afraied, they were driven to keep lively the warlike
exercises, and they honored soche as were excellent in them: But now
adays, this fear for the most part is not regarded: of those that are
ouercom, few be killed, none is kept long in prison: for that with
facelitie, they are set at liberty: the citees also, which a thousand
times have rebelled, are not destroyed, the men whereof, are let alone with
their goods, so that the greateste hurt that is feared, is but a task: in so
much, that men will not submit them selves to the orders of war, and to
abide always under those, to avoid the perilles whereof they are little
afraied: again these Provinces of Europe, be under a very few heddes, in
respect as it has been in times past: for that al France, obeieth one king,
al Spain, an other: Italy is in few parts, so that the weak citees, are
defended with leanyng to him that ouercometh, and the strong states, for the
causes aforesaied, fear no soche extreme ruin.


Cosimo. Yet there has been seen many tounes that have been sacked within
this.xxv. years, and lost their dominions, whose insample, ought to teach
other how to live, and to take again some of those old orders.


Fabricio. You say true: but if you note what tounes have gone to sack, you
shall not find that they have been the heddes of states, but of the members:
as was seen sacked Tortona, and not Milaine: Capua, and not Napelles, Brescia,
and not Venice, Rauenna, and not Room: the which insamples makes those that
govern, not to change their purposes, but rather makes them to stand more
in their opinion, to be able to redeem again all things with taskes, and for
this, they will not submit them selves to the troubles of thexercises of
war, semyng unto them partly not necessary, partly, an intrinsicate matter,
which they understand not: Those other, which be subjects to them, whom
soche insamples ought to make afraied, have no power to remedy it: and those
Princes, that have ones lost their estates, are no more able, and those which
as yet keep the^, know not, nor will not. Because they will without any disease
rain by fortune, and not by their virtue: for that in the world being but
little virtue, they see fortune governs all things. And they will have it to
rule them, not they to rule it. And to prove this that I have discoursed to
be tr^^, consider Almaine, in the which, because there is many Princedomes,
and commonweals, there is much virtue, and all the same, which in the
present service of war is good, depends of the insamples of those people:
who being all gellious of their states, fearing servitude, the which in other
places is not feared, they all maintain them selves Lords, and honorable:
this that I have said, shall suffice to show the occacions of the present
utility, according to my opinion: I cannot tell, whether it seem the same unto
you, or whether there be grown in you any doubtyng.


Cosimo. None, but rather I understand all very well: only I desire tournyng
to our principal matter, to understand of you, how you would ordein the
horses with these battles, and how many, and how they should be governed, and
how armed.


Fabritio. You think perauenture, that I have left it behind: whereat do not
marvel, for that I purpose for two causes, to speak thereof little, the one
is, for that the strength, and the importance of an army, is the footmen,
the other is, because this part of service of war, is less corrupted, then
the same of footmen. For that though it be not stronger then the old, yet it
may compare with the same, nevertheless there has been spoken a little before, of
the manner of exercisyng them. The armyng of horsemen.
And concerning tharmyng them, I would arm them as they do at this present,
as well the light horsemen, as the men of arms: but the light horsemen, The
weapons that light horsmenne should have.
I would that they should be all Crossebowe shuters, with some Harkebutters
among them: the which though in the other affairs of war, they be little
profitable, they be for this most profitable, to make afraied the country
men, and to drive them from a passage, that were kept of them: because a
Harkebutter, shall fear them more, then twenty other armed. But coming to
the number, The number of horsemen requisite for a maine battle of six
thousand men.
I say, that having taken in hand, to imitate the service of war of the
Romans, I would not ordein more then three hundred horse, profitable for
every maine battle, of which I would that there were. CL. men of arms,
and.CL. light horsemen, and I would give to every one of these parts, a hedde,
making after among them fiftene peticapitaines for a band, giuyng to every one
of them a Trompet, and a standarde: The number of carrages that men of arms
and light horsemen ought to have.
I would that every ten men of arms, should have five carriages, and every
ten light horsemen two, the which as those of the footmen, should carry the
tents, the vessels, and the ares, and the stakes, and the rest of their
other harnets. Nor believe not but that it is disorder, where the men of arms
have to their service four horse, because soche a thing is a corrupt use: for
that the men of arms in Almaine, are seen to be with their horse alone, every
twenty of them, having only a carte, that carries after them their
necessary things. The Roman horsemen, were likewise a lone: true it is, that
the Triarij lodged nere them, which were bound to minister help unto them, in
the keeping of their horses: the which may easily be imitated of us, as in the
distributyng of the lodgings, I shall show you. The Same then that the
Romans did, and that which the Duchmen do now a days, we may do also,
ye, not doing it, we err. These horses ordained and appoincted together with a
main battle, may sometimes be put together, when the battles be
assembled, and to cause that between them be made some fight of assault, the
which should be more to make the^ acquainted together, then for any other
necessity. But now of this part, there has been spoken sufficiently,
wherefore let us facion the army, to be able to come into the field against
the enemy, and hope to win it: which thing is the end, for which the
exercise of war is ordained, and so much study therein bestowed.


The third Book of the art of war, of Nicholas Machiauell, Citezeine and
Secretary of Florence, unto Laurence Philip Strozze.
Cosimo. Seeing that we change reasonyng, I will that the demau^der be
changed: because I would not be thought presumptuous, the which I have always
blamed i^ other: therefore, I resign the Dictatorship, and give this
authority to him that will have it, of these my other friends.


Zanobi. We would be most glad, that you should proceed, but seeing that you
will not, yet tell at least, which of us shall succeed in your place.


Cosimo. I will give this charge to signor Fabricio.


Fabritio. I am content to take it, and I will that we follow the Venecian
custom, that is, that the youngeste speak first: because this being an
exercise for young men, I persuade my self, that young men, be most apt to
reason thereof, as they be most ready to execute it.


Cosimo. Then it falls to you Luigi: and as I have pleasure of soche a
successor, so you shall satisfy your self of soche a demaunder: therefore I
pray you, let us turn to the matter, and let us lose no more time.


Fabritio. I am certain, that to mind to show well, how an army is prepared,
to faight a field, it should be necessary to declare, how the Greeks, and the
Romans ordained the bands of their armies: Notwithstanding, you your selves,
being able to read, and to consider these things, by means of the ancient
writers, I will pass over many particulars: and I will only bring in those
things, which I think necessary to imitate, mindyng at this time, to give
to our exercise of war, some part of perfection: The which shall make, that
in one instante, I shall show you, how an army is prepared to the field, and
how it does encounter in the very faight, and how it may be exercised in the
fained. The greatest disorder, The greateste disorder that is used now a days
in pitching of a field.
that they make, which ordeine an army to the field, is in giving them only
one front, and to bind them to one brunt, and to one fortune: the which
grows, of having lost the way, that the antiquity used to receive one
band within an other: because without this way, they can neither succor the
formoste, nor defend them, nor succeed in the faight in their steed: the
which of the Romans, was most excellently well observed. Therefore, The
order how a Romain Legion was appoincted to faight.
purposyng to show this way, I say, how that the Romans divided into.iij.
parts every Legion, in Hastati, Prencipi, and Triarij, of which, the Hastati
were placed in the first front, or forward of the army, with thorders thick
and sure, behind who^ were the Prencipi, but placed with their orders more
thin: after these, they set the Triarij, and with so much thinnes of orders,
yt they might, if need were, receive between them the Prencipi, and the Hastati.
They had besides these, the Slingers, and Crosbowshoters, and the other light
armed, the which stood not in these orders, but they placed them in the head
of tharmie, between the horses and the other bands of footmen: therefore
these light armed, began the faight, if they overcame (which happened seldom
times) they followed the victory: if they were repulced, they retired by the
flanckes of the army, or by the spaces ordained for soche purposes, and they
brought the^ selves among the unarmed: after ye departure of who^, the Hastati
incountered with the enemy, the which if they saw themselves to be overcome,
they retired by a little and little, by the rareness of thorders between the
Prencipi, and together with those, they renewed the faight: if these also were
repulced, they retired al in the rareness of the orders of the Triarij, and al
together on a heap, began again the faight: and then, if they were overcome,
there was no more remeady, because there remained no more ways to renew them
again. The horses stood on the corners of the army, to the likeness of two
wings to a body, and somewhiles they fought with the enemies horses, an other
while, they rescued the fotmen, according as need required. This way of
renuyng them selves three times, is almost impossible to overcome: for that,
fortume must three times forsake thee, and the enemy to have so much
strength, that three times he may overcome thee. The Greeks, had not in their
Falangi, this manner of renuyng them selves, and although in those were many
heddes, and many orders, notwithstanding, they made one body, The manner that
the Greeks used in their Falangi, when they fought against their enemies.
or else one hedde: the manner that they kept in rescuyng the one the other was,
not to retire the one order within the other, as the Romans, but to enter the
one manne into the place of the other: the which they did in this manner. Their
Fala^ge brought into ranks, and admit, that they put in a rank fifty men,
coming after with their hedde against the enemy, of all the ranks the
foremoste six, might faight: Because their Lances, the which they called
Sarisse, were so long, that the sixth rank, passed with the hedde of their
Lances, out of the first rank: then in faightyng, if any of the first, either
through death, or through wounds fell, straight way there entered into his
place, the same man, that was behind in the second rank, and in the place that
remained void of the second, the same man entered, which was behind him in the
third, and thus successively, in a sudden the ranks behind, restored the
faults of those before, so that the ranks always remained whole, and no place
of the faighters was void, except the last ranks, the which came to
consume, having not men behind their backs, whom might restore them: So
that the hurt that the first ranks suffered, consumed the last, and the
first remained always whole: and thus these Falangi by their order, might
sooner be consumed, then broken, for that the gross body, made it more
immouable. The Romans used at the beginning the Falangi, and did set in order
their Legio^s like unto them: after, this order pleased them not, and they
divided the Legions into many bodies, that is, in ba^des and companies: Because
they judged (as a little before I said) that the same body, should have need
of many capitaines, and that it should be made of sunderie parts, so that
every one by it self, might be governed. The maine battles of the Suizzers,
The order that the Suizzers use in their main batta^les when they faight
use at this present, all the manners of the Falangi, as well in ordryng it
gross, and whole, as in rescuyng the one the other: and in pitchyng the field,
they set the main battles, the one to the sides of the other: and though they
set them the one behind the other, they have no way, that the first retiryng
it self, may be received of the second, but they use this order, to the
intent to be able to succor the one the other, where they put a maine battle
before, and an other behind the same on the right hand: so that if the first
have need of help, that then the other may make forewarde, and succor it:
the third main battle, they put behind these, but distant from the^, a
Harkebus shot: this they do, for that the said two main battles being
repulced, this may make forward, and have space for them selves, and for the
repulced, and the same that marches forward, to avoid the iustling of the one
the other: for asmoche as a gross multitude, cannot be received as a little
body; and therefore, the little bodies being destincts, which were in a
Roman Legion, might be placed in soche wise, that they might receive between
them, and rescue the one the other. And to prove this order of the Suizzers
not to be so good, as the ancient Romans, many insamples of the Romain
Legions do declare, when they fought with the Greeks Falangi, where always
they were consumed of them: for that the kind of their weapons (as I have
said before) and this way of renuyng themselves, could do more, then the
massiuenesse of the Falangi. Having therefore, with these insamples to ordain
an army, I have thought good, partly to retain the manner of armyng and the
orders of the Greeks Falangi, and partly of the Romain Legions: How to
appoincte a main battle with armor and weapons, and to order the same after
the Greek and Romain manner
and therefore I have said, that I would have in a main battle, two
thousand pikes, which be the weapons of the Macedonicall Falangi, and three
thousand Targaettes with sweardes, which be the Romain weapons: I have
divided the main battle, into.x. battles, as the Romans their Legion into
ten Cohortes: I have ordained the Veliti, that is the light armed to begin the
faight, as the Romans used: and like as the weapons being mingled, do
participate of the one and of the other nation, so the orders also do
participate: I have ordained, that every battle shall have v. ranks of Pikes
in the front, and the rest of Targaettes, to be able with the front, to
withstand the horses, and to enter easily into the battle of the enemies on
foot, having in the first front, or vawarde, Pikes, as well as the enemy,
the which shall suffice me to withstand the^, the Targaettes after to
overcome them. And if you note the virtue of this order, you shall se al these
weapons, to do fully their office, for that the Pikes, be profitable against
the horses, and when they come against the footemenne, they do their office
well, before the faight throng together, because so sone as they press
together, they become unprofitable: wherefore, the Suizzers to avoid this
inconvenience, put after every three ranks of Pikes, a rank of Halberdes, the
which they do to make rome to the Pikes, which is not yet so much as
suffiseth. Then putting our pikes before, and the Targaettes behind, they come
to with stand the horses, and in the beginning of the faight, they opon the
rays, and moleste the footemenne: But when the faight is thruste together, and
that they become unprofitable, the Targaettes and swerdes succeed, which may
in every narowe place be handled.


Luigi. We look now with desire to understand, how you would ordein the army
to faight the field, with these weapons, and with these ordere.


Fabricio. And I will not now show you other, then this: you have to
understand, how that in an ordinary Roman army, which they call a Consul
army, The number of men that was in a Consulles army.
there were no more, then two Legions of Roman Citezeins, which were six
hundred horse, and about a leven thousand footmen: they had besides as many
mo footmen and horsemen, which were sent them from their friends and
confiderates, whom they divided into two parts, and called the one, the right
horn and the other the left horn: nor they never permitted, that these aidyng
footmen, should pass the number of the footmen of their Legions, they were
well contented, that the number of those horse, should be more then theirs:
with this army, which was of.xxij. thousand footmen, and about two thousand
good horse, a Consul executed all affairs, and went to all enterprises: yet
when it was needful to set against a greater force, two Consulles joined
together with two armies. You ought also to note in especially, that in all
the three principal acts, which an army does, that is, to march, to
incampe, and to faight, How the Romainies pl^^^ their Legio^s in the field.
the Romans used to put their Legions in the middeste, for that they would,
that the same power, wherein they most trusted, should be most untied, as in
the reasonyng of these three acts, shall be showed you: those aidyng footmen,
through the practice they had with the Legion Souldious, were as profitable, as
they, because they were instructed, according as the soldiers of the Legions
were, and therefore, in like manner in pitching the field, they pitched. Then,
he that knows how the Romans disposed a Legion in their army, to faight a
field, knows how they disposed all: therefore, having told you, how they
divided a Legion into three bands, and how the one band received the other, I
have then told you, how al tharmie in a field, was ordained. Wherefore, I
minding to ordain a field like unto the Romans, as they had two Legions, I
will take.ij. main battles, and these being disposed, the disposicion of all
an army shall be understood thereby: because in ioynyng more men, there is no
other to be done, then to ingrosse thorders: I think I need not to rehearse how
many men a main battle has, and how it has ten battles, and what heddes
be in a battle, and what weapons they have, and which be the ordinary
Pikes and Veliti, and which the extraordinary: for that a little before I
told you it destinctly, and I willed you to keep it in memory, as a
necessary thing to purpose, to understand all the other orders: How to order
an army in the field to faight a battle, according to the mind of the
aucthour.
and therefore I will come to the demonstracion of the order, without repeatyng
it any more: Me thinks good, that the ten battles of one main battle, be
set on the left flancke, and the ten other, of the other main battle, on
the right: these that are placed on the left flancke, be ordained in this
manner, there is put five battle, the one to the side of the other in the
front, after soche sort, that between the one and the other, there remain a
space of three yardes, which come to occupy for largeness.Cvi. yardes of
ground, and for length thirty: behind these five battles, I would put three
other, distante by right line from the first, thirty yardes: two of the
which, should come behind by right line, to the vttermoste of the five, and
the other should keep the space in the middeste, and so these three, shall come
to occupy for breadth and length, as much space, as the five does. But where
the five have between the one, and the other, a distaunce of three yardes,
these shall have a distance of.xxv. yardes. After these, I would place the two
last battles, in like manner behind the three by right line, and distaunte
from those three, thirty yardes, and I would place each of them, behind the
vttermoste part of the three, so that the space, which should remain between
the one and the other, should be.lxviij. yardes: then al these battles thus
ordered, will take in breadth.Cvi. yardes, and in length.CL. Thextraordinarie
Pikes, How the extraordinary pikes be placed in the set battle.
I would destende a long the flanckes of these battles, on the left side,
distante from them fiftene yardes, making.Cxliij. ranks, seven to a rank,
after soche sort, that they may impale with their length, all the left side
of the ten battles in the same wise, declared of me to be ordained: and
there shall remain forty ranks to keep the carriages, and the unarmed,
which ought to remain in the tail of the army, distributyng the
Peticapitaines, and the Centurions, in their places: and of the three
Conestables, I would place one in the hedde, the other in the middeste, the
third in the last rank, the which should execute the office of a
Tergiductore, whom the antiquity so called him, that was appoincted to the
back of the army. But retournyng to the hedde of the army, The place where
thextraordinarie archars and harkabutters, and the men of arms and light^
horsemen ought to stand when the field is pitched, and goes to faighte the
battle.
I say how that I would place nere to the extraordinary pikes, the Veliti
extraordinary, which you know to be five hundred, and I would give them a
space of.xxx yardes: on the side of these likewise on the left hand, I would
place the men of arms, and I would they should have a space of a.Cxij.
yardes: after these, the light horsemen, to whom I would appoinct as much
ground to stand in, as the men of arms have: the ordinary veliti, The
ordinary a^chars and harkebutters are placed about their own battles.
I would leave about their own battles, who should stand in those spaces,
which I appoincte between the one battle and the other: who^ should be as their
ministers, if sometime I thought not good to place them under the
extraordinary Pikes: in dooyng or not doing whereof, I would proceade,
according as should turn best to my purpose. The place where the general
hedde of a maine battle must stand, when the same power of men is appoincted
to faight.
The general hedde of all the maine battle, I would place in the same space,
that were between the first and the second order of the battles, or else in
the hedde, and in the same space, that is between the last battle of the
first five, and the extraordinary Pikes, according as best should serve my
purpose, with thirty or forty chosen men about him, What men a general
capi^ain of a maine ^attaile ought to have about him.
that knew by prudence, how to execute a commission, and by force, to
withstand a violence, and they to be also between the Drum and the Ansigne:
this is thorder, with the which I would dispose a maine battle, which
should be the disposyng of half the army, and it should take in breadth
three hundred fourscore and two yardes, and in length as much as above is
said, not accomptyng the space, that the same part of the extraordinary Pikes
will take, which must make a defense for the unarmed, which will be
about.lxxv. yardes: the other maine battle, I would dispose on the right
side, after the same manner just, as I have disposed that on the left, leauyng
between the one main battle, and the other, a space of.xxij. yardes: in the
hedde of which space, I would set some little carriages of artillery, The
place where a general capitain of all the army must stand when the battle is
ready to be fought and what number of chosen men ought to be about him.
behind the which, should stand the general captain of all the army, and
should have about him with the Trumpet, and with the Captain standerde, two
hundred men at least, chosen to be on foot the most part, amongst which
there should be ten or more, mete to execute all commandments, and should
be in soche wise a horseback, and armed, that they might be on horseback,
and on foot, according as needs should require. The artillery of the army,
How many canons is requisite for an army and of what ^se they ought to be.
suffiseth ten Cannons, for the winnyng of Tounes, whose shot should not
pass fifty pound: the which in the field, should serve me more for defense
of the camp, then for to faight the battle: The other artillery, should be
rather of ten, then of fiftene pound the shot: Where the artillery ought^
to be placed, when tharmy is ready to faight.
this I would place before on the front of all the army, if sometime the
country should not stand in soche wise, that I might place it by the flancke
in a sure place, where it might not of the enemy be in danger: this facio^ of
an army thus ordered, An army that were ordered an above is declared, may in
faightyng, use the Greeks manner, and the Roman facion.
may in faighting, use the order of the Falangi, and the order of the Romain
Legions: for that in the front, be Pikes, all the men be set in the ranks,
after soche sort, that incounteryng with the enemy, and withstandyng him,
may after the use of the Falangi, restore the first ranks, with those
behind: on the other part, if they be charged so sore, that they be
constrained to break the orders, and to retire themselves, they may enter
into the void places of the second battles, which they have behind them,
and unite their selves with them, and making a new force, withstand the
enemy, and overcome him: and when this suffices not, they may in the very
same manner, retire themselves the second time, and the third faight: so that
in this order, concerning to faight, there is to renew themselves, both
according to the Greek manner, and according to the Roman: concerning the
strength of tharmie, there cannot be ordained a more stronger: for as much, as
the one and the other horn thereof, is excedingly well replenished, both with
heddes and weapons, nor there remains weak, other then the part behind of
the unarmed, and the same also, has the flanckes impaled with the
extraordinary Pikes: nor the enemy cannot of any part assault it, where he
shall not find it well appoincted, and the hinder part cannot be assaulted:
Because there cannot be an enemy, that has so much puisaunce, whom equally
may assault thee on every side: for that he having so great a power, thou
ought not then to match thy self in the field with him: but when he were
three times more then thou, and as well appoincted as thou, he does weaken him
self in assaultyng thee in diverse places, one part that thou breakest, will
cause all the rest go to naught: concerning horses, although he chance to
have more then thine, thou nedest not to fear: for that the orders of the
Pikes, which impale thee, defend thee from all violence of them, although thy
horses were repulced. The heddes besides this, be disposed in soch place, that
they may easily command, and obeie: the spaces that be between the one
battle, To what purpose the spaces that be between every band of men do
serve.
and the other, and between the one order, and the other, not only serve to
be able to receive the one the other, but also to give place to the
messengers, which should go and come by order of the capitain. And as I told
you first, how the Romans had for an army, about four and twenty
thousand men, even so this ought to be: and as the other soldiers took
insample of the Legions, for the manner of faightyng, and the facion of tharmie,
so those soldiers, which you should join to our two maine battles, ought
to take the form and order of them: whereof having put you an insample, it is
an easy matter to imitate it, for that increasyng, either two other maine
battles unto the army, or as many other soldiers, as they be, there is no
other to be dooen, then to double the orders, and where was put ten
battles on the left part, to put twenty, either ingrossyng, or distendyng
the orders, according as the place, or the enemy should compel thee.


Luigi. Surely sir I imagine in soche wise of this army, that me thinks I now
se it, and I burn with a desire to se it encounter, and I would for nothing in
the world, that you should become Fabius Maximus intendyng to keep the enemy
at a baie, and to defer the day of battle: because I would say worse of
you, then the Romain people said of him.


Fabritio. Doubt not: The descript^on of a battail^ that is a faightyng.
Do you not hear the artillery? Ours have alredie shot, but little hurt
the enemy: and thextraordinarie Veliti, issuyng out of their places together
with the light horsemen, most speadely, and with most merueilous fury, and
greateste cry that may be, they assault the enemy: whose artillery has
discharged ones, and has passed over the heddes of our footmen, without doing
the^ any hurt, and because it cannot shoot the second time, the Veliti, and
our horsemen, have now gotten it, and the enemies for to defend it, are come
forewarde, so that neither our ordinance, nor thenemies, can any more do
their office. Se with how much virtue, stengthe and agilitie our men
faighteth, and with how much knowledge through the exercise, which has made
them to abide, and by the confidence, that they have in the army, the which,
see, how with the pace thereof, and with the men of arms on the sides, it
marches in good order, to give the charge on the adversary: See our
artillery, which to give them place, and to leave them the space free, is
retired by the same space, from whens the Veliti issued: See how the captain
incourageth them, shows them the victory certain: See how the Veliti and
light horsemen be enlarged, and returned on the flanckes of tharmie, to seek
and view, if they may by the flanck, do any injury to the adversaries:
behold how the armies be affronted. Se with how much valiau^tnesse they have
withstode the violence of thenemies, and with how much silence, and how the
capitain commands the men of arms, that they sustain, and not charge, and
that they break not from the order of the footmen: see how our light horsemen
be gone, to give the charge on a band of the enemies Harkebutters, which would
have hurt our men by flancke, and how the enemies horse have succored them, so
that turned between the one and the other horse, they cannot shoot, but are
feign to retire behind their own battle: see with what fury our Pikes do
also affront, and how the footmen be now so nere together the one to the
other, that the Pikes ca^ no more be occupied: so that according to the
knowledge learned of us, our pikes do retire a little and a little between the
targaettes. Se how in this while a great band of men of arms of the enemies,
have charged our men of arms on the left side, and how ours, according to
knowledge, be retired under the extraordinary Pikes, and with the help of
those, giving again a fresh charge, have repulced the adversaries, and slain a
good part of them: in so much, that thordinarie pikes of the first battles,
be hidden between the rays of the Targaettes, they having left the faight to
the Targaet men: whom you may see, with how much virtue, security, and
leisure, they kill the enemy: see you not how much by faightyng, the orders
be thrust together? That they can sease welde their sweardes? Behold with how
much fury the enemies move: because being armed with the pike, and with the
swerd unprofitable (the one for being to long, the other for findyng thenemie
to well armed) in part they fall hurt or dedde, in part they fly. See, they
fly on the right corner, they fly also on the left: behold, the victory is
ours. Have not we won a field most happily? But with more happiness it
should be won, if it were granted me to put it in act. And see, how there
neded not the help of the second, nor of the third order, for our first
front has sufficed to overcome them: in this part, I have no other to say
unto you, then to resolve if any doubt be grown you.


Luigi. You have with so much fury won this field, that I so much
marvel and am so astonished, that I believe that I am not able to express, if
any doubt remain in my mind: yet trustyng in your prudence; I will be so bold
to tell the same that I understand. Tell me first, why made you not your
ordinance to shoot more then ones? Questions concerning the shotyng of
ordinance.
And why straighte way you made them to retire into tharmie, nor after made no
mension of them? Me thought also, that you leueled the artillery of the enemy
high, and appoincted it after your own devise: the which might very well be,
yet when it should happen, as I believe it chaunseth often, that they strike the
ranks, what reamedie have you? And seeing that I have begun of the artillery,
I will finishe all this question, to the intent I need not to reason thereof
any more. I have heard many dispraise the armours, and the orders of the
aunciente armies, arguyng, how now a days, they can do little, but rather
should be altogether unprofitable, having respect to the fury of the
artillery: because, this breaks the orders, and passes the armours in soche
wise, that it seems unto them a foolishenesse to make an order, which cannot
be kept, and to take pain to bear a harneis, that cannot defend a man.


Fabricio. This question of yours (because it has many heddes) has need of a
long answer. It is true, An answer to the questions that we^e demanded,
concerning the shoting of ordinance.
that I made not thartillery to shoot more then ones, and also of the same
ones, I stood in doubt: the occasion was, for asmoche as it imports more,
for one to take heed not to be stricken, then it imports to strike the enemy.
You have to understand, that to purpose that a piece of ordinance hurt you
not, it is necessary either to stand where it cannot reche you, or to get
behind a wall, or behind a bankt: other thing there is not that can witholde
it: and it is needful also, that the one and the other be most strong. Those
capitaines which come to faight a field, cannot stand behind a wall, or behind
banks, nor where they may not be reached: therefore it is mete for them, seeing
they cannot find away to defend the^, to find some mean, by the which they
may be least hurt: nor they cannot find any other way, then to preuente it
quickly: the way to prevent it, is to go to find it out of hand, and
hastily, not at leisure and in a heap: for that through speed, the blow is
not suffered to be redoubled, and by the thinness, less number of men may
be hurt. This, a band of men ordered, cannot do: because if the same
march hastily, it goweth out of order: if it go scattered, the enemy shall
have no pain to break it, for that it breaks by it self: and therefore, I
ordered the army after soche sort, that it might do the one thing and the
other: for as much as having set in the corners thereof, a thousand Veliti, I
appoincted that after that our ordinance had shot, they should issue out
together with the light horsemen, to get the enemies artillery: and therefore,
I made not my ordinance to shoot again, to the intent, to give no time to the
enemy to shoot: Because space could not be given to me, and taken from other
men, and for the same occasion, where I made my ordinance not to shoot the
second time, was for that I would not have suffered the enemy to have shot at
al, The best remedy to avoid the hurt that the enemy in the field may do
with his ordinance.
if I had could: seeing that to mind that the enemies artillery be
unprofitable, there is no other remedy, but to assault it spedely: for as
much as if the enemies forsake it, thou takeste it, if they will defend it,
it is requisite that they leave it behind, so that being possessed of enemies,
and of friends, it cannot shoot. I would believe, that with out insamples these
reasons should suffice you, yet being able to show old ensamples, to prove my
sayings true, I will. Ventidio coming to faight a field with the Parthians, A
policy against bows and darts.
whose strength for the most part, consisted in bows and arrows, he suffered
them almost to come hard to his camp, before he drew out his army, the
which only he did, to be able quickly to prevent them: and not to give them
space to shoot. Caesar when he was in France, makes mention, that in
faighting a battle with the enemies, he was with so much fury assaulted of
them, that his men had no time to whorle their Darts, according to the
custom of the Romans: wherefore it is seen, that to intend, that a thing
that shoots far of, being in the field, do not hurt thee, there is no
other remedy, then with as much celeritie as may be, to preuente it. An
other cause moved me to proceed, without shotyng the ordinance, whereat
peradventure you will laugh: yet I judge not that it is to be dispraised.
Nothing causes greater confusion in an army, tha^ to hinder men's sightes.
There is nothing that causes greater confusion in an army, then to hinder
men's sightes: whereby many most puisaunte armies have been broken, by means
their sight has been let, either with duste, or with the Sun: yet there
is nothing, Nothing more blinds the sight of men in an army, then the smoke
o^ ordinance.
that more lets the sight, then the smoke that the artillery makes in
shotyng: therefore, I would think that it were more wisdom, to suffer the
enemy to blind himself, then to purpose (thou being blind) to go to find
him: for this cause, either I would not shote, or (for that this should not be
proved, considering the reputacion that the artillery has) I would place it
on the corners of the army, so that shootyng, it should not with the smoke
thereof, blind the front of the same, which is the importance of my men. A
policy to trouble the enemies sight.
And to prove that it is a profitable thing, to let the sight of the enemy,
there may be brought for insample Epaminondas, who^ to blind the enemies
army, which came to faight with him, he caused his light horsemen, to run
before the front of the enemies, to raise up the duste, and to let their
sight, whereby he got the victory. And where it seems unto you, that I have
guided the shot of the artillery, after my own devise, The shot of great
ordinance in the field, is not much to be feared of fotemenne.
making it to pass over the heddes of my men, I answer you, that most often
times, and without comparison, the great ordinance miss the footmen, much
sooner then hitte them: for that the footmen are so low, and those so
difficult to shoot, that every little that thou raisest them, they pass over
the heddes of men: and if they be leueled never so little to low, they strike
in the earth, and the blow comes not to them: also the vneuenesse of the
ground saves them, for that every little hillocke, or high place that is,
between the men and thordinance, lets the shot thereof. Because men of
arms stand closer together then light horsemen, they ought to remain behind
the army till the enemies ordinance have done shootyng.
And concerning horsemen, and in especially men of arms, because they ought to
stand more close together, then the light horsemen, and for that they are much
higher, may the better be stroke^, they may, until the artillery have
shot, be kept in the tail of the army. True it is, that the Harkebutters
do much more hurt, and the field pieces, then the great ordinance, for the
which, the greatest remedy is, to come to hand strokes quickly: and if in the
first assault, there be slain some, always there shall be slain: but a
good captain, and a good army, ought not to make a coumpte of a hurt, that
is particulare, but of a general, and to imitate the Suizzers, whom never
eschew to faight, being made afraied of the artillery: but rather punish with
death those, which for fear thereof, either should go out of the rank, or
should make with his body any sign of fear. I made them (so sone as they had
shot) to be retired into the army, that they might leave the way free for
the battle: I made no more mention of them, as of a thing unprofitable, the
faight being begun. You have also said, that considering the violence of this
instrument, many judge the armours, and the ancient orders to be to no
purpose, and it seems by this your talk, that men now a days, have found
orders and armours, which are able to defend them against the artillery: if
you know this, I would be glad that you would teach it me: for that
hitherto, I never saw any, nor I believe that there can any be found: so that
I would understand of soche men, for what cause the soldiers on foot in
these days, wear the breastplate, or the corselet of steel, and they on
horseback go all armed: because seeing that they blame the aunciente armyng of
men as unprofitable, considryng the artillery, they ought to despise also this?
I would understand moreover, for what occasion the Suizzers, like unto the
ancient orders, make a battle close together of six, or eight thousand
men, and for what occasion all other have imitated them, this order bearyng
the very same peril, concerning the artillery, that those other should
bear, which should imitate the antiquity. I believe they should not know
what to answer: but if you should ask soche Soldiers, as had some
judgment, they would answer first, that they go armed, for that though
the same armoure defend them not from the artillery: it defends them from
crossebowes, from Pikes, from sweardes, from stones, and from all other hurt,
that comes from the enemies, they would answer also, that they went close
together, like the Suizzers, to be able more easily to overthrow the footmen,
to be able to withstand better the horse and to give more difficulty to the
enemy to break the^: so that it is seen, that the soldiers have to fear
many other things besides the ordinance: from which things, with the armours,
and with the orders, they are defended: whereof follows, that the better that
an army is armed, and the closer that it has the orders, and stronger, so
much the surer it is: so that he that is of the same opinion, that you say,
it behooves either that he be of small wisdom, or that in this thing, he
has studied very little: for as much as if we see, that so little a part of
the aunciente manner of armyng, which is used now a days, that is the pike,
and so little a part of those orders, as are the maine battles of the
Suizzers, do us so much good, and cause our armies to be so strong, why
ought not we to believe, that the other armours, and the other orders which are
left, be profitable? Seeing that if we have no regard to the artillery, in
puttyng our selves close together, as the Suizzers, what other orders may make
us more to fear the same? For as much as no order can cause us so much to
fear the same, as those, which bring men together. Besides this, if the
artillery of the enemies should not make me afraied, in besiegyng a Town,
where it hurts me with more safegarde, being defended of a wall, I being not
able to preuente it, but only with time, with my artillery to let it, after
soche sort that it may double the blow as it list, why should I fear
the same in the field, The artillery is no let, why the ancient orders of
warfar ought not to be used in these days.
where I may quickly prevent it? So that I conclude thus, that the artillery,
according to my opinion, does not let, that the aunciente manners cannot be
used, and to show the ancient virtue: and if I had not talked already with
you of this instrument, I would of the same, declare unto you more at length:
but I will remit my self to that, which then I said.


Luigi. We may now understand very well, how much you have about the
artillery discoursed: and in conclusion, my thinks you have showed, that the
preue^tyng it quickly, is the greatest remedy, that may be had for the same,
being in the field, and having an army against you. Upon the which there
grows in me a doubt: because me thinks, that the enemy might place his
ordinance in soche wise, in his army, that it should hurt you, and should be
after soche sort guarded of the footmen, that it could not be prevented. You
have (if you remember your self well) in the orderyng of your army to faight,
made distaunces of three yardes, between the one battle and the other, making
those distaunces fiftene, which is from the battles, to thextraordinarie
pikes: if thenemie, should order his army like unto yours, and should put the
artillery a good way within those spaces, I believe that from thens, it should
hurt you with their most great safeguard: because men can not enter into
the force of their enemies to prevent it.


Fabricio. You doubt most prudently, and I will devise with my self, either to
resolve you the doubt, or show you the remedy: I have told you, that
continually these battles, either through going, or through faightyng, are
mouyng, and always naturally, they come to draw hard together, so that if
you make the distaunces of a small breadth, where you set the artillery, in a
little time they be shootte up, after soche sort, that the artillery cannot
any more shoot: if you make them large, to avoid this peril, you incur
into a greater, where you through those distances, not only give commodity to
the enemy, to take from you the artillery, but to break you: but you have to
understand, that it is impossible to keep the artillery between the bands,
and in especially those which go on carriages: For that the artillery goes
one way, and shoots an other way: So that having to go and to shoot, it is
necessary, before their shote, that they turn, and for to turn them, they
will have so much space, that fifty carts of artillery, would disorder any
army: therefore, it is mete to keep the^ out of the ba^des, where they may be
overcome in the manner, as a little before we have showed: but admit they might
be kept, and that there might be found a way between both, and of soche
condition, that the presyng together, of men should not hinder the artillery,
and were not so open that it should give way to the enemy, I say, that it is
remedied most easily, with making distances in thy army against it, which
may give free passage to the shot of those, and so the violence thereof shall
come to be vain, the which may be done most easily: for asmoche, as the
enemy mindyng to have his artillery stand safe, it behooves that he put them
behind, in the furthest part of the distances, so yt the shot of the same, be
purposyng that they hurt not his own men, ought to pass by right line, and by
that very same always: and therefore with giuyng them place, easily they may
be avoided: A general rule against soche things as cannot be withstoode.
for that this is a general rule, that to those things, which cannot be
withstoode, there must be given way, as the antiquity made to the
Eliphantes, and to the carres full of hooks. I believe, ye, I am more then
certain, that it seems unto you, that I have ordered and won a battle
after my own manner: notwithstanding, I answeer unto you this, when so much as
I have said hitherto, should not suffice, that it should be impossible, that
an army thus ordered, and armed, should not overcome at the first encounter,
any other army that should be ordained, as their order the armies now adays,
whom most often times, make not but one front, having no targaettes, and are in
soche wise unarmed, that they cannot defend themselves from the enemy at
hand, and they order them after soche sort, that if they set their battles
by flanck, the one to the other, they make the army thin: if they put the
one behind the other, having no way to receive the one the other, they do it
confusedly, and apt to be easly troubled: and although they give three names to
their armies, and divide the^ into three companies, vaward, battle, and
rereward, notwithstanding it serves to no other purpose, then to march, and
to distinguis the lodgings: but in the day of battle, they bind them all
to the first brunte, and to the first fortune.


Luigi. I have noted also in the faightyng of your field, how your horsemen
were repulced of the enemies horsemen: for which cause they retired to the
extraordinary Pikes: whereby grew, that with the aid of them, they
withstode, and drove the enemies back? I believe that the Pikes may withstand
the horses, as you say, but in a gross and thick maine battle, as the
Suizzers make: but you in your army, have for the hedde five ranks of Pikes,
and for the flancke seven, so that I cannot tell how they may be able to
withstand them.


Fabritio. Yet I have told you, how six ranks of pikes were occupied at ones,
in the Macedonicall Falangi, albeit you ought to understand, A battle how
^^e^te so ^uer ^t be, cannot (...) occup^ above.v. ra^k^s of y^r^^s.
that a maine battle of Suizzers, if it were made of a thousand ranks, it
cannot occupy more then four, or at the most five: because the Pikes be six
yardes and three quarters long, one yard and half a quarter, is occupied of
the hands, wherefore to the first rank, there remains free five yardes and
a half, and a half quarter of Pike: the second rank besides that, which is
occupied with the hand, consumes a yard and half a quarter in the space,
which remains between the one rank and the other: so that there is not left
of pike profitable, more then four yardes and a half: to the third rank, by
this very same reason, there remains three yardes and a quarter and a half:
to the fowerth, two yardes and a quarter: to the fifth one yard and half a
quarter: the other ranks, for to hurt, be unprofitable, but they serve to
restore these first ranks, as we have declared, and to be a fortificacion to
those.v. Then if five of their ranks can withstand the horse, why cannot five
of ours withstand them? to the which also there lacks not ranks behind,
that does sustain and make them the very same stay, although they have no
pikes as the other. And when the ra^kes of thextraordinarie pikes, which are
placed on the fla^ckes, should seem unto you thin, they may be brought into
a quadrante, and put on the flancke nere the two battles, which I set in
the last company of the army: From the which place, their may easily
altogether succor the front, and the back of the army, and minister help
to the horses, according as need shall require.


Luigi. Would you always use this form of order, when you would pitche a
field.


Fabritio. No in no wise: for that you ought to vary the facion of the army,
according to the quality of the situacion, and the condition and quantity of
the enemy, as before this reasonyng do end, shall be showed certain
insamples: but this form is given unto you, not so much as most strongeste
of all, where in deed it is very strong, as to the intent that thereby you
may take a rule, and an order to learn to know the ways to ordeine the
other: for as much, as every science has his generality, upon the which a
good part of it is grounded. An aduertisme^t concerning the pitchyng of a
field.
One thing only I advise you, that you never order an army, after soche
sort, that those that faight before, cannot be sucoured of them, which be
set behind: because he that commits this error, makes the greateste part
of his army to be unprofitable, and if it encounter any strength, it cannot
overcome.


Luigi. There is grown in me, upon this part a doubt. I have seen that in
the placyng of the battles, you make the front of five on a side, the
middeste of three, and the last parts of two, and I believe, that it were
better to ordain them contrariwise: for that I think, that an army should
with more difficulty be broken, when he that should charge upon it, the more
that he should enter into the same, so much the stronger he should find it:
and the order devised of you, me thinks makes, that the more it is entered
into, so much the weaker it is found.


Fabricio. If you should remember how to the Triarij, whom were the third
order of the Romain Legions, there were not assigned more then six hundred
men, you would doubt less, having understood how they were placed in the last
company: For that you should see, how I moved of this insample, have placed in
the last company two battles, which are nine hundred men, so that I come
rather (following the insample of the Roman people) to err, for having taken
to many, then to few: and although this insample should suffice, I will tell
you the reason, the which is this. The first front of the army, How the fro^^
of the army ought to be^ made.
is made perfectly whole and thick, because it must withstand the bru^t of
the enemies, and it has not to receive in it any of their fellows: and for
this, it is fit that it be full of men: because a few men, should make
it weak, either for thinness, or for lack of sufficient number: but the
second company, for as much as it must first receive their friends, to
sustain the enemy, How the middell part of the army ought to be ordered.
it is mete that it have great spaces, and for this it behooves, that it be of
less number then the first: for yt if it were of greater number, or equal, it
should be conueniente, either not to leave the distaunces, the which should
be disorder, or leauyng them, to pass the bounds of those before, the which
should make the facion of the army imperfect: and it is not true that you
say, that the enemy, the more that he enters into the maine battle, so
much the weaker he finds it: for that the enemy, can never faight with the
second order, except the first be joined with the same: so that he comes to
find the midst of the maine battle more stronger, and not more weaker,
having to faight with the first, and with the second order altogether: the
very same happens, when the enemy should come to the third company: for
that there, not with two battles, which is found fresh, but with all the
maine battle he must faight: The orderyng of the hinder part of tha^^y
and for that this last part has to receive most men, the spaces thereof is
requisite to be greatest, and that which receives them, to be the least
number.


Luigi. It pleases me the same that you have told: but answer me also this: if
the five first battles do retire between the three second battles, and
after the eight between the two third, it seems not possible, that the eight
being brought together, and then the ten together, may be received when
they be eight, or when they be ten in the very same space, which received
the five.


Fabricio. The first thing that I answer is, that it is not the very same
space: For that the five have four spaces in the middeste, which retiryng
between the three, or between the two, they occupy: then there remains
the same space, that is between the one maine battle and the other, and
the same that is, between the battles, and the extraordinary Pikes, all the
which spaces makes largeness: besides this, it is to be considered, that the
battles keep other manner of spaces, when they be in the orders without being
altered, then when they be altered: for that in the alteracion: either they
throng together, or they enlarge the orders: they enlarge them, when they
fear so much, that they fall to fliyng, they thrust them together, when they
fear in soche wise, that they seek to save them selves, not with runnyng
away, but with defense: So that in this case, they should come to be
destingueshed, and not to be enlarged. The ^etire of the Pikes, to place the
Targaet men.
Moreover, the five ranks of the Pikes, that are before, so sone as they have
begun the faighte, they ought between their battles to retire, into the tail
of the army, for to give place to the Targaet men, that they may faighte: and
they going into the tail of the army, may do soche service as the capitain
should judge, were good to occupy them about, where in the forward, the
faight being mingled, they should otherwise be altogether unprofitable. And
for this the spaces ordained, come to be for the remnaunte of the men, wide
enough to receive them: yet when these spaces should not suffice, the fla^kes
on the sides be men, and not walls, who^ giuyng place, and inlargyng the^
selves, may make the space to contain so much, that it may be sufficient
to receive them.


Luigi. The ranks of the extraordinary Pikes, which you place on the
flanckes of the army, when the first battles retire into the second, will
you have them to stand still, and remain with two horns to the army? Or
will you that they also retire together, with the battles? The which when
they should do, I see not how they can, having no battles behind with
distaunces that may receive them.


Fabritio. If the enemy overcome them not, How the pikes that are placed on
the flanks of the army ought to govern them selves when the rest of the
^^ui^e is driven to retire.
when he inforceth the battles to retire, they may stand still in their
order, and hurt the enemy on the flanck, after that the first battles were
retired: but if he should also overcome them, as seems reason, being so
puisaunte, that he is able to repulce the other, they also ought to retire:
which they may do excellently well, although they have not behind, any to
receive them: because from the midst, they may redouble by right line,
entering the one rank into the other, in the manner whereof we reasoned, when
it was spoken of the order of redoublyng: True it is, that to mind redoublyng
to retire back, it behooves to take an other way, then the same that I showed
you: for that I told you, that the second ra^ke, ought to enter into the first,
the fowerth into the third, and so forth: in this case, they ought not to
begin before, but behind, so that redoublyng the ranks, they may come to
retire backewarde, not to turn forward: but to answer to all the same, that
upon this foughten field by me showed, might of you be replied, I say unto
you again, that I have ordained you this army, and showed this foughten field
for two causes, the one, for to declare unto you how it is ordered, the other to
show you how it is exercised: thorder, I believe you understand most well:
and concerning the exersice, I say unto you, Thexercise of the army in
general.
that they ought to be put together in this form, as often times as may be:
for as much as the heddes learn thereby, to keep their battles in these
orders: for that to particulare soldiers, it appertains to keep well the
orders of every battle, to the heddes of the battles, it appertains to
keep them well in every order of the army, and that they know how to obeie,
at the commandment of the general capitain: therefore, it is conueniente
that they know, how to join the one battle with the other, that they may
know how to take their place atones: The number that is mete to be written in
the Ansigne of every band of me^.
and for this cause it is mete that thansigne of every battle, have written
in some evident part, the number thereof: as well for to be able to command
them, as also for that the capitain, and the soldiers by the same number, may
more easily know them again: also the maine battles, ought to be nombred,
and to have the number in their principal Ansigne: Therefore it is requisite,
to know of what number the maine battle shall be, that is placed on the
left, or on the right horn, of what nombers the battles be, that are set in
the front, and in the middeste, and so forth of the other. The antiquity
would also, that these nombers should be steps to degrees, The degrees of
honors in an army, which soche a man ought to rise by, as should be made a
general capitain
of honors of the armies: as for insample, the first degree, is the
Peticapitain, the second, the hedde of fifty ordinary Veliti, the third,
the Centurion, the fowerth, the hedde of the first battle, the fifte, of the
second, the sixth, of the third, and so forth, even to the tenth battle, the
which must be honored in the second place, next the general captain of a
maine battle: nor any ought to come to the same hedde, if first, he have not
risen up by all these degrees. And because besides these heddes, there be the
three Conestables of the extraordinary Pikes, and two of the extraordinary
Veliti, I would that they should be in the same degree of the Conestable of the
first battle: nor I would not care, that there were six men of like degree,
to the intent, that every one of them might strive, who should do best, for to
be promised to be hedde of the second battle. Then every one of these
heddes, knowing in what place his battle ought to be set in, of necessity
it must follow, that at a sound of the Trompette, so sone as the hedde
standarde shall be erected, all the army shall be in their places: and this
is the first exercise, whereunto an army ought to be accustomed, that is to
set them quickly together: and to do this, it is requisite every day, and
diverse times in one day, to set them in order, and to disorder them.


Luigi. What arms would you that thansignes of all the army, should have
beside the number?


Fabritio. The standarde of the general Captain ought to have the arms of
the Prince of the army, The arms that ought to be in the standarde, and in
the ansignes of an army.
all the other, may have the very same arms, and to vary with the fields,
or to vary with the arms, as should seem best to the Lord of the army:
Because this imports little, so that the effect grow, that they be known
the one from the other. But let us pass to the other exercise: the which is to
make them to move, The second and third exercise of an army.
and with a convenient pace to march, and to se, that marchyng they keep the
orders. The third exercise is, that they learn to handle themselves in the same
manner, which they ought after to handle theimselues in the day of battle,
to cause the artillery to shoot, and to be drawn out of the way, to make
the extraordinary Veliti to issue out, after a likeness of an assault, to
retire them: To make that the first battles, as though they were sore
charged, retire into the spaces of the second: and after, all into the third,
and from thens every one to return to his place: and in soche wise to use
them in this exercise, that to every manne, all thing may be known, and
familiar: the which with practice, and with familiarity, is brought to pass
most quickly. The fowerth exercise is, The fowerth exercise of an army.
that they learn to know by mean of the sound, and of the Ansigne, the
commandment of their captain: for as much as that, which shall be to
them pronounced by voice, they without other commandment, may understand:
and because the importance of this commandment, ought to grow of the
sound, I shall tell you what soundes the antiquity used. Of the
Lacedaemonians, according as Tucidido affirms, The soundes of the instruments
of music, that the antiquity used in their armies
in their armies were used Flutes: for that they judged, that this armonie, was
most mete to make their army to proceed with grauetie, and with fury: the
Carthagine^s being moved by this very same reason, in the first assault, used
the violone. Aliatte king of the Lidians, used in the war the violone, and
the Flutes: but Alexander Magnus, and the Romans, used horns, and
Trumpettes, as they, that thought by virtue of soche instruments, to be able
to encourage more the minds of Soldiers, and make them to faight the more
lustely: but as we have in armyng the army, taken of the Greek manner, and of
the Roman, so in distributyng the soundes, we will keep the customs of the
one, and of the other nation: therefore, nere the general capitain, I would
make the Trompettes (to stand, as a sound not only apt to inflame the army,
but apt to be heard in all the whole tumoult more, then any other sound: all
the other soundes, which should be about the Conestables, and the heddes of
maine battles I would, that they should be small Drums, and Flutes,
sounded not as they sound them now, but as they use to sound them at
feasts. The captain then with the Trompet, What is signified by the sound
of the Trompet.
should show when they must stand still, and go forward, or turn backward,
when the artillery must shoot, when the extraordinary Veliti must move, and
with the variety or distinccion of soche soundes, to show unto the army all
those mocions, which generally may be showed, the which Trompettes, should
be after followed of the Drums, and in this exercise, because it imports
much, it behooves much to exercise the army. Concerning the horsemen, there
would be used likewise Trompettes, but of a less sound, and of a diverse voice
from those of the Captain. This is as much as is come into my remembrance,
about the order of the army, and of the exercise of the same.


Luigi. I pray you let it not be grievous unto you to declare unto me an other
thing, that is, for what cause you made the light horsemen, and the
extraordinary Veliti, to go with cries, rumors, and fury, when they gave
the charge? And after in the incountering of the rest of tharmie, you showed,
that the thing followed with a most great scilence? And for that I understand
not the occasion of this variety, I would desire that you would declare it
unto me.


Fabritio. The opinion of ancient capitaines, has been diverse about the
coming to hands, whether they ought with rumor to go a pace, or with
scilence to go fair and softely: this last way, serves to keep the order
more sure, and to understand better the commandments of the Captain: the
first, serves to encourage more the minds of men: and for that I believe,
that respect ought to be had to the one, and to the other of these two
things, I made the one go with rumor, and the other with scilence: nor me
thinks not in any wise, that the continual rumors be to purpose: because
they let the commandments, the which is a thing most pernicious: The
cries and rumors, wherewith the first charge is give unto the enemies, and the
silence that ought to be used after, when the faight is ones begun.
nor it stands not with reason, that the Romans used, except at the first
assault to make rumor: for that in their histories, is seen many times to
have happened, that through the words, and comfortinges of the capitain the
soldiers that ran away, were made to stand to it, and in sundry wise by
his commandment, to have varied the orders, the which should not have
followed, if the rumoures had been louder then his voice.


The fowerth book of the art of war, of Nicholas Machiauell, Citezeine and
Secretary of Florence, unto Laurence Philip Strozze.
Luigi. SEng that under my government, a field has been won so honorably,
I suppose that it is good, that I tempt not fortune any more, knowing how
variable, and unstable she is: and therefore, I desire to give up my
government, and that Zanobi do execute now this office of demaundyng, mindyng
to follow the order, which concerns the youngeste: and I know he will not
refuse this honor, or as we would say, this labor, as well for to do me
pleasure, as also for being naturally of more stomach tha^ I: nor it shall not
make him afraied, to have to enter into these travails, where he may be as
well overcome, as able to conquer.


Zanobi. I am ready to do what soever shall please you to appoincte me,
although that I desire more willingly to hear: for as much as hitherto, your
questions have satisfied me more, then those should have pleased me, which in
harkenyng to your reasonyng, has chanced to come into my remembrance. But
sir, I believe that it is good, that you lose no time, and that you have
patience, if with these our Ceremonies we trouble you.


Fabricio. You do me rather pleasure, for that this variacion of demaunders,
makes me to know the sundry wits, and sunderie appetites of yours: But
remains there any thing, which seems unto you good, to be joined to the
matter, that already has been reasoned of?


Zanobi. Two things I desire, before you pass to an other part: the one is,
to have you to show, if in orderyng armies, there needs to be used any
other facion: the other, what respects a captain ought to have, before he
conducte his men to the faight, and in the same any accidente risyng or growyng,
what reamedie may be had.


Fabricio. I will enforce my self to satisfy you, I will not answer now
distinctly to your questions: for that whileste I shall answer to one, many
times it will come to pass, that I must answer to an other. I have told
you, how I have showed you a facion of an army, to the intent, that according
to the same, there may be given all those facions, that the enemy, and the
situation requires: For as much as in this case, both according to the power
thereof, and according to the enemy, it proceadeth: but note this, To destende
much the fro^te of an army, is most perilous
that there is not a more perilous facion, then to destende much the front of
tharmie, if then thou have not a most puisant, and most great host:
otherwise, thou ought to make it rather gross, and of small largeness,
then of much largenes and thin: What is best for a captain to do, where
his power is much less the^ thenemies power.
for when thou have few me^ in comparison to thenemie, thou ought to seek
other remedies, as is to ordain thine army in soche a place, where thou may
be fortefied, either through rivers, or by means of fennes, after soch sort,
that thou can not be compassed about, or to enclose thy self on the
fla^ckes with diches, as Caesar did in France. You have to take in this case,
this general rule, A general rule.
to enlarge your self, or to draw in your self with the fro^t, according to
your number, and the same of the enemy. For thenemies being of less number,
thou ought to seek large places, having in especially thy men well
instructed: to the intent thou may, not only compass about the enemy,
but to destende thy orders: for that in plac^s rough and difficulte, being not
able to prevail of thy orders, thou commeste not to have any advantage,
hereby grew, that the Romans almost always, sought the open fields, and
aduoided the straightes. To the contrary, as I have said, thou ought to do,
if thou have few men, or ill instructed: for that then thou oughteste to
seek places, either where the little number may be saved, and where the small
experience do not hurt thee: The higher ground ought to be chosen.
Thou ought also to choose the higher ground, to be able more easily to
infest them: notwithstanding, An aduertisme^t not to place an army where the
enemy may se what the same does.
this aduertisment ought to be had, not to ordain thy army, where the enemy
may spy what thou do, and in place nere to the roots of the same, where
the enemies army may come: For that in this case, having respect unto the
artillery, the higher place shall get thee disaduauntage: Because that
always and commodiously, thou might of the enemies artillery be hurt,
without being able to make any remedy, and thou could not commodiously hurt
the same, being hindered by thine own me^. Also, Respects for the Son and
Wind.
he that prepares an army to faight a battle, ought to have respect, both
to the Sun, and to the Wind, that the one and the other, do not hurt the
front, for that the one and the other, will let thee the sight, the one with
the beams, and the other with the duste: and moreover, the Wind hinders the
weapons, which are stricken at the enemy, and makes their blows more feable:
and concerning the Sun, it suffices not to have care, that at the first it
shine not in the face, but it is requisite to consider, that increasyng the
day, it hurt thee not: and for this, it should be requsite in orderyng the
men, to have it all on the back, to the entente it should have to pass much
time, to come to lie on the front. This way was observed of Aniball at Can,
and of Mario againg the Cimbrians. If thou happen to be much inferior of
horses, ordain thine army emongeste Vines, and trees, and like impedimentes,
as in our time the Spaniardes did, when they ouerthrewe the French men at
Cirignuola. And it has been seen many times, with all one Soldiers, The
variyng of ord^^^ and p^^^ce may c^us^ the conque^ed to be come vi^^or^^^
variyng only the order, and the place, that they have become of losers
victorers: as it happened to the Carthageners, whom having been overcome of
Marcus Regolus diverse times, were after by the counsel of Santippo, a
Lacedemonian, victorious: whom made them to go down into the plain, where by
virtue of the horses, and of Eliphantes, they were able to overcome the
Romans. It semes unto me, according to the ancient insamples, that almost
all the excellent Capitaines, when they have known, that the enemy has made
strong one side of his battle, they have not set against it, the most
strongest part, but the most weakest, and the other most strongest, they have
set against the most weakest: after in the beginning the faighte, they have
commanded to their strongest part, that only they sustain the enemy, and
not to preace upon him, and to the weaker, that they suffer them selves to be
overcome, and to retire into the hindermoste bands of the army. This breadeth
two great disorders to the enemy: the first, that he finds his strongest
part compassed about, the second is, that semyng unto him to have the
victory, seldom times it happens, that they disorder not them selves,
whereof grows his sudden loss. Cornelius Scipio being in Spain, A policy in
the ordering of me^ and pitchyng of a field.
against Asdruball of Carthage, and understanding how to Asdruball it was
known, that he in the orderyng the army, placed his Legions in the midst,
the which was the strongest part of his army, and for this how Asdruball
with like order ought to proceed: after when he came to faighte the battle,
he changed order, and put his Legions on the horns of the army, and in the
midst, placed all his weakeste men: then coming to the hands, in a sudden
those men placed in the middeste, he made to march softly, and the horns of
the army, with celeritie to make forward, so that only the horns of both
the armies fought, and the bands in the midst, through being distaunt the
one from the other, joined not together, and thus the stro^gest part of
Scipio, came to faight with the weakest of Asdruball, and overcame him. The
which way was then profitable, but now having respect to the artillery, it
cannot be used: because the same space, which should remain in the midst,
between the one army and the other, should give time to the same to shoot: The
which is most pernicious, as above is said: Therefore it is requisite to
lay this way aside, and to use, as a little before we said, making all the
army to encounter, and the weakest part to give place. When a captain
perceives, that he has a greater army then his enemy, How to compass about
the enemies power
mindyng to compass him about, before he be aware, let him ordain his front
equal, to the same of his adversaries, after, so sone as the faight is begun,
let him make the front by a little and little to retire, and the flanckes to
destende, and always it shall happen, that the enemy shall find himself, How a
captain may faight and be as it were sure, not to be overcome.
before he be aware compassed about. When a capitain will faight, as it were
sure not to be broken, let him ordain his army in place, where he has refuge
nere, and safe, either between Fennes, or between hills, or by some strong
city: for that in this case, he cannot be followed of the enemy, where the
enemy may be pursued of him: this poincte was used of Aniball, when fortune
began to become his adversary, and that he doubted of the valiantness of
Marcus Marcello. How to trouble the orders of the enemy.
Some to trouble the orders of the enemy, have commanded those that were
light armed, to begin the faight, and that being begun, to retire between the
orders: and when the armies were after buckled together, and that the front of
either of them were occupied in faightyng, they have made them to issue out by
the flanckes of the battle, and the same have troubled and broken. What a
captain ought to do when he has not so many horsemen as the enemy.
If any perceive himself to be inferior of horse, he may besides the ways
that are alredie showed, place behind his horsemen a battle of Pikes, and in
faightyng take order, that they give way to the Pikes, and he shall remain
always superior. A great ^ide for horsemen
Many have accustomed to use certain fotemenne light armed, to faighte among
horsemen, the which has been to the chivalry most great help. Of all
those, which have prepared armies to the field, be most praised Aniball and
Scipio, when they fought in Africa: The policies used between Aniball and
Scipio.
and for that Aniball had his army made of Carthaginers, and of strangers of
diverse nations, he placed in the first front thereof.lxxx. Elephantes, after
he placed the strangers, behind whom he set his Carthaginers, in the
hindermoste place, he put the Italians, in who^ he trusted little: the which
thing he ordained so, for that the strangers having before them the enemy,
and behind being enclosed of his men, could not ^lie: so that being
constrained to faight they should overcome, or weary the Romans, supposyng
after with his fresh and valiaunte men, to be then able easily to overcome the
Romans, being wearied. Against this order, Scipio set the Astati, the
Prencipi, and the Triarij, in the accustomed manner, to be able to receive the
one the other, and to rescue the one the other: he made the front of the
army, full of void spaces, and because it should not be perceived but rather
should seem united, he filled them full of veliti to whom he commanded, that so
sone as the Eliphantes came, they should avoid, and by the ordinary spaces,
should enter between the Legins, and leave open the way to the Eliphauntes,
and so it came to pass, that it made vain the violence of them, so that
coming to hands, he was superior.


Zanobi. You have made me to remember* in alleging me this battle, how
Scipio in faighting, made not the Astati to retire into thorders of the
Prencipi, but he divided them, and made them to retire in the horns of the
army, to the intent they might give place to the Prencipi, when he would force
forward: therefore I would you should tell me, what occasion moved him, not to
observe the accustomed order.


Fabritio. I will tell you. Aniball had put all the strength of his army,
in the second band: wherefore Scipio for to set against the same like
strength, gathered the Prencipi and the Triarij together: So that the
distaunces of the Prencipt, being occupied of the Triarij, there was no place
to be able to receive the Astati: and therefore he made the Astati to divide,
and to go in the horns of the army, and he drew the^ not between the
Prencipi. But note, that this way of openyng the first hand, for to give
place to the second, cannot be used, but when a man is superior to his
enemy: for that then there is commodity to be able to do it, as Scipio was
able: but being under, and repulced, it cannot be done, but with thy manifest
ruin: and therefore it is convenient to have behind, orders that may receive
thee, but let us turn to our reasonyng. Carts full of hooks made to
destroy the enemies.
The ancient Asiaticans, amongst other things devised of them to hurt the
enemies, used carres. The which had on the sides certain hooks, so that not
only they served to open with their violence the bands, but also to kill with
the hooks the adversaries: The remedy that was used against Carts full o^
hooks.
against the violence of those, in three manners they provided, either they
sustained them with the thickenesse of the rays, or they received them
between the bands, as the Eliphantes were received, or else they made with art
some strong resistance: As Silla a Roman made against Archelaus, whom had
many of these carts, which they called hooked, who for to sustain them,
drove many stakes into the ground, behind his first bands of men, whereby
the carts being stopped, lost their violence. The strange manner that ^^^^a
used in orderyng his army against Archel^u^.
And the new manner that Silla used against him in orderyng the army, is to
be noted: for that he put the Veliti, and the horse, behind, and all the
heavy armed before, leauyng many distaunces to be able to send before those
behind, when necessite required: whereby the fight being begun, with the help
of the horsemen, to the which he gave the way, he got the victory. How to
trouble (...) the faighte the army of the enemies.
To intend to trouble in the faight the enemies army, it is conueniente to
make some thing to grow, that may make them afraied, either with showyng of
new help that comes, or with showyng things, which may represente a
terror unto them: after soche sort, that the enemies begiled of that sight,
may be afraied, and being made afraied, they may easily be overcome: the
which ways Minutio Rufo used, and Aecilio Glabrione Consults of Rome. A
policy of Caius Sulpicius, to make his enemies afraied.
Caius Sulpitius also set a great many of sackes upon Mules, and other beasts
unprofitable for the war, but in soche wise ordained, that they seemed men of
arms, and he commanded, that they should appear upon a hill, while he were a
faightyng with the Frenchemen, whereby grew his victory. The very same did
Marius, A policy of Marius against the Duchmenne.
when he fought against the Duchemen. Then the fained assaults auailyng
much, whilst the faight continues, it is co^ueniente, that the very
assaults in deed, do help much: inespecially if at unawares in the midst
of the faight, the enemy might be assaulted behind, or on the side: the
which hardely may be done, if the country help thee not: for that when it
is open, part of thy men cannot be hid, as is mete to be done in like
enterprises: but in woddie or hille places, and for this apt for ambusshes,
part of thy men may be well hidden, to be able in a sudden, and contrary to
thenemies opinion to assaut him, which thing always shall be occasion to give
thee the victory. It has been sometime of great importance, A policy of
great importance, while a battle is a faightyng.
whilst the faighte continues, to sow voices, which do pronounce the
captain of thenemies to be dedde, or to have overcome on the other side of
the army: the which many times to them that have used it, has given the
victory. The chivalry of the enemies may be easily troubled, How horsemen
may be disordered.
either with sightes, or with rumors, not used: as Creso did, whom put
Camelles against the horses of the adversaries, and Pirrus set against the
Roman horsemen Eliphantes, the sight of which troubled and disordered them.
How the turk gave the Sophie an overthrow.
In our time, the Turk discomfited the Sophi in Persia, and the Soldane in
Surria with no other, then with the noise of Harkabuses, the which in soche
wise, with their strange rumors, disturbed the horses of those, that the
Turk might easily overcome them: How the Spaniardes overcame the army of
Amilcare.
The Spaniardes to overcome the army of Amilcare, put in the first front
Carts full of towe drawn of oxen, and coming to hands, they kindeled fire
to the same, wherefore the oxen to fly from the fire, thrust into the army of
Amilcar, and opened it. How to train the enemy, to his destruction
They are wont (as we have said) to begile the enemy in the faight, drawyng
him into their ambusshes, where the Country is commodious for the same
purpose, but where it were open and large, many have used to make diches, and
after have covered them lightly with bows and earth, and left certain spaces
whole, to be able between those to retire: after, so sone as the faight has
been begun, retiryng by those, and the enemy following the^, has fallen in
the pittes. If in the faight there happen thee, any accident that may fear
thy soldiers, it is a most prudente thing, to know how to desemble it, and
to pervert it to good, A policy of Tullo Hostilio and Lucius Silla in
dessemblyng of a mischaunce.
as Tullo Hostilio did, and Lucius Silla: who^ seeing while they fought, how a
part of his men were gone to the enemies side, and how the same thing had very
much made afraied his men, he made straighte way throughout all the army to
be vndestoode, how all thing proceeded, according to his order: the which not
only did not trouble the army, but it increased in them so much stomach,
that he remained victorious. It happened also to Silla, that having sent
certain soldiers to do some business, and they being slain he said, to
the intent his army should not be made afraied thereby, that he had with
craft sent them into the bands of the enemies, for that he had found them
nothing faithful. Sertorius sine a man for telling him of the death of one of
his capitaines
Sertorius faightyng a battle in Spain, slew one, whom signified unto him
the death of one of his capitaines, for fear that tellyng the very same to
other, he should make them afraied. It is a most difficult thing, an army
being now moved to fly, to stay it, and make it to faight. And you have to
make this distinccion: either that it is all moved, and then to be impossible
to turn it, or there is moved a part thereof, and then there is some
remedy. How certain captains have stayed their me^ that has been running
away
Many Romain capitaines, with making before those which fled, have caused them
to stay, making them ashamed of running away, as Lucius Silla did, where
already part of his Legions being turned to flight, driven away by the men of
Mithridates, he made before them with a swearde in his hand criyng: if any ask
you, where you left your captain, say, we have left him in Boecia, where he
faighteth. Attillius constrained his me^ that ran away to turn again and to
faight.
Attillius a consul set against those that ran away, them that ran not
away, and made the^ to understand, that if they would not turn, they should
be slain of their friends, and of their enemies. How Philip^ ^ing of Macedonia
made his men afraied to run away.
Philip of Macedonia understanding how his men feared the Scithian Soldiers,
placed behind his army, certain of his most trusty horsemen, and gave
commission to them, that they should kill whom so ever fled: wherefore, his
men mindyng rather to die faightyng, then fliyng, overcame. Many Romans, not
so much to stay a flight, as for to give occasion to their men, to make
greater force, have whileste they have fought, taken an Ansigne out of their
own men's hands, and thrown it emongeste the enemies, and appoincted
rewards to him that could get it again. I do not believe that it is out of
purpose, to join to this reasonyng those things, which chance after the
faight, in especially being brief things, and not to be left behind, and to
this reasonyng conformable enough. Therefore I say, how the field is lost,
Victory ought with all celeritie to be followed.
or else won: when it is won, the victory ought with all celeritie to be
followed, and in this case to imitate Caesar, and not Aniball, whom staiyng after
that he had discomfited the Romans at Can, lost the Empire of Rome: The
other never rested after the victory, but followed the enemy being broken,
with greater violence and fury, then when he assalted him whole: What a
captain ought to do, when he should chance to receive an overthrow.
but when a captain does leese, he ought to see, i^o^ the loss there may
grow any vtilite unto him, inespecially if there remain any residue of
tharmie. The commodity may grow of the small aduertisment of the enemy,
whom most often times after the victory, becomes negligent, and gives thee
occasion to oppress him, How Martius overcame the army of the Carthaginers.
as Marcius a Roman oppressed the army of the Carthaginers, whom having
slain the two Scipions, and broken their army, not estemyng the same remnaunt
of men, which with Marcius remained alive, were of him assaulted and
overthrown: for that it is seen, that there is no thing so much to be
brought to pass, as the same, which the enemy thinks, that thou can not
attempt: because for the most part, men be hurt most, where they doubt
least: therefore a capitain ought when he cannot do this, to devise at least
with diligence, that the loss be less hurtful, to do this, it is
necessary for thee to use means, that the enemy may not easily follow thee,
or to give him occasion to make delaie: in the first case, some after they have
been sure to lose, have taken order with their heddes, that in diverse parts,
and by diverse ways they should fite, having appoincted where they should after
assemble together: the which made, that thenemie (fearing to divide the army)
was feign to let go safe either all, or the greatest part of the^. In the
second case, many have cast before the enemy, their dearest things, to the
intent that he tariyng about the spoil, might give the^ more laisure to fly.
A policy of Titus Dimius to hide a loss, which he had received in a faight.
Titus Dimius used no small policy to hide the loss, which he had received
in the faight, for asmoche as having fought until night, with great loss of
his men, he made in the night to be buried, the greatest part of them,
wherefore in the morning, the enemies seeing so many slain of theirs, and so
few of the Romans, beleuyng that they had the disauauntage, ran away. I
trust I have thus confusedly, as I said, satisfied in good part your demand:
in deed about the facions of the armies, there rests me to tell you, how some
time, by some Capitaines, it has been used to make them with the front, like
unto a wedge, iudgyng to be able by soche mean, more easily to open the
enemies army. Against this facion, they have used to make a facion like unto a
pair of sheres, to be able between the same void place, to receive that wedge,
and to compass it about, and to faight with it on every side: A general rule.
whereupon I will that you take this general rule, that the greatest remedy
that is used against a devise of the enemy, is to do willingly the same,
which he has devised that thou shall do perforce: because that doing it
willingly, thou do it with order, and with thy advantage, and his
disaduau^tage, if thou should do it being enforced, it should be thy
undoing: For the prouyng whereof, I care not to rehearse unto you, certain
things already told. The adversary makes the wedge to open thy bands: if
thou gowest with them open, thou disorderest him, and he disordereth not thee.
Aniball.
Aniball set the Elephantes in the front of his army, to open with them the
army of Scipio. Scipio went with it open, Scipio.
and it was the occasion of his victory, Asdruball.
and of the ruin of him. Asdruball placed his strongest men in the midst of
the front of his army, to overthrow Scipios men: Scipio commanded, that
by them selves they should retire and he broke them: So that like devises when
they are foreseen, be the causes of the victory of him, against whom they be
prepared. There remains me also, if I remember my self well, to tell you what
respects a Captain ought to have, before he lead his men to faight: A
Captain ought not to faight without advantage, except he be constrained.
upon which I have to tell you first, how a captain ought never to faight a
battle, except he have advantage, or be constrained. The vantage grows of
the situacion, of the order, of having more, or better men: the necessity,
grows when thou see how that not faightyng, thou must in any wise lose, as
should be for lackyng of money, and for this, thy army to be ready all manner
of ways to resolve, where famishemente is ready to assault thee, where the
enemy looks to be ingrosed with new men: in these cases, thou ought
always to faight, although with thy disaduauntage: for that it is much better
to attempt fortune, where she may favor thee, then not attemptyng, to see
thy certain ruin: and it is as grievous a fault in this case, in a capitain
not to faight, as to have had occasion to overcome, and not to have either
known it through ignorance, or left it through vileness. How advantage
may be taken of the enemies.
The aduauntages some times the enemy gives thee, and some times thy
prudence: Many in passing Rivers have been broken of their enemy, that has
been aware thereof, who^ has tarried, till the one half has been of the one
side, and the other half on the other, and then has assaulted them: as Caesar
did to the Suizzers, where he destroyed the fowerth part of them, through
being half over a river. Some time thy enemy is found weary, for having
followed thee to vndescritely, so that findyng thy self fresh and lusty, thou
ought not to let pass soche an occasion: besides this, if the enemy offer
unto thee in the morning betymes to faight, thou may a good while defer to
issue out of thy lodgyng, and when he has stood long in armor, and that he
has lost that same first heat, with the which he came, thou may then
faight with him. This way Scipio and Metellus used in Spain: the one against
Asdruball, the other against Sertorius. If the enemy be deminished of power,
either for having divided the army, as the Scipions in Spain, or for some
other occasion, thou oughteste to prove chance. The greateste part of prudent
capitaines, rather receive the violence of the enemies, then go with violence
to assalte them: for that the fury is easily withstoode of sure and steddie
men, and the fury being sustained, Fury withstode, co^uerteth into
vileness.
conuerteth lightly into vileness: Thus Fabius did against the Sannites, and
against the Galls, and was victorious and his fellow Decius remained slain.
Some fearing the power of their enemies, have begun the faight a little before
night, to the intent that their men chaunsyng to be overcome, might then by
the help of the darkness thereof, save them selves. Some having known, how
the enemies army being taken of certain supersticion, not to faight in soche
a time, have chosen the same time to faighte, and overcome: The which Caesar
observed in France, against Ariouistus, and Vespasian in Surrie, against the
Jews. The greatest and most importaunte aduertismente, What manner of men a
captain ought to have about him continually, to consult withal
that a captain ought to have, is to have about him faithful men, that
are wise and most expert in the war, with whom he must continually consulte
and reason of his men, and of those of the enemies, which is the greater
number, which is best armed, or best on horseback, or best exercised,
which be most apt to suffer necessity, in whom he trusts most, either in
the footmen, or in the horsemen: after they ought to consider the place where
they be, and whether it be more to the purpose for thenemie, then for him:
which of them has victualles most commodious: whether it be good to defer
the battle, or to faight it: what good might be given him, or taken away by
time: for that many times, soldiers seeing the war to be delaied, are
grieved, and being weary, in the pain and in the tediousness thereof, The
condicio^s of the capitain of the enemies, and of those that are about him is
most requisite to be known.
will forsake thee. It imports above all thing, to know the capitain of the
enemies, and whom he has about him, whether he be rash, or politic, whether
he be fearful, or hardy: to see how thou may trust upon the aidyng
soldiers. A timorous army is not to be conducted to faight.
And above all thing thou ought to take heed, not to conducte the army to
faight when it fears, or when in any wise it mistrusteth of the victory: for
that the greatest sign to lose, is when they believe not to be able to win:
How to avoid the faightyng of a field.
and therefore in this case, thou ought to avoid the faightyng of the
field, either with doing as Fabius Maximus, whom incampyng in strong places,
gave no courage to Aniball, to go to find him, or when thou should think,
that the enemy also in strong places, would come to find thee, to depart out
of the field, and to divide the men into thy tounes, to thentent that
tediousness of winnyng them, may weary him.


Zanobi. Cannot the faightyng of the battle be otherwise avoided, then in
deuidyng the army in sunderie parts, and placyng the men in tounes?


Fabritio. I believe that ones already, with some of you I have reasoned, how
that he, that is in the field, cannot avoid to faight the battle, when he
has an enemy, which will faight with him in any wise, and he has not, but
one remedy, and that is, to place him self with his army distant fifty miles
at least, from his adversary, to be able betymes to avoid him, when he
should go to find him. Fabius Maximus.
For Fabius Maximus never avoided to faight the battle with Aniball, but he
would have it with his advantage: and Aniball did not presume to be able to
overcome him, going to find him in the places where he encamped: where if he
had presupposed, to have been able to have overcome, it had been conueniente
for Fabius, to have fought the battails with him, or to have avoided.

Philip King of Macedonia, Philip king of Macedonia, overcome by the Romans.
the same that was father to Perse, coming to war with the Romans, pitched
his camp upon a very high hill, to the intent not to faight with them: but
the Romans went to find him on the same hill, and discomfaited him. How
Cingentorige avoided the faightying of the field with Caesar.
Cingentorige capitain of the French men, for that he would not faight the
field with Caesar, whom contrary to his opinion, had passed a river, got away
many miles with his men. The Venecians in our time, The ignorance of the
Venecians.
if they would not have come to have fought with the French king, they ought
not to have tarried till the French army, had passed the River Addus, but to
have gotten from them as Cingentorige, where they having tarried, knew not how
to take in the passing of the men, the occasion to faight the battle, nor to
avoid it: For that the French men being nere unto them, as the Venecians went
out of their Camp, assaulted them, and discomfited them: so it is, that the
battle cannot be avoided, when the enemy in any wise will faight, nor let
no man allege Fabius, for that so much in the same case, he did fly the day
of battle, as Aniball. It happens many times, that thy soldiers be
willing to faight, and thou knoweste by the number, and by the situacion, or
for some other occasion to have disaduauntage, and desire to make them
change from this desire: it happens also, that necessity, or occasion,
constrains thee to faight, and that thy soldiers are evil to be trusted,
and smally disposed to faight: where it is necessary in the one case, What is to
be done where soldiers desire to faight, contrary to their capitaines mind.
to make them afraied, and in the other to encourage them: In the first
case, when perswacions suffiseth not, there is no better way, then to give in
pray, a part of the^ unto thenemie, to the intent those that have, and those
that have not fought, may believe thee: and it may very well be done with art,
the same which to Fabius Maximus happened by chu^ace. Tharmie of Fabius (as you
know) desired to faight with Aniballs army: the very same desire had the
master of his horses: to Fabius it seemed not good, to attempt the faight: so
that through soche contrary opinions, he was fain to divide the army: Fabius
kept his men in the ca^pe, the other fought, and coming into great peril, had
been overthrown, if Fabius had not rescued him: by the which insample the
master of the horse, together with all the army, knew how it was a wise way
to obeie Fabius. How to encourage soldiers
Concerning to encourage them to faight, it should be well done, to make them
to disdain the enemies, showing how they speak slanderous words of them, to
declare to have intelligence with them, and to have corrupted part of them, to
incampe in place, where they may see the enemies, and make some light
skirmishe with the^, for that the thing that is daily seen, with more
facility is despised: to show them to be unworthy, and with an oracion for
the purpose, to reprehende them of their cowardnesse, and for to make them
ashamed, to tell them that you will faight alone, when they will not bear you
company. And you ought above all thing to have this aduertismente, An
aduertisme^t to make the soldiour most obstinately to faight.
mindyng to make the Soldier obstinate to faight, not to permit, that they
may send home any of their substance, or to leave it in any place, till the
war be ended, that they may understand, that although fliyng save their
life, yet it saves not them their goods, the love whereof, is wont no less
then the same, to make men obstinate in defense.


Zanobi. You have told, how the soldiers may be turned to faight, with
speaking to them: do you mean by this, that all the army must be spoken
unto, or to the heddes thereof?


Fabricio. To persuade, or to diswade a thing unto few, is very easy, for
that if words suffice not, you may then use authority and force: but the
difficulty is, to remove from a multitude an evil opinion, and that which is
contrary either to the common profit, or to thy opinion, where cannot be used
but words, the which is meet that they be heard of every man, mindyng to
persuade them all. Wherefore, It is requisite for excelle^ C^pitaines to be
good orators.
it was requisite that the excellent Capitaines were orators: for that
without knowing how to speak to all the army, with difficulty may be wrought
any good thing: the which altogether in this our time is laid aside. Read the
life of Alexander Magnus, Alexander Magnus used openly to persw^dy his army.
and you shall see how many times it was necessary for him to persuade, and to
speak publikly to his army: otherwise he should never have brought them,
being become rich, and full of spoil, through the deserts of Arabia, and
into India with so much his disease, and trouble: for that infinite times
there grow things, whereby an army ruinateth, when the capitain either
knows not, or uses not to speak unto the same, The effecteousnes of speking
for that this speaking takes away fear, incourageth the minds, increases
the obstinatenes to faight, discovers the deceiptes, promises rewards,
shows the perilles, and the way to avoid them, reprehendeth, prays,
threateneth, fills full of hope, praise, shame, and does all those things,
by the which the human passions are extincte, or kendled: wherefore, that
prince, or common weal, which should appoincte to make a new power, and
cause reputacion to their army, ought to accustom the Soldiers thereof,
Soldiers ought to be accustomed to hear their Captain speak.
to hear the capitain to speak, and the capitain to know how to speak unto
the^. In keeping desposed the soldiers in old time, to faight for their
country, the religion auailed much, How in old time soldiers were
threatened for their faltes
and the oaths which they gave them, when they led them to warfare: for as
much as in all their faults, they threatened them not only with those
punishementes, which might be feared of men, but with those which of God
might be looked for: Enterprises may the easeli^^ be brought to pass by
means of religion.
the which thing mingled with the other Religious manners, made many times
easy to the ancient capitaines all enterprises, and will do always, where
religion shall be feared, Sertorius.
and observed. Sertorius prevailed, by declaryng that he spoke with a Stagge,
the which in Gods part, promised him the victory. Silla said, A policy
o^ Silla.
he spoke with an Image, which he had taken out of the Temple of Apollo. Many
have told how God has appeared unto them in their sleep, who^ has admonished
them to faight. In our fathers time, Charles the seventh king of France, A
policy of Charles the seventh king of France against the Englismen
in the war which he made against the Englishemen, said, he counseled
with a maid, sent from God, who was called every where the Damsel of
France, the which was occacion of his victory. How soldiers may be made to
esteem little their enemies.
There may be also used means, that may make thy men to esteem little the
enemy, as Agesilao a Spartaine used, whom showed to his souldious, certain
Persians naked, to the intent that seeing their delicate members, they should
not have cause to fear them. The surest wai to make souldiou^s most obstinat
to faight
Some have constrained their me^ to faight through necessity, taking away
from them all hope of saving them selves, saving in ouercommyng. The which is
the strongest, and the best provision that is made, to purpose to make the
soldier obstinate to faight: By what means obstinatenesse to faighte is
increased.
which obstinatenesse is increased by the confidence, and love of the
Captain, or of the country. Confidence is caused through the armor, the
order, the late victory, and the opinion of the Captain. The love of the
country, is caused of nature: that of the Capitain, through virtue, more then
by any other benefit: the necessities may be many, but that is strongest,
which constrains thee, either to overcome, or to dye.


The fiueth Book of the Art of war, of Nicholas Machiauell, Citezeine and
Secretary of Florence, unto Laurence Philip Strozze.
Fabritio. I Have showed you, how an armi, is ordained to faight a field with
an other army, which is seen pitched against it, and have declared unto you,
how the same is overcome, and after many circumstaunces, I have likewise
showed you, what diverse chances, may happen about the same, so that me thinks
time to show you now, how an army is ordered, against the same enemy, which
otherwise is not seen, but continually feared, that he assault thee: this
happens when an army marches through the enemies country, or through
suspected places. First, How the Romans marched with their armies.
you must understand, how a Roman army, sent always ordinarely before,
certain bands of horsemen, as spies of the way: after followed the right
horn, after this, came all the carriages, which to the same apperteined, after
this, came a Legion, after it, the carriages thereof, after that, an other
legion, and next to it, their carriages, after which, came the left horn,
with the carriages thereof at their back, and in the last part, followed the
remnaunte of the chivalry: this was in effect the manner, with which
ordinarily they marched: and if it happened that the army were assaulted in
the way on the front, How the Romans ordered their army when it happened
to be assaulted on the way
or on the back, they made straight way all the carriages to be drawn,
either on the right, or on the left side, according as chaunsed, or as they
could best, having respect to the situacion: and all the men together free
from their impedimentes, made hedde on that part, where the enemy came. If
they were assaulted on the flancke, they drue the carriages toward the same
part that was safe, and of the other, they made hedde. This way being well
and prudently governed, I have thought meet to imitate, sending before the
light horsemen, as exploratours of the Country: Then having four maine
battles, How the main battles ought to march.
I would make them to march in araie, and every one with their carriages
following them. And for that there be two sorts of carriages, that is
partainyng to particulare soldiers, and partainyng to the public use of all
the Camp, I would divide the public Carriages into four parts, and to every
maine battle, I would appoinct his part, dividing also the artillery into
four parts, and all the unarmed, so that every number of armed men, should
equally have their impedimentes. But because it happens some times, that they
march through the country, not only suspected, but so dangerous, that thou
fear every h^ were to be assaulted, thou art constrained for to go more sure,
to change the form of marchyng, and to go in soche wise prepared, that
neither the country men, nor any army, may hurt thee, findyng thee in any
part unprovided. In soche case, the aunciente capitaines were wont, to march
with the army quadrante, which so they called this form, not for that it was
altogether quadrante, but for that it was apt to faight of four parts, and
they said, that they went prepared, both for the way, and for the faight:
from which way, I will not digress, and I will ordain my two maine
battles, which I have taken for to make an army of, to this effect. Mindyng
therefore, The orderyng of an army after soche sort, that it may ma^che
safely through the enemies country and be always in a redines to faight.
to march safely through the enemies Country, and to be able to answer him
on every side, when at unawares the army might chance to be assaulted, and
intendyng therefore, according to the antiquity, to bring the same into a
square, I would devise to make a quadra^t, that the rome thereof should be of
space on every part.Clix. yardes, in this manner. First I would put the
flanckes, distant the one flanck from the other, Clix. yardes, and I would
place five battles for a flancke, in a raie in length, and distant the one
from the other, two yardes and a quarter: the which shall occupy with their
spaces, every battle occupiyng thirty yardes, Clix. yardes. Then between the
hedde and the tail of these two flanckes, I would place the other ten
battles, in every part five, orderyng them after soche sort, that four
should join to the hedde of the right flanck, and four to the tail of the
left flancke, leaving between every one of the^, a distance of three yardes:
one should after join to the hedde of the left flancke, and one to the tail
of the right flancke: and for that the space that is between the one flancke
and the other, is.Clix. yardes, and these battles which are set the one to
the side of the other by breadth, and not by length, will come to occupy with
the distaunces one hundred yardes and a half yard, there shall come between
them four battles, placed in the front on the right flancke, and the one
placed in the same on the left, to remain a space of fifty and eighte yardes
and a half, and the very same space will come to remain in the battles,
placed in the hinder part: nor there shall be no difference, saving that the
one space shall come on the part behind toward the right horn, and the other
shall come on the part before, toward the left horn. The place in the army
(...) the bo^^ (...) ^ppoincted
In the space of the.lviij. yardes and a half before, I would place all the
ordinary Veliti, in the same behind, the extraordinary, which will come to be
a thousand for a space, and mindyng to have the space that ought to be within
the army, to be every way.Clix. yardes, it is mete that the five battles,
which are placed in the hedde, and those which are placed in the tail,
occupy not any part of the space, which the flanckes keep: and therefore it
shall be convenient, that the five battles behind, do touch with the
front, the tail of their flanckes, and those before, with the tail to touch
the hedde, after soche sort, that upon every corner of the same army, there
may remain a space, to receive an other battle: The place in the army wh^^
thextraordinarie Pikes are appoincted.
and for that there be four spaces, I would take four ba^des of the
extraordinary Pikes, and in every corner I would place one, and the two
Ansignes of the foresaied Pikes, which shall remain overplus, I would set in
the midst of the rome of this army, The place in the army where the general
capitain must be.
in a square battle, on the hedde whereof, should stand the general
captain, with his men about him. And for that these battles ordained
thus, march all one way, but faight not all one way, in puttyng them
together, th^se sides ought to be ordained to faight, which are not defended
of the other battles. And therefore it ought to be considered, that the five
battles that be in the front, have all their other parts defended, except
the front: and therefore these ought to be put together in good order, and
with the Pikes before. The five battles which are behind, have all their
sides defended, except the part behind, and therefore those ought to be put
together in soche wise, that the Pikes come behind, as in the place thereof we
shall show. The five battles that be in the right flancke, have all their
sides defended, except the right flancke. The five that be on the left flanck,
have all their parts defended, except the left flancke: and therefore in
orderyng the battles, they ought to be made, that the Pikes may turn on
the same flanck, that lies open: and the Peticapitaines to stand on the hedde,
and on the tail, so that nedyng to faight, all the armor and weapons may be
in their due places, the way to do this, is declared where we reasoned of the
manner of orderyng the battles. Where the artillery must be placed.
The artillery I would divide, and one part I would place without, on the
left flancke, and the other on the right. The light horsmenne must be sent
before to discover the country and the men of arms to come behind that (...)
The light horsemen, I would send before to discover the country, Of the men
of arms, I would place part behind, on the right horn, and part on the
left, distante about thirty yardes from the battles: and concerning horse,
you have to take this for a general rule in every condition, where you ordain
an army, A general rule concerning horse.
that always they ought to be put, either behind, or on the flanckes of
the same: he that puts them before, over against the army, it behooves him to
do one of these two things, either that he put them so much before, that
being repulced, they may have so much space, that may give them time, to be
able to go a side from thy footmen, and not to run upon them, or to order
them in soche wise, with so many spaces, that the horses by those may enter
between them, without disorderyng them. Nor let no man esteem little this
remembrance, for as much as many capitaines, whom having taken no head
thereof, have been ruinated, and by themselves have been disordered, and
broken. Where the carriages and the unarmed are placed.
The carriages and the unarmed men are placed, in the rome that remains
within the army, and in soche sort equally divided, that they may give the
way easily, to whom so ever would go, either from the one corner to the other,
or from the one hedde, to the other of the army. These battles without the
artillery and the horse, occupy every way from the utter side, two hundred
and eleven yardes and a half of space: and because this quadrante is made of
two main battles, it is convenient to distinguishe, what part the one maine
battle makes, and what the other: and for that the main battles are called
by the number, and every of them has (as you know) ten battles, and a
general head, I would cause that the first main battle, should set the
first.v. battles thereof in the fro^t, the other five, in the left flanck, and
the capitain of the same should stand in the left corner of the front. The
second maine battle, should then put the first five battles thereof, in
the right flanck, and the other five in the tail, and the hedde capitain of
the same, should stand in the right corner, whom should come to do the office
of the Tergiductor. The army ordained in this manner, ought to be made to move,
and in the marchyng, to observe all this order, and without doubt, it is sure
from all the tumultes of the country men. Nor the capitain ought not to make
other provision, to the tumultuarie assaults, then to give sometime Commission
to some horse, or Anfigne of Veliti, that they set themselves in order: nor it
shall never happen that these tumultuous people, will come to find thee at the
drawyng of the swerd, or pikes poincte: for that men out of order, have fear
of those that be in araie: and always it shall be seen, that with cries and
rumors, they will make a great assault, without otherwise coming nere unto
thee, like unto barking curres about a Mastie. Aniball when he came to the
hurt of the Romans into Italy, he passed through all France, and always
of the French tumultes, he took small regard. The way must be made plain
where the army shall march in order.
Mindyng to march, it is conueniente to have plainers and laborers before,
whom may make thee the way plain, which shall be guarded of those horsemen,
that are sent before to view the country: How many miles a day an army may
march in battle day, to be able to inca^pe before sun set
an army in this order may march ten mile the day, and shall have time
enough to incampe, and suppe before Sun going down, for that ordinarely, an
army may march twenty mile: if it happen that thou be assaulted, of an
army set in order, this assault cannot grow suddenly: for that an army in
order, comes with his pace, so that thou may have time enough, to set thy
self in order to faight the field, and reduce thy men quickly into the same
facion, or like to the same facion of an army, which before is showed thee. For
that if thou be assaulted, The orderyng of the army, when it is assaulted on
the vnwarde.
on the part before, thou needeste not but to cause, that the artillery that
be on the flanckes, and the horse that be behind, to come before, and place
theimselues in those places, and with those distaunces, as before is declared.
The thousand Veliti that be before, must go out of their place, and be
divided into.CCCCC. for a part, and go into their place, between the horse and
the bornes of tharmy: then in the void place that they shall leave, the two
Ansignes of the extraordinary Pikes must enter, which I did set in the
midst of the quadrante of the army. The thousand Veliti, which I placed
behind, must depart from the same place, and divide them selves in the
flanckes of the battles, to the fortificacion of those: and by the open place
that they shall leave, all the carriages and unarmed men must go out, and
place themselves on the back of the battle. Then the rome in the middeste
being voided, and every man gone to his place: the five battles, which I
placed behind on the army, must make forward in the void place, that is
between the one and the other flanck, and march toward the battles, that
stand in the hedde, and three of them, must stand within thirty yardes of
those, with equal distances, between the one and the other, and the other two
shall remain behind, distaunte other thirty yardes: the which facion may be
ordained in a sudden, and comes almost to be like, unto the first
disposicion, which of tharmy before we showed. And though it come straighter in
the front, it comes grosser in the flanckes, which gives it no less
strength: but because the five battles, that be in the tail, have the Pikes
on the hinder part, for the occasion that before we have declared, it is
necessary to make them to come on the part before, mindyng to have them to
make a back to the front of tharmie: and therefore it behooves either to make
the^ to turn battle after battle, as a whole body, or to make the^
quickly to enter between thorders of targettes, and conduct them before, the
which way is more spedy, and of less disorder, then to make the^ to turn al
togethe: and so you ought to do of all those, which remain behind in every
condition of assault, The orderyng of tharmie when thenemie commes to assault
it behind.
as I shall show you. If it appear that thenemie come on ye part behind, the
first thing that ought to be dooen, is to cause that every man turn his
face, where his back stood, and straight way tharmie comes to have made of
tail, head, and of head tail: then al those ways ought to be kept, in orderyng
the same front, as I told before. If the enemy come to encounter the right
flancke, How the army is ordered when it is assaulted of any of the sides.
the face of thy army ought to be made to turn toward the same side:
after, make all those things in fortificacion of the same hedde, which above
is said, so that the horsemen, the Veliti, and the artillery, may be in
places conformable to the head thereof: only you have this difference, that in
variyng the head of those, which are transposed, some have to go more, and some
less. In deed making hedde of the right flancke, the Veliti ought to enter in
the spaces, that be between the horn of the army, and those horse, which
were nerest to the left flancke, in whose place ought to enter, the two
Ansignes of the extraordinary Pikes, placed in the midst: But first the
carriages and the unarmed, shall go out by the open place, auoidyng the rome
in the midst, and retiryng themselves behind the left flancke, which shall
come to be then the tail of the army: the other Veliti that were placed in
the tail, according to the principal orderyng of the army, in this case,
shall not move: Because the same place should not remain open, which of tail
shall come to be flancke: all other thing ought to be dooen, as in orderyng of
the first hedde is said: this that is told about the making head of the right
flanck, must be understood to be told, having need to make it of the left
flanck: for that the very same order ought to be observed. If the enemy
should come gross, What is to be b^^n when the army to assaulted on two sides.
and in order to assault thee on two sides, th^se two sides, which he
comes to assault thee on, ought to be made strong with the other two
sides, that are not assaulted, doubling the orders in each of them, and
deuidyng for both parts the artillery, the Veliti, and the horse. If he come
on three or on four sides, it is necessary that either thou or he lack
prudence: for that if thou shall be wise, thou will never put thy self in
place, that the enemy on three or four sides, with a great number of men,
and in order, may assault thee: for that mindyng, safely to hurt thee, it is
requisite, that he be so great, that on every side, he may assault thee, with
as many men, as thou haste almost in all thy army: and if thou be so unwise,
that thou put thy self in the danger and force of an enemy, whom has three
times more men ordained then thou, if thou catch hurt, thou canste blame no
man but thy self: if it happen not through thy fault, but through some
mischaunce, the hurt shall be without the shame, and it shall chance unto thee,
as unto the Scipions in Spain, and to Asdruball in Italy: but if the enemy
have not many more men then thou, and intend for to disorder thee, to assault
thee on diverse sides, it shall be his foolishness, and thy good fortune: for as
much as to do so, it is convenient, that he become so thin in soche wise,
that then easily thou maiste overthrow one band, and withstand an other, and
in short time ruinate him: this manner of ordering an army against an enemy,
which is not seen, but which is fe^red, is a necessary and a profitable
thing, to accustom thy soldiers, to put themselves together, and to march
with soche order, and in marchyng, to order theimselues to faight, according to
the first hedde, and after to return in the form, that they marched in, then
to make hedde of the tail, after, of the flanckes, from these, to return
into the first facion: the which exercises and uses be necessary, mindyng to
have an army, thoroughly instructed and practiced: in which thing the Princes
and the capitaines, ought to take pain. Nor the discipline of war is no
other, then to know how to commau^de, and to execute these things. Nor an
instructed army is no other, then an army that is well practiced in these
orders: nor it cannot be possible, that who so ever in this time, should use
like discipline shall ever be broken. And if this quadrante form which I have
showed you, is somewhat difficulte, soche difficultnesse is necessary, taking
it for an exercise: for as much as knowing well, how to set them selves in
order, and to maintain them selves in the same, they shall know after more
easily, how to stand in those, which should not have so much difficulty.


Zanobi. I believe as you say, that these orders be very necessary, and I
for my part, know not what to add or take from it: true it is, that I desire
to know of you two things, the one, if when you will make of the tail, or of
the flancke hedde, and would make them to turn, whether this be commanded by
the voice, or with the ^ounde: th^ther, whether those that you send before, to
make plain the way, for the army to march, ought to be of the very same
soldiers of your battles, or other vile men appoincted, to like exercise.


Fabritio. Commandments of Capitaines being not well understood, may be the
destruction of an army.
Your first question imports much: for that many times the commandments
of Capitaines, being not ^el^ understood, or evil interpreted, have
disorder^^ their army: therefore the voices, with the which the command in
perilles, ought to be clear, Respect that is to be had in commandments
made with the found of the Trompet.
and no^e. And if thou command with the found, it is convenient to make,
that bewene the one way and the other, there be so much difference, that the
one cannot be changed for the other: and if thou commaundest with the voice,
In commaundmentes made with the voice, what respect is to be had.
thou oughteste to take heed, that thou fly the general voices, and to use
the particulares, and of the particulars, to fly those, which may be
interpreted sinisterly. Many times the saying back, back, has made to
ruinate an army: therefore this voice ought not to be used, but in steed
thereof to use, retire you. If you will make them to turn, for to change the
hedde, either to flanck, or to back, use never to say turn you, but say to
the left, to the right, to the back, to the front: thus all the other voices
ought to be simple, and nete, as thrust on, march, stand strong, forward,
return you: and all those things, which may be dooen with the voice, they
do, the other is dooen with the sound. Of P^anare.
Concerning those men, that must make the ways plain for the army to
march, which is your second question, I would cause my own soldiers to
do this office, as well because in the aunciente warfare they did so, as also
for that there should be in the army, lesser number of unarmed men, and less
impedimentes: and I would choose out of every battle, the same number that
should need, and I would make them to take the instruments, meet to plain
the ground withal, and their weapons to leave with those ranks, that should
be nereste them, who should carry them, and the enemy coming, they shall
have no other to do, then to take the^ again, and to return into their araie.


Zanobi. Who shall carry thinstrumentes to make the way plain withal?


Fabricio. The Carts that are appoincted to carry the like instruments.


Zanobi. I doubt whether you should ever bring these our soldiers, to
labor with Shouell or Mattocke, after soche sort.


Fabritio. All these things shall be reasoned in the place thereof, but now I
will let alone this part, and reason of the manner of the victualing of the
army: for that me thinks, having so much traiuailed them, it is time to
refreshe them, and to comfort them with meat. You have to understand, that a
Prince ought to ordain his army, as expedite as is possible, and take from
the same all those things, which may cause any trouble or burden unto it,
and make unto him any enterprise difficulte. Amongst those things that
causes most difficulty, is to be constrained to keep the army provided of
wine, and baked bread. The antiquity cared not for Wine, for that lackyng it,
they drank water, mingeled with a little vinegre, to give it a taste: For
which cause, among the municions of victualles for the host, vinegar was one,
and not wine. They baked not the bread in Ouens, as they use for Citees, but
they provided the Meal, and of the same, every Soldier after his own manner,
satisfied him self, having for condimente Larde and Baken, the which made the
bread sauerie, that they made, and maintained them strong, The victualles
that thantiquitie made provision of, for their armies.
so that the provision of victualles for the army, was Meal, Vinegar, Larde,
and Bacon, and for the horses Barley. They had ordinarely heardes of great
beasts and small, which followed the army, the which having no need to be
carried, caused not much impedimente. Of this order there grew, that an army
in old time, marched somtymes many days through solitary places, and
difficulte, without sufferyng disease of victualles: for that they lived of
things, which easily they might convey after them. To the contrary it
happens in the armies, that are now a days, which mindyng not to lack
wine, and to eat baked bread in the same manner, as when they are at home,
whereof being not able to make provision long, they remain often times
famished, or though they be provided, it is dooen with disease, and with most
great cost: therefore I would reduce my army to this manner of living: and I
would not that they should eat other bread, then that, which by themselves
they should bake. Concerning wine, I would not prohihite the drinkyng thereof,
nor yet the coming of it into the army, but I would not use endeavor, nor any
labor for to have it, and in the other provisions, I would govern my self
altogether, like unto the antiquity: the which thing, if you consider well,
you shall see how much difficulty is taken away, and how much trouble and
disease, an army and a captain is avoided of, and how much commodity shall
be given, to what so ever enterprise is to be dooen.


Zanobi. We have overcome thenemie in the field, marched afterward upon his
country, reason would, that spoils be made, tounes sacked, prisoners taken,
therefore I would know, how the antiquity in these things, governed them
selves.


Fabritio. Behold, I will satisfy you. I believe you have considered, for that
once alredie with some of you I have reasoned, how these present wars,
impouerishe as well those lords that overcome, as those that leese: for that
if the one leese his estate, the other leeseth his money, and his mouables: the
which in old time was not, for that the conqueror of the war, waxed
ritche. The occasion^ why the wars made now adays, do impouerishe the
conquerors as well as the conquered.
This grows of keepyng no compte in these days of the spoils, as in old
time they did, but they leave it to the discreacion of the soldiers. This
manner makes two most great disorders: the one, that which I have told:
the other that the soldier becomes more covetous to spoil, and less
observes the orders: and many times it has been seen, how the covetousness
of the pray, has made those to leese, whom were victorious. The order that
the Romans took, concerning the spoil and the booties that their soldiers
got.
Therefore the Romans which were princes of armies, provided to the one and
to the other of these inconuenienses, ordainyng that all the spoil should
apertaine to the public, and that the public after should bestow it, as
should be thought good: and therefore they had in tharmie the questours, who^
were as we would say, the chamberlaines, to whose charge all the spoil and
booties were committed: whereof the consul was served to give the ordinary
pay to the soldiers, to succor the wounded, and the sick, and for the other
business of the army. The consul might well, and he used it often, to
grant a spoil to soldiers: but this grauntyng, made no disorder: for that
the army being broken, all the pray was put in the midst, and distributed by
hedde, according to the qualitee of every man: the which manner they
constituted, to thintente, that the soldiers should attend to overcome, and
not to rob: and the Roman Legions overcame the enemies, and followed them
not, for that they never departed from their orders: only there followed them,
the horsemenne with those that were light armed, and if there were any other
soldiers then those of the legions, they likewise pursued the chase. Where if
the spoil should have been his that got it, it had not ben possible nor
reasonable, to have kept the legions steddie, and to withstonde many perils:
hereby grew therefore, that the common weal inritched, and every Consul^
carried with his triumph into the treasury, much treasure, which all was of
booties and spoils. An order that the antiquity took, concerning their
soldiers wages.
An other thing the antiquetie did upon good consideration, that of the wages,
which they gave to every soldier, the third part they would should be
laid up next to him, whom carried the ansigne of their band, which never
gave it them again, before the war was ended: this they did, being moved of
two reasons, the first was to thintente, that the soldier should thrive by
his wages, because the greatest part of them being young men, and careless,
the more they have, so much the more without need they spend, the other
cause was, for that knowing, that their mouab^lles were next to the ansigne,
they should be constrained to have more care thereof, and with more
obstinatenesse to defend it: and this made them strong and to hold together:
all which things is necessary to observe, purposinge to reduce the exercise
of arms unto the intier perfection thereof.


Zanobi. I believe that it is not possible, that to an army that marches from
place to place, there fall not perrilous accidents, where the industerie of the
captain is needful, and the worthiness of the soldiers, mindyng to
avoid them. Therefore I would be glad, that you remembering any, would show
them.


Fabritio. I shall content you with a good will, being inespetially
necessary, intendyng to make of this exercise a perfect science. Captains
^ai incur the danger of ambusshes two manner of ways.
The Capitaines ought above all other things, whileste they march with an
army, to take heed of ambusshes, wherein they incur danger two ways,
either marchynge thou entrest into them, or thoroughe craft of the enemy thou
art trained in before thou art aware. How to avoid the peril of ambusshes.
In the first case, mindyng to avoid such peril, it is necessary to send
before double ward, whom may discover the country, and so much the more
diligence ought to be used, the more that the country is apt for ambusshes,
as be the woddie or hilly countries, for that always they be laid either in a
wodde, or behind a hille: and as the ambusshe not forseene, does ruin thee, so
forseyng the same, it cannot hurt thee. How ambusshes have been perceived*
Many times birds or much duste have discovered the enemy: for that always
where the enemy comes to find thee, he shall make great duste, which shall
signify unto thee his coming: so often times a Captain seeing in the places
where he ought to pass, Doves to rise, or other of those birds that fly in
flocks, and to turn about and not to light, has known by the same the
ambusshe of the enemies to be there, and sendynge before his men, and
sertainely understanding it, has saved him self and hurt his enemy.
Concerning the second case, to be trained in, (which these our men call to be
drawn to the shot) you ought to take heed, not straight way to believe those
things, which are nothing reasonable, yt they be as they seem: as should be,
if the enemy should set before thee a pray, thou ought to believe that in
the same is the hook, and that therein is hid the deceipte. If many enemies be
driven away by a few of thine, if a few enemies assault many of thine, if
the enemies make a sodeine flight, and not standing with reason, always thou
ought in such cases to fear deceipte, and ought never to believe that
the enemy knows not how to do his business, How the Captain of the
enemies ought to be esteemed.
but rather intendyng that he may begile thee the less, and mindyng to stand
in less peril, the weaker that he is, and the less craftier that the enemy
is, so much the more thou ought to esteem him: and thou must in this case
use two sundry poinctes, for that thou ought to fear him in thy mind and
with the order, but with words, and with other outewarde demonstracion, to
seem to dispyse him: because this last way, makes that thy soldiers hope
the more to have the victory: the other makes thee more wary, and less apt
to be begyled. Where me^ be in greatest peril.
And thou have to understand, that when men march thoroughe the enemies
country, they are in much more, and greater perils, then in fayghtyng the
field: and therefore the Captain in marchyng, ought to use double diligence:
The description of the country where an army must march, is most requiset
for a Captain to have.
and the first thing that he ought to do, is to get described, and payncted
out all the country, thorough the which he must march, so that he may know
the places, the number, the distances, the ways, the hills, the rivers, the
fennes, and all the quallites of them: and to cause this to be known, it is
convenient to have with him diversely, and in sundry manners such men, as know
the places, and to ask them with diligence, and to se whether their talk,
agree and according to the agreyng thereof, to note: he ought also to send
before the horsemen, and with them prudente heddes, not so much to discover the
enemy, as to view the country, to se whether it agree with the description,
and with the knowledge that they have of the same. Also the guydes that are
sent, ought to be kept with hope of reward, and fear of pain. A most
profitable thing it is for a captain to be secret in all his affairs.
And above all things it ought to be provided, that the army know not to
what business he leads them: for that there is nothing in the war more
profitable, then to keep secret the things that is to be dooen: and to
thintente a suddeine assault do not trouble thy soldiers, thou oughteste to
see them to stand reddie with their weapons, because the things that are
provided for, offendlesse. Many for to avoid the confusion of marchyng, have
placed under the standerde, the carriages, and the unarmed, and have commanded
them to follow the same, to the intent that in marchyng needyng to stay, or to
retire, they might do it more easily, which thing as profitable, I allow very
much. Also in marchyng, An aduertisme^t concerning the marchyng of an army.
aduertismente ought to be had, that the one part of the army go not a
sunder from the other, or that thoroughe some going fast, and some soft, the
army become not slender: the which things, be occation of dissorder: The
marching of an army ought to be ruled by the stroke of the Drum.
therefore the heddes must be placed in such wise, that they may maintain the
pace even, causing to go soft those that go to fast, and to haste forward
the other that go to sloe, the which pace can not be better ruled, then by
the stroke of the drum. The ways ought to be caused to be enlarged, so that
always at least a band of.iiij. hundred men may march in order of battle.
The condition of the enemy ought to be considered.
The custom and the quality of the enemy ought to be considered, and whether
that he will assault thee either in the morning, or at none or in the evening,
and whether he be more puisante with fotemen or horsemen, and according as you
understand, to ordeine and to provide for thy self. But let us come to some
particular accidente. It happens sometime, that thou gettyng from the enemy,
because thou iudgest thy self inferior, and therefore mindynge not to faight
with him, and he coming at thy back, thou ariuest at the bank of a river,
passing over the which, asks time, so that the enemy is ready to overtake
thee and to fayght with thee. Some, which chau^sing to be in such peril,
have enclosed their army on the hinder part with a diche, and fillyng the
same full of towe, and firyng it, have then passed with the army without being
able to be let of the enemy, he being by the same fire yt was between them
held back.


Zanobi. I am hard of belief, that this fire could stay them, in especially
because I remember that I have hard, Annone of Carthage.
how Annone of Carthage, being besieged of enemies, enclosed him self on the
same part, with wodde, which he did set on fire where he purposed to make
eruption. Wherefore the enemies being not intentive on the same part to look
to him, he made his army to pass over the same flame, causing every man to
hold his Target before his face for to defend them from the fire, and smoke.


Fabricio. You say well: but consider you how I have said, and how Annone
did: for as much as I said that they made a diche, and filled it with towe,
so that he, that would pass over the same, should be constrained to contend
with the diche and with fire: Annone made the fire, without the diche, and
because he intended to pass over it, he made it not great, for ye otherwise
without the diche, it should have let him. Do you not know, Nabide a
spartayne.
that Nabide a Spartan being besieged in Sparta of the Romans, set fire on
part of his town to let the way to the Romans, who alredie were entered in?
And by mean of the same flame not only hindered their way, but drove them
out: but let us turn to our matter. Quintus Luttatius a Roman, having at
his back the Cimbri, and coming to a river, Quintus Luttatius po^^^c^^ to
pass over a river.
to thentente the enemy should give him time to pass over, seemed to give time
to them to faight with him: and therefore he fained that he would lodge there,
and caused trenches to be made, and certain pauilions to be erected, and sent
certain horsemen into the country for forredge: so that the Cimbrise
beleeuyng, that he encamped, they also encamped, and divided them selves into
sundry parts, to provide for victuals, whereof Luttatius being aware, passed
the river they being not able to let him. Some for to pass a river having no
bridge, How to pass a river without a bridge.
have divided it, and one part they have turned behind their backs, and the
other then becomynge shalower, with ease they have passed it: when the rivers
be swift, purposyng to have their footmen to pass safely, they place their
strongest horses on the higher side, that they may sustain the water, and an
other part be low yt may succor the men, if any of the river in passing
should be overcome with the water: They pass also rivers, that be very deep,
with bridges, with botes, and with barrelles: and therefore it is good to have
in a readiness in an army wherewith to be able to make all these things. It
fortuneth sometime that in passing a river, the enemy standing against thee
on the other bank, does let thee: to mind to overcome this difficulty, I
know not a better insample to follow, A polecie of Caesar to ha^^ ^ river, where
his enemy being on the other side thereof sought to let him.
then the same of Caesar, whom having his army on the bank of a river in
France, and his passage being let of Vergintorige a French man, the
which on the other side of the river had his men, marched many days a long
the river, and the like did the enemy: wherefore Caesar incamping in a woddie
place, apt to hide men, he took out of every legion three cohortes, and made
them to tarry in the same place, commaundynge them that so soon as he was
departed, they should cast over a bridge, and should fortefie it, and he with
his other men followed on the way: wherefore Vergintorige seeing the number of
the legions, thinkyng that there was not left any part of them behind,
followed also his way: but Caesar when he supposed that the bridge was made,
turned backewarde, and finding all things in order, passed the river without
difficultee.


Zanobi. Have ye any rule to know the foordes?


Fabritio. How to know the Foordes of a river.
Yea, we have: always the river, in that part, which is between the water,
that is stilleste, and the water that runs fastest, there is least depth and
it is a place more meet to be looked on, then any other where. For that
always in the same place, the river is most shallowest. The which thing,
because it has been proved many times, is most true.


Zanobi. If it chance that the River have marde the Foorde, so that the horses
sincke, what reamedy have you?


Fabricio. The remedy is to make hardels of rods which must be placed in
the bottom of the river, and so to pass upon those: but let us follow our
reasonyng. If it happen that a capitain be led with his army, between two
hills, and that he have not but two ways to save himself, either that
before, or that behind, and those being beset of thenemies, he has for
remidie to do the same, How to escape out of a straight where the same is
besette with enemies.
which some have done heretofore: yt which have made on their hinder part a
great trenche, difficult to pass over, and seemed to the enemy, to mind to
keep him of, for to be able with all his power, without neding to fear behind,
to make force that way, which before remains open. The which the enemies
beleuyng, have made them selves strong, toward the open part, and have
forsaken the enclosed, and he then castyng a bridge of wood over the Trenche,
for soche an effect prepared, both on the same part, with out any impedimente
has passed, and also delivered himself out of the hands of the enemy. How
Lutius Minutius escaped out of a straight wherein he was enclosed of his enemies.
Lucius Minutus a Consul of Rome, was in Liguria with an army, and was of the
enemies enclosed, between certain hills, whereby he could not go out:
therefore he sent certain soldiers of Numidia on horseback, which he had
in his army (whom were evil armed, and upon little lean horses) toward the
places that were kept of the enemies, who^ at the first sight made the
enemies, to order them selves together, to defend the passage: but after that
they saw those men ill apoincted, and according to their facion evil horsed,
regardyng them little, enlarged the orders of their ward, whereof so sone as
the Numidia^s were a ware, giuyng the spurs to their horses, and runnyng
violently upon them, passed before they could provide any remedy, whom being
passed, destroyed and spoiled the country after soche sort, that they
constrained the enemies, to leave the passage free to the army of Lucius. Some
captain, How some Capitaynes have suffered them selves to be compassed
about of their enemies.
which has perceived himself to be assaulted of a great multitude of
enemies, has drawn together his men, and has given to the enemy commodity,
to compass him all about, and then on the same part, which he has perceived
to be most weak, has made force, and by the same way, has caused to make
way, and saved himself.

Marcus Antonius retiryng before the army of the Parthians, A polecie of
Marcus Antonius.
perceived how the enemies every day before Sun risyng, when he removed,
assaulted him, and all the way troubled him: in so much, that he determined
not to depart the next day before None: so that the Parthians believing, that
he would not remove that day, returned to their tents. Whereby Marcus
Antonius might then all the rest of the day, march without any
disquietnesse. A defense for the s^otte of arrows.
This self same man for to avoid the arrows of the Parthians, commanded his
men, that when the Parthians came to wards them, they should knele, and that
the second rank of the battles, should cover with their Targaettes, the
heddes of the first, the third, the second, the fowerth, the third, and so
successively, that all the army came, to be as it were under a pentehouse, and
defended from the shot of the enemies. This is as much as is come into my
remembrance, to tell you, which may happen unto an army marchyng: therefore,
if you remember not any thing else, I will pass to an other part.


The sixthe Book of the Art of war, of Nicholas Machiauell, Citezeine and
Secretary of Florence, unto Laurence Philip Strozze.
Zanobi. I Believe that it is good, seeing the reasonyng must be changed, that
Baptiste take his office, and I to resign mine, and we shall come in this
case, to imitate the good Capitaines (according as I have now here understood
of the gentilman) who place the best soldiers, before and behind the army,
semyng unto them necessary to have before, soche as may lustely begin the
faight, and soche as behind may lustely sustain it. Now seeing Cosimus began
this reasonyng prudently, Baptiste prudently shall end it. As for Luigi and I,
have in this middeste entertained it, and as every one of us has taken his
part willingly, so I believe not, that Baptiste will refuse it.


Baptiste. I have let my self been governed hitherto, so I mind to do still.
Therefore be content sir, to follow your reasonyng, and if we interrupte you
with this practice of ours, have us excused.


Fabritio. You do me, as all ready I have said, a most great pleasure:
for this your interrupting me, takes not away my fantasy, but rather
refreshes me. But mindyng to follow our matter I say, how that it is now
time, that we lodge this our army, for that you know every thing desires
rest and saftie, because to rest, and not to rest safely, is no perfect
rest: I doubt much, whether it has not been desired of you, that I should
first have lodged them, after made them to march, and last of all to
faight, and we have done the contrary: whereunto necessity has brought us,
for that intendyng to show, how an army in going, is reduced from the form
of marching, to the same manner of faightyng, it was necessary to have first
showed, how they ordered it to faight. But tournyng to our matter, I say, that
minding to have the Camp sure, it is requisite that it be strong, and in good
order: the industry of the Captain, makes it in order, the situacion, or
the art, makes it strong. The Greeks sought strong situacio^s, How the
Greeks encamped.
nor they would never place them selves, where had not been either cave, or
bancke of a river, or multitude of trees, or other natural fortificacion, that
might defend them: but the Romans not so much inca^ped safe through the
situacion, How the Romans encamped.
as through art, nor they would never incampe in place, where they should not
have been able to have raunged all their bands of men, according to their
discipline. Hereby grew, that the Romans might keep always one form of
incamping, for that they would, that the situacion should be ruled by the^,
not they by the situacion: the which the Greeks could not observe, for that
being ruled by the situacion, and variyng the situacion and form, it was
conueniente, that also they should vary the manner of incampyng, and the facion
of their lodgings. Therefore the Romans, where the situacion lacked strength
they supplied the same with art, and with industry. And for that I in this my
declaracion, have willed to imitate the Romans, I will not depart from the
manner of their incamping, yet not obseruyng altogether their order, but taking
the same part, which seems unto me, to be mete for this present time. I have
told you many times, how the Romans had in their co^sull armies, two Legions
of Roman men, which were about a leven thousand footmen, and six hundred
horsemen, and moreover they had an other leven thousand footmen, sent from
their friends in their aid: nor in their army they had never more soldiers
that were strangers, then Romans, except horsemenne, whom they cared not,
though they were more in number then theirs: and in all their doings, they did
place their Legions in the middeste, and the aiders, on the sides: the which
manner, they observed also in incampyng, as by your self you may read, in those
aucthoures, that write of their acts: and therefore I purpose not to show you
distinctly how they encamped, but to tell you only with what order, I at this
present would incampe my army, whereby you shall then know, what part I
have taken out of the Roman manners. You know, that instead of two Roman
Legions, I have taken two maine battles of footmen, of six thousand
footmen, and three hundred horsemen, profitable for a maine battle, and into
what battles, into what weapons, into what names I have divided them: you
know how in orderyng tharmie to march, and to faight, I have not made
mention of other men, but only have showed, how that doubling the men, they
neded not but to double the orders: but mindyng at this present, to show you
the manner of incampyng, me thinks good not to stand only with two maine
battles, but to bring together a just army, made like unto the Romans, of
two maine battles, and of as many mo aidyng men: the which I make, to the
intent that the form of the incampyng, may be the more perfect, by lodgyng a
perfect army: which thing in the other demonstracions, has not seemed unto
me so necessary. Purposing then, to inca^pe a just army, The manner of the
incamping of an army.
of.xxiiij. thousand footmen, and of two thousand good horsemenne, being
divided into four maine battles, two of our own men, and two of
strangers, I would take this way. The situacion being found, where I would
incampe, I would erecte the head standarde, and about it, I would mark out a
quadrant, which should have every side distante from it.xxxvij. yardes and a
half, of which every one of them should lie, toward one of the four regions
of heaven, as East, Weste, Southe, and North: between the which space, The
lodging for the general captain.
I would that the capitaines lodgyng should be appoincted. And because I believe
that it is wisedo^, to divide the armed from the unarmed, seeing that so, for
the most part the Romans did, I would therefore separate the men, that
were cumbered with any thing, from the vncombered. I would lodge all, or the
greatest part of the armed, on the side toward the East, and the unarmed,
and the cumbred, on the Weste side, making East the hedde, and Weste the back
of the Camp, and Southe, and North, should be the flanckes: and for to
distinguishe the lodgings of the armed, I would take this way. I would draw
a line from the hedde standarde, and lead it toward the East, the space
of.CCCCC.x. yardes and a half: I would after, make two other lines, that should
place in the middeste the same, and should be as long as that, but stistante
each of them from it a leven yardes and a quarter: in the end whereof, I
would have the East gate, and the space that is between the two vttermoste
lines, should make a way, that should go from the gate, to the capitaines
lodging, which shall come to be.xxij. yardes and a half broad, and.CCCClxxij.
yardes and a half long, for the.xxxvij. yardes and a half, the lodgyng of
the Captain will take up: and this shall be called the Captain way. Then
there shall be made an other way, from the Southe gate, to the North gate,
and shall pass by the hedde of the captain way, and leave the Capitaines
lodgyng toward theaste, which way shall be.ix.C.xxxvij. yardes and a half
long (for the length thereof will be as much as the breadth of all the lodgings)
and shall likewise be xxij. yardes and a half broad, and shall be called the
cross way. Then so sone as the Capitaines lodgyng, were appoincted out, and
these two ways, there shall be begun to be appoincted out, the lodginges of
our own two main battles, one of the which, I would lodge on the right hand
of the capitaines way, and the other, on the left: and therefore passing over
the space, that the breadth of the cross way takes, I would place xxxij.
lodgings, on the left side of the capitain way, and.xxxij. on the right
side, leauyng between the.xvi. and the.xvij. lodgyng, a space of.xxij. yardes
and a half, the which should serve for a way overthwart, which should run
ouerthwarte, throughout all the lodgings of the maine battles, as in the
distributyng of them shall be seen.

Of these two orders of lodgings in the beginning of the head, The lodging^
for the men of arms, and their Captain.
which shall come to ioygne to the cross way, I would lodge the Captain of
the men of arms, in the.xv. lodgings, which on every side follows next,
their men of arms, where each main battle, having a.C.l. men of arms, it
will come to ten men of arms for a longyng. The spaces of the Capitaines
lodgings, should be in breadth.xxx. and in length.vij. yardes and a half.
Note, which is breadth and which length in the square camp.
And note that when so ever I sai bredeth, it signifies the space of the
midst from Southe to North, and saying length, that which is from weste to
East. Those of the men of arms, should be.xi. yardes and a quarter in
length, and.xxii. yardes and a half in bredeth. In the other xv. lodgings,
that on every side should follow, The lodgings for the light horsemen, and
their capitain.
the which should have their beginning on the other side of the ouerthwarte
way, and which shall have the very same space, that those of the men of arms
had, I would lodge the light horsemen: whereof being a hundred and fifty, it
will come to.x. horsemen for a lodgyng, and in the.xvj. that remains, I
would lodge their Captain, geuynge him the very same space, that is given
to the Capitain of the men of arms: and thus the lodginges of the horsemen of
two maine battles, will come to place in the midst the Captain way, and
give rule to the lodginges of the footmen, as I shall declare. You have noted
how I have lodged the.CCC. horsemed of every main battle with their
Capitaines, in.xxxij. lodgings placed on the Captain way, having begun from
the cross way, and how from the.xvi. to the.xvii. there remains a space
of.xxij. yardes and a half, to make away ouerthwarte. Mindyng therefore to
lodge the xx. battles, which the two ordinary maine battles have, The
lodgings for the footeme^ of two ordinary main battles.
I would place the lodgyng of every two battles, behind the lodgings of
the horsemen, eeuerie one of which, should have in length.xi. yardes and a
quarter, and in bredeth.xxii. yardes and a half, as those of the horsemens, and
should be ioigned on the hinder part, that they should touch the one the
other. The lodgings for the conestables.
And in every first lodgyng on every side which comes to lie on the cross
way, I would lodge the Counstable of a battle, which should come to stand
even with the lodgyng of the Captain of the men of arms, and this lodgyng
shall have only of space for bredeth.xv. yardes, and for length.vij. yardes
and a half. In the other.xv. lodgings, that on every side follows after
these, even unto the ouerthwarte way, I would lodge on every part a battle
of foot men, which being.iiij. hundred and fifty, there will come to a
lodgyng.xxx. the other.xv. lodgings, The number of footmen appoicted to every
lodging.
I would place continually on every side on those of the light horse men, with
the very same spaces, where I would lodge on every part, an other battle
of footmen, and in the last lodgyng, I would place on every part the
Conestable of the battle, which will come to ioigne with the same of the
Captain of the light hosemen, with the space of.vii. yardes and a half for
length, and.xv. for bredeth: and so these two first orders of lodgings, shall
be half of horsemen, and half of footmen. And for that I would (as in the
place thereof I have told you) these horse men should be all profitable, and
for this having no servants which in keeping the horses, or in other
necessary things might help the^, I would that these footmen, who lodge
behind the horse, should be bound to help to provide, and to keep them
for their masters: and for this to be exempted from the other doings of the
Camp. The which manner, was observed of the Romans. Then leauyng after these
lodgings on every part, a space of.xxii. yardes and a half, which should
make away, that should be called the one, the first way on the right
hand, and the other the first way on the left hand, I would pitche on
every side an other order of.xxxij. double lodgings, which should turn
their hinder parts the one against the other with the very same spaces, as
those that I have told you of, and divided after the sixtenth in the very
same manner for to make the ouerthwarte way, where I would lodge on every
side.iiij. battles of footmen, with their constables in both ends. Then
leauyng on every side an other space of.xxij. yardes and a half, that should
make a way, which should be called of the one side, the second way on the
right hand, and on the other side, the second way on the left hand, I would
place an other order on every side of.xxxij. double lodgings, with the very
same distance and deuisions, where I would lodge on every side, other.iiij.
battles with their Constables: and thus the horesemenne and the bands of the
two ordinary maine battles, should come to be lodged in three orders of
lodgings, on the one side of the captain way, and in three other orders of
lodgings on the other side of the Captain way. The two aidyng maine
battles (for that I cause them to be made of the very same nation) I would
lodge them on every part of these two ordinary maine battles, with the
very same orders of double lodgings, pitchyng first one order of lodgings,
where should lodge half the horsemen, and half the foot men, distance.xxii.
yardes and a half from the other, for to make a way which should be called
the one, the third way on the right hand, and the other the third way on
the left hand. And after, I would make on every side, two other orders of
lodgings, in the very same manner destinguesshed and ordained, as those were
of the ordinary maine battelles, which shall make two other ways, and they
all should be called of the number, and of the hand, where they should be
placed: in such wise, that all this side of the army, should come to be
lodged in.xii. orders of double lodgings, and in.xiij. ways, reckenynge
captain way, and cross way: I would there should remain a space from the
lodgings to the Trenche of.lxxv. yardes round about: and if you reckon al
these spaces, you shall see that from the midst of the Capitaines lodgyng to
the east gate, there is.D.x. yardes* Now there remains two spaces, whereof
one is from the Capitaines lodging to the Southe gate, the other is from
thense to the North gate: which come to be (either of them measurynge them
from the poincte in the midst).CCCC.lxxvj. yardes. Then taking out of every
one of these spaces xxxvij. yardes and a half, which the Capitaynes lodging
occupies, and.xxxiiij. yardes every way for a market place, and.xxij. yardes
and a half for a way that deuides every one of the said spaces in the
midst, and.lxxv. yardes, that is left on every part between the lodgings
and the Trenche, there remains on every side a space for lodginges of.CCC.
yardes broad, and.lxxv. yardes long, measurynge the length with the space
that the Captains lodynge takes up. Deuidynge then in the midst the said
length, there would be made on every hand of the Captain.xl.
lodgings.xxxvij. yardes and a half long, and.xv. broad, which will come to
be in all lxxx. lodgings, The lodgings for the chief Capitaines of the maine
battayles and for the treasurers, marshals and strangers.
wherein shall be lodged the heddes of the maine battles, the Treasurers, the
Marshalles of the field, and all those that should have office in the army,
leauyng some void for strangers that should happen to come, and for those
that shall serve for good will of the Captain. On the part behind the
Capitaines lodging, I would have a way from Southe to North.xxiij. yardes
large, and should be called the head way, which shall come to be placed a
long by the.lxxx. lodgings aforesaid: for that this way, and the crosseway,
shall come to place in the midst between them both the Capitaines lodging,
and the.lxxx. lodgings that be on the sides thereof. From this head way, and
from over against the captains lodgyng, I would make an other way, which
should go from thens to the weste gate, likewise broad.xxij. yardes and a
half, and should answer in situation and in length to the Captain way, and
should be called the market way. These two ways being made, I would
ordeine the market place, where the market shall be kept, which I would
place on the head of the market way over against the capitaines lodging, and
ioigned to the head way, and I would have it to be quadrante, and would
assign lxxxx. yardes and three quarters to a square: and on the right hand
and left hand, of the said market place, I would make two orders of
lodginges, where every order shall have eight double lodginges, which shall
take up in length.ix. yardes, and in bredeth.xxij yardes and a half, so that
there shall come to be on every hand of the market place, xvj. lodgings that
shall the place the same in the midst which shall be in all xxxij. wherein I
would lodge those horsemen, Lodginges for the horsemen, of the extraordinary
main battles.
which should remain to the aidyng main battles: and when these should not
suffice, I would assign them some of those lodginges that places between
them ye Capitaines lodging, and in especially those, that lie toward the
Trenche. There rests now to lodge the Pikes, The lodgings for the
extraordinary Pykes and Veliti.
and extraordinari Veliti, that every main battle has, which you know
according to our order, how every one has besides the.x. battles.M.
extraordinary Pikes, and five hundredth Veliti: so that the two chief maine
battles, have two thousand extraordinary Pikes, and a thousand
extraordinary Veliti, and the ayders as many as those, so that yet there
remains to be lodged.vj.M. men, whom I would lodge all on the weste side,
and a long the Trenche. Then from the end of the head way, toward North,
leauyng the space of.lxxv. yardes from them to the trenche, I would place an
order of.v. double lodgings, which in all should take up.lvj. yardes in
length, and.xxx. in bredeth: so that the bredeth divided, there will come to
every lodgyng.xi. yardes and a quarter for length, and for bredeth two and
twenty yardes and a half. And because there shall be.x. lodgings, I will
lodge three hundred men, apoinctyng to every lodging.xxx. men: leauyng then a
space of three and twenty yardes and a quarter, I would place in like wise,
and with like spaces an other order of five double lodgings, and again an
other, till there were five orders of five double lodgings: which will come to
be fifty lodgings placed by right line on the North side, every one of them
distante from the Trenche.lxxv. yardes, which will lodge fifteen hundred men.
Tournyng after on the left hand toward the weste gate, I would pitche in
all the same tracte, which were from them to the said gate, five other orders
of double lodgings, with the very same spaces, and with the very same manner:
true it is, that from the one order to the other, there shall not be more then
a.xj. yardes and a quarter of space: wherein shall be lodged also fifteen
hundred men: and thus from the North gate to the weste, as the Trenche
turns, in a hundred lodginges divided in.x. rewes of five double lodgings in
a row, there will be lodged all the Pikes and extraordinary Veliti of the
chief maine battayles. And so from the west gate to the Southe, as the Trenche
tourneth even in the very same manner, in other ten rewes of ten lodgings in a
rewe, there shall be lodged the pikes, and extraordinary Veliti of the aidyng
main battles. Their headdes or their counstables may take those lodgings,
that shall seem unto them most commodious, on the part toward the trenche.
The Artillery, How the Artillery must be placed in the Camp.
I would dispose throughoute all the Camp, a long the bank of the Trenche:
and in all the other space that should remain toward weste, I would lodge
all the unarmed, Lodgings for the unarmed men, and the places that are
apoincted for the impedimentes of the camp.
and place all the impedimentes of the Camp. And it is to be understood, that
under this name of impedimentes (as you know) the antiquitee mente all the same
train, and all those things, which are necessary for an army, besides the
soldiers: as are Carpenters, Smithes, Masons, Ingeners, Bombardiers,
although that those might be counted in the number of the armed, herdemen with
their herdes of motons and beeues which for victuallyng of the army, are
requiset: and moreover masters of all sciences, together with public
carriages of the public munition, which pertain as well to victuallyng, as
to armynge. Nor I would not distinguishe these lodginges perticularly, only I
would mark out the ways which should not be occupied of them: then the other
spaces, that between the ways shall remain, which shall be four, I would
appoincte them generally for all the said impedimentes, that is one for the
herdemen, the other for artificers and crafts me^, the third for public
carriages of victuals, the fowerth for the municion of armur and weapons. The
ways which I would should be left without ocupiyng them, shall be the
market way, the head way, and more over a way that should be called the
midde way, which should go from North to Southe, and should pass thoroughe
the midst of the market way, which from the weste part, should serve for
the same purpose that the ouerthwarte way does on theast part. And besides
this, a way which shall go about on the hinder part, alonge the lodgings
of the Pikes and extraordinary Veliti, and all these ways shall be two and
tweentie yardes and a half broad. And the Artilerie, I would place a long
the Trenche of the Camp, round about the same.


Babtiste. I confess that I understand not, nor I believe that also to say
so, is any shame unto me, this being not my exercise: notwithstanding, this
order pleases me much: only I would that you should declare me these
doubts: The one, why you make the way, and the spaces about so large. The
other, that troubles me more, is these spaces, which you apoincte out for
the lodgings, how they ought to be used.


Fabritio. You must note, that I make all the ways, xxij. yardes and a half
braode, to the intent that through them, may go a battle of men in araie,
where if you remember well, I told you how every band of men, takes in
breadth between.xviij. and.xxij. yardes of space to march or stand in. Now
where the space that is between the trenche, and the lodgings, is.lxxv. yardes
broad, the same is most necessary, to the intent they may there order the
battles, and the artillery, both to conducte by the same the prays, and to
have space to retire them selves with new trenches, and new fortificacion if
need were: The lodginges also, stand better so far from the diches, being
the more out of danger of fires, and other things, which the enemy, might
throw to hurt them. Concerning the second demand, my intent is not that
every space, of me marked out, be covered with a pauilion only, but to be
used, as tourneth commodious to soch as lodge there, either with more or with
less Tents, so that they go not out of the bounds of the same. And for to
mark out these longinges, there ought to be most cunnyng men, and most
excellent Architectours, whom, so sone as the Captain has chosen the place,
may know how to give it the facion, and to distribute it, distinguishyng the
ways, deuidyng the lodgings with Coardes and staves, in soche practiced wise,
that straight way, they may be ordained, and divided: The Camp ought to be
all ways of one facion.
and to mind that there grow no confusion, it is conueniente to turn the
Camp, always one way, to the intent that every manne may know in what
way, in what space he has to find his lodgyng: and this ought to be observed
in every time, in every place, and after soche manner, that it seem a mouyng
City, the which where so ever it goweth, carries with it the very same
ways, the very same habitacions, and the very same aspectes, that it had at
the first: The which thing they cannot observe, whom sekyng strong
situacions, must change form, according to the variacion of the ground: but
the Romans in the plain, made strong the place where they encamped with
trenches, and with Rampires, because they made a space about the camp, and
before the same a ditche, ordinary broad four yardes and a half, and deep
about two yardes and a quarter, the which spaces, they increased, according
as they intended to tarry in a place, and according as they feared the enemy.
I for my part at this present, would not make the listes, if I intend not to
Winter in a place: yet I would make the Trenche and the bancke no less, then
the foresaied, but greater, according to necessity. Also, considering the
artellerie, I would entrench upon every corner of the Camp, a half circle of
ground, from whens the artillery might flancke, whom so ever should seek to
come over the Trenche. In this practice in knowing how to ordain a camp, the
soldiers ought also to be exercised, and to make with them the officers expert,
that are appoincted to mark it out, and the Soldiers ready to know their
places: nor nothing therein is difficulte, as in the place thereof shall be
declared: wherefore, I will go forewarde at this time to the ward of the
camp, because without distribucion of the watch, all the other pain that has
been taken, should be vain.


Baptiste. Before you pass to the watch, I desire that you would declare unto
me, when one would pitche his camp nere the enemy, what way is used: for
that I know not, how a man may have time, to be able to ordain it without
peril.


Fabricio. You shall understand this, that no Captain will lie nere the
enemy, except he, yt is desposed to faight the field, when so ever his
adversary will: and when a captain is so disposed, there is no peril, but
ordinary: for that the two parts of the army, stand always in a
readiness, to faight the battle, and the other makes ye lodginges. The
Romans in this case, gave this order of fortifiyng the Camp, unto the
Triarij: and the Prencipj, and the Astatj, stood in arms. This they did, for
as much as the Triarij, being the last to faight, might have time enough, if
the enemy came, to leave the work, and to take their weapons, and to get
them into their places. Therefore, according unto the Romans manner, you ought
to cause the Camp to be made of those battles, which you will set in the
hinder part of the army, in the place of the Triarij. But let us turn to
reason of the watch.

I think I have not found, The antiquity used no Scoutes.
amongst the antiquity, that for to ward the camp in the night, they have
kept watch without the Trenche, distaunte as they use now a days, whom they
call Scoutes: the which I believe they did, thinkyng that ye army might easily
be deceived, through the difficulty, that is in seeing them again, for that
they might be either corrupted, or oppressed of the enemy: So that to trust
either in part, or altogether on them, they judged it perilous. And
therefore, all the strength of the watch, was with in the trenche, which they
did withal diligence keep, and with most great order, punished with death,
whom so ever observed not the same order: the which how it was of them
ordained, I will tell you no other wise, least I should be tedious unto you,
being able by your self to see it, if as yet you have not seen it: I shall
only briefly tell that, which shall make for my purpose. I would cause to
stand ordinately every night, The watch and ward of the Camp.
the third part of the army armed, and of the same, the fowerth part always
on foot, whom I would make to be distributed, throughout all the banckes, and
throughout all the places of the army, with double ward, placed in every
quadrante of the same: Of which, part should stand still, part continually
should go from the one corner of the Camp, to the other: and this order, I
would observe also in the day, when I should have the enemy nere.

Concerning the giuyng of the watch word, and renuyng the same every evening,
and to do the other things, which in like watches is used, because they are
things well enough known, I will speak no further of them: only I shall
remember one thing, for that it is of great importance, and which causes
great saulfgarde obseruyng it, and not obseruyng it, much harm: The which
is, Diligence ought to be used, to know who lies out of the Camp, and who
they be that comes of new.
that there be observed great diligence, to know at night, who lodges not in
the Camp, and who comes a new: and this is an easy thing to see who
lodges, with the same order that we have appoincted: for as much as every
lodgyng having the determined number of men, it is an easy matter to see, if
they lack, or if there be more men: and when they come to be absente without
lisence, to punish them as Fugetiues, and if there be more, to understand
what they be, what they make there, and of their other condicio^s. This
diligence makes that the enemy cannot but with difficulty, practice with thy
capitaines, and have knowledge of thy counsels: which thing if of ye Romans,
had not been diligently observed, Claudius Nero.
Claudius Nero could not, having Aniball nere him, departed from his Camp,
which he had in Lucania, and to go and to return from Marca, without Aniball
should have first heard thereof some thing. But it suffiseth not to make these
orders good, except they be caused to be observed, with a great seuertie:
for that there is nothing that would have more obseruacion, then is requisite
in an army: therefore the laws for the maintenance of the same, The justice
that ought to be in a camp.
ought to be sharp and hard, and the executour thereof most hard. The fauts
that the antiquity punisshed with ^eath.
The Romans punished with death him that lacked in the watch, he that forsook
the place that was given him to faight in, he that carried any thing, hid out
of the Camp, if any manne should say, that he had done some worthy thing in
the faight, and had not done it, if any had fought without the commandment
of the Captain, if any had for fear, cast away his weapons: and when it
happened, that a Cohorte, or a whole Legion, had committed like fault, because
they would not put to death all, they yet took al their names, and did put
them in a bag, and then by lotte, they drue out the tenthe part, and so
those were put to death: the which punishemente, was in soche wise made, that
though every man did not feel it, every man notwithstanding feared it: and
because where be great punishementes, there ought to be also rewards, mindyng
to have men at one instant, Where great punishementes be, there ought
likewise to be great rewards
to fear and to hope, they had appoincted rewards to every worthy act: as
he that faighting, saved the life of one of his Citezeins, to him that first
leapte upon the wall of the enemies Tounc, to him that entered first into the
Camp of the enemies, to him that had in faightyng hurt, or slain the enemy,
he that had stricken him from his horse: and so every virtuous act, was of the
Consulles known and rewarded, and openly of every manne praised: and soche as
obtained gifts, for any of these things, besides the glory and fame, which
they got amongst the soldiers, after when they returned into their country,
with solemn pomp, and with great demonstracion among their friends and
kinsfolks, they showed them. It was no marvel that the Romans became mighty
Princes.
Therefore it was no marvel, though the same people got so much dominion,
having so much obseruacion in punishemente, and reward toward them, whom
either for their well doing, or for their ill doing, should deserve either
praise or blame: Of which things it were convenient, to observe the greater
part. Nor I think not good to keep secret, one manner of punishmente of them
observed, which was, that so sone as the offendour, was before the Tribune, or
Consulle convicted, he was of the same lightely stricken with a rod: after the
which strikyng, it was lawful for the offendour to fly, and to all the
Soldiers to kill him: so that straight way, every man threw at him either
stones, or darts, or with other weapons, stroke him in soche wise, that he
went but little way a live, and most few escaped, and to those that so
escaped, it was not lawful for the^ to return home, but with so many
incommodities, and soche great shame and ignomie, that it should have been
much better for him to have died. This manner is seen to be almost observed of
the Suizzers, who make the condemned to be put to death openly, of the other
soldiers, the which is well considered, A mean to punish and execute
Justice, without raising tumultes.
and excellently dooen: for that intendyng, that one be not a defendour of an
evil doer, the greateste reamedie that is found, is to make him punisher of
the same: because otherwise, with other respect he favors him: where when he
himself is made execucioner, with other desire, he desires his punishemente,
then when the execucion comes to an other. Therefore mindyng, not to have one
favored in his fault of the people, a great remedy it is, to make that the
people, may have him to judge. For the greater proof of this, Manlius
Capitolinus.
thinsample of Manlius Capitolinus might be brought, who being accused of the
Scenate, was defended of the people, so long as they were not Judge, but
becommyng arbitratours in his cause, they condemned him to death. This is then
a way to punish, without raisyng tumultes, and to make iustise to be kept:
and for as much as to bridell armed men, neither the fear of the Laws, nor
of men suffice not, the antiquity joined thereunto the authority of God:
Soldiers sworen to keep the discipline of war.
and therefore with most great Ceremonies, they made their soldiers to
swear, to keep the discipline of war, so that doing contrariewise* they
should not only have to fear the Laws, and men, but God: and they used all
diligence, to fill them with Religion.


Baptiste. Did the Romans permit, that women might be in their armies, or
that there might be used these idell plays, which they use now a days?


Fabritio. Women and idell games, were not suffered by the antiquity, to be
in their armies.
They prohibited the one and the other, and this prohibicion was not much
difficulte: For that there were so many exercises, in the which they kept
every day the soldiers, some whiles particularely, somewhiles generally
occupied, that they had no time to think, either on Venus, or on plays, nor
on any other thing, which sedicious and unprofitable soulours do.


Baptiste. I am herein satisfied, but tell me, when the army had to remove,
what order kept they?


Fabricio. The chief Trumpet sounded three times, Order in the removing the
army by the soundes of a Trumpet.
at the first sound, they took up the Tents, and made the packes, at the
second, they laded the carriage, at the third, they removed in the same manner
aforsaied, with the impedimentes after every part of armed men, placyng the
Legions in the middeste: and therefore you ought to cause after the same sort,
an extraordinary maine battle to remove: and after that, the particulare
impedimentes thereof, and with those, the fowerth part of the public
impedimentes, which should be all those, that were lodged in one of those
parts, which a little before we declared: and therefore it is conueniente, to
have every one of them, appointed to a maine battle, to the entente that the
army remouyng, every one might know his place in marchyng: and thus every
maine battle ought to go away, with their own impedimentes, and with the
fowerth part of the public impedimentes, followyng after in soche manner, as
we showed that the Romans marched.


Baptiste In pitchyng the Camp, had they other respects, then those you have
told?


Fabricio. I tell you again, that the Romans when they encamped, would be
able to keep the accustomed fashion of their manner, the which to observe, they
had no other respect: but concerning for other consideracions, they had two
principal, the one, to incampe them selves in a wholesome place, the other,
Respects to be had for incampyng.
to place themselves, where thenemie could not besiege them, nor take from
them the way to the water, or victualles. Then for to avoid infirmity, they
did ^ie from places Fennie, or subject to hurtful winds: which they knew
not so well, by the quality of the situacio^, as by the face of the
inhabitours* for when they saw them evil colored, or swollen, How to choose
a place to incampe.
or full of other infeccion, they would not lodge there concerning the other
respect to provide not to be besieged, it is requisite to consider the nature
of the place, where the friends lie, and where thenemies, and of this to make
a conjecture, if thou may be besieged or no: and therefore it is meet, that
the Captain be most expert, in the knowledge of situacions of countries, and
have about him diverse men, that have the very same expertenes. They avoid
also diseases, How to avoid diseases from the army.
and famishment, with causyng the army to keep no misrule, for that to purpose
to maintain it in health, it is needful to provide, that the soldiers may
sleep under tents, that they may lodge where be Trees, that make shadow,
where woodde is for to dress their meat, that they go not in the heat, and
therefore they must be drawn out of the camp, before day in Summer, and in
Winter, to take heed, that they march not in the Snow, and in the Froste,
without having comoditie to make fire, and not to lack necessary aparel, nor
to drink naughty water: those that fall sick by chance, make them to be
cured of Phisicions: because a capitain has no reamedie, when he has to
faight with sickness, and with an enemy: but nothing is so profitable, to
maintain the army in health, as is the exercise: and therefore the antiquity
every day, made them to exercise: whereby is seen how much exercise avails:
The wonderful commodity of exercise.
for that in the Ca^pe, it keeps thee in health, and in the faight victorious.
Concerning famishemente, it is necessary to see, that the enemy hinder thee
not of thy victualles, but to provide where thou majesty have it, and to see
that the same which thou haste, be not lost: and therefore it is requisite,
The provision of victualles that ought always to be in a readiness in an
army.
that thou have always in provision with the army, sufficient victual for a
monethe, and then remouyng into some strong place, thou must take order with
thy next friends, that daily they may provide for thee, and above al things
bestow the victual with diligence, giuyng every day to every manne, a
reasonable measure, and observe after soche sort this poincte, that it
disorder thee not: because all other thing in the war, may with time be
overcome, this only with time ouercometh thee: nor there shall never any
enemy of thine, who may overcome thee with famishemente, that will seek to
overcome thee with iron. For that though the victory be not so honorable, yet
it is more sure and more certain: Then, the same army cannot avoid
famishemente, that is not an obseruer of justice, which licenciously consumes
what it list: because the one disorder, makes that the victuals comes not
unto you, the other, that soche victual as comes, is unprofitably consumed:
therefore thantiquitie ordained, that they should spend the same, which they
gave, and in the same time when they appoincted: for that no soldier did eat,
but when the Captain did eat: The which how much it is observed of the
armies now adays, every manne knows, and worthily they can not be called
men of good order and sober, as the antiquity, but lasiuious and drunkardes.


Baptiste. You said in the beginning of ordering the Camp, that you would
not stand only upon two maine battles, but would take four, for to
show how a just army encamped: therefore I would you should tell me two
things, the one, when I should have more or less men, how I ought to
incampe them, the other, what number of soldiers should suffice you to faight
against what so ever enemy that were.


Fabritio. To the first question I answer you, How to lodge in the Campe^ more
or less men, then the ordinary.
that if the army be more or less, then four or six thousand soldiers,
the orders of lodgings, may be taken away or joined, so many as suffiseth:
and with this way a man may go in more, and in less, into infinite:
Notwithstanding the Romans, when they ioigned together two consul armies,
they made two camps, and they turned the parts of the unarmed, the one
against the other. Concerning the second question, I say unto you, that the
Romans ordinary army, was about.xxiiij.M. soldiers: but when they were
driven to faight against the greatest power that might be, the most that they
put together, were.l.M. With this number, they did set against two hundred
thousand Frenchemen, whom assaulted them after the first war, that they had
with the Carthageners. With this very same number, they fought against
Anniball. And you must note, that the Romans, and the Greeks, have made
war with few, fortefiyng themselves thorough order, and thorough art: the
west, and the east, have made it with multitude: But the one of these nations,
does serve with natural fury, as do the men of the west parts, the other
through the great obedience which those men have to their king. But in Greece,
and in Italy, being no natural fury, nor the natural reverence toward
their king, it has been necessary for them to learn the discipline of war;
the which is of so much force, that it has made that a few, has been able
to overcome the fury, The nombre of men that an army ought to be made of, to
be able to faighte with the puisantest enemy that is.
and the natural obstinatenesse of many. Therefore I say, that mindyng to
imitate the Romans, and the Greeks, the number of.l.M. soldiers, ought not
to be passed, but rather to take less: because many make confucion, nor
suffer not the discipline to be observed, and the orders learned, and Pirrus
used to say, Pirrus.
that with.xv. thousand men he would assail the world: but let us pas to an
other part. We have made this our army to win a field and showed the
travails, that in the same fight may happen: we have made it to march, and
declared of what impedimentes in marchyng it may be disturbed: and finally we
have lodged it: where not only it ought to take a littell rest of the labors
passed, but also to think how the war ought to be ended: for that in the
lodgings, is handeled many things, inespecially thy enemies as yet remainyng
in the field, and in suspected towns, of whom it is good to be assured, and
those that be enemies to overcome them: therefore it is necessary to come to
this demonstracion, and to pass this difficulty with the same glory, as
hither to we have warred. How to cause men to do soche a thing as should be
profitable for thee, and hurtful to them selves.
Therefore coming to particular matters, I say that if it should happen, that
thou would have many men, or many people to do a thing, which were to
thee profittable, and to them great hurt, as should be to break down the
wall of their city, or to send into exile many of them, it is necessary for
thee, either to beguile them in such wise that every one believe not that it
touches him: so that succouryng not the one the other, they may find them
selves al to be oppressed without remedy, or else unto all to command the
same, which they ought to do in one self day, to the intent that every
man beleuyng to be alone, to whom the commandment is made, may think to
obey and not to remedy it: and so without tumulte thy commandment to be of
every man executed. If thou should suspecte the fidelity of any people,
and would assure thee, How to euercome (...) vnwa^es.
and overcome them at unawares, for to color thy intent more easelie, thou
can not do better, then to counsel with them of some purpose of thine,
desiryng their aid, and to seem to intend to make an other enterprise, and
to have thy mind far from thinkyng on them: the which will make, that they
shall not think on their own defense, beleeuyng not that thou purposest to
hurt them, and they shall give thee commodity, to be able easily to satisfiie
thy desire. How to (...) to commodity the doings of soche, as use to
advertise thy enemy of thy proceedings*
When thou should perceive, that there were in thine army some, that used
to advertise thy enemy of thy devises, thou can not do better, minding to
take commodity by their traitorous minds, then to commen with them of those
things, that thou will not do, and those that thou will do, to keep secret,
and to say to doubt of things, that thou doubtest not, and those of which
thou doubtest, to hide: the which shall make thenemie to take some enterprise
in hand, believing to know thy devises, where by easly thou may beguile and
opresse him. How to order the camp, that the enemy shall not perceive whether
the same be demi^^shed, or increased.
If thou should intend (as Claudius Nero did) to deminishe thy army,
sendynge help to some freende, and that the enemy should not be aware
thereof, it is necessary not to deminishe the lodgings, but to maintain the
signs, and the orders whole, making the very same fires, and the very same
wards throughout all the camp, as were wont to be before. Likewise if with thy
army there should ioigne new men, and would that the enemy should not
know that thou werte ingrosed, it is necessary not to increase the lodgings:
Because keepyng secret doings and devises, has always been most
profitable. A saying of Metellus.
Wherefore Metellus being with an army in Hispayne, to one, who asked him what
he would do the next day, answered, that if his sherte knew thereof, Marcus
Crassus.
he would bourne it. Marcus Craussus, unto one, whom asked him, when the army
should remove, said beleeuest thou to be alone not to here the trumpet? How
to understand the secrets of thy enemy.
If thou should desire to understand the secrets of thy enemy, and to
know his orders, some have used to send ambassadors, and with them in
servants aparel, most expertest men in war: whom having taken occasion to
se the enemies army, and to consider his strength and weakness, it has
given them opportunity to overcome him. Some have sent into exile one of their
familiars, and by means of the same, has known the devises of his
adversary. Also like secrettes are understood of the enemies when for this
effect there were taken any prisoners. Marius which in the war that he made
with the Cimbrie, A policy of Marius, to understand how he might trust the
Frenchmen.
for to know the faieth of those Frenchmen, who then inhabited Lombardie, and
were in leage with the Roman people, sent them letters open, and sealed: and
in the open he wrote, that they should not open the sealed, but at a certain
time, and before the same time demaundyng them again, and finding them opened,
knew thereby that their faith was not to be trusted. Some Capitaines, being
invaded, What some Capitaines have done when their country have been invaded
of enemies*
have not desired to go to meet the enemy, but have gone to assault his
country, and constrained him to return to defend his own home: The which
many times has come well to pass, for that those soldiers beginning to fill
them selves with booties, and confidence to overcome, shall sone make the
enemies soldiers to wexe afraid, when they supposing them selves
conquerours, shall understand to become losers: So that to him that has made
this diuersion, many times it has proved well. But only it may be done by
him, which has his country stronger then that of the enemies, because when
it were otherwise, he should go to leese. To make the enemy necligente in his
doings.
It has been often a profitable thing to a captain, that has been besieged
in his lodgings by the enemy, to move an entreaty of agreemente, and to make
truse with him for certain days: the which is wont to make the enemies more
necligente in all doings: so that auaylynge thee of their necligence, thou
may easily have occacion to get thee out of their hands. Silla.
By this way Silla delivered him self twice from the enemies: and with this
very same deceipte, Asdruball.
Asdruball in Hispayne got out of the force of Claudious Nero, whom had
besieged him. It helps also to deliver a man out of the danger of the
enemy, to do some thing beside the forsaied, that may keep him at a baye:
this is dooen in two manners, either to assault him with part of thy power, so
that he being attentive to the same faight, may give commodity to the rest of
thy men to be able to save them selves, or to cause to rise some new
accidente, which for the strayngenesse of the thing, may make him to marvel,
and for this occasion to stand doubtefull, The policy of Aniball, where by he
escaped out of the danger of Fabius Maximus.
and still: as you know how Anniball did, who being enclosed of Fabius
Maximus, tied in the night small Bauens kindeled beetweene the horns of many
Oxen, so that Fabius astonished at the strangeness of the same sight, thought
not to let him at all the passage. A Captain must devise how to divide the
force of his enemies.
A Captain ought among all other of his affairs, with all subtlety to
devise to divide the force of the enemy, either with making him to suspecte
his own men, in whom he trusts, or to give him occasion, that he may
separate his men, and thereby to be come more weak. How to cause the enemy
to have in suspect his most trusty men.
The first way is dooen with keepyng saulfe the things of some of those
which he has about him, as to save in the war their men and their
possessions, renderynge them their children, or other their necessaries
without ransom. You know that Anniball having burned all the fields about
Rome, Aniball.
he made only to be reserved saulfe those of Fabius Maximus. Coriolanus.
You know how Coriolanus coming with an army to Rome, preserved the
possessions of the nobility, and those of the comminaltie he bourned, Metellus
against Iugurte
and sacked. Metellus having an army against Iugurte, all the orators,
which of Iugurte were sent him, were required of him, that they would give
him Iugurte prisoner, and after to the very same men writing letters of the
very same matter, wrought in such wise, that in short time Iugurte having in
suspecte all his counselors, in diverse manners put them to death. A practis
of the Romayne orators, to bring Aniball out of Credit with Antiochus.
Anniball being fled to Antiochus, the Roman orators practiced with him so
familiarly, that Antiochus being in susspecte of him, trusted not any more
after to his counselles. Concerning to divide the enemies men, there is no more
certainer way, How to cause the enemy to divide his power.
then to cause their country to be assaulted, to the intent that being
constrained to go to defend the same, they may forsake the war. This way
Fabius used having against his army the power of the Frenchemen, of the
Tuscans, Vmbries and Sannites. How Titus Didius staie^ his enemies that were
going to encounter a legion of men that were coming in his aid.
Titus Didius having a few men in respect to those of the enemies, and
lookynge for a legion from Rome, and the enemies purposinge to go to encounter
it, to the intentente that they should not go, caused to be noised through
all his army, that he intended the next day to faighte the field with the
enemies: after he used means, that certain of the prisoners, that he had taken
before, had occas^ion to run away. Who declaryng the order that the Consul
had taken to faighte the next day, by reason whereof the enemies being afraid
to deminishe their own strength, went not to encounter the same legion, and by
this way they were conducted safe. The which means serves not to divide the
force of the enemies, but to augmente a man's own. How some have caused the
enemy to divide his force.
Some have used to divide the enemies force, by lettyng him to enter into their
country, and in proof have let him take many towns, to the intent that
putting in the same garrisons, he might thereby deminishe his power, and by
this way having made him weak, have assaulted and ouercomen him. A policy
to win the enemies country before he be aware.
Some other mindyng to go into one province, have made as though they would
have invaded an other, and used so much diligence, that suddenly entryng into
the same, where it was not doubted that they would enter, they have first
won it, before the ennemie could have time to succor it: for that thy
enemy being not sure, whether thou purposest to turn back, to the place
first of thee threatened, is constrained not to forsake the one place, to
succor the other, and so many times he defends neither the one nor the
other. It imports besides the said things to a Captain, if there grow
sedicion or discord among the soldiers, to know with art how to
extynguishe it: How to deforme sedicion and discord*
The best way is to chastise the headdes of the faults, but it must be done
in such wise, that thou may first have oppressed them, before they be able
to be aware: The way is, if they be distante from thee, not only to call the
offenders, but together with them all the other, to the entente that not
beleeuynge, that it is for any cause to punish them, they become not
contumelius, but give commodity to the execution of the punishemente: when
they be present, you ought to make thy self strong with those that be not
in fault, and by mean of their help to punish the other. When there happens
discord among them, the best way is, The benefitte that the reputacion of
the Captain causes, which is only gotten by virtue.
to bring them to the peril, the fear whereof is wont always to make them
agree. But that, which above all other thing keeps the army in unity, is
the reputacion of the Captain, the which only grows of his virtue:
because neither blood, nor authority gave it ever without virtue. And the
chief thing, The chief thing that a captain ought to do.
which of a Capitain is looked for to be done, is, to keep his soldiers
punished, and paid: for that when so ever the pay lacks, it is conueniente
that the punisshement lack: When pay wants, punishment is not to be
executed.
because thou can not correct a soldier, that robs, if thou do not
pay him, nor the same mindynge to live, cannot abstain from robbynge: but if
thou paiest him and punisshest him not, he beecometh in every condition
insolente: The inconvenience of not punisshynge.
For that thou becomest of small estimacion, where thou chaunsest not to be
able to maintain the dignity of thy degree, and not mainetainyng it, there
follows of necessitee tumulte, and discord, which is the ruin of an army.
Old Capitaines had a troubell, of the which the present be almost free,
which was to interpret to their purpose the sinister auguries: because if
there fell a thunderbolte in an army, if the sun were darkened or the Moon,
if there came an erthequake, if the Captain either in gettyng up, or in
lightynge of his horse fell, it was of ye soldiers interpreted sinisterously:
And it engendered in them so much fear, that coming to faight the field,
easily they should have lost it: and therefore the aunciente Capitaines so sone
as a like accidente grew, either they showed the cause of the same, and
redused it to a natural cause, or they interpreted it to their purpose. Caesar
falling in Africa, Caesar chaunsynge to ^all* made the same to be supposed to
signifi good luck.
in coming of the sea said, Africa I have taken thee. Moreover many have
declared the cause of the obscuryng of the Moon, and of earthquakes: which
thing in our time cannot happen, as well because our men be not so
supersticious, Religion takes away ^a^tasticall opinions.
as also for that our religion takes away altogether such opinions: al be it
when they should chaunse, ye orders of ye antiquity ought to be imitated. When
either famishement, In what cases a C^pitaine ought not to faight with his
enemy i^ he may otherwise choose.
or other natural necessity, or human passion, has brought thy enemy to
an utter desperation, and he driven of the same, comes to faight with thee,
thou ought to stand within thy camp, and as much as lies in thy power,
to fly the faight. So the Lacedaemonians did against the Masonians, so Caesar
did against Afranio, and Petreio. Fuluius being Consul, A policy of Fuluius
^^^^by he got and and spoiled his enemies Camp*
against the Cimbrians, made his horsemen many days continually to assault
the enemies, and considered how they issued out of their camp for to follow
them: wherefore he set an ambusshe behind the Camp of the Cimbria^s, and
made them to be assaulted of his horsemen, and the Cimbrians issuyng ou^e of
their camp for to follow them. Fuluio got it, and sacked it. A policy to
(...) order the enemy.
It has been of great utility to a Captain, having his army nere to the
enemies army, to send his men with the enemies ansignes to rob, and to
burn his own country, whereby the enemies beleeuynge those to be men,
which are come in their aid, have also run to help to make them the pray:
and for this disorderyng them selves, has thereby given opportunity to the
adversary to overcome them. This way Alexander of Epirus used against the
Illirans and Leptenus of Siracusa against the Carthaginers and both to the one
and to the other, the devise came to pass most happily. A policy to overcome
the enemy.
Many have overcome the enemy, geuyng him occasion to eat and to drink out
of measure, fayning to have feared, and leaving their Camps full of wine and
herdes of cattle, whereof the enemy being filled above all natural use, have
then assaulted him, and with his destruction overthrown him. So Tamirus did
against Cirus, and Tiberius Graccus against the Spaniardes. A policy.
Some have poisoned the wine, and other things to feed on, for to be able
more easily to overcome them. I said a littel before how I found not, that the
antiquetie kept in the night Scoutes abroad, and supposed that they did it
for to avoid the hurt, which might grow thereby: because it is found, that
through no other mean then through the watch man, which was set in the day
to watch the enemy, has been cause of the ruin of him, that set him there:
for that many times it has happened, that he being taken, has been made
perforce to tell them the token, whereby they might call his fellows, who
coming to the token, have been slain or taken. How to beguile the enemy.
It helps to beguile the enemy sometime to vary a custom of thine,
whereupon he having grounded him self, remains ruinated: as a Captain did
once, whom vsinge to cause to be made signs to his men for coming of the
enemies in the night with fire, and in the day with smoke, commanded that
without any intermission, they should make smoke and fire, and after
coming upon them the enemy, they should rest, whom beleeuyng to come
without being seen, perceiuyng no sign to be made of being discovered, caused
(through goeyng disordered) more easy the victory to his adversary. How
Mennonus trained his enemies out of strong places to be the better able to
ouercom the^
Mennonus a Rodian mindynge to draw from strong places the enemies army,
sent one under color of a fugitive, the which affirmed, how his army was
in discord, and that the greater part of them went away: and for to make
the thing to be credited, he caused to make in sport, certain tumultes
among the lodgings: whereby the enemy thynkyng thereby to be able to
discomfaighte them, assaultynge them, were overthrown.

Besides the said things, The enemy ought not to be brought into extreme
desperacion.
regard ought to be had not to bring the enemy into extreme desperacion:
whereunto Caesar had regard, faightyng with the Duchemen, who opened them the
way, seeing, how they being not able to fly, necessity made them strong, and
would rather take pain to follow them, when they fled, then the peril to
overcome them, when they defended them selves.

Lucullus seeing, How Lucullus constrained certain ^e^ that ^all a^^ie from him
to h^^ enemies, to fayght whether they would or not.
how certain Macedonian horsemenne, which were with him, went to the enemies
part, straight way made to sound to battle, and commanded, that the other
men should follow him: whereby the enemies believing, that Lucullus would begin
the faight, went to encounter the same Macedonians, with soche violence, that
they were constrained to defend themselves: and so they became against their
wills, of fugetiues, faighters. It imports also to know, how to be assured
of a town, when thou doubteste of the fidelity thereof, so sone as thou haste
won the field, or before, the which certain old insamples may teach thee.

Pompei doubtyng of the Catinensians, A policy whereby Pompey got a town.
prayed the^ that they would be content, to receive certain sick men,
that he had in his army, and sendyng under the habit of sick persons, most
lusty men, got the town. Publius Valerius, How Publius Valerius ^ssured
him se^^ o^ a town.
fearyng the fidelity of the Epidannians, caused to come, as who says, a
Pardon to a church without the town, and when all the people were gone for
Pardon, he shut the gates, receiuyng after none in, but those whom he
trusted. Alexander Magnus, mindyng to go into Asia, A policy that Alexander
Magnus used to be assured of all Tracia, which Philip king of Spain did
practice to be a sured of England when he went to saint Quintens.
and to assure himself of Thracia, took with him all the principal of the same
Province, giuyng them provision, and he set over the common people of Thracia,
men of low degree: and so he made the Princes contented with paiyng them, and
the people quiet, having no heddes that should disquiete them: But among all
the things, Examples for Capitaines to win the hearts of the people.
with the which the Capitaines, win the hearts of the people, be the
insamples of chastity and justice, as was the same of Scipio in Spain, when he
rendered that young woman, most fair of personage to her father, and to her
housebande: the which made him more, then with force of arms to win Spain.

Caesar having caused that woodde to be paid for, which he had occupied for
to make the Listes; about his army in France, got so much a name of justice,
that he made easier the conquest of the same province. I cannot tell what
remains me, to speak more upon these accide^tes, for that concerning this
matter, there is not left any part, that has not been of us disputed. Only
there lacks to tell, of the manner of winnyng, and defendyng a town: the
which I am ready to do willingly, if you be not now weary.


Baptiste. Your humanity is so much, that it makes us to follow our
desires, without being afraied to be reputed presumptuous, seeing that you
liberally offer the same, which we should have been ashamed, to have asked you:
Therefore, we say unto you only this, that to us you cannot do a greater,
nor a more gratefuller benefit, then to finishe this reasonyng. But before
that you pass to that other matter, declare us a doubt, whether it be better
to continewe the war, as well in the Winter, as they use now adays, or to
make it only in the Summer, and to go home in the Winter, as the antiquity
did.


Fabritio. See, that if the prudence of the demaunder were not, there had
remained behind a special part, that deserves consideracion. I answer you
again, that the antiquity did all things better, and with more prudence then
we: and if we in other things commit some error, in the affairs of war,
we commit all error. There is nothing more vndescrete, War ought not to be
made in Winter.
or more perilous to a Captain, then to make war in the Winter, and much
more peril bears he, that makes it, then he that abides it: the reason is
this. All the industry, that is used in the discipline of war, is used for to
be prepared to faight a field with thy enemy, because this is the end,
whereunto a Captain ought to go or endeavor himself: For that the foughten
field, gives thee the war won or lost: then he that knows best how to
order it, and he that has his army best instructed, has most advantage in
this, and may best hope to overcome. Rought situacio^s, cold a watrie times,
are enemies to the order of war*
On the other side, there is nothing more enemy to thorders, then the rough
situacions, or the cold and waterie time: for that the rough situacions,
suffers thee not to destende thy hands, according to the discipline: the
cold and waterie times, suffers thee not to keep thy men together, nor thou
canste not bring them in good order to thenemie: but it is convenient for
thee, to lodge them a sunder of necessity, and without order, being
constrained to obeie to Castelles, to Boroughes, and to the Villages, that may
receive thee, in manner that all thy labor of thee, used to instruct the
army is vain. Nor marvel you not though now a days, they war in the
Winter, because the armies being with out discipline, know not the hurt that
it does the^, in lodgyng not together, for that it is no grief to the^ not to
be able to keep those orders, and to observe that discipline, which they have
not: yet they ought to see how much harm, the campyng in the Winter has
caused, and to remember, An ouerthrown caused by ^inter.
how the Frenchemen in the year of our Lord God, a thousand five hundred and
three, were broken at Gariliano of the Winter, and not of the Spaniardes: For
as much as I have said, he that assaulteth, has more disaduauntage, then he
that defends: because the foul wether hurts him not a little, being in the
dominion of others and mindyng to make war. For that he is constrained,
either to stand together with his men, and to sustain the incommoditie of
water and cold, or to avoid it, to divide his power: But he that defends,
may choose the place as he lists, and tarry him with his fresh men: and he in
a sudden may set his men in araie, and go to find a band of thenemies
men, who cannot resist the violence of them. So the Frenchemen were
discomfited, and so they shall always be discomfited, which will assault in
the Winter an enemy, who has in him prudence. Then he that will that force,
that orders, that discipline and virtue, in any condition avail him not, let
him make war in the field in the winter: and because that the Romans would
that al these things, in which they bestowed so much diligence, should avail
them, fled no otherwise the Winter, then the high Alps, and difficulte
places, and what so ever other thing should let them, for being able to show
their art and their virtue. So this suffiseth to your demand, wherefore we
will come to entreat of the defending and besiegyng of Tounes, and of their
situacions and edificacions.


The seventh book of the Art of war, of Nicholas Machiauell, Citezeine and
Secretary of Florence, unto Laurence Philip Strozze.
YOU ought to know, Tounes and Fortresses may be strong two ways.
how that tounes and fortresses, may be strong either by nature, or by
industry: by nature, those be strong, which be compassed about with
rivers, or with Fennes, as Ma^tua is and Ferrara, or which be builded upon a
Rock, or upon a stepe hille, as Monaco, and Sanleo: For that those that stand
upon hills, that be not much difficulet to go up, be now a days,
considering the artillery and the Caves, most weak. The place that now a
days in most sought to fortify in.
And therefore most often times in building, they seek now a days a plain, for
to make it strong with industry. The first industry is, to make the walls
crooked, and full of tournynges, and of receiptes: the which thing makes, How
a Tounwalle ought to be made.
that thenemie cannot come nere to it, because he may be hurt, not only on
the front, but by flancke. If the walls be made high, they be to much
subject to the blows of the artillery: if they be made low, they be most
easy to scale. If thou makeste the diches on the out side thereof, for to give
difficulty to the Ladders, if it happen that the enemy, fill the^ up (which
a great army may easily do) the wall remains taken of thenemie. The wall
of ^ town ought to be high, and the diche within, and not without.
Therefore purposyng to provide to the one and the other foresaid inconuenie^ces,
I believe (saving always better judgment) that the wall ought to be made
high, and the Diche within, and not without. This is the most strongeste way
of edificacion, that is made, for that it defends thee from the artillery,
and from Ladders, and it gives not facility to the enemy, The thickenes that
a Town wall ought to be of, and the distaunces between every flancker, and
of what breadth and deapth the dich ought to be.
to fill up the diche: Then the wall ought to be high, of that height as
shall be though best, and no less thick, then two yardes and a quarter, for
to make it more difficult to ruinate. Moreover it ought to have the toures
placed, with dista^ces of.Cl. yardes between the one and the other: the diche
within, ought to be at least two and twenty yardes and a half broad, and
nine deep, and all the earth that is dug out, for to make the diche, must
be thrown toward the City, and kept up of a wall, that must be raised
from the bottom of the diche, and go so high over the town, that a man may
be covered behind the same, the which thing shall make the depth of the diche
the greater. In the bottom of the diche, within every hundred and.l. yardes,
there would be a slaughter house, which with the ordinance, may hurt whom so
ever should go down into the same: How the ordinance is planted, for the
defense of a town.
the great artillery that defend the city, are planted behind the wall,
that shuts the diche, because for to defend the utter wall, being high,
there cannot be occupied commodiously, other then small or mean peeses. If
the enemy come to scale, the height of the first wall most easily defends
thee: if he come with ordinance, it is convenient for him to batter the utter
wall: but it being battered, The nature of the battery.
for that the nature of the battery is, to make the wall to fall, toward
the part battered, the ruin of the wall comes, finding no diche that
receives and hides it, to redouble the profunditie of the same diche: after
soche sort, that to pass any further, it is not possible, findyng a ruin
that with holds thee, a diche that lets thee, and the enemies ordinance,
that from the wall of the diche, most safely kills ^hee. Only there is
this remedy, to fill the diche: the which is most difficulte to do, as
well because the capacity thereof is great, as also for the difficulty, that
is in coming nere it, the wall being strong and concaued, between the
which, by the reasons aforesaied, with difficulty may be entered, having
after to go up a breach through a ruin, which gives thee most great
difficulty, so that I suppose a city thus builded, to be altogether
inuinsible.

Baptiste When there should be made besides the diche within, a diche also
without, should it not be stronger?


Fabricio. It should be without doubt, but mindyng to make one diche only,
mine opinion is, that it stands better within then without.


Baptiste. Would you, that water should be in the diches, or would you have
them dry?


Fabricio. The opinion of men herein be diverse, because the diches full of
water, saves thee from mines under ground, the Diches without water, A dry
diche (...) most su^es^e
makes more difficulte the fillyng of them: but I having considered all, would
make them without water, for that they be more sure: For diches with water,
have been seen in the Winter to be frosen, and to make easy the winnyng of a
city, as it happened to Mirandola, when Pope Iulie besieged it: and for to
save me from mines, I would make it so deep, that he that would dig lower,
should find water.

The Fortresses also, I would build concerning the diches and the walls in
like manner, to the intent they should have the like difficulty to be won. An
aduertisemente for the buildyng and defending of a Town o^ Fortr^ss^.
One thing I will earnestly advise him, that defends a City: and that is,
that he make no Bulwarks without distaunte from the wall of the same: and an
other to him that builds the Fortress, and this is, that he make not any
refuge place in them, in which he that is within, the first wall being
lost, may retire: That which makes me to give the first counsel is, that
no man ought to make any thing, by mean whereof, he may be driven without
remedy to lose his first reputacion, the which losyng, causes to be esteemed
less his other doings, and makes afraied them, whom have taken upon them
his defense, and always it shall chance him this, which I say, when there
are made Bulwarks out of the Town, that is to be defended, Small fortresses
cannot be defended.
because always he shall leese them, little things now a days, being not
able to be defended, when they be subject to the fury of ordinance, in soche
wise that lesyng them, they be beginning and cause of his ruin. When Genua
rebelled against king Leus of France, it made certain Bulwarks alofte on
those hills, which be about it, the which so sone as they were lost,
which was suddenly, made also the city to be lost. A town of war or
Fortress, ought not to have in the^ any retiring places
Concerning the second counsel, I affirm nothing to be to a Fortress more
perilous, then to be in the same refuge places, to be able to retire: Because
the hope that men have thereby, makes that they leese the utter ward, when
it is assaulted: and that lost, makes to be lost after, all the Fortress.
For insample there is fresh in remembrance, the loss of the Fortress of
Furly, when Catherin the Countess defended it against Caesar Borgia, Caesar
Borgia.
son to Pope Alexander the.vj. who had conducted thither the army of the
king of France: the same Fortress, was al full of places, to retire out of one
into an other: for that there was first the keep, from the same to the
Fortress, was a diche after soche sort, that they passed over it by a draw
bridge: the fortress was divided into three parts, and every part was
divided from the other with diches, and with water, and by Bridges, they passed
from the one place to the other: wherefore the Duke battered with his
artillery, one of the parts of the fortress, and opened part of the wall:
For which cause Master Ihon Casale, which was appoincted to that Ward,
thought not good to defend that breach, but abandoned it for to retire hymsef
into the other places: so that the Dukes men having entered into that part
without encounter, in a sudden they got it all: For that the Dukes men
became lords of the bridges, which went from one place to an other. They
lost then this Fortress, The causes of the loss of the Fortress of Furlie,
that (...) thought invincible.
which was thought inuinsible, through two defaultes, the one for having so
many retiryng places, the other, because every retiryng place, was not Lord of
the bridge thereof. Therefore, the naughty builded Fortress, and the little
wisdom of them that defended it, caused shame to the noble enterprise of the
countess, who had thought to have abidden an army, which neither the king
of Naples, nor the Duke of Milaine would have abidden: and although his
inforcementes had no good end, yet notwithstanding he got that honor,
which his valiantness had deserved: The which was testified of many
Epigrammes, made in those days in his praise. Therefore, if I should have to
build a Fortress, I would make the walls strong, and the diches in the manner
as we have reasoned, nor I would not make therein other, How the houses that
are in a town of (...) or Fortress ought to be builded.
then houses to inhabit, and those I would make weak and low, after soche
sort that they should not let him that should stand in the midst of the
Market place, the sight of all the wall, to the intent that the Capitain
might see with the iye, where he may succor: and that every manne should
understand, that the wall and the diche being lost, the fortress were lost.
And yet when I should make any retiryng places, I would make the bridges
divided in soche wise, that every part should be Lord of the bridges of his
side, ordainyng, that they should fall upon posts, in the midst of the diche.


Baptiste. You have said that littell things now a days can not be
defended, and it seemed unto me to have understood the contrary, that the
lesser that a thing were, the better it might be defended.


Fabritio. You have not understood well, because that place cannot be now a
days called strong, where he that defends it, has not space to retire with
new diches, and with new fortificacions, for that the force of the ordinance is
so much, that he that trusts upon the ward of one wall and of one
fortification only, is deceived: and because the Bulwarks (mindyng that they
pass not their ordinary measure, for that then they should be towns and
Castles) be not made, in such wise that men may have space within them to
retire, they are lost straight way. Therefore it is wisdom to let alone those
Bulwarks without, The fortifiyng of the entrance of a Town.
and to fortify thenterance of the town, and to keuer the gates of the same
with turnyngs after such sort, that men cannot go in nor out of the gate by
right line: and from the tournynges to the gate, to make a diche with a bridge.
Also they fortify the gate, with a Percullis, for to be abell to put therein
their men, when they be issued out to faight, and hapnyng that the enemies
pursue them, to avoid, that in the mingelynge together, they enter not in with
them: and therefore these be used, the which the antiquity called Cattarratte,
the which being let fall, exclude thenemies, and save the friends, for that
in such a case, men can do no good neither by bridges nor by a gate, the one
and the other being ocupied with prease of men.


Babtiste. I have seen these Perculleses that you speak of, made in Almayne
of littell quarters of woodde after the facion of a grate of Iron, and these
percullises of ouers, be made of plankes all massiue: I would desire to
understand whereof grows this difference, and which be the strongest.


Fabricio. I tell you again, that the manners and orders of the war,
through out all the world, in respect to those of the antiquity, be
extinguesshed, and in Italy they be all together lost, for if there be a
thing somewhat stronger then the ordinary, it grows of the insample of other
countries. You might have understood, and these other may remember, with how
much debilitie before, that king Charles of France in the year of our
salvation a thousand CCCC. xciiii. had passed into Italy, they made the
batelmentes not half a yard thick, the loopes, and the flankers were made
with a littell openyng without, and much within, and with many other faults
which not to be tedious, I will let pass: for that easelye from thin
battelmentes the defense is taken a way, the flankers builded in the same
manner, most easelie are opened: Battelment^^ ought to be large and thick and
the flankers large within.
Now of the French men is learned to make the battelment large and thick, and
the flankers to be large on the part within, and to draw together in the
midst of the wall, and then again to wax wider unto the vttermoste part
without: this makes that the ordinance hardly can take away the defense.
Therefore the French men have, many other devices like these, the which because
they have not been seen of our men, they have not been considered. Among
which, is this kind of perculles made like unto a grate, the which is a
great deall better then ours: for that if you have for defense of a gate a
massiue parculles as ours, lettyng it fall, you shut in your men, and you can
not through the same hurt the enemy, so that he with axes, and with fire,
may break it down safely: but if it be made like a grate, you may it being
let down, thorough those holes, and through those open places, defend it with
pykes, with crosbowes, and with all other kind of weapons.


Baptiste. I have seen in Italy an other use after the outelandishe facion, and
this is, to make the carriage of the artillery with the spokes of the wheel
crooked toward the Axeltree. I would know why they make them so: seeming
unto me that they be stronger when they are made straight as th^se of our
wheels.


Fabritio. Never believe that the things that differ from the ordinary ways,
be made by chance: and if you should believe that they make them so, to show
fayrer, you are deceived: because where strength is necessary, there is made
no count of fayrenesse: but all grows, for that they be much surer and
much stronger then ours. The reason is this: the carte when it is laden,
either goes even, or leanyng upon the right, or upon the left side: when it
goes even, the wheels equally sustain the weight, the which being equally
divided between them, does not burden much, but leanyng, it comes to have all the paise of the carriage on the back of that wheel upon the which it
leans. If the spokes of the same be straight they will soon break: for that
the wheel leanyng, the spokes come also to lean, and not to sustain the
paise by the straightness of them: and so when the carte goes even, and when
they are least burdened, they come to be strongest: when the carte goes
awrie, and that they come to have most paise, they be weakest. Even the
contrary happens to the crooked spokes of the French carts, for that when
the carte leanyng upon one side poincteth upon them, because they be ordinary
crooked, they come then to be straight, and to be abell to sustain strongly all
the paise, where when the carte goes even, and that they be crooked, they
sustain it half: but let us turn to our city and Fortress. The Frenchemen
use also for more safegarde of the gates of their towns, and for to be abell
in sieges more easily to convey and set out men of them, besides the said
things, an other devise, of which I have not seen yet in Italye any
insample: and this is, where they raise on the out side from the end of the
draw bridge two posts, and upon either of them they ioigne a beam, in such
wise that the one half of them comes over the bridge, the other half
without: then all the same part that comes without, they ioigne together
with small quarters of woodde, the which they set thick from one beam to an
other like unto a grate, and on the part within, they fasten to the end of
either of the beams a chain: then when they will shut the bridge on the
out side, they slack the chains, and let down all the same part like
unto a grate, the which coming down, shuts the bridge, and when they will
open it, they draw the chains, and the same comes to rise up, and they may
raise it up so much that a man may pass under it, and not a horse, and so
much that there may pass horse and man, and shut it again atonse, for that
it falls and rises as a window of a battelmente. This devise is more sure
then the Parculles, because hardely it may be of the enemy let in such
wise, that it fall not down, falling not by a right line as the parculles,
which easily may be underpropped. Therefore they which will make a city,
ought to cause to be ordained all the said things: Neither free, diche,
wall, tillage, nor any kind of edificacion, ought to be within a mile of a
toun^ of war.
and moreover about the wall, there would not be suffered any ground to
be tilled, within a mile thereof, nor any wall made, but should be all
champaine, where should be neither diche nor bank, neither tree nor house,
which might let the sight, and make defense for the enemy that incampeth.

And note, that a town, Note*
which has the diches without, with the banckes higher then the ground, is
most weak: for as much as they make defense to the enemy, which assaulteth
thee, and lets him not to hurt thee, because easily they may be opened,
and give place to his artillery: but let us pass into the town. I will not
lose so much time in showing you how that besides the foresaied things, it is
requisite to have provision of victualles, and wherewith to faight, for that
they be things that every man understands, and without them, all other
provision is vain: The prouition that is meet to be made for the defense of a
town.
and generally two things ought to be done, to provide, and to take the
comoditie from the enemy that he avail not by the things of thy country:
therefore the straw, the beasts, ye grain, which thou can not receive into
house, ought to be destroyed. Also he that defe^deth a town, ought to provide
that nothing be done tumultiously and disordinately, and to take such order,
that in all accidents every man may know what he has to do.

The order that ought to be taken is thus, that the women, the old folks, the
children, and the impotente, be made to keep within doors, that the town
may be left free, to young and lusty men, whom being armed, must be
distributed for the defense of the same, appoinctyng part of them to ye wall,
part to the gates, part to the principal places of the City, for to remedy
those inco^ueniences, that might grow within: an other part must not be
bound to any place, but be reddie to succor all, need requiryng: and the
thing being ordained thus, with difficulty tumulte can grow, which may
disorder thee. Also I will that you note this, in the besiegyng and defending
of a City, that nothing gives so much hope to the aduer-to be able to win
a town, as when he knows yt the same, What incorageth the enemy most that
besigeth a town
is not accustomed to se the enemy: for that many times for fear only with
out other experience of force, Cities have been lost: Therefore a man ought,
What he that besieges and he that defends ought to do.
when he assaulteth a like City, to make all his ostentacions terribell. On
the other part he that is assaulted, ought to apoincte to the same part,
which the enemy faighteth against, strong men and such as opinion makes
not afraid, but weapons only: for that if the first proof turn vain, it
increases boldness to the besieged, and then the enemy is constrained to
overcome them within, with virtue and reputacion. The instruments wherewith the
antiquity defended towns, where many: as balistes, onagris, scorpions,
Arcubalistes, Fustibals, Slinges: and also those were many with which they
gave assaults. As Arrieti, Towets, Musculi, Plutei, Viney, Falci, testudeni,
in steed of which things be now a days the ordinance, the which serve him
that bessegeth, and him that defends: and therefore I will speak no forther
of them: But let us return to our reasonyng, and let us come to particular
offenses. Aduertisementes for a besieged town
They ought to have care not to be taken by famine, and not to be overcome
through assaults: concerning famine, it has been told, that it is requiset
before the siege come, to be well provided of vitualles. But when a town
through long sige, lacks victuals, some times has been seen used certain
extraordinary ways to be provided of their friends, whom would save them:
inespeciall if through the midst of the besieged City there run a river,
How the Romans vit^le^ Casalino besieged of Aniball.
as the Romans vittelled their castle called Casalino besieged of Anibal,
whom being not able by the river to send them other victual then Nuttes,
whereof castyng in the same great quantity, the which carried of the river,
without being abel to be let, fed long time the Casalinians. Some
besieged, A policy for the besieged.
for to show unto ye enemy, that they have grain more then enough and for to
make him to despair, that he cannot, by famine overcome them, have cast
bread out of the gates, or given a Bullock grain to eat, and after have
suffered the same to be taken, to the intent that kilde and found full of
grain, might show that abundance, which they had not. On the other part
excellent Capitaines have used sundry ways to werie the enemy.

Fabius suffered them whom he besieged, A po^^c^^ (...) ^^^^ging of (...).
to sow their fields, to the entente that they should lack the same corn,
which they sowed.

A policy of Dionisius in besiegynge of a town.
Dionisius being in Camp at Regio, fained to mind to make an agreement with
them, and during the practice thereof, he caused him self to be provided of
their victuales, and then when he had by this mean got from them their grain,
he kept them straight and famished them.

How Alexander wanne Leucadia.
Alexander Magnus mindyng to win Leucadia overcame all the Castles about it,
and by that means driuyng into the same city a great multitude, of their own
country men famished them.

The besieged ought to take heed of the first (...).
Concerning the assaults, there has been told that chiefly they ought to
beware of the first bronte, with which the Romans got often times many
towns, assaultyng them suddenly, and on every side: and they called it,
Aggredi v^bem corona. As Scipio did, when he wanne new Carthage in Hispayne:
the which brunte if of a town it be withstoode, with difficulty after will
be overcome: and yet though it should happen that the enemy were entered into
the city, by ouercomynge the wall, yet the towns men have some remedy, so
they forsake it not: for as much as many armies through entering into a town,
have been repulced or slain: The remedy that towns men have, when the enemies
a^ entered into the town.
the remedy is, that the towns men do keep them selves in high places, and
from the houses, and from the towers to faight with them: the which thing,
they that have entered into the city, have devised to overcome in two
manners: How to make the towns me^ yield.
the one with openyng the gates of the city, and to make the way for the
towns me^, that they might safely fly: the other with sendynge forth a
proclamacion, that signifies, that none shall be hurt but the armed, and to
them that cast their weapons on the ground, pardon shall be granted: the
which thing has made easy the victory of many cities.

Besides this, the Citees are easy to be won, if thou come upon them
unawares: How towns or cities are easelie won.
which is dooen being with thy army far of, after soche sort, that it be
not believed, either that thou will assault them, or that thou can do it,
without coming openly, because of the distance of the place: wherefore, if
thou secretly and spedely assault them, almost always it shall follow,
that thou shalt get the victory. I reason unwillingly of the things
succeeded in our time, for that to me and to mine, it should be a burden, and
to reason of other, I cannot tell what to say: notwithstanding, I cannot to
this purpose but declare, the insample of Caesar Borgia, called duke Valentine,
How duke Valentine got the city of Vrbine
who being at Nocera with his men, under color of going to besiege Camerino,
turned toward the state of Vrbin, and got a state in a day, and without
any pain, the which an other with much time and cost, should scante have
gotten. The besieged ought to take heed of the decipt^s and policies of the
enemy.
It is conueniente also to those, that be besieged, to take heed of the
deceiptes, and of the policies of the enemy, and therefore the besieged, ought
not to trust to any thing, which they see the enemy do continually, but
let them believe always, that it is under deceipte, and that he can to their
hurt vary it. How Domitio Caluino (...) a town.
Domitio Caluino besiegyng a town, used for a custom to compass about every
day, with a good part of his men, the wall of the same: whereby the Tounes
men, beleuyng that he did it for exercise, slacked the Ward: whereof Domicius
being aware, assaulted and overcame them.

Certain Capitaines understanding, A policy to get a town.
that there should come aid to the besieged, have apareled their Soldiers,
under the Ansigne of those, that should come, and being let in, have got the
Town.

Simon of Athens, set fire in a night on a Temple, How Simon of Athens wan a
town.
which was out of the town, wherefore, the tounes men going to succor it,
left the town in pray to the enemy. Some have slain those, A policy to
get a town.
which from the besieged Castle, have gone a foragyng, and have appareled
their soldiers, with the apparel of the forragers, whom after have got the
town. The aunciente Capitaines, have also used diverse ways, to destroy the
Garrison of the Town, which they have sought to take. How Scipio g^^te
ce^taine ce^^elo in Afrike.
Scipio being in Africa, and desiring to get certain Castles, in which were
put the Garrisons of Carthage, he made many times, as though he would
assault them, albeit, he fained after, not only to abstain, but to go
away from them for fear: the which Aniball beleuyng to be true, for to
pursue him with greater force, and for to be able more easily to oppress him,
drew out all the garrisons of them: The which Scipio knowing, sent
Massinissa his Captain to overcome them.

How Pirrus wan the chief City of Sclauonie.
Pirrus making war in Sclauonie, to the chief city of the same country,
where were brought many men in Garrison, fained to despair to be able to
win it, and tourning to other places, made that the same for to succor them,
emptied it self of the ward, and became easy to be won. A policy to get a
town.
Many have corrupted the water, and have turned the rivers an other way to
take Tounes. How the besieged are made to yield.
Also the besieged, are easily made to yield them selves, making them afraied,
with signifiyng unto them a victory gotten, or with new aides, which come in
their disfavor. The old Capitaines have sought to get Tounes by treason,
corruptyng some within, but they have used diverse means. Sum have sent a man of theirs, How to get a town by treason.
which under the name of a fugetiue, might take authority and trust with
the enemies, who after have used it to their profit. Some by this means, have
understood the manner of the watch, and by means of the same knowledge, have
taken the Town. Some with a Carte, or with Beams under some color, have
let the gate, that it could not be shut, and with this way, made the
entry easy to the enemy. A policy of An^ball for the ^^^^yng of a Castle.
Aniball persuaded one, to give him a castle of the Romans, and that he
should fain to go a huntyng in the night, making as though he could not go by
day, for fear of the enemies, and tournyng after with the Venison, should put
in with him certain of his men, and so killyng the watchmen, should give him
the gate. How the besieged may be begiled.
Also the besieged are beguiled, with drawyng them out of the Town, and going
away from them, faining to fly when they assault thee. And many (among who^
was Anibal) have for no other intent, let their Camp to be taken, but to have
occasion to get between them and home, and to take their Town. Also, How
Form^on overcame the Calcidensians*
they are beguiled with fainyng to depart from the^, as Formion of Athens did,
who having spoiled the country of the Calcidensia^s, received after their
ambassadors, fillyng their Cites with fair promises, and hope of safety,
under the which as simple men, they were a little after of Formione
oppressed. The besieged ought to beware of the men, What the besieged must
take heed of.
which they have in suspecte among them: but some times they are wont, as well
to assure them selves with deserte, as with punishemente. Liberality makes
enemies friends.
Marcellus knoweyng how Lucius Bancius a Nolane, was turned to favor Aniball,
so much humanity and liberality, he used toward him, that of an enemy, he
made him most frendely. The besieged ought to use more diligence in the ward,
The diligences that the besieged ought to use in their watch and ward
when the enemy is gone from them, then when he is at hand. And they ought
to ward those places, which they think, that may be hurt least: for that
many tounes have been lost, when thenemie assaulteth it on the same part, where
they believe not possible to be assaulted. And this deceit grows of two
causes, either for the place being strong, and to believe, that it is
inuinsible, or through craft being used of the enemy, in assaltyng them on
one side with fained laroms, and on the other without noise, and with very
assaltes in deed: and therefore the besieged, ought to have great
aduertisment, and above all things at all times, and in especially in the
night to make good watch to be kept on the walls, and not only to
appoincte men, but Dogs, and soche fiearse Mastiues, and lively, the which
by their sent may descrie the enemy, and with barkyng discover him: and not
Dogs only, but Ge^se have been seen to have saved a city, as it happened to
Room, when the Frenchemen besieged the Capitol.

An order of Alcibiades for the ^ew keeping of watch and ward
Alcibiades for to see, whether the ward watched, Athense being besieged of
the Spartaines, ordained that when in the night, he should lift up a light,
all the ward should lift up likewise, constitutyng punishmente to him that
observed it not.

Isicrates of Athe^s killed a watchman, which slept, saying, that he left him
as he found him. Those that have been besieged, have used diverse means, to
send advise to their friends: and mindyng not to send their message by mouth,
they have written letters in Cifers, and hidden them in sundry wise: the
Cifers be according, as pleases him that ordains them, the manner of hidyng
them is diverse. The secret conueighyng of Letters.
Some have written within the scaberde of a sweard: Other have put the Letters
in an vnbaked lofe, and after have baked the same, and given it for meat to
him that carried them. Certain have hidden the^, in the secreteste place of
their bodies: other have hidden them in the collor of a Dog, that is
familiare with him, which carries them: Some have written in a letter
ordinary things, and after between the one line and the other, have also written
with water, that wetyng it or warning it after, the letters should appear. This
way has been most politikely observed in our time: where some myndyng to
signify to their friends inhabityng within a town, things to be kept
secret, and mindynge not to trust any person, have sent common matters
written, according to the common use and enterlined it, as I have said above,
and the same have made to be hanged on the gates of the Temples, the which by
countersignes being known of those, unto whom they have been sent, were
taken of and read: the which way is most politic, because he that carries
them may be beguiled, and there shall happen him no peril. There be most
infinite other ways, which every manne may by himself read and find: but
with more facility, the besieged may be written unto, then the besieged to
their fre^des without, for that soche letters cannot be sent, but by one, under
color of a fugetiue, that comes out of a town: the which is a dangerous
and perilous thing, when thenemie is any whit crafty: But those that send in,
he that is sent, may under many colors, go into the Camp that besieges,
and from thens taking conueniente occasion, may leap into the town: but
let us come to speak of the present winnyng of tounes. I say that if it
happen, that thou be besieged in thy city, which is no^ ordained with diches
within, as a little before we showed, to mind that thenemie shall not enter
through the breach of the wall, which the artillery makes: because there is
no remedy to let the same from making of a breach, it is therefore
necessary for thee, T^ defense against a breach
whileste the ordinance battereth, to cast a diche within the wall which is
battered, and that it be in breadth at least two and twenty yardes and a
half, and to throw all the same that is dug toward the town, which may
make a bank, and the diche more deper: and it is convenient for thee, to
sollicitate this work in soche wise, that when the wall falls, the Diche
may be dug at least, four or five yardes in depth: the which diche is
necessary, while it is a digging, to shut it on every side with a slaughter
house: and when the wall is so strong, that it gives thee time to make the
diche, and the slaughter houses, that battered part, comes to be much
stronger, then the rest of the city: for that soche fortificacion, comes to
have the form, of the diches which we devised within: but when the wall is
weak, and that it gives thee not time, to make like fortificacions, then
strength and valiantness must be showed, setting against the enemies
armed men, with all thy force. This manner of fortificacion was observed of
the Pisans, when you besieged them, and they might do it, because they had
strong walls, which gave them time, the earth being soft and most meet to
raise up banckes, and to make fortificacions: where if they had lacked this
commodity, they should have lost the town. Therefore it shall be always
prudently done, to provide before hand, making diches within the city, and
through out all the circuit thereof, as a little before we devised: for that
in this case, the enemy may safely be tarried for at laisure, the
fortificacions being ready made. The antiquity many times got tounes, How the
antiquity got tounes by muining under ground.
with muinyng under ground in two manners, eithei they made a way under
ground secretly, which risse in the town, and by the same entered, in which
manner the Romans took the city of Veienti, or with the muinyng, they
ouerthrewe a wall, and made it ruinate: this last way is now a days most
strong, and makes, that ye citees placed high, be most weak, because they
may better be under muined: and puttyng after in a Cave of this Gunne powder,
which in a momente kindelyng, not only ruinateth a wall, but it opens the
hills, and utterly dissolueth the strength of them.

The reamedie against Caves or vndermuinynges.
The remedy for this, is to build in the plain, and to make the diche that
compasses thy city, so deep, that the enemy may not dig lower then
the same, where he shall not find water, which only is enemy to the caves:
for if thou be in a town, which thou defendest on a high ground, thou can
not remedy it otherwise, then to make within thy walls many deep Wells, the
which be as drouners to the same Caves, that the enemy is able to ordain
against thee. An other remedy there is, to make a cave against it, when thou
shouldeste be aware where he muineth, the which way easily hinders him,
but difficultly it is foreseen, being besieged of a crafty enemy. He that is
besieged, ought above al things to have care, What cate the besieged ought to
have.
not to be oppressed in the time of rest: as is after a battle fought,
after the watch made, which is in the Morning at break of day, and in the
Euenyng between day and night, and above al, at meal times: in which time
many tounes have been won, and armies have been of them within ruinated:
therefore it is requisite with diligence on all parts, to stand always
guarded, and in a good part armed. What makes a city or camp difficulte to
be defended.
I will not lack to tell you, how that, which makes a city or a camp
difficult to be defended, is to be driven to keep sundred all the force, that
thou haste in them, for that the enemy being able to assault thee at his
pleasure altogether, it is conueniente for thee on every side, to guard every
place, and so be assaulteth thee with all his force, and thou with part of
thine defendest thee. Also, the besieged may be overcome altogether, he
without cannot be, but repulced: wherefore many, whom have been besieged,
either in a Camp, or in a Town, although they have been inferior of power,
have issued out with their men at a sudden, and have overcome the enemy. This
Marcellus of Nola did: this did Caesar in France, where his Camp being
assaulted of a most great number of Frenchmen, and seeing himself not able to
defend it, being constrained to divide his force into many parts, and not to
be able standing within the Listes, with violence to repulce thenemie: he
opened the camp on the one side, and turning toward the same part with all his
power, made so much violence against them, and with so much valiantnes, that
he vanquisshed and overcame the^. The constancy also of the besieged, By what
(...) they t^^t besiege (...).
causes many times displeasure, and makes afraied them that do besiege.
Pompei being against Caesar, and Cesars army being in great distress through
famine, there was brought of his bredde to Pompei, whom seeing it made of
grass, commanded, that it should not be showed unto his army, least it
should make them afraid, Honor got by constancy.
seeing what enemies they had against them. Nothing caused so much honor to
the Romans in the war of Aniball, as their constancy: for as much as in
what so ever envious, and adverse fortune they were troubled, they never
demanded peace, they never made any sign of fear, but rather when Aniball
was about Rome, they sold those fields, where he had pitched his camp,
dearer then ordinary in other times should have been sold: and they stood
in so much obstinacy in their enterprises, that for to defend Rome, they
would not raise their camp from Capua, the which in the very same time that
Room was besieged, the Romans did besiege.

I know that I have told you of many things, the which by your self you
might have understood, and considered, notwithstanding I have done it (as to
day also I have told you) for to be abell to show you better by mean
thereof, the quality of this army, and also for to satisfy th^se, if there be
any, whom have not had the same commodity to understand them as you. Nor me
thinks that there rests other to tell you, then certain general rules, the
which you shall have most familiar, which be these.

Ge^all rules of war.
The same that helps the enemy, hurts thee: and the same that helps thee,
hurts the enemy.

He that shall be in the war most vigilant to observe the devises of the
enemy, and shall take most pain to exercise his army, shall iucurre least
perilles and may hope most of the victory.

Never conductte thy men to faight the field, if first thou have not confirmed
their minds and know them to be without fear, and to be in good order: for
thou oughteste never to enterprise any dangerous thing with thy soldiers, but
when thou see, that they hope to overcome.

It is better to conquer the enemy with faminne, then with iron: in the
victory of which, fortune may do much more then valiantness.

No purpose is better then that, which is hid from the enemy until thou
have executed it.

To know in the war how to understand occasion, and to take it, helps more
then any other thing.

Nature breeds few strong men, the industry and the exercise makes many.

Discipline may do more in war, then fury.

When any depart from the enemies side for to come to serve thee, when they
be faithful, they shall be unto thee always great gains: for that the power of
thaduersaries are more deminisshed with the loss of them, that run away,
then of those that be slain, although that the name of a fugetiue be to new
friends suspected, to old odius.

Better it is in pitchyng the field, to reserve behind the first front aid
inoughe, then to make the front bigger to disperse the soldiers.

He is difficultely overcome, which can know his own power and the same of
the enemy.

The valiantenesse of the soldiers avails more then the multitude.

Some times the situacion helps more then the valiantenesse.

New and sudden things, make armies afraid.

Slow and accustomed things, be littell regarded of them. Therefore make thy
army to pactise and to know with small faightes a new enemy, before thou come
to faight the field with him.

He that with disorder follows the enemy after that he is broken, will do no
other, then to become of a conqueror a loser.

He that prepares not necessary victualles to live upon, is overcome without
iron.

He that trusts more in horsemen then in foetemen, or more in footmen then
in horsemen, must accommodate him self with the situacion.

When thou will see if in the day there be comen any spy into the Camp,
cause every man to go to his lodging.

Change purpose, when thou perceiuest that the enemy has forseene it.

How to consulte.
Consulte with many of those things, which thou ought to do: the same that
thou will after do, confer with few.

Soldiers when they abide at home, are maintained with fear and
punishemente, after when they ar led to the war, with hope and with reward.

Good Capitaines come never to faight the field, except necessity constrain
them, and occasion call them.

Cause that thenemies know not, how thou will order thy army to faight, and
in what so ever manner that thou ordainest it, make that the first band may be
received of the second and of the third.

In the faight never occupy a battle to any other thing, then to the same,
for which thou haste apoincted it, if thou will make no disorder.

The sodene accidents, with difficulty are reamedied: those that are thought
upon, with facility.

What things are the strength of the war.
Men, iron, money, and bread, be the strength of the war, but of these four,
the first two be most necessary: because men and iron, find money and
bread: but bread and money find not men and iron.

The unarmed rich man, is a booty to the poor soldier.

Accustom thy soldiers to despise delicate living and laciuius aparell.

This is as much as happens me generally to remember you, and I know that
there might have been said many other things in all this my reasonynge: as
should be, how and in how many kind of ways the antiquity ordered their
bands, how they appareled them, and how in many other things they exercised
them, and to have ioygned hereunto many other particulars, the which I have
not judged necessary to show, as well for that you your self may se them, as
also for yt my intent has not been to show just how the old seruis of war
was apoincted, but how in these days a seruis of war might be ordained,
which should have more virtue then the same that is used. Wherefore I have not
thought good of the ancient things to reason other, then that, which I have
judged to such introduction necessary. I know also that I might have delated
more upon the service on horseback, and after have reasoned of the war on
the Sea: for as much as he that destinguissheth the seruis of war, says,
how there is an army on the sea, and of the land, on foot, and on
horseback. Of that on the sea, I will not presume to speak, for that I have
no knowledge thereof: but I will let the Genoues, and the Venecians speak
thereof, whom with like studies have heretofore done great things.

Also of horses, I will speak no other, then as before I have said, this part
being (as I have declared) least corrupted. Besides this, the footmen being
well ordained, which is the puissance of the army, good horses of necessity
will come to be made.

Only I counsel him that would ordain the exercise of arms in his own
country, Provisions that may be made to fill a Realm full of good horse.
and desires to fill the same with good horses, that he make two provisions:
the one is, that he destribute Mares of a good race through his dominion, and
accustom his men to make choice of coltes, as you in this country make of
Calves and Mules: the other is, that to thentente the excepted might find a
byer, I would prohibet that no man should keep a Mule except he would keep
a horse: so that he that would keep but one beast to ride on, should be
constrained to keep a horse: and moreover that no man should wear fine
cloathe except he which does keep a horse: this order I under stand has
been devised of certain princes in our t^^e, whom in short space have
thereby, brought into their country an excellent number of good horses. About
the other things, as much as might be looked for concerning horse, I remit to
as much as I have said to day, and to that which they use. Peradventure also
you would desire to understand what conditions a Captain ought to have:
whereof I shall satisfy you most breeflie: The knowledge that a captain
ought to have.
for that I cannot tell how to chose any other man then the same, who should
know how to do all those things which this day has been reasoned of by us:
the which also should not suffice, when he should not know how to devise of
him self: for that no man without inuencion, was ever excellent in any science:
and if inuencion causes honor in other things, in this about all, it makes
a man honorable: for every invention is seen, although it were but simple, to
be of writers celebrated: as it is seen, where Alexander Magnus is praised, who
for to remove his Camp most secretly, gave not warnyng with the Trumpette,
but with a hatte upon a Lance. And was praised also for having taken order
that his soldiers in buckelynge with the enemies, should kneel with the
left leg, to be able more strongly to withstand their violence: the which
having given him the victory, it got him also so much praise, that all the
Images, which were erected in his honor, stood after ye same facion. But
because it is time to finishe this reasonyng, I will turn again to my first
purpose. and partly I shall avoid the same reproach, wherein they use to
condemn in this town, such as knows not when to make an end.

The auctor retorneth to his first purpose and makes a littell discorse to
make an end of his reasonyng.
If you remember Cosimus you told me, that I being of one side an exalter of
the antiquity, and a dispraiser of those, which in weighty matters imitated
them not, and of the other side, I having not in the affairs of war, wherein I
have taken pain, imitated them, you could not perceive the occasion: whereunto
I answered, how that men which will do any thing, must first prepare to know
how to do it, for to be able, after to use it, when occasion permits:
whether I do know how to bring the seruis of war to the ancient manners or
no, I will be judged by you, which have heard me upon this matter long
dispute: whereby you may know, how much time I have consumed in these studies:
and also I believe that you may imagen, how much desire is in me to bring it
to effect: the which whether I have been able to have done, or that ever
occasion has been given me, most easily you may conjecture: yet for to make
you more certain and for my better iustificacion, I will also aledge the
occasions: and as much as I have promised, I will partly perform, to show you
the difficulty and the facelitie, which be at this present in such
imitacions.

Therefore I say, A prince may easelie b^ynge to inci^^e perfection the se^uis
of war.
how that no deed yt is done now a days among men, is more easy to be
reduced into ye aunciente manners, then the service of War: but by them only
that be Princes of so much state, who can at least gather together of their
own subjects, xv. or twenty thousand young men: otherwise, no thing is
more difficulte, then this, to them which have not soche commodity: and for
that you may the better understand this part, you have to know, how that
there be of two conditions, Capitaines to be praised: The one are those, Two
sorts of Capitaines worthy to be^ praised.
that with an army ordained through the naturalle discipline thereof, have
dooen great things: as were the greater part of the Roman Citezeins, and
such as have led armies, the which have had no other pain, then to
maintain them good, and to se them guided safely: the other are they, which
not only have had to overcome the enemy, but before they come to the same,
have been constrained to make good and well ordered their army: who without
doubt deserve much more praise, then those have deserved, which with old
armies, and good, have valiantely wrought. Of these, such were Pelopida, and
Epaminonda, Tullus Hostillius, Phillip of Macedony father of Alexander, Cirus
king of the Percians, Graccus a Roman: they all were driven first to make
their armies good, and after to faighte with them: they all could do it, as
well through their prudence, as also for having subjects whom they might in
like exercises instruct: nor it should never have been otherwise possible, yt
any of them, though they had been never so good and full of al excellency,
should have been able in a strange country, full of men corrupted, not used
to any honest obedience, to have brought to pass any laudable work. It
suffiseth not then in Italy, to know how to govern an army made, but first it
is necessary to know how to make it and after to know how to command it: and
to do these thin-it is requisite they be those princes, whom having much
dominion, and subjects inoughe, may have commodity to do it: of which I
can not be, who never commanded, nor cannot command, but to armies of
strangers, and to men bound to other, and not to me: in which if it be
possible, or no, to introduce any of those things that this day of me has been reasoned, I will leave it to your judgment.

Albeit when could I make one of these soldiers which now a days practice,
to wear more armur the^ the ordinary, and besides the armur, to bear their
own meat for two or three days, with a mattocke? When could I make them to
dig, or keep them every day many hours armed, in fained exercises, for
to be able after in the very thing in deed to prevail? When would they
abstain from play, from lasciviousness, from swearynge, from the insolence,
which every day they commit? when would they be reduced into so much
dissepline, into so much obedience and reverence, that a tree full of appels in
the midst of their Camp, should be found there and left untouched? As is
read, that in the ancient armies many times happened. What thing may I
promis them, by mean whereof they may have me in reverence to love, or to
fear, when the war being ended, they have not any more to do with me? where
of may I make them ashamed, which be borne and brought up without shame? why
should they be ruled by me who know me not? By what God or by what saints
may I make them to swear? By those that they worship, or by those that they
blaspheme? Who they worship I know not any: but I know well they blaspheme
all. How should I believe that they will keep their promise to them, whom
every hour they despise? How can they, that despise God, reverence men? Then
what good fashion should that be, which might be impressed in this matter?
And if you should aledge unto me that Suyzzers and Spaniardes be good
soldiers, I would confess unto you, how they be far better then the
Italians: but if you note my reasonynge, and the manner of procedyng of both,
you shall see, how they lack many things to ioygne to the perfection of the
antiquetie. And how ye Suyzzers be made good of one of their natural uses
caused of that, which to day I told you: those other are made good by mean
of a necessity: for that seruyng in a strange country, and seemyng unto them
to be constrained either to die, or to overcome, they perceiving to have no
place to fly, do become good: but it is a goodness in many parts fawtie:
for that in the same there is no other good, but that they be accustomed to
tarry the enemy at the Pike and sweardes poincte: nor that, which they lack,
no man should be meet to teach them, and so much the less, he that could
not speak their language.

But let us turn to the Italians, who for having not had wise Princes, have
not taken any good order: and for having not had the same necessity, which
the Spaniardes have had, they have not taken it of them selves, so that they
remain the shame of the world: The Auctor excuses the people of Italy to
the great reproach of their princes for their ignorance in the affairs of
war.
and the people be not to blame, but only their princes, who have been
chastised, and for their ignorance have been justly punisshed, leesinge most
shamefully their states, without showing any virtuous ensample. And if you will
see whether this, that I say be true: consider how many wars have been in
Italy since the departure of king Charles to this day, where ye war being
wont to make men warlyke and of reputacion, these the greater and fierser that
they have been, so much the more they have made the reputacion of the members
and of the headdes thereof to be lost. This proves that it grows, that the
accustomed orders were not nor be not good, and of the new orders, there is
not any which have known how to take them. Nor never believe that reputacio^
will be gotten, by the Italians weapons, but by the same way that I have
showed, and by means of them, that have great states in Italy: for that this
form may be impressed, in simple rude men, of their own, and not in
malicious, ill brought up, and strangers. Nor there shall never be found
any good mason, which will believe to be able to make a fair image of a
piece of Marbell ill hewed, but very well of a rude piece.

A description of the folishenesse of the I^^lion princes.
Our Italian Princes believed, before they tasted the blows of the outlandishe
war, that it should suffice a Prince to know by writings, how to make a
subtell answer, to write a goodly letter, to show in faiynges, and in
words, wit and promptenesse, to know how to canuas a fraud, to deck
them selves with precious stones and gold, to sleep and to eat with greater
glory then other: To keep many lascivious persons about them, to govern
them selves with their subjects, couetously and proudely: To rotte in
idleness, to give the degrees of the exercise of war, for good will, to
despise if any should have showed the^ any laudable way, minding that their
words should be aunswers of oracles: nor the sely wretches were not aware,
that they prepared them selves to be a pray, to whom so ever should assault
them. Hereby grew then in the thousand four hundred nintie and four year,
the great fears, the sudden flightes, and the marvelous losses: and so three
most mighty states which were in Italy, have been diverse times sacked and
destroyed. But that which is worse, is where those yt remain, continue in the
very same error, and live in the very same disorder, and consider not, that
those, who in old time would keep their states, caused to be dooen these
things, which of me has been reasoned, and that their studies were, to prepare
the body to diseases, and the mind not to fear perilles. Caesar and Alexander,
were the formoste in but tell.
Whereby grew that Caesar, Alexander, and all those men and excellent
Princes in old time, were the formoste amongst the faighters, going armed on
foot: and if they lost their state, they would loose their life, so that they
lived and died virtuously. And if in them, or in part of them, there might
be conde^pned to much ambicion to reason of: yet there shall never be
found, that in them is condemned any tenderness, or any thing that makes
men delicate and feable: the which thing, if of these Princes were read and
believed, it should be impossible, that they should not change their form of
living, and their provinces not to change fortune. And for that you in the
beginning of this our reasonyng, lamented your ordinances, I say unto you,
that if you had ordained it, as I before have reasoned, and it had given of it
self no good experience, you might with reason have been grieved therewith: but
if it be not so ordained, and exercised, as I have said, it may be grieved
with you, who have made a counterfaite thereof, The Venecia^s and the duke of
Ferare began to have reduced the war^^re to the Aunciente manners.
and no perfect figure. The Venecians also, and the Duke of Ferare, began
it, and followed it not, the which has been through their fault, not through
their men. And therefore I assure you, that who so ever of those, which at
this day have states in Italy, shall enter first into this way, shall be
first, before any other, Lord of this Province, and it shall happen to his
state, as to the kingdom of the Macedonians, the which coming under Philip,
who had learned the manner of setting armies in order of Epaminondas a Thebane,
became with this order, and with these exercises (whileste the rest of Greece
stood in idleness, and attended to risite comedes) so puisa^t, that he was
able in few years to possess it all, and to leave soche foundation to his
son, that he was able to make himself, He that despises the seruis of war,
despises his own welthe.
prince of all the world. He then that despises these studies, if he be a
Prince, despises his Princedome: if he be a Citezein, his City. Wherefore, I
lamente me of nature, the which either ought not to have made me a knower of
this, or it ought to have given me power, to have been able to have executed
it: For now being old, I cannot hope to have any occasion, to be able so to
do: In consideracion whereof, I have been liberal with you, who being grave
young men, may (when the things said of me shall please you) at due times
in favor of your Princes, help them and counsa^le them, wherein I would have
you not to be afraied, or mistrustfull, because this Province seems to be
altogether given, to raise up again the things dedde, as is seen by the
perfeccion that poesy, paintyng, and writing, is now brought unto: Albeit, as
much as is looked for of me, being strooken in years, I do mistruste. Where
surely, if Fortune had heretofore granted me so much state, as suffiseth for
a like enterprise, I would not have doubted, but in most short time, to have
showed to the world, how much the aunciente orders avail: and without
peradventure, either I would have increased it with glory, or lost it without
shame.


The end of the seventh and last book of the art of war, of Nicholas
Machiauell, Citezein and Secretary of Florence, translated out of Italian into
English: By Peter Whitehorne, fellow of Graise Inn.
Nicholas Machiauel, citezein and Secretary of Florence, to the Readers.
TO thentente that such as read this book may without difficulty understand
the order of the battles, or bands of men, and of the armies, and lodgings
in the Camp, according as they in the description of them are apoincted, I
think it necessary to show you the figure of every one of them: wherefore
it is requiset first, to declare unto you, by what poinctes and letters, the
footmen, the horsemen, and every other particular membre are set forth.

Know therefore that. Target men. ' Pike men. ^ a Captain of ten men. v Veliti
ordinary. which at those me^ that shoot with harc^^uses or bows. r Veliti
extraordinari which at those me^ that shoot with harc^^uses or bows. C a
Centutrion or captain of a hundred men. which are those me^ that shoot with
harc^^uses or bows. k Singnifieth a Constable or a captain of a band of four
hundred and fifty men. H Singnifieth The head captain of a maine battle. G
Singnifieth The general Captain of the whole army. t The Trompet. d The Drum.
b The Ansigne. s The Standerde. m Men of Arms. l Light horsemen. A Artillery
or ordinance.


In the first figure next following, is discribed the form of an ordinary
battle or band of four hundred and fifty men, and in what manner it is
redoubled by flank. And also how with the very same order of lxxx. ranks, by
chaungyng only to the hinder part the five ranks of Pikes which were the
foremost of every Centurie, they may likewise in bringyng them in battle
raie, come to be placed behind: which may be done, when in marchyng, the
enemies should come to assault them at their backs: according as the
orderyng thereof is before declared. Fol. xxxij. fol. xxxv.

In the second figure, is showed how a battle or band of men is ordered,
which in marchyng should be driven to faight on the flank: according as in
the book is declared. fol. xxxv.

In the third figure, is showed how a battle or band of men, is ordered
with two horns, Fol. xxxv. and after is showed how the same may be made with
a void place in the midst: according as the orderyng thereof, in the book
most plainly is declared, fol. xxxvj.

In the fowerth figure, is showed the form or facion of an army apoincted to
faight the battle with the enemies: and for the better understanding
thereof, the very same is plainlier set forth in ye figure next unto it,
whereby the other two figures next following may the easier be understood:
according as in the book is expressed. Fol. xliiij.

In the fiifte figure, is showed the form of a four square army: as in the
book is discribed. Fol. lxvij.

In the sixte figure, is showed how an Army is brought from a fowersquare
facion, to the ordinary form, to faight a field: according as before is
declared. Fol. lxix.

In the seventh figure, is discribed the manner of incamping: according as the
same in the book is declared. Fol. lxxviij.

The first Figure.
This is the manner of ordering of CCCC men, into.lxxx. ranks, five to a rank,
to bring them into a.iiii square battle with the Pikes on the front, as after
follows.

This is the foresaied.lxxx. ranks. of.iiii. C. men brought into a four
square battle with the Pikes on the front. And the fifty Veliti on the
sides and on the back.



The second Figure.
This is the manner of ordering of CCCC men, into.lxxx. ranks, five to a rank,
to bring them into a.iiii square battle wi^^ the Pikes on the side, as after
follows.

This is the foresaied.lxxx. ranks. of.iiii. C. men brought into a four
square battle with the Pikes on the side.



The third figure.
These are the no^bers of ranks appoincted to make the horned battle of, and
the square battle with the void space in the midst, as a^^er follows.







map of military camp The seventh figure.
Captain way. Overthwart way. The Market place. Market way. The midde
way. Provision of Victualles. Provision of Armor. Private and public
Artificers. A place for cattle.




The table of certain principal things, contained in this work of Machiauel.
In the first book.
WHy a good man ought not to exersise warfare as his art. Fol. vi. Deeds of
arms ought to be used privately in time of peace for exersise and in time of
war for necessetie and renoume. Fol. viii. The strength of an army is the
footmen. Fol. ix. The Romans renewed their Legions and had men in the flower
of their age. Fol. ix. Whether men of arms ought to be kept. Fol. x. What is
requisete for the preparyng of an army. Fol. xi. Out of what co^trie soldiers
ought to be chose. Fol. xi. xii. Soldiers ought to be chosen, by
thaucthoritie of the Prince, of such men as be his oune subjects. Fol. xii.
The difference of ages, that is to be taken in the chosinge of soldiers for
the restoring of an old power and for the making of a new. Fol. xij The
weapons or power that is prepared, of the natural subjects, of a common weal
brings profit and not hurt. Fol. xiiii. What cause let the Venetians,
that they made not a Monarchi of the world. Fol. xiiii. How an army may be
prepared in the country, where were no exersise of war. Fol. xv. The custom
that the Romans used, in the chosyng of their soldiers. Fol. xvi. The
greater number of men is best. Fol. xvii. Whether the multitude of armed men ar
occation of confusion and of dissorder. Fol. xviii. How to prohibit, that the
Capitaines make no discension. Fol. xix.
In the Second book.
WHat armor the antiquetie used. Fol. xx. The occation of the boldenes of the
duchemen. Fol. xxij. Which manner of armyng men is better either the Duche or
Roman fasion. Fol. xxij. Diverse examples of late days. Fol. xxiij. An
example of Tigran. Fol. xxv. Whether the footmen or the horsemen ought to be
esteemed most. Fol. xxv. The cause why the Romans were overcome of the
parthians. Fol. xxvi. What order, or what virtue makes, that footmen ouercum
horsemen. Fol. xxvi. How the antiquity exersised their men to learn the^ to
handle their weapons. Fol. xxvij. What the antiquity esteemed most happy in a
common weal Fol. xxviij. The manner, of maintainyng the order. Fol. xxix What a
legion is, of Greeks called a Falange, and of Frenchemen Catterua. Fol. xxix.
The division of a legion, and the diverse names of orders. Fol. xxx. The order
of batellraye, and the manner of appoincting the battles. Fol. xxxij. How to
order. CCCC. L. men to do some several feate. Fol. xxxv. The fation of a
battle that the Suisers make like a cross. Fol. xxxvi. What carriages the
Capitaines ought to have, and the number of carriages requisite to every band
of men. Fol. xxxvij. Diverse effects caused of diverse soundes. Fol. xxxviij.
Whereof comes the utility, and the dissorder of the armies that are now a
days. Fol. xxxviii. The manner of arminge men. Fol. xl. The number of
carriages that men of arms and light horsemen ought to have. Fol. xli.
In the third book.
THe greatest dissorder that is used now a days in the orderinge of an army.
Fol. xlij. How the Romans divided their army in Hastati, Principi and
Triarij. Fol. xlij. The manner that the Romans used to order them selves
again in the overthrow. Fol. xlij. The custom of the Greeks. Fol. xlij. A
maine battle of Suissers. Fol. xliij. How many legions of Roman Citesens
was in an ordinary army. Fol. xliiij. The manner how to pitche a field to
faighte a battle. Fol. xliiij. Of what number of faighting men an army
ought to be. Fol. xlvi. The description of a battle that is a faighting.
Fol. xlvij. An exsample of Ventidio faighting against the Parthians. Fol.
xlviij. An example of Epaminondas. Fol. xlix. How the Artillery is
unprofitable. Fol. xlix. How that a maine battle of Suissers cannot ocupie
more then four pikes. Fol. lij. How the battles when they cum to be eight or
ten, may be received in the very same space, that received the five. Fol.
liiij. The arms that the Standarde of all tharmie ought to have. Fol. lv.
Diverse examples of the antiquetie. Fol. lv.
In the fowerth book.
WHether the front of the army ought to be made large. Fol. lvij. To how
many things respect ought to be had, in the ordringe of an army. Fol. lvij.
An example of Scipio. Fol. lviij. In what place a Capitain may order his army
with sauegarde not to be clean ouerthorwen. Fol. lviij. Aniball and Scipio
praised for the ordering of their armies. Fol. lix. Carts used of the
Asiaticans. Fol. lix. Diverse examples of the antiquity. Fol. lx. The prudence
which the Captain ought to use, in the accidence that chaunse in faightinge.
Fol. lx. What a Captain ought to do, that is the conqueror, or that is
conquered. Fol. lxi. A Captain ought not to faighte the battle, but with
advantage, except he be constrained. Fol. lxij. How to avoid the faightinge
of the field. Fol. lxiij. Aduertismentes that the Captain ought to have.
Fol. lxiiij. Speaking to soldiers helps much to make them to be curagious
and bold. Fol. lxiiij. Whether all the army ought to be spoken unto, or
only to the heddes thereof. Fol. lxv.
In the fyueth book.
THe manner how to lead an army gowinge thorough suspected places, or to
encounter the enemy. Fol. lxvij. An example of Aniball. Fol. lxviij. Wether
any thing ought to be commanded with the voise or with the trompet. Fol.
lxx. The occations why the wars made now a days, do impouerish the
conquerors as well as the conquered. Fol. lxxij. Credit ought not to be given
to things which stand nothing with reason. Fol. lxxiij. The army ought not
to know what the Captain purposes to do. Fol. lxxiiij, Diverse examples.
Fol. lxxv.
In the sixte book.
THe manner how to incampe an army. Fol. lxxviij. How broad the spaces and the
ways ought to be within the camp. Fol. lxxxij. What way ought to be used
when it is requiset to incampe nere the enemy. Fol. lxxxiij. How the watch
and ward ought to be apoincted in the camp, and what punishmente they ought
to have that do not their duty. Fol. lxxxiiij. How the Romans prohibited
women to be in their armies and idell games to be used. Fol. lxxxv. How to
incampe according to the number of men, and what number of men may suffice
against, what so ever enemy that were. Fol. lxxxvij. How to do to be assured,
of the fideletie of those that are had in suspicion. Fol. lxxxviij. What a
Captain ought to do being beseged of his enemies. Fol. lxxxix. Example of
Coriliano and others. Fol. lxxxix. It is requiset chiefly for a Capitain to
keep his soldiers punished and paid. Fol. xc. Of aguries. Fol. xc. Most
excellent aduertismentes and policies. Fol. xcj. The occation of the
overthrow of the Frenchmen at Garigliano. Fol. xciij.
In the seventh book.
CIties are strong, either by nature or by industry. Fol. xciiij. The manner of
fortificacion. Fol. xciiij. Bulwarks ought not to be made out of a town
distante from the same. Fol. xcv. Example of Genoa. Fol. xcv. Of the Countes
Catherin. Fol. xcv. The fation of percullesies used in Almaine. Fol. xcvi. How
the battelmentes of walls were made at the first, and how they are made now
adays. Fol. xcvij. The provisions that is mete to be made, for the defense of
a town. Fol. xcviij. Diverse policies, for the beseginge and defendinge of a
town or fortres. Fol. xcix. Secret conueing of letters. Fol. Cj. The defense
against a breach. Fol. cij. General rules of war. Fol. ciij.
The end.
ARMIPOTENTI ANGLIAE


Certain ways for the orderyng of Soldiers in battelray, and setting of
battles after diverse fashions, with their manner of marchyng: And also Fygures
of certain new plattes for fortificacion of Towns: And more over, how to
make Saltpeter, Gunpoulder, and diverse sorts of Fireworkes or wild Fire, with
other things a pertaining to the wars. Gathered and set forth by Peter
VVhitehorne.

A PERFECT RVLE TO BRING men into a square battle, of what number so ever
they be. Cap. 1.
FOr to make a square Battle of a number of men, or of an Army, the
fowersquare root or quadrant number of them, must be taken, and so many as ye
same root conteynes, so many ought to be set in array. As for example in a
littel number, for the better understanding thereof: Admit there be a.100. men,
the fouresquare root of a.100. ought to be taken out, which is ten: Then
puttyng ten of these men in a rank, there will be ten ranks, ten to a
rank. Which ten ranks placynge them ordinarely, the one behind the other,
so that all the distances that shall be between man and man, as well on the sides,
as before and behind be equal, such.100. men will make a fouersquare
battle, as by the figure here following apereth.

Head. Flank Flank




But for that, men ordered in battelraye, stand not, nor march not, as above
is supposed, I mean in equal distance, for that every man (as Vegetius
affirms) would have for largeness three foot, that is from shoulder to
shoulder, and for length seven foot, that is three foot before him, and three
foot behind him, and one foot that his own person will occupy, for which
cause the above written order, men standing according to the said ordinare
distance, shall not be a just fowersquare, but ye length thereof shall be.70.
foot, and the bredthe.30. foot, as apereth by the figure following.

Flank Head Flank




And where some number of men comes not after such sort to be fowersquare,
as.200. the root whereof is.14. although there be.4. overplus: in this case
there ought to be put foureteen in a rank, and the said battle will come
nevertheless to be fowersquare: That is, it shall be of.14. ranks of men.14. to
a rank, and as for those four men that are overplus out of the array, the
Sergante may place either in the tail thereof, or else where seems him best
out of that order.

Likewise after this manner, an army of men how great a number so ever it be,
may be brought into a fowersquare, as for example, admit there were an army
of.35000. of these.35000. men, ye fowersquare root is to be taken out,
according to the order that I have declared before, and the same shall be found
to be.187. and.31. men remainyng overplus, so that placyng.187. men in a rank,
such an army will be infacion fowersquare, that is, it will amounte unto 187.
ranks.187. men for a rank. And as for the.31. odd men, the Captain may
apoincte where he shall think good.

To know how many men may march in a rank, and at a sudden to bring them
into a fowersquare battle, so that their Ansigne, may come to be in the
midst. Cap. 2.
FOr to do this thing with speed, the fowersquare root of what number of men
so ever it be, is straight way to be taken: and if the same root be so that it
may be equally divided into three, so many as shall be the third part of
that root, so many of the said men for a rank ought to march by the way.
As for example, if the men that are to be conducted, be.81. the root of
those.81. must be taken, the which is.9. And for as much as the root of this
may equally be divided into.3. and the third part thereof being.3. the
said.81. men must therefore be made to march in iorneyng three in a rank, and
they shall make in all.27. ranks, as here under appears.

Tail Head




And when need is that they must be brought into a fowersquare battle, al
these.27. ranks would be divided into three equal parts, as is declared by
ab and cd. So that to every part there come to remain 9. ranks, three men in
a rank, and afterward the first part that is in the Front must be caused
to stay, and the other twain to proceed forward, the one on the right hand,
and the other on the left hand of the first (now standing still) until the
head or Front of either of the said two parts do unite or come to be even
with the head of the first, and there to stay. As by the figure following may
be understood.

Front




The which three parts thus brought and ordered, shall make a fowersquare
battle, as apereth by this figure following: and to cause that the Ansigne do
fall in the midst of such a battle, always it ought to be placed in the
midst of the first part, as before apereth in the poyncte. A.

Head




But to know how to divide the said.27. ranks into three equal portions
without standing to tell.9. ranks, considering that if it were a great number
of men, it should be a thing very long so to do: therefore seeing that to
every number of men, there is commonly placed a rank of Harkabutters or
Bowemen in the Forewarde, and an other in the Rerewarde, in this figure above
written of four score men and one, there would be.18. Harkabutters: that is.9.
in the Forewarde, and.9. in the Rereward: and setting two ranks of
Harkabutters in the places where the deuisions are to be made, as hereafter
appears in figure, understanding the Harkabutters by this letter H.



By those Harkabutters you may always understand where the divisions are to
be made of the said 27. ranks, and likewise in every other greater number.
And when such a root cannot be divided into three equal parts, of
necessity there must remain over one or two. Now let us first take for
example this, where remains over one, as it should be if it were a hundred
men, the root whereof is ten, which ten divided into three, comes to three
times three, and one remainyng overplus. Wherefore there must be made.10.
ranks to march.3. and.3. (that is so many ranks as the number of the root
is of) and other.10 ranks.4. and.4. together, and the last.10. ranks also
three and three together: as here following appears with their.20. Harkabutters
or Bowemen, besides the said hundred men.

Front




And these three parts when it is needful to bring them into a fowersquare
battle, must be ordered as above is rehearsed, or else causynge the first
part in the Forewarde to stay, and to make the second part to proceed onward
until the head or front of the second part come to be even with the head of
the first, and so the said second part standing still, to cause also the
third part to proceed forward after the same manner, the which thing being don,
such a battle shall be brought into fashion fowersquare, with their Harkabutters
or Bowemen before and behind: as apereth by this figure.

Head Back




But when in deuidyng the said root there shall happen to remain.2.
overplus, as should be when there were.121. the root whereof is.11. which.11.
partyng into.3. comes to.3. times.3. and two remaynyng overplus (as I have
said) in this case and in other like, I would make a.11. ranks to march
(that is, as many as the root conteines).4. men in a rank, and an other.11.
ranks.3. men together in a rank, and the other.11. ranks also.4. men to a
rank: As hereafter apereth in figure, with their.22. Harkabutters, beside the
said.121. men.



The which men always, when they would be brought into a fowersquare
battle, must be ordered as before is declared.

And this rule may serve likewise in what littel or great number so ever it be,
as well quadrante as not quadrante. As for example only in words: put the case
that there be.3969. whereof being minded to know how many men in a rank
should be caused to march togethers by the way, so that commodiously they may
at a sodden be brought into a fowersquare battle, there must be taken the
quadrante root of this number of men (by the same way that I have taught)
which shall be found to be.63. so that on every side of the square battle
shall be.63. ranks of men, and for as much as this root (which is.63.) may be
divided into.3. equal parts, the third part thereof is to be taken (for a
general rule) that is.21. and therefore.21. men in a rank would be made to
march togethers by the way. And always there shall be as many ranks in all
after.21. to a rank, as are three times so many as the root is of, which is,
three times 63. which comes to.189. so ye.189. ranks of men shall be the
number thereof after.21. to a rank. And by the root that is.63. you may
understand that such division is to be made between.63. and.63. so that the
first part shall be as well.63. as also the second and the third. In which
deuisions the two double ranks of Harkabutters are to be placed for the
redier knowledge to bring them into a square battle. But if in deuyding the
root into three, there should remain.1. overplus, as should happen if the
presuposed men were.5776. the root whereof being.76. which root divided
into.3. shall come unto.25. and one to remain overplus. Now I say, that all
the ranks that rises of these men, shall be not withstanding three times so
many as the root, that is three times.76. which makes.228. And for as much as
all these orders of ranks, are divided ^uermore into.3. parts (as before has
been declared).76. ranks to a part (that is so many as the root is of)
therefore it is to be understand, that the first and the last of these three
parts must be made to march.25. men in a rank, which is as much as is
the third part of the root, and for that there remains one overplus (as
above appears) I say yt the same one must be put always in the second part,
which is in the midst. I mean causynge those of the said second part, to
march.26. men in a rank, so yt the first and the last part of the great rewe
of ranks, be.25. men in a rank, and the second part to be.26. men in a
rank, and the very same ought to be done of every other root that may be
divided into three, where only remains overplus one, but when there
remains overplus.2. it follows clean contrary: For that the first and the
last part, would be of one man more, then the same that the third part of
the root is of. As for example if the said men were.2809, the root whereof
is.53. which divided into there, comes to.71. and.2. remainyng overplus:
therefore of so many men, there shall be made.159. ranks (that is three
times.53.) which.159. ranks deuidynge them also into three parts, comes
unto.53. to a part, that is the number of the root. And the first and third
part would be of one man more then the third part of the root, that is, it
would be of.18. men to a rank, and the second part, which is the part in
the midst, would be the very third part of the root: yt is, 17. men to a
rank, so that of all the.159. ranks, as well the first.53. ranks, as likewise
the last.53. ranks, ought to be of.18. men to a rank, and the.53. ranks in
the midst would be only of.17. men to a rank. And, wherein partyng the
root into.3. there remains overplus only one, it goes clean contrary to
this. For that the first and the third part of the said great rue of
ranks, will always be of as many men to a rank as shall be the whole third
part of the root, and the middell part, which is the second, will be of one
man more then the third part of the root. And for as much, as there can never
remain overplus above one or two in deuidyng the root into.3. therefore this
foresaied rule shall serve in what number of men so ever it be, as well
Quadrante as not Quadrant, for that like as before is said in numbers not
Quadrante, always there is taken ye root which goes nerest to such a number,
and therewith to do accordyngly, as above has been said. And as for the
residue of the men that comes to be overplus of the Quadrante of such a root,
may be placed some other where as shall be thought most best. For example if
there were.4000. men, which number is not Quadrante, yet notwithstanding of
the same number there ought to be taken out the nearest root thereof, which
is.63. so that there shall remain overplus.31. men, whom mindynge in a sudden
to bring into a fowersquare battle, there ought to be put in a rank.63. men,
and such a battle shall come to be fowersquare, as in the beginning has been
said: and where there remains overplus those.31. men, the Sergiant may place
them as he shall think good. Likewise minding to cause those.4000. men to
march, there ought also to be taken the nerest root thereof, which as
aforesaied, is.63. which deuidyng into three, comes unto three times.21. and
nothing remaynyng overplus. And therefore the said men ought to be caused to
march.21. in a rank, and the said rank to be divided into three parts.63.
to a rank according to the foresaied rule, in such sort that the last part
shall be.64. ranks, and also.10. men more, because of those.31. men that were
overplus in the beginning, the which as has been said remained out of the
array: And after the same manner, it is to be done when the root of such a
number that is not quadrante, does not agree with the perfect division by
three, which is, if there be overplus one, to proceed as above has been
declared, I mean to put a man more in a rank to the middel part, and to the
other two parts, the first, and the third, to put only so many men in a
rank, as the third part of the root shall contain, and when there remains
over plus two, to proceed clean contrary: that is, to put a man more in a
rank to the first, and to the third part, and to the second, to put only
so many men in a rank, as the third part of the root shall be of, and those
men that are remainynge overplus, in taking out the root in the beginning, to
place them as above I have said.

How to ordeine a number of men or an army into a battle, like unto a wedge,
or three square, so that it may be apt to march with the poincte thereof
tovvarde the enemies. Cap. 3.
THis fashion of battle, is made after this manner, first placyng one man, and
after three, and next five, and after seven, and then.9. after a.11. and so to
increase always two men more, till such time as there be no more men to
place. Albeit there may be such a number of men, that at the last they can
not, or there shall not be sufficient to make up the last rank, which
hapnynge, those men may be left out of the araie to serve where their Captain
shall think most meet, for that the like happens often times, and in every
manner of orderyng men, that always there rests some man out of the array. And
for the better understanding hereof: admit for example that the men that is
to be brought into a three square battle be a.100. I say that first one is to
be placed, after.3. after.5. after.7. after.9. after.11 and so to proceed:
adding always two men more in a rank, until they be all placed, as here
following apereth in figure. Where the last rank in this case, shall come to
be.19. men, not remainyng any man overplus: and this is, for that the number of
men, (which is.100.) is a Quadrante number: and like wise in every other number
that is Quadrante, the said Triangle battle shall be made without any man
remainyng overplus.

Head




But if the said number of men be not a quadrant number always there shall
remain overplus so many men, as the said number of men shall be more then
ye great quadra^t number contained of the same: as for example, if ye
presuposed men to make the three square battle were.120. I say that there
shall remain overplus.20. men out of the array of the three square, that is so
many as the.120. excedeth.100. (being the greater quadrante number contained in
the same) which also shall be.20. but if the said men were.123. there should
remain overplus only two men, for as much as the greatest quadrant number
that can be taken of.123. shall be.121. and.123 is more then the said.121. by
the said two, and the very same is to be understand in every great number.

To make the battle called the Sheeres, which in old time they used to set
against the Triangell. Cap. 4.
THe Sheeres are made with two Triangels joined togethers for to receive
between them the said battle, made like a wedge or Triangell. The example
whereof I will make also with.100. men, as the Triangell or wedge was made, so that
thereby may be judged if there were two armies of equal numbers of men, and
that the one of them were pitched like a Triangell, and the other like a
Sheeres, which of them should have the advantage. Wherefore minding of.100. men
to make the battle called the Sheeres, they ought to be divided into two
equal parts and of every one of these parts being 50. to make a Triangell
according to the manner above declared, and to ioygne them together, as here
following apereth in figure with their poinctes toward the enemies: I mean
toward the wedge, to receive it between them: And it is to be noted how in
making of these two Triangels, there shall remain overplus one man of every
one of them out of the array, for that the number of.50. is no Quadrant number,
and it is more then the Quadrante number contained of the same (which is.49.
by a man only, so that between them both, there shall remain overplus two
men, as here appears in Figure.

Head Head Head




What auantage it is to order men in a Triangell battle against the enemy
that knows not how to make the battle called the Sheeres to set against it,
inespecially where there is as many men of the one part as of the other. Cap
5.
WHen the contrary part would come against a threesquare battle, with a
battle that were fowersquare, as now a days is used, by all reason it shall be
broken and overthrown. As admit for example that there be.100. in a
threesquare battle, and a.100 other men in a fowersquare battle, pitched
against the threesquare, as here following appears in figure.



And for that the order of the Triangell in faightyng, is after such sort,
that all those which shoot with any kind of weapon, as pieces of Ordinance,
Harkabuses, Darts, Bows, or Crosbowes, ought all to direct their shot, and
to strike only in the same place, where the poincte of the Triangell seeks to
enter, I mean in the poincte A. whereby the men that are in the same place,
shall either be slain or else constrained to give place to the poincte of the
said Triangell through the great multitude of shot strikyng in that place.
So that the poincte of the said Triangell enteryng therein, may continually
penetrate all the said array clean through. For as much as all the
Harkabutters, and Archers which remain without, must not cease to shoot in
the very same place, and no other where else: which thing doeyng it is
impossible but that way shall be given for the said Triangell to enter in,
and once entered, such an army is overthrown without any remedy. For all
the force and strength of such a Triangell being made in that place only, it
is not possible that men in such a place may be able to withstand, although
there were many more in soche Quadrant array, then those that be in the said
Triangell, because the place of A cannot be succored of any of those of the
same battle, considering that if those which are placed toward B. or else
toward C. would come to succor the place where the violence and force is
made, it must needs be, that they must disorder them selves: and being once
disordered, they run into the very same mischief, after such sort, that they
shall remain altogether broken: and remaynyng in their places, their strength
or power, rests of none effect: for as much as none of them can be abell to
do any thing, how valiante soever he be. Whereby may be understood of what
importance this triangell battle is against the enemy, that knows not the
medesin or remedy thereof.

To bring a number of men or an army, into a battle, which in old time
was called a Savve. Cap. 6.
THis fashion of battle according to the qualitee of the name, ought to be
made as it were with teeth, like unto a Saw which they use to saw timber with
all. And therefore minding to bring a number of men, or an army into such a
fashion, there must be considered two things, the one, how many teeth this
saw is to be made of, and whether besides those teeth, there would be any
other rays to sustain such teeth or no. As for example, admit that the men of
whom must be made those only teeth of this foresaid Saw, be.100. now
these.100. men ought to be divided into the number of the teeth that this
Saw shall have, and of every one of those parts, to fashion a Triangell, by
the rule declared in the third Chapter: and those Triangels to ioigne close
together, according as was done of those two that made the Sheeres: As put
ease that of the said hundred men there would be made four teeth of a Saw,
then the said.100. men must be divided in to four parts, in which deuisions
it will come to 25. for a part. Now of every one of these parts, there ought to
be fashioned a Triangell, according to the order given in the foresaied third
Chapter. And these.4. Triangles to ioigne them straight together, as here
following appears in figure: and this is in as much as in making the teeth
only: but if peradventure there would be put an other order behind the said
four teeth, it is needful first to determine of how many men such a raie
is to be made, and those to take out by them selves, and of the rest to make
the teethe, and behind the said teethe to plase those number of men which
first were taken out, and to ordein them so many men in a rank, as shall be
found directly in length in all the hinder parts of the teeth that are made,
as for example, admit there be 244. men, and that with a hundred men thereof,
there must he made four teeth of a Saw, and the other 144. to be made
certain ranks to sustain the said four teeth: Therefore the hundred men
being brought into four tenth, as above is declared, consequently behind
those, there ought to be placed those.144. men, 36. men to a rank: for as
much as in all the four lower parts of the said four teethe there be.36.
men, as in the figure next following appears. And after this manner and order,
if there were a hundred thousand men, they might be set in a raye, placyng
them, as above is done with that littell number.

Front.




To fashion a battle of a number of men or an army like unto two Triangels
ioygned together, so that they may be apt to march with a corner thereof
tovvarde the enemies. Cap. 7.
WIth the rule whereby the single Triangle is made, with the very same almost
this fashion battle is also made: for as much as deuidyng all those men, or
that Army wherewith this fashion battle is to be made into two equal
parts, and of the one half thereof to make a Triangell and that done, upon the
very last side of the same, there ought to be placed the other half number of
men in ra^kes, which continually go decresyng by two men less, I mean clean
contrary to that was done at the beginnynge with one, where beginnynge to make
the poincte of the Triangell, the ranks were continually increased with two
men more. But it is to be understand, that if in making the first Triangell,
there happen to remain overplus any men, that are not sufficient to make up an
other rank, yet the very same rank ought to be finisshed up with some of the
other half number of men, for that one of these two Triangels ioigned
together, comes to be of one rank more then the other. As for example, admit
the men, wherewith this fasshion battle is to be made, be.320. which must be
divided into two equal parts, so that by such division there will be.160.
men for a part, and of the one of these parts, there would be made a
Triangle, according to the order declared in the third Chapter, which done,
there shall be found to remain overplus.16. (by the reason aledged in the said
third Chapter) so that there shall lack.9. men to finishe the said last
rank of the first Triangell: Therefore the said rank must be made up, with
the men of the other half, as taking those.19. men which lackes, so that in
the said first Triangel may be.169. men, and in the other part only.151. men,
wherewith the other Triangel ought to be made upon the last rank of the
first, which last rank shall be of.25. men: wherefore upon the same, there
must be placed an other rank of two men less, that is.23. and upon the same
said.23. men, to place an other of.21. men, and upon the.21. men, to place an
other of.19. men, and upon those.19. men, to place an other of.17. men, and so
to proceed always with two men less, til such time as it comes to the rank
of one man only, as here following appears in figure: True it is, that there
shall be found in the end, to remain overplus.7. men, the which the
Sergiant may place where he shall think good. And thus with this manner of
order, there may be brought into like array, any army how great so ever it
be, and they may turn them selves, and in marching, make of the Rerewarde, the
Forward, and likewise of what so ever side they list.

Front The overplus.




What is best to be done where the ordinance of the enemies being shot into
the Army has slain many men. Cap. 8.
AN army of men that happens to have certain ranks thereof to be stricken
down and kilde with the enemies ordinance, and marchynge after such sort,
leauyng void the places of those men which are slain with the Artillery,
or else drawing them selves close together, to fill such empty places, the one
of these ways is very evil, and the other much worse: for as much as leaving
those places after such sort open, inespecially in the Foreward, there is
given thereby great faciletie unto the enemies to enter into the said rays,
and to overthrow them: And likewise causing after such misfortune the said
rays to draw together, to fill the said places, those rays must needs
altogether be disordered, and shall be brought almost into confusion: for yt
it is to be thought that the said artillery, does not destroy any rank of
men wholly from on end to an an other in length, but only a part of some, and
a part of other, and some to remain untouched, or unhurt. In which case
being minded to cause the^ to draw together, to fill up the said voied places,
it must needs follow that the whole rank do disorder in lengthing those that
lack so that some of the ranks shall remain with a greater number of ranks
of men (in length) in the Rerewarde, then in the Forward, whereby if such a
battle would march, of necessitee it will imediatlye run into confusion,
because of those ranks that are imperfect in length. Wherefore that Captain,
is to be praised, which instructs his men that in like chances, they
never remain without a compaignion before them, except it be in the Front,
as to advertise every one of them, that if it fortune to happen any of them to
lack ye same man, which was wont to march before them, or else mo, that then
incontinente, and with seleretie they do march forward, until they find an
other compaignion in the accustomed distance before them, and where it
fortuneth no man to be found, to advertise them, how they should then proceed
till they come to the head or Front and in such place to stand still, or else
to march according as the other ranks in the headde or in the Front shall
do. And this being a general rule that every man must take the measure of
his marchyng softely or fast of his compaignions that goes before him, and not
of any that be of their sides. All those men therefore that shall be found in
the very same rank behind such a man that does lack his compaignion or
compaignions before him, shall be constrained to run, or go a pase according
as that man shall march, which shall be next before him: which thing being
observed of every man in the battle, always the Forward or Front thereof,
shall come thereby to be whole and sound, and those empty places of the dead
to be transformed into the Rerewarde, in which places there shall not almost
be any perrill. As for example, admit, that in a battle of 144. men in
fashion fowersquare, the enemies has slain.12. men, as by the void places in
the figure following appears, I say that having advertised every man to do as
much as before I have declared, which is, that every time that he lacks his
fellow (or more men) that marched before him, he do straight way make haste, and
with all speed possible not to seace going forward, til he find an other
compaignion in the accustomed distance that goth before him. Front


And if it fortune in such a rank that in the end he find no man, yet he
ought to proceed so much till he come to the last rank in the Front, and
there to stand still, or else to march according to the order of the said
rank. And likewise every man ought to take heed that in his marchynge fast
or softely, he do^ rule him self by his compaignion that goes before him, and
not of any of those that be on his sides: which thing being observed, as in
the figured rays above Front.


written, the same battelles, shall be transformed in this other manner, like
unto the last figure, that is, those.12. void places shall be transelated into
the rerewarde, as plainly may be seen.

How to change with speed an Army, that is, in battle raie fovversquare,
into a triangell fation, without dissordering the first ranks, and without
perrill of confusion. Cap. 19.
LIke as the Capitain with sound of the trompete, or with voice shall cause the
soldiers to be advertised and taught to know how to turn that way, which
is between the front and the right side, or the left, and likewise that way
that is between the right, or left side, and the back, and after that they
shall be well informed therein, even so I would also have the^ to be well
advertised of the same, that was declared in the last chapter, which is to
show and teach every man, that always when he shall be caused to turn
toward any of the forsaide sides, and shall not find to have his fellow in
the accustomed distance before him, that then the same man with all speed do
proceed, or march so far right forth, till he find a companion before him
in the acustomed distance. Of which thing every soudier being well informed
and instructed, with the twinkling of an iye an Army that is in fasion.iiij.
square, may be transeformed into a tria^gle. As for example, minding to make
the right corner the poincte of the said tria^gell, with sownde of Trumpet, or
with voice, causing every man in the army to turn them selves with their
faces that way, which is between the front and the right flancke, and
incontinente, so sone as they are turned, every man obseruinge the forsaide
order, that is, that all those, which shall perceive not to have his fellow
before him in the accustomed distance, do proceed straight forth until he
have one, which done the said fowersquare fation, shall be found to be
changed into a triangell fation, and the poinct of the same triangell figure,
shall come to be the right corner of the front of the first figure. Which
thing, is as easy to be done as is possible: for the trial whereof, let there
be for example.25. men standing in fation four square, as hereafter appears
in figure, and to cause it to be better understand, I have thought good to make
this figure with ye 25. letters of the abc. Now mindyng to change this four
square figure, into a tria^gell figure, it is nedeful to cause them all to
turn Front.


with their faces that way, which is between the head and the same side, where I
have thought good to make the poinctt of the wedge or tria^gle: as for example
purposing to make the corner. E. the poinct and head of the tria^gle, I shall
cause that every man do turn with his face that way, between the front and
the right flancke, toward the corner. E. which thing done, the forsaide
figure shall cum to stand as here apereth: in which figure may be seen many
men, that has no fellow in the acustome distance before him, although they have
a fellow straighte before him, much more farther Frnot.


of then the ordinary, which is double so much as the ordinary, as appears
by. F. who has right before him. B. but the distaunce that is between the
said. F. and the said. B. is double so much as the ordinary distaunce,
wherefore if. F. shall obcerue the precepts above declared, immediately so sone
as he shall have turned his face that way, he should incontinent go, to come
nerer to the said. B. in the accustomed distaunce, which doing, he shall bring
himself between A. and. G. Albeit the said. G. shall not remain in his first
place, but shall go nerer unto. C. to the accoustomed distaunce, and in the
place where. G. was first L. must cume. So that. F. shall stand between. A.
and. L. and likewise if all the other shall proceed forward, according to the
said order, until every man find a fellow in the accustomed distaunce before
him. H. shall go nerer unto. D. and. M. shall follow the said. H, and. Q.
shall follow after the said. M. every one of them, until they come to their
accustomed distaunce. And in like manner. I. shall go nerer unto. E. and. N.
shall follow. I. and. R. shall follow. N. and. X. shall follow the said. R.
every one of them until they come to their accustomed distaunce. Likewise. O.
shall go nerer to. K. and. S. shall follow. O. and. Y. shall follow. S. also to
the ordinary distance: and likewise. and. shall also go nerer to. V. to the
accustomed distaunce, which thing being observed, such a four square battle
shall be transformed into a triangle battle, as here following appears in
figure, the poinct whereof shall come to be the corner. E. and with this order
a Captain may change an army, with tournyng of a hand, though it were
of.100000. men from the fasion of a four square to the fation of threesquare.
So that Front.


the said men be advertised and taught, as before has been declared, both as
well to know how they ought (...) to turn as to march. Which is of
wunderfull importance: for as much, as at a sudden to reduse an army after
this sort into a triangell fation, it is almost impossibell that the enemies
shall be abell, or shall know how to make their army like the Sheres to ^et
against it, whereby shall cum great advantage as by the.5. chapter above is
plainelis proved: for that it semes unto me that a triangle battle, may be
allwaye sufficient able to break all manner of fowersquare battelles as is
used now a days, although it had half so many more men, so long as those of
the triangell battle be well instructed of the manner of their faightinge
declared in the 5. chapter.

Of the perfect form or fation of strong places.
THe form which unto the circular fatio^ does most resemble, of expert and
skilful soldiers, is above al other with most reason praised, so that the
Curtine or walls thereof, be made straight, and of such length, that of the
bulwarks they may be flanked: which fation being made with many corners,
is very meet and necessary if in a sufficient great place it be erected:
for where in small romes the just length of the curtyne is shortened, it is
conueniente to build them with few corners, because if otherwise they should
be shortened with a number of corners, the shorter of necessity the spaces
between those must be, so that besides that the one bulwark may hurt the
other, they shall be moreover to no purpose, but rather an occation of infinite
cost, their curtines neding as is requiset to be defended of platformes and
the corners thereof shall come to be less blunte, and much sharper then they
ought to be, by reason of the little distance between them and the platformes.
Therefore the more that they be made distante from those bulwarks (the due
length of the curtin being kept) so much the blunter the corners will cum to
be, which by them must be defended, and the more of those corners that there
are in the same fasion, so much the blunter they shall also come to be. So
that where the fation of the places that are builte be sufficient great to
contain all the forsaide particulars, which for a sure fortress is requisett
to be made, all thing commodiously will cum to pass: and the greater that
they shall be, the more men they may have to defend the^ and more comodious
space within, for to retire with great and strong fortification, and the
platformes may be made much further in, and have the corners of their
bulwarks blunt, and with a large back, mete for defense, and in an assault,
much surer then the sharp, because the sharp poincted bulwark, being
battered defends thenemie from the platformes, so that under the same, being
covered, he may almost out of danger, make an assault. Where against a town
or fortress, that were built after the fatio^ of these plattes following, in
what so ever part of soche places, the enemy should approach marchyng toward
them to incampe, or in battle raie to assalte the^, or with trenches, and
artillery to batter them, either high or low or by the curtin within, or
otherwise, he shall always from many of those flankers of the same place, be
greatly hurt and repulced, and of the platformes in espetially, more then from
any other where, because they be most nere, and stand higher then all the
other, and they shall also hurt him more, when he shall be somewhat far of,
then nere hand, as may be seen by the plain platte that has the number.1.
and in the same that is raised up, that has the number.2. The which with two
other are also here after pictured, to the end that thereby may be considered
of such as shall see them, the sundry good and notable effects that be in
them, the which although it be not possible so easily with writing to be
expressed, yet by their help they may be better understand and comprehended,
and moreover by them shall be gotten this knowledge, whereby every man
commodiously may understand, where the enemy gowinge about with his power,
may best devise to assail them, and how they within may provide to defend
and withstand the same with their men, taking them from those places where
they may best be spared, so that buildyng the fasion of fortresses, in the
said manner, there shall in no place happen any such incommodities, as in
other that are ignorauntly made, after the ordinary fation with less corners,
as also by these figures, here following is more plainly declared.

There ought also to be noted, that these and the other plattes, in this
treatise set forth, being drawn in a little space, could not be fasioned
with their due proportion: albeit to the end that the same which is reasoned
about them, might partly be understand, they are not left out or omitted:
for without their help it should have been impossible for any man, to have
comprehended that, which I seek to declare, concerning fortificacion, although
they were expert soldiers: as by the foresaied plattes of the number of.1.
and.2. may manifestly be seen, how well the courteines of such a town, is by
the bullwarkes thereof defended, and how the di^hes of the platformes, and of
both of them are flanked and skowred, besides other things, which by the
lines that are drawn be declared, where otherwise it could not be showed
after such sort, as it might be understand, and the like hapeneth in the
other.

1


2


The strongest and perfectes fation of all other for the building of the cortin
or wall of a Town or fortres.
BEfore being showed concerning the perfection that for the fation of
fortresses is requisette, how they ought to be builded with a number of
corners proportioned nevertheless, with a just length of the cortin, and a
sufficient distaunce between every bullwarke, so that the more that with like
conditions to the circular fasio^ it resembles, so much the more it becomes
perfect. There now remains to be considered, what fation is to be judged of
most perfection, either the same which without any edification placed in the
middeste of the curtin thereof, shall be builded, or that which shall have either
caualiers, or platformes, or what so ever other manner of edification or figure,
that for to defend the curtins of ye bulwarks may be placed: or whether it
be of those fatinos, which unto this present has been used of other in
building, or some new manner that might be devised. Therefore in this part
leauinge to reason of those, that shall have caualiers or platformes as also of
those bulwarks that the cortines shall have, which from the one to the other
most straightly without other edification placed in the middeste do shoot,
for this time I shall only show a new fation, the which I judge to be the
most perfectest, that is possible to be imagened, as may be seen by the lines
that are drawn from the plain platte of the number of.3. and by the platte
that is raised up of the number of.4. here under figured, which rese^blyng so
nere the circular figure, as the due length of the curtin will suffer, they
shall have this diffre^ce from the other which directly ar distended, that the
cortin being made back a conueniente distaunce, that spase may be left mete
to make from the one and the other poincte of the same retire, a flanker, as
two like flankers may be seen, in the plain platte of the number of.3. by
the letters E. and. F. and in the plat that is raised up of the number of.4. by
the letters. A. and. C. they shall have comodetie to direct their ordinance
to flank, as well high as low, like unto those that are commonly builte now
adays: whereby, not only the same space of the curtin, that is between the one
and the other of them shall be perfectly defended, as may be perceived by the
platte of the number of.3. by the line drawn from the letter. E. to the
letter. F. but also that which lies between them and the bullwarkes, as in the
said platte, by the lines that describes the manner of the shot the one from
the letter. E. to the letter. S. the other from the letter. F. to the letter.
R. may be understand, and likewise the curte^nes of those bulwarks, as also
in the very same, by the line that is drawn from the letter. F. to the
letter. Q. is showed, with a better manner than in other fation of building that
is used can be defended, so that all the parts of them shall not only be made
to be able to shoot by flank, but also thereby to shoot by right line, as
in the platte of the number of.4. by the line that passes from the letter. C.
to the letter. D. and from the letter A to the letter. B. may be perceived.
And whereas they may be builded with less cost then otherwise, they have also
commodity to make their gates equally distante the one from the other, from
the next bulwarks: where they are placed most safely and commodiouslie with
great strength, and those gates be as well, as all the rest of the wall, and
greatlier in that part, much surer from the assailing of the enemies, then in
what so ever other manner of fation might be devised: for as much as the
platforms, and caualiers be nothing so strong, but more easy to be
overthrown, in respect to this manner of buildinge, which is most sure from
such danger, and excedingly well defended from the force of the enemy: to the
which, the nerer that the enemy shall aproche, so much the more he shall of
those within be hurt, contrary to that, which in the platformes happens.
Moreover there may be certain slaughter houses builte in the diche, as in the
plat of the number of.4. by the letters E.H. is showed, which the enemies with
great difficulty must first seek to win, before they can come nere the
walls. And those being won, shall be but small preiudise to the town or
fortress: wherefore without comparison, this fation is greatlier to be
praised, then the same with platformes, for that the nerer the Wall, the
enemy shall come, so much more from the bulwarks by flank, and all most on
the back, and from other places, both by flank, and by front in one instant,
he shall be hurt and stricken. Where also in such a kind of fation with many
corners, the greatness and rome of the town within, is somwat deminished, in
respect to those that are made with platformes. Therefore I conclude, for the
considerations a foresaied, these to be the most perfectest fations that any
strong fortress, is possible to be made.

5


6


3


4


An example of the quadrant form to prove that it causes debilletie and
weakness. Cap. xxii.
THe tounes and fortresses that are builded after a fowr cornered fatio^, in
what so ever manner they be made, ar subject to most great inconuenie^ces: for
that the sharp corners of their bulwarks which of necessity the same fation
will cause them to have, may very easelie be battered, and under the ruyn
thereof, the assaults of the enemies defended, as in the platte following of
the number of 7. by the bullwarke C. battered of the artillery D. is seen.
Whereby also may be perceived how the ordinance may be planted to make a
breach, and to take away their flankers after such sort, that the enemies
may safely aproche to enie place, either marching in battle ray to incampe, or
assault, or with pianers to work, or for enie other purpose, as by the four
flankers of the three bullwarkes. L. E. C. may be understand, the which of the
artillery. H.^.K.G. not only ar battered, but also two of them that have the
letters. L. C. as is see^, may of the artillery. K.G. be beaten through their
flankers, and the back of the bullwarke. E. nerest to them, which is on both
sides of the fla^kes battered, the which for having in such place less
thicknes the^ enie where else, and great heygth, may be the more easelier
ruynated, as is to be seen in the said bullwarke E. battered with the
artillery F. and H. and also by the breach of the battery, which in the
cortin is made of the ordinance B. as is seen where the artillery G. by the
cortin does beat through the same in the breach of the battery A. as
manifestly apereth: and moreover when they within would do any thing, they
shall be beaten with the artillery over the wall within the cortin N. from the
caualier M. without, so that no man shall be able to stand behynd the same to
defend. And not only in this sort, but in sundry wise, and in diverse
manners, what so ever town or fortress is builded after such fation, may
easelie be battered and sune made sautable, wereby without forther declaration
it is plainly to be understand, how much the forsayde plattes of the other
fation eccel this.

7


Of the nature of Saltpeter, and the manner how to make and refine it. Cap.
xxiii.
SAltpeter is a mixture of many substaunces, gotten out with fire and water
of dry and durtie grownde, or of that flower, that grows owte of new
walls, in selars, or of that grownde which is fownde loose within toombes, or
desolate caves, where rain cannot come in: in the which ground (according
to my judgment) the same is engendered of an ayrie moistenes drunk up, and
gotten of the yerthie drynes: whose nature (by the effect thereof)
consideringe, I cannot tell how to be resolved, to say what thing properly it
is. The well learned and most wise Physicians (besides medisinall experience)
by the taste (findinge it salt, and with exceeding sottill sharpnes, and
consideringe the great bytinge thereof) supose verily that it is of nature
hot and dry: on the other part, seeing it to be a thing engendered of air,
and towched of fire to fall in a flame, and vapore, and rise with a terrible
violence (as the same co^pounded, is seen by Gunpoulder most manifestly
declared) seems to be of an ayrie nature, hot and moiste: and again saying it
with shining and glitteringe whitenes, as a thing to the nature of water
conformable, it seems that it may be said, that it is of a waterie nature,
findinge it heavy: to which may be joined the experience of the taste, and
of the exceeding coldenes that in sumer it cawseth the water to be of, wherein
it is put to keep wine cold, as they use in Italy, and by the brittelnes
thereof, it may be thought to be of the nature of yerthe: and so much the
more, where burning it with as much brimstone, it will turn into a hard
white stone: so that to conclude, it seems that it has the soueraintie and
quality of every elemente. Now this of aunciente writers, was called nitro:
and Pliny in his natural history in the.xxxi. book says, that it
differs not much from salt: whose nature semes also that unto Physicians
has not ben hyd: and it is found in many places, but the best is fownde in
Macedonia: Albeit the late writers, spetially they of our parts, say that
Pliny, and ye other writers believed that it was minerable: and peradventure
they are deceived: for that there is of the artifitiall, which has the very
same virtue, and as sum think, more stronger of nature: and is found for ye
very same medicinal effect, better then the natural. Now this (as I have
said) is drawn forth from the said durtie yearthe, so that the yearthie
drines by rain has not ben extincte: but the most excellenteste of all
other, is made of the dunge of beasts, converted into yerthe, in stabells or
in dunghills, of long time not used: and above all other, of the same that
cumeth of hogs, the most and best is gotten: what so ever dunge it be of, it
is requiset that by continuance of time it be well resolved into yerthe, and
the humiditie thereof dried: yea and it is needful that the same yerthe be as
it were dustie. To mind to have a say to know whether it be good, by the
taste of the tongue it may be felt if it be bytinge, and how much: and
findinge it strong, so that you determine to work of it (making a great
quantity) it is necessary to provide many Cauldrons, forneses, barrills or
tubbes: and likewise wood, white lime, and ashes of old oak: but chiefly
must be provided a great barn, or other walled house nere to the water
(whereof it is needful to have inoughe, as also of yerthe, both commodious for
the place, and likewise every other thing.) But first the forneses must be
made for the cawldrons, and they must be placed thereon, as those be that the
diers use: then there must be prepared ioystes as long as the house, and so
brodde, that co^modiuslie above ground may stand buttes with their heddes
knocked out, square chestes, barrels or tubbes to the number of.50. or.60.
or.100. (according to the caulderns, and the capacetie of the place) and
between every two of those vecells, there must be set a half tubbe to
receive the water that shall run out: or there would be placed a channel of
wood that may go alo^ge under the holes of the veselles that are set above
ground, so that it may convey all the water that comes from them, into a
great tubbe or two sufficient to hold all the water full of substance of
Saltepeter: and the buttes that have their heddes knocked out, or barrells or
tubbes, in the bottom of every of them there must be made a hole on the one
side, with an Awgar, or else three or four littell holes made with a good big
perser: and upon them must be laid a littel thin linen clothe or else the
end of a brom, or sum straw, to the intent that it may keep the yerthe up
and strain the water that shall be put amongeste the same yerthe which is to be
wroghte, when it is tasted with the mouth so that it be certain, that it
contains Saltepeter. Then there must be made thereof, in the midst of the
house where it is to be wroughte, a great hill, next unto which must be made
an other halffe so big, which must be made with two parts of o^slaked lime,
and three of oak ashes, or other ashes, which in taste ar very strong and
sharp: and then the one hill must be well mingled with the other, and with
the same composition, the tubbes must be filled that are set alofte upon the
ioystes, within a span of the mowthe, or else (minding not to mingel with the
yerath the ashes and the lime together) you may put first a spane thickenes
of earth in the bottom of the tubbe, and then three fingers thicknes of the
foresaid lyme and ashes: and upon the same after, an other spanne thicknes of
yearthe, and on that likewise, an other three or fowr fingers thicknes of lime
and ashes: and so puttinge one rewe of one thing, and an other of an other,
you shall fill all the buttes and tubbes, or other vecells that you have
placed, even as above I have said, within a span of the mouths of them: and
the rest that is then empty, which you left, you must fill with water: the
which running through all the yerathe, by a littell and a littell, you must
let it drop in the tubbes that stand under to receive it, or in the gutter
or channel or whear you list, so that it be co^veyd into one or into sundry
tubbes, or where you think good: and so you must see well that you gether all
the water that you powered upon the yearthe, after it is passed through the
holes of the bottom of the tubbes, in such wise, that it bring with it all
the substance and virtue of the Saltepeter that was in the said yerthe:
whereof by puttinge sum of it on your tongue, you may taste: and findinge it
bitinge and very salt, it is a token that it is good and that you have done
well: if not, power it again upon the very same yerthe, or upon sum other
new: but finding the first yerthe full of substance as much as suffices,
you may again power upon it more water, to wasshe better the remnante of the
yearthe: albeit this second water would be saved in an other vecell, and
after this, the yerth may likewise be washed the third time, to thintente
that all the substance thereof, may perfectly be gotten: but this second nor
the third, ought not to be mingled with the first, if it happen not to cum of
the very same taste: the which I believe that it will not: but it must be put
by it self, in other vecells, for that it is good to power upon the change of
the next earth, and so you may proceed, gathering a good quantity of such
water, taking head nevertheless, that it be full of the substance of
Saltpeter: the which if it seem unto you, not of the same perfection, as you
would have it, you may power it again upon the very same yerth, or upon other
new, till such time as it satisfy you, and that you know, that it be full of
the substance of Saltpeter. Besides this, there must be made a furnes with one
or ij. cauldro^s of brass walled thereon, which must be as great as those that
the Diers use, and these cauldrons must then be filled, with the forsaied
Saltpeter water: the which (as alredie I have told) ought to be as full of
substance as may be, so that it have about the.ij. third parts, and make it
fair and softly to boil so much till it cum to one third part, or there
aboutes: and after take it of, and put it to settell in a great vessel,
covered, which must be well bound aboutel, with hoopes of iron, and sure
and close in the ioinyng thereof, to the intent it spill not: and thus when the
same water is settled and well clarefied, and from the yearthie and gross
matter, which in it remained, dilligently purged, it must be taken out and
boiled again of new in the same cauldron, or in sum other: and for as much as
every time that it boileth, if it be not taken head of, it turns into skum,
and somtymes swells so much, that often times runnyng over it spilleth, and
carries away therewith much of the good: the which mindynge to remeadie,
you must take three parts of Oak ashes, and one of lime, and moreover, in
every hundredth pound waighte of water, there must be dissolved four pound
of roche Alum: and when the cawldron boileth, take of the said water with a
pot, and power into it ones or twice, and specially when you see the saltpeter
water rise in skum, which in a little while you shall se it alaie, both clear
and fair, and of an azur color: and it must be boiled so long, till all the
thin watrines be vapored away, and the substance of the saltpeter thickened:
so that it being taken out, and put in chestes or tubbes and coled, may
congele: the which is best done, when the water is brought to least
quantity, taking it out and puttyng it into a less caudron, wherein it will
sooner congele: the which water being tasted, and seen to be brought to such
pass, to be ready to congele, you may take it out, and put it in vecelles of
wood, or of earth that are rough within, with certain sticks of wood, to
congele, and so you shall let it cool, and rest.iij. or iiij. days, so as it
may drop, and be strained through some little hole, in the botom of the
vessel: and all the water that is not then co^geled, you must take out and
save for to sees again: and the saltpeter that is in any quantity congeled,
you shall find to be, according to the virtue that was in the water, or in the
yerth: but ye clerenes and fairenes thereof, will cum of the master virtue of
the water, that is put into it in the boiling, which has strength to purgeit,
and make it cum, as it were refined in the first seething: now this being taken
from the sides of the vessel, where it co^geled, and in the water thereof
washed, you must lay it upon a tabell to dry thoroughly: and the same semyng
unto you to have need, or nevertheless mindyng to have it above the common use,
for some purpose, more purefied, and without yerthie grosnes, and altogether
without fatnes and saltnes, which for to make excedyng fine powder, or aqua
fortis, is must requised so to be: to be short, for what so ever cause it
ought to be refined, I council you, to do it after one of these.ij. ways,
which here following, I shall teach you: The first, which I like best, is
with water: and the second is with fire, with water it is refined in this
manner, taking of the forsaid mixture made of lime, ashes, and allome desolued:
and then for every harrill of water that you have put in the cauldron, for to
disolue the saltepeter, you must put into it six potfulls of the forsayde
strong water: and in the same quantetie of water so prepared, put so much
saltepeter as you think may well be disolued: and with boylinge make it to
resolve very well, and saying it in boylinge to have cast up skum, you shall
then take it out of the cauldron, and put it into a tubbe, in the bottom
whereof, you must first have put four fingers thicknes of fine sand clea^
washed, and that must be keuered with a linen clothe: and by a littel hole
made in the bottom of the tubbe, you shall suffer it to drop by littel and
littel into sum other vecel set under to receive it: and so this water thus
strayned, you must after put in the very same or in an other cauldron to
boil again, and to make the greater part of the same water, that you put
into it sees away: finally make it boil so much, until you see it reddie
to thicken, poweringe now and than, in making it, a littel of the forsayde
strong water, and spetially when it swells and casts up skum: and this
thing (being so handled) you must take out of the cawldron, and put it in
chestes or other vecells of wood, to congeale: which, being a great
quantetie, in three or four days, you shall find all that congealed, which
will co^geall: which, being taken out, you must order as you used before the
other: and the same water that is not congealed, must be boiled again: and so
you shall do from time to time as it gathers together and co^gealeth: and
after this sort you shall make the saltepeter most white and fair, and much
better then at the first seathinge.

Also saltepeter is refined in an other manner, which is with fire, but in a
littel quantetie mynding to do it well: and although it be a reddie way, yet
few use it: albeit it serves to get out the fatnes of saltepeter, for that
it sends into the botto^ very much yearthenes, not withstonding I like
better the forsayde way in purginge it with water, then this with fire: But to
do this, take a salet, or sum other iron or brazen vecell, and fill it with
saltepeter, and keuer it with a keuer of yro^, brass, or earth, so that it be
made bighe inoughe, mete to be taken of and put on when you list, that the
vesell may be well keuered: and then it must be set in the midst of a good
fire of coals, and so the saltepeter will melte: which is soune perceived of
the expert artifecer: but when you think that it is molte, look upon it: and
if it be not well molten, keuer it again and let it melt well: then it being
well molten, take brimstone most finely beaten in powlder, and straw sum
thereon: and if of it self it take not fire, do you kendel it: and being
kendeled let it burn till such time as the brimstome be all consumed, so that
nothing else be burnte, but the vper part, and certain gross vnctiousnes of
the saltepeter, the which when it is burned, will leave the rest fair and
clear: and then it must be taken from the fire letting it cool, where in
the vessel you shall find it (when it shall be could) all in one piece white
like unto a piece of marbell: and all the yearthienes thereof remaininge in the
bottom: which shall be good saltepeter to make powlder withal, but not very
commendable to enie other use: and about saltepeter the wit of men have so
much imagened, that means ar found to cause it to grow in the ground, and
in places, that never had enie before, by disoluinge saltepeter in water: for
with the same water weating the ground, and lettinge it stand so a certain
space of time, saltepeter will be inge^dred, so that the same that was put there,
will multeplie wonderfully: and it is a most certain thing, that in making
saltepeter, the yearthe that has been occupied, heaped up in a place that is
covered, so that the rain do not wash it, within the space of five or six
years, may again be labored, and saltepeter shall be found to be engendered,
and yield much more, then it did the first time: and this that I have
declared in this chapter, is as much as I can say of saltepeter.

The manner how to make all sorts of Gunpoulder. Chapter.xxiiii.
GVnne powder, is made of three simples only: that is, salt peter, Brimstone
and Coals: and some proporcioneth it after one fashion, and some after an
other, and also according to the Gunnes, and purposes, wherewith they will
occupy it. For that one sort is occupied for great ordinance, and an other
sort for less pieces: and this is known to every Bombardier: In Harkabuses,
and hand gunnes, is not occupied common powder, but about certain fire
works: and therefore to every of the said purposes, the ponders is
proporcioned accordynglie. For that if Serpentine powder, should be occupied in
hand gunnes, or Harkebuses, it would scant be able to drive their pellettes a
quaites cast, from their mouths: and if hand gunne powder should be used in
pieces of ordinance, without great discrecion, it would quickly break or mar
them: and to mind to have all sort of pouders good, three things is
requiset to be observed, in making thereof. The first is to see, that the
substance, wherewith it is made, have no yearthy grosenes. The second, that
it be finely beaten: the third, that it be very well dried, from all humiditie
or moistenesse, and this done, you shall have strong and excellent good powder.
And it is to be understand, that the chief thing that is in powder, is Salt
peter: for that of it (by the same that is seen) depends all the forse. And
therefore provision is to be made, to have a good quantity thereof, and that
it be clean and nete: the which by burning, may well be known, for that in
all sorts of powder, it is needful, that the Saltpeter be good.

Now, for to make common powder, for great pieces of artillery, there must be
taken three parts, of refined Saltpeter, two of Willowe coals, and one of
Brimstone, and grinding every thing: all must be well mingled together, and all
the moistness thereof dried up, as I have said. To make powder for small
pieces of artillery, there must be taken five parts, of refined Saltpeter,
and one and a half of Coals, and one of Brimstone, and grindyng it most
finely, and minglyng it well together, it must be corned, and then dried.
The manner of cornyng all sorts of powder, is with a Seeue made, with a thick
skin of Parchement, full of little round holes, into the which seue the
powder must be put, while it is danke, and also a little bowl, that when you
sifte, may roll up and down, upon the clottes of powder, to break them,
that it may corn, and run through the holes of the Seeue.

To make Harkebuse and hand Gunne powder, there must be taken ten parts of
refined Saltpeter, and one of young basell coals of a year old made clean, and
one part of brimstone, and beatinge all in a mortar or grindinge it excedingly
well that it may be mingled together and so fine as is possible, then it must
be corned and thoroughlie dried. And note that if it be not marvelusly well
beaten, it will never be good. But because making of poulder, which ar of
things that will easelie kindell, cannot be without perril of him that makes
it, except it be remedied with weating: therefore it behooves to take heed that
it be not beaten dry, as well to avoid such perrill, as also for that it
will be beaten better: for which causes it must be wet with comun water to a
certain degree of moistenes, so that taken up in ones hand it may clingh
together. Sum moist it with vinegar: and sum, for to make it more stronger,
with ca^phored aqua vitae. When I have caused gunpoulder to be made, I have
used comun water, and therefore I am able to say which of those things is
best: and to tell my opinion, I doubt whether vinegar or aqua vitae causes
the gunpoulder to be any better then the common water: for as much as they
vaporinge away, as they do, and as of necessetie they must, I believe that
littel of their substance remains. There be sum which in making cole
(besides wellowe) make them of hasell: and sum of vine sticks: and sum of baie
sticks: sum of reeds: sum of kecses: and to be short, all the coals that are
made of soft wood, ar of wood which have much pith: but it is requiset that
they be small, young, and tender, and without hardenes of knottes: otherwise
they be not good: Albeyt they be made in diverse manners: but in making of enie
great quantetie of poulder, the ordinary cole is to be taken: How to make
cole where with gu^poulder is made.
and making a littell, they use to take young hasell of a year old, cut in
short peses, and then puttinge them into a great yerthen pot, or other
vecell of iron, or brass, they shut it and keuer it close, and lute it or
daube it very well about, so that it cannot breathe: and then they make fire
round about it and upon it, till such time as it may be thought that the
heat is well entered in through all, and that the wood that is within is very
well fired: and without firebrandes, or flame, burned only through such heat:
and then they take the fire from the pot and let it cool, and so they find
the same wood becum cole. I happening onse to have need of coals (to thintente to
make sum quickly, took as many dry hasel sticks that had their ryndes
scraped of, as I thought sufficient to serve my purpose: and breaking them in
peses and laiynge them close together on a hepe, I set them on fire and burned
them all well, and then sprinckeled water upon them with a broume, and with the
same wet brume quenched the fire: and so scattered abrod the coals hear and
there, always sprinckelinge water upon them till I quenched them: and thus I
have served my purpose without so much difficulty.

Moreover it is a very proffitable thing, yea and a necessary, that I declare
the manner and faciletie of beating it, for to be able safely to make a great
quantetie thereof. In old time they were wont to grind gu^poulder with
certain handemilles, as they use to grind corn, but (besides the pain) it
is away very perrillus: for that such a composition grownde together with
stones, will catch heat in such wise, that it will sone inge^der fire,
inespetialy every thing being a matter disposed to fire: as also by rubbinge
together with violence a cople of baye sticks, you shall straighte way kendell
fire. Sum grind poulder in such mylles as they use to grind crabbes or apells
to make vargis or cider: and sum has it stamped in morters with a water mill
or a horsemill, which way is the best of all other, and most sureste and
also it is beaten finelier, and with less labor and pain. Sum (that has not
the comodetie of water) make a great wheel, devised after such sort, that
with the cogges thereof it may raise up many heavy pestells, which fallinge,
beat in diverse morters of wood made in a beam of oak, of the which there be
sum have the bottomes of brass.

Sum stamp with their arms, with a great pestel tied to the end of a pole
with a cord, right over, a mortar of wood or brass, and so they beat the
easelier: other some beat it in a stone mortar, with the mouth sumwhat large,
with a wooden pestell, with the handel thereof made like unto a hamner or a
mall. And these, and other, that may be made, is as much as about the devise
of beating and making gunpouder is needful.

They have used heretofore to waighe every matter by it self, and then they
have gone mingling and beating all together. There have been after, sum that
have devised to beat every thing severally by it self, and then mingelld
altogether and made it. But finally the best and most readieste way, is to
take a a quantetie of saltepeter, wherewith you will make your poulder, and put
it into a cauldron with so much water (as being set upon the fire) may be
thought sufficient to disolue it: which so sone as it is resolved, must be
taken of and set on the ground in a cold place: and the quantitee of beaten
coals that is sufficient, must be put into it, and so slurringe it about,
must be mingled well with the saltepeter desolued: and then taking your
brimstone finely beaten in powder, and with a staff stirring about the coals
and the saltepeter, you must straw it finely upon the same, as well as you
can, with continual sturringe and minglinge them together, which composition
thus made, you must then dry sumwhat in the sun: and then to have it
excellently well made, there needs no other to be done, but to beat it all
together, to the intent that it may incorporate most finely, which done,
you must dry it with most great diligence: and then sift it very well
through a seue, and moisting it again with water or vinegar, sturring it
sumwhat together in a seue, you may corn it as already has been declared:
and then again for to occupy it about your business you must dry it well:
and so being dried, put it into dry vecells of wood to keep: and set it in
the higheste places of your house, where few comes for diverse respects: and
though it were for no other, at least to keep it dry. They that are expert,
know good poulder in this manner, by the color: for that if it be very black,
it is a sign that it is made with very much coals: or that it is moiste: and
when you rub it upon a piece of paper it will black it more then it ought to
do: and drawing it with your finger, you may se whether it be finely beaten
or no: for it must be so much beaten that nothing, neither of saltepeter nor
of Brimstone be diserned in any wise: for with reason they ought not to be
seen: they take also for a trial, three or four corns of poulder, and lay
them upon a white Paper, distaunte three fingers, the one from the other, and
fire one of them: and if the poulder be good, you shall see them all to fire
at tones: so that there shall be no residence remaining, neither grosenes of
Brimstone, nor of saltepeter, nor of any other thing, and the paper not burnte.
And if it be not so fownde, they know that it is evil made, or not good, but
full of yearthenes of Saltepeter: or that it is moiste, so that it is naught
for shooting of ordinance, besides the perrill that it puts them in. And
undoubtedly naughty poulder, is a cost half cast away: and it is a great
fault in him that makes it, or that causes it to be made: for that in time
of need, it is of no effect, and causes much shame to the Gunners, which
occupy it: and therefore diligence ought to be used and, good head taken that
it be made according as I have taught. There are many which bring up lies,
saying: that they can tell how to make poulder that shoting it in gunnes shall
make no noise, the which is impossible, the fire and the air violently
incountering together, where besides that they are not able to do the same they
say, with a piece of ordinance, they are less able to do it with one of those
potgunnes of elder that boys use to shute paper and slowes in, by the noise of
which, may well be perceived, that all proceeds of breakinge of the air.
Also there be many that say, that they ca^ make white poulder, that shall not
black ons hands, by putting in a certain thing in the stead of coals: sum
other, read, with dried red flowers: and other blewe, with blewe flowers: sum
other say that to make the poulder of more force and strength, that it is
very good to put to every pound of brimstone an ounce of mercury, the
brimstone being first put in by a littel, and a littel. Morouer there are sum
other that say, that for to make the like, there ought to be put to every
pound of saltepeter, a quarter of an ounce of salt ammoniac: sum other therebe
also, which say that in the stead of coals, it is better to take linen clothe
and to burn it to tinder, and therewith to make poulder, which is more
excellenter then any other cole that is possible to be used, about such a
purpose. And allthough that in my judgment I have declared allredy the best
receites, that is for the making of all sorts of gunpoulder, yet to the
intent that it may be understand how much me^ have travailed and imagened
to bring the same to all perfection, I have thought good to show herefollowing
diverse more receiptes both good and bad, which for the making of poulder has been experiensed of sundry men.

The first invention and oldeste manner in making of sarpentine poulder, or
poulder for ordinance.
1 Saltepeter i. part. Brimstone i. part. Coals i. part.
The next practis of making poulder for ordinance.
2 Saltepeter iij. parts. Brimstone ij. parts. Coals ij. parts.
Poulder for ordinance of a newer making.
3 Saltepeter x. parts. Brimstone iij. parts. Coals iij. parts.
Poulder for ordinance not so old.
4 Saltepeter xij. parts. Brimstone iij. parts. Coals ij. parts.
Poulder for ordinance not very old.
5 Saltepeter ix. parts. Brimstone ij. parts. Coals iij. parts.
Poulder used of late days for handgunnes.
6 Saltepeter iiij. parts. Brimstone i. part. Coals i. part.
Poulder for ordinance used not so long agon.
7 Saltepeter xx. parts. Brimstone iij. parts. Coals x. parts.
Poulder for ordinance used of later days.
8 Saltepeter c. parts. Brimstone x. parts. Coals xxxvi. parts.
Gross poulder of a newer sort.
9 Saltepeter c. parts. Brimstone xx. parts. Coals xxxvij. parts.
Fine poulder of a making not very old.
10 Saltepeter ix. parts. Brimstone iij. parts. Coals vi. parts.
Gross poulder of a newer making.
11 Saltepeter ij. parts. Brimstone i. part. Coals i. part.
Harkabus poulder of a newer making.
12 Saltepeter iij. parts. Brimstone i. part. Coals of wilowe sticks i.
part.
Fine poulder of a newer making.
13 Saltepeter often refined. v. parts. Brimstone i. part. Coals of ionge
hasell sticks. i. part.
Gross poulder of a newer making.
14 Saltepeter refined iij. parts. Brimstone i. part. Wilow coals. ij.
parts.
Poulder of a newer making.
15 Saltepeter x. parts. Brimstone ij. parts. Wilowe coals. iij. parts.
Harkabus poulder used now adays.
16 Saltepeter very often refined x. parts. Brimstone i. part. Coals made of
hasell twigges with the bark pilled i. part.
Handgun poulder of a newer making.
17 Saltepeter refined xxvij. parts. Brimstone iij. parts. Coals of hasell
having their ryndes pilled of iiij. par.
Handegun poulder of a stronger and of a newer making.
18 Saltepeter refined vij. parts. Brimstone i. part. Coals of ionge hasell
i. part.
Finer and stronger handegun poulder.
19 Saltepeter diverse times refined viij. parts. Brimstone i. part. Coals of
young hasell twigghes having their ryndes pilled of i. part.
Gross poulder used now adays.
20 Saltepeter iiij. parts. Brimstone i. part. Wilow coals i. part.
Gross poulder used now adays.
21 Saltepeter xx. parts. Brimstone iiij. parts. Wilow coals v. parts.
Handegun poulder used now adays.
22 Saltepeter refined dry xlviij. parts. Brimstone cetrine vij. parts.
Hasell coals viij. parts.
Handegun poulder used now adays.
23 Saltepeter refined. xviij. parts. Brimstone ij. parts. Hasell coals iij.
parts.
The manner that is used of charging and shooting of ordinance. Cap. xxv.
FOr as much as if Gunners should chance to be slain or otherwise lacking,
to the intent that every soldier in time of need may know how to serve in
one of their stedes, I have thought good and necessary, to show and declare
the manner of charching and shooting of peses of ordinance. Wherefore it ought to
be understood, how much poulder is occupied atonse in charging of every peese,
which most commonly, is two third parts, of that which the shot or
bullet thereof wayeth: as for example if the boolet of a peese of ordinance
wayghe.xxj. pound, then there must be taken.xiiij. pound of poulder for the
just charge of the same peese. And then with a long staff that has at the
one end a bob as bygge as the boolet of the peese, and at the other end a
ladell made for the same purpose that will take so much poulder up at twyse or
thrice, as is aforsayd, the peese must be charged, after this sort. Take the
ladell full of poulder, and thrust it into the Gunne so far as it will go, and
then turn your hand with the ladell that the poulder may fall out and
remain there behind when you pull out your ladell: which done, you must with
the bob end thereof, thruste the poulder home fair and softely: and so with
the ladell taking up the rest of the poulder you must do likewise, and
thruste after at the last a wispe of hey or of sumthing else, to swepe all the
poulder together, and then the bullet which must be of a fit biggnes for
the pese: And also an other wispe to stay the bollet for roling out: and
putting sum poulder in the touchehole and about the touchhole, the Gunne is
then charged. Now to level it, a man must stand directly behind it, and
with a lever, turn it this way, or that way till such time as it be brought
to lie just, as a man will have it, so that loking straighte from the brieche
or hinder part of the peese as low as may be upon the upper part thereof, he
may see the mouth of the peese to lie even with the mark and as it were to
keuer it: which done, if the ground whereon it stands, be even, as it is
requiset to be, and that the one whele stand not higher then the other, gyuing
fire to it with a linte stock which is a match fastened to the end of a
staff of a yard or two yardes long, you shall se the shot to strike the
same thing that you shot at, if it be within enie reasonable distaunce. And for
more spedie shoting of ordinance, the just charge in poulder of every piece
may aforhande be prepared in a reddines, and put in bags of linne^ or in
great papers made for the same purpose, which in a sudden may be chopte into
the mouth of a pese with the boollet or shot thereof thruste after, as far
as they will gowe, and then thrusting a long wire into the tooche hole that may
perse through the bag or paper wherein the charge of poulder lies within the
piece, filling the same toochehoole with corn poulder so sone as it is leueled,
it may incontinente be shot of: which manner of charging is doe^ most
quickly and a great deall sooner then enie other way, and when haste requires,
very needful.

How to get out quickly the nails that should happen by treason, or
otherwise to be driven into the toucheholes of ordinance. Cap. xxvi.
IF it should fortune at some sudden assault, ye touch holes of the
artillery to be nailed up, after such sort as they cannot be discharged, of
shot of, the spediest way to vnnaile the^, is first to charge again all such
peses of artillery, with smaller bullettes the^ their ordinary: and when they
are so charged, to leuel them toward those places where need requires, even as
they should have been, if they had not ben nailed: and then there must be made
a train of poulder, along the bottom of the canes, from the mouths to the
bollettes of every pese of ordinance: and to the intent not to shoot them in
vain, you may tarry for occation, and occation serving to shoot them, you
may give fire at their mouths, where besides that they shall do their
ordinary effects, they shall all in the discharging, be vnayled, blowyng out
the same nails or pinnes of iron, wherewith their tocheholes were stopped: and
so doing, of such naling there shall happen no great harm. But if sum of them
for being beaten in harder then other, should chance at the first not to be
driven out, then the remedy is, to charge thom again, and to shoot them of,
after the said manner, putting on the toucheholes a littel oil made very hot,
heating also first the place that is nailed, with a burning cole, making
moreover with clay, upon the pese, a littell cup about the hole, that may
hold the hot oil that is poured upon it, after such sort, that through the
heat thereof, it may soke into the hole with the iron in it, whereby the same
iron shall then be made so slippery, that at the next discharging of the pese,
the fury of the fire most easily shall blou it out.

How much the artillery ought to be esteemed of the armies now adays, and
whether the same opinion of them which is had universally, be true. Cap.
xxvij.
COnsidering how many battles and deeds of arms, were made of the Romans at
sundry times, there is cum unto me in consideration, the universal opinion of
many men, which is, that if in those times there had been ordinance, the
Romans should not have been abell to have conquered, nor so easily have won the
cuntries, and made the people their tributaries, as they did, nor they should
not have in enie manner made so mighty conquestes. They say also, that by mean
of this instrument of fire, me^ cannot use, nor show their strenghth and
virtue, as they might in old time. And they add a third thing, that they
come with more difficulty to faighte a field then they came in those days, nor
there cannot be kept in them the orders of those times, so that at length the
war shall be brought to co^siste altogether in artillery. And mynding to
write, whether such opinion be true, and how much the artillery has
increased, or demineshed the strenghth of armies, and whether it takes away,
or gives occation to good Capitaynes to do valiantly, I will begin to speak
concerning their first opinion, that the aunchie^t Roman armies should not
have made the conquestes which they did, if the ordinance had been in those
days. To which answering I say, how that war is made either to defend, or
to offend. Where first it is to be examened, to whom these two manner of wars
causes most proffit, or most hurt. And albeit there is what to say of either
part, notwithstanding I believe, that without comparison, they do more harm
to him that defends, the^ to him that inuadeth. The reason is, that he that
defe^deth, is either in a town, or in a ca^pe within a tre^che. If he be within
a town, this town is either littel, as the most part of fortresses ar, or
it is great. In the first case, he that defends, is altogether lost: for
that the violence of the artillery is such, that there is no wall, how great
so ever it be, which in feu days it battereth not dou^. And if he that is
within, have not space enough to retire, both with diches, and with rampires,
he is over cum, because he is not abell to withsta^de the violence of the
enemy, who through the breach of the wall, will after enter: nor in this
case, the artillery which he should have, shall not help him: for that this
is a general rule, that where men in a throng, and with violence may go, the
artillery cannot withold the^. Therefore in the defense of a town, the fury
of the enemies cannot be withstonde. Though the assaltes the which are not
thronged, but scattered, which be called scirmushes be easily withstode. And
they which go with this disorder, and coldenes to a breach of a wall, where
artillery is, do go to a manifest death, and against them the artillery
prevails: but those, which assault a breach in a throng hard together, so
that the one thrusts forward the other if they be not holden out of dyches,
or of rampires, they enter in every place, and the artillery keeps them not
back, and though sum be slain, they cannot be so many, that they shall let
the victory. This is known to be true, by many expugnatio^s of tounes made in
Italy, and in espetiallie in the same of Brescia: for as much as the same
town being rebelled from the frencheme^, and yet the fortress being kept for
the King of France, the Venetians for to withstand the violence, which from
the same might cum into the town, had laid all the street full of Artillery,
which descended from the fortress to the City, and they planted them on the
front, and in the flanks, and in every other fit place. Of the which
Mounsier de Fois made no other cou^pte, but with his squadro^s, coming down on
foot passing through the midst of them, got the city: nor it was not known
that he received by those enie notabel hurt. So that he that defends him
self within a littel town (as has been said) and finds the wall on the
ground, and has not space to retire with rampires, and with diches, and is
constrained to trust upon the artillery, is ouercum straight way. If thou
defendest a great town, and where thou haste comodity to retire, yet not
withstanding without comparison, the artillery is more proffittabell to him
which is without, then to him that is within. First, to mind to have a piece
of Artillery hurt those without, thou art constrained to get the up with it
from the plain ground of the town: because standing upon the plain ground,
every littell bank and rampire that the enemy may make, shall cause him to
remain safe, and thou can not hurt him, so that being driven to stand
alofte on the top of the wall, or in what so ever other manner on high, thou
drawest after the two difficulties. The first is, that thou canste not bring
up so great and mighty peses of artillery, as he without may shoot, being
not able in littel spaces to handell great things. The other is, that although
thou could bring the^, thou can not make such strong and sure defense for
to save the said artillery from dismounting, as they without may do, being on
the ground, and having that comoditie and that rome, that they them selves
list. So that it is impossible for him that defends a town, to keep the
artillery on high places, when they which are without have great ordinance
enough. And if they be driven to come with them on low places, they becum for
the most part vnprofittable, as has been said. So that the defense of the
city, is brought to be defended with arms, as in old time they did, and with
small artillery. Of which if there be gotten a littel proffitte (having
respect to the same small artillery) there is gotten so much incomoditie, as
counterpeaseth the comoditie of the artillery: for as much as having respect
to the same, they make the walls of tounes low, and as it were under ground in
diches, so that so sone as they cum to the battle at hand, either because
the walls ar battered, or because the dyches ar filled up, he that is within,
has much more dissadua^tage, then he should have had in times pass. And
therefore (as before is said) those instruments helps much more him that
besigeth a town, then he that is besiged. Concerning the third thing, to lie
in camp within a trenche, to the inte^te not to faighte the field but at thy
commodity, or advantage, I say, that in this part thou have no more remedy
ordinarily to defend thee from faighting, then they had in old time. And
sumtimes, considering the artillery, thou haste greater disaduauntage: for
that if the enemy meet with thee, and have a littell advantage of the
country, as may easily chance, and find him self higher the^ thou, or that
in his coming thou have not yet made thie banks or rampires, and keuered thee
well with those, strayghte way, and before thou haste enie remedy, he
vnlodgeth thee, and thou art constrained to issue out of thy fortress, and
come to faighte: the which happened to the Spaniardes in the battle of
Raue^na, who being fortefied between the river of Ronco, and a bank, because
they lay not so high as sufficed, and for that the Frenchmen had a littell the
advantage of the ground, they were constrained of the artillery to issue out
of their fortress, and cum to faight. But admit that ye place, which thou have
taken with the camp, were much higher, then the other against it (as for the
most part it ought to be) and that the banks or rampires were good and sure,
so that by meanse of the situation, and thy other preparations, the enemy
durst not assault thee, it shall cum in this case to those manners, which in
old time it came, when one was with his army in place not possible to be hurt:
the which are to ouerun the country, to take, or besege the tounes that are thy
friends, to stop thee thy vitualls, so that thou shalt be constrained of
sum necessetie to vnlodge, and cum to fayghte the field, where the artillery
(as herafter shall be said) does not much hurt. Considering then what kind
of wars the Romans made, and seeing how they made almost all their war to
invade other men, and not for to defended them selves, it shall be seen (when the
things said before be true) how they should have had more aduau^tage, and much
souner should have made their conquestes, if ordinance had been in those days.
Concerning the second thing, that men cannot show their strenght, as they
might in old time, because of the artillery, I say, that it is true, that
where men scattered do show it, they stand in more perrill, then in those
days, when they had to scale a town, or to make like assaltes, where men not
thronged together, but severally the one from the other did apeare. It is also
true that the Capitaines, and heddes of armies, stand more subject to the
perrill of death, the^ in those times, because they may be reached with
artillery in all places, nor it helps not them to be in the rerewardes,
guarded with most strong men. Notwithstanding it is seen, that the one and the
other of these two perrills, do seldom times extraordinary hurtes, for that
the tounes well appoincted and furneshed with munition are not scaled, nor they
gow not with weak assaltes to assalte them: but mynding to win them, the
matter is brought to a sege, as in old time they did. And in those, which
nevertheless ar won by assalte, the perrills are not much greater then they
were in those days: for that also in those times, they which defended a town,
lacked not things to throw and shute, the which (though they were not so
furius) they did concerning the killing of men the like effect. Concerning the
death of Capitaines and conducters, there has been in.xxiiij. years that the
war was of late days in Italy, less examples, then there was in x. years
with the antiquetie: for that except Count Lodouike of Mirandola, who died at
Ferare, when the Venetians, a few years agon, assalted the same state, and the
Duke of Nemors, which died a Cirignuola, there has not happened of the
artillery enie to be slain: for as much as Mounsier de Fois at Rauenna, died
of yro^, and not of fire. So that if men show not particularly their
strenghthes, it grows not of the artillery, but of the naughthie orders, and
of the weakness of the armies, the which altogether lacking strenghth, cannot
show it in part. Concerning the third thing said of them, that men cannot
cum to hand strokes, and that the war shall be brought to stand altogether
upon artillery, I say, that this opinion is altogether false: and so
always shall be taken of those, who according to the aunciente virtue will
occupy their armies: for that he that will make a good army, it behooves him
with exersises, either fained, or true, to accustom his men to give the charge
on the enemy, and to cum to the swerdes poincte with him, and to the graspine
by the bosom: and he ought to ground him self more upon the footmen, then
upon the horsemen. And when he shall ground him self upon the footmen, and
upon the forsayde manners, the artillery becummeth altogether vnproffittable.
For that with more facelety, the footmen in aproching nere the enemy, may
avoid ye shot of the artillery, then they were abell in old time to avoid
the violence of Elifantes, of carts full of hooks, and of other strange
incou^ters, which the Roman footmen incountered withal, against which,
always they found the remedy, and so much more easelie they should have
found against this, the shorter that the time is, in the which ye artillery
may hurt thee, then the same was, in the which the elifantes and the carts
were abell to hurt: for as much as they in the midst of the faighte
disordered men, these only before the fayghte do troble men: the which
impedimente the footmen easily avoid, either with gowing keuered by the
nature of the situation, or with falling down upon the ground, when they
shoot: the which also by experience has been seen not to be needful, in
espetially to be defended from great ordinance, the which cannot in such
wise be leuelled, because if they gowe high, they touch thee not, and if
they gow low, they will not cum nere thee. Then the armies being come to
handestrokes, this is more clear, then the light, that neither the great, nor
the littell can after hurt thee: for that if the same, which has the
artillery, be before, it becumeth thy prisoner, if it behind, it hurts the
friend before thee. Again on the back it cannot hurt thee after such
sort, that thou art not abell to gow to win it, and it cumeth to follow
the said effect. Nor this need not much disputation: for that there has been seen the example of the Suizers, who at nauara in the year of our lord
1513. without artillery, and without horse, went to encounter the French
army furnesshed with artillery within their fortress, and they overthrew
them without having enie impedimente thereby: and the reason is (besides the
things told before) that the artillery mynding to have it work has need to
be guarded either of a wall, or of dyches, or of banks. And when it lacks on
of these gardes, it is taken, or becumeth vnprofitabell, as it happens when it
is defended with men, for where they chau^se to be in a battle, and in the
faighte on the land, they cannot be occupied by flank, but in the same
manner, that the antiquetie occupied the instruments to shoot, which they
placed out of the squadrons, for that they should faight out of the orders,
and always when either of horsemen, or of other they were charged upon, their
refuge was behind the legions: he that otherwise makes account of them,
has no skill, and trusts upon a thing, which easily may deceive him. And
though the Turk by meanse of artillery, against the Sophi and the Sultan,
has had victory, it has not happened through other mea^se, the^ through the
fear that the horsemen were put in by the strange rumor thereof. Therefore to
make an end of this discoorse, I conclude, that the artillery is proffittable
in an army, when the aunciente virtue is mingled therewith, but without the
same, against a puisante army, it is most vnproffittabell.

Of Muynes and placing of poulder under ground, vvherevvith inuinsible
fortresses, by fire may be ruignated, when ordinance cannot be brought
unto them. Cap. xxviij.
THe better and greater quantety of poulder which is put in a Cave that is
made to overthrow a forte or Castle, the greater undoubtedly shall be the
effect thereof: which cave is best to be made a good way within the ground,
and in a hard place, to the intent that when the same is shut and well
walled up, the fire be not able easily to have enie other way out, then in
overthrowing the thing that is to be ruyned. for as much as if the air, and
the fire in the rume of that enclosed place, may have meanse to breathe out,
the forse thereof will be of no effect. Also it would be taken head of, that the
cave be not by no other means marde, so that the fire may break out: for
which cause, it ought to be made, with the beginning thereof sumwhat dista^te
from the place, that you mind to overthrow: to the intent that in making
thereof, the men of the same place do not issue out to let you, nor perceive
the certain place of the hurt, to be able to provide for it, and to make
countermuynes to let the fire brethe out and pas without enie effect,
whereby all yowr cost and labor, may becum vain. Moreover they make these
muynes, the most naroweste and most crookedest that may be, and in
espetially nere the very place that is appoincted to be overthrown, and
therefore under such a place there must be dug a hole that may be at
least three yardes high or more, and two yardes brodde, and that the entry
unto it be vndergrounde in the manner, as by this present figure you may se
described.

THE FOUNDATION OF THE MVINE DISCOVERED

THE PLACE OF GREATEST EFFECT.



And in this to put barrelles with their heddes knocked out full of good
strong poulder, between which you must also straw poulder enough upon the
bordes whereon they stand, laiynge to it a good great match made of cotton,
boiled in vinegre, brimstone, and saltpeter, which must be well roled in good
serpe^tine poulder well dried in the son: and having laid it to the place,
you must make a train of poulder upon it, even to the gowinge out, so that it
may be keuered therewith: placinge it in pypes of yearthe or tronkes of wood
in the place of the entry thereof: and that don, you must wall it up most
strongly, laiynge ouerthwarte great blocks of oaks or other wood: so that
with those and with the wall, it may be strong to resist the furye of the
fire, as much as is possible: and the entry in such manner made up and
fortefied, when you shall think it time to bring the effect to pas, to
destroy the adversaries, or to make a ruyn, you may cause the train to be
set on fire, where you shall see a maruelus and horrible effect follow. More
about this matter I need not to declare sauinge that if it should chance the
muyne to be made in a stony place, where the stones will fall down, that then
the best is to underprop them with pipes of wood filled full of poulder.

The manner hou to make tro^bes or trunkes of fire, as well to assault as to
defend a breach, or gate, and to set a fire a town or Camp or enie
thing else. Cap. xixx.
First cause a cane of good wood to be made at the torners as big as a ma^s
thighe and the length of an ell, after such sort that the hole thereof be as
wide that a man may thruste in his naked arm, and cause that the bottom of
the said truncke be made in such wise with a littell hole, that the staff of
a partesan may enter into it and so to be made fast thereunto, byndinge the
said trunk with yro^ wyre at both ends, and in the midst for more suerty
that it break not, through the fury of the fire. The^ fill it with this
mixture here following. Take serpe^tin poulder.iiij. pound, rosen.j. pound,
ca^phere hause a pound, beaten glass.iiij. ounses, and mingell every thing
together, then begin to fill and put in the trumbe a handful of serpentine
poulder vnmixte, next a handefull of the forsayde mixture, after a littell
poulder, then a stoppell of cotton wet in oil of gineper, and put in upon the
said cotton as you have don at the first, that is to say poulder, and then
mixture etc. And thus you must do till you have filled it full, stampinge in
the stuff always lightely, and if for lack of gineper oil you wette the
cotton in aqua vitae, it is very good puttinge after every quantety of poulder
a littel quickesiluer, then when it is full, put in the mouth sum good
poulder, making it a singell keuer of parchemente bound about with
packthred, and with a littell hole in the middeste of the parchemente, wherein
you must put a match made with gunpoulder, the which easily and quickly with
your common match may kendell the fire, being cum to the face of the enemy:
which is an excellent thing for the faighte on the sea, or for to dissorder
a a band of horsemen.



How to make bottells or pottes of fire work to throvve into ships or
emonge men that are in battaylraye. Cap. xxx.
SVche yearthe^ bottells or pottes as is commonly used to keep vinegar or oil
and such like, is best for this purpos, which must be filled with this
composition: serpentine poulder ij. parts, rosen one part, pytche one part,
beating most fynele, al these things together in a mortar, then take
turpentine, and a littell gineper oil, or linsede oil, and mingell them
therewith in a caudron upon the fire with a a stick of a yard long, and fill
the bottells haulfe full of this forsayde receipte, that done, take serpentine
poulder one part, rosen one part, brimstone haulfe a part, pytche haulfe a
part, and of this last mixtur the bottells or pottes must be filled up: then
in the mouths of them there must be put sum good poulder, to the intent that
with the match it may quickly kendell the fire: which bottells or pottes
serve well to throw into a town or out of a town among enemies, for that
the fire of them breakinge out, flies all abroad and burns most horribly
where it lights, but good head must be taken that it be first well kendeled
before it be thrown, in espetially if it be cast from above.

An other composition of fire work. Cap. xxix.
CAuse as many yerthen bottells or pottes to be made as you list to have,
which must be as it were but haulfe baked, then fill them with this mixture
followinge, serpentine poulder three parts, saltepeter one part, turpentine
haulfe a part, pytche haufe a part, brimstone one part, baye salt haulfe a
part, and when you will throw them set them on fire and se that they be well
kendled.

Balls of mettel to throvve among men in battelraye or otherwise, which
breakinge shall do vvonderfull hurt. Cap. xxxii.
TO dissorder and to make the enemies to give place, there may also be
provided, certain hollow balls of mettel as big as small boules, and a
quarter of an ynche thick, cast in mouldes and made of three parts of brass
and one of tin: but the brass ought to be molte before the tynne be put to
it, which balls filled half full of fine coren poulder, and the other half
full, of serpentyne poulder, myngled with rosen beaten into poulder, so that for
three parts of serpentine poulder there be one part of rosen: and then
putinge in the mouths of the holes of them a littel fine core^ poulder to make
the rest to fire the suner, and after being fyred and thrown, they will
break and fly into a thousand pieces, and both hurt and kill whom so ever
is nere or about them. Wherefore they are very good to throw over the walls
into a town or fortress, or into a camp, to hurt and to give a terror to
those that are within: but these balls after they are fyred and well kyndled, and
having blown a littell, must be quickle thrown, least they hurt such as
would hurl them: and therefore the experience of one, ought first to be made
in a close place, to se how long it will tarry before it break, and the holes
that it will make in diverse places, whereby the other may the better be known
how to be used.

(...) The manner how to prepare pottes and bales of fyrevvorke to throvve
with hand. Cap. xxxiii.
IN the world there has been always men of such prengna^te wits, that have
eccelled in sundry and infinite inventions, as well for the sauegarde of
human bodies as also for the destruction of the like. By whose help there
have been Capitaines, which imitatinge their councelles, have caused their
footmen to carry in their hands, certain yearthen pottes and balls, filled
full of a certain composition of poulder, or sum vnctius liquor, apt to take
fire quicly: with the which incounteringe the enemies in battle at hand,
have vigorusly whorled those among them, for to prove, whether with such
meanse they might be able not only to dissorder them, but also to make them
give place, and to overthrow them: for as much as such fyreworkes will
maruelusly hurt the enemies not only with the smoke of them, but also a great
deall and much more with the horrible and vnque^chable burninge of them, so
that thereby such men have always had most happy succes, with most
glorious laud and praise. These fyreworkes ar made in this wise: Take as many
yearthen pottes or bottelles as you list, caused to be made for this purpose,
either baked or vnbaked which makes no matter, so that the moistenes of the
yearthe be dried up: and these must be filled half full of serpentyne poulder,
and sumwhat more: and the same poulder must be mingled with pytche and
brimstone beaten to poulder to the qua^tety of the third part thereof: then
there must be put upon it a finger thiknes of hogs grease, to the intent
that it may make the fire to dure the lengher and it being in this manner
ordered, there must be made a hole into it and a peese of gunpouldred match
put therein, with a littell good poulder, and fyringe it, and holdinge it so
long till it be well ke^dled, you shall then throw it. Also there is made a
liquide composition in a cauldron, wherein is put hogs grease, oil of
stones, brimstone, saltpeter twice refined, aqua vite, pytche, turpentyne and
sum serpentyne poulder: and the pitche, the brimstone and the saltepeter being
liquide, puttinge thereto the grease, the turpentyne, the oil, and the poulder
over the fire, all must be sturred and mingled together very well in an
yearthen pot, or sum other thing prepared for the same purpose with a
stick, to the intent that it may the better incorporate: and the^ it must
be keuered about with good poulder, that it may fire the easelier when you
will have it. And that don, you may ocupie it when you will, and whorle it
either with a slinghe, or with a cord tied unto it, or otherwise with the
hand as you shall think best: also of this composition their may be filled
certain littell purses of linen clothe, which being bound about with a
cord will be fationed like a ball: and these may be whorled or shot out of
trunkes of fire, or otherwise as shall please him that makes them. Also with
this composition may be anointed what so ever a man would have quickly
burnte, as Gates of tounes, bridges of wood, carts, monitions, and such like,
for that it is a matter that will sone kendell and set a fire enie thing, and
also able to maintain it: moreover littell balls thereof may be tied to the
heddes of darts to throw among the enemies, or where one would have enie
thing fyred.



How to make balls of vvilde fire, to ^hoote in ordinance or to throvve
with hands. Cap. xxxiiii.
TAke serpentin poulder five parts, saltepeter refined iij. parts, brimstone
two parts, Rasapina one part, Camphere haulfe a part, turpentine haulfe a
part, haulfe a part of glass grosely beaten, baye salt haulfe a part haulfe
a part of oil of stones, and oil of linte sed, as much of the one as of the
other, Aqua vite haulf a part, and all these things being mingled together
very well, take the^ a pese of canuas as big as you will make the balle, and
make it like unto a purse, and fill it with the said mixture, and then make
two or three holes therein with a round iron sumwhat bigger then a bodkin, and
put in every hole a littell stick.

And it is to be understood that this forsayde mixture may be also made
upon the fire in a cauldron and the balls that are made thereof must be rouled
in serpentine poulder, and then in the mixture, often times keueringe them with
toe, well plaistered on, of a good thicknes, then when they shall be a littell
dried, take the said sticks out of the holes, and fill them haulfe full of
serpentine poulder, and the other haulfe with coren poulder, and gyuinge fire
to the said balls, and throwinge them emonge the enemies, they will do
maruelus and wonderful hurt. For that the said balls will burn within the
water, so that fallinge upon the armur of sowdiers, water cannot quench them
nor any thing else, except abounda^ce of mire or durte. And addinge to the
said mixture that is vnsod haulf a part of beaten glass and haulfe a part of
baye salt, you may fill a trumbe therewith after the manner as I have taught a
littel before.

To trim Targettes with fyrevvorke to assault, or to defend a breach. Cap.
xxxv.
GEt pypes of bras as many as you list, and nail them upon a target, either
six.viij. or ten, and fill the said pypes full of the forsayde mixture vnsod,
and order the pypes after such sort that they fire not altogether, but one
after an other, so that when one is almost burned out, the same may give fire
to an other by a littell pype as small as ons finger, that must gowe from the
bottom thereof to the mouth of an other, and so successively to all, which
shall continue a long time, but the said target must be keuered with black
buckeram that the fyreworke be not perceived and the gyuing of fire the one to
the other.

To make an other kind of fyrevvorke. Cap. xxxvi.
TAke willowe roles, saltpeter, aqua vite, brimstone, pitche, resapina,
Camphere, oil of stones, vernice liquide, turpentine, as much of ye one as of
the other, mingling every thing together, and then take a littell purse of
cannas, and fill it full of serpe^tine poulder, and keuer the purse all over
with the forsayde mixture of a good thicknes, and with as much toe as you
shall think good, and the^ make a hole that may gowe to the middeste of the
halle, which must be filled full of poulder, so that thereby all the
composition thereof with a match may be set on fire when you list.

How to make a mixture in stone that shall kendell fire with water or
spittell. Cap. xxxvii.
THis stone is very necessary for a Captain to give fire to his gunners, when
through foul wether, all their matches should happen to gowe out, and where
they cannot kindell them again because of the rain. First take unslaked lyme
one part, Tutia alessandrina unprepared one part, saltpeter very well refined
one part, quick brimstone two parts, Camphere two parts, calamite stone
one part: Al these things must be well beaten and sifted, and bound hard
together with a pese of new linen clothe, and put into a copell of year the^
cups, such as goldesmithes use to melte in, the mouths of which must be
joined together and fast bound with iron wyre, and daubed over with lutum
sapientia, that it breathe not out, and then dried a littel, till it becum
yelowe, that don, put it into a fornes where they burn brick or yearthen
vesells, and let it tarry therein as long as the brick or yearthe^ vessels
be a bakinge, and then taking it out, you shall se it made like unto a
brickstone.

To make an other kind of stone to kendell fire with water or spittell. Cap.
xxxviii.
TAke Camphere three parts, saltepeter well refined two parts, vnflaked lyme
two parts, brimstone two parts, all these things (being well beaten
together, and put into a copell of goldesmithes meltinge cups well stopped
with lutum sapientia) must then be baked in a fornes, and when the yearthen
vessels be taken out, this shall also be made.

How to make lutum sapientia. Cap. xxxix.
TAke of the best white potters earth that you ca^ get, for in one place there
is better than in an other, that is to say, of that which can best endure the
fire, as such as they make pottes of in Padua, and likewise in Germany: for it
is of such perfection, that the pottes which be made of it, and wherein they
dress their meat, may also serve to found metalles in. Take then of the
best, and specially if it must serve for a thing that has need to be long
upon a great fire, otherwise, take such as you can get. There is found of
it, that is of a graye color, as the common sort is, and also there is white,
that men use in some place of Vicence, which is like loaves of Gispum, or
plaster, and is called of the Italians Florette de Chio. We here in England
upon the use thereof, may give it what name we will. Potters use of it in
Venise, for to whit the dishes, and other things, before they vernish or
pollish them. There is also found of it that is read, as in Apulia, where
there is great qua^tety, and that they call Boale, and is the very same that
some Apoticaries do sell for Boale Armenick, and the Venetia^s use of it, for
to paint read the forefro^tes of their houses with lime, brick, and
Vermillion, covering it afterward with Oil of line. This red earth is the
fattest, and the clammiest of all the rest, and therefore it cleaves soonest
by the fire, if it be not tempered with some other substance. And because that
all the said earthes be to fat, the one mor than the other, therefore men
put to them some lean substance. Now, if you take of that of ash color,
which is most comme^, and the lest fatty, you may compose and make it in this
manner. Take of the said earth four parts, of clothmakers floxe or shearing,
one part, ashes that have served in a buck, or other, half a part, dry horse
donge, or the dong of an Ass, one part. If you will make it parfiter, put to
it a few stamped brickes, and sparks of iron: let al these things be well
stamped, and sifted, that is to say: the earth the ashes, the horse donge, the
brickes, and the sparks of iron: than mingle al together, and make it into
earth, and make a bed thereof, upon the which you shall cast by little and
little, the floxe, as equally as you can. This doe^, power to it water,
styrring it well first with a stick, and than with a pallet broad at the
end. And wha^ all is well incorporated together as you would have it, lay it
upon some great board, and beat it well, and that a good space with some great
staff or other instrument of iron, mingling and stearing it well, for the
longer you beat it, the better it is. By this mean you shall have a very
good claye for to lute or clay, and join violles, flagons of glass to still
with, and bottells of gourdes for stilling, and other great things, as
furnesses and such like. But he that will make it with mor ease, let him put
the earth only, the flox, and the horse dong, with a few ashes. Some put no
horse donge to it, and some no floxe, according to the purpose that they make
it for. For to stop and close up the mouths of skilling glasses, or violles,
to thinte^t they take no vent on the fire, the said clay will be very good:
nevertheless men put to it two parts of quick lime, and the whites of Eggs,
and then it will be surer to let nothing vent out but the glass it self. Al
kind of clay or earth would be kept moist, and ready dressed for him that will
occupy it continually, but it must not be kept to watery, nor yet left to
dry, for than it would serve for nothing, saying that after it is once
hardened, a man can not dress it any more to do any good withal. And when you
put water to it, it is mollified by little and little above, and is as it were
a sauce, but within remains hard, and if you put to much water to it, you
mar it utterly. Therefore, when you see that it begins to wax dry, feed
it a new little and little with water, styrring it till it be well, and so
shall you make it perfect.

How to make certain fyrevvorke to tie at the poinctes of pykes or
horsemenstaues. Cap. xl.
FOr to assault or to defend a breach, and also to work sum pollecy in the
night against the enemies, it is somtymes good to tie at the poinctes of
pykes or lances, certain canes like unto squibbes made of paper upon a foorme
of wood as long as the breddeth of a sheet of paper, filled full of serpentyne
poulder, amongeste the which must be mingled littell pieces or cru^mes of
pitche, of brimston, grains of baye salt, fylinges of iron, and beaten glass,
arsinic, cristall beaten to peses, and such like, and after they are closed up,
and tied fast at one of the ends, this composition must be well beaten into
them, with there own forms or mouldes: unto every one of which there must be
put a good match sod in saltepeter and gunpoulder, and then well dried, and
fasteninge them to staves, after such sort that the ysue of the fire be
turned toward the adversaries, when you think good, you or sum other may
fire them: where you shall then see the fire blow out two yardes long, which
in the night will seem terrible: but in a calm wether, or at least when the
wind is in the faces of the enemies they are best to be used. And moreover for
the faighte on the sea, they are most excellent.



How to make diverse compositions of fyrevvorkes. Cap. xli.
EVery thing that will quickly burn, and that by sum proper virtue is apt to
multeplie fire, and maintain it, may be put in fyrie compositions: for that
in effect of such things they are made: of which things there are sum that
are mynerall, as brimstone, and the oil thereof, and saltepeter, and sum other
substances, hot, dry, and thin, and sum vnctius, as grease, and all sorts of
oils: sum very dry, as pytch or wood: and of these there be sum natural,
and sum artefitiall: But now leauinge to seek such difference of their
compositions, among as many things as well old as new that I know, I have
found only these: out of which I have chosen sum of the notablest, spetiallie
these, that for to make them, there must be taken Rosen, Alchitrean, quick
brimstone, tartar, sarcocolla, saltepeter, and oil of stones, and of every one
sum part, but doble so much of unslaked lime: and all must be compounded with
the oil of eggs: and put into a vessel of glass or of earth that is leaded,
and keuered very well: putting it after under hot dunge for a month: then
taking it from thense and setting it over a soft fire, the vecell being well
stopped, it must be melted: which don, the lycor thereof may be put into
hollow staves, or in yearthen bottelles, or other vecelles made of purpose:
unto every one of which, must be put a peese of a gunpouldered match, in
the midst with sum gunpoulder also, to the intent that they may the easelier
fire.

Also there may be made an other sort of fyreworke after this manner: taking
brimstone, or oil of brimstone if it may be had, oil of stones, or of the
same stony oil of juniper, saltepeter very well refined: and for every
portion of such things five of aspallto: and moreover goose grease, pure
pitch, vernis, poulder of pigeons dunge, and so much aqua vite, that may
thoroughly moist all the forsayde things: which then must be put into a
vessel of glass, and the mowthe thereof well stopped with wex, and then put
under a hot dunghyl xxv. or xxx. days: and after to make it the better
incorporate, it would be set over a soft fire: and that don, this composition
may be put into hollow staves, or yearthen pottes or like vessels to be
thrown with the hand: also there may be taken a bullet of stone with a ringe
fastened therein, whereunto would be tied a cord of a yard long: and about
ye same stone putting Toe imbrewed with the foresaid composition, or else pieces
of lynen clothe all to rayed therewith, which fyringe, when it is well
kendled, may then be throwe^. Also balls of this composition may be shot
in pieces of ordinance, or a stone that has a ringe of iron fastened in it,
to the which ring may be tied a piece of a rope steped and sod in the forsayde
composition, or else a littell bag full thereof, which may be shot or
thrown as one list. Moreover balls of this, being made with lynen cloth as
before is showed, may be cast with all sorts of slinges which way one will.

Also there is made an other compositio^ in this manner, with vernice liquide,
oil of quick brimstone, and oil of the yelkes of eggs, turpentine oil,
juniper oil, linsede oil, and olium saxum or oil of stones, and haulfe as
much of aqua vite as all the said compositions: and also as much poulder of
bays fynelie beaten as will suffice to thicken all, with as much more
saltpeter: and all these things must be put together in a vessel of glass,
or sum vessel of earth leaded with a littell mouth, which with wex must be
so stopped that it vente not: and this must be kept after three months in
hot dung, to putrefie, remouinge it every month four of five times, and
shaking it together every time: and this matter being brought in such wise,
when you will ocupie it, it is requisite that you anoinct the same thing that
you will use, or to put thereof into that vessel, where you will have the fire
to work: for that the same fire is such, that putting thereto sum gunpoulder,
or a gunpouldred match, it will strayghte way kendell: and it is so
vnquenchiable, that it burns till he, or the thing that it lights on, be
altogether consumed: and if this composition fyred chance to be thrown and
light upon armur, it will make it so glowing read in such sort, that he that
has it on his back, shall be constrained to put it of, if he will not be burnt
to death.

Also there is made an other sort: and it is a most thin liquor apt to fire,
with the which if in the canicular days a pese of wood, or other thing apt to
burn be anoincted, the heat of the sun is then able to set it on fire, and
to burn it: and so sone as it is touched with fire, it kendeleth incontinente,
and is unquenchable: except it be choked up with sand, or wet with very stale
vrin, or most strong vinegar: also it will burn in the water: ye making,
whereof is in this wise: there must be taken Camphire, oil of quick
brimstone, oil of turpentine, oil of dunge, oil of iuneper, oil of stones,
oil of lyntesede, alchitrean, colofonia, most fynelie beaten, oil of eggs,
pytch, goose grease, saltepeter, and as much aqua vite as all the rest of the
composition, and as much arsinic, tartar, and armoniack salt, as the eyghte
part of altogether. Which thing must be put into a glass or pot well
stopped, and the^ set to putrefie in a hot du^hgill for the space of two
months: and after all the foresaid things must be destilled with a gentle
fire: where within eyghte hours, there will cum of those things a most
suttill lyquor, into the which puttinge then so much oxedunge dried in an oven
and most fynelie beaten to poulder, as may make it so thick as soap or
sumwhat thinner: and after mynding to ocupie it, the thing that is to be
burnte, must be annoincted therewith: and this also the Son will set on fire,
and burn what so ever is nere it.

Also there is an other composition of fire, that any thing that is anoincted
therewith, will maruelusly burn and fire with wetinge of rain, or otherwise:
which to make, there must be taken new whitelyme made of flinte, calamite made
to poulder by fire, vitrioll gross beaten the two and thirteth part,
saltepeter refined eyghte parts: and as much camphere as all the forsayde
things: oil of quick brimstone: oil of turpentine, salt armoniacke, by
waighte as much as the vitrioll, and as much tartar and baye salt: salt of
vrin, aqua vite made of strong wine as much as all the rest of the
composition: the which things compounded together, must be put like as the
other were, into a great glass well stopped that it breathe not out: and then
it must be set in a hot dounghill for two or three months, remouinge the
glass and chaunginge the dounge at least every ten days, to thintente that
the same matter may ripen well, and be like unto a liquor all of one thing:
the which after ought to be boiled so much upon a soft fire, that all the
oily humidetie, and other moystenes that is in it, may vapor away, and the
rest to becum dry and stony: and when it is dry and stony, breaking the
glass and taking it out, it must be ground to poulder: the which when it
is to be ocupied, must be strawed upon the place that is dressed for the same
purpose, so that it being rayned upon, or enimaner of ways wet, will kendell
and fall on a fire.

How to make a girdell for Soldiers or Fisshers vvherby they may go in the
water and pass over a river without either bridge or bote. Cap. xlii.
THis Girdel ought to be made according to the fation of the figure next
following, and of such lether that must be dressed in like sort, as the same
is where with footebals ar made: whereunto a pype must be fastened like unto a
baggepype, so that the girdell, when it is girte about a Soudier upon his
armur, may be blown full of wind: by help whereof, he may then safely pass
over a river, goinge through the same, how deep so ever it be, where he shall
not sink in the water, forther then from the girdell stead dounewarde: which
for men of war, is very commodius and a most necessary thing.



How to write, and cause the same that is written to be red a far of
without sendinge enie message. Cap. xliii.
WHen a Capitayn were so be seged of enemies in a town or fortress that no
man could cum unto him, or be sent from him with letters, whereby his mind,
or the distress and inconvenience that he is in, might of his friends be
understand. Yet his mind being written, may of them notwithstonding in the
night be red, as far of as a light can then be seen, and by day, as far
as a burninge glass can cast the sun, or a hat or any other such like mark
may perfectly be decerned, so that the order therein be first known and
agreed upon between both parties. The manner in doing it in the night, is
thus: he that gives the advise, must hold his letter in the one hand wherein
his mind is reddie written, and one light or.ij. lights in the other hand,
and the other that should reed and copy the same, ought to have paper, and pen
and ynke with this a b c, etc. herefollowinge, and understand: a b c d e f g h
i k l m n o p q r s t v vv this part of letters with.i. light, and this part
with two lights. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
10 11 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

And for the plainer understanding hereof, it is to be noted that the first
part of the letters ar showed with one light, and the second part beginning
at, M, are signified with ij. lights, and every letter of the a b c must be
understand and known by the number or often shewinge and hyding of the light
or lights: As for example, if this word, Man, were to be written, because M is
the first letter standing in the second part, M must be signefied by two
lyghtes showed onse, and then hydden, and stayed so long as may be thought
that he that does copy after the light so severally showed, and the number
dilligently marked, may have convenient time to write M: then one light
being showed onse, and so hid and stayed, a must be written: for that a is
the first letrer in the first part: and again two lights being showed
twyse and stayed, n, ought to be written, because n is the second letter in the
second part: which done, there shall be written Man. And thus by marking well
the number of showing, hyding and stayng of the light or lights, the letter
that thereby is signified, may most easily be understood and perceived. So
that after this sort, there may be expressed and written what so ever a man
list.

To the Reders.
WHen the Britons the aunciente inhabitauntes of this isle (for lack of
skillful me^ of war of their own; being afraid of the Franki, and Burgu^di,
which were certain Barberous nations, who at ye time ouerra^, spoiled, and
possessed France) caused the Germayne people called Angly to come to aid and
defend them, by whose procurement the Angly under Vortiger their King, taking
upon them the same enterprise, after they had ones defended them, did then
incontinence drive them out of this ylande, remainnig here them selves to
inhabit: and after their name called it England: even as also of later days,
ye like chance happened to the Greeks, by calling in the Turks to help them
against their enemies. Which examples, with innumerable like being well
considered, do most manifestly show, how dangerous and pernitius it is for a
Prince and his Realm, to be driven to trust to the seruis of strangers for
lack of sufficient skillful men of their own for their defense. Wherefor
since my intent in setting fourth this book of Martial affairs, has been
only to the end to declare my good will, to have my natural cou^triemen not
to be inferior to any in warlyke knowledge, but rather to excel in the same,
whereby without aid or help of any foreign nation, we may always be most
renoumed and famous, I shall beseech all gentill readers, for this my labor
done for their comodeties, to judge and report thereof accordingly. And
although my doings herin, be not correspo^dente to my desire, nor to the
satisfaction of every ma^s mind (which were impossible) yet my trust is, ye
some nevertheless by dilligente reding thereof, and imitating the example of
Lucullus, (who chefelie by study of like books, in very short space, became
one of ye valiantest and worthiest warrior of all the Romans,) may if they
list, take comodity and profit, whereby the knowledge in wars, may of such
as never have been trained in them, be the more easily gotten and attained. For
which cause, my endeavor and travail taken herein, for to profit this our
common weal, deserves not utterly to be despised, seeing that the most
verteous life, and government of Alexander Seuerus Emperor of Rome, with many
other Princes, and Common weals, could not, being necligent in this kind of
study and practis thereof, save or defend them selves, from most shameful
ends, and miserable deaths: wherein fortune was not to be blamed, but only
their folly and ignorance, for having never thought in time of tranquillity
and pease, that it could change in to adversity and trouble: the which is a
common fault of men, not to make accompre in fair weather, of the tempest to
come.

A Perfect rule to bring men into a square battle, of what number so ever
they be. Fol. ij. To know how many me^ may march in a rank, and at a suddein
to bring them into a fowersquare battle, so that their Ansigne, may come to be
in the midst. Fol. iij. How to ordeine a number of men or an army into a
battle, like unto a wedge, or three square, so that it may be apt to march
with the poincte thereof toward the enemies. Fol. vi. To make the battle
called the sheeres, which in old time they used to set against the Triangell.
Fol. vij. What auantage it is to order men in a triangell battle against the
enemy, that knows not how to make the battle called the Sheeres to set
against it, inespecially where there is as many men of the one part as of the
other Fol. viij. To bring a number of men or an army, into a battle, which
in old time was called a Saw. Fol. ix. To fashion a battle of a number of
men or an army like unto two Triangels ioygned together, so that they may be
apt to march with a corner there of toward the enemies. Fol. x. What is best
to be done where the ordinance of the enemies being shot into the Army has
slain many men. Fol. xi. How to change with speed an Army, that is, in
battellraye fowersquare, into a triangel fation, without dissordering the
first ranks, and without perrill of confusion. Fol. xiij. Of the perfect
form or fation of strong places. Fol. xvi. The strongest and perfectes fation
of all other for the building of ye cortin or wall of a town or fortres. Fol.
xviij An example of the quadrant form to prove that it causes debilletie and
wealines. Fol. xxij. Of the nature of Saltpeter, and the manner how to make and
refine it. Fol. xxiij. The manner how to make all sorts of Gunpoulder. Fol.
xxvij. The manner that is used of charging and shooting of ordinance. Fol.
xxxiij. How to get out quickly the nails that should happen by treason, or
otherwise to be driven into the toucheholes of ordinance. Fol. xxxiiij. How
much the artillery ought to be esteemed of the armies now adays, and whether
the same opinion of them which is had universally, be true. Fol. xxxiiij. Of
Muynes and placing of poulder vndergrounde, wherewith inuinsible fortresses, by
fire may be ruignated, when ordinance cannot be brought unto them. Fol.
xxxviij. The manner how to make trombes or tru^kes of fire, as well to assault
as to defend a breach, or gate, and to set a fire a town or Camp, or enie
thing else. Fol. xxxix How to make bottells or pottes of fyrworke to throw into
ships, or emonge men that are in battellray. Fol. xl. An other composition of
fire work. Fol. xl. Balls of mettel to throw among men in battelraye or
otherwise, which breaking shall do wonderful hurt. Fol. xli. The manner how
to prepare pottes and balls of fire work to throw with hand. Fol. xli. How
to make balls of wild fire, to shoot in ordinance or to throw with hands.
Fol. xlij. To trim Targettes with fyreworke to assault, or to defend a
breach. Fol. xliij. To make an other kyude of fyreworke. Fol. xliij. How to
make a mixture in stone that shall kendell fire with water or spittell. Fol.
xliij. To make an other kind of stone, to kendell fire with water or spittell.
Fol. xliiij. How to make lutum sapientia. Fol. xliiij. How to make certain
fireworke, to tie at the poincts of pykes or horsemenstaues. Fol. xlv. How to
make diverse compositions of fyreworkes. How to make a girdell for Soldiers
or Fisshers whereby they may go in the water and pass over a river without
either bridge or bote. Fol. xlviij. How to write, and cause the same that is
written to be red a far of, without sendinge enie message. Fol. xlviij.
The End.
Imprinted at London, By Ihon Kingston: for Nicolas England.

Anno salutis, M.D.LXII. Mense. Aprilis.


