THE MAINTENANCE OF FREE TRADE, ACCORDING TO THE THREE ESSENTIAL Parts of
Traffic; Namely, COMMODITIES, MONEYS and Exchange of Moneys, by Bills of
Exchanges for other Countries.

OR, An answer to a Treatise of Free Trade, or the means to make Trade
flourish, lately Published.

Contraria iuxta se Posita magis Elucescunt. By GERARD MALYNES Merchant.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for William Sheffard, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the entering in of Popes head Allie out of Lumbard street, 1622.

TO THE MOST HIGH and mighty Monarch, JAMES, by the grace of God, King of great
Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Traffic, (Most Dread and gracious Sovereign) by Nature Admirable; and by
Art Amiable; being the Sole peacible Instrument, to enrich Kingdoms and
Commonweales: may properly be called, The Praeheminent study of Princes; the
rather, because the Sacred wisdom has approved this Axiom: That a King is
miserable (how rich soever he be:) if he Reigns over a poor people; and that,
that Kingdom is not able to subsist (how Rich and Potent soever the people
be:) if the King be not able to maintain his Estate. Both which, (being
Relatiues) are depending upon Traffic and Trade, which is performed under
Three Simples or Essential parts, namely, Commodities, Moneys, and Exchange
for Moneys by Bills. Whereupon having lately perused a Treatise entitled Free
Trade, or, The means to make Trade flourish; wherein the Author, either
ignorantly or wilfully, has omitted to handle The Praedominant Part of Trade,
namely, the Mystery of Exchange: which is the Public measure between us and
other Nations, according to which, all our Commodities are bought and sold in
foreign parts: his only Scope being, to have the Moneys of the Kingdom
inhaunced in price, and the foreign Coins made Current within the Realm at
high Rates, (whereby great inconveniences will follow:) I could not but be
moved, both by my faithful allegiance due unto your Majesty, and the
obseruant duty owing by me, to the Public good:) To make an answer to the
material points of the said Treatise, by comparing things by contraries for
the better illustration; the rather for that it was published in Articulo
temporis, when your Majesty's vigilant Princely Care, had been pleased to
refer the Consideration of this important business of State, to the learned,
Lord Vizcount Maundeuile, Lord President of your Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, and other persons of knowledge and experience: amongst whom
(although unworthy) my self was called, and our opinions were certified unto
your Highness.

For the Consideration of this weighty matter of great Consequence, is
absolutely to be submitted unto your High Wisdom and Transcendent judgment,
by means whereof (according to the saying of Epictetus the Philosopher, Hoc
est Maxim iudicis, Aptare Vniuersalia singularibus,) All Causes both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, are observed, discerned and applied to their proper
and determinate ends.

Your Majesty therefore, may be pleased to vouchsafe (with a gracious aspect)
the reading of this small Treatise, which (like unto the little fish, mentioned
by Plutarch, swimming before the great Whale, giving notice of dangerous
shallow places;) shall be amply explained in a Volume (almost imprinted:)
entitled Lex Mercatoria, or the Ancient Law Merchant, which (in all
humility:) is to be presented unto your most Sacred Majesty; wherein the
dangerous Rocks, (to be avoided in the Course of Traffic, and the means
thereunto conducing:) are manifested for the preservation and augmentation of
the wealth of your Highness Realms and Dominions, to be effected by the Rule
of justice grounded upon Aequality and Aequity according to Ius gentium, which
is chiefly maintained by the Law Merchant. The knowledge whereof, is of such
moment, that all other Temporal Laws (without it) are not complete, but
imperfect.

Worthy of commendation, are those offices, who can by Providence preserve the
Treasure of Kings and Commonweals; worthier are those that both (by honest
and lawful means) can preserve and augment them: but worthiest of all
immortal praise, are these, who can and do (by easy, just, and Politic
means) enrich Kingdoms and Commonweals, and thereby fill the Princes
Coffers with standing Treasure, to serve all occasions in the two seasons,
which Princes are to care for; (observed by the Emperor Justinian,) namely the
Time of War, when Arms are necessary, and the time of Peace, more fitting
wholesome Laws. In the Theoricke Part of which Study, I have these forty
years spent much time and charges at the pleasure of great personages: and
albeit nothing did encounter me but ingratitude, yet my constancy to spend the
Remainder of my days therein, (in hope of Practice,) is as immovable as the
continuance of my daily prayers, to the Great Jehovah, to multiply your
Majesty's days as the days of heaven. London the 25. of October, 1622.

Your Majesty's most Loyal Subject Gerard Malynes.

THE Maintenance of Free Trade, According to the Three Essential parts of
Traffic, namely, Commodities, Monyes, and Exchange of Monyes by bills of
Exchanges, for other Countries.
NATVRALL Mother wit, did teach man, before Arts or Sciences were invented;
that of all things and in all humane actions: the Beginning, Progress,
Continuance and Termination Finis corcnat opus.
or End is to be observed; whereupon Politicians or Statesmen have noted, that
the often comparing of a thing unto his Principle or Original produces the
longer continuance, showing (by digresion) how the same is decayed and may be
reduced to the first integrity and goodness. For there was never any thing by
the wit of man so well devised, or so sure established; which in continuance of
time has not bin corrupted.

The consideration whereof is most requisite, in the reformation of the course
of Traffic, as a matter eminent for the good and welfare of Commonweales, and
especially for England. Quia vita ciuilis in societate posita est, Societ as
autem in imperio and commercio.

According to this rule, let us observe, that all the Traffic and Trade
between us and foreign nations, is performed under three Simples, which are
the essential Parts thereof, namely, Three essential parts of Traffic.
Commodities, Monyes, and Exchange of money by Bills for foreign Parts; which
may be aptly compared to the Body, Soul, and Spirit of Traffic.

The First as the Body, vpheld the world by Commutation and Bartring of
commodities, until Commodities.
money was devised to be coined.

The Second, as the Soul in the Body, did infuse life to Traffic by the
means of Equality and Monyes.
Equity, preventing advantage between Buyers and Sellers.

The Third, as the Spirit and faculty of the soul (being seated every where)
corroborateth the Exchange.
Vital spirit of Traffic, directing and controlling (by just proportions)
the prices and values of commodities and monyes.

Now even as monyes were invented to be coined of the purest metals of silver
and gold to be the Square and Rule to set a price unto all commodities and
other things whatsoever within the Realm, and therefore called Publica
Mensura: even so is exchange of monyes by Bills, Money and Exchange two public
Measures.
The Public Measure between us and foreign countries, according to which,
all commodities are bought and sold in the course of Traffic; for this
exchange is grounded upon the weight, finenesse, and v^luation of the money of
each country: albeit the price thereof in exchange does rise and fall
according to scarcity and plenty of money, and the few or many deliuerers and
takers thereof.

These three essential parts of Traffic are to be considered jointly and
diuidedly for the good of Commonweales in the benefit to be procured for the
general welfare, or for the particular profit of some few persons; for albeit
that the general is composed of the particular: yet it may fall out, that the
general shall receive an intolerable prejudice and loss, by the particular
The general to be preferred etc.
and private benefit of some: These (in this respect) are not to be regarded,
especially if they may make the like benefit (in some measure) without hurt or
detriment to the general.

Some Merchants do deal all for Commodities, others for Monyes, and other
some altogether for Exchanges or all three, or that which yields them most
gain: and commonly without consideration had of the good of the Commonwealth,
which is the cause that Princes and Governors are to sit at the stern of the
course of Trade and Commerce.

For to speak ingeniously, Merchants cannot enter into consideration of the
quantity of foreign Observations surpassing the study of Merchants.
commodities imported at dear rates, and the home commodities exported at
lesser rates Respectively in former times; by the disproportion whereof comes
an evident ouerballancing of commodities. Merchants do not regard, whether the
monyes of a Kingdom are undervalued in exchange, by the inhauncing of monyes
in foreign parts, whereby our monyes are exported; when the exchange does not
answer the true value by Bills, and the monyes of other countries cannot be
imported, but with an exceeding loss, which every man shunneth. True it is,
that they observe within the Realm to keep the price of money at a Stand,
according to the Kings valuation: but in foreign parts, they run with the
stream, headlong down with other nations, without consideration of their own
hinderance. Merchants do not know the weight and finenesse of monyes of each
Country, and the proportions observed between Gold and Silver, nor the
difference of several Standards of coin; a matter so necessary for them to
know, to make thereby profitable returns of the prouenue of our home
commodities, either in Money, Bullion or Wares. Finally Merchants (seeking
their Priuatum Commodum) take notice only of what is prohibited and commanded,
whereas it may fall out also, that to require their opinion for the reformation
of some abuses: they may be thought many times as unfit, as to call the
Vintner to the consultation of laws to be made against drunkards.

Kings and Princes therefore, which are the fathers of the great families of
Commonweales Parens Patr^.
are to be careful for the general good, so that the expenses do not
exceed or surmount the incombes and revenues thereof, according to the saying
of Marcus Cato, Oportet Patrem familias, vendacem esse, non emacem, He must
be a Seller, and not a Buyer.

For the effecting whereof, there is a serious study to be had in the true
understanding of the Three essential Parts of Traffic, whereof the course of
exchange (which is the most neglected) will be found to be the efficient
Cause, which with us is Praedominant, and ouerruleth the course of Monyes and
Commodities, as shall be declared in this discourse. For these Three parts of
Traffic concur jointly together in their proper function and nature, by an
orderly carriage, according to their first invention and institution.

For as the Elements are joined by Symbolization, the Air to the Fire by
warmenesse; the Water to the Air, by moisture; the Earth to the Water, by
coldness: So is exchange joined to mohyes, and monyes to commodities, by their
proper qualities and effects. And ever as in a Clock, where there be many
wheels, the first wheel being stirred, drives the next, and that the third,
and so forth, till the last that moves the instrument that strikes the
clock: even so is it in the course of Traffic: for since money was invented
and became the first wheel which stirs the wheel of Commodities and
inforceth the Action. But the third wheel of exchange of monyes between
Country and country; being established and grounded upon monyes, is (in
effect) like to the instrument that strikes the Clock, being therein the
thing Active, and Commodities and Monyes are become Exchange Active, Moneys
and Commodities Passive.
things Passive: in so much that the Sequel thereof may be compared unto
Archers shooting at the Bu^tes, directing their Arrows according as the Blanke
does stand, high, or low; for so do Merchants by exchange in the sale of
commodities and negotiation of monyes, without which, commodities lie dead in
all markettes. Since the Ancient Commutation of commodities in kind did cease,
and the body of Commodities does not work without the Spirit which is
exchange, so that this observation being neglected: the whole instrument of
Trade must needs be out of order, and discompounded, like a distempered Lock,
which will neither open nor shut.

When the Art of navigations and shipping had continued many years, and
mariners did ^mitate each others observation, before the Science of the
Mathematiks was invented: It ^apned that two great Whales with a great
^olubility swimming in furious manner, did approach The ship of Traffic taken
for the whole Trade.
an English ship of Traffic which was ^ound for the Coast of Barbary, saden
with di^ers good Commodities and Staple wares. The mariners (as the manner
was:) did with all diligence cast ouerboord diverse empty barrels for the whales
to play with all, and to keep them from the ship. The whales not pleased
therewith, and a sudden storm arising, did endanger their ship, which made
them unawares to cast over board many good wares and rich Commodities,
wherewith one of the whales was playing. But the other whale more fierce,
struck the Ship many times with his Tail, and at last broake the Rudder of the
Ship, whereby they were much hindered in their Sailing, and all the ships of
their fleet took the Start of them and arrived to their destined ports, the
rather because they lost also their sailing Compass by the violence of the
said Stormy wind and tempest. And the mariners had leisure (with a Calm) to
discourse of the Accident to question which was the most necessary and Active
thing of True sailing.

Some did attribute the same to the winds and Current of the Seas; Others to
the sails and agitations of the winds in them. And others to the compass made
by the admirable virtue of the loadstone. But all of them were Nouices in
Magnes stone.
their profession; whereupon a merchant standing by (being a passenger in that
voyage) used these or the like speeches, My friends and good fellows, I do
not a little admire to hear you thus ignorant in matter of your Profession:
Can not the loss of the Rudder of our ship make you sensible to understand,
That the Active Part of sailing is to be ascribed thereunto, seeing it drives
the ship according to all the points of the winds and variation of the Compass
being fastened upon the Parallel of the Keele of Equality? Shipwrights will
tell you, That if it be not Rightly placed, it does interrupt sailing: and if
it be not of Competent length, but that the upper building of the ship do sway
the same, it makes a ship unserviceable: That neither the direction of the
Compass, nor the Receptacle of the Sails forewind, can make her perform her
voyage as other ships do. I perceive you are like unto him that did
attribute to the letters of a clock dial, the showing of the hour, and not
to the hand or Index, which is the Active thing to show you the same, albeit it
can The Index of a Dial Active.
not do the same without the other, which is the Thing Passive: you must
therefore truly distinguish and attribute the efficient Cause of Sailing to
the Rudder of a Ship, and the other are called Secondary or mean Causes. And
they all agreed that this observation was true.

Is not the Modern Merchant of Hackney or the Author of the Treatise of Free
Trade like unto these Nouices? who perceiving two great whales to have
assaulted the English ship of Traffic, Wars and the Policy of Princes like
two Whales de^ouring Trade.
The cruellest being the wars in Christendom and the Pirates, The other more
gentle, being the Policy of Princes and States in the Course of Trade: has
published in the year of Grace; 1622. The Causes of the decay of Trade in
England, and the means to make the same flourish, without observation of the
operative power of exchange, which is the Rudder of the Ship of Traffic
fastened upon the Rule of the equality of Moneys according to their weight
and finenesse, to be denominated by the valuation of Princes as a matter
peculiarly appertaining to their Praerogatiues.

And because that therein, he has like unto Esops Iay clad himself with the
feathers of other Birds: I hope it will not be impertinent, To unmask his
discourse, and nevertheless to supply Canker of Englands Commonwealth, and
Englands view.
(according to my former Treatises) The maintenance of free Trade, wherein I
endeavor to be Compendious and Substantial, and to follow his Method and some
distribution for the better understanding, as a most important business of
State, which is the cause that so many Statutes and laws have been made
concerning moneys and exchanges. 2. So many Proclamations for the due
execution thereof have bin published. 3. Lastly, so many Treatises and
Conferences have been had from Time to Time, Both with other Princes and
within our selves, which in the judgment of the said Author are neglected as
unnecessary, or by ignorance not mentioned; concluding with him, That as there
are many causes discussed and discoursed of, at this time of the decay of
Trade: So are there many Remedies propounded, wherein if either the Principal
Causes be mistaken (as he has done) or defective Remedies propounded: The
present disease of this Trade may increase and cast the Body into a more
dangerous Sickness. For the effici^ Cause being unknown, puts out the
Physicians eye, as the Proverb is.

Now let us come to the handling of the particulars in order, and afterward to
the True Remedies, which must arise from the matter of exchange, as shall be
plainly demonstrated to the judicious Reader, void of partiality; for the
exchange is the faculty or Spirit of the soul of moneys in the Course of
Traffic.

CHAP. I.
The Causes of the Want of Moneys in England.
THis Assertion we shall now bring to the hammer, the Anuel and the Touchstone,
namely to firm Reason, by his own first Argument of the immediate Cause of
the want of money in England, alleged by him to be the vnderualuation of his
Majesty's Coin, where he says by way of interrogation:

Who will procure license in Spain to bring Realls Page 8. Vnderualution of
the Kings Coin, The 1. Cause.
into England, to sell them here at Ten in the hundred Gain, which is less
then the exchange from thence will yield, when he may have for the same, five
and twenty in the hundred in Holland?

Here in an obscure manner, he observes the exchange from Spain to be Six
pence the Real, as value for value, or the Par in exchange, whereby it is
less (as he says:) and he does account the price of 8. Reals at 51. Stiuers
in Holland, and the Rate of exchange at 33. shillings 4. pence Flemish to
answer our 20. shillings Starlin as at Par pro Pari for those parts, howbeit
that 42. shillings 6. pence Flemish paid there for the 5. Realls of 8. make
25. shillings 6. pence Starlin according to that Computation; howsoever we see
that this is grounded upon the exchange, which is the efficient Cause thereof,
otherwise the 15. in the hundredth to be gotten in Holland more then in England:
is altogether imaginary and not Real. For example let five of these Realls of
8. be bought here for An imaginary gain made Real of our own means.
22. shillings Starlin, and be transported into Holland, and there buy
commodities with the same, according as the price of them, is inhaunced there;
no man makes any doubt, but that the said Commodities are also raised in
price, according to the money inhaunced. So that the gain becomes
uncertain, for the Commodities may be sold to loss. But the merchants trading
in Spain, which cause their Realls to be sent from Spain thither, or do
transporte them from the Downs: Rely wholly upon the Vnderualuation of Moneys
in exchange.
low exchange, whereby they are enabled to deliver their money there, by
exchange at an undervalue, in giving there but 33. shillings 4. pence and
under, to have 20. shillings Starlin ^ayed by Bill of exchange in England,
whereby ^he kingdom makes good unto them the said ^5. upon the hundredth. For
this Real of 8. was valued but at 42. Stiuers, when the Par of exchange was
made to be 33. shillings 4. pence, in the year 1586, when Robert Dudley, Earl
of Leycester, went to take the government of those Countries: And shall we now
receive in exchange the said price of 8. Reals for 51. Stiuers, which is above
five shillings and one penny Starlin, because they have inhaunced the same to
their advantage, and continue the Par of exchange at 33. shillings 4. pence. by
which Computation the said 42. Stiuers make but four shillings two pence half
penny or thereabouts in true value? Absit ignorantia. Whereas, if our merchants
of Spain should give the said price there in exchange for 42. Stiuers, as
they did formerly, (and may be done by order of exchange:) They shall not find
thereby Ten in the hundredth gain, which they can make here more certain and
commodiously, whereby this money will be imported, without inhauncing of our
Coin. This is so plain in the understanding of Merchants, that there needs
no other explanation, for it demonstrateth manifestly, that if the low
exchange were not, This Gain would prove to be Imaginary, as we have noted.
And this causes these Realls of Spain to be diuerted from us, and might else
be imported to the said Merchants or others, which do practice upon the
Benefit of moneys to be made between the exchange and moneys.

For the Rule is infallible, That when the exchange does answer the true value
of our moneys according to their intrinsicke weight and finenesse, and their
extrinsicke valuation: They are never exported, because the Gain is answered
The Rule of excha^ge excludes the gain to be had by Moneys
by exchange, which is the Cause of Transportation. This cause being prevented,
makes the effect to cease; and this is engraffed in every man's judgment,
according to the Maxim often noted heretofore, Sublata Causa, Tollitur
effectus.

So that exchange still has the command and strikes the Stroke, insomuch
that albeit the price thereof rises and falls, according to Plenty or
Scarcity of money: yet moneys are ouerruled thereby. For if you inhaunce the
Coin, the exchange does controlle it and rise accordingly. And if you
undervalue the same, The exchange in like manner does fall in price. Wherein
note the operation of exchange both here and beyond the Seas, in places where
exchanges run upon the pound of 20. shillings Starlin. If the inhauncing of
Coin be beyond the Seas, and the exchange be not made accordingly: Then our
moneys are carried out. If the inhauncing of Coin were made here: E contra,
moneys would be imported. But the merchant Stranger, who observes the rule of
exchange, and (will not be ouer-taken as we ^e;) will overrule the same ipso
facto, and ^e you so much less in exchange, as we shall ^haunce our Coin by
valuation, or imbase the ^e by Allay. In like manner if you Cry ^wne moneys
beyond the Seas, The Exchange ^ll alter in price accordingly: and if you Cry
^wne moneys here, or undervalue them by ^me, The Exchange ought to Rule and to
make ^e denomination accordingly in price, and still ^maineth Predominant over
moneys and com^odities. Exchange is still Predominant.
For even as Commodities being the ^dy of Traffic, draw unto them moneys, and
therein may seem to be Active; yet mo^y (being the right judge or Rule which
gi^th or imposed a price unto Commodities:) (...) the Thing Active, and
Commodities become (...) thing Passive: Even so, although money is ^e Subject
whereupon exchanges are made (...) ^et still the exchange is made to Rule
moneys; To the end, that the value thereof should be ^nswered by the Public
Measure of exchange; To prevent all abuses and inconveniences ari^ng by the
price of Commodities, and the va^uation of moneys in exchange: which moneys are
either Real or imaginary, according to the Custom of the place of exchange by
the device of Bankers.

This was Seriously observed in the year 1576. by diverse most honorable and
Grave Counselors of State, Namely, Sir Nichol^ Bacon, Lord Keeper of the
great Seal; Sir Willam Burghley Lord Treasurour of England, T^ mas Earl of
Sussex, Francis Earl of Bedfo^ Sir Francis Knowles, Sir James Croft, and M^
ster Secretary Walsingham, with the assistan^ of other worthy persons of
experience, nam^ ly Sir Thomas Chamberlain, Sir Thomas Gr^ ham Knight, Master
Peter Osborne, Mast^ James Altham, Master Thomas Riuet, and M^ ster Richard
Martin, Master of the Minte: (...) they found that the following inconvenience
were practiced, by Bankers or exchangers for the Private gain and benefit,
for the advancing some Commonweals, and ^e the destruction other
Commonweals.

To lay their money with Gain in any place of the world, where exchange lies.
Admirable feats to be done by exchange.


To Gain and wax Rich, and never medd^ with any Princes Commodity; or,

To buy any Princes Commodity with the Subjects money, and not one penny of
their own.

To understand whether money employed on exchange or Commodities is more profit.

To live and increase upon every Princes Subject, which take up moneys.

To wind out every Princes Treasure out of his Realm, whose Subjects bring in
more Wares, then they carry out.

To make the Staple of money Run, where the Rich Prince will have it.

To unfurnish the poor Prince of his provision of money in Wars.

To furnish their need of money, that tarry the selling of their Wares or
Commodities.

To take up money to engrosse any Commodity, or to incorporate any Trade.

To hide their carrying away of any Princes money.

To fetch away any Princes fine money, with the baser money of other Princes.

To take up Princes base money, and turn it into fine, and pay the party with
his own.

To get all Merchants money into their hands and gain thereby, and paying
them, with their own.

To make that Realm gain of all other Realms: whose Subjects live most, by
their own Commodities, and sell yearly the overplus into the world, and both
occupy that increase yearly, and also their old store of Treasure upon
exchange.

To undo Realms and Princes, that look not to their Commonwealth, when the
Merchants wealth in such and the great houses of one Country, conspire
together; so to rule th'xchange, that when they will be Deliuerers, they will
receive in an other place above the Standard of the Minte of the Princes money
delivered: and when they will be Takers; they will pay the same in an other
place, under the Standard of the Princes money taken up.

To get ready money to buy any thing that is offered cheap, and to raise the
price of Wares.

To get a part, and sometimes all his Gains, that employeth money taken up by
exchanges, in Wares, and so make others travel for their Gain.

To keep Princes from having any Customs, Subsidies, or Taxes upon their
money, as they employ it not.

To value justly any Wares they carry into any country, by setting them at a
value, as the money that bought them, was then at by exchange in the Country,
whither they be carried.

By the premises we may see, of what importance the operation of exchange is,
wherein the endeauours of Sir Thomas Gresham, thinking to rule the exchange of
England by plenty of Queen Elizabeth lending money out of The Exchequer.
money proves fruitless, and might have been done with more facility by
direction, as shall be made manifest.

This was the cause that the French King Lewys the ninth, and Philip the fair,
did Consiscate the Bankers Goods, and so did Philip d^ Ualois, who indicted them
as Coozeners of the Commonwealth; for it was found, that in a short time (with
24. thousand pounds) they had gotten ^e and twenty hundred thousand Bodin de
Rep.
pounds. The kingdom of England would have been more sensible of the like*
loss, if the hostile depredations heretofore made, had not supplied the same,
notwithstanding that the offers of Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, ^ere
stored with seven hundred thousand ^unds Starlin, before the Wars with the
^rle of Tyrone in Ireland, wherein more then ^uble that Sum has been spent,
as I found (...) the accounts. For this disordred course of ^change (as I have
said) is like to the cruelty of ^e Planet Saturn, which makes his Spheri^ll
course in 30. years with great operation, ^d it is not many years less,
since I have ob^ued this inconvenience for the good of the ^ealme, albeit Envy
has crossed the same, by The Canker of Englands Commonwealth.
^gnorant men denying Principles, and by other ^eanes here not to be mentioned.

The second cause of the want of Moneys in ^gland, is (says the said Author)
the superfluity (...) Plate generally in private men's hands. Here he ^th
omitted, to Note the great quantity of Silver consumed in the making of Silver
Thread, Spangles, Purles, Oaes, and the like, which upon late examination of
the Right Ho^urable Henry Vizcount Mandeuille Lord ^esident, are found to
amount 80. thousand ^unds and upwards yearly; whereas the Plate ^ade in
London, is only but 50. or 60. thou^d The second cause the superfluity of
Plate, etc.
pounds worth, which remains as a stan^ng Treasure, when the other is worn
and con^med, leaving but some part to be molten a^ine: and if the Plate were
converted into ^oneys, without all doubt, it would more easily be Transported,
having his weight and ^ine nesse, and affording 12. in the 100. Gain abo^ the
exchange in two months and less time.

An exchange hereof, we have yet fresh (...) memory, during the Reign of the
Fren^ King Charles the ninth, who after the Massa^ of Paris, finding the
Treasure of the Real^ exhausted, and his Subjects wealth to con^ more of Plate
then of ready Money, was a^ uised by some, that under color of the Sup^
pressing of Pride, it were good to prescribe (...) uery man, what store of
Plate he should keep^ according to his degree and quality, and the rest (...)
be turned into moneys: others were of opinion that it would not only breed a
discontent vn^ his Subjects, but also a derogation and dish^ nour to the Kings
Reputation with forra^ Nations: Seeing, That the State of a Pri^ The state of a
Prince consists as much by reputation as by strength.
does as much consist by reputation, as by streng^ Therefore like good
Politicians, advised t^ King somewhat to imbase his money under t^ Standard of
the Plate, which would cause t^ less exportation, and the Plate (of course)
(...) be turned into money: and this was do^ accordingly, and had also the
same effect, s^ uing that where they thought money wo^ not be Transported; they
found themselves d^ ceiued, for the course of exchange was not lo^ ked into,
which, not being answered accordi^ to the true values of the moneys, made a
Gai^ by the vnderualuation of them in exchang^ and so long as the Gain
remained, it was con^inually Transported, whereby at last the Plate of the
Realm (turned into money) was lost; ^swell as he lost his money before that
time: and ^o it came to pass in England, during the Reign of King Henry ths
eight, who Granted ^euerall Letters Patents, or Authorities to di^ers of his
Nobles to make base moneys of their own Plate, which did fall out to be the
greater prejudice to the Commonwealth, and ^o himself but a present shift for
the time.

Concerning the Gold and Silver thread, I have ^eretofore endeavored to have
the Manufacture Englands View.
thereof in England, upon plenty of money and Silver to be procured from
foreign parts by means of the exchange. But finding of late such unreasonable
Consumption of Silver therein spent after the refining thereof, and the
uncertainty in goodnnesse by the Wierdrawers: it pleased his Majesty with the
advice of his most Honorable privy Council, to forbid the same lately by
Proclamation, and to admit the foreign silver Thread to come in; whereby our
Silver is not only preserved, but the quantity also is increased, because after
the wearing a good part, remains in burnt Silver, whereas the Silk lace is
consumed to nothing. And such is the Gain of Silver beyond the Seas (in regard
of the low exchange by Bills, vnderualuing Exchange the scope of gai^.
our moneys,) that Purles and Oaeses (in some sort prepared here) have been
(by way of Merchandise) Transported of purpos^ to melt the same down there,
for the making of moneys, as I have seen by diverse Certificates from Dart in
Holland.

The third Cause of the Want of Moneys (...) The third cause the consumption of
foreign wares
England, is the Consumption of foreign Commodities, which I have always
called, The (...) uerballancing of those Commodities, with the native
Commodities of the Kingdom, in Price* and not so much in the quantity. And
the comparison hereof is, principally to be made in the Trade of cloth, and the
Return of it, made by Foreign Commodities, As Silks, Linner cloth,
Cambrickes, Lawnes, and other the like Commodities brought in by the Merchants
Aduenturours which have the Maine Trade, and buy these Commoditis
(proportionably) dearer then they sell our home Commodities; The Canker, etc.
which I have proved, by many reasons to proceed, by the abuse of exchange,
according to which, they are both ways sold and bought. Is there any man of
judgment, who sees not, That this ouerballancing does expel our moneys out
of the Realm, and which are (in effect) as it were given to boot to other
Nations to Counteruaile this inequality? Let them consider of the Reasons
following.

First, moneys being undervalued in exchange, Causes of the ouerballancing of
Commodities.
causes the price of our home Commodities to be abated, and to be sold better
cheap in foreign parts, and is also the cause that our moneys are continually
Transported.

Secondly, the moneys being Transported, takes away the lively course of
Traffic of our said Commodities, and causes young merchants to Run by
exchanges upon Bills to maintain their Trade, paying great Interest for money,
which they cannot take up at Use upon their single Bond, as they can do by a
Bill of exchange, without Sureties.

This causes the said young Merchants and others to make rash Sales of their
Commodities beyond the Seas, to pay their Bills of exchanges, whereby they
overthrow the Markets of others, and make them to Sell good cheap.

So on the contrary, the Coins being ouervalued in exchange, and also
inhaunced beyond the Seas, causes the price of foreign Commodities to be
increased more then our home commodities, and our Merchants are compelled of
course, to make Return thereby. For they cannot import those ouervalued
moneys, but to their exceeding great loss; and by exchange, they find few
Takers, unless it be our young Merchants, which do consume their Estates by
exchanges and Rechanges: For of the English Merchants bereaved of the 2.
essential parts of Trade.
Three Essential Parts of Traffic, we have but the use of one, which is the
buying of foreign Commodities to make Returns homewards, and does increase
the consumption of the said Wares.

Moneys remaining hereby plentiful beyond the Seas, the rather for that they
make Bills obligatory, serve as ready Money, which they Transfer and set over
between man and man for the payment of Moneys or Wares* causes there a lively
course of Trade, whereby their Commodities are advanced in price and sale,
neither are they compelled to sell them, but at their price, because they find
money at interest at 5. and 6. in the hundred. This money is made daily more
plentiful, by our Spanish Merchants, which do divert the Realls of Spain, as
before has been declared: hence it proceeds, that our home Commodities, are
many times sold better cheap beyond the Seas then here; for although Merchants
do lose thereby, they make account to gain more, by the low exchange,
delivering their moneys there, or taking of them up here by exchange, to pay
their Bills of exchange at an undervalue: insomuch, that many Merchants having
no Commodities there, may take up money here, and sending over the same in
specie, will pay therewith An ingenious pra^ise of ex^hange.
their Bill of exchange, and Gain (by dexterity of wit) 15. in the hundredth
in less then two months time. Thus when Gain is practiced by exchange, the
Commodities of the Realm are less vented, and the moneys are exported, which
causes the less employment here to be made upon our Commodities: Even as the
importation of moneys being hindered (by the inhauncing of the Coins beyond
the Seas:) compels our Merchants to make ^he greater employment upon
foreign Commodities at dear Rates.

For the Commodities beyond the Seas, are ^n the hands of them that make sale
of them, upon a certain price (as it were) at their pleasure, having Plenty of
money, and at cheap Rate at interest, whereas also they have no man ^o
vndersell them, here and there, as our Merchants Our Commodities fallen
overmuch in price.
do our Commodities, which (without all comparison:) are far much fallen in
price, ^hen the foreign Commodities now somewhat ^bated in price.

Concerning other Commodities imported, As Wines, Raisons, Corints, Tobacco,
and Spices of the East Indies: Let us briefly observe, that the Wines of
France might be bought better cheap, if the money of the Realm were not French
Wines deerer by exchange.
^ndervalued in exchange; for whereas heretofore they gave us in paym^t their
French Crown of Gold for 64. Soulx, now they give us the same at 75. Soulx,
which Crown was then worth 6. shillings, 6. pence Starlin, and their quart
d'escu now paid for 16. Soulx and above, was then but 15. Soulx, for which we
gave here (accompting 4. to the Crown of Silver) 69. pence and thereabouts,
and now 72. pence and above.

And besides that, more of our native Commodities were vented with better
profit, according to the exchange; for the Rule is, that the less of Starlin
money we do reckon in exchange with them, the more is the Gain of our
Commodities. The like may be applied for the Trade of Corints, which is now
provided by other means. But the limitation to restrain all men from importing
them, then only those of the Leuant company, makes no free Trade of this
Commodity, nor other the like.

The immoderate Use of that weed Tobacco The immoderate use of Tobacco.
has been so effectual in debarring us from Spanish Realls to be (as
formerly) imported to a great value yearly: but the wisdom of the State has
so qualified the same, that our Merchants trading in Spain do now sell
Perpetuanoes, Bays, Says, and other our home Commodities to benefit, which
before were sold to loss, to have moneys to buy this Tobacco, that the
Spaniard did say, Todo te pagara in humo, All shall be paid with smoke.

The fourth cause of the want of Money in England, is (as the said Author
says) The great The fourth cause the want of the East-Indie stock.
want of our East India stock here at home, which he terms the especial
Remote Cause; whereas most men would have expected that the ready moneys sent
in Realls of Plate to make the employment of the said Trade, would rather have
been mentioned. My meaning is not to become a Trapezuntia^ Flatterer. For
Aesops Moral, That the Lion could not be healed without the Ap^ (...). A Table.
Herodot, in Cl^o.
Liver: that is, Princes can not be safe without the destruction of flatterers:
remains still fresh in memory; but in favor of truth and Policy, I am
resolved to deliver my plain and sincere opinion, concerning the said Trade,
which began with us in England immediately after the great Iubile year, 1600.

If the Discourse made of the Trade from England into the East Indies be truly
collected, no A discourse of the East India Trade by T. M.
doubt the said Trade may be found very profitable hereafter, albeit it has
been very difficult in the beginning, according to the Proverb, Omne
principium grave; especially when the Controversies between us and the
Hollanders shall be determined, and their agreements established.

For if Pepper do but cost two pence halfepenny the pound in the Indies, and
that ten shillings employed therein will require but 35. shillings for all
charges whatsoever to deliver it in London; where it is usually sold for above
20. pence: It follows by consequence, that there must be a very great gain,
which will increase, when the said parties shall be united in true Love, and
buy the said Commodities better cheap; and so proportionably for all other
Spices, drugges, silks, Indicoes and Callicoes.

Again, if one hundredth thousand pounds in money exported, may import the
value of 500. thousand pounds Starlin in wares or Commodities: albeit England
do not spend above 120. thousand pounds, and 380. thousand pounds is exported
unto diverse foreign parts, and there sold for ready money with great advantage.

And lastly, if the very Commmodities of the Realm exported into the East
Indies, will buy so much as England uses of their Commodities, and the
employment is made for foreign Coin or Realls of 8. procured from other
places, what man of understanding can justly find fault with that Trade? If
treasure were imported thereby unto us, as their final end, as the Discourse
says, but that other Trades do divert the same? For when the said Indian
Commodities are sent from England into Turkey, Ligorne, Genoway, the Low
Countries, Marselleis and other places, and are sold for ready money: The same
is employed again upon Corints, Wines, Cotton-Wooll and Yearne, Galls and
diverse other Commodities, wherewith the Ships being reladen: yet a great
proportion remains to be brought over in moneys, which are diuerted from us,
by the course of exchange in undervaluing our moneys, as has been declared.
The loss whereof is greater to this kingdom, The loss had by exchange
yearly, is greater then the East Indie stock yearly employed.
then all the moneys employed yearly for the East Indies, comes unto, which
without due consideration, seems to be impossible. So that we may very well
affirm, that by this Trade the Treasure of the Realm can greatly be increased
and augmented, reserving nevertheless unto us the use of foreign Commodities
at reasonable rates. And therefore is the same by all means to be continued,
the rather for that the Hollanders have declared 5. especial Reasons for the
continance of their East Indie Trade, which are not to be neglected, but are to
be pondered by all Politicians and Statesmen.

1. Because the Right, Power, and freedom A discourse of their Eastindie Trade.
of the Traffic and Trade belongs unto them (iure gentium) as well as to any
nation of the world; which the Spaniards did call in question.

2. For that the revenge of any injuries done to the Hollander, may be
recompensed in those Countries; which was heretofore without breach of Truce.

3. For the maintenance of their Mariners and Shipping, of which two, they
abound above all nations.

4. For the increase of Customs and means raised by the Buying of these
commodities, their Country being a Storehouse for all wates and merchandises.

5. Because that by the continuance of the said Trade (although it should
prove unprofitable:) They maintain a certain peace and assurance in the
course of their government which consists thereby.

This Trade of the Hollanders for the East Indies began upon the Embargoes made
in Spain of their goods and interruption of their Trade, wherein they did
associate themselves with the Germans to disperse and vent their said India
commodities better and speedier.

To this Argument appertains, the consideration of the Trades out of
Christendom, maintained for the most part with ready moneys. As for Turkey and
Persia, wherein the abundance of Silver and Gold come into Europe, since the
West Indies were discovered, is to be noted, which has made every thing dearer
according to the increase of money, which like unto an Ocean, dividing the
Course into several branches in diverse Countries, has caused a The Ocea^ of
Monyes from the West Indies.
great alteration. But England does not participate by the Course of Traffic
a proportionable Competent share of the said abundance of moneys, as other
nations do: albeit not many years since, we had more moneys then in times
past, before the said discovery of the West Indies: But we must now measure
things according to the said abundance, which is much diminished by the
continual exportation of moneys for the East Indies from all places of
Traffic.

The fifth Cause of the Want of Money in England, he says, are the Wars of
Christendom, The fifth ^ause, the ^arres of ^irates.
causing exportation of moneys, and the Pirates hindering importation of money.
The latter is merely a Prevention or Robbing of our monyes, which are
supposed, might be brought in. But if Pirates did not take some of our monyes,
it follows not, that the same should come unto us in specie. For experience,
by the example of the Spanish Merchants, diuerting ^e Realls of 8. from us (for
Gain to be made (...) foreign parts:) proves unto us the con^ary. Gain
being always the Scope of Mer^ants: and to prove that this Gain, is made
^ally only by the abuse of exchange (which ^herwise would be but Imaginary,)
we have ^ready declared.

Now touching the exportation of monyes ^y the Wars of Christians, where he
declares (...) urgent instance: That the Riecks Doller, is ^ised (two marks
Lubish making the said Dol^:) to twenty marks Lubish in many pla^s of Germany,
whereby abundance of money (...) drawn unto the Mintes of those Countries, ^om
all the Mines and Parts of Christendom: ^erein he is much mistaken; for when
moneys ^e inhaunced, they never are carried to the Money inhaunced never
carried to the Mint.
Mintes for to be converted into other Coin. ^ut they remain current,
between man and ^an, running like a Poste-horse, every man ^aring to receive a
loss by the fall. Neither ma^eth this any rule for merchants in places of
^rade, otherwise then that they may take ^nowledge of the public valuation
thereof, to ^ell their Commodities accordingly, by rating ^he price of
exchange, upon their former obser^ation; which being neglected or done in part,
^auseth the vnderualuation of our moneys in ^xchange. And this is the immediate
Cause by ^im first alleged and treated of, wherein the Commodities are no more
Active, then Tenderdon Steeple in Kent, was the Cause of the decay of Dover
haven.

To make this to appear, let us note, that this Rieckx Doller being the maine
and most usual Coin in Germany, Eastland, the United (...) Reconciled
Countries under both Gouernme^ and many other places, was valued at 2. man
Lubish, every mark being 16. shillings Lub^ or 16. Stiuers; for in the year
1575. the (...) Doller was still coined in the Empire for (...) Stiuers. And
was so current by Valuation in (...) Low Countries, whereby the said shilling L^
A shilling Lubish and Stiuer Flemish all one in the year 1575
and the Stiuer Flemish were al one, but the (...) in the Low Countries has
bin the cause of (...) inhauncing of this Doller, which was brou^ to 35.
Stiuers, and in the year 1586, to (...) Stiuers by intermissiue Times and
Valuati^ howbeit at Stoade, Hamborough and other places in Germany, the said
Doller did remain st^ at 32. Stiuers or two marks. And as the sai^ Doller did
inhaunce in price: so did they coy^ new Stiuers accordingly, sometimes lighte^
weight, and at other times imbased by Allay (...) Copper. And yet in account,
the Stiuer did a^ does remain the ground of all their mony^ A great fallacy.
But the said Doller holds his Standard agreeable to the first Doller, which
is called the Burgondian Doller with the cross of Saint Andr^ coined in the
year 1575. which is in finene^ ten ounces, and twelve penny weight of fi^
silver, and four and one half of these Dollers, were there made equivalent to
our 20. shillings Starlin, as a Public measure in exchange be^weene us, and
the Low Countries, Germany, and all other places where this Doller was cur^ant,
which made the Par or price of exchange ^o be 24. of their shillings, for 20.
shillings of ^ours, according to which computation, exchanges were made,
always above that price, both here and beyond the seas; and the Stiuer of the
Low Countries was not in value answerable thereunto, for being but two ounces
17. pence with fine, their 32. Stiuers for the said Doller, (which is four
pieces and one half 144. Stiuers:) did not contain so much fine silver in
them, as the said Doller proportionably. But there wanted above 3. shillings
Flemish in the pound of 20. shillings Starlin.

These Dollers have since been imitated and made by the States of the united
Low Provinces in their several Mintes, as also by the Archduke Albertus in the
reconciled Provinces. And the price of them at Hamborough, Stoade, and other
places was inhaunced but one Stiuer: that is to say, at thirty three Stiuers,
where the said Dollers, went in the Low Countries by valuation for 45. Stiuers
in the year, 1586, at which time the Par of exchange was found to be twenty
four shillings nine pence for those parts, and for the Low Countries at thirty
three shillings 4. pence; which was so agreed upon to our disadvantage, for
according to the said 4^ Dollers, at forty five Stiu^rs, it makes thirty
three shilling nine pence; but our twenty shillings valued at ten Stiuers for
the shilling, was the caus^ that it was put to thirty three shillings four^
pence. My self being there, a Commissione^ appointed by the Council Table,
with Sir Richard Martin Knight, and Monsieur Ortell, Mo^sieur Coase, and
Monsieur Valcke, Commissioners for the States of the united Provinces.

This Doller is since that time inhaunced t^ In the united Provinces.
fifty two Stiuers in the Low Provinces, which makes the price of exchange
above thirty eight shillings, or rather thirty nine shillings: and shall we
suffer this, and not alter our price of exchange accordingly, but be contented
to take thirty four shillings or thirty five shillings, and after that rate
vndersell all the Commoditis of the kingdom, and suffer also, (because of this
gain) our monyes to be exported, the Realls of 8. to be debarred from us to
be brought in and carried to other Countries, for bringing a loss to the
importer, which by inhauncing of the price of our exchange (and no^ by
inhauncing of our monyes:) can be easily prevented? as hereafter shall be
declared.

This Doller is likewise since that time, more inhaunced in Germany from time
to time, and In Germany.
leaving the excessive alteration in Remote places, let us note the Ualuation
of Hamborough, where it has been at fifty four Stiuers the Doller, which
makes the exchange above forty shillings of their money for our twenty
shillings. And although we have raised the price of exchange from twenty four
shillings nine to thirty five shillings or thereabours: shall we rest here and
go no further? have we reason to do it in part, and not in the whole,
according to justice, equity, and true Policy? And shall we be like a man,
that by halting in jest, became same in earnest? I say again, Absitignorantia.
Thus much Obiter.

CHAP. II.
The Causes of the Decay of Trade in the Merchandise of England.
THE Moneys of Christendom, which have their ebbing and flowing, do show
their operation upon Commodities, making by Plenty, the price thereof dear, or
by Scarcity better cheap. And on the contrary, by exchange we find that
plenty of money makes a Low exchange; and the price of monyes to fall in
exchange: and that Scarcity of money makes a high exchange, and the price to
rise, ouerruling both the price of moneys and Commodities, which being
observed by the great exchangers or Bankerers; caused them to invent all the
means to compass the same, and to rule the course thereof at their pleasure,
having the maine sea of exchanges, wherein the exchange of England runs like
a River or Branche, and is ouerruled by the general Current; which may be
prevented: for we have the head of exchange of 20. shillings Starlin for the
places where most of our Commodities are sold, which will command all the parts
and members of the body of Traffic, and procure plenty of money, whereby the
other causes of the want of monyes in England (as the waste of the treasure and
the like:) will not be so sensible as ^ow they are, especially when needful
Commodities of Trade, shall be imported from some pla^es, which shall supply (as
in times past) the exportation of much money, when the Commodities of Russia,
being Tallow, Wax, Hides, retransported Commodities of other countries, used
to provide Wines, Raisons, etc. The first cause of the decay of Trade.
into France and Spain, did by exchange furnish the Realm with Wines,
Corints, Raisons and the like Commodities.

The Want of Money there, is the first cause of the Decay of Trade, for without
money, Commodities are out of request. And when they fall again into
Permutation or Barter, Traffic is subject to the necessity of Merchants,
which ^endeth to the destruction of one Commonweal, and to the enriching of an
other. And this is effected by the exchange, as the grave and wise Cou^sellors
of State before mentioned, have very well observed, whereof Aristotle and
Seneca could take no notice in the infancy of Traffic, which makes me to
forbear to allege their opinions and definitions; howbeit Commercium is
quasi Commutatio Mercium, which the said Author would turn again by a change
of Page 20. 21.
wares for wares, and not money for wares. No marvel therefore that he does
inuert things, and runs into a Labyrinth without distinction, between the
thing Active, and the Passive, by approouing Money to be the rule and square,
whereby things receive estimation and price. And yet commending the Commutation
before Money was devised to be coined.

Aristotle says, That Action and Passion are merely Relatiues, and that they
differ no more, Phys. 3. lib. cap. 3.
then the way from Thebes to Athens, and from Athens to Thebes. We will
therefore leave this Merchant to walk between both until he can discern
the one from the other. And then he shall find, that as the Liver (Money) does
minister Spirits to the heart (Commodities,) and the heart to the Brain
(Exchange:) so does the Brain exchange minister to the whole Microcosme or the
whole Body of Traffic. Let the heart therefore by the liver receive his
Tinctured Chilus by his own mouth and stomach, and the blood full of Spirits,
shall fill all the Ueines, and supply the want of monyes. The easy course and
recourse of whose exchange, shall bring all things in time, and serve all men's
turns. For even as there are two Courses observed of the Sun: the one
Annual, and the other by daily declination, rising and going under: even so
must we observe in exchange two Courses, the one according to Par pro Pari, or
value for value: the other rising and falling from time to time, as we have
already declared.

The second Cause of the decay of Trade, says he, is Usury, meaning Usury
Politic, wherein he The second Cause of the decay of Trade.
is prevented to speak, because of a Treatise made against Usury by an
unknown Author, and presented to the last Parliament, for whom he takes
great care, that he be not abused as Virgill was by proclaiming too late, Hos
ego versiculos feci, tulit alter honores. True it is that the said Author does
not attribute unto himself the making of verses: but takes the whole
substance of his discourse out of other men's Englands View.
works, published above twenty years since. Turpe est Doctori, dum culpa
redarguit ipsum. Cato.

Usury in a Commonwealth is so inherent, and does properly grow with the decay
of Trade, as Pasturage does increase, with the decrease of Tilling. Albeit in
some respects, Trade is increased by monyes delivered at use or interest upon
occasions, when the Usurer is glad to find a taker up of his monyes, and does
Plenty of money abateth the Ra^e of Usury of Course.
pray him to do the same, by reason of the abundance of money; which makes
the price of Usury to fall, more then any Law or Proclamation can ever do. So
that to abate the Rate of Ten upon the hundred to eight (as the said Tract
against usury would have had the Parliament to do:) will be effected of course,
which always has the greatest command.

This does also much prevent, that the Rule of Concord and Equality is not so
soon broken and overthrown in Commonweals, some growing very rich, and
others extreme poor, not able to live in their vocation: The most pregnant
cause of discord, causing many times Civil wars, as Cornelius Tacitus has
noted, and appears in another Treatise where the operations S. George for
Eng^and.
of Usury are described.

The biting Usury and intolerable extortion committed by certain uncharitable
men, commonly called Brokers for pawnes, is not to be touched in a word, for
this is the only the remarkable sin, (I mean extortion and oppression:) for
which the first world was drowned, which feeds upon the sweat and blood of
the mere merchanicall poor, taking 40 50. 60. and 100. upon the 100. by the
year: besides Bili money and for feiture of the pawnes, when charitable
persons have offered above 20 years since, to give largely, and to lend moneys
Gratis, as also after 10. in the 100. to supply by way of pawn-houses (by some
called Lombards:) the need and occasions of the Englands ^iew, Page ^2.
poor and mechanicke people; the neglect whereof shows that our hearts are
ouerfrozen with the Ice of uncharitableness, which otherwise could not have so
long continued; for it provoke Gods anger against us in the highest degree.
If these men had been Jews, I might have bestowed some Hebrew upon them in
detestation of the word Neshech, which is nothing else but a kind of biting, as
a dog uses to bite and gnaw upon a bone; otherwise to use many languages in a
little Treatise of free trade may seem impertinent.

The third cause of the decay of Trade he says, is, The third cause of the
decay of Trade.
the litigious Law suits, which as one way they increase by scarsity of money,
which compels men to stand out in Law for a time, when they cannot pay
until they receive: So another way, when moneys are plentiful, men care the
less for money, and pride causes them to spend, and to go to law for every
triflle, disputing Delana Caprina: true it is, that this Law warfare
interrupteth trade, but to make the same to be one of the efficient Causes of
the decay of trade, I cannot altogether agree thereunto: but rather to the
Remedies which shall be hereafter declared; albeit many men, are vexed,
imprisoned and overthrown, having spent their time and means in Law: which
might have bin employed in trade for the good of the Commonwealth and their
own quietness.

I do likewise omit to entreat of transportation of ordnance and munition
heretofore permitted, mentioned by the said author, and now prevented in some
sort; neither was England in the year, 1588. in such great distress to be
termed in articulo Page 75.
temporis, when the merchants Adventurers did provide from Hambrough a ships
lading with Powder and shot, as parcel of their duty to assist the Kingdom,
by God only preserved.

The fourth Cause of the Decay of Trade, or The fourth cause of the decay of
Trade.
to speak properly, neglect of Trade, is, The admitting of foreign Nations,
to fish in his Majesty's Streams and dominions, without paying any thing for
the same, whereby their Navigations is wonderfully increased, their Mariners
multiplied, and their Country enriched, with the continual labor of the
people of all sorts, both impotent and lame, which are set on work, and get
their living.

Concerning this fishing Trade: there has been a continual Agitation above
30. years to make Busses and Fisher-boats, but the Action is still
interrupted, because other Nations do find too great favor and friends here
to divert all the good intentions and endeavors of such as (with the Author of
this Discourse) have employed their Time and good means therein; for the
Merchants Aduenturours, the Company of Merchants Trading in Russia, and the
East-land Merchants, did also oppose themselves against it at the Council
Table, and did allege the reasons following.

1. The infringing of their Privileges here and beyond the Seas.
Inconveniences against the ^shing in England.
2. The Interloopers advantage to interrupt their Trade under color hereof. 3.
The want of means to make Return, both for Fish and Cloth also. 4. The
inhauncing of the price of foreign Commodities. 5. The preoccupying of money
to the hinderance of Cloth. 6. The dissolution of the joint stock of the
Russia Company. 7. The encouragement of Strangers hereupon to make a Contract
with the Russian Emperor. 8. The discouragement to undertake new discoueries.
9. The defraying of the Charge of Ambassadors and other extraordinary Charges
for honor of the State. 10. The plenty of Fish, which those Countries have
from time to time, and some other Reasons.
So that in conclusion, England (by their saying) cannot maintain the Sea
Trade and the Land Trade together; neither do they make account to make Return
in money, knowing that they should lose more thereby, then by the exchange of
those Countries, or by Commodities. And albeit that all the premises may be
moderated without hinderance to the said Companies: nevertheless such is the
condition of some Merchants, not understanding the Mysteries of exchange, and
ouer-ruling others by their order of Antiquity in their Society: that neither
Reason or experience can prevail; insomuch, that whereas other Princes take
their Duties of other Nations for fishing, and fish themselves also by their
Subjects: yet England cannot resolve to do the like, or at least take order
for the said Duties.

In Russia many leagues from the Maine, Fishermen Exemplary Actions of other
Princes about duties of fishing.
do pay great Taxes to the Emperor of Russia, and in most places, other
Nations are prohibited to fish.

The King of Denmark does the like, and takes great Tribute, both at
Ward-house and the Sound.

The King of Sweden in like manner, and the said King of Denmark now for the
Kingdom of Norway.

All the Bordering Princes of Italy do take Taxes upon fish within the
Mediterranian Seas.

The like Tax is taken by the Duke of Medina Sidonia for Tunny in the Spanish
Seas.

The States of the United Provinces do take an imposition upon fish, which is
taken within the Streams, and Dominions of other Princes.

The Hollanders do allow the Tenth fish, both in Russia, Lappia and other
places, or pay a Composition for the same; as also moreover a Tribute in the
Sound for passage, to fetch the said fish. And of mine own knowledge, I am
assured, they would willingly have paid the same unto England, or a good
composition for it, had not the greedy lucre of some persons hindered the same.

These exemplary Actions have long determined Com^nitie of the Seas, as also a
distinct Dominion.
the question of Mare liberum, touching the Community or freedom of the Seas,
which is acknowledged to be so, for Navigations, without that the same does any
manner of way prejudice the Distinct Dominions of the Seas of all Princes
concerning fishing; that is to say, the fishing Trade. So that it is
superfluous to allege the opinions of Orators and Poets about the fishing
heretofore in the Mediterranian Seas, neither does it belong to this place to
cite the Determinations of the learned Ciuilians which are mentioned in the
Treatise De Dominio Maris. For the matter has been learnedly handled at the
Council Board, before the Grave Senators, many years since, by our Ciuilians
and others, which (to avoid prolixitie) I do omit.

Now from the Fishing we are come to Clothing or Drapery of the Kingdom, and
the The fifth cause of the decay of Trade.
abuses thereof, as the fist cause of the decay of Trade: wherein to use many
distinctions of the new and old Drapery (unless it were to Reduce matters in
statu quo prius:) shall be needless. And although the dressing and dying of
Cloth, was insisted upon to be done in England in the year 1616. To establish
the Manufacture within the Realm, (at which time 64. thousand Clothes were
exported:) which was afterward revoked:) I cannot omit to observe the
Practices which were used by Combination with other Nations abroad, and
domesticke intelligence a^ home, whereby many good Actions are o^rowne, to the
general hurt, and with little advancement to the particular.

It cannot be denied, but that the Drapery of foreign Nations (not only the
making of Cloth in the Low Countries, but o^ late yeere^ in Italy and Spain
also:) the Trade of Cloth (...) much diminished, both in the number made, and
in the price thereof, which is a Canker to the Commonwealth. But this is not
to be cured by abating the price of our Cloth continually (as it were)
striving to our undoing, to vndersell other Nations; for Satan cannot cast o^
Page 105.
Satan, as the said Author alleges: which might hereunto be better applied,
if the Simile were grounded; for in Physic one deletorious poison, is hardly
tempred, but by one of equal strength. For the vnderselling of our Clothes
will not make them more vendible, when the Accidents of great Wars does
hinder the same: wherein we are to note two principal points.

First, that other Nations (buying heretofore The advantage of our Merchants in
the sale of Clothes.
our Clothes when they were sold deerer, by the one half in price then they be
now) did never complain that the Clothes were sold too dear, but they did
always complain of the false making of our Cloth.

Secondly, that other Nations are as willing to sell unto us their foreign
Commodities, as we can be to sell our Clothes to them; for those that make
Clothes in their Countries, have no occasion to buy foreign Wares, or the
Commodities of others, but seek to sell them for ready money, or to be paid
at some times: whereby England has a great advantage, and may enjoy the
benefit of it, in selling their Cloth with Reputation, which is ever
accompanied with Request, and causes Commodities to be sold at good rates;
whereas vilifying the price of Wares, can never establish a Trade, and make
Commodities more vendible; for this course is violent, and Nullum violentum
perpetuum.

And in this place it may be thought convenient The Authors Apology.
to make an answer, to the imputation and false interpretation which the said
Author makes, in the last chapter of his Treatise upon the words mentioned in
the Canker of Englands Commonwealth, wishing the amendment of the above said
fault, That our Cloth might be sold at Page 46.
so dear a Rate, and according to the price of foreign Commodities, that
thereby other Nations, should take upon them, to make our Clothes. And the
Remedy is added, by selling our Woolles deerer, whereof they must make them;
for in those days of the latter Time of Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory,
and until the second year of our most Gracious Lord King James, Wools were
permitted to be Transported by the Staplers and others. And the makers of Cloth
beyond the Seas, must needs have them to cover their Woolles in the Indraping,
which is now prohibited, and the Case is altered: hereupon this Modern
Merchant out of his deep Speculation; says, which seems to have in it, much
more Dutch then English, to deprive this Kingdom of so Royal a Manufacture,
whereby so many thousands of poor Families are maintained: imitating herein
the Butchers fly, biting upon one place, which seems to be ga^ld, as he
says, and leaving all the found body untouched. For my Writings which are
extant Englands View. Page 88. A Manuscript of the Royal Merchant of great
Britain.
in Print, and Manuscripts, do show, that my continual study has been to
seek the welfare of this Kingdom, which caused foreign Nations to say, that
I did savor of too much English, and had made my self odious thereby, so that
I may justly Challenge the misapplied example of the great Commander of the
Romans Belizarius, alleged by the said Author; for Envy (looking asquint, as
if she were borne under Saturn:) having deprived me of the sight of one eye
with foreign Nations; does now endeavor to make me blind, to bring me to
say, Date obulum Belizario, quem inuidia, non culpa caecauit. The like part
she played with me, for the invention of Farthing tokens, by accusation, that
there was an intention to bring the use of Copper moneys within the Realm;
which Tokens are found to be very commodious and necessary, whereby the waste
of much Silver is prevented, the mere poor relieved, and many of their lives
saved, and the Commonwealth cannot be without them, unless Leaden Tokens were
made again in derogation of his Majesty's Praerogatiue Royal. Wise men have
noted, that the due observation of virtue, makes a Stranger grow natural in a
strange Country, and the vicions a mere Stranger in his own native Soil:
and to their judgments I shall always appeal with the divine assistance, and
also pray for Unity and Concord where none is, especially where the Spirits of
neighbor friends should be united by true Religion to make Justice flourish;
to which end, Wisdom does construe things in the best Sense For if they had
with Patroclus put on Achilles Armor, and rid on his Horse, and durst Page 15.
never touch Achilles his Spear: Surely our Achilles Spear does both wound
and heal, as his did, and like unto the water of Dodona, both extinguish and
lighten Torches, whose continual Of (...) and (...) to work forcibly. iXres, A
Step, (...). To distribute.
vigilant care by many Nocturnall Lucubrations, has no need to be remembered
by the sight of his Subjects blood in sheets, written within and without,
proceeding of (...) a Revenging eye.

Returning to the Cloth Trade and the Clothier, with a consideration of the
merchants Aduenturours, Eastland merchants, Russia Merchants and others, and
the Wool Grower, or the Gentleman; let us carefully observe them in particular
and in general, supposing their complaints were all heard at one instant
together, as also diuidedly, whereby Truth does better appear by observing
their Policies, partly declared in the neglect of the fishing Trade. The
merchants Aduenturours having engrossed into their hands by color of their
last Letters Patents, The sole Power of exporting all The sixth Cause of the
decay of Trade, The Policies of Merchants.
white Clothes, colored Clothes, Kersies, Baies, Says, Serges, Perpetuanoes,
and all other new Draperies, into Holland, Zealand, Brabant, and other parts of
the low and higher Germany, has abated the Trade.

For all Merchants Strangers, might and did heretofore export white Clothes out
of the Kingdom, paying double Custom, which they now may not.

The Merchants of the Staple, from all the Staple Ports, As London,
Westminster, Brist^l, South-hampton, Hull, Boystone, and New Castle, have
heretofore exported, either Cloth or Wool, or both, which now they may not.

All other Merchants at large, as well at London, as of all other parts of the
Kingdom have usually heretofore exported, colored Clothes, Kersies, Bays,
Says, Serges, Perpetuanoes, etc. which now they may not. So that all the Trade
of the Merchants of the Staple, of the merchant Strangers, and of all other
English Merchants, concerning the exportation of all the Commodities made of
Wool into those Countries, where the same are especially to be vented, is in
the Power of the Merchants Aduenturours only; and it is come to be managed by
40. or 50. persons of of that Company, consisting of three or four thousand.
Nay one man alone, has compassed into his hands, the whole Trade of colored
Clothes and Kersies for these parts, by the means of exchanges, and moneys
taken up at Interest. It is impossible that the same number with the same
ability, can manage the same Trade, to the best profit in Times of wars, as
in Times of Peace: Then much less can a lesser number, with lesser ability
manage a greater Trade, in most Troublesome times, especially if they have
borrowed 50. or 60. thousand pounds at use, for the service of the Company, and
thereby engaged the Trade, and set themselves in debt; which causes many of
the best merchant Aduenturours to give over Trade, and are become purchasers,
or lenders of money at Interest. Many others of them have engaged themselves in
the East Indian Company, which did carry away their money, and left the Cloth.

This small number to manage so great a Trade The seventh cause of the decay,
is the false making of our Cloth.
incourageth the Clothier to adventure to make false Cloth, because it is
impossible, that so few Merchants can search and visit every Cloth, as it ought
to be done, and the Clothiers conscience is satisfied. For he says that the
falsest Cloth is answerable to the best price, because none may export but
they, and therefore they will give what price they please: for this deceitful
Cloth has caused great iarres and differences between the English Merchants
and the foreign Nations for Tare or Rebatements, and the general Report of
the falsenesse of English Manufactures, has caused a wonderful decay of the
sale thereof.

The Trade thus limited to a small number of a Company, residing for the most
part at London, is a general prejudice to the whole Kingdom, which though it
have made London rich, it has made all the Ports and other parts of the
Kingdom poor; for it enforces needless and chargeable carriage and
Recarriage of diverse Commodities, whereby they are endeared unto us, and it
hinders all the Ports (being the Walls of the Kingdom) from having either
foreign or domesticke Commodities brought unto them at the best hand, which
causes them to be almost desolate and forsaken: and it hinders the Clothiers
and new Drapers (which dwell in remote parts:) from selling their Cloth and
Stuffes at their next adjoining Ports, for how can they sell, when there are no
Merchants?

It causes all Chapmen to give poor and faint prices for Wool, because when
it is indraped, it may not more freely be exported to the best advantage. So
that the Grower is hindered in the price of his Wool, for every loss and
prejudice that comes upon cloth and the Clothier, One extremity enforces
another.
does fall upon the Wool and the Wool Grower. And the Clothier says, he is
prevented of his best Chapmen for his Cloth, for that merchants Strangers, or
other English merchants cannot work upon the advantage of Markets and the
Clothiers necessity, which beats down the price of Cloth; the price of Cloth
beats down the price of Wool; the price of Wool beats down the price of
Lands, which cannot be improued; and foreign Commodities are freely taken in
Barter for the Return of our home Commodities, when moneys nor Bullion can be
imported, as has been declared: so that the Hammers at the Minte, where the
pulses of the commonwealth should be felt, are the life and moving. And it is
come to such extremity with the Eastland merchants, that they cannot vent
their Cloth in Barter of other Wares to make Return, and by money their loss
would be incredible.

Shall this be Proclaimed a Free Trade, when within our selves, we are in
Bondage, and have lost the benefit of the Two essential Parts of Traffic,
namely the Rule of money and exchanges? Let every man judge.

To say nothing of the dependances of Trade, as the increase of Navigations and
Nauigators, when Merchants heretofore had more freedom, and the Ports were
furnished and frequented, with great store of shipping; which although they
were but small of burden: yet every one had their several Pilot and Mariners,
which did daily supply the Land, with plenty of Seamen.

The Merchants Staplers have observed, that the Merchants Adventurers, have an
inevitable opportunity of Combination, to set what price they please upon cloth
to the Clothier, of Wool to the Grower, and of all Commodities exported and
imported; and likewise to lay what private impositions they please, upon any of
the said Commodities, so that whether they do well or ill for the
Commonweal, there can be no apparent trial: for having power to bar all
others from Trade, but themselves, they are like a Commodity weighed in a
Balance, that has but one end, where there can be no Counterpoize, and then
it seems to be great weight, although it be never so light. So that this
engrossing of Trade into few men's Engrossing of Trade.
hands, has caused our home Trades to decay, our Manufactures to decrease, and
our homebred Commodities to lie upon our hands unsold, or to be sold at a low
price, to the utter undoing of all sorts of poor people in England, and the
great damage of all his Majesty's loving Subjects: and whilst our merchants
hinder one another from Trade, other Nations increase their own Manufactures,
and enlarge their Trade; not only for the said Countries of high and low
Germany, but also for Russia, Eastland, Poland, and other places.

For the making of good and true Cloth, many excellent Laws have been made
and enacted, especially in the fourth year of his Majesty's happy Reign;
whereupon I have heretofore made a Demonstration which was exhibited to the
Right Honorable the Lords of the Privy Council, showing the weight, length
and breadth of all sorts of Clothes, and that Weight and Measure does controlle
each other, whereby the Merchant that buyeth the Cloth, may be enabled to find
out the fraud and deceit of the Clothier: but this should be done before the
selling of them, and that by honest Officers or Magistrates, according to the
said Act, whereof our great Book (now under Lex Mercatoria or Law Merchant.
the Press,) entitled Lex Mercatoria or the Law Merchant, does entreat of
more particularly.

The eight cause of the decay of Trade, is, Th'exportation The eight cause of
the decay of Trade, exportation of Materials and impositions.
of the materials of Woolls, and Wooll-fells, from the Seacoasts of England,
and the Kingdom of Scotland, and the Customs and Impositions laid upon
Clothes at home and abroad in other Countries, especially the great Imposition
in the Low united Provinces called Consumption Money, paid by the Retaile of
Cloth or Drapery, only upon our English Clothes, and not upon Cloth in those
parts, whereby their Cloth is more vented, and English Cloth in less Request.

Touching the exportation of Materials, there is a provident order taken. to
prevent the same in England, by a late direction and Proclamation, prohibiting
the exportation of Woolls, Wooll-fells, Wool-yearne, Fullers earth, and
Woodashes. And the like will be done in Scotland; and for the better execution,
there is a Committie appointed of certain selected discreet persons under the
great Seal of England.

The ninth Cause of the decay of Trade, are The ninth cause of the decay of
Trade, the wars, the Pirate, and Bankrupts.
the Wars in Christendom, as also in other Countries out of the same, where
our Cloth and Manufactures have been transported, increased by the daily
losses sustained by Pirates, and continual breaking of Merchants and Tradesmen;
all which is merely Heterocliton or opposite to Traffic, and they concur
all in nature, to the interruption and overthrowing of Trade; and this can
never be diuerted, prevented, nor remedied, by selling our Clothes or
Manufactures cheap, to vndersell other Nations, who meet with the said
hindrances and interruptions as well as we do, in the Trade of the Clothes
made by them: But Time and quietness must be expected in some measure. The
price of Wool being fallen from 33. shillings the Todde, to 18. shillings and
under, disimproning the Revenue of lands, can never increase Trade, but
impouerish the Kingdom and all landed men.

Aristotle says, that Riches is either Natural or Artificial. The natural
Riches, as lands, vines, forests, meddowes, etc. The Artificial, as Money,
Gold, Silver, Cloth, and all things metalline or mineral, and manufactures,
proceeding of the Natural Riches. And as both these do receive their price
and estimation by money (as the Rule and square:) so reason requires a certain
Equality between them in the estimation of the value thereof, which daily
decreaseth by abating the price of our Commodities, and for the want of moneys;
wherein some unskillful merchants are much to be blamed in making
inconsiderate Barters for our Clothes Inconsiderate Barters.
beyond the Seas, wanting vente, and being (by the abuse of exchange) deprived
to import moneys and Bullione. To conclude this point, let us remember, that
the Protection of Princes in wars and against the Pirates, is to be
maintained to prevent the decay of Trade.

The tenth and last Cause of the decay of Trade, The tenth cause of the decay
of Trade. The Use of foreign Wares.
is the immoderate use of foreign Commodities, and the less use of our home
Commodities: for albeit that by the Superfluity of our native Commodities,
Trade is procured: yet if that Superfluity do abound so, that thereby the price
of it becomes abated: Then foreign Commodities being more used and worn,
come in the liew thereof and are advanced, which brings an evident
ouerballancing of Commodities.

This caused some States men in France, to invent means how the Trade might be
cut off, and that no Commodities should be transported out of the Realm,
making account, that they could live peaceably within themselves and very good
cheap, without giving or receiving any thing of other nations. This was much
contradicted by Monsieur Bodine the great Politician of France, as is noted in
Englands View, who showed that they had need of the Stranger, and most
especially of the Traffic with them: Insomuch, that although they could have
lived without them in regard of Commodities: yet charity, humanity, and Policy
wills us to maintain friendship with our neighbors, and rather to give them
part of our blessings, then not to deal or Communicate with them. True it is,
that it cannot be denied, that if any kingdom under the Sun, can subsist of
it self, none has more cause of thanksgiving unto God, then the Kingdoms of
Great Britain and Ireland, so richly replenished with all things serving ad
Victum and Vestitum, for the Back and Belly, as we term it, not only for our
own maintenance, but also for the supply of others. But God caused nature to
distribute her benefits, or his blessings to several Climates, supplying the
barrenness of some things in one country, with the fruitfulness and store of
other countries, to the end that interchangeably one Commonweal should live
with an other. And therefore is Traffic and Trade so much to be maintained
and defended, wherein all manner of rashness in the sale of wares is to be
avoided, but by Policy to be prevented and vpholden, according to the Plutarch
in vita Sertorij
Policy of that valiant Captain Sertorius, who did prefer the same before
strength by setting the feeble Souldior to pull out the horses tail, which the
mightiestman of his camp could not effect, using violence: when the feeble man
did perform the same by pulling out the hairs by little and little. Merchants
can use the like Policy, when they want not monyes, and do expect a
convenient time to sell their Clothes with reputation.

CHAP. III.
Of Governed Trade, and therein of Monopoly.
HITHERTO (says the said Author:) the matter of Trade has been considered
in Money and Merchandise, and the exchange of monyes is past over by him, as a
matter not worthy the consideration: Commodities and Moneys.
indeed it was good for him to sail between the two Rocks of Scylla and
Charybdis, without further adventure, and not to suffer Shipwreck upon the
dangerous Rock of exchanges. But diverse merchants have much distasted, that a
man of their profession should neglect one of the Essential Parts of
Traffic, and the most operative in Trade, being the only measure between us
and foreign nations, without which, all his discourse is without Rhyme or
Reason. So that he cannot find any Parity nor Purity in exchanges; like unto a
sick body who by reason of the bitterness of his tongue, can not relish.

Monsieur Bodine says, that when a man is noted to be of experience, and to
understand matters, wherein he is surpassing others: The Proverb is, Il
entendle Par, he does understand his Par or Equality; which cannot be applied
unto him that does not understand the matter of exchange: for all his arguments
are framed between Commodities and moneys, from whence this Syllogism may be
drawn against him, to maintain the vnderualuation of our money in specie.

Nothing causes Merchants to export more money out of the Realm, then they
bring in: but only the bringing in of more Commodities into the Realm then
they carried out. The vnderualuation of our moneys, causes no more Commodities
to be brought into the Realm, then is carried out: Ergo, the vnderualuation
of our moneys, causes not more money to be carried out of the Realm, then is
brought in. But left this should breed a Dilemma, let us examine his words
concerning exchanges.

It is not the Rate of exchanges, but the value of Page 104.
Monyes, here low, elsewhere high, which causes their exportation; nor do the
exchanges, but the Hysteron Proteron.
Plenty and Scarcity of moneys cause their values.

There are three ways to dissolve an argument, (...) t^ ^ssolue an argument.
Denial, Retorting and Distinction. Denial is too hostile, sauouring more of
obstinacy, then of Art; Retorsion is more witty, then profitable. But
Distinction is like to mature Remedies compared to Purges, which cleanse and
feed. Now the said Author takes the course of Denial, and proves nothing.

If monyes be here low, and elsewhere high, how is this known but by the
Valuation of exchange? Exchange compared to the Assay of money.
considering the diversity of moneys of several Standards, wherein the
exchange is like to the Assay, whereby the finenesse of Silver and Gold is
known, grounded upon the quantity, which the exchange requires according to
the weight of fine Silver and Gold, contained in the monyes of each Country,
which is the intrinsicke value, and not according to the extrinsicke valuation,
which is altered by Denomination; for the name of a thing does not alter the
value Really, but the substance does it, if it be altered; much less does
Plenty or Scarcity of monyes cause their values, it being contrary to the
nature and properties of money. The public Measure, the yard does measure the
Cloth, but the Cloth does not measure the yard. To illustrate the premises by
examples, I have heretofore showed the consideration incident. The Canker of
England. Page 58.


Suppose that some Merchants Strangers do come over into the Realm, to buy a
Pack of Ten Clothes valued at 80. pound Starlin, which they are to pay in
Gold and Silver, and yet they do not know, what the Weight and finenesse of
our Starlin money is, neither does the English Merchants know the weight and
finenesse of the foreign Coin, which they have brought over: hereupon to
content both parties, the moneys on either side must be tried by the Subtle
Assay according to their finenesse, calculated upon the pound weight of 12.
ounces Troy, and then by Weight they answer each other accordingly; and so this
negotiation is (in effect) but a Permutation of monyes for Commodities, before
exchange was invented.

This being not well observed, might cause men to be deceived, as the Pewterer
(sometime an Alderman of London.) was, who being used to change old Pewter for
new, taking a consideration for the fashion, would take the like course in the
buying of Silver Plate of a Goldsmith, delivering his money by weight, whereby
he sustained a loss, because he did deliver him a quantity of old groates,
which were lighter then their value; as also other Starlin moneys, which were
worn out in continuance of time, and much under their true weight. And
boasting of his good bargain, he was made to calculate what an ounce of
silver did stand him, and he found that by thesemeanes, he had paid 6.
shillings the ounce for that, which was offered unto him for 5. shillings, 6.
pence. Faller^ fallentem non est fraus.

The lightness of this Pewterers money may be compared to the low exchange in
the vnderualuation of our moneys, by exchange; for if a Merchant Stranger did
bring over money in specie at this time, to buy Commodities within the Realm,
and deliver the same here according to the very value in payment by the Assay;
and thereupon do look back how his money is ouerualued in regard of the
exchange, whereby he might have made over the same by a bill of exchange: he
shall find a far greater loss then the Pewterer did, not of 6. pence in an
ounce, but above nine pence in every ounce of Silver. Great are the gains to
be made by exchanges, without ever to deal or meddle with any Commodities at
all.

I know that to the judicious Merchants; I have given cause of offense, to have
written so much in the defense of exchange; But knowing that many grave and
discreet persons have given over this Princely Study, imagining therein A
Princely Study.
more mystery then there is, rather then they would take pains to understand
it: I have bin prolixe, wishing that the said Author had the Purity of
understanding to know the Parity of so many exchanges, as have been devised in
Italy, Germany, France, Spain, The Low Countries, Eastland, Poland, and other
places, at large declared in my book, Lex Mercatoria; serving all Societies
and Companies of Merchants to be mindful of the Common Welfare, wherein
Master Hussy Governor of the Merchants Adventurers company in the beginning
of Queen Elizabeth's Reign took great pains with others, To find and
establish the True Par of exchange, which was examined and altered Par of ex
change.
in the years, 1564. and 1576. as also in the years 1586. and 1600, my self
being a Commissioner in the later: But the true Remedy to rule the course of
exchange, was but lately found out.

Concerning the government of Trade, we have noted heretofore, that in all
Traffiques, the general does govern the particular. Some would have other
nations to come to buy the Commodities of us, within the Realm, for, say they,
Foreign nations fetch our Wares.
there is according to the Proverb, twenty in the hundredth difference between.
Will you buy? and will you sell? These men have no consideration of the
maintenance of navigations, which is the greatest strength of the Realm, whose
defense (next under God) consists most of Ships and well experienced
Mariners. Whereas also the transporting of our Cloth to certain places,
causes other nations to resort thither to buy them, which may be more
properly called to be, Will you sell? Seeing that those nations do bring their
own Commodities unto our Merchants to the places by them appointed, as Delf
and Hamborough; which is (in effect) as much as Will you buy? And would not this
be, Will you buy? if in a dispersed and straggling manner, our Cloth were
carried to all markets beyond the seas in several places; which would take
away the desire of buying: for he that buyeth, does it in hope of gain to be
had in places where he intends to carry the Commodities, which Commodities if
he knows to be extant in most places to be vented, will quench his desire
of buying: and he that comes to barter other Commodities for ours, has the
like consideration.

But let us admit, that our Cloth would be advanced in price, when men (should
by multitudes) run to the markets, or into the country in all places to buy it:
what would be the event of it? It would not only be sold beyond the seas
with a smaller gain and many times to loss (we being naturally to make speedy
return:) but we should also pay dearer for the foreign Commodities, which we
should obtain by way of Permutation, or for the Bills obligatory of the
Merchants to whom we sell our Cloth: and if our Merchants were cut off, and
that other nations should buy the Cloth within the Realm, and so advance the
price thereof: (as it happens most commonly in France and Spain at the
Vintage time with their Wines and Raisons:) Then foreign Commodities would be
sold dearer unto us by them again: for the small gain had upon our
Commodities causes us, and would cause them to seek a better gain upon the
foreign Commodities to the general hurt.

Others would have all things at large in the Dissolution of Societies, etc.
course of Traffic, and that there should be no societies or corporations of
Merchants for any places of Trade, (terming them to be Monopolies,) but that by
way of partnership Merchants might associate themselves, according to the
manner of some other Countries: These men have no regard, that innouations are
as dangerous, as to remove the corner stones of a building; neither do they
observe a momentary difference betwixt the Government of a Monarchy, and that
especially in an Island: and the government of a Democracy which is popular, or
of an Aristocracy, which is governed by the better sort of the people; these
seeking by all means to make their Countries populous by the inhabiting of all
nations for the increase of their means collected by impositions and Aczises,
and that upon all things consumed and most upon victuals; the other, namely the
Monarchy, avoiding as much as they can, the multitude of foreign nations to
inhabit within their government, and holding impositions and Taxes to be done
with great aduisement. And that the ouerballancing of foreign Commodities with
the native Commodities may be prevented; which by the other is not regarded,
neither can it be by them observed.

The Providence of the State has also a great consideration in the course of
Trade, under government in appointed places, especially in that of the Merchant
Adventurers company, (who have the managing of the cream of the land, the
maine Trade of the kingdom, and do expose to adventure the greatest part of
the wealth thereof with foreign nations in trouble. some times of wars:)
because they may by this order be soon removed or called home upon occasion,
which cannot be done conveniently otherwise: where there is no vigilant eye to
take care for the general wealth of the Realm, for no nation of Christendom
Traffiques so much in Bulk of Staple Commodities, as the Realm of England;
which Boters (though altogether Spanish in times past, and no friend to
England) confesses, that two years before the taking of Andwarpe, all the
wares of Christendom being Ann. 1584.
valued, and summed by the offices of that City, (which were vented there in
one year.) The whole being divided into six parts: the English amounted to
four parts thereof.

But we must not seem to flatter Companies or Societies, when it is found that
they deal unadvisedly, or that by their means, things are out of order in the
course of Trade; for then the Kings authority or the Royal Merchant of great
Britain, must be the ture Palynurus, and sit at the Rudder of the Ship of
Traffic, to reform abuses. For a Society may become to be A Monopoly in
effect, when some few Merchants A Society may become a Monopoly.
have the whole managing of a Trade, to the hurt of a Commonwealth, when many
others might also Traffic and negotiate for the Common good, having their
Stocks employed therein to sell the Commodities of the Realm with reputation
at convenient times, and not upon a sudden to pay Bills of exchanges or
moneys taken up at interest,

To make a Definition of a Monopoly, we need The property of Monopoly.
not use many words, for the abuse of Monopolium has made the same as well to
be understood as the word of Vsura, I mean biting Usury. The parts of it are
to be considered.

The Restraint of the freedom of commerce to some one or few, and the setting
of the price, at the pleasure of one or few; to their private benefits, and the
prejudice of the Commonwealth. And as this may be done by authority, so may
the abouesaid course also be committed under the color of authority by the
Princes grant or letters Pate^ts.

Commendable is the custom of the City of Norenborough in Germany, where to
maintain the people on work, they receive all their manufactures and pay them
weekly, and afterward sell the^ for a reasonable profit, which thereby become
dispersed in all countries; whereby they have made a great Trade for the West
Indies, and they maintain thereby their Commo^-wealth as an Aristocratick
government: and this is neither A Monopoly, nor properly An engrossing, being
done by public authority. Such therefore as sell the Commodities of the Realm
unto foreign nations with advantage of private benefit, (albeit within the
Compass of a Monopoly:) are more to be tolerated then those that vndersell the
Commodities of the kingdom, and procure their Gains by the Commodities of
other nations to be sold dear within the Realm.

Here I call to mind our former observation of that Royal Commodity Tin,
which above Englands View. Page 142.
one hundred years past, was sold for 40. shillings the hundredth, when the
best veluets were sold for 10. shillings the yard: how the Merchants trading
Turkey found fault of his, Malesties Praeemption, and caused the same to be
abolished, to keep the price at 55. shillings the hundred; and bringing in
Corints, Leuant Wines, Spices, and Indicoe (at dear rates:) used all means to
suppress the rising thereof: which caused foreign nations to fall into
consideration thereof, and using means to incorporate the same, it brought
that Commodity in estimation again. And the said Praeemption was
reestablished again, which has advanced the price to double the rate; whereby
the stock or wealth of the kingdom, has been since increased 600. thousand
pounds Starlin, and his Majesty has received for his benefit. 150.
Praeemption of Tin.
thousand pounds, which was gotten by foreign nations, who justly paid the
same according to the value; the price of foreign Commodities considered. On
the contrary, another Commodity mineral, namely Copperas, which was sold for
10. and 12. pound the Tun, and whereof a great Trade might have been made
for other Countries: has been so ill governed by workmens vnderselling one
another, and for want of good order, that the same is sold for 3. pounds the
Tun, and is become out of request in all countries. For the best things may
be marred in handling, which by the wisdom of the State, is to be foreseen
by means of Merchants of experience, who might have maintained the same.

In like manner the sole importation of Spanish Tobacco, does gain and save
the kingdom many thousand pounds yearly. For Bays, Says, Perpetuanoes, and
the like Commoditiet, License of Tobacco.
which these two years have been sold in Spain with 15. upon the hundred
loss to procure money to buy the same, are now sold to so much profit,
besides the benefit of his Majesty's imposition and advancement of the
Virginia and Bermodaes Plantation: the like may be practiced upon other
Commodities, without incurring the inconuenciences of Monopoly.

Concerning Companies or Societies to deal in a joint Stock or apart: it may
be thought Joint Stocks or apart.
convenient to have joint Stocks for Remote places, as the East Indies and
Persia. And albeit that some would have the same to be only outward in the
employment, but in Return to be divided in kind or Species of the
Commodities which they Receive: yet the manner of the Portugals, is (by
experience) found better to sell also jointly, considering we sell unto other
Nations, who pay for it, although some part thereof is sold deerer thereby
within the Realm to the Subjects and inhabitants. But for other places nearer,
the Merchants to deal apart under some Government, may seem convenient.

The general intention of all Grants by The intention of Letters Patents for
new inventions.
Letters Patents, for the making of any kind of Manufactures has Relation to
set the people on work, to recompense the Inuentor for some years with a
privilege: but most especially, that thereby the said Manufactures or
Commodities may be sold better cheap to the Subjects. What shall we say then
of those Grants, which make the Commodity deerer to the Subject, and sell the
same better cheap to Allomes.
the Transporter or Stranger? Surely they may be thought to be, for to set the
people on work upon the common Purse, but otherwise there is but little
policy in it; much like unto the Silver Mines of the Duke of Brownswicke,
which he maintained to his charges, called the Wild man: which causes him to
coin Dollers, having on the one side his Arms, and on the other side a Savage
man, holding a burning Candle in his hand with an inscription, Alijs
inseruiendo, Consumor.

To end this point, wherein the said Author has made good distinctions, I
shall only add moreover, that when new inventions are found out, for the good
of the Commonwealth: That the next is, to augment them by Trade in foreign
parts. And to prevent that the same be not overthrown by the knowledge of
their servants or others, but that by some good privileges and means, they
may be maintained to the increase of Trade, for the General welfare of the
Kingdom.

CHAP. IIII.
Of want of Government in Trade.
WIse Men have noted, that A Distinction only, does dispell the foggy mysteries
of deceitful fallacies: as the Sun drives away the Wind and Clouds.
Therefore too many distinctions in a little Treatise may seem superfluous,
especially when they are grounded upon many Repetitions: So that having in the
former Chapters, observed the Defective Parts of Trade, and tacit answered
some objections, I will omit, the commendation of all the Societies of
Merchants, handled by the said Author in his fourth chapter, as also the
effects of the former Causes, as they may concern the Kings Majesty and the
Commonwealth mentioned in the fifth and sixth Chapters, to avoid the cramming of
a man with learning, as promises do with hope; and so come to his propounded
Remedies.

But lest this Title of the want of Government Errors in Trade committed by
Merchants
in Trade, should seem to be misapplyed: I have thought good to declare,
wherein Merchants may easily commit errors, to the prejudice of the
Commonwealth, albeit, it makes for their private benefit, namely;

In the selling of their Cloth good cheap beyond the Seas in greater
quantity, when they have beaten down the price with the Clothier, whereby the
Clothier is forced to do the like with the Wooll-grower, which disimproueth
the Revenue of lands; but the Merchant employeth the lesser Stock, and has
not therefore the less benefit; the Wooll-grower and the Clothier bearing the
loss.

To make over their moneys from beyond the Seas, at a low price of exchange, in
giving less money there, to have the same paid here by Bill of exchange in
Starlin money, receiving the moneys there at such prices, as they cannot import
them, but to their exceeding loss: whereby it comes to pass, that the
exportation of our moneys, gives an exceeding gain on the contrary, and our
Cloth is thereby more vndersold as before said.

To conniue or wink at the false making of Cloth, and afterward to abate the
greater Tare, for the faults, upon the Clothier.

To make continual Returns of our Cloth in foreign Commodities, and thereby
procure the more gain, because of the small gain or loss either, had upon
their Clothes, whereby the Commonwealth is impouerished.

To sell our Cloth so good cheap beyond the Seas, that other Nations may make
a Trade thereby for Russia, Eastland, Barbary, and other Countries, to the
great hinderance of the Merchants of those Societies.

To abate the Customs and Impositions here laid upon Clothes, to the end, they
may sell them better cheap, by vnderselling others.

To vndersell our Clothes so much in price, that in comparison of the Cloth
made beyond the Seas, the Drapery there be given over, without regard had, how
to Return some money and Bullion, but by transferring of their Bills of debt
for foreign Commodities, to ouer-lade the Kingdom with them at dear Rates,
according to the inhauncing of their Coins; all which may prove beneficial to
them in particular, but wonderful prejudicial to the whole Kingdom.

Now, before we come to entreat of the Remedies for all the aforesaid
inconueniencies, it is most necessary to examine the Defective Means and
Remedies, which have been tried, these 350. years. And these may be
distinguished in their proper and several natures, three manner of ways: for
the wealth of a Kingdom Three means (...) decrease the wealth of the Realm.
cannot properly decrease, but by selling our native Commodities too good
cheap, by buying the foreign Wares too dear, and by the exportation of our
moneys in specie, or by way of exchange for moneys by Bills.

1. First, the Statute of Employment made for Merchants Strangers, for 3.
especial causes. 14. R. 2.
1. The advancing of the price and sale of our native Commodities. 2. To
prevent the ouerballancing of foreign Commodi tie sAnd 3. To preserve the
moneys within the Realm.

2. The lodging of Merchant Strangers with free hoasts, who had an inspection
of their negotiations for Commodities and moneys.

3. The keeping of Staples for Woolls, Woollfels, and other Commodities beyond
the Seas, with the Correctors and Brokers to Register the buyings and sellings
of Strangers.

4. To cause Denizons to pay Strangers Customs.

5. The Sunday Treaties and Conferences, with the Commissioners of other
Princes, about merchandise moneys and exchanges.

6. The severe Proclamations for the observation of the Statures made,
concerning the same, and the Articles of intercourse.

7. The prohibition to export Commodities, but at great Ports.

8. The prohibition for Strangers to sell Wares by Retaile.

9. The prohibition for English Merchants to ship in strange bottomes.

10. The Transportation of money, made felony by Act of Parliament.

11. The attendance of Searchers, Waiters and other Officers.

12. The informations in The Exchequer and other Courts.

13. The Swearing of the Masters of ships, about moneys.

14. The Reformation of the ouer-heauinesse of our pound Troy of 12 ounces, in
the Tower of London.

15. The Reformation of the ouer-richnesse of our Starlin Standard. Moneys.


16. The Alteration of the proportion betwixt Gold and Silver.

17. The making of more prices out of the pound Troy.

18. The inhauncing of Silver and Gold Coins in price.

19. The imbasing of money by Allay of Copper.

20. The use of several Standards, and the Reducing of them again to two
Standards of Gold and silver.

21. The increase of Coynadge money to hinder exportation.

22. The prohibition to cull out heavy pieces to export.

23. The banishing of light Spanish money out of the Realm, and light Gold to
be molten down.

24. The giving more for Bullion in the Minte.

25. The prohibition of Goldsmiths to buy Bullion.

26. The making of the principal foreign Coin, current in England.

27. The binding of Merchants to bring in Bullion.

28. The prohibition to pay Gold to Merchant Strangers.

29. The prohibition to take Gain upon Coin.

30. The Bullion delivered in the Minte by weight, to be restored in Coin by
Tale.

31. The inhauncing of Gold, and vnderualuing Exchange.
of Silver.

32. The punishment of the Transporters of money, by great Fines in the
Star Chamber.

33. The prohibition by Acts of Parliament, to make exchange for money by Bills
for foreign parts without the Kings License.

34. Moneys delivered to Sir Thomas Gresham Knight out of The Exchequer to Rule
the course of exchanges.

35. The Office of the Kings Royal exchanger, never put in practice, since the
merchandising exchange began, whereof there was two The Kings Royal Exchange.
Offices, namely, Custos Cambij Regis, erected by King Edward the first in the
11. year of his Reign; and Custos Cambij infra Turrim: which were both put
into one man's hands, by a Law made in the Time of K. Henry the Sixth: so that
all the precedent means, have been found defective and fruitless, as more
particularly may be proved, by diverse Records and observations: The Coppies
whereof are in my custody, to do his Majesty all dutiful and acceptable
service.

Here we are to observe, that the Statute of employment to be Defective,
appears more manifestly at this time, when Merchants as well English as
strangers, have an ability given The defects of the Statute of employment.
them by exchange, to take up money here, and to deliver a Bill of exchange for
it, payable beyond the Seas, and can send over that money in specie, and become
a great Gayner thereby; insomuch, that if I receive here one hundredth Pieces of
20 shillings, I can send 90 Pieces to pay my Bill of exchange, and put 10
Pieces in my Pocket for an overplus and gain. The like may be done, by making
over money from beyond the Seas, to be paid here by exchange; which being
received, I can Transport with 15. upon the hundredth, gains in two months and
less, advancing thereby an hundredth upon the hundred in a year: which
exceeds all the benefit to be made by Commodities, wherewith I need not to
entermeddle, neither can the said Statute b e any help herein, to anoide the
same.

Concerning moneys, which do consist of Money consists of weight, finenesse
and Valuation.
weight, finenesse and Valuation; it is evident, that Gold and silver are but
materials, and in the nature of Bullion; but Ualuation is the Spirit which
gives life. This Ualuation, is twofold; the one by the Public Authority of
Kings and Princes, the other by the Merchants in the course of exchange; and
this is Praedominant and ouer-ruleth the Kings Ualuation: for when the King
has valued the shilling piece of Starlin money at 12 pence, they do
undervalue the same at 11 pence half penny, or 11 pence; which vnderualuation
causes the continual exportation of our moneys, and is the hinderance of
importation of moneys and Bullion, as we have so often inculcated, to make the
motive stronger to produce a sufficient Remedy, as follows.

CHAP. V.
Of the Remedy, for all the former causes of the Decay of Trade.
Having hitherto observed the Method of the said Author, in part of his
Distribution in the matter and form of Trade, and therein showed very great
deformities: I am now to apply the True Remedies likewise in order, according
to the causes alleged, which are noted by me to be ten in number.

The Efficient cause of the Transportation of our 1. Cause of the
vnderualuation of our moneys.
Moneys is (Gain,) and this Gain arises by the vnderualuation of our moneys,
in regard of the inhauncing and ouervaluation of foreign Coin; so that the
cause is Extrinsike and comprised under the said exchange of moneys, and not
intinsicke, in the weight and finenesse of the Coin, which are considered in
the course of True exchange between us, and foreign Nations; and thereupon it
follows, that neither difference of weight, finenesse of Standard, proportion
between Gold and Silver, or the proper valuation of moneys, can be any true
causes of the exportation of our moneys: so long as a due course is held in
exchange, which is founded thereupon.

Hence arises the facility of the Remedy, by the Reformation of exchange, in
causing the value of our money to be given in exchange, which cutteth off the
said Gain, had by the said exportation, and causes (in effect) that the
foreign Coin beyound the Seas, shall not be received above the value,
although the inhauncing thereof, or the imbasing by allay were altering
continually. For take away the cause (Gain) and the effect will cease.

All men of common understanding, when they do hear of the raising of moneys
beyond the Seas, are ready to say, we must do the like; for they conceive the
saying of Cato, Tu quoque fac simile, sic Ars deluditur Art, to be a proper
application hereunto: but they do not enter into consideration, what
Alterations it would bring to the State, and that the matter might run, Ad
infinitum, as shall be declared.

But let us suppose, that this will be a sufficient Remedy, to inhaunce our
moneys, as they do theirs, to imbase our Coin, as they do theirs, and to
imitate ouerualuation and vnderualuation of Gold and Silver, as they do,
requiring a continual labor, charge, and innovation; is it not an excellent
thing that all this can be done by the course of exchange, with great
facility? And that without inhauncing of our moneys at home, or meddling with
the weight and finenesse of the Starlin Standard?

This is to be done only by his Majesty's Proclamation The way to restore.
Englands wealth.
according to the Statutes of exchanges, prohibiting that after three months
next ensuing the same, no man shall make any exchanges by Bills or otherwise,
for moneys to be paid in foreign parts, or to be rechanged toward this
Realm under the true Par, or value for value of our moneys, and the moneys of
other Countries in weight and finenesse, but at the said Rate, or above the
same, as Merchants can agree, but never under the said Rate: which shall be
declared in a pair of Tables publicly to be seen upon the Royal Exchange in
London, according to the said Proclamation, and the said Table shall be altered
in price, as occasions shall be ministered beyond the Seas, in the general
Respective places of exchanges, either by their inhauncing of moneys by
valuation, or by imbasing of the same by Allay; which by a vigilant eye may be
observed, and will be a cause to make other Nations more constant in the course
of their moneys. And this will be executed more of course, then by Authority;
because Gain does bear sway and command with most men.

The facility hereof puts me in mind of the Geometrical Axiom or Maxim,
observed in commendation of the invention of round Wheels, Cir^ulus tangit
Planum, vnico puncto, A Geometrical Axiom.
as a reason to draw and carry Loads with a small strength; whereas if they had
been made square, or in any other Poly-angle and proportion: Forty horses
would not so easily draw them, being laden, as two does now, both with speed
and ease. Unto which this Remedy may be aptly compared, which (in a manner)
comprehends all the other Remedies.

For the Merchant Stranger, being here the Deliverer of money generally: will
easily be induced to make the most of his own, receiving by exchange more for
the same beyond the Seas; and the English Merchant being the Taker of the said
moneys, will not be so injurious to the State, as to give less beyond the
Seas, then the value of the money of the Realm in exchange, contrary to the
said Proclamation: and if he would, the Deliverer will not let him have it.
Besides that the Takers occasions are enforced by necessity, and he can be no
loser; for by this direction, he will sell his Commodities beyond the Seas
accordingly.

English Merchants being the Deliuerers of money beyond the Seas, and the price
of exchange altering there accordingly, will have the like consideration, and
the Merchant Stranger will provoke him thereunto. And if there be no Takers,
the English Merchant may bring over the money in specie, wherein he shall
become a Gayner.

This course is agreeable to Justice and the Ius gentium.
Law of Nations, and will not hinder the exchange to rise and fall as formerly;
but keep all in due order, with those considerations, Cautions and preuentions
as shall be set down to prevent all inconveniences, proceeding by the
inhauncing of money; which fall generally upon Inconveniences of the inhauncing
of Moneys.
all men, in the indearing of things, and particularly upon Landlords and
Creditours in their Rents and Contracts; and especially upon the Kings
Majesty's Lands.

Now before we come to answer some objections made against this Remedy, let us
examine what Time the old obseruer, and experience the best Schoolmasters of
man's life, have manifested touching the Raising of moneys in foreign parts,
and within the Realm; it being one of the 34. defective remedies before
declared.

It is recorded in an ancient book, that the inhauncing of the Coins beyond
the Seas, was the cause that King Henry the sixth of England, did raise the
ounce of Starlin Silver from 20 pence to 30 pence: and King Edward the fourth
from 30 pence to 40 pence. And after him King Henry the eight, after many
sendings to foreign Princes about Minte affairs and exchanges, (perceiving
the price of money continually to rise beyond the Seas:) caused in the 18.
year of his Reign, The Angel Noble to be valued from 6 shillings 8 pence,
unto seven shillings and four pence, and presently after to 7 shillings 6
pence; whereby every ounce of Starlin Silver was worth 45 pence: and yet there
was nothing effected thereby, the money still altering beyond the Seas;
whereupon Cardinal Wolsey had Letters Patents granted him by the King, to alter
the Valuation of money from time to time, as he should see cause.

Afterward the said King in the 22. year of Grastons Chronicle.
his Reign, perceiving that diverse Nations brought abundance of foreign
Commodities into his Realm, and received money for it; which money they ever
delivered to other Merchants by exchange, and never employed the same on the
Commodities of the Realm, whereby his Majesty was hindered in his Customs,
and the Commodities of the Realm were not uttered, to the great hinderance of
his Subjects: as is there alleged: His Majesty caused a Proclamation to be
made, according to the aforesaid Statute, made in the time of King Richard the
second, That no person should make any exchange contrary to the true meaning of
the said Act and Statute, upon pain to be taken the Kings mortal enemy, and
to forfeite all that he might for feite: which took effect but for a short
time, and no other was to be expected, it not being of that moment, nor the
principal mean to do it.

After this followed the imbasing of Moneys, and then all the price of foreign
Commodities did rise immoderately, which made the native Commodities to rise at
the Farmors and One extremity enforces another.
Tenants hands, and thereupon Gentlemen did raise the rents of their lands, and
took farms to themselves, and made enclosures of grounds; and the price of
every thing being dear, was made dearer through plenty of money and Bullion
coming from the West Indies, as is already noted; and by these means, was the
Office of the Kings Royal exchanges neglected, because upon the Base money no
exchange was made, and other nations counterfeited the same, and filled the
kingdom with it, and so carrien out the good Staple wares of the Realm for it.

This raising of money was augmented afterward by Queen Elizabeth of blessed
memory, in the highest degree, by one full third part, from 45. pence the
ounce, unto 60. pence or 5. shillings Starlin Standard: But the exportation did
never cease, because the course of exchange for money did run always under
the value of the money, still affoording a gain between the said exchange and
money, which caused the said exportation. And so will it be still, if this be
not prevented by Direction in a pair of Tables, much like unto the Tables kept
Table of exchange at Dover.
at Dover in the time of King Edward the third, to receive the passengers
money, and by exchange in specie for it beyond the Seas; which made them to
leave their moneys within the Realm; and this course of exchange so directed,
is the only mean and way to restore Englands wealth by importation of money
and Bullion, advancing the price of our native Commodities, and to prevent the
Transportation of our moneys: and all other Remedies. are Defective, as
experience will prove and demonstrate, if good things can be favored.

The Statute of employment must also be observed, to make the Remedy more
complete with a Register also, to record the Moneys which foreign Mariners
do receive for freight coming from Norway and other places, which are above
one hundred voyages in one year; as also many other Ships, bringing corn into
the Northern and Western parts of the Realm, and exporting money for it.

The Turk, Persian, and Russian have herein been more Politic then we,
keeping the price Policy of the Turk, Persian, and Russian.
of their exchanges high much above the Ualuation of their moneys. So that they
have no Trade by exchange, nor moneys, but only for Commodities; whereby they
prevent the over; ballancing of foreign Commodities with theirs, as also the
exportation of their moneys: albeit the use of our Commodities in those
countries, is very great.

The Objections made by some against this Sole Remedy may easily be answered,
for they are grounded upon Suppositions against assured experience.

1. Some make doubt, that the price of exchange Obiectio^s.
being risen, there will be no takers of money, and then the deliverer is more
thrust upon the exportation of moneys.

2. Others say, that those merchants, which have sold their Cloth beyond the
Seas, shall receive a loss in the making over of their money from thence.

3. Others say, that they shall not be able to vent their Cloth, according to
the high exchange, especially now that the same is out of request; and would
have the matter of reformation deferred until an other time.

The first objection is answered before, That the taker is ruled by the
deliverer, who will not Answers.
give his money by exchange under the true value according to the Proclamation
to be made; and the deliverer being the Merchant stranger here, will sooner be
thrust upon the Statute of employment; for by the exportation of money, he
shall have no gain, whereas some of the discreeter sort would not have that
Statute too Mediocria firma.
stricktly pressed upon the Stranger, because the Trade should not be driven
into their hands.

To the second, the Proclamation limiting a time for execution, gives
Merchants ability to recover their moneys, or to sell their bills of debt for
money, or to buy Commodities for them, as the manner is.

To the third, experience makes a full answer to both, that there did not want
takers, when the late inhauncing of money at Hamborough, caused the exchange to
rise from under 28. shillings to above 35. shillings; which is more then the
present alteration will be, and Wool was at 33. shillings the Todde, which is
now fullen under 20. shillings. So that the vent of our Cloth was not hindered
when it was sold dearer by one full third part: But there was above 80.
thousand Clothes sold yearly, where there is not sold now 40. thousand
Clothes. The time is also to be thought more convenient to advance a
Commodity being undervalued, then to do it when the price is high. For this
Pleurisy of the Commonwealth is dangerous, and admits no time to be
cured; like the fire in a City, which permits not enquiries to examine how
the fire began, but requires every man's help to quench the same.

And whereas it is alleged in defense of the inhauncing of our Coin, That
which is equal to all, when he that buys dear, shall sell dear, cannot be
said to be injurious to any. This opinion seems to be eiusdem farinae, as the
former, and has no consideration what the alteration of Weights or Measures
between us and foreign nations, may produce to the loss of the
Commonwealth, albeit that between man and man, it may prove alike in some
respects.

To make this evident, suppose two Merchants, the one dwelling in London, and
the other dwelling at Amsterdam, do contract together; that the Londoner
sending Clothes to sell at Amsterdam, the merchant of Amsterdam sends him
Veluers and Silks to be sold at London; and in the account to be kept
between them they agree to reckon the moneys in exchange but at 30. shilings
flemish for 20. shillings Starlin, and so make return each to other from time
to time as money shall be received, both here and beyond the Seas. Whereupon put
the case that there is received at Amsterda^ 1500 lib. flemish for Cloth, and
at London there is received 1000. lib. Starlin for Veluets and Silks, which by
the said rate and calculation is all one (in effect) between them, and might by
way of Rescounter answer each other in account. But the Rescounter in Account.
Merchant of Amsterdam, (knowing that by reason of the moneys inhau^ced there)
he can make a great gain to have the said 1000. lib. sent unto him in specie:)
desires the Londoner to send him this 1000. lib. Starlin in silver and gold
coyns, Realls of eight or Rieckx Dollers, whereby he shall profit 15. upon the
100, by the means aforesaid, which amounts to 150. lib. gains. The Londoner
having his 1500. lib. flemish, or 1000. lib. Starlin at Amsterdam, cannot do
the like, because the moneys are inhaunced and received above the value, so
that his money must be delivered by exchange there at a low rate, or at 33
shillings 4. pence, whereby he does receive here the said 1000. lib. with no
gain at all. Thus the account between them is made even; but by these means,
the Kingdom is deprived of the 1000, lib. of the Merchants money sent to
Amsterdam, which does not only procure the want of money in England, whereof
every man has a feeling to his loss: but also it causes the native
Commodities to be vndersold, and the foreign Commodities to be advanced in
price beyond the Seas, by plenty of money; and hinders the importation of
money and Bullion, as aforesaid.

To prevent this, the Question is now, whether it be better and more expedient,
to raise the price of exchange, or the price or valuation of our moneys; Surely
all men of judgment will say, that the raising of exchange breeds not that
alteration, which the inhauncing of moneys does, namely to make every thing
dear, and to cause Landlords and Creditors to lose in their Rents and
Contracts. And Merchants of experience do know, that we cannot do as they
do. For the inhauncing of moneys here, will be countermined by other Nations,
who still will undervalue them in exchange between us, unless it be prevented
by our own true valuation to be made known as aforesaid, which by the Law of
Nations, cannot be contradicted; whereby we shall also be enabled to meet with
them upon all Alterations and practices, to direct our course accordingly,
sooner then a Milner can turn his Winde-mill, to grind Corn with the
variation of all winds.

It follows (says the said Author) that the Raising also of the Coin, would
raise the price of The want of money causes the price of Plate to fall
Plate, To lessen the superfluity, or to be turned into Coin. It is worthy
the observation, that (by reason of the want of money:) the price of Plate is
fallen from 6 shillings 6 peace guilt, to 5 shillings 6 pence; and white Plate
from 5 shillings 8 pence to 5 shillings 2 pence. And if the moneys were
inhaunced ten in the hundredth, that is to say, an ounce of Starlin Silver to 5
shillings 6 pence: the Plate and all other things would rise accordingly.
Whereby if a man that spends two or three hundredth pounds by the year,
should spare one hundredth pounds worth of his Plate, and bring the same to be
Coined, might thereby get once ten pound, and pay ever after (for all other
things) twenty and thirty lib. dearer yearly. And the moneys made thereof,
would nevertheless be transported, unless the exchange did prevent the same.

In this place, we are to remember, that the Silver used for diverse
manufactures and Plate, does much differ in finenesse, whereby many of his
Majesty's Subjects are deceived: It may therefore be thought convenient, that
no silver made into manufactures be sold, unless it be tried by an Assay
master, and marked accordingly, especially the silver Thread coming from
beyond the Seas: some being but eight ounces fine, which is offered to be
sold accordingly: or else to make it finer, as shall be thought convenient to
serve the kingdom, and to become bound to make Return in the manufacture of
our Wool for their manufacture of Silver and Silk; which may be thought a
very reasonable Permutation.

The want of money coming by the consumption of foreign Commodities, may
properly be termed overballancing of Commodities, which are more worn and
used, because of the quantity of them, imported proceeding also of the abuse of
exchange, as the efficient Cause thereof, as aforesaid.

The excessive Use of Tobacco for so much as concerns the importation thereof
in liew of Treasure, will be much diminished by the late limitation of a
quantity of Spanish Tobacco lately established; to the end that the Plantation
of Virginia and the Bermodaes may be advanced thereby; and it is to be wished
that the moneys to be employed in Spanish Tobacco were likewise made over by
exchange, and delivered to the Merchants adventurers and others, to be bestowed
upon the Commodities of the Realm to make benefit of our own; for if such
foreign Commodities, shall vanish away in smoke or be consumed and brought (as
it were) unto Unprofitable lands.
doung, and surmount the price of the Commodities, or fruits of the land:
Certes, that land^ unprofitable in every man's judgment. For lands (being the
Natural riches so much desired of all men) are much disimprooued by the want
of money and the selling of our native Commodities too good cheap in regard of
the price of foreign Commodities; This being an evident token of the poverty
of a Commonwealth, which (like an unweildy Elephantike Body) has a slow
motion, and therefore more dangerous and subject to destruction, which by the
want of money, is made visible and sensible.

The returns lately had from the East Indies, will in part assuage the same, if
Merchants in the dispersing of those Commodities, will procure importation of
money and Bullion, as (no doubt) they will do. And this will further be
increased, when the Hollanders and our Merchants shall be at an end of their
present controversies, which by his Majesty's high wisdom, will soon be
determined.

Touching the wars of Christendom, for so much as concerns the want of
moneys: I have already showed how the same is also comprised in the reformation
of the abuse of exchange, procuring thereby moneys, which are Nerui Bellorum.
But to take upon me to discourse of wars, might make me subject to Apelles
his reprehension, Ne suitor vltra Crepidam. Only I hope that the famous example
of Augustus Caesar the Emperor may be remembered, who perceiving the forces of
the great Pirate Crocataes to increase daily by the concourse of many nations,
whilst he was in Spain, caused a Proclamation to be made, that whosoever
should bring him the head of the said Pirate, he would reward him with 20.
thousand The Policy of rewards.
crowns; whereupon the said Pirate was brought in danger of the humors of the
said nations, whose suspected inconstancy and lucre bred a resolution in him,
to offer his own head to the obedience of justice, and demanding the said 20.
thousand crowns, had the same paid unto him, whereby all his associates were
overcome and dispersed. In like manner did Sixtus Quintus deal with the
Banditi in Italy, and made them to cut one another throats. This Policy of
reward draws as forcibly as the Adamant or Loade-stone, which caused the
Spaniard to say, Dadiuas quebrantan Pennas, Gifts do break stony Rocks.

From the Precedent causes of the want of The 1. Cause.
money in England, come we to the causes of the decay of Trade in order,
whereof this is the efficient Cause, whereunto the only Remedy has been
declared already.

Usury Politic, is made the next cause of the decay of Trade, which must be
remedied by the The 2. Cause.
Plenty of money to be procured as aforesaid, wherein that laudable Custom of
the transforming or setting over of bills of debt from man to man is to be
remembered, which by his Majesty's Praerogatiue Royal or by Act of Parliament
might be established; for thereby great matters are effected as it were with
ready money. But our law requires a more preciseness in the execution
thereof, then in Germany and the Low Countries, it not being Chooses in Action,
as the Lawyers speak. But the necessarines hereof, Englands View, Page 157.
so urgent, that no man is like to contradict the same; for we do find by
experience, that things which are indeed, and things which are not indeed,
but taken to be indeed (as this is for payment of moneys) may produce all one
effect. And for the biting Usury before mentioned, there will be stock found
to erect pawn houses, Page 159.
by means as shall be more amply hereafter declared; and here is to be wished,
that the City of London, and every principal town of a Shiere or the most
part of them, would take upon them to take money casually at the hand of such
as will deliver the same upon the adventure of their or other men's lives. As at
Venice, where a man for the sum of three or four hundredth pounds once given
(and in like manner at Amsterdam) shall be sure to have one hundredth pounds a
year, during his life; whereby a great Stock might be raised for the general
good of all parties, and especially to set the poor people on work, and to
take their manufactures of them to be sold with a reasonable gain: for
experience has taught in all places, where the like is used, that the City
becomes always a Gayner by the decease of the parties that do deliver money
in this nature. But it is convenient to prescribe certain rules hereupon in
the making of all manufactures, which commonly is best effected by Corporations.

The litigious Suits in Law being noted as the The third Cause.
third cause of the decay of Trade, can hardly be remedied for the reasons
before declared, but must have their course; and herein there can be no shorter
course devised by the wit of man, then the Commonwealth does use upon proof
and specialties, if the pleadings and issues (although Peremptory:) be joined
according to the first institution, whereby the Matter of fact may nakedly
appear before the Jury of twelve men, who are to judge thereof according to
the evidence of witnesses produced before them; for touching the matter of Law,
the same being separated from the matter of Fact, makes a Dem^rer to be
determined by the Judge. I have great cause to enter into Campum spatiosum
about this Law warfare, having by experience and study spent much time therein.
But I think fit only to commend the orders used in Germany to take down the
litigious humors of some persons: To make them pay a Fine of twelve pence upon
the pound or more to the Emperors or Magistrates, for so much as they claim
more of the defendant, then they can justly prove to be due unto them; besides
(...) further charge, if he be found in his proceedings to do things for a
Revenge, which they call an unlawful imprisonment, although by the law he
have commenced his Suit lawfully: and this is termed Poena Plus Petentium.

For all other means, whereby the differences happening between Merchants are
determined, I must refer the same unto my book of Lexmercatoria, as a matter
requiring a large explanation.

The like I must do concerning the fishing Trade, which is the fourth Cause
noted before, The fourth Cause.
which has a reference to the want of money, or to speak ingeniously, is a
chief cause of the want of money, which might be procured thereby; whereby
both the Trade of Cloth and fishing might flourish together, contrary to the
opinion of the several societies of Merchants before alleged: for although
they be of several companies, yet such orders may be devised by the
corporation to be made of fishing Merchants, as shall not infringe their
several privileges any way: and all objections may be answered by true and
just prevention, observing other nations, Facilius est addere, quam constituere.

The fifth cause of the decay of Trade, by making Cloth in foreign Countries
has been The fifth Cause.
considered of, whereupon the late Proclamation was made, prohibiting
Th'exportation of Wool, Wooll-fells, Wooll-yearne, Fullers earth, and Wood
ashes, and all materials, serving for the making of Cloth. The Rules also to de
described for the true making of Cloth (wherein the said Author has been a
good obseruer) may be (with a vigilant-eye of the Officers to be employed
therein by the Corporation, and the increase of Merchants to manage Trade:) a
Remedy to the seventh cause: as also to the eight Cause of the decay of Trade:
but the sixth cause concerning the Policy The 6. 7. and 8. Causes.
of Merchants, is not to be omitted, whose orders already made, and hereafter
to be made, may be thought convenient to be Surueyed by a Commttie, who (upon
complaints of the parties grieved in all Societies:) may take order by way of
approbation or denial, to execute things for the general good, and not for
the particular: as I have noted in all this Discourse. So that other Merchants
upon reasonable considerations, may be admitted (upon this especial occasion)
to be of the said Societies or Companies; for otherwise it may seem somewhat
dissonant from reason, to prohibit all Merchants, as well English as Strangers,
to bring in any of the Commodities of Turkey or of the Leuant, and now lately
from Eastland and those Countries; unless they were free of the said
Companies: but to prohibit the importation of Commodities in Strangers
Bottomes concurreth with the Law.

The ninth cause of the decay of Trade, consisting The ninth Cause.
of the interruption thereof by Wars, Pirates, and Bankerupts, I have partly
handled in the fifth Cause. And although decayed men are found at all times,
yet the want of money has caused diverse Merchants and Tradesmen to Break, who
might have maintained then credits, but that being out of their moneys, and the
moneys out of the Kingdom, makes them to go out of their credits; for
Necessitas Parit Turpia. The Remedy hereof does most depend upon plenty of
money, or means in the liew of money, as the setting over of Bills of debt
before spoken of. For the Statute against Bankerupts, cannot produce any great
effect, but be a mean to undo the party for ever, if it do depend long upon
him contrary to the intention thereof; for whereas all such as are Creditors,
ought to come in within four months to take their part, of what may appear
of the state of the Bankerupt, to be examined by all lawful means: the same
is protracted for ten, twenty, and more months; and all those that come in
the said I^erim are admitted with the former, and a great part of the estate is
spent in charges. This may be remedied by the Authority of the Chauncery to
the Commissioners appointed for the execution of the said Statute.

The Remedy to the last and tenth Cause of The tenth Cause.
the decay of Trade, (being the immoderate use of foreign Commodities:) does
(as I have showed before) consist, partly by the abundance of those Commodities
imported by the abuse of exchange, and partly by the wearing of those
Commodities, affected by the vulgar sort or Common people. Monsieur Bodine does
observe with Plato, that as the Prince is, so are the Subjects, who (by
imitation) follow his example, which sooner enters into their eyes, then into
their ears: And the greater their Authority is, the more affectionate is
their imitation. Alexander cast his head aside, and all the Court held their
necks awry; Denis was Purblinde, and his Courtiers stumbled at every step and
iustled each other, as if they had been evil sighted: and so of other Princes
in their apparel, precious stones and other things, which is made to be the
fashion. Hence the Proverb took beginning, Countries fashion, Countries
honor. And the effect hereof, is many times greater then the Laws can bring
to pass, unless it be upon some Remarkable occasion, as the late Command may
prove for the wearing of Blackes at Funerals, in Cloth and Stuffes made of
English Wool within the Realm.

Here I have omitted, to speak of Customs, Impositions public and secret,
laid upon Commodities, especially upon Cloth, both here and beyond the Seas;
because the same requires great consideration, and the abolishing thereof
(being once laid on) will hardly be brought about, unless it be, with the
consent of both parties, where the one has provoked the other to impose them.

For a Conclusion therefore let us note, That all the said causes of the decay
of Trade in England, are almost all of them comprised in one, which is the want
of money; whereof we find the abuse of exchange, to be the efficient Cause,
which makes us to find out so easy Remedy, whereby the Kingdom shall enjoy
all the three essential parts of Traffic under good and Politic Government,
which will be Free Trade effectually or in deed. And this will also be
admirable in the eyes of other Princes, finding his Majesty's wisdom to be
Transcendent in Governing of his own, which (by so many sendings and
remissions of Ambassadors unto foreign Princes and States by his Noble
Predecessors:) could never be effected, as by diverse Records appears;
albeit there was nothing required of them, but what did stand with the Rule of
Equality and Equity, which cannot err: But velut Ariadnae caeca regens filo
vestigia, non modo nos errare non sinit, sed etiam efficit, vt aberrantes in
Rectam viam deducamur.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

