A True Discourse of the late Battle fought between our Enlishmen, and the
Prince of Parma, on Monday the 15. of November 1585. and of such Towers and
Cities as are of late conquered and brought to the Queens Majesty's
subjection, by that valiant gentleman M. Norris.

R W
printer's device of Roger Ward, consisting of a pheasant upon a wreath within
an ornamental frame, with the printer's initials at the side

LONDON Imprinted by Roger Ward, dwelling near unto Holburne Conduit, 1585.

To his very friend W. G. gentleman in London.
FOr as much as the nature of man is always desirous of novelties, and that
diverse people are given to speak d uersly, some for favor, and some for
malice, making sundry reports of one matter either adding or diminishing, as
best it fitteth their fancies, or according as they bear in affection.
Therefore that my friends in England may be fully certified of the truth of our
latest affairs, I have sent you here a certain draught of our attemptes,
since our ariuall into these parts of Flaunders: the truth whereof you need
not to doubt, for that my pen has written nothing but what my own eyes have
beheld and seen. Therefore as you esteem of my deeds give credit to my
words, and as you have, tried my truth, make accoumpt of my tidings, the
contents whereof does briefly follow.

Your assured friend W. M. seruitour under Corronall Norris.

AFTER it had pleased the Queens most excellent Majesty, with the consent of
her grave and honorable counsel to send succor to the poor afflicted and
distressed people of the low Countries, whereby they might be defended from
the oppression and cruelty of their bloody enemies, which has so many years
endured the misery of deadly wars, and only for their ancient liberty,
and the cause of their consciences, which has against right been holden from
them by the means of the King of Spain: whereby the country has been
consumed, the inhabitaunc^ spoiled, and all things brought almost into
dessolution: in so much the poor people remained suckerlesse, till it pleased
her graciou^ Majesty to yield them relief. Since which time her Noble Army
have not spent their time in vain, but to the honor of their country, and
the joy of all her Majesty's faithful subjects, have so valiantly behaved
themselves, that by the help of the most mighty God (who has wonderfully
prospered their proceedings) they have given their enemies the repulce from
diverse places, and gained sundry Tounes and Cities unto the Queens Majesty's
use. If then the magnanimity of noble minds may be judged by outward works,
and zealous hearts toward God and Prince, may be measured and made apparent
by manfull exploites and cruel conflictes tending to no less then the loss
of lives, and confusion of commonweals, what may we say of these late
victorious conquestes, gained by Gods providence, and their adventures, who
have put themselves in the hazard of so many enimies-hands, whose insatiable
panche^ have been glutted with the blood of so many good and faithful
professors, whose bullets rebounding from the breasts of our valiant
defenders, has recoyled into their own bosoms, as in Flaunders has of late
been seen acchiued, by those worthy men the only instruments appointed by Gods
grace and her Majesty's providence, to repress the tyranny of those proud,
insolent and presumptuous Spaniardes, whose f^rce the most part of these people
have felt, to their great grief, and our immortal glory: by ^^ose painful
prowess, and dexterity in marciall affairs, the frontiue towns of Holland
and Zealand be already given up to her Ma^^stie^ (...) in them (...) at Bull,
and in Fl^ng, besides (...) and Burga^on, the very entrie^ into Fl^^^ders and
Br^ba^t: Likewise (...), (...)e, Williamstut, and the land of ^agon. All which
(...) her Majesty's government besides that valiant and hard captain M. Norris
is now in G^^derland, whereby (...) and ^e he has made such an (...) that many
multit^^^s Spaniardes can hardly repute it again, so many bulwarks has he
beaten down: and so many mighty walls has he cast underfoot. Also by
force of Arms and the help of God he has taken the Sconce of Arn^, which was
erected hard by a river side: wherein M. Norris for the better success in the
enterprise, placed five ships, and two days, which sped very (...) for that
they were (...)g^d, and in the enemies reach, knowing no way to escape the
^^^^ent danger: Which captain Hunnings perceiving, and seeking to escape the
enemies hands, being already sore hurt, thought to leap out of a ship into a
boat: but by reason of his Armor which he had on that time, he lighted short,
and by that means, was unfortunately drowned Notwithstanding M. Norris still
continued his skermish on land (in a sconce which he had butted against them)
so manfully, that having sore discomfited them by means of his force and hot
assalte: and the day drawing near to an end they rested.

On the morrow, (...) Norris both in respect of his own valor, and his
countries credit, continued his determination and purposed to bid them Battle.
But the enemy knowing their want of ability to withstand his force, and being
without hope of help, voluntarily appealed to the law of Arms, that they
might depart with bag and baggage: and surrendering the town into his hands. M.
Norris with no small credit so his country, and honor of his name, with humble
and hearty thanks unto God for (...) clemency, with great glory he entered
the sconce of Ar^ (...) which he placed such a garrison as was convenient for
the keeping thereof. M^reouer, this worthy and valiant minded (...) determi^^^
^o leave nothing vnato^ed t^^^ ^ight any way imp^ the enemies arrogance, (...)
and country, with a mind inconquerable (...) the City of Nimgant A
wh^re (...), and knightly, chivalry, subduing another of the (...) ^ed the
river Rhin from their possessions, by which deed (worthy, immortal
commendations) he has opened the passage from Cu^^sin and all the high
countries, which is a most profitable and ready help to the universal
English Ca^e. This done, secretly in one night by serious pains and industry
(as a wise and pollitique captain letting slip no occasion that might be
profitable for his purpose) he raised a mount before the City and that of
such a hight and strength, that thereon he planted his ordinance, for that the
situation of the Town was such that otherwise he could have done it small
hurt, but by means of this now raised mount: on the morrow he shot manfully
into the market place, greatly terrifying their enemies and inhabitance of the
city. The Prince of Parma hearing what had happened, presently martched
toward the succor of the City, purposing fully to have given M. Norris the
repulce, who for the better and more easy accomplishme^t thereof, their
pretense was to travel secretly in the night, thinking thereby to take the
Englishmen unprovided for their coming, as indeed they had done, had not the
commendable and diligent care of our spies prevented that inconvenience, by
forewarning the Camp of their coming, who at that instant were not far of:
at length, the enemies approaching, having for their guide and governor the
Prince of (...), (a man of great (...) and de^teritie in feats of wars,)
and master, Norri^^ man, of no less cou^^ge then courtesy, with a most
cheerful heart encouraged his men to the battle hidden by the enemy,
wherein he him self for the encouragement of the rest to the worthy example
of all that followed gave the first stroke in the face of his for, and that so
terrible to the enemy that turning their backs they fled away as m^^^ amassed
(...) ^le to sustain the force of his hands which our Englishmen perceiving
most ^oriously followed in pursuit of their fainting foes, with such
earnestnes of mind and courage, that with the (...) ^lowes they gave, the
Spaniards were laid level with the g^^^^^ in which conflict was slain of the
enemy, to the number of a thousand, at what time there was taken from them in
the field, (...). Ensigns, which was no small grief to the hearts of our
enemies what greatly bewailed their unfortunate success. which was done with
very small loss of our Englishmen, whose death was doubled with hundreds of ye
foes: which battle was fought on monday the 15. of Neuember, 1585, for which
victorious co^quests, let all faithful and true hearts (tendering the
advancement of Gods glory, and the prosperous estate of our gracious
sovereign,) yield hearty thanks unto the Lord of hosts: who is the only
giver of victories, by whose grace and favor, the enemies af his truth are
trodden under foot, which have set themselves, and bent their force, against
the true professors of his glorious name, but with the blast of his mouth they
shall be overthrown, and with his power consumed to nothing. But returning to
our matter, After this M. Norris marched to the Town, of Briell, of which
town he is made chief General under her Royal Majesty, where he was
honorably received by all ye states, Burgises, and Citizens, with great triumph,
and in every corner of the city great bonsiers were made, all the Bells were
rong, and many a peale of great ordinance was shot of for joy of his entrance
into the City, and all the people with loud voices, God save good Queen
Elizabeth, God save the good Queen of England.

Thus have you heard the true report of these last exploytes in Flaunders,
which God increase for the glory of his name, and prosper all their
Counsels, and affairs, in this their godly and rightful cause to the
comfort of the poor afflcted people of that troublesome country, and the
honor of her royal Majesty by whose merciful and bountefull hand the
opressed are defended and relieved. For whose happy and continual reign all
faithful subjects may heartily pray that many years she may reign over us.

Here follows the names of such Captains as were hurt at the winning of
Arnam scence.
Captain Bowrowes. Captain Wotton, Captain Knowles. Captain Blunt. Captain
Vaursor. Captain Wilson.



