A plain and easy way to remedy a Horse that is foundered in his Feet: By
which using this remedy (within.xxiiii. hours after his instaunt foundering)
you may within.xxiiij. hours after the cure used, travel your Horse, and
journey him at your pleasure, as if he had not been foundered at all.

Set out by Nicholas Malbie Gentleman, servant to the Queens most excellent
Majesty.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Purfoote, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at the
sign of the Lucrece. 1576.

To the right Worshipful master Edward Fitzgerald Esquire, Lieuetenaunt of the
Gentlemen Pencioners.
SIR at my late being at the Court (which as I remember was about.xij.
months now past, at what time I came out of Irelande) and now again at my
present being here, I have been requested by sundry honest Gentlemen, some my
good friends and old acquaintance: some other, who knowing more my name then
my self, have repaired unto me with like request, to instruct the^, in the
curing of a foundered Horse. Whose favors did move me to offer and promise
unto them, to put the same in print. Partly for their friendshippes sakes: and
partly to make a present thereof unto all my Countrymen that either be or
intend to be trauailers on horsbacke. Reputyng it also convenient to publishe
the same in common, the rather, for that I judge the poorest sort shall receive
most benefyt thereby. And because it is not meet that this excellent cure
should want the^ reputation it deserves, neither to be accounted a vain thing
not worthy the having, as many be that being printed have small credit
notwithstanding they carry, probatum est, I do dedicate the same unto you, both
for the friendly affection I owe you, and for that you can give good
testimony of this cure, by an experience made upon an Horse of your own. I
have caused the same to be printed, as well to ease my self of the travail I
should have to answer every man's request: as to satisfy my friends, to whom I
have made promise, and all others that are desirous to understand the knowledge
thereof. Which I pray you may be under your protection, and presented to as
many as you shall please, and of the rest let the Printer make his profit. So
God keep you.

From London the first of April. 1576. Your affectioned friend to command
Nicholas Malbie.

To the Reader.
AMong many diseases which do reign in a Horse, I have seen that the
foundering has been reputed the most difficult to be cured. And as the gout
in man is accounted an infirmity incurable: so is the foundering in a Horse
(of most men) thought irrecouerable. I wish I could as well heal the one, as
(by Gods sufferaunce) I can give remedy for the other, I would as willingly
present unto you both, as I do this one. Notwithstanding accept this as it is,
and refuse it not, as sundry curious and scornful Farriers have done unto me,
who neither knowing how to remedy the disease, nor willing to learn, have
rejected at my hands the understanding of the cure, and as it were, in spite of
art and cunning, cut out the sowles of the horses feet (a thing commonly used
among such ignorant persons) by which any Horse so misused shall never have
his feet sound again, (whatsoever they promise you,) where by this which I do
here set out, neither shall you once remove your horses shoes, neither yet
touch any part of his hoof or feet, and yet shall your Horse be as sound as
ever he was.

Farewell. London first of April. 1576.
The way and mean touching the said Remedy.
WHen you find your Horse to be foundred in his feet, which you shall perceive
by drawing in all his four legs together, and by his standing crooching as
though he stood upon nedles, and will be loath to go: you must cause him to be
let blood on his two breast veins of his two forelegges somewhat above the
knees. Let him also blood on his spur veins on both his sides, and on ye
veins of his two hinder feet a little above the hoof, between the hoof and
the pastorne, as you may perceive by this Picture.

diagram illustrating where to let blood from a lame horse

Let the veins bleed well, to the quantity of a quart, or three pintes.
which blood you must save in some vessel, and stir it with a stick to keep
it from cluttering: and when he has bled as abouesayd, put it al into one
vessel: then stop the wounds with some horsedung, or some earth, and make a
Charge with the blood in this sort:

Take as much wheat meal (as it comes from the mill) as will make the
blood somewhat thick and put it into the blood. Take eight or ten eggs raw,
and break them also into this blood, shelles and all: Take a pint of strong
viniger, and a quantity of Bole Armoniack brayed, and put the^ into the same
blood also. Which done you shall stir them all together. Then shall you with
your hand lay the said Charge all along upon the raynes of the Horses back,
upon his buttocks, and down his shoulders: as by this picture you may see.

diagram illustrating where to apply the charge on a lame horse

When you have laid on this Charge thus, you shall take two Linen rags
dipped in the same Charge, with which two rags so dipped, you shall garter the
Horse above the knees of his two forelegges somewhat hard. (That done) cause
him to be walked upon the hardest ground you can find, for the space of two or
three hours: if he be loath to go (as commonly he will be) let one follow him and
beat him with a stick or wand to force him to go, Then after this walking let
him be set up and tied to the rack that he lie not down, and there let him
rest two or three hours: which done, let him be walked again two or three
hours more, as aforesaid. Then set him up and let him feed, and when you give
him drink (which you may do within two or three hours after his feeding) let
the water be heated somewhat hot, and put some grounded malt, or some bran into
it, and let him drink it blood warm, and feed a little after it, Then ride
him a little, and if you let him stand an hour or two in a poole of standing
water up to ye belly, and one upon his back, it is good to do it, and after
that ride him again a little. Then let him be set up, well dressed and
covered, and so by little and little ride him a day or two, and then may you
boldly journey him, for it is riding that brings the Horse to the perfectnes
of his feet, and you shall find our Horse as sound as ever he was, for this
cure is infallible. I have my self helped and cured about a hundred Horses,
and for sundry of them so cured by me, I have good testimony of diverse
Gentlemen now present at the Court.

Certain notes touching this cure to be observed.
YOu shall not need to take of the Horses shoes, nor to touch them at all,
except it be to amend them for some other needful cause.

You must after xxiiii. hours rub of the Charge from the Horse back.

You must take of the Garters after xii. or xiii. hours, and rub his knees
up and down with your hands, to put the numnes away.

You shall also understand that I have helped many Horses, either without
Viniger or Bole Armoniack, for that I have bin in place where I could not have
it. I have also used Oten meal when I could not have wheat meal.

I have also healed a Horse by letting him blood in the neck, when he would
not bleed in the veins before prescribed, and used and compounded the same
blood, as above is written.

I do also seldom use the standing of the horse in a poole of water, as
before is said.

But if you do all, as is first written, it is the best and surest way no
doubt: but if you be in place where you can not attain to all the premises,
you shall make good shifte with part of it. And surely I do find that it is
the taking of the blood that is the chief and principal cause of the cure.

And where I do write also that you must take your Horse in hand (to cure
him) within xxiiii. hours after his first foundering, I think good to let you
understand that it is best so to do, and yet did I once help a Horse of mine
own that had been foundered five days, and he was verywell cured, but he
asked four or five days more to come to the perfectnes of his feet, then
usually the Horses do; that be taken in hand, as above said.

This cure has also this virtue, that your Horse being once cured, shall not
commonly or never founder again. I never heard of any that so did but one,
which was M. Edward Fytzgeraldes Horse, whom he helped presently again with
the same cure, and he has the same Horse at this day as sound as ever he was.

Thus much I have thought good to say touching the observation of the cure
upon any necessity; when you can not be in place to provide you of all such
things as be requisite for the same.


