ROMULUS AND TARQVIN First Written in Italian By the Marquis Virgilio Malvezzi.

And now taught English, by ICL.

LONDON Printed by I. H. for John Benson, and are to be sold at his Shopp
under St Dunstons Church Fleet street. 1637.

ROMULUS AND TARQVIN.

First Written in Italian By The Marquis Virgilio Malvezzi: And now taught
English, BY ICL.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for JOHN BENSON, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Saint Dunstans Churchyard, 1637.



TO THE MOST Sacred Majesty of CHARLES the first, Monarch of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, etc.
GIVE me leave, SIR, I beseech you, to present your Majesty with a Glass,
wherein you may see your Soul: A good face may be discerned in a Glass of
Jeat; and if contraria juxta se posita, do magis elucescer^; if contraries do
best appear, when most directly opposed; how can CHARLES the Gracious be
better drawn to the Life, than by the description of TARQUIN the Proud? How can
the unparalled, CHARLES the Chaste, be better portraited, than by the
deciphering of TARQUIN the foul Ravisher? How can the happiness your
Majesty's Realms enjoy (and long may they enjoy it) under your Majesty's
blessed Government, better appear, than by the making known what Miseries and
Slavery the Romans endured under the Rule of TARQUIN the Tyrant? And how, SIR,
can your Piety, and religious Zeal, be better manifested, than by the
selfe-deification of ROMULUS? who though it be true, he had the honor of being
the first Founder of a Famous People, yet Non minor est virtu^ quam quaerere,
parta tueri. Wherein to show Your Majesty's Wisdom and Vigilancie, I need not
to expatiat my self. This Glass, SIR, is originally Italian, and those your
Majesty knows are much better than ours of England, as made by better
Workmen, and of more refined Materials. This, SIR, is but the Copy of a
Principal, which, I must confess, deserves to be copied by a much more
skillful hand; but as it is, SIR, I humbly beg your Majesty's gracious
Patronage of it, and your pardon for my so doing, to

Your Majesty's Humble and Loyal Subject, and therein most happy, ICL.

To the favorable READER.
THIS Book in its native Language, I dare boldly affirm, does very well
deserve the reading; if it shall not seem to thee to do so, being thus
transplanted, the fault is either thine, or mine; all of favor I will desire
of thee is, not to be too sudden in thy censure; for believe me, it will admit
of second thoughts.

THE AUTHOR to the Reader.
I HAVE commented upon, but not yet fully finished the Lives of the seven Kings
of Rome. This of Romulus, ifit like thee the Reader, is the beginning of the
Book; if it like thee not, the end; a few lines, but ifbad, not few enough;
every Entity is too great, whose formality is misshapen; a few lines, but if
good, many: the quality ofGood, measures the quantity, and the intension is
that which extends it. I term him mercenary, who in many sheets binds up a
few precepts; the Readers patience pays him the full price for what he
learns; and he is the worst of thieves, whilst he steals away Time which
cannot be restored: Art is long, life short, which is more spent in reading
than profiting, if men delight more to write than instruct: and to profit in
the sciences of these days, a man must be a better Atletas than Academian, for
the labor of the arms is no less in the largeness of volumes, than is the
labor of the brains.

I write to Princes, because I write of Princes: to entertain them with
flim-flam tales, is to sin against the common good; their grievances are
cured by quintessences, they ought not to be n^uciated with decoctions.

I have dedicated this my work in my mind, but not published it, because I
will only have the Reader for my protector, nor do I look for any other
reward, than to be praised, or borne withal. Reader, if thou applaudst not my
discourse, applaud my good will.

Romulus.
TO write of modern men is a troublesome business; all men commit errors, few
having committed them will hear thereof; one must, or flatter them, or say
nothing; to comment upon their actions, is to endeavor to teach more by a man's
own example, than by that of others, more to him that writes, than to him that
reads; more to be silent, than to be active: The actions of Princes have every
other appearance, than that of truth; to relate them as they appear, partakes
of the Epique strain; as they are, of the Satyricall. Flatterers have yet
moreover so exalted their good deeds, that the naked truth redounds to the
blame of the relatour; for the truth of that praise which is heard, comes short
of that which is believed; and some there are who arrive at that height, as
they leave no place for flattery, fansying themselves greater than flattery can
make them.

Present actions are not with safety related, nor are they listened unto
without danger: well may they be reverenced, never censured: who puts them in
print, seeks after an uncertain glory, exposes himself to a certain danger;
who leaves it to be done by posterity, reapes no other fruit of his present
labors, than the mere contemplation of a future imaginary fruitless glory.
Worldly glory ends with the world, and for us, the world ends with our lives:
to have ones thoughts wholly busied upon the good of posterity, is either a
more than humane conception, or else a foolish one; to dedicate ones labors to
glory alone diabolical; to accompany them with the good of others, humane: to
have in them no self respect, divine. I will avoid the treading of so steep
and intricate a path. I will write of times past, to the time present. The
defects of the Su^ne, which are with safety pointed at, reflected in waters,
are not without danger of the eyes, seen in a direct line. I will write more
of man, than this or that man; for this or that man dies, and man lives; and my
busy genius venting it self in deeds of old, if they purchase me not the
crown of glory, they will at least serve for a Buckler against envy. The
Actions of our Ancestors use to be examined, not maligned, for we not
emulate, but imitate them; we willingly listen to the praises of such who
gotten long since out of the reach of envy, seem by their deeds of fame to
raise the weakness of mortality; and faults which are found in past actions
displease not, whilst they take from the evil opinion of present times.

Envy, like poison, works not where it finds no heat; dead carkases are meat
for crows and worms, not men. Death has only ice enough to extinguish the
fire of envy, and leave some ashes of compassion: she makes us see no one is
superior to another, by her making of us all equal, and by her often changing
(by a sudden Metamorphosis) the terms of most happy, into titles of misery
and poverty.

Romulus his valor, Numas pity, Tullus his fierceness, Anchus his goodness,
the vigilancie of Lucumus, fortune of Servius, and impiety of T^rquin shall be
my subject.

Procus King of the Albans had two sons, Amulius and Numitor, the latter elder
in years, the other of a more working spirit; the King left his Kingdom to
the elder, but the fathers will, and brothers prioritie in years, were forced
to give way to the others more daring spirit.

THat Power which Princes make use of for the maintaining of Reason in the
interests of particular men, they use the very same to destroy it, in what
concerns themselves. Justice came down to us from above, to withstand
violence, man's weakness bereaving her of her weapons of choice, makes her
assume force, to extinguish force, b^t she vanishes with the planet of her
birth, when the sword, which should defend, destroys her. Princes sometimes
keep her untouched by others, that they themselves may commit a rape upon her;
they measure her with weapons, and when business comes to be concluded of
amongst them, he has the justest cause, whose strength is greatest; all other
manner of proceeding, they think only does become such who either dare not
use violence, or fear to have it used unto themselves. They think it no
reason for him to command others, who is not able to resist the force of
others; neither would subjects be better than their Princes, but equally
unjust, were they not more compelled: they who can have recourse to the sword
which Justice holds up in her right hand, seldom betake themselves to the
balance which hangs on her left side.

Nor has the prerogative of Age any more precedencie in matters of State; men
do not wait for such years as do destroy life, but such as valor may be
grounded upon; the selfsame weapons which Time uses to subdue the body, are
by the understanding used to subdue time, whose tyranny is avoided, whilst by
the means of Fame it gets into the bosom of Eternity; but admit it should
yield, yet ought we not to honor Time which only works our destruction.

Amulius is not content to have unthron'd his brother Numitor; the taking away
of Kingdoms would be but little cruelty, did not the taking of them engage a
man to greater; the one springs from the other, and the latter is more
fruitful. He fears his brothers children. He kills the male, nor does the
female sex free him from fear; if she chance to have sons, he thinks he has
taught them the art of bereaving Kingdom.

The Tyrant is afraid of everyone, and it is fatal that he fears his own
example; for in that he fears every one, he is not exempted from fearing, in a
manner, himself. He thinks to fence himself sufficiently against fate
without blood, by putting her amongst the Vestals, to consecrate her virginity
to the gods.

Women's weakness serves for innocence with Tyrants; they meet with more
difficulty, where they are least withstood; they cannot find in them those
faults which makes their cruelty be praised; or feign such fear in themselves,
as may not make them bea^e with them. They suffer them to live, believing that
at their pleasure, they may put them to death; but oftentimes, through Gods
infallible judgment, they are thrown down headlong, as falsifiers of
Wisdom.

Women are fit instruments to cause the loss of Kingdoms: nor is it a
sufficient remedy to marry them to men of quiet dispositions, if they
themselves be of a turbulent spirit; and say no fear ought to be had of them,
who can secure himself of their offspring? Children, for the most part, side
with the belly, and their change is easy, where are alike qualities: Nor do
the people think it shame, to change Lord, if they choose one out of their
Masters Family.

Amulius was wicked, I confess, but he knew not how sufficiently to make use
of his wickedness, he bereft his brother of his kingdom, his Niece of her
liberty, and took from neither of them their lives. I cannot well say, whether
or no he did despise Numit^rs weakness, whether he built upon his patience or
not, or whether his policy was to color his own wickedness, by making the
world see he had not a sufficient courage to govern a Kingdom, who had so
little courage to live, being deprived of one.

To take away a Kingdom, and suffer the King to live, is a cruel piece of
charity, wherewith all Tyrants whilst they go about to deceive the world,
they oft-times deceive themselves. The whole will easily meet together, the
parts whereof are left alive. To set the Statue of Virtue upon a despicable
foundation, is as much as to build a Colossus of gold upon feet of dirt: Piety
becomes a King, for that his government is voluntary: Cruelty a Tyrant, for
that his is violent; courtesy befits the one, force is requisite to the other:
neither yet does that secure him, he is not unlike a belly-god, who if he
persist to eat, a surfeit kills him, if he desist, a diet: if the Tyrant bloody
his hands without respect, he dies for being cruel; if otherwise, for seeming
to be pious; Vice, though in the midst of Virtue, is not secure, because she
contaminates them.

The young woman tarried not long amongst the Vestals, before she was brought
to bed of two sons, having had company with Mars, as she affirmed, to the end
that this her necessary error might not only, through the eminency of the
person prove excusable; but in some kind worthy of commendations: the martial
acts of Romulus gave credit to this report; the people of Rome for their
greater glory did increase it, and stranger Nations, for their less of shame,
gave way unto it.

IT is no shame to be inferior in power, to what is superior in nature; nay,
were not the combat to be accounted rashness, to lose would be accounted
glorious, since the victory of the strongest party redounds to the honor of
the weakest.

To make Mars the author of sacrilege, was to save ones self from the
severity of man, with the mantle of a god; even good Princes run often
shipwreck upon this rock, either in their own credulity, or in that of their
people, as being pious, or not seeming impious. A Tyrant laughes at all which
not concerns himself; he more fears the power of men, than of God;
otherwise, he would not endeavor to secure himself from the one by that
cruelty which does more incense the other.

He delivers the young woman into the hands of the Priests, to be dealt
withal according to the severitie of Justice; he commits the Twins to the
charge of a subordinate officer, with charge to drown them; but he endeavored
to give way to fortune for their safeguard, as also for his own defense; he
feared that Revenge which ofttimes not being able to be taken against the
Master, does vent it self against the Officer.

IT is no wholesome counsel to trust another with the death of one descended
of Royal blood: he suffers him to live either through pity, or policy: If he
be compassionate, he knows not how to be cruel; if politic, he thinks the
present times will not last long; his thoughts are busied on times to come; he
has one eye upon the Tyrant, another upon him that shall succeed him; and he
endeavors more to save himself, than to secure his Prince.

He exposed them therefore to the standing waters of Tybur, in the midst of a
spacious shelfe, where when the river eb'd they were left upon the dry sands.

TO have the command of people, and to float upon the waters, have such a
proportion between them, as many Princes have in their tendrest years been
exposed to the fortune of this element, or in their riper years, have been
summoned to pass over it. Waters have somewhat of sympathy with the common
people; they sustain light things, suffer what is heavy to sink; they are
tumultuous and inconstant; easy to be withstood when calm, not so when
troubled; their force increases when it meets with an obstacle, but who goes
with the stream, go the waters never so high, reapes profit by them.

The little ones lament, and to their whinings, comes in a Wolf, or woman, in
manner or name, conformable to such a beast, which gave them suck: there the
shepherd Faustulus found them, and fashioning unto himself real beauties in
the majesty of their countenances, as if the Stars did foretell to them some
great good event; being smiled on by the one, and allured by the other, he
resolves to save them.

PRinces have somewhat more than other men in the majesty of their
countenance, in their tutelary Angels, and in the influences of the Stars.
Some call a Prince an Hero, Truth it self calls him a god, nor had the
Gentiles been much out, had they not by equivocating from the similitude to
the essence, added to the Name of God adoration; the common people, because
they think him more than man, wonder if he be but equal to other men, are
offended if he be inferior: Princes ought not suffer themselves be measured;
who suffers competition, not sure to win, is sure to lose; somewhat of more
than from others is required from him that has somewhat of more than others.

This Shepherd gladded, carried the Children to his own house, and delivered
them to his wife Laurenza, that she might bring them up. The waters bear them
up, a wild beast gives them suck, a shepherd takes them up, and joys to be
joined a minister with the waters and wild beasts in these adventures, which
might already be discerned in these miraculous events.

THe Heavens never send forth any great signs, which have not a particular
relation to some great personages, for they are the unive^sall cause of all
things, and whilst they produce effects, which seem to have relation to one
only; if he be a Prince, it has an universal operation; for the people are
partakers with their Princes in his gains, losses, virtues, and vice.

They were not much advanced in years, when exercising their strength and
valor amongst the woods, in the day-breake of their youth, might be discerned
the bright Sunshine of riper years.

HUnting is a kind of warfare, and is more seemly than any other hostility, in
as much as the dominion over beasts, is more na turall than over men. The
pursuit of timorous beasts does not become a Prince; it may peradventure
advantage him in the knowledge of situations, but for ought else, it only
teaches how basely to run away from those of greater power, or else to pursue
with poor reputation, such as do not defend themselves.

These young youths did exercise themselves in the chase of fierce beasts,
thereby inuring their bodies to hardness, and their mind not to fear danger:
where the spoils of the slaughtered prey serve for trophies erected to the
valor of the hunter; in a short space they left preying upon wild beasts, and
fell to pursue such men who barbarously preyed upon other men, where guided by
valor, having won reputation, and being followed by a number of country
people, they freed those parts from robbers, and made themselves chief head of
all the neighboring Shepherds.

MEn cannot live happy where they live not safe; therefore is it that Cities are
built, the Princes are accepted of, and impositions tolerated. The ancient
Idolaters, amongst the rest of their gods, placed him for one, who made safe
unto them their leisure times.

These do all honor due to a Prince, to those who did discharge the duty of
a Prince.

Valor is a dumb eloquence, which draws all men unto it, either for that
they admire it, fear it, or do thereby receive benefit: selfe-interest begins
at the high concave superficies of the Moon, and penetrates even to the
poorest shepherds cottage; it had its beginning with the world, that it might
first maintain, and then destroy the world: it is the moral Philosophy of
the world, which penetrates even into the most solid parts: man would not
only predominate over man, but Element over Element; and when the one shall
have compassed his intent, the other will have done so also; for the world will
end with the self respect wherewith it did begin.

Such as did live by rapine, did not well brook the actions of these brothers,
and being desirous of revenge, whilst Romulus and Remus did assist at the
celebration of some sports, dedicated to the honor of god Pan, with more
confidence than becomes any who thinks it lawful to offend others, they set
upon them; and taking Remus prisoner, brought him before Amulius,
notwithstanding his enmity to thieves, as one that committed outrage in his
Majesty's grounds.

TO take from others the means whereby they were wont to live, would go hand
in hand with taking away their lives, but that it is worse, in that it leaves
way for revenge, which continual loss causes continually be desired: an
injury in honor is of no force in basely minded people, it is of power enough
in generous hearts; yet often it vanishes away with time, as that which has no
other foundation than opinion: in the death of friends and allies, those who
are far off, leave the revenge to those whom it most concerns; those who are
nearer at hand, comfort themselves in the good they thereby purchase, content
themselves therewithal, and whilst their mind is set upon peaceable enjoying,
they forget revenge: To be wronged in a man's livelihood, is the only injury
which admits not of oblivion, for present poverty is intolerable to him that
has not been thereunto accustomed, it calls to mind the former more
plentiful condition; and loss which is not the least in aggravating offenses,
is the greatest in provoking revenge.

The Shepherd Faustulus, by the calculation of times, was not ignorant of their
birth, being to the belief thereof, the more incited by their magnanimous
acts, which did far surpass the souls of shepherds; nor had he for all
this, intention of making their descent known, till he were thereunto
constrained by lawless necessity, or by a fair occasion persuaded.

He would not engage them in great affairs, before they had great power: when
the obligation is greater than the means, man either dies unfortunately, or
lives discontented; he would not sour the sweets of their Victories, with the
wormwood of their birth; for whereas to be the chief of Shepherds, was the
greatest glory that could befall the sons of Faustulus, it would prove a
deplorable misery to the sons of a King.

THat birth detracts from the merits of great actions, which obliges to greater.
He is not glorious that is borne a Prince, but he that becomes one; nor is he
to be accounted abject, who is borne a private man, but he whose actions make
him so; that grain of corn is called great which is bigger than the rest; and
that mountain little, which does not exalt his head so high as others: A certain
wise man said that God is a Geometrician; perhaps because the world consists
more of a Geometrical, than Arithmeticall proportion: Praise or dispraise are
not occasioned by descent, but may well be weighed together with descent; they
consist in differing from them in valor, to whom a man is equal in nature;
herein consist man's rancor; and he is not the aimed at mark of envy, to whom
honor has not formerly had refuge.

Necessity administering occasion, he acquaints Romulus with the business.

TO know ones self descended from famous ancestors, serves as a go^d to those
magnanimous spirits, who take it for a note of infamy to be held famous for
the actions of other men; but serves for a chain or clog to such poor minds,
who hold it lawful quietly to enjoy the rest, caused by other men's labors;
and glory in a long Series of hewn out marble, worthy memories of dead men's
actions, hateful sepulchers of renown to such as live.

When Romulus knew his descent, he was more violently incenst against the
Tyrant, by whose death he might appease two powerful affections, the one of
Glory, the other of Revenge: He knows his forces too weak for open violence;
he has recourse to Stratagem. He took his way straight to the Kings Palace,
accompanied by many others, disguised in poor apparel; being come thither,
and encouraged by his brothers armed neighborhood, he set upon the King, and
slew him on that seat where he had committed so many wickednesses.

A Tyrant is to all men hateful; he builds the whole body of his State upon
the colums of fear; his ruins arise from either not fearing, or not being
feared: confidence destroys him, fear secures him not; and oft-times when he
thinks to abase men's hearts, he infuses valor into them; for the greatest
daring proceeds from the greatest fear; to talk against him is dangerous, to
kill him safe; the action is easy to be effected, which has nothing of
fearful in it, but the act it self; it were more easy to kill a good Prince,
if there were not more difficulty in having killed him; it were more dangerous
to kill a Tyrant, were not the danger less when he is slain; who does not
for revenge adhere unto the fact, adheres for glory; no man appears enemy to
him that killed him, because no man will see me to be friend to him that was
killed.

Numitor, who was not ignorant of Rhemus his descent, and who by just, at least
justifiable pretenses, had seconded the act committed, favored by the
guardianship of Rhemus committed to his custody, seeming ignorant that they
had assaulted the King, though the Palace, with intention of purging, not of
taking the City; summoned the Albian youths to defend the Tower; but when he
saw the two young men come toward him, calling a Council, he related unto
them how they had bin brought up, how borne, how exposed to the waters, and how
saved.

The young men saluted their Grandfather with title of King, the which was
followed unanimously by all the rest; as well for that it is usual in such
assemblies, for all to follow, where a few do but begin; as also for very
commiseration, which never forsakes infelicitie.

TO have been hated by the Tyrant, is desert enough to purchase the good will
of the people; to them he who is in danger is always acceptable; they would
always raise him up, whom they see kept down, they have compassion on any one
that suffers violence; where the fire of tyrannical hatred flames highest,
there it is that the waters of popular favor shower down; all men do more
naturally desire to restore him to his state, from whom it was taken, than to
adhere to him that took it; they have compassion on him, because there are but
few that can use violence, and all those hate it that fear it; they help him,
because a greater reward is expected for helping out of misery, than for
applauding prosperity: Envy remains to the happy for punishment, and loss:
compassion to the miserable for comfort, and re-establishment; to restore
Princes into their estates has always the face of charity, but if self
interest concur not therewithal, they are pitied, not helped; and then the
envy which hurts not, is punishment, though but a vain one, to such as are
fortunate; compassion, which helps not, is a comfort, though unprofitable, to
man in misery.

Romulus and Remus having made their Grandfather King, they turned their
thoughts elsewhere.

MAny know how to give a Kingdom to another, who know not how to brook a
King; to uncoth a thing, is to obey him, who through ones own means commands;
to receive a Principality from another man's valor, is a kind of servitude;
which necessitates a man, either to show himself simple, or ungrateful: to
satisfy their intolerable desires, is voluntarily to surrender up the
Principality to them that gave it; not to humor them, is to hazard the
surrendering of it up to them by force; for it is an easy thing for them who
got a kingdom for another, the same cunning not failing them, to get it for
themselves; who has once with good success imbrued his hands in Royal blood,
fears not to venture the second time; and he who was deprived of a Kingdom, is
always jealous, and fears that which he knows is fesable; how can the
Obligation be canceled which one owes to him who has got a Kingdom for him,
if it be not to be paid, but with the loss of the same Kingdom; it is great
discretion to keep far from that Sovereign, who cannot sufficiently requite
the Obligation he owes: benefits are always willingly received, but the
benefactours are not always willingly beheld; and when the debt is such as
cannot be paid, as if upbraided with disabilitie, favor is often changed into
hatred; and then the obligation not being to be acquitted, they endeavor to
acquit themselves of the Obliger: Service which is received from an inferior
argues weakness, and challenges great recompense; to equalize the recompense
to the benefit received, is to equalize the receiver to the Benefactour; the
name of Magnanimus is lost, and the name of ungrateful hardly wiped off; those
benefits which are received from a Superior, are willingly acknowledged, for
acknowledgment is all he expects, ^he which witnessing the receivall of them,
obliges to an addition of more.

These respects, the motives of ambition, and incitements of glory, caused the
generously minded young men, keep aloof off from their grandfathers
subjection.

TO expect a Kingdom after another death, hinders or retards glory; men's
spirits with years grow cold, and during the fathers life, that a man may live
secure, he oftentimes must live idle; Princes do sometimes envy, yea, even
the egregious deeds of their sons, because they fear them; private men
rejoice, because they share therein: amongst the good fortunes of valiant men,
their parents speedy death ought to be accounted one; who after having brought
them up, cannot do better for them than die; a kingdom is not to be desired,
if it bring not glory along with it; glory belongs to them who have won it
with the sweat of their brow, not to those who receive it calmely from another;
valiant men who are borne fortunate, are unfortunate; for the inheritance of
Monarchies takes away the glory of acquiring them.

They go about to build a new City, or rather to build the walls of that
which their generous actions brought along with them; to this purpose they
choose that place where they were exposed to waters, as I believe, either out of
memory of their fortune, or out of gratitude.

The places choice shows the builders wisdom; the first stone they laid is a
Touchstone, by by which the worth of their metal is tried.

HE is not to be praised, who to withdraw himself from the downey bed of
idleness, has recourse to the brutishness of sterilitie; one ought seek
help from education, not situation; that it may appear virtue, not necessity;
the way of Merchandise makes men industrious, but withal ti^orous; and that
City is in no good condition, the riches whereof consists, amongst some
particulars, not in the public; where the riches is locked up in (...), not in
the Commonwealth, when danger comes, men know not how to defend it, but study
how they may quit it; and such estates as are portable, set their owner at
liberty, for they make them but inhabitants, not subjects.

Nor can it be affirmed, that the barrenness of a place takes from its
neighbors the desire of dominion, which is the child of glory, not of avarice.

He that builds in strong places, erects fortresses for tyrants, at least nests
for vices; and they that live in security, want that fear of losing their
own, which oft-times serves for just occasion to usurp another right; and on
the contrary side, to build open Cities without walls, was a melancholy humor
of some ancient Philosopher, which neither deserves discourse, nor imitation.

Romes situation was full of health-inspiring hills, not too far distant from
the sea, that they might receive commodities; not too near, that they might
shun the inundations of barbarous people; watered with a continually running
River, placed in the midst of Italy.

They were ready to raise the walls of the City, when neither of them would
yield in the naming thereof unto the other nor in the making of laws. Equality,
the producer of envy, had much more force in them; for that beyond the common
equality amongst brethren, they did particularise in being equally conceived,
and equally at the same time borne.

WHen any excuse is to be found, seniority is allowed of; many would yield, if
they could find pretense to do so, and many times men contend more out of
shame than pride.

The mixture of greater and less is good, but that of equals stark naught;
either in the variety of nature it is not found requisite, or else it lasts
not in the world; because it is founded upon the perpetuity of motion; and
inequality does by so much the more differ from tolerable, by how much it
comes near to equality; therefore is an Unison displeasing in music, which
though it were exquisite, is unfruitful; it makes no action, produces no
harmony; the greater and less, answer to the sharp and flat; from those the
world receives its form, from these music her sweetness, and each are
damnified by the contrary, if it be dissonant; profited, if it be harmonious.

Since they could not find on earth how to decide precedencie, they seek to
Heaven by auguries; Rhemus on the Auventine hill, Romulus on the Palatine; and
whilst it is reported that six Vulturs appeared to Rhemus, Romulus shows that
number doubled to them that stood about him: some are of opinion, that from
hence a contention rising betwixt them, Rhemus was slain by Romulus.

TO have an equal preferred by man, is a sufficient anxiety, but therein may be
deceit; to have the like preferred by Heaven, makes the anxietie greater,
because it is always truth: This accident was the first canker that introduced
manslaughter, and the first manslaughter was between brethren.

The more common opinion, notwithstanding is, that he lost his life in
leaping, by way of derision, over the walls his Brother built.

Rhemus by this action, either declared himself to be Prince, by pretending
not to be subject to any Laws, or else intended to take the principality from
others, by making a mockery of the Laws.

MIsobservancie differs from contempt; the one reflects upon the Institution,
the other upon the Institutor; he who covertly transgresses the Laws, leaves
the reputation of him that made them, untoucht; he who openly offends against
them, aims more to weaken the Prince, than the Laws: Errors which are
occasioned by whatsoever other affecti-on, may be great or little; those who
are occasioned by contempt, are always giant-like; some of them reflect upon
the profit of the subject, and it is good to punish them; others upon the
Majesty of the Superior, and it is necessary to chastise them; Respect is the
soul of government; a Prince fallen to neglect, is a dead carkas.

Giving to the begun City, the beginning of his own name, he called it Rome,
and instituted pastimes in the honor of Hercules.

Laws were yet wanting to a City, which full fraught with diverse Nations, and
of diverse manners, could not without them receive unity.

Laws are of diverse sorts, some aim at the preservation of mankind, others at
the maintenance of the State; the former belong to ministers of law, as
Judicial; the latter to the Prince, as Poli^call; the first requires
stability, because they are judiciously considered before they be made; but
once being made, they ought not to be judged, since by them judgment is made.
The other sort to be good, ought not to be perpetual, for that if they
continue still in force, they ruinate the State: and if they be transgressed,
as time necessitates, an ill example, without profit is introduced; It
suffices not, not to observe the old ones, when there is no way given to make
new ones. The Prince is Superintendent over the Laws, not in that he may not
observe them, but in that he may change them: Transgressions in whatsoever
kind is naught; change in the latter is necessary; the same meat does not
befit the same man at all ages, neither are mal^dies by the same means cured
in the beginning, after a whiles duration, and when they grow worse.

All things in this inferior world have their periods; a man must change as
time and occasion require; most of States have run a hazard, for not being
able to bear with their ancient Ordinations, and not knowing how to alter them.

Romulus gives the Laws, Ministers to execute corporal punishment amongst the
Romans.
he strengthens them by force, threatened by the twelve Lictors which waited
upon him.

LAw is of no use to persuade, if it have no power to punish, otherwise it is
too little for them that are naturally inclined to mischief, ^oo much for
those who voluntarily do well.

To might, he adds Majesty, figured by the grave habit which he wore,
differing from the habit of other men.

ALL things (I had almost said, that which has no entitie, but is very
nothing) help those who are of power enough in themselves; ciphers meeting
with ciphers, make nothing, but if they meet with figures, they multiply; the
habit makes him not venerable, whose actions have not formerly made him so; he
has no Majesty, but what the eye allows him by being accustomed to see him
clad like men of Majesty, and if by virtue of authority he occasions reverence,
for want thereof he moves derision.

Clothes were made to cover the defects of the body, now they discover the
affections of the mind, they were made to hide our weakness, now they lay open
our ambition; the Lord clothed man, when he disrobed himself of original
righteousness, when he became servant to sin, and he (O foolishness)
glories in the ensigns of his slavery, as if they were trophies of his
victory.

Romes walls increase, but there want inhabitants to people it, they proclaim
Sanctuary, whither whosoever, having committed what fault soever, might have
safe recourse.

Quietness is an enemy to new built Cities, all hope consists in motion;
people who are not apt to live in Cities, are apt to fight in the field; and
who knows not how to be a good Citizen, proves oft-times a good Soldier: Rome
might rather be called the Randevous of an army, than an assembly of citizens,
for it was not built for commodious living, but to be made greater by such,
whose ends were not safety, but glory.

AN Army is an Academie, where the wilder spirits are disciplined in open
field, that they may afterward bebrought within the compass of walls; to
those who command in Armies, Cities seem distastefull, not to those that serve
in them as common soldiers; for the rigor of military obedience, makes the
yoke of civil life seem sweet.

It was not long ere it was replenisht with Inhabitours; noveltie is a light
which has the virtue to draw eyes unto it, and power to dash them. Men,
because of necessity they must d^e, Look not willingly upon things as
inclining toward the Sunset, bring to their minds this necessity, but
willingly upon such as rising with the Sun, gives them belief of augmentation;
men write their names in tender plants, because they grow; not in aged Oaks,
because they are cut down.

Did not Novelty bring with it so many prerogatives, the world would grow old
with the same things wherewith it did begin; our wits would be barren, were
they deprived of invention, which makes them fruitful; our understandings grow
vilified with known things, and conceive things unknown greater than they are.

All such as did neither envy nor fear Rome, flockt together, some for
safety-sake, some delighted with noveltie, some persuaded by the desire of
change, some of glory.

SPritely wits are seldom content with the present condition. Felicity is
always sought for in things we want, which when we get, we find her not; men
cannot satisfy their desires, no not with the accomplishment thereof; they
think they may once be happy, when they can never be so; hence is occasioned
the hatred of tranquillity, the desire of motion, the loathing of present
things, and seeking after future.

The greatest part of this people came to amend the condition they were borne
in, under the fortunate conduct of Romulus.

Noveltie has power enough to draw men unto her, but not to keep them; she,
when her self suddenly is gone, cannot detain others long, unless she
ensnare them in the birdlime of profit, or take them in the net of ambition.

To this purpose Romulus chose an hundred Senators for Companions, a number
sufficient to govern whatsoever State, and equal to their number, to whom all
other form of others command would have been insupportable.

In the beginning of government, every small Authority seems great; in the
continuance thereof, how ever great it be, it seems little; whence it
proceeds, that in time those Magistrates are not endured, which were too
greedily at first created.

Liberty and principality are incompatible, they meet not together, or if
they do, they last not; every one seeks his own perfection, which depending
upon the destruction of another, they seek it there: It seems strange to the
Senate, that they should be free and yet serve; Strange to the Prince, that
he should be chief Lord, and not command; the mean of Liberty is the mother
of Tyrants, which being to them intolerable, whilst by violence it is taken
away, it inforceth withal a violent government; to live quietly, it behooves
either to be totally free, or totally tied to servitude.

To Romes entire perfection women were wanting; they concur to the essential
constitution of families, families to the like of Cities: Rome had more of
form than matter; Romans lived there, but there were no Romans borne.

WHere men live, and none are borne, death must en^e, and no new births follow:
Parents live again in the children, which they produce; man has no greater
desire than this, nor Nature greater necessity; the species remains, if not
the individual; the matter remains, if not the form: it is an error of
understanding, to believe that woman is an error of Nature; she is perfect,
since she is made for the perfectest of works, she is of form equal to us;
originally composed of more noble matter than we.

Rome might be called a circuit of walls, not a City; it was rather a
sepulcher, since there being an impossibility of man's being there borne, they
must there only die.

And who was there to be found, who by granting them women, would cooperate to
the greatness of this people, and deprive themselves of those arms to
extinguish them, which their singleness of life administered?

Romulus was not ignorant of this difficulty, he notwithstanding sent
Ambassadors to his neighbors, either to obtain some justly, or to take them
away by force.

HE who is necessitated to use violence, has first been violenced by
necessity; of all Laws necessity is most odious, of all justice the most
rigorous.

The neighboring people, angry that the Romans had received those whom they
had driven away, deny to send them women; and some giving way to anger, seem
to slight them with words, I know not whether fuller of ignorance or weakness.

THey are little to be feared, whose tongues serve them for swords; greater is
the danger which is threatened by silence, than the offense given, by over much
talk.

Anger which shows it self, is kindled in the spirits, not in the humors;
and like powder it raises fire, but does retain it, it carries it out, keeps
it not within; choler which vents it self by the mouth, does not vent it self
by hands; a mine which finds a vent, vapors away, makes no breach: to offend
with deeds, is hostility; with words, malignitie; the one is profitable to the
Enemy, the other fruitless; and damage is more supportable than evil
speaking, because it is more reasonable.

The answer, which together with damage, was accompanied with disrespect,
caused no small indignation amongst the Romans; to make use of revenge, they
betake themselves to dissimulation.

Romulus faines himself sick, they dedicate sports to his recovery, and
prepare for them with magnificence.

The neighboring people, together with their women, flock to see the sight,
thinking, belike, with safety to present meat to the famished.

GReat was the error certainly which was the cause thereof; since that too
much weakness sprung from too great confidence, or too great rashness, from too
little valuation; to deny the Romans women, yet bring them to Rome; to trust to
them who they had despised; not to fear the violence of necessity, was one of
those follies occasioned by curiosity. Curiosity, if devoted to the delight
of sense, is not praiseworthy; if to the delight of the understanding, it may
admit excuse; it is never free from blame, if accompanied with danger; too much
and too little thereof, argue equal weakness.

Women are made to stay at home, not to wander abroad, their delights ought to
be, what delights their husbands, by participation, not propriety: to bring
them abroad to Festivals, moves them that look upon them, to undervalue them,
if they be ill-favored; if handsome, to lust after them; look^ how many
friend^ they get unto themselves, so many enemies procure they unto their
husbands; within doors they may help, without doors they cannot but be a
trouble; their conversation if it be pleasing to them, who there they find, is
for the most part displeasing to them that brought them thither: Though they
suffer not in coveting, they suffer in being coveted; if their company be
shunned who wishes your misfortune, why is theirs pursued who wish your
dishonor? The vanity of men herein, is more than it is of women; they think
to make themselves be envied, and are caught in a noose, when at last in stead
of envy remains compassion. It is true that many value not what they
possess, if others know it not, but it is of less value, if by making it
known they lose it; Reputation is a choice color, which fears the ^ire; it
is a transparent Crystal, which is dimmed, being looked upon by such as are
lasciviously given: All occasions of dangers ought always to be shunned,
where the danger trenches upon Honor.

The spectators were intent upon the sports; when the sign being given, the
young men of Rome laid hold upon the strangerwomen; their friends fly,
complain of violated faith; they call for vengeance to their gods, at whose
pastimes they were abused.

They ought rather to blame themselves than others, more for being cause of
their being taken away, than for their being taken away.

IT is by so much more insufferable to lose by deceit than by force, by how
much it is better to be overcome by the body, than by the understanding: In
force we have no shame, because it is altogether without us, but cosenage is by
the policy of others, built upon the foundations of our own
inconsiderateness: Wounds occasioned by force, are assuaged by their occasion,
Fortune; tho^ which are caused by deceit, are aggravated by complaining of the
occasion, Improvidencie.

Nor were the Virgins less incenst than were their fathers; Romulus persuades
them with arguments drawn from the efficacy of necessity; their husbands
appease them with fair words, drawn from the power of Love, which coupled
with admiration; force was now no more complained of, being accompanied with
the praise of beauty; the which being numbered amongst the happinesses of women,
left them no cause to complain of being unfortunate. Matrimony had already
mitigated the Rape, and the mariage-bed quieted the minds of the Sabine dames,
when their friends clad all in mourning, joining anger to calamity, did incite
their neighbors; and incensing the whole body of the people, they assembled
themselves before Titus Tatius, a Sabine King, where the Council being met,
we may suppose that one of them, who was abused at the aforesaid sports, spoke
in this manner.

THe Romans demanded women, and you denied them; it was not s^re an effect of
chance, if you all agreed in the denial; are then the reasons of their denial
now ceased, because they are violently taken from you? ought that be granted to
force, which was denied to love? we that were deaf to their entreaties, shall
we be blind to their violence? we refused to bear their supplications with
patience, shall we endure their outrages with stupiditie? showing them, that
with us, whilst to take by violence is safe, there is nothing dangerous but to
demand.

They make necessity a cloak for their outrage; that necessity which had wont
heretofore to be the shield of the unfortunate, and the cheering, or
encourageing of the fearful, is now become the cloak of these who are
fortunate, and the incitement of the rash; they took from us our Citizens
under title of safety; they forced from us our women, under color of marriage;
they will likewise seize our Cities by claim of dowry; as they have had need
of our daughters to increase their numbers; so will they have need of our
Countries, to increase their estate. And say the desire of reign should cease
amongst the Romans, their once having offended us, will serve for provocation
to them, to offend us at all times. Favors conferd on any one, are renewed,
thereby to continue the memory of the former: Injuries are multiplied, to
secure ones self for those already done. He who has done wrong, can hardly
become a friend, because he thinks the wronged party can never become his
friend: where friendship is not hoped for, and injury has been received,
nothing but revenge is to be had; the which retarded prolongs, but makes the
danger greater, by taking away the advantage of prevention.

Whatsoever is suffered by force, though sometime good effects ensue, is
always harmefull, because either it proceeds from envy or contempt: neither
does patience serve the party injured for ought else, but to make them more
insolent who account it weakness; and to encourage them to offend yet more
haynously: those who easily bear injuries already done; if the suffering of
injuries would cause quiet, it would argue great wisdom to pass by them; but
without any other profit, it makes the injured parties be esteemed, or foolish,
or cowards; as if they either wanted wit to know them, or courage to revenge
them; whence men lose both compassion and fear, affections only able to
refrain affections in worldly men.

Rome had her beginning in the midst of us, and we despise her; she
augmenteth, and we nourish her; we give her life, she threatens our death:
those who saw her in her beginning, foreseeing the danger that might ensue to
their posterity, left the care thereof to their posterity; and as a thing
which th^ned all, every one f^ll to b^ her, none to hinder her: in common evils
private men fear not, and in future events, men look for help from Time and
Fortune.

The eye which beholds noveltie, leaves no space for the understanding to judge
the danger, till it be so far advanced, as there is no remedy for it; the
errors of slothfulness are then discerned, when all diligence is bootlesse.

It is a false opinion held by melancholy men, to give the title of Wisdom to
delay; most businesses suffer shipwreck, because occasions are hasty, and men
slow; men talk of the present time, when it is already past; moments ought not
to be neglected, when upon these moments, an eternity depends.

In things which are arrived at full perfection, if not their final end, at
least their decaying ^ge may in time be expected; but in things which but begin
to increase, to expect, is as much as to give time that they may increase. If a
traveller meet with a River at its head, when it is yet but a small brook, he
should do ill to travel further along it, till he must ferry it over where it
is become a large stream. Rome is a little Rivelet, our people like torr^nts
flock thither, we must fight, not discourse; and fight with Romans, before
that Romans become a Race of Sabins, before our enemies be our kinsfolk: haste
is the best remedy, where time is the greatest enemy.

This man having ended his discourse, we may believe that Titus Tatius
answered in this manner.

YOU ought either to have granted women to the Romans, or else have fought
against their City, and gone unto their sports with troops of armed men, not
of young girls. I expected they should have come within our walls to take them
from us by force, had not you gone within their walls to offer them to their
rapine; he who denies another what of necessity he must have, having gainsaid
entreaties, ought prepare for violence.

To endeavor Romes ruin by force, was a wise consideration, but dangerous; for
your own more safeties sake, you resolved to deny them women: Good resolutions
are seldom taken all together; in all things dangers do appear, and to
secure our selves from evil, good is done by halfes; and the half of that
good is not good, which consisting in the whole admits of no division. To renew
things now irreparable, and which cannot be diverted, is to believe ones self
greater than the gods, and a labor without profit, or rather accompanied with
loss, since thereby we call to mind those things, the chiefest happiness
whereof consists in forgetfulness.

Rome may be said to have its rise and its increase from us, and it is fatal
that fathers should lose in the having of children; drawing nearer to death, by
giving life to others, if it be true that the generation of one be the
corruption of another.

It Is true, there ought a remedy be had for the appearing danger; but I not
commend the repairing of past errors, caused by delay, with new, and greater
caused by impatiencie.

Injuries received, tend to the ruin of men, who with the zeal of honor do
not accompany wisdom; they run upon revenge for past wrongs, and throw
themselves headlong upon new miseries; they would amend one error, and produce
a thousand.

Too much haste is as much before time, as too much delay is out of time.
Errors of impatience are worse than errors of delay; for it is better to sh^n
precipices, than to run upon them: if they be not hindered, they are retarded.
Justice is not believed to be there, where violence is observed to be; nor can
it be accounted wisdom, where there is no argumentation. Argumentation is not
had in an instant; Time is not measured by instants. Wisdom is the daughter
of Cold, Violence of Heat; things which have not been done in times past, may
well be effected in times to come; but things already done, cannot be undone
again: occasions are never wanting to men, but men are wanting to occasions;
they may be expected, they ought not be prevented.

He who fights, egged on by Fury, begins his war for having lost; he
satisfies his affection, not his duty; and is sooner beaten by his own
weakness, than by another valor.

Our forbearance is to be feared, not despised; the world is his who has
patience, when it proceeds from sagacitie, not timiditie. Generous spirits
address themselves to endure present injuries, out of hope of future revenge;
they reserve their anger to vindicate offenses, not to evaporate passion.
Dissimulation is not to be blamed, when by the injury of Time, it is not
transformed into oblivion; dissimulation is never worse, than when it becomes
forgetfulness, never better than when it resembles it.

It is more safe to hinder the increase of Rome, than her subsistancie; for it
is easier to let her wax old, than cause her dye: increase is not there had,
where there is no motion; nor can Cities in peace, increase and receive
nourishment; new Plantations are augmented by the ruin of old ones; and tender
plants, which are hindered by the shade and roots of neighboring trees, want
force to grow up: Rome cannot grow greater without the ruin of our Cities; nor
can they ruin our Cities without war: to wage arms to destroy her, may
afford matter for her increase. All fires are not suppressed by ruins, nor
quenched by blood; that fire which wants nourishment, wants life; and where
of it self it must needs go out, it needs not the ruin of others.

All industry ought to be used to have peace with a people, who can never have
a worser war than peace: fair pretenses are not wanting to cloak our received
injuries. Necessity commits no offense, kindred are not enemies; matrimony is
no rape; let injuries done unto the gods, be left unto the gods; it is they were
injured, not man; and if men, not Cities; and though Cities, recourse ought not
therefore be had to arms; to revenge injuries, to reward good turns, love and
hatred are the affections of private men, Commonwealths and States have self
interest for the sphere of their actions; beyond the which they neither see
nor hear, it is the object of their senses, the mover of their affections, the
ruler of their passions.

The discord caused between Titus Tatius his slacknesse, and the peoples
impatiencie, was good harmony for Romes increase, for if she were likely to be
lost, if set on only by the Sabine forces, what think you would have become of
her, when they should have been assisted by so many other confederates?

SUndry people assembled together to work the same end, do not always
endeavor it with the same end; lines which meet all in one point, go not all the
same way; they often meet, and yet differ.

These men will overthrow this frame, but because each one puts it upon
another back, none move it.

WHere there is store of pates there is store of confusion; many stones of not
above three inches thick, may raise a height of a thousand yards; but the
uniting of many wits, serve not to the advancement of one understanding; they
help not, they hinder one another; nor is it true, that two eyes joined see
more than one, if one see more than both disjoined, when the greatest sphere
of the eyes motion, is understood to be the greatest distance.

In such an assembly there cannot be so good a resolution had, but will become
bad, if observed but by a few; nor so bad, which may not prove exceeding good,
if observed by all; wise men ought always to counsel the best, yet sometime
follow the worst, if the worst be the opinion of the most.

The Cernetians, Crustumanians, and those of Antenna, depart no ways contented
with the Sabins slow resolutions: and the Cernetians more impatient than the
rest, enter the Roman territories to ransacke them.

THe desire of revenge is more eager than any other affection, yea, more than
love it self, for that the blood is more active in the arteries, than in the
veins; Choler has no commerce with Wisdom, she is companion to audacitie,
she levels precipices, makes mountains valleys: The choleric man fears
not, because he looks upon the object only how he may offend it, not how he
may by it be offended; his eyes are always on the extremes; he sees not the
middle; and oft-times falls, because he knows not that he can fall; all his
spirits flock to assist him, making him believe he is able to do more than
indeed he is, and hindering one another, he ofttimes is of less ability than
usual; he thinks upon nothing but how to quench that fire that burns, nor
finds he other water to quench it withal, than that of revenge; he runs for
remedy to him that first did kindle it, that by his blood he may extinguish it,
nor does he stop, till it be thus fed, or by fear quite put out.

Romulus makes toward them, teaching them how vain that Anger is, which is
not sustained by forces. He overcomes them, treads them under foot, kills their
Leader, takes their City, and brings home his victorious Army.

Romulus was no less daring in his actions than eloquent in his speech;
valiant in doing brave things, wary in assisting them with fair appearances.

GReat actions have need of help, else they will be suffocated by simplicity:
when wonder is conceived, thence proceeds reverence.

It is easy to add to the greatness of actions by words; to truth by
appearances, and it is not amiss. A Prince obliges himself to things greater
than he has yet done, if he make them not seem less, than what they are
believed to be; to add to petty actions, moves laughter, and merits the name
of vanity; to assist actions of a middle condition, causes admiration, and
immortal fame.

He caused the enemies spoils be erected, and from top of the Capitol did
dedicate them, together with a Temple, to Jupiter Feretreus.

Whilst the Romans were busied about such solemnities, those of Antemna did in
hostile manner forage their Country: the Romans without delay, bring forth a
Squadron of men against them, and easily defeated them, who of spoilers became
a spoil; and they which lay in wait for the goods of other men, lost their
own Castle; but Ersiglia, Romulus his wife, solicited by the tears of those
women which had been violently detained, by profitable entreaties persuaded
her triumphing husband to pardon those who were their parents, and kinsfolk,
and to receive them into the City.

THis manner of making the conquered companions; to receive for citizens, those
whom the same day they had seen as enemies; did make the waging of war more
easy to other people, but made it more difficult to overcome in war; it
increased the desire of combat, but took from the heat of fighting; where it
was a question, whether were the greater reward to overcome, or be overcome;
whilst they who lost, acquired the honor of being a Citizen of Rome.

Whosoever shall read the Roman Histories, considering their ways of growing
greater, will either believe that they did ill, or else will blame those who
now adays having Monarchies, and needful of people, do rather drive away
former forrenners, than they are persuaded to receive in new ones, whereunto
they have by some been solicited; but the diversity of circumstances, has
not given applause to such couns^ls The Romans by taking people of the same
Province, may be rather said to have framed one body out of many members, than
out of many bodies; there being under the selfsame clime, of the same
language, and little or nothing differing in manners, freed them from tumults:
their union was the more secured, by their being all new, and tender, easy to
be joined together; as it falls out in young childrens bones: their love was
the more secured by calling them to Senators places, and other commands in the
City; for being straightened by wars, they were easily persuaded to accept of
their enemies company, when being come to a greater growth, they refused the
society even of their friends: Strangers may be received for companions, where
there is a form of Commonwealth, or body of a Senate; but where there is an
absolute Monarchy, they cannot be accepted of, but as servants. They therefore
do wisely, who having passed their younger years, in which it was necessary
to receive into their body people of different language, climate, and manners;
do not call in strangers to enjoy, or without all peradventure, to trouble
what they have with their sweat won.

Those of Antemna being vanquished, the Crustumanians take arms, and were
soon overcome, fighting more out of fear than out of hope; disheartened and
made weak by their neighbors losses.

THe glory of the first wars had its rise from honor, of the rest from
reputation; to have overcome in these, availes as much as to overcome in those:
An army which fears to lose the day, is already beaten by its own belief;
each noise the enemy makes seems victory; each motion of its own men,
flight; such an army is more prepared for what it fears, than for what it
hopes; and ofttimes it leaves the field, more for that it fears to lose, than
for that it has lost: he who always thinks to overcome, fights always; but
he that doubts, defends himself, but fights not.

Romulus knowing that things won by valor, must be maintained by wisdom,
caused the Senate be assembled, where I may suppose he spoke in this manner.

TO conquer people, and not to know how to make the victory beneficial; to win
subjects, and not be able to keep them in subjection, is a loss both of men
and time. Providence is necessary, and it is laborious.

Means are not wanting, but those means are full of difficulties; were there
any infallible rule found, whereby to secure ones self from the rebellions of
such as are under him, I believe the world ere long would belong to one only
man; but in politic affairs there is no rule but fortune.

To captivate men's minds with rewards is impossible; servitude cannot be
rewarded with any other recompense, than being set at liberty: to tie them by
an oath, is no way safe; they are not subjects, whose power is only subject to
will; Liberty is natural; servitude violent; what is violent needs somewhat,
which from without may withstand it, if its beginning be not occasioned from
some internal cause.

To raze the walls of strong Cities, when subdued, encourages strangers to
make themselves masters of them; to leave them standing, facilitates the
insurrection of Citizens; and say it were a good advice for places that are
within the body of the State; it is undoubtedly bad for frontier places, where
it is hard so to do, as that they may be of defense against the enemy, and
not subject to the rebellion of friends: he leaves men's minds apt to
commotions, who takes not from them all means of defense.

Those who send Garrisons thither, or build Castles there, endeavor to
maintain them by force, and oftentimes lose them voluntarily: they secure
themselves from strangers, and put themselves into the hands of their own
people; over whom they lose the authority of command, because they lose the
power of punishment; they free themselves from the danger of citizens, they
submit themselves to the fidelity of a Captain; and he, though he may think
it ignominious to deliver up the City to an enemy, may think it may be
borne withal, if he keep it for himself.

He who builds Fortresses in weak Cities, depends also too much upon the too
mutable faith of the Captain; nor can they much hinder him that is master of
the field, as being only useful to curb unarmed Citizens, of no use against
armed enemies.

To send Colonies to work this effect, more incenses the ancient inhabitants,
and protests the n^w ones but for a small time: they are plants transplanted,
they soon accommodate themselves to the Country, from whence their roots
receive nourishment. They forget their original in all things, save in their
desire to be no more subjects, but companions. Men who go from their own
homes, to plant themselves in new places, go not thither to be servants to
them who send them thither, but companions and equals to those who remain
behind.

To keep Armies still on foot, to suffocat sullevations in their cradle, is the
greatest, and would be the best remedy, if then it were not in the Generals
choice to make a Commonwealth a Monarchy, and himself Lord thereof.

He that were always sure to return victorious, needed no other means to
secure himself; if enemies be vanquished, friends are tardie, because their
fear is greater, and their shame less; but the success of war is uncertain;
and it is almost certain that rebellions succeed overthrowes.

I should think the best course for the present, is to send abroad Colonies;
by so doing, the City will be free from beggars; nor will any courageously
minded man leave Rome, while she is bent upon glorious actions; and the people
round about our walls being subjected unto us by keeping an Army always on
foot, we shall secure them from their enemies, our selves from rebellions.

According to Romulus his opinion, Colonies were appointed for such places as
were won.

This mean while the Sabins waged war against the Romans; a war the more to be
feared, by how much the later it was undertaken, being governed by reason,
deprived of its first cholerike violence, nor sooner taken notice of, than in
the field.

The Sabins seek rather to secure their State, than to vent their anger; they
assault the City, not the Citizens, that they may bring it in subjection,
without intention of revenge.

The fear of Romes greatness, causes them to move: their rage for the
committed violence, the original thereof.

STates that enjoy rest and quiet, because they are in league and friendship
with all their Neighbors, have great good fortune if they meet with any
occasion of offense; and wise men in such like occasions seek after them; for
the common people will not be persuaded to more than what they see, they judge
by the eye, not the understanding, nor is there any argument with them of force
enough to gainsay appearance. To keep friendship with neighbors is exceeding
good; but hereupon to build the security of a State, is passing bad: they are
well held for friends, if they be considered as enemies; that so they may be
bound to love, and not able to hurt; the height of that building, which is
delightful and pleasing, when one thinks to enjoy it for an habitation; is
displeasing, if he look it shall fall upon his head.

The Sabins by deceit get into the Citadel of Rome, having by gold corrupted
the daughter of Spurius Tarpeius, Captain thereof; not without the death of
the treacherous young woman; whether it were out of hatred of the treason, or
did they fear mischief by the example, or were it for that they did expect
great glory, by making men believe they had won it by force, and not by
fraud.

THE obligation which remains, sowres the sweet of a benefit, which either is
rewarded, and then as good a turn is done to the benefactor, or else the badge
of ingratitude remains, which is equal shame to the benefit received: those
benefits seem sweet which are received by treason, which is a thing so
hateful, as it takes all merit from whatsoever action: A traitor cannot find
fault without accusing himself; ingrati^de becomes praise, reward blame; and
thus depriving men of hope, a new benefit is received from being ungrateful.

The Capitol being possessed, the next day they give battle, in the plain,
between the hill of the Capitol, and the Palatine hill, where by the death of
Hostilius, who opposed himself to Mutius, the upholder of the Sabine
squadrons, the Romans began to give back.

Romulus borne along by them that fled, made a stand upon the Palatine hill; he
vows a Temple to Jupiter, and prays to him for victory, wherein he is not
wanting in his own endeavors.

IN vain do men call to Heaven for help, when they withstand the helps of
Heaven; many do invoke it, and yet do hinder it; they require help from
others, and do abandon themselves, and by their deeds contrarying their words,
they show not to desire what they have entreated, and to have entreated that
they might not be heard.

Romulus gives on where the danger is greatest; the most hardy follow him; they
drive Metius into a moorish ground, where both parties meet with all their
forces, the one to succor their Captain, the other to oppress the enemy.

THe death of valiant Leaders, is the loss of battles; the danger of death is
the cause of Victory; all run to the battle, as well out of hopes of reward,
by freeing of him, as fear of loss, in losing of him; all dangers ought to be
shunned, when the State is in safety.

The business was doubtful, when amidst blood and dead bodies the Sabin women
came running forth, treading underfoot their own fear, with the fear they had
of others; with hairs about their ears, their garments rent, and turned
toward their brethren, toward their parents.

TOo late, said they, is Rape revenged, now when Violence is turned to Love,
Rape to Matrimony; and by that Matrimony children are had; we are mothers, we
are wives; who is it you will revenge, if there be none that suffer offense,
but in being revenged? You cannot redress our losses, and you take from us our
recompense; you revenge our long ago lost virginity, by bereaving us of the
fruits we have thereby received; you revenge your sisters Rape, with the
slaughter of your brethren in law; if you desire revenge, pardon the innocent;
let them only suffer death, who are the occasions of so great evils: Though we
be without fault, it may in some sort be termed a fault, to have been the
occasion of great mischief: Wherefore endeavor you with your weapons to pierce
our husbands bowels? they love your sisters, but we your enemies.

Cut off these arms, which have so often served for chains about their necks;
pierce these breasts which give suc^e unto your enemies: let the injuries of
kisses and embraces be cancelled by wounds and blood. O how much more unhappie
are we in being revenged, than in being ravished: dear husbands, cast away
your weapons, suffer your selves to be slain, in a war where it is more
glorious to lose, than to overcome, where victory is parricide.

Such like, and more ardent passions proceeded from the mouths and eyes of the
grieved Sabine women, when both sides made a stand, either enchanted by their
laments, or induced thereunto by danger, which being equal, they stood more in
need of interposal, than persuasion.

THere has always been a scarcity of men, who love to interpose themselves
in business; the shame of yielding has ruinated more Princes, than the
coveting to overcome; how many are there that have cast away themselves, for
want of some that would dissuade them?

Heat and cold meet together in lukewarm; for contraries often join, if they
have a mean: But those who want a meame, never unite, but consume one another.

In the already wearied affairs, and dangerous to all sides, wise men do
willingly intercede, and are rather the occasion, than the cause of
accommodation, for he easily suffers himself to be persuaded by another, who
was already persuaded by himself; contrary Elements, when they are weary of
fighting, appease themselves in mixture.

Forced marriages amongst Strangers, begin with war, and end in peace, because
they have those women always as mediators for peace, who first caused the
war. Voluntary marriages amongst friends, are worse; they serve for balance
to some present acco^modatio^; they begin in laughter, and end in tears; but
they are worst of all, when they are violent, inforst between enemies; for
such matches having not any one good moment, the ties of love serve for
incitements of hatred.

The uprore being ceased, the one and the other Captain meet in the midst to
become friends; and as not hatred alone, but rather desire of rule, had share
in the war, so had it also place in the peace.

OH the deceitfulness of man, which makes the desire rule, seem necessity of
revenge; there is too great a difference between the true, and pretended
cause, the formers thoughts are wholly bent upon the State, the latters upon
particular persons; the one after a little vent, having anger for its ground,
vanishes; the other keeps still its station, beco^es hereditary in our
posterity, by acquiring what it desires, it increases; the end serves for a
beginning, and sometime serves for the occasional means, and for such a
covetous desire, the world is too narrow: we do destroy our own desires, we
hinder our end whilst we do endeavor it, and as most inhumane in the most
humane affection, we kill those out of a desire of rule, which being dead,
cannot be ruled. What other passion is there in man, by seeking to satisfy,
the which part of that is lost, which is able to satisfy? This affection was
placed in all men, to tender the rule over al difficult to one alone; nor would
this peradventure suffice, did not every one hinder it in himself;
facilitating his being overcome, by overcomming; our very body it self, whilst
we endeavor that it may live, we bring it nearer death, so as we cannot so
much as therein overcome our enemies, without loss of our friends.

The victory which by Physic we obtain over our diseases, weakens us more
and more, and at the last, we lose at once with as much facility, as at
another time we were with violence victorious: we have need of as much force
to keep a State, as to win it. People which are overcome by blood, in being
subjected, make the Conqueror subject to service; by their loss they hinder
his rule, they put a period to his victory: things sublunary are not eternal,
because all who are actors by winning, lose and suffer by working. Those
Princes may be called fortunate, who inherit their States: those wise, who
finding them full of malcontents, wind themselves smoothly into them: those
most happy, who without loss of blood by reputation only, or some such like
meeanes, make themselves masters of them; these like Rivers, the further they
go, the greater they become, whereas they who have need to use force in
conquering, lose it by using it; and like Bees, whilst they hurt another, lose
their sting.

These end the war, joining together with their minds, their Cities; a more
profitable agreement for Rome, because she thereby grew greater, than would
have been the victory, which would have lessened her.

The Sabins would free their Country of one infirmity; and drawing from out of
her, her best blood, they expose her to death by every little accident; they
would extinguish Rome, and they make her greater; they bring stones, to stone
withal, and they use them for building; the chief Sabins become Senators;
Titus Tatius partner with the King.

HE might well enough have known by the example of Rhemus, that it was safer
to be Romulus his enemy, than his companion.

Examples, if they be of actions which have had good success, they make us
more fervent in them; and though of such as have had bad events, they make us
notwithstanding cease to go on, because men have greater hope of good fortune,
than fear of bad; they feign a likelihood, where there is none, and where it
is, they make diversity appear, either to encourage, or not dishearten
themselves.

Titus Tatius suffers himself to be blinded, by being made companion in the
Kingdom; he quits his ancient Scepter, where he ruled alone, to share in
another; he drinks the poison, because the cups brim is sweetened; he
perceives not how Rome grows, because himself is the causer of it.

There is nothing so pleasing to man as this, no cosenage that equals it; it is
the overthrow of the wisest, the ruin of them that are most powerful; we do
not in a straight line see in our selves things which are within us, but by
reflection in others; ones own beauty is not known without a glass; and he
whom we have raised to greatness, is the glass wherein we see our own
greatness; his greatness is with contentment beheld; and greater he would be
seen, not for that it is he, but that we think it is our selves; he is not
suspected, because ingratitude is not expected from him; he is not feared,
because his is not valued; to throw down seems to be more easy than to
build up; it is true, that Towers which are raised on high, may at ones
pleasure be thrown down, but not men. Greatness is not wholly to be
attributed to any one, who was not the sole causer thereof; when the subject
concurs not only passively by receiving, but actively by cooperating, we call
it an helping hand, not an entire Fabric; hence it proceeds, that when we
think we have reared a greatness lesser than our own, we find that they
themselves have reared unto themselves a greater.

These two Kings reigned a long time together with concord and agreement.

I wonder at Romulus, who not being able for a few days to bear with the
company of an associate given him by nature, did for many years bear with it
in a Competitour given him by Fortune; but he perchance desired the death of
his fellow King might proceed from fate, or else expected what occasion time
would afford him, that he might not discover his brothers murder did proceed
from desire of rule, but zeal to Justice.

PResent faults make past excuses of no validity; for once a man may be
wicked, and yet be thought good; the reiterating of vicious acts, causes them
be believed to proceed from man's depraved nature, not from the necessity of
the occasion: wary and vigilant men make show always to be good, that they may
be once bad to purpose; and this is a greater vice than others, because it
borders near upon virtue: what better could be expected from him, who had no
religion but selfe-respect, no desire but glory, no thought but how to rule
alone, who could nor suffer his brothers company, the Senates assistance, who
for that he would have no cause to fear God, would be believed the son of a
god?

The King loves no companion; he entertaines one, because he would have none:
a Kingdom should have two Masters, if a King could suffer a companion; the
government of two is not displeasing to subjects, because the number of the
bad, exceeding the number of the good, they desire what is bad, rather than
what is good; so if they err, they may have a place of refuge; if they offend,
they shall be backed; the loss of one Masters favor, is a sure way to purchase
the others good will; all things are lawful, save what is lawful; and were it
not that a City is first divided, and then destroyed, such a servitude would
be more favorable than liberty, at least it would be conformable to custom,
which calls living licentiously, living at liberty: a Kingdom is the
government of one, a Commonwealth, of many; the latter is lost by lessening,
the other by extension; two good Masters do oftentimes turn bad, but two bad
ones are seldom seen to turn good: it were better they were three, for so
they might the more easily be reduced.

Titus Tatius was now in the fifth year of his reign, when some of his
neighbors slew some of the Laurentinian Ambassadors. Romulus who till then
had concealed any desire of discord with his Colleague, now suffers it to
break forth, cloaked by Religion; and that he himself might be thought to
be pious, and his Companion impious, he publicly says, that the author of
so great a wickedness, ought be delivered up to the Laurentinians, but he
could not compass his desire, nor perhaps did he desire to compass it. Titus
Tatius does not consent that they shall be punished, showing himself to be
an obstinate defender of those who were his, though in things unjust.

The Laurentinians encouraged by this dissension, or were it Romulus that did
encourage them, slew Titus Tatius as he was busied about some sacred action.

THe Subject commits a fault, and the Master is slain; there would be no
wicked men, if there were no protectours of wicked men; permission is
protection. The first faults are theirs who do them, the second theirs who
permit them; and the Prince shares in all, if he punish not all.

The Sabins suspect that Romulus had a hand in their Kings death, but he as
seeming to reverence Justice, and not to fear violence, neither made show of
too much joy, that he might not seem impious; nor of overmuch grief, that
he might not seem fearful: an affected semblance of grief, where the grief
may make appear innocent, where the fault is dangerous, and the danger is of
insurrection, in my opinion is rather a harmefull, than profitable advice.

IT is an argument of fear, fear an argument of possibility of being
offended; and the act suddenly succeeds such possibility either known or
believed: who makes his people fear, is made fear by his people; their
tumults are easilyer allaid by undaunted men, than by wise men; for they more
esteem the breast than the brain, and are sooner compeld than persuaded.

A Prince can commit no greater error, than to seem capable of offense. What
is possible is the only object of the will, nor do men covet that which they
think impossible to obtain: fear ought always to be had, but never to be
shown.

Romulus renewes Truce with the Lavinians; and whilst he makes himself sure
of these, war is brought home to his own door by the Fedenations; but he
assisted by artificial cunning, suddenly overcomes them.

TO say the truth, fortune favored the Romans; all things concurred to their
increase, many might, and none knew how to ruinate them: at first when it was
easy to oppress them, no one stird against them; when they were increased, in
the common danger, every particular will of himself undertake the war; and
whereas all joined together, had overcome them, each particular by them was
overcome.

When they could not by weapons beat their enemies, their women work upon them
by tears, the last and fat all bulwarks of the walls of Rome.

I Am not of their opinion, who labor to prove that nothing but virtue had
share in the Romans actions, and therein grow hot, as if to term them
fortunate were a badge of infamy.

Wherefore ought daring be praised in a man, and not fortune; he has no
greater share in being ^old, than in being fortunat; belike men believe her to
be without man, because we see her not within him, but she is borne with us,
as are other qualities; and if she be not an operation of the understanding,
she is at least somewhat that moves the understanding to work in due season;
she is a kind of Enthusiasme, she makes him speak well, that knows not why
he speaks; she makes him work to purpose, who knows not why he works; a
might and power of the last individuation of a temper, which works not only in
the subject, but transmit her qualities forth thereof; whence are caused
operations in us, useful to others, caused by somewhat, which what it is we
do not know; and it is that man's fortune: she is an incanta^ion of that
temper, as Rhetoric is of the tongue, and makes her self be waited upon by
all the other parts of man; she is called fickle, not because she ceases to be
good, but because she gives way to a better.

The Veientanians slept in quiet, whilst their neighbors were together by the
ears, not unlike men oppressed with a Lythargie, who sometimes waken at the
hour of death.

THe splendor of that fire which burns our neighbors, deceives the eye; it
seems fair, because it shines; it seems good, because it gives light; the
harm thereof is not felt, till loss be thereby occasioned.

They begin to ransacke the Country; they tarry not the coming of the enemy,
and return home: The Romans, when they found them not in their Territories,
go to the City Veia; the enemy comes forth to meet them, and to their loss
give battle; the Romans forage their Country: and finally, at the
Veientanians request grant them peace for an hundred years.

Whilst Romulus, to call the Army to a Rendevous, made an Oration in the sield
next to the Caprean fenne, a great and sudden storm of wind and thunder
arising, he was no more seen; but being covered with a thick obscurity,
vanished from the sight of those who heard him.

The people did suspect that the Senators (whom he had deprived of their
authority) had slain him.

TOuching the ends of men of might, Fame is always sinister; as if death her
self did fear to affront them, if not enforced; or because they have offended
many, that is believed to be man's revenge, which is caused by Natures self; it
may be likewise they believe that art may have powerful remedies against
death, and that Princes being thereby taught, cannot dye naturally, but by
excess of old age.

The people make a tumult; their choler boyles apace, but leapes not out of the
vessel; they show themselves ready to follow any who will revenge him; some
Senator, who at that time had made himself the peoples Leader, might
doubtlessely have made himself Master of the City.

Julius Proculus came in, affirming that he saw Romulus ascend up into heaven,
and that his will was to be called the god Quirinus; the people believe him,
appease the tumult, and in stead of revenging him, prepare to offer sacrifice
unto him.

THey detract from the merit of Romulus his actions, whilst they augment his
nature; they lessen the wonder, and increase the reverence; they abase
Divinity, if they think it of so small esteem; they vilify humanity, if
they think it not of so much worth; the common people do easily deifie
Princes; him whom they see greater than many men, they think him greater than
Humanity; they apprehend their Genus to be above that of other individuals;
they believe Infinity to be there where they cannot reach unto with their eye;
and from the superiority of power, argue the superiority of Nature.

These are the actions which were by Romulus done, in war and in peace, who
wanted not spirit to recover a Kingdom for his Grandfather, not counsel to
build one to himself, nor wisdom to strengthen himself in Peace, which
facilitated by his so many Victories, might be long enjoyed by his posterity.

Romulus lived glorious by reason of his great achievements, and failing in
the midst of them, before he had made trial of adverse fortune, he dyed
fortunate.

Fortune is not sufficient to raise a man to greatness, if she be not
accompanied with worth; and worth is vain, where fortune wants: they are,
perhaps, more unfortunate than others, that are more fortunate; they are
accustomed to see good events ensue, yea, even upon bad advice and counsel; and
because they can give no reason of their good effects, they always address
themselves unto them without reason, as if their past good fortune, were a
clear demonstration of future felicity, and not rather an argument of
approaching miseries, in a world where the star which in the morning is the
Zenith to our head, is at night found to be the Nadir to our feet.

Virtue, when unaccompanied, is not discerned; counsel is only approved by the
event; and if virtue unaccompanied be discerned, it is either despised as
unusefull, or pitied as unhappie.

If God should make the effects of all things succeed contrary to our wisdoms
reason, men might perhaps believe the world were governed by chance; and if all
things did succeed according to wisdom, I am afraid such is humane weakness
as it would deifie her; whereas now, through the only light of Nature, it is
forced to believe, that there is somewhat without or forth of us, in which all
things are.

Those who have Virtue coupled with Fortune, ascribe all actions to their
wisdom; nor will they acknowledge Fortune to have any share therein, and
indeed it behooves them to know, that she has a great share in affairs, which
makes them fear that instability, which cannot be apprehended from elsewhere.

Romulus was made great by Virtue, guarded by Fortune, till he became great;
Virtue, though fair, uses to be accused of fruitles^esse; Fortune, though
fruitful, of instabilitie; the ones labors usually fail of fruit, the others
gifts of belief. Romulus may well be termed happy, whose virtue was fruitful,
and whose fortune permanent.

To compare him with any of the Ancients, the resemblance betwixt him and Moses
is not to be let slip; the one and the other in their births exposed to the
wa^ers: Moses, for Pharaos fear; Romulus, for that of Amulius; both of them
fortunately saved. Moses past his youths under sheepherds attire; Romulus was
educated amongst shepherds. Moses is the cause of Pharaos death; Romulus
kills Amulius. The one and the other were Leaders of People, the Introducers
of Senats, Lawgivers; and as they were alike in the beginning of their lives,
so were they in their ends.

The Lord takes Moses from the sight of the Israelites, he leads him into a
Mountain where he ends his days; he buries him, his death not being known.
Romulus was taken from the eyes of the people, was led into some solitary
place, was slain by the Senators, and buried, his death not being known. A
like case, from a differing cause, and differing end; because it was effected
by different agents: God because he saw the Israelites addicted to idolatry,
that they might not adore Moses as God, would not suffer them to see his bones
buried: Gods adversary, out of a desire to keep and continue the Romans
Idolaters, to the end that Romulus may be adored as a God, procures that his
death be not known, nor his bones seen: the one, because he is not found,
is not worshipped; the other is worshipped, because he is not found.

Romulus his moral faults, were the rape of the Sabine women, the death of his
brother, and of his colleague; his political error was only his indowing the
Senate with so much power, and then his bereaving them of it.

The government of a State, is but a slippery path; one only bad action is
sufficient to ruinate a Prince, who has been raised up by a thousand good
ones.

I do not remember that ever any Ruler sped amiss, for having left authority
to the Senate, but often for having taken it from them: If men commit errors, men
ought to be punished, and not the calling; and if the calling be feared,
wherefore was it ordained? but it is not fear which causes such wickedness,
it is the violent thirst after rule; otherwise they would not leave the
condition, when they take away the authority; being no less subject to their
possibility of reuniting, than of command: the institution and permission of
Senators in the original of commands, is not only done that subjects may be
content with their servitude; but because Princes are really satisfied with
what they ordain: It is the nature of beginnings, not the art of ruling. Who
prepares for a great leap, is content to arrive at the side of the ditch, but
afterward stays not there: man's understanding, because it has not in this
world any adequate end, coveteth as an end, any thing that seems desirable unto
it; and it has no sooner compast that end, but it makes use thereof as a
medium to arrive at some other end, which was first hidden from it by the
former, and continues to be the desired end till it be obtained; a little
master-hood seems enough, where there is none at all; but where there is but a
little, enough seems nothing, if all be not had.

Romulus in his beginning was followed by the noblest sort, because he won upon
them by conferring on them authority; in his end he was hated by them, for that
he incensed them by bereaving them of it. He cannot suffer the Senate which
he himself did institute, and because they would have him as a companion, whom
they accepted for their Prince, he would make them slaves whom he took for
assistant Officers: both exceed their bounds, they in obeying, he in
commanding. The Senate which is made to assist the Prince, thinks only how
they may lessen him: the Prince who ought govern the Senate, seeks to destroy
it: that Magistracy in States is of duration, which is content to execute as a
Minister, not to command as a Lord.

I have nothing of misfortune to recount of Romulus, save what was the occasion
of his death; and yet therein he was fortunate, because it was sudden. If there
be nothing else of evil in death, but the troublesome cogitations of the
mind, and the painful torments of the body, both which do precede it, that
death which is sudden, preventing torments; that which happens soon,
preventing the troubles of the mind, should be esteemed best.

There is nothing better in general, than what is worst in the individual:
the foundation whereon the Colossus of the world, does erect it self to
manifest its beauty, is death: it is the most solid part of consort, on which
all descants do depend. What would there be after the loss of original
righteousness, if men did not die? the fear thereof holds in fortunate men;
the hope thereof withholds unfortunate men from wickedness. Who should take
away death, should take away the Corner stone from the worlds Fabrique, should
take away all Harmony, all order, and should leave nothing but dissonance and
confusion: the order of the universal, is contrary to that of individualls.
The heavens which of their own particular nature do turn from West to East,
are by the universal nature carried every day from East to West: Death can
neither be bad nor painful, if to die be natural; for natural things are
good. I am of opinion, that to end ones days in decrepit age, is to fall
asleep, not to die: and say to die were to be accounted amongst the worst of
things, yet to be dead, were certainly to be numbered amongst the best.

One must live, as considering he must live always, not that he must once
die: the Soul which is that which understands, ought not to think of death,
for she never dies; and if the Soul do not, the Body cannot fear it,
because it knows it not, as that which by means of contemplation, is a dead
carkas before it be dead: Wherefore should the Soul rather fear, than desire
the death of the Body, which is burdensome unto her? and why should not the
body also be desirous to be bereft of its imperfections? it leaves frailty,
to put on immortality; it dies base, and may rise glorious; death is always
good, but appears sometimes to be bad, because they are sometimes bad who
dye; let a man live innocent, for he shall be joyd at the remembrance of
death, not terrified; and were not natures frailty subject to lapse, I should
be sorry she should be provoked to do good out of the fear of death, or
allured by the love of reward: the very foul ill favorednesse of doing ill,
ought to be a sufficient fear; and the comeliness of having done well, a
sufficicent reward; and if a man would consider that rewards are received, he
might consider what reward he has already received, when of nothing he was
created to immortality; nor am I any whit the more satisfied with well doing
out of gratitude, but much when good is done out of love due to the infinitely
lovely Nature of GOD.

Let us then say:

I do not only love thee Lord, because thou have created me; but I will
return again to nothing for thee. I do not love thee, because thou have
promised me the beatificall vision of thy divine Essence; but I will go even
into hell for thee. I do not love thee my God, for fear of evil; for if it
be thy Will, I covet it as the greatest good. I love thee, because thou art
altogether lovely, because thou art all Love it self.

Lord, if I love thee not as I instruct others to love thee, assist the
weakness of my nature, with the efficacy of thy helps: Stir up my
understanding, direct my will; whilst to the Glory and Honor of thy great
Name, in the which I desire to end my life, I put an end to this my Book.

Where the Author names Princes in wicked actions, he means Tyrants; and where
he writes of Fortune, he understands her to be a cause unknown to us; which
as all others depend upon God, the cause of all causes.

The end of Romulus.
TARQVIN THE PROUD.
BEHOLD a Serpent, Tarquin the Proud: he is not alive, so he might kill; he
is dead, and consequently may heal: he is not painted out only for delight, he
is described also for instruction; you shall see him made to bow by his own
proper fruit, who watered with the blood of so many innocents, like to the
Cedar, erects his head higher than all others. You Princes, or you, who ere you
be, that read this Treatise, decline this Serpent, tend not this Cedar, which
in the beginning may seem to contest with Heaven; pass forwards, turn back
again, and ye shall see him thrown headlong into Hell: that ear tha^ shall
take offense at the progress of this acromaticall harmony of so many harsh
Notes, let it expect to see it set to such a cadence so harmoniously, as may
serve to salve all dissonances his Principality has passed through.

It is never safer to write the actions of Tyrants, than under the government
of good Princes; the dissimilitude of their manners will not permit them to
believe that their actions are blamed, whilst the faults of others are related.

My book, which otherwise is a Satyr of Tyrants, is a Panagericke of Princes;
and if therein I sometimes praise Liberty, I compare it with Tarquin; I hold a
good Principality as free, as a bad Commonwealth tyranous: all forms not
corrupted are good, I only know that for best which is possessed, for all change
is very bad.

Wherein could I better serve the now present Princes, than by putting their
subjects in mind of the calamities of such as have preceded them? People who
now live, know not their own good fortune, because they are borne in it. I do
not desire they should be unhappy, but that they should know they are happy. I
like not that they make trial of Tyrants, but that they read their lives;
then will a good Prince be reverenced, when it shall be known that God
sometimes permits bad ones.

And wherein could I d^e better service to subjects, than in writing of a
Tyrant, of Tarquin? If those who write Tragedies, have thought, not only to
cause pleasure, but likewise profit to Princes, they have been deceived; they
make them most unprofitable, when most pleasing: then is the Tragical person
approved of, when he marches in the middle, between virtue and vice; then is
the alteration of the Scene delightful, when the change is made unlooked for;
but such a person instructs not them, because he only teaches the like, or
else the contrary; but so unlooked for an alteration of Scene instructs not,
it terrifieth; since as the worst of Princes are subject to dangers, grounded
upon reason, so cannot the best withdraw themselves from events caused by
Fortune.

They who write the Lives of such Tyrants, as happily arrive in the Haven,
delight, but ruin Princes; they are well liked, because some would follow
their own sensuality, and be secure, as if they thence might draw precepts how
to live well, and govern ill. I write a useful Tragedy, the life of a Tyrant
Prince, who reigning without reason, did with reason, to a wicked beginning,
and worser progress, join an end worst of all.

To prescribe precepts unto Princes how to govern well, has in it somewhat of
delightful, but it is a laborious, I had almost said, a proud undertaking;
they are for the most part Idea's, their being lies in the Intellect, out of
which they have no subsistence; they are coveted forms, and because
impossible, not obtained. A point which in the abstract is individible, is
divided into many parts in the concrete, may suffer infinite divisions: I think
examples fitter for the managing of such an affair, than precepts; they tend
both to the same end, yet run not the like danger; and in examples, Princes are
more pleased, when compared with a worser than themselves, than when with a
better; if the party spoken of surpass them, they listen to it with shame;
with emulation, if he equal them; but if he come short of them, with glory.
Bad actions related of former Princes, redound to the praise of the present, if
they be not found in them; and say they be, they make them yet be borne
withal. Detraction is applauded, and praise is not believed: in the latter,
Truth purchases the name of flattery; in the former, malice, the name of free
spoken; whence it proceeds, that the lives of worser than our selves, are both
more willingly written and read, than the lives of such as are better.

If I were fit to prescribe rules to Princes, I could not choose a better
means, than by propounding the life of Tyrants; it is much easier to say, a
Prince ought not to be thus, than to say, thus he ought to be; the negative,
than the affirmative: those who too severely restrain the^ within certain
narrow limits, dishearten, not instruct them; whence it oftentimes ensues, that
having broken those narrow bounds, and thereby thinking they have transgressed
the Laws of a good Prince, they become headlong, as bad as who is worst. The
goodness of Sovereignty does not consist in one individual point, it has its
latitude; and so depraved is humane nature, that he is to be esteemed virtuous,
who is without vice; he exceeding good, who is not bad. All men have not the
worth of Cyrus, and though some have it, they want the means of showing it; to
propound his life for imitation to one who has not his endowments, is as much
as to go about to erect the like building, where are not the like foundations.
Al may easily abstain from Tarquins vices, but all cannot imitate Cyrus his
virtues; he who has not wings cannot mount toward the skies; and who has not
the eyes of an Eagle, cannot look upon the Sun.

All things of this world are so knit together, that one depends upon another,
and upon that, another; who so takes one link from this chain, breaks it. In
a Prince who has won reputation, courtesy begets good will; in another, who
is foolish, it begets scorn, because the link of reputation is wanting; many
lines meet in one point, many ways lead to one place; he that cannot go the
troublesome way, let him go the easy, for if he arive not at his journeys end
with so much praise, he will yet get thither without blame.

To give instructions to Princes, it behooves to look into their nature, and
sometimes to be contented to allow him good, when he cannot be better.

Servius was the last birth of regal power in Rome; after him she brought
forth nothing but a monster.

Tarquin makes his entrance into the Kingdom by force; he may pursue therein
with courtesy, but he will make use of cruelty: in the death of his wives
Father, he shows himself to be revengefull; in leaving him unburied, proud;
in comparing him with Romulus, irreverent.

A Princes death, though violent, if his whole Race cease in him, is no
impediment to the good government of him that succeeds, if he be not a cause
thereof himself, through his bad government: where there is none of the blood,
there is no head; where there is no head, people do but murmur, they take no
resolution; the greatest provocations to revenge, are either necessity or
profit: friendship is maintained with men, seldom with dead carcasses; and if
it remain after death, it is only for compassion, not revenge. Princes ought
then to assail their subjects with good turns, not with weapons; the present
moves more forcibly, than what is past; and though ancient friendship may
hinder some one from applauding, new benefits will retain him from plots and
machinations: one who has received a good turn, either does not budge against
his Prince, or if he do, is followed by none; his past ingratitude teaches
others how dangerous it is to oblige him: But what will you more? wicked men
for a punishment of their mis-doings, are confident where danger is, diffident,
where security.

Those cruelties which tend not to dominion, are furious, not discreet; he who
uses them is a cruel beast, not a cruel man. It seems Tarquin did better
love revenge, than rule; rather to have his hands blouded, than his head
crowned. Princes are sometimes borne withal, if necessity of government cause
them be cruel; but if they be so by instinct of nature, they are always hated.

He who fears he has taught others how to enter the Kingdom through that
breach which he has made by violence, kills all such Senators as were friends
to Servius.

If it be a hard matter to maintain tyranny, where a Tyrant is driven out; it
seems impossible to maintain it, where a good Prince is expeld; in such a
case the Government cannot be preserved from being lost; for he that will kill
all the friends of a good Prince, must kill all his subjects.

In the putting to death of one alone through cruelty, a Prince obliges
himself to commit many the like facts; the one springs from the other, and the
last is always most fruitful; he doubts the tie of Allies, he fears the
hatred of their friends; and to free himself from danger, works new
cruelties, which never render him secure, but put a necessity upon him to
commit greater.

He who has won a Kingdom by the sword, if he lay not down the sword, the
sword will lay down him; he is too great a fool who will use the same food to
continue health, which he did to acquire it; and the Tyrant is not wise, who
makes use of the same means to govern a State, which he did to possess
himself thereof. This is not written that it ought to be done, but because it
usually is done; it is rather the nature, than doctrine of men; they think
that good always which they have found once good. It is a precept convenient
for Princes, not becoming Tyrants: goodness preserves it self with its like,
naughtiness is reduced by its contrary; and so great is the power of good, and
the weakness of evil, that men have often a necessity of being often good,
be it but to continue themselves the longer bad.

Far be the sword from the hands of Princes; pardon, not cruelty enforces men's
hearts; the latter used against one alone, begets the hatred of a thousand; the
former is not used without the addition of new friends. The Tyrants fear
increases with his power, and look how many he commands, so many he stands in
awe of; he is not worthy to be obeyed, who uses not the means to be
beloved.

I blame not Princes, because they make themselves be feared, but because they
know not how to make themselves be feared. It is not likely that this desire
of being feared should take so firm root in the greater number of Princes who
begin to rule, if it were not useful for government; it makes us like unto
God: but men in causing it, suffer themselves often times to be deceived through
ignorance, or miss-led through difficulty; and whilst they endevor to reach
unto what is Divine, they fall into what is bestiall.

Man in his nature is free, borne to command, at least not to serve; man is
unbridled, uncurbed in his passions; he is first a creature, before a
reasonable creature: the chiefest bridle he has is fear, because it is the
chiefest affection, if it grow not to so great a height, as it cause it self
be driven away by the desperation which it self is cause of: he who despaires
of life, cannot fear death, for he esteems himself as dead already, and
future things are only capable of fear.

Love is a silken thread, which holds in the horse, whilst he feels not
himself spurd by any other passion, which then or breaks or overcomes it, and
runs to the destruction of his ruler, because the incitem^nts of anger, and
desire of glory, are more powerful than the affections of love.

It Is good to cause men fear, but not to cause ones self be feared by men:
it is good that they fear their own actions, not the actions of their Princes,
unless by reason of their Prince^ actions; fear would be the child of
Majesty, not of cruelty; the one causes reverence, the other is accompanied
by hatred; the former is the offspring of worthy actions, the latter of bad.
That master is safe whose virtue is feared, and he is but in a bad condition,
whose folly causes awe. A Prince partakes of Divinity, when he causes
himself be feared, because he desires that we should do well; and he sides
with the Devil when he causes himself be feared, because he himself would
do ill.

Tarquin keeps always about him a guard of armed men, that he might by force
maintain that Scepter, which he had won by force.

A Princes Guard, if it fi^de him not a Tyrant, does often times make him one. If
fear be the greatest obstacle to wickedness, security is the greatest
occasioner. It is certainly a strange thing that a Prince should keep a guard
to secure himself from those, of whom he himself is the guard. That
Commonwealth neighbors upon corruption, which stands in need of a guard; and
that principality is already corrupt, which has need thereof: Natural
operations proceed from form. If a State maintain it self by ought else than
form, it is violent; if violent, of little durance. An army will not suffice
to guard that Prince, whom a few will not serve to guard; because few are
enough, where is the love of many; and many are but few, where is the hatred of
all.

The same sword that may defend him, may kill him, if the covetousness of a
Mercenary man, meet with the liberality of a Commonwealths man. How unhappy is
the life of a Tyrant? it behooves he guard himself from those that guard him.
And what is it that can render him safe? Affections? no: for wicked men are
hateful even unto such as reap benefit by their wickedness. Reward? no: for
the rewards which other men promise for the death of a Tyrant, are always
greater than those which he himself gives for the preservation of his life.
An Oath? no: for an Oath which is a good thing, partakes not of any thing that
is evil, and nothing can be worse, than to defend a Tyrant. Shame? no: for it
is no shame to foul ones hands in his blood, whose death would make paricide
be commendable. Good God! If Princes did but consider how easy and safe a
thing it is to govern well, how difficult and dangerous it is to govern ill,
Soldiers might well serve to adorn their Majesty, not to defend it.

A good ^rince may distaste, but not offend; he may purchase ill willers, but
not enemies; and he needs but a slender guard, because he distastes but a few,
and those out of necessity. If malcontents issued only from the tribunal of
Justice, and not elsewhere, Officers would be a better defense than Soldiers:
But a Prince is in worse condition, in bestowing his favors, than in
administering Justice: in the one, necessity defends him; in the other,
liberality makes him odious. If Justice go amiss, it acquires equal number
as well of friends, as enemies; whereas reward be it never so well bestowed,
pleases but one, and causes the hatred of all others that are unrewarded;
which is so much the greater, because it proceeds not only from loss, but
from a disregard the Prince seems to put upon those that share not equally of
his favor; declaring them to be inferior to him he has made choice to
bestow it on.

A Prince cannot then be termed a Tyrant, whilst he requires a small guard,
that he himself may guard many; he rather deserves that name, when he
indevours to secure himself from the hatred occasioned by his wickedness: but
howsoever it be, a Princes guard is not pleasing to the Senate; they imagine it
to be invented to offend them, not to defend the Prince; wi^h whom they always
are at variance, for that liberty, which is already servitude, when it falls
into the hands of such as may safely use violence.

To make his power greater, and himself more terrible, Tarquin himself alone
takes cognizance of all causes, yea, criminal: whence he has opportunity
afforded him to condemn such, from whom he may either hope for profit, or
fear damage. He hates the virtues of other men, he covets their riches;
which at such a time is an enemy to the possessor; nor can there be a greater
happiness under a Tyrant, than to be unfortunate.

IT is held as a necessary Maxim amongst Princes, that all things may have
their dependancy upon one alone; 'twas strengthened by the testimony of an
approved Counselor, who is thought to have put it amongst his first
instructions, for the preservation of an Empire. But either I am deceived, or
he did not intend such private affairs, as properly belong to justice, whose
errors can cause but small harm to the Prince. He surely intended such as
belonging to government, are apprehended under that point of determination,
upon which depends the being, or not being of a Principality.

It behooves a Prince as well to abstain from all things which not become him,
as to do those things which belong unto him. He who either too much
slackneth, or too much inhaunceth his power, abandoning the degree of a Prince,
does either too poorly serve the Common people, or does too arrogantly command
the Nobles; the one of which errors springs from too much familiarity, the
other from too much pride.

All men though never so wise, or of never so mean understanding, when they
hear the lives of past Princes recounted, be they good or bad, praise the
goodness of the one, and blame the wickedness of the other. Yet are there
some who afterward arriving a supreme authority, leaving tho^ things which
they though^ praise worthy, betake themselves to those which in former times
they had blamed. Wherefore, many thinking this to happen out of mere election,
cease not to wonder, that when Princes may live with safety and honor, they
choose to live in fear and diff^mation; whereas if they had considered how that
men do seldom imbarque themselves in evil actions, but are led thereunto,
not of their own will, nor yet against their will, but of somewhat beside
their will; they would have had more occasion to inquire into the reason, than
to continue wondering.

I verily believe that all Princes would be good, but that many are hindered by
their Subjects, and some miss-led by the times. Fortune has likewise a great
share, if not in making a Prince good, at least in making him appear so. C^sar
might happily have been exceeding good, if he had met with Cyrus his Subjects
or Trajans times. It behooves not to meet with great resistance, where any great
work is to be well brought in: the comparisons of the worst, are sometimes
necessary to make the best known: all Princes may be good, but not all seem
good. The subjects complaints are of power enough to dazzle the writers eyes, so
as he see not clearly those actions which he writes; the Prince is left alone
to speak against all, whereas all speak against him, and injustice is
believed to be always on the more powerful side. Subjects are so desirous of
liberty, as he that would govern them well, must not govern them at all. He
is not accounted a good Prince amongst them, who does not la^ down his
principality. Cities, where the more powerful trample upon the Plebeians, can
never be well governed, but through ill government. If he defile his hands in
the blood of the Nobility, they call him Tyrant; they hate him as a Tyrant, and
often times make him become one: If he suffer the common people to be trod under
foot, he is no Prince: that dignity is conferd upon him, that he may defend
them most, that are least able to defend themselves. I had almost said, it is
as hard to know who has been a good Prince, as it is to be a good Prince: Had
it fallen to the common people of Romes share to give their vote, they would
have proclaimed some one for an excellent Ruler, who by the Senate was declared
a Tyrant.

I deny not, but acknowledge that Princes sometimes run voluntarily into evil
ways, being deceived either by a false good, or false glory; they find it
more troublesome to make good a Tyranny, than a principality; they think it
likewise more glorious; they betake themselves unto it, as if that were more
praise worthy which is more difficult than that which is more convenient.

Tarquin reduces the Senators to a small number, that they may be less
esteemed of by others, and more observant of him.

THe sinews are taken from the authority of a Senate, when it is reduced to a
few: the authority of one Senator, is hinderd by the exte^ding of it to many:
particular men grow less esteemed of, because that one man is not so much
esteemed of, for arriving at that degree whereunto so many come, and the
reverence of the common people, by how much it is extended, by so much it is
lessened: one man in a small assembly, either by his worth or fortune, may
easily make himself umpire; and inequality preserves a Prince, if it be of
many; but if it be of one alone, it ruins him. That Prince which is not a
Tyrant, ought augment his Senate, because great men are more dangerous than
great Magistrates. A Prince who is a Tyrant, has good fortune, if he find it
lesned, whether his intention be to curb it, or quite extinguish it. Those
who augment the number of Senators, if they do it with an intention of
weakening the Senate, by how much more they increase it, the more they
strengthen it: how great soever it be, it is always in a possibility of
becoming little, and the authority of a great many, may be managed by the
brains of a few. If they do it with an intention of introducing their well
willers, whilst they think to make Senators partial in their behalf, they
lose those subjects which were formerly partial unto them. Such things are not
real, but rational: they are not found in realities, but only in the
understanding. The same path which mounts from the foot of the hill, descends
from the top: he who from the Tyrants palace looks upon the Senate,
miss-likes the Senate; but if from the Senate house, he look upon the Tyrant,
he miss-likes the Tyrant. Hence it proceeds that many Magistrates of a refined
judgment, have sometimes brought into the Senate factious people, to make them
change their minds. He is the self same, which was in the market place, and
which is in the Senate House; but the prospect is not the same from the Senate
to the market place, as from the market place to the Senate. Who changes the
prospect of necessity, changes likewise the point. That which no^ possessed,
appeared evil, producing envy and malice, being possessed, (and so those
removed) is acknowledged for very good: the greatest and most wonderful
metamorphosis that is, is that which presents it self to the eye of any one,
when he lays aside envy and malice.

Tarquin marries his daughter to the Latins, he thinks to shun the danger
he might have run in marrying her amongst his own friends: to augment his
forces, that he might tyrannise over the Romans, and to prepare means, that
he might in time subdue the Latins.

It Is true, a neighbor friend was more useful to him, than a thousand
friends, or kindred a far off. Who sees not the Tyrant, cannot aid him; his
defense is of no further extent than his voice: the chances which befall* him
are conspiracies, and conspiracies are sudden. If he have friends a far off,
he may be said to have a place whereunto to fly, when he is driven out; not a
stay to keep him from being driven out. But Tarquin did rather aspire to the
winning of the Latins kingdom, than fear the loss of the Roman: besides,
in so hard a business, he reapes profit enough, who receives no damage; and
he is sufficiently defended, who is not offended.

He was a good example to himself, of the bad examples which marriages into
the blood Royal do produce: the first thing they conceive withal, is the
desire of government; the first birth which they would bring unto their
husbands, is a kingdom. Matrimony requires equality, which if it find not, it
causes. Principality in its own essence, covets inequality. A Princes
kindred, are they who first show dislike unto the government, as they who are
likeliest to desire it, aptest to compass it. Kindred in a private estate are
not always friends; they pretend equality, grow to emulate, and what they
cannot compass by emulation, they endeavor by malice; which mischief it is
impossible to allay, either by benefits, or wisdom, or goodness, or any
thing whatsoever, death excepted. The world would be much obliged to an
Author, who would show the means how a man might shun envy and malice, when the
subject is capable thereof.

Tarquin had already won great power amongst the Latins, and perhaps that he
might make it greater, was the cause why he desired them to assemble themselves
together in the Ferentine wood, to treat of public affairs. They came as
appointed, he delaied his coming; and Turnus, who together with a great deal
of liberty, had but small store of understanding, not able to suffer so long
delay, we may imagine spoke in this manner in the midst of them.

TARQVIN, (O you Latins) is not to be ranked amongst the unwary, nor numbered
amongst the unadvised. This action proceeds not from pride, and if from pride
it is done that be may govern; not through neglect. He who is wont to make his
companions become his servants, will have his friends become his subjects: he
trie^ our patience by the same means, by which ^ee once won the kingdom; to
assemble a Council, is the authority of a Prince; not to appear there, the
pride of a Tyrant; to endure it, the patience of subjects.

Tarquin is too great to be any other member of our body, than the ^ead: the
harmony of many good voices is marred by one, though better, if it be too
great and loud. If you bring in a Lion into your Commonwealth, prepare
likewise to obey his will: humane power is as the wind, which though it stands
fair for whither we are bound, yet if it be too great, it drownes us. Those
who are by much greater than we, ought to be kept as far off as may be, or
at least where they are. We ought endeavor to have them not our enemies, but
not desire to have them our friends: their conversation is not company, it is
servitude, if it become not enmity. He who would see a large figure at the
best advantage, must not see it near to his eye, the sight thereof requires a
great distance.

Princes become Tyrants, because they are never satiated with government: they
will be Lords of our honor, goods, and persons. They hold all which they
possess not, their enemy; they think all lost which they get not, no man is
content with what he possesses: our felicity which is never found, consists
more in getting, than in having got: for in the one, men take delight out of a
belief of attaining to it, whereas in the other they are vexed, finding they
have not attained there: unto.

I p^de m^ self that if ere were Lord of the whole world, and had what ever he
could desire; yet cloyd with worldly delights, he would despair, seeing he
had not found out felicity, nor knew no other place to look her in.

There is nothing so averse to a Tyrant, as liberty; nor is there any worse
liberty to him, than what is nearest him: his people learn by example, when
they are not fomented by force.

If a stranger take upon him the authority to assemble a Council, he will
shortly have enough to command it. Forms are not changed in an instant:
accidents which have no bodies, are those which cause change in bodies.

Do you believe that he who is not content to be Prince amongst his own
people, will content himself to be a private man amongst the Latins? do you
believe he will abase himself to the brotherhood of a City, who leaves no
wickedness unattempted, to raise himself to Monarchies?

You have for example before your eyes, the Romans; examples are no more
believed, they admit of interpretation; such as had wont to serve for
instruction, before a deed be done, find no belief, till after it be done.
They are become pernicious in humane actions, they are not considered as they
are; every one fits them according to his own desire, either to believe too
much in them, or not believe in them at all.

What will you have to do with him from whom you can expect no help, unless
it be to rule you; nor expect counsel, unless it be how to grow cruel? And
say his customs hurt not you, because they are in him; they will endammage
you, because they will pass into you: mischief of its own nature is taking,
and it is likely that Tyranny has somewhat of sweetness in it, since that many
laying aside the security of Principality, betake themselves to Tyranny not
without danger. We have too much forgot our selves in suffering his alliance:
matches with Princes, become not a Commonwealth; strangers have got one foot
in, to take possessiot; citizens have a leaning stock without, whereby to make
themselves Masters thereof.

Tyrants ought to be hated, not reverenced by the people; it is not safe to
mention him, much less to introduce him into a Commonwealth; he who speaks
of him, should make him be believed to be a Tygre, a Sphinx, not a man.

I cannot believe you have a desire of Lords to become servants; I know not
whether ye suffer your selves to perish through ignorance, or weakness, or
through both; for my part, my vote shall cease together with my life, and not
before, in this Commonwealth; whilst Turnus lives, silence shall not be the
overthrow thereof; he who will follow my steps, shall not be commanded by
Tarquin.

Here Turnus made an end, when each one turned about to salute Tarquin, who
arrived at that very instant; and being admonished to make his excuse, said
that the occasion of his so long stay, was his having stickled in a difference
between a father and a son.

Turnus, who by fierceness and freedom of speech, had won reputation
amongst the Latins, following his accustomed wont, answered; Such differences
require not much time to end them: the son is bound to obey his father, if he
be good; if he be bad, to bear with him; howsoever, to reverence him: and he
has then least reason on his side, when he pretends to have most.

IT would be a great good fortune to be borne in times fitted to ones proper
Genius, if those times were permanent, or if one were to die therein: but since
that alterations happen almost always, and death but seldom; it is a great
misfortune, to live in a happy time, and dye in an unhappie one: it is not
without wonder to be considered, that we who with times change our external
habits, will not believe with time, our internal habits ought also to be
changed: the ignorant, as well as the learned, are subject to this weakness,
either for that they ^ow not how to change that nature whereunto they are
accustomed, or that they believe they ought not to change that which has been
successful to them; but Fortune often varies with man, because she changes
the times, and they change not their manners.

That Lion-like fierceness which was was serviceable to Turnus in private
factions amongst his equals, ought to have been dissembled with his
superiors; winning behavior, advisednesse, and fierceness mingled together,
season any affair excellently well, when the winning behavior appears
sufficiently, the advisednesse not at all, and the fierceness but a little.

As it is weakness to dissemble with ones equal, so not to dissemble with
ones superior is rashness; it is not at all times good to say all what the
heart thinks, though all what the heart thinks be good; freedom of speech
ought sometimes to be forborne, when freedom of life is corrupted; who uses
it not in a befitting time, hinders not, but hastens power.

Tarquin, who wrought himself in by little and little, ought by little and
little to be wrought out; to oblige him to do some great act, by which he may
either become, or learn how to become Prince: it is not good to pass by the
least errors in an entire Commonwealth, and it is worse to withstand all in a
Commonwealth corrupted; at such times to appear too much a good Commonwealths
man, is the next way to produce a Tyrant; the weight which preserves in safety
an upright pillar, causethit fall, if the pillar lean to one side.
Difficulties ought not always to be thrust at, in desperate cases, it is
better to commit them into the hands of Fortune, than to seek to remedy them;
where we cannot help our selves, to be busy, can work no other effect, than
hinder the effects of a cause superior to our selves; and whilst that comes
by, by unknown ways, impatiencie in seeking of it out, may easily not afford
it leisure to come; or disturb it, by causing it take some other way: How many
has Nature helped, whom Art has abandoned? and how many has Art slain, whom
Nature would have restored to health?

Tarquin says no more: he is not wont to defend himself with words, who is
used to hear nothing but flattery: these speeches take him unprovided, because
they are free: to answer all, pertaines to private men; to punish all, to
Tyrants. Princes ought not contend in words, left they the more incense others,
or become themselves too passionate, and bring their Majesty in question: more
place is reserved for craft, when less is afforded to choler. A Tyrant
sometimes is well pleased, when he hears himself provoked by great men; he
seeks out offenses, that he might commit them; he is glad to receive them,
out of a desire to revenge them; if he meet with none, he faines them, either
for his better excuse, or that he may be the more incenst.

Tarquin, that he might plot the death of Turnus, has recourse to some of the
contrary faction, by whose means, a servant of his is suborned to receive
great store of arms and weapons into his house.

STrangers have fitting means for revenge in a factious City: if there be
none there obliged to do ill, there are always enough, contented to see ill
done; if there be none that have the act of anger, there be enough that have
the habit of hatred: a stranger in such places meets seldom with any
provocations to blood, save hatred and malice; because offenses are for the
most part, either old, and already forgotten, or new, and already revenged; it
is neither wisdom nor foresight for a Citizen so to embroile himself; the
stranger is gone, the Citizen remains. If the business succeed not, the former
has the glory to have attempted, the other remains in danger, because he has
attempted, and suffers scorn for that it has not succeeded; such kind of
people would not be found in Cities, were there not many in all Cities, who
wanting experience and discourse, abound in nothing but ignorance and malice.

The next morning, Tarquin assembles together many of the chief of the Latins,
in the midst of which, we may imagine he spoke thus:

MY yesterdayes delay, oh ye Latins, has delayed all our deaths. Turnus was
grieved at it, because his hopes were thereby prolonged; he that day thought
to make himself Master over you; he deferd his thought, because be on whom his
thoughts were chiefly bent, deferd his coming. I know this to be true, and
such is his untamed pride, as might make you know it also: but it will appear
plain unto you, when searching into the most secret places of his house, you
shall find them filled with weapons.

A fierce and proud Citizen, is the Lion of the City; if he tarry there, he
will be King; fierceness makes him rashly seek for that, which pride makes
him covetously desire, such a ones greatest enemy is he who is the Cities
chiefest friend.

Your own ears filled with so many opprobrious lies utterd against me, may be
a witness of this; he never sought for glory, but by detracting from others;
he is one of those who term themselves free, and are so indeed, in as much as
they are not subject to reason; a people who see nothing but faults, because
they seek after nothing else: they blame the Sun, because it offends their
eyes, and know not that the fault is in their eyes, not in the Sun: a wicked
generation, whose fame lies only in diffamation; their praise in blaming,
their greatness in detraction. They say whatsoever comes next to mouth, so it
be bad enough; they are proud, envious, arregant, and malicious; they seek
for applause, through evil speaking, and because they meet with it in the
weaker sort, they make the better Citizens grow desperate; and under a false
show of liberty, they first confound the true one; then oppress it: they have
no means to raise themselves, but by taking from others; that they may rise,
they put him under-foot whom they detract, and so, (...) they may appear
great, like women, they care not whether it be by flesh, or a chopine: this
kind of people most pernicious to the whole world, sow confusion, make Princes
become Tyrants, raise discords in Senats, fill Cities with calumnies, and
finally with dead men.

Turnus says, I aspire to the government of you; he brings for example, that I
am hateful to mine own people, an enemy, a Tyrant to them.

O miserable condition of Princes! when as necessity inforces them to oppose
themselves to the ambition and hatred of great ones, they call them Tyrants:
They cannot make good the reasons they have of putting them to death, unless
the Princes will suffer themselves to be st^ine: conspi^acies ^e (...) tricks,
and inventions, when they end it not in a Tragedy with the death of the
Prince; they are held impossible, though their truth ^e seen every d^y; it is
lawful to beat back force by force; if private men do so, they are borne
withal, if not commended; in Princes it is blamed, and necessity is termed
cruelty; the weakest seems always to have the justest cause, though true
justice consists only in such as are powerful, who have it in their choice to
do, what the others are inforst to do.

And who is it that hates me, unless it be the Senate, which cannot brook
Princes, nor be brooked by Princes; it was a friend to Servius, because it took
not from him that Authority it took from the Kingdom, though it belonged not
unto him; but it has taken both the one and the other from me, to whom of
right they did belong; Right is not by them weighed, but numbered; and is there
believed to be, where it is cried up by the major party.

A Senate is ordained for free Cities; where such freedom is not, it
corrupts Government, and makes Monarchy turn Tyranny.

Do not believe (O Latins) that the faults which they object unto me, proceed
from any vice of mine, they (...) caused through the necessity of government:
they who desire a mediocrity in liberty, desire it not as meaning to rest
there, but that they may the easier compass what yet remains behind: if a
rider put a rough bit in a horses mouth which will not be governed, no man
blames him for severity; they blame the horse because he will not be ruled; and
yet they call the Prince cruel, who would c^rb the Senate, and call not the
Senate headstrong which will not obey the Prince: where there i^ such a
magistracy, the Prince must either hear himself called Tyrant, or suffer his
Principality be taken from him, or give it up himself: this name of Tyrant,
which is so frequent in every man's mouth, what is it, but his command who
forces himself to be obeyed? which if it be true, every one that commands is
a Tyrant; since there are very few, or indeed none at all, who, all other
impediments taken away, do naturally affect servitude; for my part I will
rather re^ounce, than prejudice government; quit the Principality rather than
lessen it.

But allow it, though void of all truth, that I be hateful, an enemy, and a
Tyrant to my people: who knows not that if I have enemies, it behooves me
seek for friends? that he who is hated of his subjects, cannot subsist
without the love of forrenners? that he cannot by violence hold in the Romans,
who has not the Latins for his faithful confederates? In brief, Truth is a
precious liquor, it will not be kept under by the waters of falsehood, but will
float above; and falsehood is a viper, which wounds with her teeth, and bears
the cure in her belly.

You see now the words which Turnus made use of to falsify truth, are the
selfsame by the which I prove the truth; you shall see the same man, who has
offended me, stand up in my defense. I will then show you what Tarquin is,
when you shall know what Turnus is.

Truth has no such enemy as likelihood; and oft-times, one truth is an utter
enemy to another.

More belief ought to be given to things which appear impossible, than to
those which admit of likelihood; who would make a lie be believed, delineates
forth a seeming truth, and not the impossibility; I was about to say, and am
almost of the opinion, that he is in a worse condition, in the worlds respect,
who is loaded with calumnies, than he who is infested with accusations.

There is no lie so dangerous, as that which most resembles the truth; many
likly propositio^s seem to conclude a necessary truth; and many true
antecedents, are of force enough, yea, amongst the most wary, to aver a false
conclusion.

It happens now and then, that an innocent man can deny no interrogatories, yet
will deny the consequence; a thousand moments make no difference in time, a
thousand points make not one line, and a thousand likelihoods make not one
truth.

It was true that Turnus was a proud man, it was true that he was fierce, it
was true that he blamed Tarquins tarrying, it was true that he had a number of
arms hid in his house, but all the rest was false; there is no means to
preserve ones self from such wicked ways, and perverse calumnies; they are
mines which cannot be avoided, but by foreseeing them.

A State is maintained by accusations, ruined by calumnies. It is a common
tenent amongst politicians, the latter part is not heeded now adays by the
world, because that though men do not believe falsehood, yet they give way
thereunto. Subjects use their pen, not their tongues; and though in what they
write, calumnies are often enough deserved, yet are they not punished, because
the calumniators are not known. Such proceedings puzzle the brains of
Princes; and if it cause not diffidence arise in them, it causes confidence to
cease: all are not of his opinion, who at the same time when as he swallowed
down the suspected drink, put into his friends hand the calumnious paper: it
was an action of one void of fear, I cannot call it a wise man's part:
falsehood when constantly affirmed for truth, if it deceive not even those who
know the certain^y thereof, it assuredly makes them suspend their judgment:
many believe, that nothing which is done would be known, if this means were
not used; and I am of belief, that but a little is known, because it is used;
if men were certain there were no other way of accusation, than by revealing
themselves, in things which appertain unto the State, their duty and honor
would lead them to it; and for what concerns civil conversation, oftentimes
hatred and envy, yea, sometime zeal and conscience. Then if a Prince would
reward accusers, and punish slanderers, he would in a short time make happy
his estate; for that accusers by little and little winning reputation, they
would at last come to such an height, that men would not be ashamed to accuse,
as the most reputed Citizens in the best times have not been: the suffering of
accusations to go less in reputation, and calumnies to get footing, has
been the increase of manslaughter, and the continuance of enmity. Happy
shall the subjects always be of that wise Prince, who does countenance
accusations, and check calumnies.

The Latins go to Turnus his house, prepared to believe all, if they find
that of the arms true; and finding it to be true, they make him prisoner; they
assemble the Council, and placing Turnus and his arms in the midst, the anger
of those who stood about him did so increase, as not allowing him to speak in
his defense, they found a new way of death for him in the Ferentine waters.

IN such like cases as this, it is equally capital to be accused, and to have
conspired: there is no defense but impossibility; a possibility of conspiracy
is no sooner seen, but the conspiracy is believed: likelihood, if of good
things, causes so earnest a desire of them, or if of bad, such a fear, that
it leaves no place for consideration of the truth, because it affords not time
for the sifting of it. Conspiracy affrights the heart, and stupifies the
members; who hears it, is apter to say, I should not have believed it, than I
do not believe it. Slander seems to be there impossible, when the accusation
ought to be capital to the accuser, if it prove not so to the accused: in all
other cases help may be hoped for from adherents; in this to defend another,
is to offend ones self: who shows himself a friend, seems a confederate.
Judgment cannot rightly be given, whether the accused ought to die or not,
till such time as he be dead, because the truth of the conspiracy cannot be
known till the danger be over.

In those waters where Turnus lost his life, the Latins almost lost their
Liberty. Liberty of life cease, when liberty of speech cease; and it is
hateful to a Tyrant, because it is necessary for a Commonwealth: he cannot be
said to be master of himself, who has his tongue subject to another; one
only, who fears not to speak, and knows when to speak, will cause fear in
a thousand: they withhold themselves from doing ill, who are sure to hear
thereof; and one freeman that has brains, is sufficient to save a whole
City, which is in hazard of being lost through silence. Liberty belongs to
equals, flattery to inferiors, the one is the Commonwealths Nurse, the other
the Tyrants foster-mother.

It is true, and I have already said it, that Turnus was not cautious in the
handling of Liberty; but in his case it had been all one, ^ven with them that
had gone about it never so wisely; it was not his death which damnified the
Commonwealth, it was the example of his death.

Tarquin summons the Latins again to Counsel, he praises the revenge they
have taken of one that was seditious; he desires them to renew their league
and friendship with the Romans.

THe proposition peradventure was not pleasing, yet was it entertained, though
much beneath the Latins; and to say truth, who was there that would gainsay
Tarquin? who was there that had a mind to follow Turnus his footsteps, which
led to the Ferentine waters?

He who is hated, so as he be also feared, though he have not men's good
will, yet he uses his will and pleasure with them; he is obeyed, if not
loved; nothing is granted unto him, nor any thing denied him.

Terrible examples, though they rob us not of power, yet they take from us the
soul of that power, because they take our courage from us; they incite anger,
but accompanied with fear: from which conjunction, hatred and cowardice
arises. The death of one great man, if it be single, way well produce hatred,
but makes not that hatred dangerous, because it is not accompanied with
despair; it brings with it all the good which Princes think to reap by being
cruel, and not all the inconveniences. A present good action is able to make
a past bad one be forgotten, when it is thought the like will not again be
done. One harsh note in music, is not only allowable, but makes the harmony
the more pleasing, so as it be but one, and be followed with a concord.

Tarquin commands that all the armed youth assemble themselves together, in the
Ferentine wood; where all the people being met, and having for their greater
security, mingled together the Roman and Latin Colors, he there-out framed
an army.

THis way of security, is not very safe: a known sign among them,
distinguishes them from confusion, and confusion is only hurtful to the
causer. With what courage will he fight, who stands in continual fear either
of being abandoned, or not followed by his companion? An army composed of
sundry Nations likes me well, out of another reason: they seldom mutiny all
together, because they jointly understand not one another; and many times there
is caused such an emulation amongst the several parts, as in the whole makes
an harmony, when it is not accompanied with the disagreeing notes of hatred;
and this also if the parts be more than two, will not lessen the sweetness of
the concordance, though it increase the commanders labor. When one side
mutinies, the o there is quiet, expecting profit for not having mutinied: when
one side advances it self against the enemy, the other endeavors to be as
forward, holding it a scorn to be behind: they have two incitements to fight
valiantly, their own particular honor, and the honor of their Nation.

The general is the ground work of the music, the other parts if there be
no discord amongst them, make not harmony with him; and making it with him,
they altogether make up a most exact consort. All his difficulty lies in so
behaving himself, as his affection may be a center equally distant from all
the parts of the circumference; it is the like disproportion that the whole
become a part, as that the commander become partial.

He wages war against the Volsians, he by force takes from them Suessa, and
Pometia; he reserves the prey, to build a Temple to Jupiter.

Tarquin was a wicked Prince, but a valiant Captain.

IF evil have no essence, what would become of it, were it not supported by
goodness? This it is, that is the ground work of the worlds worst things; it
is that which maintains sin: to be valiant in war, if it secures not
Tyranny, it at least prolongs it: It suffers not fear to become contemptible,
which arrives at the degree of being shameful, when a Prince is feared,
because his command is offorce, not because he is worthy to command. All
cruelties are bad enough, but they are better endured in a Commander of worth,
than in one of no estimation: in the one weakness is discerned, and has fear
for its companion; in the other fierceness, and has daring for its companion.
Men always go with a kind of reverence, when they assault their master, and
with fear also, when that master is a brave fellow: and where fear and
reverence once enter, conspiracies seldom succeed well. It behooves that
subjects, to the end that they may patiently endure a Tyrant, confess him to
be a great Prince, if they acknowledge him not to be a good one.

Valor is a kind of Besar, which comforts the hearts of subjects, that they
may the better endure a Tyrants venom: but they seldom arrive at such a
degree of virtue, as makes them tolerable; and when they do arrive there, then
they are the more secure, but not altogether out of danger: it is true, that
reputation may defend severity, but not cruelty; and if cruelty, such as is
used in armies, not such as is practiced amongst Citizens.

A cruel Tyrant could be no where better than in a Camp, were he but secure
of his Citizens. Those vices which are insufferable in a City, are sufferable
in an army: it is no new thing there to see blood, where nothing but blood is
shed; and military discipline, if it may not admit of a cruel Prince, requires
often a severe one.

If war encounter with a Tyrant, who naturally is given to blood, it augments
his cruelty; because the use of seeing dead men takes mercy totally away; if it
meet with one who uses cruelty, because he would not be despised, whilst it
affords him occasion of making himself glorious, it takes from him the
occasion of being cruel. Hence is it, that the obtaining of victories is
sometimes poison to Princes; and on the contrary, an antidote to Tyrants: the
one sort being already in safety, find themselves oft-times egged on by
victory to those vices, from which fear kept them back: the other already
famous, find themselves withheld by glory from those vices whereunto the
doubt of being despised had incited him.

Tarquin besieges the Gabians, but being driven from their walls, and
desparing to overcome them by Roman Art, he has recourse unto his
treacheries; wherein his youngest son interposing himself, we may imagine
that Tarquin being himself most wicked, did most wickedly, in some such sort
as this encouraged him.

WE have in vain, O Sextus, by force assaid the Gabins, naught now remains but
craft, which is the second means of greatness; force being the first, craft is
good to add force to things already acquired: force is requisite to maintain
what is gotten by craft: The one of it self is of no use, the other without
relish. I surely should not put this behind what ever else, for what concerns
the augmenting of States, were it not a weapon which often lose h his edge, when
it is first made use of. Who will avail himself of wisdom, shall be
always good, but not always great. Liberty were not necessarily natural to
man, were not force and craft to be used in his subjection.

No people are overcome but by some means, and that means deserves praise,
because it has prevailed. They are to be blamed I confess, who have offered
at a Tyranous government, but not they who have effected it. Tyranny is a
flame, which at the first sends forth smoke, burns bright at last; and
becomes always most clear, as it finds least resistance.

That which many account infamy, is for the most part overcome by the rumor of
victory, or by time quite extinguished: most Princes, are Princes, because
their predecessors have been Tyrants.

To become great, it is not sufficient not to fear the sword, if either men's
tongues or pens be feared; they blame all means, whereby they may be brought
in subjection: to purchase immortal fame, it suffices that all ones actions
be great; equal renown is got by a good and by a bad report, if they be
equally great.

Those Philosophers which the world calls wise, I call crafty; they are weak
people, therefore blame violence: abject, therefore blame greatness: poor,
therefore praise poverty.

They teach to be contented with little, because they themselves cannot
attain to much; and that which being necessity would cause them be pitied,
they would make the world believe were virtue, that they might be admired:
every one that has brains in his head, seeks priority, and who cannot get
it amongst men, seeks for it amongst children.

What do they intend when they blame greatness, but to make themselves be
believed great; since not being so, and passing their time in rest and
quietness, as drowned in a loathsome idleness, they seek to abase, nay to
hurry down those glories which the most renowned Princes of the world have won
with their so much labor and danger. Great sure is their humility, who being
the most contemptible of all the world, would make themselves be believed
greater, than who are greatest. They contend against nature, and yet would
sublimate themselves contrary to the will of fortune: they teach all things to
be contemptible, save such qualities as they are endowed withal, though those
be of all other most contemptible; but what will you? they praise these
virtues as chiefest, which make them greatest.

We all aim at the same thing; every one blames that course which hinders him.
They praise humility, poverty, and continency, even to the Skies, because their
so doing makes them seem great: we all fish in the Sea, but with differing
tools; one takes a Minim, the other a Whale.

Go then my son to the Gabins, seem as if you fled from me; accuse me of
cruelty, endeavor their confidence, behave your self as one of their
companions, if you will attain to command.

We may believe that those most wicked lessons were given to a son, to
instruct him in villainy. He obeyes, flies to the Gabins; and it is likely that
in the midst of them he broke into such like words as these:

Lo here a son, O Gabins, escaped from his fathers sword, to shield himself
in his enemies arms! he brought me up as a sacrifice, to make an oblation of
me to the Temple of cruelty: if fathers be enemies, it behooves enemies be
fathers.

He would cause the same loneliness in his Family, which he has done in the
Senate; he knows not how to be father, neither of his Country, nor
Children. All his thirst is after blood; he only covets rule, that he may
kill. He covets the command of Cities, only that he may dispeople them. He
likewise would destroy father-hood it self, perhaps because it resembles
Principality.

His cruelty is a fire, which always burns what is next unto it, that after
other things it may consume it self. He seeks his sons blood, cloyd with the
blood of so many Citizens, for his further delight, he must needs use some
extraordinary cruelty.

He sees he has sons, he thinks them like himself; he fears them,
because he fears himself. The consciousnesse of his own misdeeds, corrodes
him; he fears his own imagination, which only represents unto him horrible
things; and he thinking to take courage, betakes himself a fresh to murders:
and by how much the more he imbrues his hands in blood, that he may free
himself from fearing others, he fears himself the more. A Tyrant would not
know what to desire, if after having committed so many man-slaughters, he
should forget the having committed them: fortune may well free him from
punishment, but nothing from fear; his f^are endures as long as does his life.

It Is safer to be Tarquins enemy, than his son; there is no such way as
enmity to free ones self from being assassinated by such a one.

Startle not, O ye Gabins, at my being begot by Tarquin; Children do not
always resemble their fathers: a tender worm sometimes has its beginning
from a knotty piece of wood. If things begotten did not ofttimes differ from
things begetting, there would be no variety of individuals, but only a
didiuersity of species; and the world, deprived as it were of its beauties,
would remain always in the same state.

It Is I, it is I, that will revenge, so many villainies; the fates will have it
so. Tyrants are like fruit, like iron; they from their own substance produce
the rust which consumes them, the worms which devour them.

If love to fathers were natural, bruit beasts would likewise observe it: and
how many children do we see adulterously begotten, who love those as their
fathers, who are not so?

If he begot me, 'twas either out of the itch of sense, or incitement of
ambition, either to delight or to eternise himself: and if he did desire a
child, he did not desire me for that child: and what obligation owe I then to
him, who desired my life when he knew me not; and knowing me, desires my
death?

The Gabins entertain him; they believe, their belief springs from their
desire.

THis alone often times brings forth monsters, because it couples with chimera's:
great desire is subject to great deceit; or ^ther he may almost be safely
co^ned, who vehemently desires: he believes what he covets, possible: he
frames arguments to make himself believe it, and thinks his understanding who
deceives him, j^mps with his conceit. The wisest many times run upon this
^ocke; for the object of a prevailing passion suddenly presented, is of equal
force with a lodestone: the sense which sees it, thinks not it needs the
help of reason to judge it; it first allows it, and then disputes; and often
times finds it not to be poison, till it begin to work.

Sextus Tarquin seems not willing to meddle in civil affairs, he persuades
them to trust him with what belongs unto the war: and so behaves himself,
that having some small bickerings with the Romans, he came always off with the
best.

THis is a heat which seems natural, as if it cherished, when indeed it is
feverish, because it burns.

Sons are like their fathers, when their mothers differ not i^ manners from
their fathers. Sextus Tarquin should have thought himself worse than his
father, in that Tulli^ was his mother, more wicked than her husband.

Who always doubts, is never deceived; wise men believe nothing but what they
see, and what they see they often doubt of.

Suspicion is no fault, but the bewraying of it, a great one; wherein can a man
be injured by his not believing, when he reapes the like profit as if he did
believe, and yet is wary as if he did not believe? The best rule which can be
given for living in safety, is always to feign belief, yet always doubt.
Things only which belong to God, ought to be believed, not examined; He is the
very truth it self; he is not false, no deceiver: yea it is he that teaches
us not to believe men, because they are all liars.

If men were what they ought to be, they should be accordingly dealt withal;
but corrupt bodies, require not solid meat.

The wary will never err in their believing little, and the inconsiderate,
will seldom but err in their over easy belief. It Is true, that he who
cannot make use of incredulity, will run into as many errors, as he who is
too credulous.

Suspicion does well in all things, not that we should let slip all things, but
that we should be in all things caute^ous. Incrudelity should make a man be
advised, not irresolute; nay, sometimes to compass great actions, it is
necessary we recommend somewhat to fortune, wisdom not being able to secure
us in all things: which fortune most commonly (let others say what they list)
sides with the wise, or for that she follows them better, or for that they
lay better hold on her.

The Gabins might have so entertained him, as if he had told truth, he might
have availed them; if otherwise, done them no harm.

He is affable unto them all, justly divides the spoils; will be their
companion; nor shows any superiority, save in valor. And so ties the hearts
of the people to him, as his authority amongst the Gabins, is not inferior to
Tarquins, amongst the Romans.

THis Estridge, which seeme^ as if he would cut the air with his feathers,
has wings to cousin, not to fly withal: he swallows Iron, disgests it not,
but renders it up again: He like a Stage Player, puts on the semblance of
doing like a Prince, not of being a Prince; and if of being a Prince, in no
other manner, than as the picture of a man may be said to be a man.

It Is true, he knew how to be good; he might have been good, but would not.

Those who value daring, more than wisdom, think nothing glorious, but what
they have with their daring won. The reputation of a good Prince relisheth not
with them; they cover the sharpness which Tyranny brings with it, and honor
most what makes most noise: they think that brains are made for
contemplation, not for government.

This is the ruin of youth; the most of them believe that true wisdom
consists in being courageous; and are not aware that whilst they seek after
the fame of valiant, they purchase the title of fool hardy; and no greater
misfortune can befall a man, than to have a heart, and to want brains.

He sends a messenger to his father, to let him know what he has done, and to
hear from him what he would have him do.

The counsel which Tarquin gave his son, was the same which Periander gave
Trasybulus. He leads the Ambassador into a garden, where with a wand he tops
off the heads of the highest flowers.

AL men walking in the fields, or disporting themselves in gardens, cast their
eyes suddenly upon such a flower or simple, as is higher than the rest, and
break it off; or for that the hatred of pride is so natural, as it makes not
only him who is endued with it insufferable, but whatsoever represents it; or
by virtue of an exquisite imagination, which making it appear to us dissonant
and deformed, will not permit us with patience to suffer it: or else it may
proceed from the easiness of cutting it shorter: for all such things as do
eloigne themselves from the equality of the others, eloigne themselves also
from their defense.

It is not good in gardens for any plant to be greater than the rest, unless
it be a Tree, whose bulk makes it not easy to be snapt in two. A flower
which is higher tha^ another is topt off: a taller Tree is seen with
admiration; so in Cities, he who will be esteemed and not cut short, must if
a Citizen, be equal; if Superior, a Prince. He whose fortune or valor has
made him higher than others, let him stoop till they be equal. Let him not
expose himself to eyes, if he will shun hands; otherwise he causes envy in
those who ought to be his equals, because he has out stripped them, fear in him
who should be his Superior, because he equals him.

Such a flower is easily topt off. All great men are enemies to a greater; and
so much the more implacable, by how much nearer him they are: But the Common
people which hate the Magistracy of great men, reverence a great man: or rather
because they hate the former, they love a greater man, and suffer him not
willingly to be cut off, because they admire his beauty, enjoy his shade, and
by his leaves grow fat. To banish, to transplant him, and not cut his ^oots; to
make him lose the City, and not lose his power, is a business ill undertaken:
he loses not his reputation amongst his friends, if he wins credit amongst
strangers; he is desired in the City, and he desires the City: whereinto not
able to return a Subject, he sometimes endeavors to return Master.

Sextus understands his wicked fathers counsel; and by sundry means he
banisheth some of the chief Citizens, puts some to death, and leaves way for
some to escape; and dividing all their goods amongst the common people, by the
sweet of profit, he luls them into a lethargy, from which they never did
awake, till the Gabines liberty was at an end.

Cruel actions are so many bolus, which are never better taken, than when
wrapped up in gold. Tyrants who being wise, are likewise liberal, have a good
stock to lean unto, but they seldom take that way; and if they do, they
keep not long in it, for cruelty is seldom without avarice, by which if it
be not caused, it causes it.

The public good is a specious name; it is sought for with relation to the
private; otherwise, men would cooperate as well under a good Prince, as under a
common wealth.

That doctrine of Philosophers, that private good may be preferred before the
common good, is as pernicious when it bears with it such a proportion, as the
allowing wine to the sick of a Fever. When sense is the incitor, things
granted are always exceeded, all rules enlarged, and an easy passage is made
from things conditional, to things absolute; who will take away the pravity of
feeling, must not give way to the pleasure of seeing.

Where liberty is, if great men be Magistrates, they are hateful to the
people; they willingly see them abased, nor are they aware that they are banks
reared up, which though they hinder the sight, yet withstand inundations. The
Common peoples hatred to the Senate is so natural, that they continue it, yea
under Princes; and Princes in my opinion (at least in this respect) ought to
cherish a Senate, as a fit place for Subjects to vent their complaints on, who
always more willingly-complaine of the Senate, than the Prince; either because
they envy them more, as being nearer them, or fear them less, as being less
powerful. The Senate matters not much, yet fears to break off the peoples
blows, who passionately run their lances against a Saracin of wood; it is like
fortune, which does just nothing in the world, and yet is always cursed for
doing mischief.

Tarquin makes peace with the Equi, renewes his league with the Tuscans, and
betaking himself to City affairs, will finish the Temple of Jupiter Tarpeius.

TYrants are wicked, yea in the building of Temples; they build them not so
much for worship, as to be worshipped: it is rather policy, than religion. A
wicked piece of Piety, to build great Temples out of a desire of becoming
great, to seek worldly honor by things divine, to make God a cloak to hide
ambition, and nourish our desires. The scum of the people partake of the
Chyromancer; they will see the hand, to judge the heart: but how many are there
who present themselves before God with hands of gold, and hearts of clay?
Monuments of stone are fading; what is exposed to the injuries of time, cannot
defend us from being thereby devoured. Good men need not to have their names
written in Marble, whose actions live in the memories of men: bad men should
not seek to eternise their memories by Monuments, since oblivion is the
greatest happiness can befall them.

The Temple being built, wherein he had employed the people; he fell to the
causing of certain common Shores be cleansed.

TO set people accustomed to war, about sor^id businesses, does irritate them
against the ^etter on, and imbaseth them in the eyes of their enemies.

The first and principal secret of Tyranny, is to keep friendship with the
people; which the oppression of great folks hinders not, but augments: it is
the nature of all things, that one part rise as another falls; if it be not
raised, it is eased: the people covet quietness, plenty, safety, to live, and
suffer others live. That which is hardest to a Prince, is easiest to a Tyrant,
whilst the latter practices upon the Nobility, the other is by the Nobility
hindered, which often times does tyrannize, when not tyrannized.

I hold it ever a difficult thing to maintain a Principal^y in a City, where
the people and great men do both agree in the desire of liberty, unless it
be done without weapons. It Is evidently seen, that Tarquin was no Tyrant by
Art, but Nature; not for his safety, but delight: the people like better of a
Tyrant, than of liberty; when liberty is not popular, and the Tyrant wise. A
Tyrant has none on whom more to trust, nor whom more to fear; he has no
better friend, no worser enemy: he was therefore wise as I believe, who thought
the government of a bad Prince, and an uncorrupted people, profitable for a
City: the one is a curb to the Tyrant, the other to the Nobility. A Prince
kept within bounds, a people not corrupted, and an humbled Nobitity, makes an
excellent composition.

Whilst the Romans were intent upon their affairs, a great prodigy
appears. A Serpent is seen to come out of a Column of wood, which frightens,
and puts to flight all the Court.

PRodegles which are forerunners of things to come, are seldom regarded
before the things be come to pass; and if they be sometimes regarded, yet are
they not understood. Many have believed, that in man also there are certain
seeds of Divination of future things, not known till they be past: I grant it,
and should believe them to be the motives of our tutelary Angels, were it not
that they are unusefull, either for provision, or prevision. I fear me the
Devil is the framer of prodigies: it seems to be the aim of one proud and
envious. He shows us things to come, that he himself might reap honor; he
suffers us not to know them, that we may not thereby reap profit: or shall we
say that those Stars which threaten or promise good or bad influences,
whilst they dispose the matter, endeavor to introduce the form, and whilst
they do introduce it, do produce in such a place, such a thing, such a man,
many things which precede, which accompany, and which follow; which though they
be not always the same things, yet come they always from the same things.
That constellation which moves the Serpent to enter the Court, is the same
which moves Brutus to drive out Tarquin from thence. Great alterations require
great influences, which when they* cause great diversity in their working,
happen not because the influences are diverse, but because they are diverse who
receive them. Actions are not done by their agents in an instant; dispositions
precede them, the truth of whose effects we do not know, because the virtue of
causes is unknown to us.

Moreover, men of themselves understand not things to come, because while they
seek the help of Reason, they lose the assistance of the Stars; they with
their disputes confound the motives of Nature; it is, perhaps, to punish our
rashness, which willing to make use of the understanding, to arrive at that,
where the understanding cannot sometimes arrive, goes not thither, whither
Nature would lead it; its motive is on the sudden, whilst there is neither
thought nor dispute about it; it is not minded, because not disputed; and
therefore good, because not disputed. Hence it is that women advise well on the
sudden, and that children and fools prophecy; they say what heaven, not
reason dictates to them.

Tarquin sends his two sons, Titus and Arons, to the Oracle; who take along
with them, Junius Brutus, their sisters son; whom he had not only suffered to
live after having slain his brother, but for his fate permitted him to keep
company with his sons.

WIcked men do often ruin themselves, through Gods not permitting them to be
wholly wicked (otherwise the world would be destroyed.) It seldom happens,
that together with the fear of God, they lose the shame of infamy; all
wickedness would succeed well to them, were they not many times hindered by a
desire of honesting them; and so whilst they will be wicked, and appear good,
they either undertake no greater wickedness, or else it succeeds not; but be
it as you please; let the Tyrant have strayed from reason in whatsoever manner,
he has not lost the desire of glory: it is true though, that he who erres in
^e general, as he persuades himself, that what is bad, is good; so knowing no
other difference in the atchiving of renown, than the greatness or poorness
of the undertaking; he indevours sometimes a great fame, though purchased by
never so great an^ in^mie.

This Brutus, who knew no greater safety under the Tyrant, than scorn and
neglect, where a greatly good and greatly bad fame are equally dangerous, where
Justice is not regarded, where knowledge is pernicious, betakes himself to
madness, and assisted by his being naturally given to melancholy, by
counterfeiting secures himself, leaving nothing for the Tyrant either to
desire or fear.

MElancholy men do so resemble madmen, that when they are not busied about
any thing, but idle, I cannot distinguish them from mad men, I had almost said
from beasts; but when they do any thing, I know them to be very wise, I had
almost said, they contend with the intelligences. No other cloud, save Brutus
his melancholy humor, could have shaded the Sunbeams of a great
understanding; all other humors would either not have long deferd revenge, or
for ever forgotten it. Long use of meats may change the habit of the body; long
counterfeiting may shape a new habit in the understanding; for custom has
power to make that become natural, which is not so.

Melancholy, which is not the dregs, but purest part of the blood, which is no
cole, but precious ^ewell, is that which produces Heroes, since bounding upon
madness, it brings men to a sublimity, out of which one cannot pass, and
within which all our wisdoms ^atitude extends it self.

He is greatly wise, who under a Tyrant can counterfeit a fools part; it is a
good piece of cunning, if the cunning be not discovered, for it is harder to
play the fool, than to be wise; and I should hold it to be a very safe way,
were not one only action sufficient to take off the disguise, having no means
of ever resuming it again.

Brutus who was Master of this Art, with the turning of the Scene, ownes
himself.

He makes himself known when he drives out the Tyrant; he unmaskes himself
at the last Scene; every one commends him, when they consider him, because they
considered him not till the end of the Tragedy.

TYrants ought more to fear those who cloak their passions, than those who
discover them; these stand nakedly exposed to the injuries of who has a mind
to hurt them; the other defend themselves behind the trenches, from such as
assault them, that they may sally forth when i^ ^s fit time to make assault.
The ^arily advised, and hare-brained ^ole-hardy, flattery and liberty, ^e
equally dangerous to a Prince that man never sufficiently to b^ ^raised, who
speaking of a Ty^nt, left in writing, how he fea^ed liberty, and hated
flattery; perhaps might as well have said, that ^ee hated liberty, and feared
flattery.

They come to the Oracle, and after having made known their Fathers desires,
they make inquiry touching the succession of the Kingdom; a voice was heard to
answer, he of you shall reign, who shall first kiss his mother: the two
brothers agreed, not to speak of this to Sextus, who staid at Rome, and to
commit it to Fortune, which of them should first kiss their mother: but
Brutus, seeming as if he fell, kissed the earth, as he who knew the answers of
Oracles, not to be so clear, but full of a thousand ambiguities.

THE Devil did not this as knowing what was to come, but he told what was to
come, that he might procure that that might afterward happen which he had
foretold; he endeavored it to winue himself credit, God permitted it to
punish humane arrogancy; it may be also the truth of Astrologicall predictions
are rather caused by the Devil, than by the Stars; so by God permitted to
confound our rashness, whereby it happens, that when we would foretell
things, we do it by the Devil. The desire to know things to come, is a
desire to be like God, and this was the forerunner of original sin: who tells
them, is presumptuous; who inquires after them, is vain. Some seem desirous
to search into them, that they may encounter the good which thereby is
promised, and shun the evil which is thereby threatened; and many times by
incountring the good, they lose it, and by shunning the evil, they meet with
it; but they seek after them, that they may find what they desire; which if
they find not, they believe them not; they beg food for their present
ambition, with the deceitful hopes of future greatness.

They return with their answer to their Father, whom they find has waged war
with the Rutuli, and besieged Ardea.

TARQUIN would make good his expenses by the riches of that people, and by
ransaking that City, reunite his soldiers hearts, who were not well satisfied
in their having changed their swords into mattocks; and the emptying of their
enemies bosom of blood, into emptying of sinkes.

When the Treasury is emptied by magnificent expenses, it is filled again by
wicked means.

Some Philosophers have held it good that Cities should be poor, that they
might be safe; they would have them shun envy, which hardly can be shund
without falling into the hands of compassion. It is better being rich than
poor; riches may at any time be le^t, but not poverty: The worst that can
befall a prospering City, is the happiness which they wish it; these are
things which heard of e cathedra, make men lowre; but out of the Schools
provoke to laughter. If riches move desire, they are likewise a help to
defense. For one time that a Prince is incited to invade States for the
increase of his revenues; he is a thousand times spurd thereunto, out of a
desire to enlarge his bounds. War is not usually good merchandise, whereby to
become rich, but whereby to become great; more is consumed in the acquiring,
than the thing acquired is worth; the gain is always uncertain, the loss
certain.

Whilst they were besieging of Ardea, which siege was more tedious, than
otherwise troublesome; Collatine, and other young men, supt one night with
Sextus Tarquin, and warmed with overmuch wine, there grew a contention amongst
them concerning their wives, each praising his own above the rest: they
resolve to go find them out forthwith, that they may be certain of the truth.

WIne molests the fancy, by sending up into the brain many gross vapors; it
bounds them not, because they are humid; it agitates them, because they are
hot; and whilst by its steame it represents many fancies, it affords occasion
of speaking much, and considering nothing; it is good to make men's hearts be
known, but not their brains: where there is no cold, there is no judgment;
where no dryness is, there is no weighing of words.

Men are all prone to think well of their wives; whether it proceeds from their
husbands great desire that they should be such, or from their cunning in
appearing such; or from the gift of Nature, which is never wont to be
defective in things necessary: for I am of opinion, that if all things were
known in them as they are, and not much believed of them, which is not, either
more liberty ought to be allowed to women, and so change the law of honor; or
if the former ought to be preserved, the latter ought more strictly to be
restrained; since through the misfortune of the general, there are very few
of them that are good, and through the good fortune of individuals, every man
believes his to be one of them; whence it happens that a great part of worldly
felicity is taken upon trust, consisting more in belief, than real being.

Men ought not talk of their wives, no not when sober; who speaks ill of
them, incurres blame, for it is the husbands fault if the wife be bad; who
speaks well of them, is in danger to be practiced upon, because he moves
desire; men desire the good they possess should be known; and oft-times
whilst they make it known, they make it be possessed: it is true that real good
is in its own essence communicable, and by being communicated, receives
increase; but ours, which is but an apparition, if communicated, is many times
lost. Praise, if it be of any thing within us, is to be desired, because it
cannot be taken from us; if of any thing without, or forth of us, it ought be
avoided, because it may be taken from us; praise makes it be desired, and
desire makes us lose it: I wonder at those men who complain of their being
annoyed, when they have done all they are able to make themselves be annoyed:
it is a great comfort, it is true, to possess things commended by all men; but
as Philosophy, to counterpoize the vexations of the intellect, has placed
greatest honor there, where is greatest trouble: so Nature to counterpoize the
pleasure of the sense, has placed most danger there where most delight is.

These young men make haste, first to Rome, then to Collatia: they find
Lucretia, not like the Kings daughters in law, feasting and rioting; but amidst
her women dividing out their work; they grant her the victory; and here being
by her husband invited, a base lust arises in Sextus Tarquin, occasioned as
well by the chastity as by the beauty of Lucretia: the look of a lascivious
man, is like the look of a Basiliske, it kills Chastity by beholding it.

MEN lustfully given, cause all their senses, yea, the understanding it self
to minister provocations for the satisfying of that sense; beauty, birth, sweet
odours, harmony, all which have nothing to do with feeling; and which is
worse, Virtue her self, and amongst virtues, very Chastity, the very opposite
to Lust, do more incite thereunto: Virtue is so lovely, that she makes her
self be beloved, yea, even by Vice: those who have written that dishonest
women desire that their lovers should be endowed with all good things, except
the understanding, understood it not well (or else I am deceived) they desire
their understandings should also be good in general, only defective in one
particular.

A small matter would satisfy the necessity of Nature, if men made it not
necessary to satisfy what is not necessary; what imports it to be clad in rich
array, to live in stately Palaces, to feed* on dainty cates, if all clothes
cover us, all houses shelter, and all meats satisfy us? we make necessity
become lust, to delight our selves yea in the imperfections of Nature. We
think not the desire of one sense satisfied, if the other senses stand i^le:
we cannot taste any one pleasure, if therein likewise our ambi^ion be not
delighted; no vice is bounded within it self: in such things Nature is not to
be blamed, because they are not seen in those who work only according to
Nature.

Many days past not, ere Sextus Tarquin returned to Collatia, with one only
companion, not making any mention thereof to the rest; he was fairly welcomed
by her who apprehended no deceit; he supt, withdrew himself to his lodging,
and when he thought that all were fast asleep, he came with a naked dagger in
his hand to where Lucretia lay; he laid his hand upon her breast; he has
recourse to the instruments of hatred, for his assistance in love; and he who
was wont by sword to vent his angry passions, knows not how to lay it aside
in tendrest affections; he threatens her, he speaks her fair, and seeing her
ready rather to embrace death, than him; ready rather to lose her life than
honor; he says he will kill some servant close by her, to make her be
believed a foul adulteress. See how this wicked one threatens to bereave her
of her honor, that he may bereave her of it. Lucretia thus assaulted, with the
same weapons wherewith she defended her Chastity, yielded to Tarquins
prevailing lust.

I For my part believe that Lucretia yielded for fear of death, which certainly
is much more fearful, when expected from another, than when acted by ones
self: and if this my opinion were not true, I should have much more cause to
marvel at those who (under the rule of Tyrants) either despairing of life, or
weary of that kind of life, have slain themselves. If th^se could not, or
would not live, wherefore did they not endeavor to kill the Tyrant? The danger
they should have run, would have been the same they could not shun, or desired
to meet withal; the reward which proffered it self unto them, was hope of
living honorably, or assuredness not to die without glory: to say they were
withheld by fear of torments, is idle: there is no torment more terrible than
death; who fears not death, ought not believe any thing of fear to be in the
world: and when he finds such a thing to be, he may always have recourse to
the other. Nature has not bin so niggardly toward us, as not permitting us to
live as long as we would, she has not at least allowed us a power of dying
when we please; if he lives not, who breathes not, and if not to breathe be
in our choice, who will may die.

Let it then be lawful for men to say, that death is more horrid in the hands
of an incensed man, than in our own; and moreover, that it requires more
courage, though there be less danger, to kill another, than to kill ones
self; the one proceeds from animosity, the other oft-times either from the
weakness of the brain, or poorness of courage; for a generous heart seldom
finds the way so shut, as that he cannot make his death glorious. It is a
yielding to Fortune, against which, the courageous, till their last gasp,
fight undauntedly. How many silly women are there who have slain themselves,
when they durst not have looked upon, much less have abided the looks of an
incensed man? And how many are there, who to shun the enemies sword, have
thrown themselves down from rocks, buried themselves in bogs, and drowned
themselves in water, without any hope of life?

Tarquin overjoyed, departs triumphant; saddest Lucretia remains overwhelmed
with grief; she sends for her father and her husband. Spurius Lucretius comes
and brings with him Publius Valerius; Lutius Junius Brutus accompanies
Collatine; she acquainteth them with what is past, which said, sorrowful as
she was, I persuade my self she added these like words.

AND what could unfortunate Lucretia do? if she had died that she might have
lived chaste, you would have thought her slain for having been unchaste. O
most cruel Law of Honor, which savest not the innocent; A law never descended
from Heaven, but come from the deepest Abyss of Hell.

I who would have mine honesty known to all, have more studied glory than
chastity; and whilst I sought after the name of Chaste, I am with infamy
become unchaste: I thought death the worst of all evils; I thought it the cure
of all misfortunes; I feared nothing, since I feared not to die, yet now I was
inforst to choose life, so not to lose mine honor, and by my living have lost
it.

I am resolved to die, if not for what has already befalne me, at least for
what may hereafter happen unto me. But what then? If I dye, I shall seem to
acknowledge I have done amiss; they will say my guilty conscience killed me.

If I live, you will believe I have done amiss, you will say I consented out
of too much desire of life. O, of all others most unfortunate Lucretia, whose
innocence neither life nor death can justify.

This Soul (O Collatine) whose delight was chastity, abhors now that body
which is polluted; and as being wholly thine, cannot endure that that part of
me should have any longer being, which can no more be only thine.

The wicked wretch did never prostrate me; it was not Lucretia, it was a
Carcass; for the Soul is not where it consents not; sin is the offspring
of the will, not of the body; where consent is not, there is no sin; but I
should think my self worthy of death, if he had only desired me; and blame
my self, though without fault, for that I pleased him.

O Beauty, pernitiously coveted by our unsound minds, you only serve those
that possess you, that you may be desired by who possesses you not. Frail
and fading vanity of the body, whereby the eternal beauty of the Soul is
sullied; who is endowed with you, or sins with you, or causes sin through
you.

But what was it in me that encouraged that wicked one to so great mischief?
perhaps my honesty, which he thought greater than that of others. Most sacred
honesty, art thou then become an inciter to lust? and in stead of defending,
offendest? Do thou in stead of bridling desires, egg on to fury and violence?

His heart, where cruelty is harbored, which can kill none but the innocent,
is likewise a receptacle of lust, which can covet none but the chaste: to have
what they desire, is not that the Tarquins do desire; they find no pleasure
where they use no force; and like Lightning, rend most where they find most
resistance.

And whither can unfortunate Lucretia go for revenge? to the Kings family, who
has injured me? to mine own friends, whom I have injured? You gods of
Hospitality, it is you I call upon: but to what purpose call I on you, since
you have permitted it? Revenge me, you infernal powers; but why invoke I you,
who were his assistants?

I my self will revenge my self, and will by death take greater revenge on
this mine enemy, than by living.

I will dye, not to lessen my faults, but to aggravate his; not for that I have
sinned, but to show that she did not subject her self to sense, who
voluntarily deprives her self of sense.

I will die, that I may not live in so wretched times, which make life a shame;
and to be borne, a misfortune. My fall shall ease your thoughts, make my
revenge happy; and I, who will not live an example of dishonor to women, will
dye an example of fortitude to men.

This said, she plunged a knife into her heart, and fell down dead thereon.

The Father and Husband stood shedding unprofitable tears, over the body of
Lucretia; they compassionated that chance, which not being natural, ought
rather to have moved anger in them, and animated them to revenge, than have
incited them to pity, and bedewed them with their tears: But Brutus the
punisher of tears, drawing the knife from forth the wound, wills them, they to
take an oath to drive out the Tarquins; he speaks not of killing them: Herein
his revenge is not of large enough extent, it reaches not to life; he will
have them swear, not to suffer any more in Rome, any regal power: herein it
extends it self too far, it reaches to that form, which is not in fault.
But Brutus, who hated more the Regal power, than the Kings faults, moves
rather against his State, than life; more to vindicate Romes liberty, than to
revenge Lucretia.

HE who is endowed with valor and wisdom, makes his passions serve him in all
his achivements; he uses vengeance as long as he knows it useful, and
thinks it folly to hazard both life and goods in killing of one, by whose
death, nothing but the name of revengefull can be purchased.

Lucreti^ chance is the occasion, not the cause of the commotion against
Tarquin.

Some writers say that Brutus caused her dead body be carried into the market
place: I believe he first recounted the case with as powerful exaggerations as
he could, and in the heat of his discourse, showed Lucretias body: for
certain, if he did not use this manner of proceeding, he should have used it.
Sight moves more than hearing, and gradation should begin with the meanest. It
is almost incredible to believe what great effects the representation of
somewhat to the eye does work, when men's hearts are formerly by speech
prepared in any Tragical case. Few can forbear from tears, it moves
compassion in all, anger suddenly gets in, and oftentimes fury.

States have no greater enemy than Rhetoric, such writings should be burnt,
and the teachers banished, were not Nature her Mistress: A wise man who is bold
and eloquent, is an ill instrument for a Common wealth.

All the Citizens of Collatia take arms, and leaving the Gates well guarded,
that the news may not be brought to the King, they go to Rome, where having
assembled the people, Brutus having related the adultery committed by Sextus
Tarquin; I believe he might break forth into some such like exclamation.

WIll you still suffer this ravenous cruel lustful Tyrant? To what end do
you bring up your sons? To what end give you education to your daughters? To
what end do you heap up riches? for a cruelty, which will kill them? for a
lust, which will strumpet them? for an avarice, which will take them from you?

If you bear with him in hopes that he may change, it is vanity; if because
you fear him, it is madness: who shuns death, encounters with it; and who
encounters, shuns it.

A Tyrant is a monster, he is by nature intended only for a scourge to men:
he works not well to the end he was ordained to, if he work not ill: nor
best nor worst can be safe under him. He equally fears and hates the good of
good men, and the bad of wicked; and where he finds nothing neither to be
feared nor hated, he despises lukwarmnes.

Among barbarous people, where bodies govern the mind, where rationality is
in habit, not in act, where to command is slavery, to obey liberty: let there
be regal power; they are people which think themselves free, when they are
freed from the burden of commanding.

To desire liberty and shun servitude, is natural to very beasts; and man
seeming to be of worse condition than brute beasts, which as rational pass by
the greater delights of sense to shun subjection; he as irrational, passing
by the better reasons of the understanding, precipitates himself into
servitude, as if slavery were the greatest sensuality.

The Gods have made all souls equal, all bodies of the same materials; and
if they endowe one species with more nobleness than another, they do not so
in individuals. Wherefore shall we then make him greater than all, whom nature
has not made greater than any one?

What take you him to be? he is a man, and one who has no more brains than
other men, unless when he makes use of other men's brains, who has no more
power than you, but only in that you obey him; shall then your own power
subject you to a brain, which is not that which governes you?

If a Common wealth be liberty, a Kingdom is servitude; nor is it the more to
be praised if it be voluntary; rather he is more to be blamed who serves out
of weakness, than he who serves enforst by necessity.

When time requires recourse to daring, there ought no recourse be had to
patience: patience does well in generous breasts, to assuage necessity, and
there it becomes fortitude: In all other places it is baseness of mind,
unless it be assumed when time serves, to be laid aside when time serves.

What is it you expect? perhaps the old Kings death; perhaps ye hope better in
a new succession; A good Prince is seldom followed by a better, a bad one
often by a worse. Nature proceeds thus in humane things: evil of it self
always increases, good always diminishes. Who will make the sons better
than the father? Their temperature is composed of the blood of two wicked ones;
they are educated by a Tyrant, borne in a commanding Family, more proud than
Tarquin, for they are likely to be more insupportable, who brought up in good
fortune, have no reason to remember or fear bad.

To say that good Princes ought to be begged of the gods, and to be borne
withal be they what they please, is an instruction how to live, but not how to
live well; it belongs to slaves, not free men; it has respect rather to the
retchlesnesse of subjects, than honor. When a Prince cannot be made good, he
ought to be driven out bad as he is: he is not to be suffered, who by
sufferance becomes worse.

The world is grown so corrupt, that a good Prince is not so much as to be
hoped for. Wisdom makes him not be the more esteemed, but craft; the names
of things are changed: goodness, is termed simplicity; Tyranny, policy: and
a Prince is thought so much the greater, by how much more he has enlarged his
Empire or Authority; nor are the means examined how he enlarged them, he is
praised only because he has enlarged them.

Tarquins lust is not extinguished by Lucretias death: 'twill be more raging
if it remain unpunished. The calamities of others may be a lesson to you: it is
true, the good which is learned by what befalls ones self, is counterpoysed by
disasters: he knows much, to whom much has befalne; but who can learn by
another man's harm, say he be less wise, he is for certain more fortunate.

To conclude, be a Prince never so good, he ought always be feared, because
he is powerful; and it is better to die soon, than to live long in fear.

Let your bosoms be no more exposed to the loss of blood, for the increase of
that city which belongs to another; by the gains whereof you reap nothing but
blood, and wounds; are you not aware that you c^nquer Nations to Tarquins
tyranny? that by bringing others into bondage, you make your own slavery the
greater; and that like wood, you augment that flame which does consume you?

No longer suffer that your hands accustomed by deeds of fame to bring home
glorious triumphs, wherewithal to adorn the Capitol, be practiced in sordid
labor, and emptying vaults of foul uncleanness.

Go to, Citizens; deceive your selves no longer through ignorance of your
selves; hence forward, know your own strength; loyter no longer in an
enterprise, which can by nothing be made difficult, but by loytering. Now that
you have one to lead you, you will not want followers. First motions against a
Tyrant are difficult; to move is to overcome: it is hard to find a leader;
every one will follow, a leader being found. All men's wills are alike opposite
to Tyrants, they are not alike shown because all are not alike daring. I Will be
your head to drive out your king, your companion in forming of a common wealth,
the first in danger, the last in happiness.

Brutus his words make a sudden impression in the people: he who would have
them follow him, needs no other bait than the name of liberty. For ought I know
it is a word of enchantment, which has not its force within, but without its
self, for I know not what it is.

If by liberty be intended a power of doing what one will, 'twill turn to
licentiousness, and that government which has most thereof, will be worst. If
thereby be meant a power of doing what is convenient, it needed not be parted
from Principality, under which what is convenient has no less place, than
under a Commonwealth: and if thereby be understood a power of commanding others,
it is so much less for the Common people which obey, by how much their
servitude is extended to a number of masters: but it is but a Chimera, which men
feign unto themselves, to bring their wills to pass, and oftentimes to sweeten
the beginning of a bitter servitude. Barbarous people come sometimes to that
height of ignorance, that though their feet be shackled, they think their
liberty confists in the tongue.

The opinion which was held of Brutus his foolishness, stood him in good
stead; they think it forebodes something, to hear one speak so well, who
they hardly did believe could speak; his speech was then of so much more
force, by how much it was formerly thoughtfull of weakness: they look for no
cunning in a man, whom they judge in his p^ris naturalibus.

Men who are accounted very wise, are by their wisdom greatly injured: men
either hearken not to what they say, or weigh not what they hearken to. Every
word breeds doubts; they think demonstrations to be the deceits of knowledge,
and not the efficacy of truth: as if knowledge were a kind of legerdemain
which cozeneth the eye sight. By reason of this fatality of not believing the
advice of the wise, so many men, families, common wealths, and kingdoms run to
ruin.

Brutus departs; and at the same time (but by another way) when he goes to the
army, where he is with applause received, Tarquin comes to Rome, where as an
exilde man he is repulst.

It Is easy to shut the door against one that is abroad, but it is hard to
drive one out that is within. 'Twas observed as a maxim by a wary Tyrant, and
'twas written by a discreet writer, that the Metropolis of the Empire is never
to be abandoned for whatsoever cause.

He who is upon the place, sees the original of tumults; and because
beginnings are usually weak, he easily hinders their proceedings, who with
courage and without delay, maks head against them.

Many things in the world resemble smoke, their beginning is but small, their
end great; and many resemble the wind, whose beginning is boisterous, and end
weak. He saves himself from the former who suffers them not to increase, from
the later he who suffers them to blow over: progress of time may be expected
in the one, where the other ought to be smotherd in the cradle. Melancholy men
are apt to overcome such difficulties as are strongest in the beginning;
choleric me^, such as gather their force by peecemeale.

Tarquin retires toward the Tuscans, and is followed by two of his sons. His
youngest son Sextus flies to the Gabins, where in stead of being received, he
was slain.

A Tyrant either stands on the top of the wheel, or falls to the bottom; his
fortune finds no mean where to take footing; the wheel no sooner turns, but
he falls headlong down. The Gabins who formerly did receive him, when clad like
a Lamb which flies from the Wolf, now knowing him better, opened their gates,
not to save him, but to shut him up. His fate leads him thither, where he has
trespassed, that those who were injured, might revenge themselves: he flies
from one who expels him, and goes to another who kills him.

Sextus betakes himself to the Gabins, for though he has lost that force and
reputation, which made him be feared and esteemed, yet he thinking himself
rather beloved by them, than but tolerated, not having lost those qualities
which he thought desirable, returns to them.

The Tyrant who hears himself flattered, thinks himself beloved; he thinks
his being had in reverence, to be the fruits of his wisdom: and because he
makes away with all those whom he hates, he thinks nothing remains for him
but love: he sees himself honored, and believes he does deserve it; not
knowing that it proceeds from his cruelty, not worth.

And wherewithal are men easilier deceived, than by being honored? They
sudde^ly imagine in themselves some merit to which it is due; and though
sometimes they know they deserve it not, they are so infatuated with the desire
that the reverence done them should be real and not fained, as they rather
believe he that honors them is himself deceived, than that he deceives them.

This is the greatest of all affections, the last, which departs not but with
the last breath; common to both good and bad; affected likewise by those who
seem not to value it.

Observance, reverence, humble bowings of the body, are enchantments, are
adulations, which are often done with the feet; and are so much worse than
those which are done by the tongue, by how much they seem to be more lawful, by
how much they are more concealed. The honor therefore which Subjects use unto
their Princes, ruins them; for they whom for our own interests we honor,
believe it done for their deserts; and honor being indeed the reward of
virtue, they are not aware that sometimes too it is yielded to Titles and
Riches.

These are the actions done by Lucius Tarquin the Proud, in the progress of
his reign of five and twenty years; after which Aristocracie was
constituted.

BRUTUS was to blame in the framing of the Commonwealth, to make it too much
Aristocraticall; for had he granted in those beginnings a share of government
unto the people, he would not have necessitated them to assume the whole unto
themselves; nor would he have put the City in danger of being lost, in those
Tumults, wherein if he did not ruin the Commonwealth, he did for certain
ruin the form of that Commonwealth. Perhaps, Brutus believed, the people
would give way to the Majesty of the Senate.

States which are maintained by Art, may well continue, if managed by
intelligent Arts-men; but this but for a while; Art will be discovered, nor can
it be conceald, if it be often used: if the Cock should tarry long where the
Lion is, after having some few times been afraid of his crowing, the Lion would
devour him: when that would be made seem to be, which is not, it must be
cursorily done, if any good success be expected.

He who in the beginning of Commonwealths does constitute the best form,
does not constitute the most durable; when a man can climb no higher, and
cannot stay himself upon a point individible, he must down again, and so
doing, oftentimes precipitates himself. So a Commonwealth reduced to the very
best form, not able to retain it, whilst it seeks after what is natural, it
oft-times falls upon what is violent, which does corrupt it. A man must shape
his designs according to his materials, and of what he cannot make a Colossus,
be contented to make a Statue no bigger than the life.

The most part of Cities, which once freed from the hands of Tyrants, have fallen
into them again, have done it by reason of this: great judgment is required
in the sounding what form a City is capable of; and one ought not always
think of forming there a Commonwealth; but sometimes where a Tyrant is driven
forth, a King should be erected, to shun the ensuing of another Tyrant.

There is no man, how wise soever, who being a former, or reformer, Institutor
or Lawmakers, does not commit some errors in his first Ordinations, Statutes or
Laws, which in the process of time may ruin his structure; that Machine is
only of duration, which in the first appearing of errors, or in the correcting
of them, runs not total ruin.

It is apparent that the City of Rome, whose people had their weapons in their
hands, and were every day verst in the atchivement of new States, did rather
require a Democraticall than Aristocraticall government; and that not being to
be withstood by a greater force, she would come to it of her self; it was
therefore her great good fortune, that in approaching thereunto she fell not,
because she made her approach leasurely.

It is worthy observation, how the forms of state require a disposed matter,
the which they no sooner find, but they introduce themselves: it is not men
which constitute Co^mon-wealths, or yet Principalities, but a certain nature
or power of interest, which though not known suffers them not to be in quiet,
till it has brought them where they have a great proportion; just as it uses
to befall elements, which not knowing whither they go, being led by a natural
instinct, never are at quiet, till they arrive at that place, which though
being natural unto them, was not known by them. Wa^er in its proper sphere is
not heavy; and common people in their natural form are easily governed, nor
can they be taken out, or withheld from thence, without a not lasting violence.

Had not Tarquin been driven out by Brutus, and had the regal power yet a
little longer endured, I do almost, nay, undoubtedly assure my self, that
Rome had never tasted the sweets of Liberty; not for that the corruptions which
were in the King, (as some have believed,) entering into the other members of
the City, had disinabled her for this purpose, but because that he would
totally have extinguished the Senate, the memory whereof being forgotten, the
hope of liberty would have been likewise lost.

Those Monarchies which are governed Monarchically, where one only commands,
and all the rest obey, have seldom an end; but those which by means of a
Senate are governed Aristocratically, end most commonly in an Aristocracie.

I seldom find that the Senate of Rome has cast away their chief;
conspiracies would be sudden, and known but to a few, here they are slow, and
known to many: the greatest harm occasioned hereby to a Prince, is the
holding always before the citizens eyes, the picture of Liberty; those who see
it, desire it, hope for it; and when they happen upon a Tyrant Prin^, there
wants not some amongst them, who will adhere to the bringing in thereof.

A Senate when uncorrupted, always endeavors equality, and whilst it endeavors
that none be greater than other, it is true, it makes a Tyrant liable to the
danger of a Commonwealth, which may arise; but it does almost secure him from
the ambition of such as seek after Principality.

But be the effects of Senates good or bad to Princes, it is apparent that
Princes cannot endure them, and that they endeavor to destroy them. Some of
which leaving the Titles to Magistrates, have taken away from them the
substance; and these have augmented authority, but not secured dominion; others
have assayd to extinguish the Senate, by suffering the old Senators to dye by
course of nature, and not substituting new ones in their places; but this being
too tedious a way, requiring the life of more than one Prince, it has seldom
succeeded well, because seldom do two Princes succeed of the same mind.
Tarquin had likewise this intent, and to free himself from the difficulty
caused by the length of time, he put them to death; nor yet did this cause
good success unto him: A long cruelty is, by the speech of men, too long
remembered and the Prince sooner ends his life, than his cruelty. Moreover, by
reducing the Senators to a small number, where the form of a Senate is
corrupted, the form of a conspiracy is initiated.

There was one, who on the contrary part, did in his first entrance into
government, at one clap put down a whole magistracy, and he had good success
in living quietly amongst his citizens, and likewise in subduing of strangers,
till such time as he met with greater forces than his own: this man's case,
because it succeeded well, has been by some wicked men in their writings
commended, and his example by some lewd Princes imitated; it was neither well
written, nor well imitated; the one has reaped little honor by teaching it,
the other little profit by following it.

This did not damnifie Cleomenes, for he did not extinguish that Magistracy to
tyrannize, but to reform the City, and showing that the Ephori would have
hindered his right end, being of themselves wicked, that act bore rather the
face of Justice than cruelty: it is not cruelty, when a good Prince puts wicked
men to death, because they may not hinder his goodness; and if it be cruelty,
it is not mis-becomming; but then it is cruelty when a bad Prince puts good
men to death, that they may not hinder his wicked proceedings. He left no
desire of revenge, because it was calmly executed; nor did he afterward give
any occasion of revenge, for that to a severe beginning, he added a pleasing
progress: and as small present occasions, have no great operation, if they be
not preceded by weighty past causes, so weighty past causes have no operation
at all, if they want a present occasion.

Tarquin did not only exasperate the Senate, but made the common people value
him but a little, by his employing them about buildings: which in my opinion
was a great cause of his ruin.

A Prince who has the people for his friends, let him take heed of treachery,
for he may almost secure himself from insurrections; he may be slain, never
driven out. I know that people, though never so much bound unto their Prince,
will sometimes be provoked by a sudden scorn, or persuaded by a man of worth.
But let him take heed of tumults caused by hatred, for such are not to be
withstood, whereas those that are occasioned by a flash of anger, or fitly
applied eloquence, may be remedied by discretion.

In such a case the people do naught at all, if not in an instant; he who has
been assisted by them in the act, let him fear them when it is done; for the
act is no sooner done, than by them repented; and often times they turn
themselves against him that did persuade them, either because they will revenge
their Prince, or else cancel their own shame. Water which contrary to its
nature is heated, no sooner parts from what did heat it, but it returns to it
first condition: the witchcraft of Rhetorique being ended, which is not long a
doing, or the fire of anger being over, which suddenly vanishes; nothing
remains in the common people but shame, for having appeared against a
benefactor.

He who writ of so many things, and writ so masterlike in all, for the
maintaining of Tyranny, praises the employing of the people about building; and
yet this was perhaps the cause why Tarquin lost his: nor was this only caused
by their being rather sordid than magnificent, but likewise by the difference
between taking people from a chargeable idleness, employing them in a useful
labor, and the taking of them from the molestations of war, employing them in
the labors of the mattock. Nothing makes the troubles of war more supportable,
than the rest and quiet which is hoped for at home; nor is there any thing
encourages more to fight against enemies, than hope of acquiring glory amongst
friends: it is strange then, that rest after war should be greater labor, and
the glory thereof turned to shame.

The examples alleged by that author, are either of barbarous people, their
Princes slaves, and who know no other glory, than their belly: or else of
Tyrants, who having usurped the liberty, wherein the people had a large share,
had reason rather to fear the peoples leisure times, than the hatred of the
great ones. But the Romans were civilized subjects, not slaves, accustomed to
war, wonted to victory, lovers of repose, when it did not repugne their glory:
but Tarquin had not usurped the peoples liberty, but had rather freed them from
the oppression of great ones, over whom till then, he was only Tyrant.

Pride likewise had her share in Tarquins loss: by pride Princes think to
shun contempt, and they meet with hatred; they think thereby to become
majesticall, and they become detested: majesty requires mildness, not pride;
which is signified by them, who did assign both these, as inseparable
qualities, to the Eastern beams of Jupiter. But this is a vice almost not to
be separated from great ones; there is nothing makes us more believe, that the
sin of the cheifest angel in heaven was pride, than because he was cheifest.
Astrologers (suppose their art be vain) have notwithstanding united pride to
greatness, whilst they make the Sun in regard of manners, the infuser of
pride, which in regard of dignity, they make the dispenser of principalities.

But to what end do I continue numbering up his errors, if his whole life was
one compact error? He could not maintain Tyranny by goodness, accosting it to
monarchy, nor yet by craft, keeping it far distant from monarchy: he was
more rash than politic; more wicked, than wary; he lived ill himself, he
brought up worse sons; and being himself a wicked king, he left no hopes of a
good successor.

I deny not but that he was a valiant Captain, but to what purpose? If war be
to a Tyrant pernicious, either he commits the trust thereof to others, and
incurs danger of him who commands the army, or else he goes himself in
person, and runs in danger of those who stay behind. He who praises a warlike
Tyrant, would (it may be) understand it of one that had been so, or at least
of one that did not only wage war with city arms, but likewise with those of
strangers, wherewithal he might bridle a tumultuating Army, or oppress a
City that should rebel.

I cannot conclude this my discourse better, than by calling to mind to all
those that read it, the thanks due to Almighty God, for having caused us be
borne in times abounding with good Princes, when Christianity lives happy, void
of Tyrants. The most holy, most wise, and most loving head whereof exalted
above others, like to the brazen Serpent, is of power and force to free us from
the bitings of such Serpents, if they should arise: and because God does
sometimes permit Tyrants, for the chastisement of mankind; to see that all his
people are this day governed by excellent Princes, makes me believe, that the
world (whatsoever others think) is not now worse than it has been, and that
if there be some wicked men that irritate his Justice, there be likewise some
good, that excite his mercy. The which mercy I pray, and humbly turn to pray
again, that it will please his divine goodness, to make us partakers of now,
and in the hour of death.

FINIS.

