Here is a necessary Treatise for all manner persons to read, and has to
name, the Maidens Cross rewe.




IAnus Byfrons, amyddes January
With his frosty berde, and thycke loches rore
Begen the cold calenda^ of February
Right than I thought, how long me before
My master Lydgate, did apply him sore
Fables to feign unto moralyte
To show the evil their iniquyte.
All this consyderyd to my bed I went
Falling a sleep than full right shortly
And in this slumbre me thought incontinent
By an olyue tree I was full sodaynely
Where sat a Maid complaining rufully
Beatynge her hands, and under bows did shrowde
In the manner following bewailing all alowde.
Alas she said I may now sorrow ever
My good friend is gone which would have remain
The time so past se now shall I never
Therefore no wonder though that I complain
With syghes deep and with mortal pain
My flowrynge age I spent in vanyte
With all wretched folly and fragalyte.
I took no head unto dame reason
Which these proverbs following did me tell
Upon all the letters to have conclusyon
So was I ruled by three enemies so fell
As the world, the flesh, and the fend of hell
But as I may, I will them specify
Each after other as I hard them truly.
A.
ALas riot ledeth the brydyll rain
Alas that I loved so concupyscence
Alas time past may not turn again
Alas that I lost it by neclygence
Alas to learning I had no dylygence
Alas that ever I loved unhappiness
Alas I have banyshed reason and sadness.
B.
Beware thou youth evermore of ydlenes
Beware of pride, and also envy
Beware of wr^the, be ruled by mekenes
Beware of couetuousnes and of glotony
Beware also of the sin of Lechery
Beware right well also of presumpcyon
Beware and wise also of false rebellyon.
C.
Coueyte heaven with deeds of Charity
Coueyte conning with all thy busynes
Coueyte the company of dame fydelyte
Coueyte wisdom and all stablenes
Coueyte repentance for the wretchedness
Coueyte measure for thy bodily wealth
Coueyte the way also of thy souls health.
D.
Dread god also above every king.
Dread for sin evermore the vengeance
Dread for the time, the time of reckoning
Dread for to do thy neighbor anoyaunce
Dread above other thy self for to auaunce
Dread for to do evil always certain
Dread evermore also thy sovereign.
E.
Exyle from the falshode and flatery
Exyle from the evermore the vycyous
Exyle also vile speech and rebaudry
Exyle all things now superstycyous
Exyle dysdayne which is presumptuous
Exyle folly and dyssymulacion
Exyle always also detraccion.
F.
Follow the trace of truth and ryghtuousnes
Follow example of virtuous governance
Follow bounte and also lowlynes
Follow measure in all thy purueaunce
Follow wisdom by good remembrance
Follow Justice without corrupcion
Follow conscience at every season.
G.
Gladly be ruled by counceyll prudent
Gladly enclyne always to reason
Gladly to learn be thou much dylygent
Gladly take tr^uth to thy companyon
Gladly forsake the ill operacyon
Gladly serve God and thy prince also
Gladly be pacyent in trouble and woe.
H.
Have good respect unto things all
Have thou no doubt of holy scripture
Have God in thy mind most memoryall
Have gentle chere and countenance demure
Have good remorse to every creature
Have most thy trust in Gods goodness
Have not thy trust in worldely riches.
I.
I knew nothing in youth what I was
I would not know the steps of virtue
I thought full little how my youth should pas
I would nothing the carnal vice exchewe
I thought good fortune would me well renew
I was ^^^^^ed or that I was ware
I little thought of mine after care.
K.
Know first God and thy self secondly
Know well thy prince by dew obedyence
Know thy neighbor well and certaynely
Know well conning by dew expetyence
Know well in whom thou may have confydence
Know well the pore and not him forsake
Know him well that thou of counsel make.
L.
Love God also above every thing
Love thy neighbor and cherysshe thy wife
Love not riot nor back reakenynge
Love always peace and avoid the strife
Love in honest to lead thy life
Love ever mirth and virtuous dysporte
Love to the woeful to give aid and comfort.
M.
Much myschyfe comes of great debate
Much drink does wisdom aswage
Much sorrow does the courage abate
Much evil greueth a great outrage
Much medlynge lets great auantage
Much Joy grounded upon unity
Much harm does grow of instabylyte.
N.
Nothing is sweter than the dew of grace
No man may taste it, but by Sapyence
No man without charity may heaven purchase
No man without labor may have a science
Nothing to man is better than pacyence
No earthly riches, but it is transmutable
No man without manners can be conuenable.
O.
O mortal man rise out of deedly sin
O foolysshe love of worldly vanyte
O unkind man to amend the bygynne
O man remember Gods benygnyte
O man Gods goodness consydre and se
O man remember how he grants space
O man in time now take the gift of grace.
P.
Please God thy maker, and keep his commandment
Please not thy flesh, by carnal affection
Please well thy prince and be to him obedyenc
Please not the world with hole occasyon
Please the causer of thy first creacyon
Please not the Devil, by Pride, Envy, and Ire
Please him above, that is the heavenly Empire.
Q.
Quare deo fui sic contrarius
Quare heu non ipsum amaui
Quare noloissem cum habuerim tempus
Quare ve sic semper peccaui
Quare mundum ego frequentaui
Quare me sequetis o tu vir in vanis
Quare laboras sic mundi inanis.
R.
Right grievously I have God offended
Right naught I thought upon his Justice
Right little I thought for to be a mended
Right often I did my neighbor preiudyce
Right well I thought fortune should suffyce
Right little I thought on my souls health
Right so my mind was all on worldly wealth.
S.
Supporte not wrong unto right contrary
Supporte Justice with all thy dylygence
Supporte not thy servant to do vylany
Supporte no man when he does offense
Supporte always the ground of Capyence
Supporte pouerte in the time of need
Supporte always the ryghtfull man to speed.
T.
Truth may be bold in every manner of place
Truth is good and must needs endure
Truth does his servant call unto great grace
Truth is right fair and a precious treasure
Truth is worshyped of every creature
Truth is good both in word and deed
Truth of God shall have reward and mede.
W.
Woe worth falshode now every where aryued
Woe worth also false ymagynacyon
Woe worth pride which has mekenes depryued
Woe worth now flatery and dissymulacyon
Woe worth doublenes and detraceyon
Woe worth debate without extynguysshement
Woe worth also a corrupt Judgment.
X.
Xp^i time semper potentiam
Xp^i vide ac quinque vulnera
Xp^i tu^c pete misericordiam
Xp^i december serua mandata
Xp^i sit nomen in memoria
Xp^i mors liberet nos a morte
Xp^i nos saluet omni ip^e.
Y.
Ye that list heaven now for to attain
Ye must apply to virtuous governance
Ye in this world must yet take a pain
Ye must not follow your sensual pleasaunce
Ye should your end have in remembrance
Ye must forgive as you would have forgyuenes
Ye than shall come to the glory that is endless.
Amen.
Alas these proverbs, which I have you told
I little regarded in the time so past
But now by reason I do them behold
Full well is him that may have grace (...) lost
Beware right well, spend not your youth in wast
Lose no time, but spend it virtuously
Than shall ye come to heaven merely.
I wretched maid plouged all in care
The time so past may right sore bewail
That the flesh with sloth had me in a snare
Alas the Devil did me right sore assail
The world also did give me a battle
These three me fettered in a deadly place
Till I was helped out by good dame grace.
Which me has set in his garden grene
Under this olyue tree to sing right swetely
Amyddes this arber so right fair and shene
Gyuynge great lawdes unto God almighty
Which me has brought out of vayneglory
And there with all she began to sing
Lawdes to her maker in the fair morning.
The cock crowed and I did awake
Greatly musing upon my vysyon
And unto me I brefly began to take
Pen and ynke for to write that season
All that I had hard without abusyon
Preyenge you all that it does here or se
To Pardon me of your benygnyte.
Finis. quod Robert Wyer.

