SAINT GEORGE FOR ENGLAND, ALlegorically described: By GERRARD DE MALYNES
Merchant.

Veritas Temporis filia. Imprinted at London by Richard Field for William Tymme
Stationer, and are to be sold at the sign of the Flower de luce and Crown in
Paternoster row. 1601.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR THOMAS EGERTON KNIGHT, LORD KEEPER OF THE GREAT
SEAL OF ENGLAND, Chamberlain to the County-Palatine of Chester, and one of
her Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel, G. de M. wishes all health,
increase of honor, and everlasting happiness.
THE invented history of S. George (right honorable and my singular good Lord)
howsoever heretofore abused, may conveniently be applied to these our days of
her Majesty's most happy government, wherein the beams of the Oriental star
of Gods most holy word appear unto us most splendent and transparent, to the
singular comfort of all faithful. For whereas under the person of the noble
champion Saint GEORGE our Savior Christ was prefigured, deliu^ring the Virgin
(which did signify the sinful souls of Christians) from the dragon or devils
power: So her most excellent Majesty by advancing the pure doctrine of CHRIST
JESUS in all truth and sincerity, has (as an instrument appointed by divine
providence) been used to perform the part of a valiant champion, delivering an
infinite number out of the devils power, whereunto they were tied with the
forcible chains of darkness. In which sense retaining S. GFORGE for England,
not only as the patron of the noble order of the garter, but as the head and
patron of our eternal glory, both those that be knights of that noble order,
and all other of what degree or calling soever, have just cause to rejoice, and
to expect their deliverance purchased by the spilling of his most precious
blood, following him as our general, and hearing only his voice sounding in
his most holy word. For even as right soldiers having the sign of marching
forwards given the^, do take up all their trinkets: but hearing the note of
battle, lay them down again, preparing and making themselves ready with
heart, eyes, and ears, to execute whatsoever is by their general commanded:
So ought al Christians always to be ready to abandon all worldly goods and
honors, for to follow their said general JESUS CHRIST cheerfully and with
courage, for they do hear the note of battle daily preached unto them, under
the most peaceable government of her most excellent Majesty. The due
consideration of which preparation is the only and principal point that the
noble knights of this renowned order are to study wearing the livery of the
holy cross imprinted in their minds, as being true knights of Malta, to defend
and advance true religion, and the welfare of their country: the prosperity of
both being overmuch hindered by the means of a cruel dragon, has given me
cause to explain the same, and to describe the history of Saint GEORGE
Allegorically in this treatise, the dedicatio^ thereof properly belonging unto
your honor, whom her Majesty by divine inspiration has been pleased to advance
to the authority of that honorable place, where the cruelty of this dragon is
qualified, and in some sort bridled: his operations and effects are tending to
the overthrow of equality and concord, two things required in every well
governed comonwealth; which being neglected, all policy of government is
broken, concord within the realm amongst the several members of the same, and
equality in the course of traffike between the realm and other countries.
Pardon (my good Lord) my boldness in publishing this testimony of good will and
duty unto your honor in these few words, seeing that so many are the honorable
favors received at your Lordships hands, that an Epistle dedicatory unto a
treatise cannot co^taine the same, unless I would seem to build a high
steeple unto a little cotage. Wherefore humbly commending this treatise to your
judicial eyes and protection, and craving pardon for my presu^ption proceeding
from an affectionate desire to your honors service, whereunto before all men I
acknowledge my self bounden, I beseech the eternal God to increase his graces
in your L. that his glory may more thereby appear, and multiply your days as
the days of heaven. London this 24. of May. 1601.

Your Lordships most humble and in all duty bounden, GERRARD DE MALYNES.

To the loving Reader.
GENTLE Reader, I have laid open in this treatise the operations or effects of
the subtle and cruel dealings of a Dragon, of whose manner and behavior
diverse have written heretofore, and declared the same to have been the cause
of the overthrow of kingdoms, states, commonweales and families. But forasmuch
as they have not made the application evident, some writing thereof according
unto Divinity, others according to the prohibition of diverse laws, I have
taken occasion to describe briefly and allegorically, the history of Saint
George for explanation thereof: the rather, for that I do find recorded by
Cornelius Tacitus a renowned author, that this Dragon is the chiefest head and
cause of rebellion and variance in countries, and was therefore altogether
banished in the old time, when least corruption of life appeared amongst men.
For he overthrows the harmony of the strings of the good government of a
commonwealth, by too much enriching some, and by oppressing and impouerishing
some others, bringing the instrument out of tune: when as every member of the
same should live contented in his vocation and execute his charge according to
his profession. For albeit, that equality would be the cause that every man
should have enough, which made some of opinion that goods ought to be common:
yet forasmuch as the same was never used or established in any age, reason
requires, that according to the course of humane affairs, all things should
be governed in the best and most assuredst manner that can be devised, and as it
were, seeking a certainty, even in uncertainties, which is termed Policy:
For all worldly and transitory things being mutable, makes the world properly
to consist of strife, war, discord, envy, rankor, burning, sacking, wasting,
spoiling and destroying: a very uncertain ground to build upon. And yet a
certain equality and concord is required in every well governed commonwealth,
the prince or governor having the disposing both of the one and the other.
Equality concerning the traffic and negotiation betwixt his dominions and
other countries in the trade of merchandise: and Concord amongst the members of
a commonwealth, when every member thereof does live contentedly and
proportionably in his vocation. Both these are brought to confusion and utter
destruction by the means of this Dragon, a monster found out by covetousness
the root of all evil: whereunto Ambition is annexed which moves sedition
and civil war: when pride does oppress love, which provoke disdain and
kindles malice, confounds justice, and at length subuerteth states: whereas
humanity stirs up affection, augmenteth amity, maintains love,
supporteth equity, and most soundly preserves cities and countries. This
Dragon brings inequality in a commonwealth by the means of his tail,
wherein lies his greatest strength, making the expenses thereof to surmount
the revenues. For he depriueth the Prince (which is the father of this great
household) of his treasure and ready money, which are Nerui bellorum, and is
the cause of many other inconveniences, as both in this and in another treatise
I have described unto you. This he effects by falsifying the valuation of
money, which is the rule and measure of things, which money he caused to be made
uncertain, and as it were a merchandise, giving thereby a wonderful ability
to some of the members of a commonwealth to oppress the other: whereby the
concord is broken, and men cannot live in their vocation, by that whereunto
they were borne or bred. Hence do arise the causes that statesmen, or
magistrates which have the managing of the government of kingdoms, and are the
Physicians of commonweales, are many times blamed and found fault withal, for
not lealing effectually the biles, botches, ^ankers and sores thereof, albeit
the fault proceeds not of any act or negligence of theirs, neither is the
same properly to be attributed unto them, but unto this old venomous sore,
being primum mobile, and yet not spyed out: in the curing whereof they would be
thought to be very foolish Physicians, if by their medicine the body were cast
into a more dangerous sickness. Wherefore as the wounds of this dragon are
inueterated, so must he be dealt withal by degrees and lenity, depriving him
first of the strength of his tail, which will cause a great obstruction to his
breath, whereby his power shall so much be weakened, as he may easily be
brought into a consumption: albeit that the pollitike government of some states
do admit him, as a necessary evil, with the keeping of a lombard to qualify
his extreme devouring of the poor. This dragon is called Foenus politicum,
his two wings are Vsura palliata and Vsura explicata, and his tail inconstant
Cambium. The virgin is the kings treasure: the champion Saint George is the
kings authority, armed with the right armor of a Christian: who with the sword
of the spirit of Gods most holy word, explained and corroborated with several
other laws, signified by the Pybal horse whereon he was mounted: did destroy
the cruel dragon, rescuing the kings daughter, and delivering the
commonwealth, as by the circumstances of the history may appear: the
Allegory whereof requires a due consideration, which would dilate unto
another treatise. Wherefore leaving this to thy good acceptance and friendly
censure, I wish and pray that all things may be well, although it be impossible
to have perfection and soundness of life in all men, and amongst all states.
God grant that all men may amend their lives in every vocation, and that his
kingdom may come hastily amongst us, to the comfort of his chosen people.
Farewell, London this 24. of May. 1601.

Yours to use, GERRARD DE MALYNES.

Saint George for England: Allegorically described.
APRIL having with his sweet showers moystened the drought of March, bathing
every vein of the roots of trees and ingendring flowers, Zephirus with his
pleasant breath provoking tender crops by virtue of young Phoebus, holding her
course in Aries. Abstinence in Lent performing her accustomed race feeding on
waterie creatures, the Moon being entered into the aquatike sign of Pisces,
and my blood increasing with the nource of digestion, caused me to slumber, and
no sooner did I discharge some part of that tribute due unto nature, when
suddenly falling into most strange dreams, or rather visions, which seemed to
dim my sight, I was partly amazed, and partly ravished with such admirations:
which by apprehension have left such deep impressions in the treasury of my
brains, as I am now compelled to commit some of them to the general recordor,
whose body (after the amputation of his head) called for black drink to
stain the ouerbeaten clouts, to ease my fatigable memory, the receptacle
whereof is otherwise barred from all succeeding matters, like a trammell
replenished with fish, which can contain no more then her full (as it were)
natural imbibition.

Me thought according to the provoked motion, that being in a ship sailing on
the seas with a prosperous wind and pleasant travel, I did arrive into a most
fruitful Island, whose beautiful and pleasant sight, with sauorie and
delicious fruits distilling the juice of Nectar, ministrated such delight and
health unto my wearied bones and drowsy mind, that by the delectable object of
mine eyes, of fair running rivers with their silver streams, of green fields
with their variety of flowers, of easy high ways set with fruite-trees on
every side, of stately hills gracing their Horizon as the nose does the face, of
lively fountains of refreshing water, and by the sweet and harmonious melody
of birds, whose warbling notes did penetrate my ears, all my senses were
reduced to purity; my sight without color, my hearing without sound, my
smelling without smell, my tasting without smacke or feeling, and my feeling
without sense or tasting: all of the^ being simple in themselves, seemed to
have obtained fruition of their wished desires, as if all things with a
Simpathy of a general applause had been entertaining them, and prognosticating
unto me all worldy felicity. Traveling along with a settled pace, taking the
benefit of these rare blessings, an insupportable loathsome smell scaled the
fortress of my nose, depriving me of some part of the former pleasures. But
the sense of smelling not having so great operation with the heart as the
motion of the eyes, made the sense of seeing to remain predominant: howbeit by
the interposition of the faculty of hearing. For behold a man of mean
stature, stricken in age, yet bearing his body upright, did stand on the high
way, in whose face did shine such amiable reverence as was pleasant to behold,
notwithstanding his pale color caused through the stinking smell; who told me
with a loud voice these or the like speeches.

Not without cause (courteous gentleman) do you stop your nose to avoid this
pestiferous smell, as dangerous to the smelling as the cockatrice is to the
sight, proceeding from a terrible cruel Dragon, which deuoureth and destroys
daily the inhabitants of this (otherwise) flourishing Island, the king himself
being in great ieopardy, with his sweet and well-beloved daughter: as heretofore
his predecessor has been, whom Saint George that valiant champion (through
his great faith and valor) did rescue and save miraculously, delivering thereby
the whole state of this common wealth from the like danger. The consideration
whereof does comfort and revive our dead hopes, that God will be pleased to
stir up some other champion, who like unto the noble Roman Marcus Curtius
shall deliver our weal public, and destroy this hideous monster, wherewith we
have been troubled almost these 30. years*

Hearing the same, me thought I was possessed with a most fervent desire to
understand the particularitie as well of that Dragon whereof he complained, as
of the other which is reported to have been slain or vanquished by Saint
George: for I had many times inquired very diligently where that Island might be
situated where that dragon was destroyed, and how it was possible that he could
devour such an infinite number of creatures as is reported, which made me to
be very importunate with this man to know every thing with the circumstances
thereof, whom I found to be not only by learning, but also by nature of
singular eloquence, and in reasoning and debating of matters of politic
government, what by his natural wit, and what by daily exercise, surely he
had in my judgment few fellows, by reason whereof, he gave me full
satisfaction and answer to all my demands, and seemed in his discourse to
discharge the part of an Orator.

This flourishing Island (quoth he) which ouerfloweth with milk and honey, is
called Niobla, and lies under the kingdom of Persia, the chief city whereof
called Diospolus stands partly upon the side of a low hill, in fashion almost
four square. For the breadth of it begins a little beneath the top of the
hill, and still continues by the space of one mile. The length of it which
lies by the rivers side is somewhat more. The river called Semath rises above
four score miles above Diospolus out of a little spring: but being increased
by other small rivers and brooks that run into it, before the city it is
half a mile broad, and farther broader, and forty miles beyond the city it
falls into the Ocean sea. By all that space that lies between the sea and
the city, and certain miles also above the city, the water ebbeth and
flows six hours together with a swift tide, when the sea flows in, for
the length of thirty miles it fills all the river Semath with salt water, and
drives back the fresh water of the river: and somewhat further, it changes
the sweetness of the fresh water with saltness. But a little beyond that the
river waxes sweet, and runs foreby the city fresh and pleasant. There
goes a bridge over the river, made not of piles or of timber, but of
stone-worke, with gorgeous and substantial Arches, at that part of the city
that is farthest from sea: to the intent that ships may pass along foreby all
the side of the city without let: from this river the water is derived and
conveyed down in channels of lead diverse ways, even into the highest part of
the city, which does the inhabitants great service. The city is compassed
about with high and thick stone walls, with some bulwarks, and a dry ditch
somewhat broad and ouergrowne with bushes, briers and thorns. The streets
are commodious and reasonable broad for the most part, with diverse gorgious
and fair buildings standing together without partition, diverse gardens are
enclosed by the back part of the street, all in good order and most
commodious. Almost in the middle part of this city in a most sumptuous and
stately building, being four square, all of marble and free stone, erected
upon several pillars curiously wrought, has this Dragon his principal and
most ordinary habitation, albeit he wandreth through the whole Island at his
pleasure, and bears a wonderful command in devouring and destroying an
infinite number, altering the course of our government. For the the execution
whereof, what with his venomous breath, what with his subtilty of setting men
together by the ears, what with his natural devouring, or what with his
alluring Serenian songs, he has all the means that can be excogitated, even
under the color of religion and justice.

Wonder not (good sir) for this monstrous beast waxing every month bigger one
then another, is like unto the Serpent that with the subtle guile of Satan
seduced our great grandmother Eve, and brought all her posterity into exile,
and misery upon mankind, and so does this monster bring al misery and
calamity unto our commonweal. Therefore with great reason it was recorded,
that great was the faith of Saint George, whereby he was corroborated and made
valiant to deliver this commonwealth of the like cruel and execrable monster,
which daily devoured so many oxen, sheep, and other cattle, and at last all
reasonable creatures, until by the fatal lot the kings daughter was in danger
and appointed to be devoured. Neither must you imagine, that this infernal
dragon does devour so many creatures, as it were consuming them, but by sleight, devises and stratagemes, he causes them to destroy one another, in
such sort as I have determined to tell you.

But first I will tell you in what manner, and by what means the inhabitants of
this Island did live before this monster was bred in hell, next what the
conditions and qualities are of those that be in league with him. And lastly
what practices this dragon uses with every member of our weal public, to
the general destruction thereof. O Codrus of Athens, were thou alive to destroy
this serpentine dragon, that creeps not upon his belly, as the serpent of
Paradise was condemned to do, and feeds not on earth, but domineereth on his
four indented Harpyon feet, feeding on the most precious meat, which does
command all other meats and delicacies. And behold his cruelty by so much the
greater, as most usually this meat is prepared unto him by the poorer sort,
and upon them he feeds most greedily. And whether ever that serpent went
skipping upon his tail before the curse, I know not: but I am sure this
bears his tail aloft like a conqueror, riding in his triumphant chariot. The
curse of the Scripture denounced against him is neglected, the writings of
Divines has no efficacy, the Canonists cursings is without virtue, the
prohibition of Ciuilians is overcome by the tolleration of the Statute Law, and
the manner of men's actions before this monster did tyrannize, is clean
forgotten, whereas Licurgus did banish this canker worm out of Sparta, Amasis
did punish him severely in Egypt, Cato did banish him also out of Sicilia, and
Solon did condemn him in Athens. And should not we do the like, if some
Lucullus would deliver us of this contagion, wherewith we are infected, when as
Sergius Galba being president of Africa, under the Emperor Claudius, caused
one to be punished with death by famine, for feeding and entertaining this
monster, which like a whirle-poole swalloweth whatsoever it catches?

The inhabitants of this noble Island did live by the natural richesse of the
lands they were borne unto, or by the artificial riches they were bred unto,
according to their educatio^ and profession, every man using and enjoying his
own, and nothing but his own, which in regard of charity every man possessing,
yet seemed not to possess at all: Clergy men and magistrates did live by their
revenues and pensions, Noblemen and Gentlemen of their lands, husbandmen by
their farms, merchants and citizens by their trade, artificers by their craft
and handyworke; all of them making a perfect consent and harmony of the
government of a commonwealth, in proportionable manner with exercise of
religion, and due administration of justice in time of peace, and necessary
provision for war, which the Prince is to provide for in the two seasons of
peace and war. And from the Prince as from a lively fountain all virtues did
descend into the bosom of that commonwealth, his worthy counselors were with
the magistrates as ornaments of the Law, and did ministrate (like Physicians to
the weal public) good potions for the ridding out of all distemperate
humors: every man was contented to live in his vocation with true obedience: so
that experience it self made manifest proof, Justice to be ordained of God,
as a measure amongst men one earth, to defend the feeble from the mighty, for
the suppressing of injuries, and to root out the wicked from among the good,
prescribing how to live honestly, to hurt no man wilfully, and to render every
man his due, carefully furthering what is right, and prohibiting what is wrong:
to which intent every man did endeavor himself for the good of the
commonwealth, observing concord, and all things in the course of traffike were
carried with an equality, free lending was used, hospitality maintained,
commiseration toward the poor was exercised, and love which is the very sum
and substance of the Law, did flourish to the general comfort of a Christian
society.

But since the accursed coming of this hell hound, the concord is broken,
charity is grown cold, inequality is crept in, by falsifying our measure: the
general rule, Do as thou would be done unto, is broken, free lending is
banished, oppression must needs flourish, and no man seems to be contented to
live in his vocation, as though Pride sitting upon the highest degree, did
contend with Ambition for pre-eminence. Brief, our commonweal will in time
be more like a prison, where this beast with his adherents lives like a
Iaylor, with his family in pleasure and wealth, whiles all other weep and
smart for it. Avarice found out this monster, which nourishes idleness, and
idleness is the bringer forth of evils.

Our society and weal public is furnished with six necessary things, namely
divine service, judgment, arms, riches, arts and sustenance, all which are
brought out of their due course and proportionable order, and those that have
the managing thereof as Clergy men, Magistrates, Noblemen, Merchants,
Artificers and Husbandmen, and such as are comprehended under these, cannot
execute their charge according to their profession. For behold the insinuating
dealings which this monster uses with some of the better sort, and his cruel
proceedings with the inferior.

He gives them ability to destroy one another, and many times the seven lean
kine of Pharao do devour the seven fat kine, and yet prove no whit fatter
themselves.

Some neglecting their charge, have their minds filled with worldly cares, and
ability given them with Simon Magus to buy that which ought to be freely given,
which makes them to sell that which they should freely give.

Others he makes with Ananias and Saphira to dissemble with God, tempring the
holy Ghost, boasting of false liberality, being like clouds and wind without
rain.

Hospitality is by his means turned into Jack Droms entertainment, and and
Laban and Nabal, two Churles in the Scripture mentioned, having but one name
preposterously taken, as being too many, are propagated into an infinite number.

Others he causes to measure Gods blessings by worldly riches, and with the
kite to mount exceeding high in outward show, but never looking upwards to
heaven, having the eyes of their mind set and fixed below on worldly things.

Others do blow with him the windy bellows of the organs of vain glory, and
without his help they should give but little sound.

Others do neglect to relieve the poor, and put innocent Joseph (being in
prison) in oblivion.

Others are by his means so enticed with the feeding of delicacies, that
setting all religion aside with Festus, they accuse Saint Paul of madness,
even in the presence of Agrippa.

Others he makes with Lot to be so loytering and trifling in Sodom, that the
Angel is feign to pluck them out with violence, when God is pleased to save
them.

Others he makes to go laden with gold and silver, gauling their souls
until they be despoiled thereof by death, and cast into the loathsome stable
of damnation: like unto the mules of Princes, going all the day laden with
treasure, and covered with fair clothes until they be shaken off into a sorry
stable.

Others he makes void of all charity, which will lend no money but for gain,
unto such men as they esteem to be good, but nothing to the poor man,
although the pawn of the Gospel does assure them, that God is the poor man's
surety, and will for his promise sake pay all men's debts, though the men be
never so unthankful.

Others he makes to use the Laws like unto cobwebs, to catch only little
flies, and to have ability to purchase dignities.

Others have ability given them by the multiplicities of suits grounded upon
bonds and counterbonds, to accumulate riches, and to incorporate farms, and to
make unlawful enclosures of grounds, to the decay of many.

Others he causes to account nothing to be science or learning, but that
wherewith money is to be gotten to feed him withal, because they find that a
lu^pish blockhead churl, which has no more wit then an ass, shall have many
wise and good men in subjection and bondage, only for this, because he has a
great heap of gold and silver.

Others he causes to put the kings daughter in danger, feeding thereuppon with
this dragon to the kings great loss and hinderance, if he have present
occasion to use his reasure, which by the means of the dragons tail may be
exported.

Others having of this meat belonging unto the king, do detain the same into
their hands to please this monster, and to share the booty between them.

Others he causes to put the king in remembrance of certain old mo^th-eaten
laws, of every man forgotten, as a way unto him honorable and profitable,
having a show and color of Justice, and all this for to be meat for him to
feed upon.

Others have a present greater ability given them to live licenciously,
following whores, harlots, wine-tauernes, and many other unlawful games, to
their utter destruction.

Others do augment by his means the number of vagabonds, which through
idleness the (root of all mischief) do commit robbery and theft, and then are
they destroyed by the gallows.

Others he causes to spend their stocks by prodigal riot, sumptuous fare,
and strange and proud new fangles in their apparel, growing insolent, and
riding a gallop with a lame jade, and yet are they too, soon destroyed by
war or otherwise.

Others having spent their goods, he beats with the whores and harlots (like
to the prodigal son) out of doors, when they have no more for him to feed
upon.

Others he makes to whet their knives upon a chalk stone, never sharping
them, spending their time and dulling their wits, with the use of dicing and
carding, when the box does carry away the gains on both sides.

Others having devoured and consumed by his means all what they could come by,
or had about them, do creep out like the vermin out of the nut, and then are
they but newly borne.

Others he makes not to be contented to live idle themselves like dorrers of
that which others have labored for, polling and shauing their tenants to the
quick: but to carry about with them at their tails a great flock or train
of followers: which being turned off, when he has undermined their masters
living, become unthrifty, and having never learned any craft whereby to get
their living, fall a stealing, and are by the gallows cut off, if by wars
they suffer not a commendable death.

Others he makes to be like raging and roaring Lions, spoiling and devouring
all that they can catch or come by.

Others have ability given them to be like unto great floods and swelling
rivers, when they ouerflow their channels, and do break through their banks,
by reason of their raging and violent stream, hurting what they find in their
way, polling and pilling the richesse and substance of the silly weak and
poor, filling their purses with the blood of innocents, and building their
houses and dignities by the destruction of others.

Others he makes wealthy and rich, and like sheep and kine which are put into
pasturs to be prepared for the shambles, or like oxen wearing the garland
against the day of their slaughter.

Hercules his exploit in killing the Serpent Hydras was great, because it had
many heads, and after the amputation of one, another did arise: But the heads
of this monster do multiply without that any be cut off, and those that are
infected therewith, are as swelling monsters, like unto those that are diseased
with the dropsy, which the more they drink, the more increases their desire
of drinking.

Some he causes with Sampson to discover the secret of their strength, unto
Dalilah, and before they do perceive the same, their locks are shorn off
suddenly, and their strength is taken away.

Others he causes to bestow all their wealth upon the opinion of men, in
gemmes and precious stones, as fit meat and commodious for him to feed upon,
in hope that the folly of others shall pay for all: whereby he brings some to
destruction; for these things increasing and not wearing away, neither being
consumed, must of necessity consume others.

Others he causes to devour one another, and by his posteriors he does avoid
them both as excrements.

Diana is prevented to cause Acteon to be devoured of his own dogs. Hero and
Leander may drown themselves without an Ocean. For this monster is the right
firebrand which Samson put between the foxes tails to burn the rickes and
standing corn, with the vineyardes and olives. For the world consisting of
strife, war, and discord, must needs bring a confusion, and fall into
wasting, spoiling and destroying, when this monster does augment the causes
thereof.

Consider then, how justice and religion can flourish? the one showing us how
we ought to live in this life, and the other teaching us of the life to come.

Will not religion suffer shipwreck in time, when charity decays and the
bonds of love are broken, and diversities of opinions are the causes of
Schisms? Shall I with the Philosophers describe justice to be of four sorts:
Celestial, Natural, Civil and Judicial: I shall but knock at a deaf man's
door: yet in hope of the antiquity thereof, which (as Cicero says) will make
the same flourish, I demand where Celestial justice (which is the perfect
consideration and duty to God) is found, seeing that Natural justice, which
all men should have amongst themselves by nature, is banished, which was the
cause that Civil justice was made, grounded upon the law of nature, the
statutes of the people, the consultation of the Senators, or the authority of
grave and wise men, as the device of Princes, whereupon also Judicial justice
depends, for the commodity of the commonwealth. In regard whereof we are in
hope that one day this monster shall be destroyed. For the better
acco^plishme^t whereof, I would our images of Judges were erected again, having
neither hands nor eyes. O Manlius Torquatus who shall imitate thee in the
execution of of justice, not sparing thine own son?

The members of our commonwealth which have the managing of the natural and
artificial riches, are dealt withal in most strange and subtle manner by
this monster, which has his principal delight therefore to feed upon them,
and with his scornful look, recreating his mind with the internal misery of
the mind of his leaguors, and with the external calamity of the body, and
inward troubles of the mind of others, he bears a wonderful sway.

Those that be in league with him, and become miserable in mind, he haled with
a cable rope of insatiable desires, causing the^ to make no period or comma
from the highest Zodiac or Climate to the lowest Center, and to be more
foolish the^ Tantalus, amidst the water dying of thirst, obtaining with Mydas
the transmutation of all things they touch into gold, and staruing for want of
food: for they make by his instigation of abundance, indigence, to the end that
by possessing more, they should have less, as not having a heart given the^ (as
the wisema^ says) to enjoy their wealth

He makes them think with the Ape that is tied to the clogge, that he keeps
the clog, and not the clog him, for they keep not their riches, but riches
keeps them, and entangleth their minds.

He makes them like unto the Ass which carries meat for his masters belly,
and the clothes for his back, yet himself is contented to feed upon grass,
and to wear a hair skin, for misery has assaulted their souls.

He makes them like unto the Indian Ants or Emets, who gather the gold and
keep it, although they cannot use it, and to hunt after goods, granting them
only the sight, and not the use thereof: he makes their riches to increase,
as though he would make them contented, seeming to quench the fire by casting
oil into it, and making them more covetous.

He causes diverse to get their goods fraudulently, and by taking of
forfeitures, which makes them to hide their treasure, or to purchase lands
therewith: when as their heirs shall vnthritily spend that, which they have
unlawfully gotten.

Some he makes like unto the wolves of Syria, which delight to bark against
the Moon, spending their time about nothing, and entertaining Podagra, for the
most part of the year.

He caused him that did dream to have spent a great sum of money in a
banquet, to have so strong an imagination, that by the apprehension thereof,
thinking the same to be true, went to hang himself most desperately, having
bought for the purpose a two penie halter, and being saved from hanging by the
means of his friends which did cut the halter, would notwithstanding make his
friends pay for that halter.

He caused the unthrifty son to hang himself, that gaping for his fathers
death for to enjoy the goods of this nature, became desperate upon the witches
declaration, that his father should yet live thirty years.

He caused that miser (who having hid his treasure in a hollow tree, and
finding the same taken away) to hang himself, changing his treasure with the
halter that a poor man left: who by the finding of this treasure was saved
from hanging, being through the cruel dealings of others become desperate.

Some he causes to have all their wealth in paper and ink, or parchment,
which they account as precious as the golden fleece, multiplying the same in
their imagination until they die, when as the debtors have of a long time been
insoluent, and they deceived with false pleasure, like unto those who hiding
their gold in the ground do deprive themselves of the use of it, hoping for
joy: when as the gold having been stolen and they ignorant thereof, dye ten
years after, and all that ten years that they lived after the money was
stolen, have fed themselves with a vain conceit.

Others he makes to grow and spread as great oaks full of branches, by whose
dropping he destroys and suffocateth the young little sprigs.

Others he causes to be more doggish then the dogs themselves, which will
sooner lick the ulcers and sores of Lazarus, then they will give any relief
to the poor.

Others he causes to sell their lands and goods, and to live obscurely, like
unto the staring owl, which will not look upon the bright sun.

Others he makes to seem that which they are not, like unto the hypocrites
which are as a wooden leg set to the body, being no member thereof.

Others he makes like unto mad men, desiring nothing so much as to get
water, by reason of their excessive distemperature, when as there is nothing so
much tormenting them; as the abundance of riches.

Others he makes like unto the Moon when she is at the full, and then
farthest from the sun of whom she has her light: and so by increasing their
riches, remoueth them farther from God and godliness.

Others which be lean, like unto the hen which daily did lay an egg, or in
poor estate did good deeds and were virtuous, he causes to become fat,
leaving the laying of eggs, and to become wealthy and vicious.

Others he makes like hogs to feed upon acornes under the oak, and in steed
to look thankefully upward, to devour the garment of him that feeds them.

Others he causes to be like unto the fawning Spaniell, which oftentimes
fetches his masters glove, in hope to change it for a better morsel: doing a
small pleasure, to the end they might reap a greater advantage.

Others he makes to be like floods, which send their waters into the sea, and
leave the dry land (which is thirsty) vnwatered, bestowing or leaving their
goods unto those that need them not.

Others are exalted like unto the Iuie sticking to the boughs of trees, and
yet by an ouerhard embracing do hinder the growing of the trees, making mean
men to oppress their betters, by whose means they have been advanced.

Others he makes to live idle, and their brains to become a shop for the
Devils Alchemy, sowing tares amongst the wheat, whiles men are asleep, setting
with the traitorous servant, the door open to the thief.

Others he makes to think that the increase of riches comes by their own
means: whereas with king Kanutus who in this Island would have commanded the
waters, they should learn, that they were commanded by the heavenly power.

Others he makes like unto the two thieves of Esops fable, the one stealing,
and the other the receiver or conueyer.

His strength lies chiefly in his tail: for trial whereof, even for his
recreation and sport, after a full stomach, he will many times encounter with
great Elephants, clapping his tail about their mil-post legs, and never
leaving them until he have felled their vnweildie bodies to the ground.

But behold his subtle proceedings, for he will not only change colors with
the Camelion, but also weep for their overthrow with the Crocodiles tears,
when as he intended to make them instruments to serve his turn.

With the wild boar and swine, which are wont to eat and destroy all other
corn, he will beware of bearded wheat, because of the prickie beards which do
hurt him, as the authority of great men. Yet sometimes like the boar franking
in his stye, he will consume men of many miles off, by the means of his
leaguors and attendants, whereby he knows the lands and abilities of noble
men and gentlemen, yeoman and husbandmen, and here he will gobble up a whole
town, and there a goodly park, here a Lordship or Manor, and there a most
pleasant wood.

Some he causes to weaue continually Penelopes cloth, undoing by night that
which they made in the day, and loosing one way that which they get another way.

Others he sets on Icarian wings with wax, and makes them to fly even
above the clouds, when as the wax by the heat of the sun dissoluing, they
are drowned unawares.

Others that upon pleasure entertain him, and have taken him up out of the
snow, being almost dead with the snake of AEsope, do find him ready to bite of
their throat in process of time.

Others he causes to serve his turn, whose labor like unto the Cats paw, he
makes to serve as the Ape did, to take the chestnuts out of the fire for his
own use.

Others he makes with the hawk to mount so high, trusting to their wings and
other men's feathers, that they lose themselves, and their wit and wisdom is
overcome.

Others he makes so poor, that they are always in prison, forth-comming, but
never coming forth.

Others he causes always to be waited on by Serieants, and their clokes
cannot take hold at a butchers hook, but they imagine that the Serieants Mace
takes them by the back.

Others he plays withal like the Cat with the mouse for a time for to eat
her up, or like the fly about the candle, and in the end are brought to
destruction.

Others he makes like unto AEsops Iay, clad with the feathers of other birds,
which being discovered and stripped of all, for a reward are thoroughly scorned,
and turned from their scarlet Gowns, into black threed-bare cloakes.

Others he makes like unto bondmen and slaves, that though they toil and
labor never so much, all is for their masters, and they get nothing for
themselves.

He causes Mariners to conspire against their ships, and the devil Bommery to
arise to boar holes to make them sink and perish.

He makes many owners of ships, and by their discord to destroy shipping. For
he is like unto the worm called of Pliny Teredo, that breeds in timber,
which being touched or handled seems gentle and soft, and yet has so hard
teeth that he destroys all manner of wood.

He draws with the Lady Claudia, the ship wherein the idol of the Goddess
Bona is, and makes that the Mariners (like unto the young men) not once do
stir.

He causes the water to get in secretly, and to increase by the Pumpes of
their ships, so that both they and their ships are drowned.

He causes many apprentises to become untimely masters, when as swimming with
other men's bladders, they are soon drowned.

He makes them to spoil their masters occupation and their own, and not to
be able to live by that they were bred unto.

He makes the husbandman unable to live by his farm, and gives ability unto
others to incorporate them to the decay of husbandry.

He makes sheep to become deuourers of men, destroying the lusty husbandmen
which are always the best soldiers.

He makes the husbandman to make money of his woods and trees, in proyning his
old trees, and never to mipe or graffe young settes, so that the woods do daily
decay, and the trees dye within few years.

He makes them to sell their croppes half for naught, and to buy such things
dear as they have need of.

He will like a thorne-bush succor and shelter a poor silly sheep in some
storm or tempest a little while: but when she departs from the bush, keep
back a piece of her fleece, and that so often until all be consumed.

He brings with the Be sweet honey in his mouth, but a very sharp sting in
his tail.

The horse of Gargantua had not so much strength in his tail as he has, for
the same being pricked of flies, did beat down with his tail, all the trees
of a great wood. But this Dragon by the means of his tail causes others to
transport whole woods, with trees, houses and lands into foreign countries.

He makes the prosperity of commonwealths to be like unto the grass on the
house top, which for lack of root withers before it can grow up to be mowne,
and the Princes bare of flesh, and void of strength, like unto hearts that can
find no pasture, for the commonwealths treasure (which he transporteth) is
accounted theirs.

He is the cause that the kings treasure is like water powered into a sieve or
basket, which presently runs out, and is never filled.

By the means of his tail he maintains a league with foreign nations, and
causes them to serve his turn, by bringing in superfluous commodities at a
dear rate, and they to feed upon our native soil, to the commonwealths
destruction.

He does falsify our weight and measure, and brings thereby inequality, to
our ouer-great hinderance, making of money a merchandise.

He carries out our treasure in bullion and money, empouerishing our
commonweal, in giving us chalk for cheese, making us like unto AEsops dog,
going over a bridge to snatch at the shadow of the flesh, loosing the flesh it
self.

He causes us to spend far above our revenues, and makes us to buy more
then we sell, and to sell our home commodities good cheap, and to pay dear
for the foreign commodities, all tending to our destruction.

He feeds upon both kinds of commodities, and makes the husbandman unable
to live by his farm, and the merchant by the trade of our own commodities.

He brings inequality between the estimation of the natural riches and the
artificial riches, and a great part of our wealth to be imaginatiue.

He gives ability unto landed men to incorporate more lands and farms
converting arable ground into pasture to the decay of husbandry, and
destruction of soldiers.

He gives ability to the grower, not to have cause to bring his corn or
cattle to the market, but rather to engrosse more, and to sell them dear, or
to have it transported unto other nations.

He is the cause of dilapidations of cities and towns, and depopulations of
inhabitants, with the decay of their occupations and handiworke.

He gnaweth the poor artificer to the bones, and sucketh out the blood and
marrow from him, feeding on him most greedily.

He causes by the incorporation of many farms into few men's hands, the kings
subsidy much to decrease, and the kings rewards or recompenses to be supplied
diverse ways.

He is like Naa^ the Ammonite warring against the men of Iabes Gilead, who
would not raise his siege, but upon condition that he might thrust out all
their right eyes, for he puts out the right eyes of the judgment of
governors, in the course of politic government, to bring commonweales to
destruction.

He is the cause of rebellion and variance in countries, which many times is
imputed unto the governors thereof, and makes men generally unable to live by
the natural or artificial riches whereunto they were borne or bred.

He makes in some barren and unfruitful years many thousands of people to
starve for hunger, and yet diverse men's barnes to be well furnished with corn.

He sets up pride and new fangled apparel, by the means of the merchant
that brings in those commodities which please men's humors, for pride does not
measure wealth and prosperity by her own commodities, but by the misery and
incommoditie of other.

He gives ability to intemperance the daughter of excess, which makes men
slaves to the mouth and belly, bringing them both ways to destruction.

He makes money to be the creed of the world, and persuaded men to seek
first money, and that honesty then will follow of course, and that learning and
wisdom is nothing without it.

He causes men to commence suits in law for every trifle, and exaction and
extortion to flourish, relying upon the penalties and forfeitures of bonds and
counterbonds.

He strikes out with the raven, first of all the sheep eyes, and so brings
to pass that men cannot see the way to escape his tyranny.

He is the right Cannibal, feeding only upon raw flesh, especially of men, and
like an Apothecary he covers his bitter bills with some sweet substance, to
make them to go down the easier.

He makes men to fall into the mire, and the more they stir, the more are
they defiled and brought into his danger: for like a bitter and pinching black
frost, he kills and destroys the tender, sweet and beautiful blossoms.

He will not have men to depend upon the reward of God, but upon the reward of
man, for charity and free lending he causes to be banished, and prefers the
brittle metal before the eternal treasure.

He makes the hearts of his leaguors not to be inflamed with a true and
sincere love to God: but to be wide open unto all temptations, like unto a pot
full of sweet liquors over the fire (which not boiling) are corrupted by
flies, and they are become the wolves of our Island, since that all other wolves
have been destroyed: for they devour both lean and fat sheep.

He makes men generally like unto the decreasing moon, having here open side
hanging downward, and their hearts set only on worldly things, whereas with the
moon increasing and open toward heaven, they should be gathering light, and
not step aside to gather feathers, and leave to run the golden game of
inestimable value.

He makes men to be discontented, and to judge as bondmen do of those that are
free, never being contented with their state, always beholding how much
inferior they are unto others.

And to conclude, whereas every well governed commonwealth is to keep a
certain equality concerning the traffic between them and other countries,
and a concord amongst the members of their commonwealth, when every member
thereof lives contentedly in his vocation, this dragon has brought in discord
and inequality. And if this Gangrena be not cured, it will in time subvert the
whole state of the realm, for Synons horse was not so dangerous to the
Troyans, as this dragon is to our commonwealth.

Conceive now (I pray you) in your imagination on the one side, the cruelty of
this monster, and his subtle practices and dealings, and on the other side the
meekness and innocence of the creatures devoured by him and by his means.
And because the consideration there of would amaze your judgment, do but
remember the tender and inexplicable love of a father toward his child, and
especially of a most victorious king toward his fair and peereles daughter:
the bright splendent beams of whose angelical beauty, do dim my sight, and
captiuate my understanding. Hide Absolon thy clear guilt tresses, and you
Hester your meeknes and beauty, giving place to this Virgin and noble creature;
you Penelope, Marcia, Lauine and Helleni, make no comparison with her: neither
you Lucrece and Polixene, Dido, Laodomia or Tisbe, that have bought your love
so dear; or thou Cleopatra with all thy passions, you all may be handmaids
unto her: for her melodious voice does command the heathen Gods, Bacchus, Pan,
Ceres and Minerua, and by her sweet breath a second life is inspired into you
all. Venus her self gives her the pre-eminence, for the strength of Cupide
without her countenance will soon decay, his fiery darts will soon be cold,
and his wings loose their viuacity. Mars, Pallas and Bellona cannot subsist, if
this Virgin should withdraw her favor, she remains still a Virgin
immaculate, though all the world seems to be contaminated by her, for her
constancy is singular, she is bright shining as the Moon, although the Eclipse
does darken her for a time, to make her brightness to appear more glorious:
and albeit she received her light from the transparent Sun, yet in a manner
she seems to be predominant, and by a voluntary love to command, for she is
the rose of the field, and the lilly of the valleys, whose fragrant smell as
the savor of good ointments poured out, does rejoice and make glad the king,
and makes him run after her, for his soul loves her, and he has brought
her into his chamber, where like a bundle of mirrhe she lies between his
breasts, his left hand is under her head, and his right hand does embrace her,
for she is fair and pleasant. She came accompanied with a Lamb representing
her innocence, her amiable eyes the messengers of her perplexed heart,
distilling salt tears, did wound and penetrate the cruellest mind: the locks
of her golden hanging hair did adorn her as a triumphant Goddess: her yuory
white teeth stood like a flock of sheep in good order: from her scarlat lips
did drop the sweetness of honey combs, for honey and milk was under her
tongue, and the savor of her garments was odoriferous as the smell of Lebanon:
her straight snow white neck like a pretty tower of iuory was compassed with
chains of oriental pearl, wearing the garland of her virginity of most
precious stones, as a royal Diadem: and yet from her two breasts (which were
like two young Roes that are twins feeding among the lillies) two lively
fountains of celestial water did run, nourishing an infinite number: her
cheeks were as a bed of spices, and as sweet flowers delectable: the joints
of her fingers were delicate, making the whiteness of her hands to have a
strong attraction. For in brief such was her perfection, that Dame Nature was
ashamed to see her self overcome and vanquished of her own work: her
admirable body was covered with a garment of white silk Damask hanging loose
about her, embrodered with letters of gold Patientia victrix, wherein the Sun
with the assistance of AEolus did seem to play her illustration, with the
repercussion of the variety of colors of the garments of the Virgins
following her.

Consider now the agony of her mind tempered with magnanimity, notwithstanding
the aggravating thereof by the lamentation of her associats, and although the
lot cast for her was not so fatal as the rash vow of Iphtah was to his
daughter: yet she had greater cause to go to the mountains with her
companions, to lament and bewalie her virginity, because the devouring of the
dragon was far more crueller then the fire wherewith Iptahs daughter is said
to have been consumed; when as this Virgin being brought up like a kings
daughter in all pleasures and delicacies, was brought to the sight of this
cruel monster, and that she was ready to abandon her ornaments, preparing her
gentle body to his cruelty with a perfect patience.

If Griselde was worthy of commendation, and obtained the name of Patient, for
being advanced by the Marquess of Saluzze, who took her from a poor estate
to be his wife, and afterward to try her, made a show to relinquish her
again, under color that he would have married another, which (unknown unto
her) was her own daughter had by him, and thereupon deprived her of all her
ornaments; if she (I say) was renowned for enduring all this patiently, much
more without all comparison is the patience of this rare Virgin to be had in
perpetual remembrance, who abandoning all her peculiar prerogatives and
pleasures, suffered her body to be expounded to the cruelty of this monster.
And the greater was the exployt of Saint George in delivering her, who like a
valiant champion being arrived into this Island, and understanding of the danger
she was in, came with a Princely resolution to deliver her, mounted on a pyball
horse of several colors, armed like a conqueror, to fight the co^bat with
the shield of faith, having on the breast plate of righteousness, the helmet
of salvation, his loins girt about with verity, and being adorned with the
livery of the Cross, did with the sword of the Spirit destroy this monster,
and delivered this Indian Phoenix and this Island, of that contagion and
abominable hell hound, being not moved or amazed at his terrible sight and
fashion; neither regarding those that were in league with this dragon, or took
upon them to speak in his defense.

What unspeakable joy came thereby, let the consideration ravish your mind, and
ease me of the amplification thereof. For I must now exactly describe unto you
this dragon concerning his compounded body, as I have already done his
properties, and the effects of his mischievous condition and qualities.

His ordinary mansion (I have told you) to be about the middle part of the
city, which is beset with many grasshoppers round about, without any green
fields whereon to feed, for they be not wild, savage, or noisome, diverse of
those that be in league with the dragon are like toades, which drink the juice
of grapes so fast, till ouercharged with the broth, their bowels do burst,
casting their venomous poison and infecting many, and yet the air is soft,
temperate and gentle.

Here may you behold this hideous monster, swelling every month bigger one
then another, with his fiery flaming eyes, seeming to cast fire at every
moment, by the means of his tri^^^ted tongue like unto a Turkish dart, his body
unweildy like an Elepha^t, but his tail nimble, and continually wavering and
inconstant, for therein consists his greatest strength and actiuity, to the
commonwealths destruction: and the same is marked with the new Moon of the
Turks, like unto the letter C, and his forehead with an F, like a fellon, he
walks upon his four Harpion legs, like a thief closely to surprise any man
either by night or day: for he omitteth no time, albeit he seems with the
index of the dyall not to move, when he is continually moving, and stirred in
such sort, that when men begin to perceive his motion, and pretend to run
from him: he does so allure them, that the more they run, the more he seems
to follow them, as the moon does to the little children, whereby his motion is
the less regarded. He rides upon the wings of time, and by imagination
hasteneth the course thereof: so that he that sits surest may be
overthrown, for he has two wings to fly withal, the one having an internal
strength from the mind, and the other an external from the body: that of the
mind is (as it were) covered with a veil: but the other is plain and naked:
howbeit both of them are indented with several branches, wherewith according
to the Adage, the Devil seems to be God to some body, and makes those to
speak in his defense. For in abusing justice to the hurt of many, he seems to
do good unto some particular: these therefore (although they be ashamed of him)
do allow him as a necessary member in a commonwealth, like unto the hangman
which for executions sake must needs be had. Others do compare him to be
admitted, as the husbandman suffers many weeds to grow in his ground which
he likes not, and that so he is to be tolerated; when as in the like manner
they might speak for murderers and thieves, and say that the natural rule
(Do as thou would be done unto,) is to be taken general without any
exception in all things and in all respects: whereby the Magistrate must of
love spare the convicted malefactor: for if he were in the malefactors case, he
would be glad to be spared and pardoned himself: albeit they would not be bound
by this rule, to give all their goods unto another, seeing their gripple mind
is such, that they would willingly an other man should give them all his
substance. They would be contented to have money freely lent them, yet they
would lend none freely themselves, for (say they) I must make a gain of my
money, which is as lawful for me to take, as others do of the rents of their
houses, revenues of lands, or gains of corn and cattle, or wares and
merchandises: whereas they do not consider, that money was ordained as a pledge
or right betwixt man and man, and in contracts and bargaining a just measure
and proportion, which measure is by them falsified: and this monster causes
them to incorporate the same, so that no man can come by it without their
consent and paying for it, falsifying and altering the same. And yet can they
find fault, and hold for very absurd, if upon plenty or scarcity of corn, or
abundance of cloth, or scarcity thereof, the measure or yard should be altered
upon all occasions, considering that a measure ought to remain at a
certainty. But what cannot this dragon bring to pass? when he will seem to
be a protector of orphans, as though Magistrates or tutors could not provide
for them, for unless he should carry some show of good, he could never have
reigned so long: he seems to favor justice, for if any man borrow money for
an other, and do enter his bond for it, and take of him the like that received
the money, he will see him that borrowed the money recover that by law ex
damno habito which he is damnified, albeit there be means otherwise to
satisfy him. Again, if a shopkeeper lend money freely to his neighbor till
such a day, having then occasion to use it at some fair to lay it out in
wares, if he break touch, he helps the shopkeeper with all extremity under
color of justice ex lucro cessante, to recover so much as he sustained loss
for want of his money to lay out; as if at an other time the other could not
lend him the like sum of money, and make him recompense another way. Whereas
these events come to pass upon abuses which this monster has brought in,
having with the operation of his tail (being a very Canker) transported the
moneys of our Island, and within our land altered the nature and valuation of
the money, making one hundred pounds, to be one hundred and ten pounds, and
having overthrown charity and free lending. Hence did the cause proceed,
that the statute laws were repealed, which did banish this monster, for
therein it was like unto the water which the more it is pent, the more it
swells, and like a thief, who when he is locked in at the prison door,
breaks out at the windows, falling to his shifts, subtilties and devises.
For if money had remained plentiful with us, this monster could never have
prevailed, nor charity should have waxed so cold, neither casual and
aduenturous bargains would have been so hunted after. And to conclude, no law
can do good which admits an inconvenience as a necessary evil.

I am not ignorant, that with a wet finger, some do point at those that are
grown rich by the means of the feeding of this monster, which makes me to
remember a pretty history to my purpose. A man coming into a certain church,
and seeing it fraught full of images made of wax, demanded what might be the
cause of such an unwonted sight; answer was made, that those whom these images
did represent, were certain persons, which on a time were saved from drowning
by calling upon our Lady. Nay then (quoth he again) where be the images of
those (I pray ye) that called upon our Lady and were drowned notwithstanding?
So say I in this case, if any man will set before me the instances, and as it
were the images of those who have fed this dragon, and yet are not become
poor: I would demand on the other side, that he show forth the hundreds and
thousands of those, whose estates and persons he has devoured, they will be
found a million for one, yea to be without all comparison: for this monster is
an active element that consumes all things.

He demands consideration for that which is none of his own, and moreover
two recompenses for one entire thing: by reason whereof he brings forth
inequality for his advantage, making men to forget that ever they lived
without him, by that which they were borne or bred unto. But let this hideous
monster be destroyed, and every man will return unto his quietness, and live
within his bounds and calling, using such trade as he ought to do. Plenty will
soon increase, and money will abound, if you take away but the strength of his
tail, and we shall feel our liberty and deliverance.

Will not the danger that the leaguors of this Dragon do run into, give them
warning, when as at one time five hundredth Jews were transported with Carons
boat the ferrie man of hell, which were slain by the Citizens of Troynouant
for feeding him? Let the punishments assigned for them, put them in fear if
they have any feeling.

The curse of God denounced against them in the holy Scripture, in Exodus 22.
Leuiticus 25. Psalm. 15. Ezechiel 18. and Luke the sixth chapter, expounded by
the ancient and learned holy Fathers, upon which ground the temporal
punishments have been ordained against those that should feed this monster:
whereby their condemnation appears.

They are diffamed persons by the law, and if any man make by his last will
any goods unto them, the testament may be broken, neither should they be
admitted to communicate with Christians, or enter into their congregation, or
offer any oblation.

When they are dead, they should not be buried in Christian burial, and if
they be, the doers thereof are excommunicated: for they are not worthy of such
reverence, which dumb beasts, and even a silly Ass (who like unto Balaams
Ass was inspired) did manifest, for one of these leaguors being departed out
of this world, a certain zealous and godly parson would not bury him,
notwithstanding his great riches, whereof part was offered unto the parson to
the same effect. Whereupon his friends understanding that the parson had an ass
which brought his books from his parsonage daily to the church, being a pretty
distance in sunder, they politikly desired to obtain this favor of him, that
as his ass did daily carry his service books to the church, so it would please
him, that for this one time the quick Ass might take pain to carry this dead
ass in a Coffin; with this condition, that wheresoever the ass stayed, there
the body should be buried, persuading themselves, that as the ass by an
ordinary course, used every day to go from the parsonage to the church with a
burden of books upon his back: so of course he would take the same way with
this dead man's corpse being chested, eue^ straight to the church; which being
granted by the parson, had not that eue^t. For the ass feeling a weightier
burden upon his back then usually, did seek all the means to be disburdened,
running and flinging along the streets, until he came to a pair of gallows
at the towns end, and there did never leave tumbling and tossing himself upon
the bare ground, till he was clean disburdned of so miserable a carrion, leaving
a sacrifice to that altar as miraculously assigned for it: for it was not
without cause that priests were forbidden to give unto such any ghostly
comfort, but upon evident proof of repentance; also that they must make their
wills without witness, which wills are not of any force except satisfaction
be made, or else their goods to be forfited to the higher powers, with many
other hard ce^sures which ought to move any reasonable man in the observation
of so easy a coma^dement as to forbear to feed a monster unto whom Cerberus in
hell, and all those monsters that Hercules subdued are inferior in evil. Alas
poor creatures, how are you tossed with the waves of care to satisfy this
dragon before you are destroyed? you know by experience, that the fear of
death is more then death it self: what shifts, devises, or extremities are not
you driven unto? Aristophanes has painted forth your agonies and perplexed
minds, under the person of an aged man altogether shipwracked by fraighting
with this monster, who thinking to have found out the way to be eased of his
slavery, did propound unto Socrates this demand: That if he should by a witch
of Thessalia, and by her enchantments fetch the Moon out of heaven, and bring
it away, and afterward enclose it in a case of glass, and so keep it, as if
he would keep a fly in a box: Socrates demanding, what good that would do
him: he answered, If the Moon do never rise again, and I being constrained to
feed this monster by the new Moon, shall be freed of that trouble. A strange
shift, that this poor man was driven unto, to pluck by violence the Moon out
of heaven for his help. For in truth the witch did her best, and began to
charm the Moon, which when the leaguor of the dragon understood, did put him
in such a pelting chafe, as was wonderful to hear: for accusing this poor
man of enchantment, at last he went himself to another witch, not only to
keep the Moon from coming out of heaven, but also to hasten the course of it
faster, that the monster might be the sooner fed. Good God what a trouble was
the Moon put unto between these two witches? What storms and tempests did
arise? What horrible wind did blow? What great rain did fall? What floudes
ensued every where? What countries were almost drowned and under the water in
many places? But herein (say some) was the dragon to be blamed, for troubling
or oppressing a poor man, or feeding upon him, which he ought to have done
upon the rich: for they conclude that to be lawful, in regard of the
prohibition of the other; as who would say, it is not lawful to vex a poor
man by law, therefore it is lawful to vex or trouble a rich man by law:
whereas neither rich or poor, young or old, low or high, should be troubled
or vexed at all to feed this monster: for it takes away the chiefest comfort
of the poor, which is the quietness of their minds, and deuoureth their gain
before it can be gotten; and to the rich it gives ability to do all the
mischief that can be devised, as I have told you. Others say Volenti non fit
iniuria, when as money being made a merchandise, hinders the course of
commodities, and that even the politic course of our government drives men
to feed this monster, and for the most part upon an imaginatiue wealth, when
by means of his tail he has transported our treasure into foreign parts.

Arise thou o Prophet Daniel, and make known unto our most gracious king the
deceipts and cruelties of the false god Bell and of this dragon. Let the
footsteppes be seen of those that are in league with their false God Mammon
and this Dragon, in the ashes of the efficacy of holy Scripture, and our most
wholesome laws, and let them be used as pitch, fat and hair, to burst this
Dragon in sunder.

He is not contented with the spending daily of twelve great measures of fine
flower, forty sheep, and six great pots of wine: but he consumes thousands
of measures of corn, innumerable flocks of sheep, and whole ships lading of
wines, even with all the creatures that have the managing thereof: for he does
not feed threescore and ten priests with their wines and children only, but an
infinite number that are in league with him and their followers, to the
commonwealths destruction.

The aspect, countenance, and behavior of creatures does many times provoke
love toward the^. But behold his ugly and fearful countenance, his ill
favored shape and cruel behavior, and you will wonder how it is possible that
any man can love him.

With that, me thought he took me by the hand, and showed me a certain place,
where this monster stood wallowing like a bear, which expects the coming of
the dogs; presently al my senses did assail him, Prima facie I saw him, then I
imagined him and my fancy did delude me, as if I had seen some satire, half a
man and half a beast, which made so deep an impression into my memory, that by
the apprehe^sion thereof, I was possessed with a great fear and ashonishment,
which made me to cry and awake from slumber, remaining still pensive above
measure: for on the one side I know the passions of men and the debility of
nature, and on the other side I do consider the difference betwixt dreams and
visions.

Such are the natural passions of men, that some not fearing to fight with the
strongest and stoutest man, will notwithstanding cry out, and sweat at the
sight of a cat, or any other abject creature: others are always in fear, if
they be alone, and cannot abide to have their doors locked in private: nay,
some cannot endure the pointing of a finger or any iesture toward them, or but
the rehearsing or telling of a dream, for they do for the time participate so
much of the melancholic humor, that reason and discretion is not able to
conquer it: dreams being provoked according to the disposition of the mind
and of the body, and dilating into fancies and illusions, I can hardly conclude
them to be visions; for visions are really seen, and fancies are but
represented or imagined.

But howsoever this came to pass, and may be imports little, so long as the
moral of it declares with all the history of Saint George, wishing with all
my heart, that I might have seen also that valiant champion prefigured unto me
as the dragon was, for then no doubt the deliverance expected and long required
would ensue; and this my dream (howsouer displeasing to some) might be
admitted for a vision to the welfare of the commonwealth.

Exitus acta probat.
A conclusion to the Christian reader.
Covetousness the root of all evil, brought forth the tree of Political
usury, whose root with the body and branches, together with their operations
and effects in the course of politic government, we have laid open in this
treatise under certain Metaphores and Similies, the Moral whereof we do leave
to thy good construction and amplification. For albeit that the substance with
the application of the effects thereof is here declared: yet upon due
consideration many branches more may be handled, which the deuines at their
pleasure may apply and amplify, for they have the word of God for their
warrant, without which all humane policy is vain. So that as he would be
accounted foolish, that would take upon him to plant or set a fruitful tree
into a vault or seller, where the Sun has no operation: much more without
all comparison are those foolish, that will seem to set this tree of
Political usury in the government of any commonwealth, seeing that the same
is both deprived of the blessings of the most glorious Sun, and accompanied
with the heavy curse of Gods most holy word. For with this holy word all humane
laws should agree and concur, notwithstanding that the laws are said to he
made according to the people of every country, and every country to have his
influences according to the climate, whereas many of such laws might be
abolished, if the causes of offenses were prevented, among the which usury is
the chiefest, and gives therefore just cause of admiration that politicians
will any manner of ways suffer the same. Wise was that politician who
perceiving that there was not any punishment so horrible to punish theft, that
it could keep men from stealing, would have Magistrates not to be like evil
schoolemaisters, which be readier to beat then to teach their scholars: But
rather to prevent the causes, and to provide means whereby men might get their
living, whereby no man should be driven to this extreme necessity, first to
steal, and then to dye: the chief cause of this necessity or poverty is
usury, which does too much enrich some few, and does impouerish too much a
great many. So that men cannot live contentedly and proportionably in their
vocation, according to their profession, taking away the chiefest comfort of
the poor, which is the quietness of their minds, and giving ability to the
rich to do all the mischief that can be devised: which being duly considered
of, will no doubt in process of time work effectually for the good of the
realm. Mean time I pray God that we may all become Spiritual usurers in the
Lord, using pity and compassion toward our neighbors, for which God himself
will pay usury: to whom be all honor, praise and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

