A fruitful treatise of fasting, wherein is declared what ye Christen fast is,
how we ought to fast, and what ye true use of fasting is. Newlye made by Thomas
Becon.

Matthew. vi. When ye fast, be not sad, as the hipocrites are The sayings of
the holy Scripturee.
Eccles. xxxvii. BE not gredy in every eating and be not to hasty upon al
meats. For exces of meats brings sickness, and glo^o^y comes at the last to
an unmeasurable heat. Through surfeit have many one peryshed, but he that
dyeteth him self te^peratly, prolongeth his life.

Luke. xxi. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be
overcome with surfetyng and dronkennes. Roma. xiii. Make not provision for the
flesh to fulfill the lusts of it. ii. Cor. vi. Let us gi^e no occasion of
evil, that our office be not evil spoken of, but in all things let us behave
our selves as the ministers of God in much pacyence in watchynges and
fastings. Ephe. v. Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess, but be filled
with the spirit. ii. These. v. Let us watch and be sober. i. Peter. iiii. Be ye
sober and watch unto prayer. To the most reverend father in God, Thomas
Archbishop of Caunterburie, Primate of al England and Metropolitan, Thomas
Beacon his humble and faythefull servant wishes the favor of God, long
life, contynuall health and prosperous felicity.
Our Lord and alone savior. Math. xiii
Jesus Christ declares in a parable of the gospel, that after a certain
houshoulder had sowed good seed in his field, while his servants slepte,
his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat and went his way, This
houshoulder is Christ the lord. The good sede is y^ children of god and gods
word. The servants that slepte are negligente Prelates and sleepye
shepheardes, which watch not over the Lords flock. The enemy is the devil.
The tares are the children of the wicked, and errors and heresies, which?
Satan sows in the hearts, of the unbelieving. Of this parable as we learn
the goodness of Christ toward us in be getting us a new, i. Peter. i.
not of mortal sede but of immortal by the word of God, which lives and
lasts for ever, so like wise learn we the maliciousnes of Satan, which
like a subtle serpente and old enemy of ma^kinde, never sleeps, but
contynuallye walcketh up and down like a roryng lion, seking whom he may
devour and warely watches his time to destroy, ii. Pete. v.
when souer any occasion is given, be it never so little. Not without a great
cause therefore did out savior. Christ exhort us to watch and pray, that we
fall not into temptation. Mat. xxvi.
And albeit in this our frail and synnefull life many occasions of doing
myscheife be offered to the ennemy on our behalf such is our negligence and
vncircumspecte beha^youre, yet the gratest occasion wherein Satan most gloryeth
and soonest hops for the victory, is when the shepheardes of Christ's flock
give no ate^dau^ce to their charge but lie sleepynge and snortyng, walowynge
and welterynge in their pleasures, and suffer the wolf to scatter, yea to
catch, to kill and to destroy the sheep. Esaye. lvi. Ihon. x.
For although the devil leteth go no profer, which may move him to do evil,
but lays hand on it straight ways, yet as the histories both of the holy
scriptures and of credible writers do testify, he never shows him self so
right a devil nor so lively sets forth him self in his true colors, as
when y^ guids of the Lords flock be either absent from their sheep, orels are
negligent in doi^g their duty, I mean in preching gods word, and in writing
godly books, if need require for the confutacion of erroures and heresies and
for y^ establishment of gods holy religion. How sone had the people of Israel
for gotten god and his goodness toward the, after Moses was gone from them into
the mount Sina^ to talk with god and to receive the law? Exo. xxxii
Fell they not streightwaies from the one and alone true and living god unto
abominable idolatri, and worshipped a golden calfe? After the days of Moses
and of other godly Prophets and preachers when wicked kings reigned, and the
preachinge of gods word ceased, did not ye people of Israel fall to the
worshipping of strange gods, and made of the brase^ serpent (which was but a
sacrament and figure of Christ) a God and brent sacrifice unto it? Ihon. iii.
iiii. re. xviii
Certain years before ye co^mi^g of christ into this world, into how mani
sects and so^dry religions were the Jews divided among the^ selfs, which not
with sta^di^g counted themselves only the people of god and hated al other
nations, as abominable Idolatours? Yea in the time of the Apostles, were there
not y^ denied Christ to be either true God or true man? How sone were the
Corrinthians and Galathians seduced by false Apostles, after that the most
worthy Apostle. S. Paul was departed from them? How many kind of Heretics
rose there up in the church of Christ after the Apostles time? What great
and how many contencions both in sermons, disputacions and wrightinges had
the holy Bishops and godly fathers of the primative church with the heretics of
their time for the maintenance of gods truth and for plucking up y^ enemies
tares? Since the time yt those verteous Bishops and learned fathers of Christ's
church died, into how many sects have the people y^ profes god be divided? The
number of sects and counterfeit religious, which yet live under the Bishop of
Rome, are almost innumerable. Neither cease Satan eue^ in this most clear
light of the gospel to play the right devil, and to cast mistes before the eyes
of the unfaithful. Into how many sects is Christendom yet divided? Are not some
called papists, some protestants, some Anabaptists, some sacramentaries? Whence
come al these abhominacions but only from satan the author of al evil?
Moreover in what field, where good sede has been sowed, has not the ennemie
sowed his tares also? how pestilentlye has he corrupted the pure wheat of
gods word with myngeling his chafe, dross, darnell, cockell and tares, I
mean the false gloses, and unsavory exposicions of the papists, Anabaptists,
and such other sec^aries? How wickedlye has he perverted the right use of
the sacraments, specially the sacrament of Christ's body and blood?
fasting, prayer and alms deed, how has he made the^ to be abused? There
is no point of Christen religion, which Satan has not attempted too
overthrow by his ministers. And albeit as I said before the enemy labors at
all times to sow his tares in the Lords field, yet when the shepheardes of
Christ's flock be negligent in doing their duty, fall a sleep and look not to
the Lords field, then does he most of al play his part and bestoure him like
a right devil, as Solomon says. When the preahing of gods word fai^leth, Pro.
xxix.
the people pearishe. It therefore becomes al men that tender the glory of
God, but specyallye the Lords Ministers to look diligently unto their lords
field, and earnestly to take heed that the enemy sow not his tares among the
Lords wheat. If any be sowed, it is their duti to labor even to the
vttermooste of their power not with violence and corporal armours (for the use
of the seculare swearde is not committed to the preachers of gods word, Luke
xxi^. Roma. xiii
but to the temporal rulers only to punysh malefactoures) but with the swearde
of the spirit which is the word of God, Ephesians. vi.
with prayers, supplycacions and ^eares to weed them out.

The weapons of our warfar, says S. Paul, ii. Cori. x.
are not carnal things, but things mighty in god to cast down strong holds,
wherwyth we overthrow counsels, and every hye thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, and bring into captivity al imaginacion to the
obedience of Christ. And in this behalf, I mean, in pluckinge up the enemies
tares, and in purging the Lords field that nothing may grow therein but pure
wheat, your both godly and vnreastfull pains (most reverend father) a^ well
known in this church of England, and thanckefullye accepted of all faithful
Christen hearts, insomuch that very many do daily render unto God most
humble and hearty thanks for the singular and great benefits, which they have
received of him through your virtuous travail, in attayninge unto the true
knowledge of justification, of the sacrament of Christ's body and blood, and
such other holy mysteries of our profession.

And al be it the devil roar, the world rage, and the hipocrites swell at
these your most Christen laborers, which you willinglye take for the glory of
God and the edifyinge of his congregacyon, yet as ye have godly begun, so
without ceasinge continue unto the end. i. Peter. v.
By this means shall it come to pass, yt when the chief shepherd shall
appear, ye shall receive an incorruptyble crown of glory.

And forasmuch as so many as the Lord has appointed watchmenne over his
flock, ought every one according to their talente to follow your Godly
example in weedynge our erroures and plantynge true and Christen opynyons in
the hearts of the people, saying that Satan has not a little corrupted the
true use of fasting, which being rightly used does hyghelye please God,
and abused, displeases him: I thought it good against this time of Lent,
which of long contynuaunce has been appointed to abstinence, to write some
what of fasting, that might both openne away too the faythefull how they
may fast to please God, and also dysclose the falsse manner of fasting
brought in by the devil and his Ministers. And in this my treatise I have
first declared what the Christen fast is, The Contents of this book.
secondly how we ought to fast, and thyrdly what the true use of fasting is.
I took this labor upon me the more gladlye, partelye because no man
hitherto has written of that matter in our English tongue partlye to satysfye
the heartye requests of diverse faithefull brethrene, which ceased not to
require me in the Lords name to wryghte some what, that might enstructe them
in the true use of fasting. The matter, I grant. requires a work manne of
riper judgment, and more exercysed in the Lords harvest then I am, which
might according to the worthynesse of the matter, have set it forth
pleasauntly and learnedly, but seeing no man has hitherto taken it in hand, I
thought it my part not to deny the godly requests of the brethren but gladly
to bestow upon them what so ever the Lord has given me in this behalf.

This treatise what so ever it is, I your humble and faithful servant, not
having otherwise wherwyth to testify the thankfulness of my heart toward your
most honorable Lordship, for the manyfold benefytes which ye have bounteously
bestowed upon me, do dedicate to your name, most humblye besechynge you
accorto your accustomed gentleness to take in good part this my rude and
gross work, which to polyshe and to make nete (if habylitie had served)
shortness of time would not suffer,

God, whose honor you most desirouslye seek, moughte vouch safe to preserve
your grace, in continual health and prosperous felicity unto the glory of
his most blessed name, and the profyt of his holy congregacyon.

Amen.
B. I.

A treatise of fasting.
What the true and Christen fast is.
The.i. Chapter.
THe true and Christen fast is freely and willinglye to abstain not only from
al kind of meats and drynckes, The diffynicyon of y^ true fast.
but also from all those things, wherein the flesh has pleasure and
delectacion, which abstinence or forbearing of meats, dryncks and other
plesures, wherein the outward man deliteth, rises either of an heart contryte
and sorowefull for the sins committed against god, or elsse of a mind
feruentlye given to godliness.

That this is a true diffinicion of the Christen fast, The Fast of the Fathers
of y^ old law.
it may be easelye proved out of the holy^ scryptures. First to whom is it
unknown, that when the holy men in times paste fasted, their manner was, so
long as the fast continued, to abstain from al kind of meats and drinckes
and from all pleasures wherein the flesh deliteth, and wholye to give them
selves (all worldelye affairs set aparte) to godly exercyses, Spyritual
exercyses in y^ time of Fasting.
as to the heartye and vnfayened lamenting of their sins, where with to much
vnkindelye they had offended their Lord God, and provoked his fearse wrath
and vengeance to fall on them to feruente prayer and diligente calling on the
name of God for turnyng away his heavy dyspleasure from them, and for
remission of their sins through faith in the holy sacrifice to come of that
blessed seed of the woman, which by his one and alone oblacion they believed,
should reconcile mannekinde to God the father, pacifye his wrath, and make him
a merciful Lord to the hearing and readinge of gods word, to the
com^orting of one another, to the study of amendment of life, to the
prouisyon making for the poor, to the redress of abuses in ye common weal
to the planting of true godliness, and abolishing of all wicked and strange
relygion. Joel. ^. ii.
Of this manner of fasting speaks the Prophet when he says, halowe ye a
fast, meaning that they which fast, should in the time of their fasting
occupy them selves in spiritual and not in worldly exercises, or elsse is it
no fast before God.

The.ii. Chapter.
THis abstinence or forbearing of meats did always continewe at the least one
whole day without receiuinge of any corporal sustenance, Iudi. xx.
many times ii. or.iii, days, as the historyes of the holy scripture teach
us. The Israelits, when they saw so great a multitude of their people slain of
the Beniamites in the battle, went up and came unto Bethel where the arc of
the appoyntement of God was in those days, wept, sat there praying before
the lord, and fasted the same day unto even, and offered burntoffe ringes and
peace offeringes before the Lord. Again, Reg. vii,
when the Israelites gathered together a^ Mizpha, lamentiug their sins and
prayinge unto the Lord for healpe against the Philistines, they fasted the
whole day. So likewise did David and they that were with him, when they heard,
that Saul and his sons were slain in battle. ii. Reg, i.
Nehemiah fasted two days together or moo. For he said, as it is written of
him. Esdras. i.
I sat me down and wept, and mourned certain days and fasted and prayed
before the god of heaven. We read that Queen Esther Esther. iiii
and her Maidens with all the Jews that were found at Susan, fasted three
days and three nights together, and did neither eat nor drink. Moses,
Elias and Christ fasted fortye days and as many nights without receiuinge
of any corporal food, but such fastes are not to be practiced, for as much
as they are marvelous and past the bounds of men's nature, and are done only
by the unsearchable power and mighty worcking of God in few of his creatures.
But the common manner of fasting among the true godly was, when they did
fast, to abstain from al meat the whole day til night, that they might
the more frelye give their mind to spiritual exercises, and at night to take
some refeccion moderatli yea and that with thanckes giving. And on this manner
as some fasted but one or.ii. days together, so some fasted many, every one
as they were moved by the spirit of God, and as occasyon required.

We read that the Prophet Daniel Daniel. x.
fasted thus three weeks together. His words are these: I Daniel mourned for
the space of three weeks, so that I had no list to eat bread, as for flesh
and wine there came none within my mouth. No, I did not once annoynte myself,
till the whole three wekes were out. The scripture testifies, that the
virtuous woman Judith Iudi. viii.
fasted all the days of her life, except the sabbothes and new moanes and the
solemn days, that the people of Israel kept. Likewise read we of Anna the
Daughter of Phanuell, which departed not from the temple, but served god with
fastings and prayers night and day. Luke. ii.
On this manner did the Apo^tles after Christ's ascension and many other godly
men in the primatyue church fast, So that their custom was on that day that
they did fast, to eat nothing til night, but to occupy them selves about such
godly exersyes, as here to fore are mentioned.

The.iii. Chapter
ANd as the godly men in the time of their fasting did abstain from meat
and drink, so did they from al other things that might delight the flesh,
and be haued them selves outwardlye according to the sorrow and trouble of
their heart inwardlye. Out of a mourning and soroweful heart did spring
outward yea and those vnfayened tokens of sorrow and mourning. For we heard
before, that when Daniell fasted three weeks, and prayed unto the Lord his
God, although he did eat bread every night for the comfort of his weak
body, yet he neither eat flesh, nor dronck wine, nor yet once anointed him
self. Daniel. x.
And in a another place he says: I turned me unto God the Lord for to pray,
Daniel. ix.
and to make mine intercession with fasting, sakcloth and ashes. Jonas. iii.
The people of Niniue, when they heard the preaching of Jonas, which
threatened them and their city destruction after fortye days, repented,
believed God, and proclaimed fasting, and arrayed themselves in sackeclothe, as
well the great as the small of them. And when the tidyngs came unto the king
of Niniue: he also arose out of his seat, and did his apparel of and put on
sackeclothe, and sat him down in ashes. ii. Esd^. ix.
Again, the children of Israel (as we read in Esdras) when they fasted, did
put on sackeclothe, and sprinkled earth upon their heads, knowledged their
sins, prayed unto God, and read in the book of the law of the Lord their
God. E^ther. iii^
Queen Esther also when she fasted, laid away her glorious apparel, and put
on the garments that served for syghyng and mourning. In the stead of precious
ointment, she scattered ashes and donge upon her head, and as for her body,
she humbled it with fasting, and brought it very low. Likewise king Achab,
when he was reproved of the Prophet Helyas for killing Nabothe, fell to
fasting, iii. ^e. xxi.
and as he fasted, so did he put sake cloth about his flesh, lay in
sackclothe, went barefoote and hangyng down his head.

The.iiii. Chapter.
VUhat so ever might make to the hu^blyng and taming of the flesh, that did the
godly men use for the most part in the time of their fasting. Neither did
those corporal exercyses displease God, seeing they came from a co^trite heart
and troubled spirit, wholye dependynge with strong faith on the great mercies
of God. For David says: A troubled spirit is a sacrifice to God, nether does
he despise a contryte and humbled heart. Psalm. li.
But these outward signs of humiliacio^ God utterly abhors, when they come
not from a penitent and faithful heart, and casts them away as hypocrytysh
and devilish, as we read in the Prophet Esaias, Esai. lviii
wherefore fast we, say the hipocrites, and thou O God see in not? We put our
lives to straightnes, and thou regardest it not. Behold, says God, when ye
fast, your lust remains s^yl, for ye do no less vyolence to your debtors.
Lo, ye fast to strife and debate, and to smite with the fyst of wickedness. Now
ye shall not fast thus, that your voice might be herd above. Thyncke ye this
fast pleases me* that a man should chaste^ him self for a day, and to wrythe
his head about like an hoope, and to lie upon the earth in an heary cloth?
Should that be called fasting, or day that pleases the lord: Does not this
fasting rather please me, that thou loose him out of bondage that is in thy
danger? that thou break the oath of wicked bargaynes? that thou let the
oppressed go free, and take from them all manner of burdens? to deal thy
bread to the hungrye and bring the poor wandering home into thy house? when
thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and hyde not thy face from thy
neighbor, and that thou dispyse not thine own ^^eshe? (If thou thus fastest)
then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thy health flooryshe
right shortly, thy ryghteousnes shall go before the, and the glory of the Lord
shall embrace thee. Then if thou call, the Lord shall answer the, if thou
cryest, he shall say, here I am, Yea if thou layest away from thee thy
burdens, and hold thy fyngers, and ceacest from blasphemous talkyng, if
thou have compassion upon the houngrye, and refreshest the trubled soul, then
shall thy light spryng out in the darkness, and thy darkness shall be as the none
day. The Lord shall ever be thy Guide, and satysfye the desire of thine heart,
in the time of drouth, and fill thy bones with mary. Thou shall be like a fresh
watered garden, and like the the^ fou^tayne of water that never leaves
running. Again, God says by the prophet Io^l, Joel. ii.
turn you unto me with al your heart, with fasting, weping, and mourning, tear
your hearts and not your clothes. Moreover albeit S. Paul councelleth that
married folk should not wythdrawe them selves one from another any long time,
^. ^ori. vii.
lest Satan tempt them to incontinency and uncleanness, yet y^ they might be the
more apt to fast and to pray, he would have them sometime to withdraw the^
selves one from another. Hereunto pertayneth the saying of the Prophet Joel:
Blow out with the trumpet in Syon, proclayme a fasting, call the congregation,
Joel. ii.
and gather the people together warn the congregation, gather the elders,
bring the children and suckelyngs together. Let the bridgrom go forth of his
chamber, and the bryde out of her closet.

The.v. Chapter.
THus have we learned out of the holy Scriptures, The true Fast.
that the true and Christen fast is to abstayn not only from al kind of meats
and drinks (during the time of fasting) but also from al those things wherein
the flesh has pleasure and delectacion, and to occupy our selves in all godly
and spiritual exercyses unto the glory of God, the comfort of our neighbor,
and the health of our own souls. Constrained faste^ please not God.
But it is to be noted that this abstinence or fast must be freely and
wyllynglye done, or else can it by no means please God. For what so ever
comes from an unwilling and constrained mind, God abhors, appear it never
so godly and praise worthy before the world. God loves a cherefull geuer,
ii. Cori. ix.
says Saint Paul. And the Psal-inographe says: Psalm. liii^.
An offering of a free heart will I give the, and praise thy name, O Lord
because it is so comfortable. They therefore that fast for custom sake or at
the commandment of man only, and not of a good will and fre spirit, do
nether please God, Iere. xiiii.
nor profit themselves. Therefore shall that chance unto them that God
threatens by the Prophet, saying: When they fast I will not hear their
prayers.

The.vi. Chapter.
Hear peradventure some manne will say, Is it ungodly to fast at the
commandment of man? Fasts com^^^ded of the high powers.
What if the Magistrates cause a fast to be proclaimed? Ought it not to be
observed of their subjects? I aunsweare. If the hye powers at any time
commands fasting, so that it be done unto a godly end, and ryseth not
of supersticion, it ought to be observed of the subjects. For we have
examples hereof in the holy scryptures, which do both set forth the
authority of Magistrates in commaundynge fasting, and also the obedyence of
subjects in observing the same.

When the Israelytes were in great fear and danger of the Philistines,
Samuel, which at that time judged the people, i. Reg. ^^
called all the house of Israel together, proclaimed a fast, exhorted them
unto prayer, wylled them to put away the strange Gods from among them,
and with their whole heart to turn again unto the Lord their God, and he
of his mercy would surely rydde them out of the hands of the Philistines.

The people gladly obeyed Samuels commandment, put away their idols,
confessed their sins, served the Lord only, and fasted the same day unto
even. And God saved them from y^ hand of the Philistines all the days of
Samuel,

King Iehosaphat hearing ii. Chro. xx
that y^ Moabits and Ammonites came with an exceadinge great multitude against
him to battle, was in great fear, sought for healpe at the Lords hand,
proclaimed fasting through out all Judah, and called the people together to
pray unto the Lord. The people willingli obeyed the kings commandment.
All Judah came and stood before the Lord with their young ones, their wives and
their children, to a^ke counsel of the Lord.

They both fasted and prayed unto the Lord their God for healp against their
enemies. And the Lord gave them a wonderful and glorious victory.

Esdras returninge unto Jerusalem i. Esd. viii.
with the childrene of Israel proclaimed a fast and exhorted them to call on
the name of God that he might give them a prosperous iourenye. The people
obeyed, fasted and prayed unto the Lord their God, and they had good
success in all their doings.

The king of the Ninevites hearing of the most terryble Iona. iii.
and grievous plage that was threatened unto them and their city by Jonas the
Prophet of god, humbled him self, and sent forth a proclamacion unto al his
people commanding that neither man nor beast, Ox or sheep should taste any
thing at al and that they should nether eat nor drinck water, but put on
sackclothe both man and beast, He commanded them also in his proclamacion to
repent, to believe God and his word, to turn from their wicked ways, and
mightly to cry unto God for mercy. The people did according to the kings
proclamacio^, so that both y^ king and his subjects together repenting,
fasting, believing, turning from their wicked ways and mightily calling on the
Lord for mercy, and forgiveness of their sins, were saved both they and their
city withal that they had.

Esther Esther. iiii.
hearing of the proclamacyon that king Ahasuerus at the subtle suggestion of
wicked Haman had sentforthe for the destruccyon of the Jews, commanded
Mardocheus to gather together all the Jews that were found at Susan, and to
fast for her, so that they should neither eat nor drink by the space of
three days and three nyghtes, but spend all that time in fasting and
prayinge. Esther. iiii
Her commandment was fulfilled It came to pass, that God preserved the
Jews alive, and brought their enemies to a shameful end.

Thus have we learened out of the holy scryptures, that the rulers have
authority given the^ of God to comau^d their subjects to fast, whenso ever
any vrgen^ cause is offered, as in the time of battle, honger, droute, plage,
pestilence. etc. and that the people are bound by gods commandment to obey
the magistrates and their ordinances in all such things, as they tender the
glory of God, the conseruacyon of the common weal, and the health of their
own souls. Joel. i.
This means the Prophet Joel speakinge unto the heads of the people on this
manner: Proclaim fasting, call y^ congregation* gather the elders and all the
inhabytoures of the land together into the house of the Lord your God, and
cry unto the Lord. Joel. ii.
etc. Again, blow out with the trompet in Sion, proclaim fasting, call the
congregation and gather the people together.

The.vii. Chapter
FUrthermore the true and christen fast rises either of an The Fast that
comes of a soroweful heart.
heart contryte and sorrowful for the sins committed against God, or elsse
of a mind feruentlye given to godliness. As touching that fast, which
comes from a contryte and sorowefull heart for the sins committed
against God, it is a worthy and noble fast in the syghte of God, and can not
but hyghelye please him. Psalm. ii.
For the Psalmographe says, A troubled spirit is a sacrifice unto God,
neither does he desyyse a contryte and humbled heart. And God him self
says by the Prophet. Esaye. lvi.
Whom shall I regard and favor? Even him that is poor, and of a lowelye
and troubled spirit, and such one as stands in awe of my words. Who so ever
doothe so fear God and stand in awe of his indygnacyon and heavy
displeasure, that he is loath to offend him, Mark well
and therefore seeks al means possible to please him: and if at any time
through fraylenesse of nature he chances to offend, he is strayghtewayes
angrye with him self, repe^teth of his former misdedes, and conceiueth such
an inward sorrow in his heart, that he delyteth in no worldly thing,
neither in meat, drink, apparel, richesse, pastimes, pleasures. etc. but
contynuallye soroweth for his dysobedyente unkindness and unkind
dysobedyence against God our heavenly father, so that the very trouble of his
heart will not suffer him to eat or drink, till through continual calling on the
name of the Lord he feels in his mind some token of Gods goodness, grace and
favor toward him, and is through faith in Christ's blood fullye persuaded
that all his sins are forgeuen him, and he again received into favor, the
fast of such one is an acceptable sacryfyce unto God.

Of this inward sorrow of the heart did the fastes of many good men
heretofore rise, as the holy Scryptures do declare, and therefore did they
hyghlye please God, in so much that God granted them their requests, and
was their merciful and most loving lord. Examples hereof are the Israelytes,
that were gathered together a^ Mispha, the Ninevites, Either and her company,
Judith with the citisenses of Bethulia, Achab, and diverse other, whose fasts
God allowed because they proceeded from the hearts of such as humbled them
selves in his sight, repenpented them of their sins, asked forgiveness, and
promised amendmente of life.

The.viii. Chapter.
Now as touching that fast which springs of a mind, The Fast that comes
of a mind given ^o godlynes.
given to godlynes, it can not be disalowed of God. For he that seeks to
please God, and to auaunce his glory by any godly means, and that h^ may have
the grace soto do, fasteth, prays, studieth, labors, his fasti^g his
prayinge, his studyinge, his labouringe can not but please God, and have good
and fortunate success. On this manner fasted Daniell, Daniel. ix
that he might be the more apt to receive the knowledge of gods mysteries,
which were afterward declared unto him of the aungel. So likewise did Esdras.
iiii. Esd. v
Of this godly manner of fasting spoke Christ, Math. ix.
when the Disciples of Ihon came unto him. and demanded, why his Disciples
fasted not, as they and the Pharisees did. To whom Christ answered and said.
Can the brydegromes children mourn so long as the brydegrome is with them?
But the days will come, when the brydegrome shall be taken from them, and then
shall they fast. According to this Prophecye, when Christ, which is the
bridegroom was taken from them, I speak concerning his corporal presence (for
by his spirit he is with the faithful unto the end of the world) they
mourned, fasted and prayed for the gift of the holy Ghost, Mat. xxviii
which was promised to be sent unto the^ for to be their Comfortour and
teacher, Acts. i.
and to lead the^ into al truth, Iho. x^ii^. xv. xvi.
and the holy ghost was given unto the^ according to y^ promise of Christ and
their expectacio^. They fasted also and prayed after they had received the holy
Ghost, that they might worthelye fulfill that office which was committed unto
them, that by their preaching many thousands might be conuetted and saved,
Act. ii. iii.
and it so came to pas. The holy and devout wyddow Anna fasted and prayed
continaallye Luke ii.
in the temple for the coming of the promised Messiah, and she saw him before
her death. Cor^elius that godly man being troubled in his mind, Acts. x.
as it may be thought with the multitude of religions, which at that time
reigned in the world, as the religion of the Gentyles, of the Jews, of the
Pharise is, of the Saduces, of the Essees, and the late sprung up religion of
the Christians humbled him self in the syghte of God, mourned, fasted, gave
alms and prayed, that it would please God to declare unto him, which among
them al was the true relygyon that he might observe the same, frame his life
according unto that, and so please God. And to obtain this thing of God, he
continued long fasting and praying. God therefore accepted his fast, heard his
prayer, and granted him his request. The Prophets and Preachers at Antioche,
Acts. xiii.
fasted and prayed, that both they them selves might preach with frut, and
that other also might be sent of God, and appointed unto that office, that the
glory of God might be set forth, that his word might be received, and that all
nations of the earth might believe in him, and in his Son Jesus Christ. Their
fasting and praying were allowed before god, and their desires were fatisfied.
For the holy ghost said unto them, separat me Barnabas and Saul for the
work, whereunto I have called them. And when they had fasted and prayed, and
laid their hands on them they let them go. Paul and Barnabas also fasted
when they prayed for the congregacions of Listra, Acts. iii^.
Iconium, Antioche and Pisydya, and when they ordained them elders in every
congregation to teach and instruct them in their absence, and to confirm
them in the faith and doctrine, which they had all ready received. And God
gave good succes to their doctrine and ministracion. Al these fasted of a mind
feruentlye given unto godliness.

Hitherto have we learned out of the holy scryptures, what the true and
Christen fast is. Now let us se in few words, whether the Popyshe manner
of fasting, which we have so many years vnfruitefullye observed, be like
unto that trade of fasting which we have so many years unfruitfully observed,
be like unto that trade of fasting, which the word of God has painted and
setforthe unto us.

The.ix. Chapter
THe true and Christen fast is done freely and willingli, Of the popish manner
of fasting.
and comes from the fervent mocion of the spirit. The popish and
supersticious fast serves the custom only, and is done at the commandment
of man with a grudgynge and unwilling mind, which being loathe to fast if
the custom and man's ordinance were not, wishes both the fast and the
commander of the fast at the devil. And if any in so great a multitude do
willinglye fast, yet is it done partly to satisfy the custom partly because
they will be counted good devout and catholic me^, partly to honor some
saint, partli to deserve remiscion of their sins, and to win everlasting life.
Can this kind of fasting plese god? Math. xv.
They worship me in vain, says Christ, teachinge doctrines that are the
commandments of men. Romans xiiii
Saint Paul also says, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

The true and christen fast, during y^ time of fasting is to abstain from al
kind of meats and drinks (except very necessiti requires y^ contrary) and
from al those things, where in the flesh deliteth. For yt was y^ manner of
fasting among ye fathers of the old law, as we herd afore^, Hierome confirminge
the same: Lib. ii. ^^tra Iouin^ anum.
The Jews, says he, on those days yt they fast, took nomeat, til they se ye
evening star up. And a certain counsel called Concilium Calcedonense, ordained,
ye such should not be counted to fast, that did eat before euensonge was
done, which at the time was not celebrated, as it is now at.ii. or iii. at
the clock after dinner, but at night about the.viii. or.ix. hour, when the
day was al past.

The popish and supersticious fasters persuade them selves to fast well, and to
do a meritorious deed, if they only abstain from flesh though in ye morninge so
sone as they rise out of their beds, O worthy Fast.
they enfarse and stuff their belies with as manyfine cakes and tostes of whit
bread as they be able to eat, and with as much good aleful of spices or else burnt
Maulmesy, as their pau^ches can hold. And when dinner come, if they abstain
from a smoky peace of Bacon or hard salted and poudred biefe or such like, The
Papists drinkyng in y^ morning.
though they eat the most delicious fishes that can be gotten, and enfarse
their beastly bodies with all the sweet meats that ca^ be invented and sought
out, yea and that so vnmeasurably, yt after they have once dined, they are
provoked either to the pleasure of the body, The Papists manner of dynyng.
or else like beasts of the b^lly fall straightwais unto sleep, so yt they are not hable to serve god, nor the^ selfs, nor any other, yet thinck they yt they
fast well and do god a great pleasure. A story of a Monk wych was a great faster.
This manner of fasting among many other used a certain monk in my country,
which not with standing was counted the greatest and deuotest faster in all those
quaters. His manner was for the most part to make but one mele a dai, as they
use to say, yet such a mele as the meat of yt one mele might have seemed
sufficient to any reasonable creature to have served vi. godli fasters at a
mele. When he came unto Dynner and was set down at the table, his use was ever
to unbuckle and let slack his girdle a great quantity, which before was
straight girded to his bodi. He fell to his meat, as the hongry wolf to his
pray, and never leafte of deuouringe the best meats that were set before him,
till he had so stuffed his relygyous paunche, that his girdle being before lose,
was so hard to his body, that he could not put his little finger between the
girdle, and his clothes. He sat so swelling and sweting at the table through ye
tomuch deuouringe of pleasant meats and whot wines, y^ if Apelles had been
present with his pensil* he might have had a ioly paturn ^o paint a right
Epicure. And not withsta^dyng both he and such like were counted good, holy,
devout, religious and catholik^ fasters. To consume at one di^ner so much as
would serve three, was no breaking of a fast. To devour immeasurably al kind of
pleasant fishes, or whatsoever deinties besides could be devised, was fast
good enough in y^ popes kingdom, but to eat a peace of flesh although never so
gross, was twice a deadly sin, and punished with fire. The eater of ye flesh was
called a Lollore, and adjudged to be bre^t with fire for his I know not how great
offense, as though god abhorred more the eating of flesh then of fish, or as
though fish were clean in ye sight of god, and flesh vile and abominable. Mat.
xxiii
O belied hipocrites which strain out a gnat and swalow down O spirits of
error and teachers of Diuelishe doctrynes, ^. Tim. iiii.
which speak false through hypocrisy, and have their conscience marked with
an hot iron, forbiddinge to marie and commanding to abstain from meats,
which God has created to be received with thanks geuinge of the^, which
believe and know the truth. For all y^ creatures of god are good, and nothing to
be refused, if it be received with thanckes giving. For it is sanctified by the
word of god and prayer. ^ilus. i.
Unto ye pure al thgi^s ar pure but unto the^ yt are defiled and unbelieving is
nothing pure, but even the mind and conscience of the^ is defiled. Why do not
those blind guides remember this saying of our savior Christ, Math. xv.
and cease to condemn the innocent? That which goes into the mouth, def^leth
not yt man, but y^ which comes out of the mouth, defiles y^ man. For what so
ever enters in at the mouth, goes into the belli and is cast out into ye
draught, but those things which proceed out of the mouth, come from the heart,
and they defile y^ man. For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts murders,
breaking of wedlock, whordomes, thef^es falls witness, blasphemies, These are
the things which defile a man.

The.x. Chapter.
Again at night albeit the popish fasters eat no meat, The Papysts drinkyng at
night.
yet make they such a drinki^g, as might iustli seem a costious kind of
ba^ketting. Besides their white bread and fine cakes, they have their figs,
reasons, almonds, aples, pears, nuts, carowis, biskits, su^cat, marmilado,
cherise condite, quinches condite, and I know not what. And besides their nappi
ale and heady beer, they have sundry wines, some spiced, and some brewed with a
cup of Ipocras at y^ latter end to make up their mouth withal and to finishe
their holy and religious fast. Is it not to be thought, yt these men take
great pains in their fasti^g? do not such fastes please god greatly think
you? O abominable mockers of christen abstinence. These are those Epicurcs,
which as ye Poet says, Curios simulant et bacchanalia uiuunt. Mat. xxiii
These are those hipocrites, which bind heaui burdens and grievous to be born,
Luke. xi.
and lay the^ on men's shoulders, but they the^ selfs will not heave at the^ with
one of their figers. And as y^ welthi worldli^gs and rich Epicures thinck the^
selves to fast well, if they make but one mele on y^ day, though otherwise they
enfarse their bellies with never so mani deinties, even so judge the baser kind
of people, yt they fast well, if they eat no meat, though they stuff their
pau^ches with never so much bread and drink. Notable is this sentence of.s.
Hiero^ against al such belli gods. What avails it, says he, to eat no oil,
and to seek about for such meats as are most deinty and hardest to come by, Ad
Nepot
as dry figs, pepper, nuts, dates sine cakes, honey, Pistaciu^, is a kind of
Nutte^
and pistacies? All the deinties that gardens can bring forth are sought,
that we should not eat ye usual bread. And while we seek deliciously to live, we are plucked back from the kingdom of heaven. Moreover I hear say, that there be
some which contrary to the rule and nature of men, Nyse and fine Fasters in S.
Hieromes time.
drink no water, nor eat bread, but soupe not out of a cup but out of a shel
deynty brothes, and herbs brayde, and the iuce of Beetes. Fie for shame, are
we not ashamed of such fo^dnes, nor wearye of the supersticion? Yea we living
in all deliciousnes, seek to be praised for our abstinence. The myghtiest fastis
water and bread, but because it has no glory nor notable fame, and because we
al live with bread and water, it is not counted as the publyque and common
fast. Would God yt al they that fast, yea and so many as profes Christ would
remember and continually set before their eyes this saying of s. Auste^. Erser.
lvi Detempote.
It nothing profyteth, says he, to have passed an whole day in long fasting,
if afterward the soul be oppressed with dylyciousnes or superfluitye of meats,
for so is the mind much filled, soon dulled, and the earth of our body so
watered, will bring forth thorns of wicked lusts. Let therefore our meat be
temperate and no more then is sufficient, and let our belly never be to full.
And let us always have more mind of the meat for the heart, then of meat
for the body, because with in the inward man we be made after the image of God,
but in the flesh we are fashioned of the slime of the earth.

The.xi. Chapter.
FUrthermore the Christen fast ryseth of an heart contrite and sorrowful for the
sins committed against God, as we have heard heretofore. The popish fast
ryseth either of custom or else of supersticyon. For the Papystes in their
chief and solemn fasting days are led with no true fear toward God,
neither do they lament their syns, nor study by hearty repentance, true faith
and amendment of life to apease the wrath of God kindled against them for
their abominable living on those days that they fast, more them any other
time. What Papiste among them forsakes his papistry, hipocrisy, supersticion,
and idolatry, and gladly receives the truth of Gods word? What coueuetous
worldling leaves his covetousness and exercises mercy toward the pore members
of Christ? What proud man gives over his pride, and embraces humility? What
adulterer forsakes his adultri, and leads an honest co^uersacion? what
gloton or dronkard gives over his glotony or dronkennes, and leads a sober
life? what vsurar leaves his usury? what briberer his brybery? what catchepole
his extorcion? what tirante his tirannye? what whore her whoredom? what
rybalde his rybaldrye? what blasphemer his blasphemy? what envious man his
envy? etc. As they begin their fast with an vnrepenta^t and wicked heart, even so
do they continue and end the same, so far is it of, that they have any sorrow in
their heart for their syns committed against God, which should earnestlye move
them to forsake their meat, and to give them selves wholly to be reconciled
unto god by repenting and calling on the name of God for mercy in Christ Jesus
our lord. Their fast therefore is abhominacion before God, forasmuch as in the
time of their fasting they give not over their wyckednes, and earnestlye seek
to please God.

Moreover the Christian fast rises also of an heart ferue^tly given to godlynes.
In this behalf also y^ popish fast agrees nothing with Christian abstinence.
In what the ^^ynges of y^ papists consists.
For the Papystes minds are set on no true godliness in the time of their
fasting, but altogether on supersticion and hypocrisy. Their godlynes, yea
rather ungodliness, when they fast, consists in obseruyng the popes ceremonies
and man's inuencions. If they fulfill those, they think themselves godly enough,
when notwithstanding they ^e furdest from all true god lines. Nether do they
direct their fastes unto any godly end, but as eueri one ^antasieth so do they
fast, yea and that for sundry purposes. Some fast bread and water, The
fondness of the ^apists in their fastyng^.
some eat nothing but fruit, some taste no kind of meat or drink that is
dressed with fire, some in their fast go wolwarde, barefoted, and barelegged
some are so scrupulous and supersticious in their fasting, that in the time of
their fast they will neither eat nor drink, nor sleep, nor yet swalowe
dow^e their own spittle, If they do they think them selves damned. Provided
always that they also must be first and last at church. If they observe
these fastes, they promise them selves, I know not how great rewards, ane
how hie seats in heaven aboud other, and how many gay garlandes of red roses
an^ sweet violetes, that God and our Lady and the blessed saints shall give
them after this life for their devout fasting and pr^aty pains. O fond
folishnes and folysh fondnes, worthy rather to be lamented then to be laughed
at. If it be done of a good intent, say they, al is weil whatsoever we do. If
we fast the blessed Saints euens, The supersticious worshyppynge of Saints.
and worship them with a Pater noster, Aue and Creed, they will do for us
whatsoever we axe. S. George will defend us in battle against our ennemies. S.
Barbara will keep us from thondring and litenyng. S. Agasse will save our house
from burning. S. Antony will keep our swyne. S. Luke will sa^e our. Ox. S.
Job will defend us from the pox. S. Gertrude will keep our house from mise
and rats. S. Nicholas will preserve us from drowning. S. Lo^ will cure our
horse. S. Dorothe will save our herbs and flowers. S Since will bring again
whatsoever we lose. S. Apoline will heal the pain of our tethe. S. Sweteladde
and. Sayute Agnes will send us Maids good husbands. Saint Peter will let
us in at heaven gates, with a thousand such like. This supersticion and
idolatry is the godliness of the Papists. If they fast and serve the saints
unto this end, and on their feastful days fare deintely and drink largelye in
the honor of the good saint, they think they have done much for the saint and
have showed them selves good, godly and devout persons. O double ungodliness.

What shall I speak of the spiritual exercises, which the true and Christen
fast requires to be done in the time o^ ^asting? If we mark well the manners
of the papists, and notetheyr behauour on their fasting days, we shall ca^^y
perceive that in the mids of their fasting they are no less wicked and
ungodly, no les proud and envious, no less lecherous, and covetous, no les
backbitinge and slanderous no les polling and pillinge, no les churlish and
unmerciful, no les given to glotoni and dronkennes, then they were before. They
lament not their syns, they fall not to faithefull prayer, they call not on the
name of God as they ought, but fle unto creatures, they give not them selves
to the hearing or reading of gods word, which many of them extremelye
abhor, they go not about to leave their idolatri and wish to be better
instructed in the knowledge of gods law.etc. but continuing still in their old
supersticion and idolatri they think them selves godly enough and good enough.
If they eat no flesh, if they for bear white meats al is well whatsoever they
do, though there be no repentance, no calling on the name of god, no correccion
of ma^ners, no ame^dme^t of life, God have mercy on us, god open their eyes and
give the^ grace to amend,

Hitherto have we learned out of the word of god, what the true and Christen
fast is. We have heard also, how greatly the popyshe manner of fasting
differs from the true use of fasting which the holy scriptures teach. Now
the order requires, that we also declare, how we ought to fast, that we
may please god and not fast in vain as the hypocrytes do.

How we ought to Fast.The.xii. Chapter
IN declarynge how we ought to fast, whom should I rather follow then our
savior Jesus Christ the teacher of all truth, Math. vi.
which says: When ye fast be not sad as the hipocrites are. For they
disfigure their faces, that they might be seen of men to fast. Uerelye I
say unto you, they have their reward But thou when thou fastest annointe thy
head, and wash thy face, that it appear not unto men, that thou fastest, but
to thy father, which is in secret, and thy father which sees in secret
shall reward the openly, Christ our savior in this place does not only
rebuke the hipocriticall and supersticious manner of the ungodly fasters, but
he also teaches the true manner of fasting. Of these his words we learn,
that who so ever entendeth to fast a right, he must observe three things.
Three things are to be observed in fasting.
The first is, that he annoynte his head. The second that he wash his
face. The third that he fast in secret. These Phrases annointynge of the
head, and washing of the face with many other seem very strange manners of
speaking to such as are not perfectly exercised in the ^^ading of y^ holy
sc^iptu^es and of the ancient wrighters, it is convenient therefore, that we
learn to know what is meante by them. And no man in this behalf can satisfy our
desire better then our golden mouthed Doctoure. S. John Chrysostom, Hom. xlvi
Ex cap. vi Math. ix.
whose words are these.

In the anointing o^ the head, says he, we know that mercy is signified.
What it is too annointe the head.
Therefore to annoynte the head, is to show mercy to our neighbor. For that
mercy that is done unto a poor man, is referred unto God, which is the head
of the man, as the Apostle and the lord him self says. i. Cori. xi.
What soever ye have done to one of my lessest brothers, Math. xxv
ye have done it unto me. In the stead of y^ which mercy with the divine
retribucion as with a certain he auenlye oil, we are poured and shed over by
him* Math. v.
which says. Blessed are the merciful for God shall have mercy on them. Ps.
cxxxiii
Holy David also did know the vnccion and anointinge of the celestial oil in
the head, when he said, as in y^ ointmente, which came down in to the bearde.

But in washinge the face, the purity of a clean body and of a sincere
conscience is known to What it is to wash the face.
be signified so that to wash the face, is to make clean the face of our heart
from al filthiness of sin, and from the vncomelines of trespass, and to have a
very pure conscience, that we may truly have in us the gladness of celestial
joy. and the familiarity and chearefulnes of the holy ghost.

Hitherto have I rehearsed the words of.S. Ihon Chrysostom whereby we may
learn, that to annoynte our head is none other thing, then to show our
selves beneficial to the pore members of Christ. Again, to wash our face is
to make clean both body and soul from sin and wyckednes. If we therefore
will fast a right after the mind of.S. John Chrysostom, we must first anoint
our head, y^ is to say, comfort the pore people with such good as god has
committed unto us. For the riches that we have be not ours, but they be gods,
as he says by ye Prophet, Agge. ii.
gold is mine, silver is mine. ^sa. xxiiii
The psalmograph also says, the earth is the lords (...) all that is contained
in it.

The.xiii. Chapter.
GOd has put y^ goods of this world into the ritche men's hands, Aspectacle
for rytch^ men.
that they should distribute part of them to the pore people. They are the
stewards of god and the dispensatours of his treasures, that they conveniently
living of them, should also with the distribucion of part of them comfort the
nedy members of Christ If they spend them otherwise the^ God has appointed in
his word they shall render a streyghte accountes for it to the high judge
Christ. They have nothing at all, but that they shall be called too accountes
for it even too the vttermooste farthynge.

If they be not found to have Math. xxv
used their talente well, and unto the profit of other they shall with that
unprofitable servant of the Gospel be cast into utter darckenes, where
weeping and gnashinge of teethe shall be. If they be proved unmerciful and
negligent in the destribucion of the worldly goods, surely they shall be carried
with the rich gloto^ of whom blessed Luke speaks in the gosple unto hell,
Luke. xvi.
and there burn in such cruel and bitter flames, as the fire whereof shall
never be quenched, Esaias. lxxi.
neither shall the worm which shall gnaw the consciences of them that are there,
die at any time, as the prophet says.

What cause then have the rich men to boaste themselfes and to glory of
their worldly goods or to auaunce them selves above other for their
possessions sake? C^^^es none at all, more then a great man's servant has,
to whom his Lord and Master has committed his goods for a certain space
to keep, the servant loking at every hour* when his master will call him to
accou^ts and require them of him again.

Basilius Magnus has a notable sentence, Ser. i. i^ d^uites auards.
and it is this: He is a very the^e and a robber, says he, which makes that
thing his own that he has received to destribute and give abroad. An has
saying for vnmercyful rytchmen.
For the bread that thou retainest and kepest is the bread of the hongri, ye
garment, which y^ kepest in thy chest, is the garmente of the naked, the sho
that is mould with the, is the shoo of him that is unshod, and the moni, which
y^ hidest in the ground is the money of the nedye. Moreouerthou do injury and
plain wrong to so many as thou forsakest, when thou art able to help them.
Here to pertayneth the saying of the wyseman. (...). xxxiiii
The bread of the nedy, is the life of y^ poor, he that defraudeth him of it,
is a manslear. God also by the Prophet teaches, that that fast pleases him
best which is accompanied with the works of mercy saying: Esal. lvi. i
Break thy bread to the hungry, and lead the nedye and wayefaring into thy
house. When thou see a naked manne cover him, and despise not thy flesh.
Mark that he says: What it is to break thy bread to the hungrye.
Break thy bread to the hongrye. Certain that expound this text, say that
thou then breakest thy bread to the hungry, when thou so fastest, that thou
sparest from thine own belly to give to the pore hongry man, For a Christen man
ought to be no les careful for the poor, then for him self. We therefore do
break our bread to the hongrye, when we give him that, which we our selves
necessaryly should have eaten. So that to annoynte our head, is to break our
bread to the hongri, to lodge the poor in our house, to give clothes to the
naked, and to comfort according to our habilytye so many as have need of
our help. Unto these works of mercy does our Savior Christ exhort us in the
Gospel, saying: when thou make a dynner or a supper, Luke xiiii.
call not thy fryendes, nor thy brethren, neither thy kynsfolke, nor thy rytch
neighbors, least they also bid the again, and a recompense be made the But
when thou makeste a tea^^e, call the pore, the feeble, the lame, and the blind,
and thou shall be happy, for they can not recompense the. But thou shall be
recompensed at the resurreccion of the ^ighteous. Again he says, give alms
of those things ye have and behold all things are clean unto you. Luke. xi.
But of this we shall entreat more largelye when we come to the true use of
fasting.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
Moreover if we will fast a right, we are not only commanded to annointe
our head, that is to say, to show mercy to the pore people, but also to
wash out face, that is, to make our hearts clean from al sin through
faithful repentance, that we may have a pure conscience. For it is not
enough to be beneficial to other, except we also be beneficial to our
selves. This shall come to pass, if we labor withal main to have a mind
pure and clean from all carnal affectes, a body void of wicked deeds, and a
life garnished with good works. Why god did cast away the sacrifices, feasts
and fasts of the Jews.
For what was the cause that God did cast away the fastes and solemn feasts
of the Jews, but only that they washed not their face, that is, they went not
about to put of their old conversation and to become new men: I hate and
abhor, says God, your sacrifices, your solemn feasts and your fastes.
Esaye. i.
Offer me no mo oblacions, for it is but lost labor. Your incense is
abhominacio^ unto me, I have no pleasure in your sacrifices. I may not away
with your new mones, your sabbathes. etc. Why so For your hands, says he, ar
full of blood. Your hearts are full of vengaunce, your consciences are
spotted and defiled with all kind of sins, your life is abominable in my
sight, ye walk having no fear of God before your eyes. etc. What is then to
be done* Be ye wash^d, says he, be ye clean take a wai your evil thoughts from
mine eyes. Cease to do evil, learn to do well. Seek judgment, healpe ye pore
oppressed, be favorable to the comfortles, defend the widow. Iere. ii^i
etc. Again God says, wash thine heart from wickedness, y^ thou may be
healped. How long shall thy noisome thoughts remain with the? god hates those
fastes, those prayers those good deds, as they call them, that come from a
bloody conscience, a spotted and pocki soul, a defiled bodi and wicked life, as
a certain* man says, Pius (...) Roma.
It profits a man nothing at al to fast and pray and to do other good things
of devotion, except the mind be refrained from ungodliness, and the tung from
back bitings. For god has ever a principal respect to the heart of the doer of
the work, as we se in y^ history of the sacrifices of Abell and Cain. Gene.
iiii.
If the heart be pure, clean and faithful, God judges the work of the heart,
and not y^ heart of the work^
the^ does god approve ye work, but if it be spotted with sin, god casts
it awai^ appear it never so glistering and comme^dable in the sight^ of the
world. Offer not, says the wise man, wicked gifts, for God will not receive
them. ^ec. xxxv.
Solomon also sa^eth, the sacrifices of the ungodly are abominable. ^rou. xxi.
That fast therefore that comes not from a pure heart, from an vncorrupt
conscience and from a godly life, pleases not God, but is abhominacion unto
the Lord our God, yea it is by no means worthy the name of a fast. For
Basilius Magnus says, Ser. i. de Ie^unio.
the true and christen fast is not only to abstain from meats but also to
eschew evil things. And our golden mouthed Doctoure says: Hom. xv. in Cap.
vi. ^ath.
he that abstaineth from meat and not from evil works, appears to fast, but
yet he fasteth not in deed. For look how much he fasteth unto me^ so much does
he eat before god, seing^ he goes forth still to sin. In Leuit. ^^mel^ ^. Cap.
vi.
The ancient Doctor Origene says also will thou that I show unto the, what
fast y^ ought to fast? Fast from evil deeds, abstain from evil words,
refrain from evil thoughts. etc. Such a fast pleases God Again. S, Hierome
says, then is the abstynence of the body commendable before God, when the
mind fasteth from vices, For what does it profit to make weak the body with
abstinence, when the mind swells with pride? Hereunto pertains the saying
of. Ex sermon. L. lx^ii
S. Austen. The fastes of christen men, says he, are rather to be observed
spiritually then carnally. In considera^ion whereof, let us fast principal^y
from our sins, least our fast be refused of the lord, as the fast of ^he Jews
were. What a fast is ^his, that an impostore or deceitful fellow I can not tell
who, should abstain from meats, which the Lord has created, and yet waxes
fat with the fatnes of sins? Have I chosen such a fast says the Lord?
Esaias. lviii
Read the eighte and fifty. Chapter of the Prophet Esaye. And a little after
he says. The fast, which the most highest do approve and allow, is not
only to leave of to refresh the body, but also to depart from evil deeds. In
a another place he also says. Ex ^ract. xvii. in ^^anes.
The great and general fast is to abstain from iniquities and unlawful
pleasures of the world* which is a perfect fast, that we forsakinge
ungodliness and the lusts of the world, Titus. ii.
should live in this world soberlye, righteouslye and god^y Of these
authorities of the holy Doctors also do we learn, that the true Christen
fast does not only consiste in the abstinence of meats, but also in the
forsaking of sin. Therefore if we entende to fast a right, and to make our
fast acceptable to God, let us provide earnestlye, that our fast proceed from
a pure and clean heart, void of al carnal affectes, stuffed full of faith and
charity, and altogether studious of true innocencye and unfeigned godliness. So
shall it come to pas, that both our fastes and all that ever we do according to
gods word, shall highly please God. Hitherto have we heard what it is to
anoint the head and to wash the face. Now remains to declare what it is to
fast in secret.

The.xv. Chapter.
TO fast in secret, What it is to fast in secret.
is not to keep our selves close from the sight of men, and so hydinge our
selfs in privy corners to abstain from meat, but not to hunte and hawke
after vain glory nor the praise of men, Math. vi.
for our fasting, nor to seek to be seen of men while we fast to the end,
that they may commend and praise us, as the hipocrites did, whom Christ
reproves for their vain glory and ambicion, and says, they have their
reward, not of god but of me^. We are counted before god then to fast in
secret, when we fast with such a mind, yt we would fast in deed, though no
man living did se us, and when we regard more the acco^plishment of gods will
and the subieccion and taming of our body, then all the glory and praise that
man can give unto us. It is lawful to do any good deed in y^ syghte of men,
so y^ vain glory be absente.
It is lawful for a Christen man to fast, Math. v.
to pray to give alms, or to do any other good work before the world, so
that the desire of worldly praise and vain glory be not in his mind. For our
savior Christ says let your light so shine before me^ that they may se your
good works and glorify your father which is in heaven S. Paul also says, be
such as no man can complain on, Philip. ii.
and the unfeigned sons of God without rebuke in the myds of a crooked and
perverse nation, among who^ se that ye shine as lyghtes in the world, holding
fast the word of life. i. Peter. ii.
Again. S. Peter counceleth us, that where as some backebite us as evil doers,
we should lead an honest and godly life among them, that they saying our good
works may praise God in the day of visitacion. But if we seek any praise of
men, The desire of vain glory poy^oneth all good works.
and desire to be magnified for our good deeds doing, verily then have we our
reward not of God but of the world. For there is not a more pestiferous
infeccion to poisonne any good woorcke, that it should lose the reward before
God, then the desire of vain glory and worldly praise. Math. vi.
For that it is, which Christ condemns in the alms deeds, prayers and fastes
of the hipocrits. Hom. xlvi in Mat. vi
S. Ihon Chrysostom says, they that so fast, ye they plese men rather then
God, they have a labor concerning the afliccion of the body, b^t through vain
glory they ca^ have no reward of their labor with god, which when they ought
to do it onl^ for religion or faithes sake, had rather to seek y^ vain glory of
the world. And therefore says the Lord, Lib. iiii. c^tra Iulia* cap. ii.
verily I say unto you, they have receuied their reward. S. Auste^ also says,
some good things may be done, and yet they not doing them well, of whom they are
don. For it is a good thing to healp a man y^ is in ieopardy and in danger,
Mark well
namely if he be an in innocent. But he that does this good deed* if he does
it because he loves the praise of men rather the^ ye glory of god, it is not
good y^ he does, for as much as he y^ does it, is not good. For God forbid, y^
that should be or be counted a good will, which glories in other, or in it self,
In libro. de ^elia et ^e^unio.
and not in ye lord. Hereto pertains ye saying of. S. Ambrose when thou
fastest, boaste not thy self, nor brag not of it, for in so doing thy fast
profyteth the nothing. Those things that are done unto ostentacion and bosting
continue not to be recompensed in the world to come, but they are consumed and
brought to naught with the reward of present things. Of exchewinge vain
glory our savior Christ gave us no table examples in all his doings. When he
had healed the Leper, Mat. viii.
he said unto him, se you tell no man. Math. ix.
After that he had restored the two blind men to their sight, he charged
them, that no man should know of it. Mark. ^ii.
And when he had made whole the du^me and deaf man, he commanded them that
were present that they should tell it no man. In all these his doings and such
like he gave us example to ^le vain glory and worldly praise and only to seek
the glory and honor of god, ^e^em. ix.
and that we should rejoice and glory in nothing but in god alone, ^ ^orin. i.
as it is written, he that reioiseth, let him reioise in the lord Therefore all
the works that we do, whether they be prayer, fasting alms deed, watching,
visiting of the sick, comforting of the prisonners, or any other that be
agreeable to the word of God, we must do them with a single mind, and with such
an heart, as being altogether estrau^ged from vain glory and worldly praise,
seeks only the honor of god and the acco^plishment of his most blessed will.
So shall we do our works in secret, and our father, Math. vi.
which sees in secret shall recompense us openli

Thus have we heard boothe what the true and christen fast is, and also how we
ought to fast. Let us now fall in hand with the third and last part of this
treatise, and so make an end,

Of the true use of fasting. The.xvi. Chapter.
THe use yea rather the abuse of fasting in the Popes kingdom The manner of
fasting in the Pop^ ki^gdome was wicked.
was very wicked and worthy to be abhorred of y^ faithfnll. For besides the
fondness of the simple people in abusing the noble ve^tue of fasting for want
of knowledge unto many and sundry superstic^ous and ungodly purpos^s as
partelye heretofore we have heard: there have not wa^ted among them that profes
divinity which both in their sermons and writyngs corrupted the true and
godly use of fasting. For they have taught, that fasting of it self is so
worthy a virtue, and of so great power, that it is hable to satysfye for
sins, The erroneous doctrine of y^ Papystes co^cernyu^ Fasting.
to appease the wrath of God, to reconcile us to god, to deserve
righteousness and to win everlasting life. This doctrine is an enemy to
the free grace of god, injurious to the fruits and merits of Christ's passion
and by no means to be received of the faithful Christians. Fasting is a
fruit of repentance.
For all be it fasting be without doubt a worthy fruit of repentance,
and pleases God, when he that fasteth, humbles him self in the syghte of
God, confesses his sin, repents him of his misdeeds, calls for mercy,
believes to be forgeuen for Christ's sake, and studyeth earnestly from hence
forth to lead a life comformable to the rule of gods word, yet is it not of
such virtue in it self, that it is hable to bring unto us those good things
which we look for at the hand of God through Christ our Lord, I mean the
favor of God, the forgiveness of sins, the gift of the holy ghost, a new
heart stuffed with spiritual affects, righteousness, peace, quietness of
conscience, and everlasting life.

These be the singular and free gifts of God, given only of him to so many
as be borne a new by the holy ghost, and believe in him. If the fastes of the
holy men of whom we heard here to fore had been directed unto that end, that
is, if by their fastes they had sought to be justified, Gene. xii. ^xii. xxvi.
and.xxviii
and turned their eyes from that blessed sede, in whom all nations of the
earth were promised to be blessed, so had their fastes been no^ commended but
discommended of God, not favored but abhorred, not received but rejected.

But their fastes came from a penitent and faithful heart toward God, and were
exercised of them unto godly purposes, as we have heard, they seekinge
salvation only at the merciful hand of God for the promised seed sake
therefore were boothe they and their fastes allowed of God. The fasts of the
old Fathers.
Let us therefore learn the true use of fasting, that we may know to what
end our fastes ought to be directed, least while we seek for medicine, we
find poison, and receive for salvation, damnacio^.

The.xvii. Chapter.
First forasmuch as the life of man upon earth is nothing Job. vii.
else then a warrefare and contynuall aflycte with her ghostly enemies, Galath. v
saying also that the flesh without ceasing through the subtle suggestion of
satan lusts contrary to the spirit, so that man in this vale of miserye is
never at quiet, nor has so much leisure as once to breathe, so greatly on
every side is he besieged and compassed about with cruel enemies, which
assaulteth him, and te^pteth him vehementelye that except he stronglye fight
against him with the weapons of the Lord, and also if he gives not
dylygente watch, he streyghtwayes falls into his adversaries hands and is
utterly undone. It is conneniente, that whosoever entendeth to get a glorious
and triumphante victory over his enemies, and not like a cowarde either to be
put to flyghte, or else to be overcome, and for ever and ever pearish but
rather valeauntlye to fight and never to cease till he has subdued his
enemies, that he striuinge couragiouslye may obtain that reward, i^. Tim. ^
which is promised to so many as fight lawefullye, even the crown of glory
and the enherytaunce of everlasting joy, it is conuenyente, I say, that he
seeks all means possible to avoid the danger of his enemies, and so to
behave him self in all his doings that his adversaries may have no interest in
him, nor spy any void place about him where they may give the first
adventure, and by this means be encouraged not only to assail him, but also
to va^quish him. And for as much as the devil our head e^nemie goes about
not only him self like a roringe Lion seeking whom he may devour, i.
Peter.v.
but besides innumerable thousands of wicked spirits, which pertain to his
army, The diuelles armiar y^ wicked spirits the world and the flesh.
and are ready at every moment to seek the destruction of man, has also two
special servants, which daily procure our utter subversion, I mean the
world and the flesh, the one being his waitinge man, the other his hand
maid, ready at every hour to assail and to subdue man, if diligente watch
be not given on our behalf: and forasmuch as among these our deadlye
adversaries the flesh is the most present and mortal foo, and an houshoulde
enemy ever at home and never without, even with in our own breast, carried
about with us whersoeuer we goo, and accompanyinge us what so ever we do and
continuallye prouokinge us unto those wicked acts, Galat. v.
which strive against the heavenly mocions of gods holy spirit, that by this
means she may do her master the devil great pleasure by bringing us to
destruction: if we entende to subdue and get the victory of this our
houshoulde enemy the flesh, let us know for a certentie, that there is not a
more spedye way nor a more present remedy against her assaults, then godly
fasting is, which enemy, that is the flesh, being once subdued, the forayne
enemies shall the easelier be kept out, and we live in the more quietness by
the healpe of gods spirit and feruente prayer.

The.xviii. Chapter.
ANd hear begin we to learn the true use of fasting, and to know unto what
end our fastes ought to be directed. The first true and godly use of fasting
is to subdue the flesh, to mortifye her beastelye affectes, and to repress
the wild and rank mocions thereof, that it may be subject and obediente to
the spirit as an handmaide to her mastres, or a servant to his Lord. For all
be it God has made us of two parts, that is, of body and spirit, yet has
he ordained the spirit to be ruler, and the flesh to be in subieccion to
the spirit. The rebellion of the flesh against the spirit.
But not with standing the flesh (such is her wild disobedience and
disobedient wyldenesse) can by no means abide to submyt her self to the
rule of the spirit, but continuallye stryueth to have the upper hand, and
contrary to gods appoinmente to make the spirit subject unto her The spirit
provoke unto humility, Charity, Patience, quietness, continencye,
pureness of life, moderate eating and drinkinge. etc. The flesh contrariwise
calls unto pride, hautynesse of mind, envy, malice vengaunce discord,
whordo^, auoutry, glotoni dronkenship. etc. So that there is a continual
con^icte between the spirit and the flesh* who shall have the victory as. S.
Paul says If the flesh subdueth the spirit, then pearyshe we, Galath. v
but if the spirit according to gods ordinance bears rule, and has the
flesh in subieccion, then well are we. Now that this may be brought to
pass, godly and Christen abstinence shall healp greatly. Fasting tameth the
flesh.
For there is nothing that so tameth and brings under the wild and unruly
lusts of the flesh, as fasting and abstine^ce, even as there is nothing that
makes a wild and fearce horse so tame and obedyent to his master as the
withdrawing of his hay, otes, bread, and such other prouender. They
therefore that will use their fast a right and unto a godly end, must
first direct it unto this purpose, that by the exercise thereof they may
bridle the wantonness of the flesh, and refrain their bodies from sin that the
spirit, i. Pete. iii.
which is a precious thing before God, may be quiet, or else all other
exercises and trauails although never so painful, are vain. To this use
served the fastes of many godly both men and women in times paste, that the
body being mortified, the spirit might the more freely attend on God. The
prince like Prophet says, I put on sack cloth and humbled my soul with
fasting. Psa. xxxv
This holy Prophet and king used fasting to this end, that he might bring
his body low and in subieccion to the spirit, that the ungodly lusts thereof
might no more rage and rule in him as they did, ^ ^eg. xi
what time he took Bothsaba the wife of Urias and lay with her, and that he
might freelye enioie her, caused her husband to be slain in battle. Psalm.
cix.
In another place he also says, my knees are weak through fasting, my
flesh dried up for want of fatnes. We read likewise, Esthe. xiiii
that that most virtuous Queen Esther brought her body very low with
fasting Again. ^. Cori. ix.
S. Paul says of him self, I chastise and tame my body, and bring it into
subieccion, least by any means it come to pas that when I have preached to
other, I my self should be cast away These with many other chastysed and tamed
their bodies with fasting, that the spirit might have free course unto God
and be occupied about heavenly things. After this manner ought all true
Christians to do, that the body being kept in subieccion, the spirit may
rule and have the ouerhande, and by no means to follow the wicked manner of the
papists, which in their fastes abstain from gross flesh, and devour all
kind of deinty and fine fish, which make their bodies much more prone to
lewdnes, then the eating of flesh, and also brings the spirit into miserable
seruitute and bondage. O ungodly manner of fasting.

The.xix. Chapter.
Unto this taming, De salut. document Capi. xxxv
chastining subduing and mortifying of y^ flesh by y^ true use of fasting
does. S. Austen exhort us, saying: Let oureflesh be continuallye subject to
our soul, and serve it as an handmaide does her Masters. Let us not suffer
our body to be ouerlustye, least (...) war against the spirit, but always
let the flesh be subject that it obei the commandment of the holy ghost.
Been. xvi.
Neither let us suffer the handmaide to wax to rank, least she set light by
her maistres, but rather let her obey all her commandments and do her
seruise. For as horses must be brideled, so must our bodies be restrained with
fasting, watch and prayer For as if the guides of chariots do give their horse
the reanes they draw them into head long down falls so if our body be not
brideled, the soul and it both together slip into the deep pit of hell. Let us
therefore be good and expert Carters or Chariot dryuers to our body, that we
may go the rig^twai. etc. Quest. ^. xx vet. et ^dtest.
Again he says fasting swageth the intemperancye and unruliness of the body,
and represseth or keeps under the troubio^s mocions and raging lusts thereof.
It causes the soul to ^e at liberty and not to be oppressed of the flesh, as
the Lord says, take heed that your hearts be not ouercom with surfetyng and
dro^ke^nes. Luke. xxi.
For when the soul is delivered from to much eating and drinking, then does it
consider it self the b^tt^r, and waieth in what case it stands. For as a man
in a filthye glass sees not him self such one as he is in deed, so likewise
if he be ouerladen with to much eating and drinckynge, he thincketh him self
to be another manner of man then he is. Yea then is he provoked unto
sensualilitie and filthye lust, moved unto anger, puffed up with pride, and
stirred unto letchery. In respect whereof the Apostle says, be not drunk
with wine, (...). v
wherein is dishonest behauioure. But if the body be kept in order, and
accustomed with fasting, then does the soul know the better, with what deuocio^
she ought to serve her redemer. Fasting therefore is very necessari. Hereunto
pertains y^ saying of. In Gene. Home. ix. Why we abstain from meats.
S. Ihon golden mouth The abstinence fro meats is received for this purpose,
y^ it should restrain the rigor and fearsnes of y^ flesh to make it obedient to
the spirit, eue^ as an horse is to his keeper. For he that fasteth, must above
all things refrain anger, learn mekenes and gentleness, have an heart
contrite, and such one as may repel and put back unclean concupiscences and
lusts He must also set before his eyes always the eye of the everlasting judge
and y^ iudgeing place that can not be corrupted. Again he must by his monye
be made the better by distributing it to the pore, and have rule over it. He
must be liberal in giving alms and receive into his heart no evil against his
neighbor, Esaias. (...)
as Esaye speaking in y^ person of god sath: have I chosen this fast, says the
lord? Though thou wrye about thy neck like an hoope, and strowest under the
sackeclothe and ashes, yet will not I regard thy fast says the lord. What fast
the^, tell me? Losen, says he, the bonds of the wicked bargains, break thy
bread to the hongry bring the poor man that has no house into thy house. If
thou do these these things, says he, the^ shall thy light break forth as y^
morning light and thy health shall spryng right shortly. Have thou now seen (my
well-beloved) what y^ true fast is? Let us look upon this fast, and let us not
think, as many do, y^ fasting stands in this point, if we continewe
without any dinner til it be night. S. Hierome also says: Satietie or fulness
is to be exchewed even of y^ most vile meats. For there is nothing y^ so
ouerwhelmeth y^ mind, as a full bellye. Thus have we herd that the first and
principal use of fasting is to tame, chastise, subdue and mortifi the flesh, A
Rule to be observed in fasting.
y^ it resist not, but rather obei the rule of y^ spirit as an hand maid, her
maistres, or an horse his keeper. But this is to be considered in our fasting,
y^ we do not with our unmeasurable fasts so make weak and feable the body,
that it be hable to serve neither God, nor our neighbor, nor yet our selves,
and by this means utterly quench the use and workyng of the spirit, as we read
that many in times past have done, such fasts please not God. This
commandment therefore of S Paul is to be observed in all our fasts, Make not
provision, Romans xiii.
says he, for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it. An horse that is to much
delicate lyfed, casts his master, again if he be kept to hongry, he faynteth
in the mids of the journey, and does not his office. A mean therefore is to be
had as in fedinge of the horse, so likewise in ordering of the body. We live
not to eat, but we eat to live.

The.xx. Chapter.
THe second cause why we ought to use fasting is, To fast to give unto the
poor.
that we abstaining from meats, may have to give unto the pore and hongry the
more liberallye. For this kind of fasting pleases God greatly, when he sees
that we have so put on the bowels of tender mercy and are led with such and so
hearty compassion toward our pore neighbor, that we can not find in our heart
he should want, yea rather then he should lack, we will spare it out of our
own belli and give it him, god right well accepts this fast, and blesses the
faster with plentye and abundaunce, as the wisema^ says He that has pity on
the poor, Prove. xix
makes the Lord his debtor, and look what he lays out, it shall be paid
him again. Unto this manner of fasting does God exhort us by the Prophet,
Esaias. lvi^^
where he says, break thy bread to the hongrye, and led the neadye and
wayefaringe men into thine house. When thou see a naked man, cover him, and
despise not thy flesh. What it is to break thy bread to the hongri, we heard
before in the.xiii. chapter. Toby. x^^.
The angel of God told Thobye* that when fasting prayer and alms deeds go
together, that is good and accepted in the Lords sight It is written in a
certain ^oke called Pastor (the author whereof Hermas S. Paul's Dyscip^e.
they say Hermas. S. Paul's disciple was) on this manner: On that day that thou
shalt fast, thou shall taste nothing at al but bread and water, and when thou
have counted the quantitye of the meat that thon wast wont to eat on the other
days, the cost y^ thou should make on that day that thou fastest lay it up,
Mark^ and follow.
and give it to the widow, to the fatherles childe^, or to the porema^, and so
shall thou fast a good fast, that he which has received it of the, may fill his
soul, and that his prayer may go unto the lord for the. If thou fulfillest thy
fast on this manner, as I command the, thy sacrifice shall be acceptable to the
Lord, and thy fast shall be written in the book of life. In Leui. Cap. vi. Home.
x.
Origin says, we find in a certain book, that the Apostles said, blessed
is he that fasteth to this end, that he may nourishe the poor man. A notable
sentence.
The fast of such one is wonderfully accepted before God. Hereto pertains
the saying of. Quest. C. xx.
S. Austen, mercy did commend and greatly setforthe the prayer and fasting of
Cornelius. Acts. x.
For he being rich and a wealthye man fasted. He did not only fast, but he
also fed them that wanted, that their fullness might make his fast
acceptable. Again in a another place he says, Sermon lvi de tempo.
before all things, that which we were wont to eat at our dynner, on the
fasting days let us bestow it on the poor. Our goulden mouthed Doctoure in
a certain homily councelleth us, In Gene. Home. vii.
that when so ever we fast, we should be lyberall to the poor, and give
them largelye of our goods. In a another place he also says, he that eats
his meat and is not hable to fast, Home. ix. In Gene.
let him give the larger alms, let him be the more diligent in praiing, let
him have the more fervent desire to hear the word of God. Here Chrysostom
estemeth alms among other virtues of so hie price, that if there be any which
can not abide to fast for y^ weakness of their body, yet if they be plenteous
in doing the works of mercy and in prayinge and hearing the word of God,
they are not refused of god, but accepted as good Christians. Mercy therefore
and alms is a precious thing in the sight of God* and ought to be exercised
of the faithful, when so ever occasion is given whether they fast or not.

Mercy, Toby. xii
says the angel, is better then to hoorde vp^e treasures of gold. For
mercy delyuereth from death cleanse the sin, and causes to find everlasting
life.

Thus have we heard that Christen men ought to use their fast unto this
end, that they abstaynynge from meat and drink might have whereof to give
the more abundantlye to the poor, to feed the hungrye, to clothe the naked,
to relieve the sick, to healpe the endebted, and to comfort the neadye. O
blessed are they that so fast. Rara auis in terris.
But where are they, and we shall commend them, and call them blessed? For
great and commendable things do such woorcke among their neighbors and
Christen brethren.

The.xxi. Chapter.
THirdly if we will use fasting aryghte, Fasting to serve prayer.
we must use it unto this end also, that by the dilygent doing and often
exercise thereof we may be made the more apt to pray and to lift up our
hearts unto the Lord our God with fervent prayers, humble supplications, and
heartye thanckes geuinge. For unto this end served fasting in times past, as
diverse histories of the holy scripture do declare. If any mysfortune or
grievous plage chanced at any time to the people of god, Iudi. xx.
then streightwaies they fasted, as we read in the book of judges. Again, if
any plage were threatened the^ by the Prophets of god for their wyckednes,
Jonas. iii
as we read of the Ninevites, or if they perceived any great evil to be at
hand as we read in the histories of the Israelites, i* Reg. vii.
of Iehosaphat, Judith, ii. Para. xx
Esther. etc. then fell they straightwaies to fasting. Iudit. iiii. and.viii.


And their fastes were taken unto Esther. iiii
this end, that they might humble them selves in the syghte of God, and be
made the more mete for to pray, and to swage the wrath of God. Nether do we
read, that any solemn fast was proclaimed at any time, Why the godly men
used fasting in times past
but it was done to this end, that the fasters might the more quietlye and
freely serve god, and call on his holy name, by fervent and continual prayer. And
as we read this in the old testamente, so lack we not the like examples in
the new. Is it to be doubted, but that our sauyoure Christ in that time of
his long and solemn fast joined to his fast prayer? Math. iiii.
He without doubt prayed unto God his father all that time, that by his
preachinge which was at hand, many might be tourened from their
ungodliness unto the true worshippinge of God, from wickedness of life unto
innocencye of ma^ners, We read also that the godly Luke. ii.
Matrone Anne served God in the temple with fasting and prayer both day and
night. The Apostles likewise after Christ's ascencio^ did always ioin to their
fasting, Acts.xiii. and.xiiii.
prayer. In like manner read we of the virtuous manne Cornelius, which joined
to his fasting both prayer and alms deed, Acts. x.
And the aungel said unto Thobye, prayer is good with fasting. Toby. xii.
Esdras said likewise to the Jews. We fasted and prayed unto the lord, i.
Esdr. viii
and we had good luck. Queen Esther also sent word to Mardocheus, Esthe.
iiii.
saying, gather together all the Jews, and pray for me, but se that ye
neither eat nor drink.iii. days and three nyghtes, and I with my maids will
fast and pray likewise. Again Eliachim the priest said to ye children of
Israel, when they were in great sorrow and danger of their enemies. Iudit.
iiii.
Be ye sure, that the Lord will hear your petycyons if ye contynewe steadfast in
fastings and prayers in the syghte of the Lord. Thus se we, that the godly
people both of the old and of the new testamente, joined always for ye most
part fasting and prayer together, thincking them selves the^ to fast well, when
their fast was acco^pained with prayer, as it is written, prayer is good with
fasting. S. Toby. xii.
Peter also says, be ye sober and watch unto prayer. i. Pet. iiii.


The.xxii. Chapter.
Moreover our savior christ also ioineth prayer and fasting Mat. xvii.
together wherhe says, this kind of dyuels is not cast out but by fasting
and prayer. Mark. ix.
To this kind of fasting does S. Paul exhort us when he says: ii. Cori. vi.
let us give no occasion of evil, that in our office be found no fault, but in
all things let us behave our selves as the ministers of God in much patience,
in labors, in watchings and fastings: Also S. Peter Be ye sober, says he, i.
Pet. iiii.
and watch unto prayer. And from the contrari does our savior Christ call us
away, saying: Take heed to your selves, Luke. xxi.
lest at any time your herts be ouercom with surfeting and dronkennes, and
cares of this life, and so the dai (of judgment) come on you unawares. The
prophet Esaias thoundereth against them, which despising this godly manner of
abstinence, set al their minds on bankettyng and belly there. Woe be unto the^
says he: that rise up early to follow dronkennes, Esaye. v.
and to them that continue so until night, and till they be set on fire which
wine. In those companies are harps and lutes, Tabrets and pipes and wine. But
they regard not y^ work of ye lord. Again he says: Woe be unto the^ yt are
strong to sup out wine, and expert me^ to set up dronke^nes. These give
sentence with the ungodly for rewards, but condemn the just cause of the
ryghteouse. Therefore like as fire licketh up the straw, and as the flame
consumes the stuble, even so their root shall be as corrupcion, and their
blossom shall vanysh away like dust, for they have cast away the law of the Lord
of hosts, and blasphemed the word of the holy, maker of Israel. From beastly
ba^ketting unto faithful fasti^g and contynual calling on the name of the Lord
does the prophet Joel call these belly gods, saying, Wake vpye dro^ckards and
weep mourn al ye wine bibbers, Joel. i.
and not without a cause. For he yt has his body laden with meat and drink
is no more mete to prai unto god then a dead man is to tell a tale, nether can
the mind of such one any more fly unto god with heavenly desires, then a ship
to much cu^bred with burdens and at the point to sinck, can any longer flote
upon of ye waters, We have a proverb no les true then commen among us. A true
and common proverb.
When the belly is full, the body would be at reast, meaning that he, which has
enfar^ed his belly with delicious meats and costious dri^cks, is more mete to
stepe like a swine, the^ to take any earnest, and weighti matter in hand. We
have not red says.S. Eiprian, Ser. dete^t et ieiunio. Christi.
ye the godly men did ever take any great thing in hand, except they first
fasted. So often as they went about to obtain any thing of God, they fasted, and
wept, and watched whole nights in prayer, and wear garments of hear next to
their flesh, and so withal humblenes, desired god to be benificial to the^.
Nether wanted they of their purpose when they most humbly fell down at the fete
of god and offered unto him the sacrifice of a contrite heart, but god was near
unto them, yt called on him, and reached forth his hand to them yt were in
danger, and help the^ that were in trouble. Again he says, prayer is of
great virtue, when fasting goes before. Basilius magnus says also, yt fasting
is necessari, when we desire obtain any thing of the Lord The ancient fathers
of Christ's In regular Mona. Capi. ^.
church godly considering how necessary a thing prayer is in the Church of
Christ, ordained certain feastful days in the year, Why fastes were appointed
of y^ fathers of Christ's Church.
on the which the people should resort and come together unto the temple for
to pray unto the Lord God. And that they might come the more deuoutely and
pray with the greater fruit, they appointed also that the day before the
solemn feast, they should fast that they might be the more apt to pray, when
they come together into the temple. Note.
For where the body is burdened with meat, there the mind can have no free
passage unto God. Let the^ therefore that fast, appointe their fasting also to
this use, that by their abstinence they may be the more re pray, and not only
to prepare them selves to pray, but also earnestly to give their minds unto
prayer, or else what does their fast profit them? To fast from meat and to goo
about worldly matters, what other thing is it, then a mockinge of God, and a
derision of christen abstinence as.S. Ambrose.
Ambrose says, do you think yt he fasteth aright, which waking betymes in
the morning goes not unto y^ church (to prai and to hear the word of god) but
as soon as he is up, gathers together his servants lays abroad his nets,
brings forth his dogs, and goes running about the forestes? Therefore if we
fast, let us fast a right, and after the examples of the au^cyente holy
fathers let us always couple prayer with our fasting. So shall boothe we,
our fastes and our prayers please God.

The.xxiii. Chapter.
FOurthelye and finally forasmuch as the word of God is the singular and
unspeakable gift of God, Psalm. ^ix
given of him to be a lantarne to our feet and a light to our pathwaies,
Psalm. xix.
to turn souls from idolatri unto true god lines, to give wisdom to the
humble, to make the faithful penitent hearts glad, to lighten the eyes of the
ignorant, to teach the true relygyon, to i^proue errourres and heresies, ii.
Tim. iii.
to amend sinners, and to instruct all degrees in righteousness, that the man of
God may be perfect and prepared unto all good worckes: it is conueniente,
whither we hear ^t of other or read it our selves, that we both hear and
read it with great reverence and all humility, saying that not man, but the
holy ghost is the authoure of it, which breathed into the hearts of holy
m^nnethe knowledge of it, and put in their minds what they ought to wryghte
as.S. Paul says, the whole scripture was given of God by inspiracion. ii.
Tim. iii.
And.S. Peter records the same, ^i. Peter. i.
saying. The scripture came never by the will of man, but holy men of God
spoke, as they were moved by y^ holy ghost. If the holy scripture then comes
from god, and god be the author of it, who dare presume either to hear or to
read it, but with an humble reverence and reverent humility? Ad Iulianum, ep.
^.
As.S. Austen says, by the books of the holy scripture God him self and
our lord speaks unto us, and shows unto the effect of a godly will* Let
us then consider and mark well, with what honor the message of that god and
Lord ought to be received of us. What if a message came unto us very earlye in
the morning from a king, would we not straight ways (al other cares laid
aside) receive the letters with a ready will and withal deuocio^, and after we
had red them, labor to fulfill the kings request to y^ vttermoste? And
behold from the heaven of heavens the King of kings and Lord of Lords, yea
and our redemer has vouched safe to dyrecte his letters unto us by the
Prophets and Apostles, not that he should commytte unto us any service
necessary for him, but sygnifye, what things may do us good unto salvation
and glory. O with what, reverence and great honor ought we then to
receive, read or hear the letters of this everlasting king and immortal god
sent for our glory and for our salvation, seeing that by them not man, b^t
God speaks unto us as our savior Christ testifies, he that hears you
(he speaks of the preachers of gods word) hears me, Luke. x.
and he that despyseth you, despises me, and he that despises me, despises
him that sent me. Now y^ we may come reuere^tly and humblye to the hearing of
gods word, it shall not be unsitting to use our fast unto this end also, that
we may come unto it with fasting and empty stomachs, that our mind and
inward man may have the purersenses to understand, the clear sight to
behold, the more open ears to hear, and the gredier stomachs to digest the
holy mysteries of god For likewise as he is no mete man to pray unto God, that
comes out of the Tauern sweating and set on fire with drincking of whot wine
and eati^g of delicious meats, so in like manner is he no fit man either to
read or to hear y^ word of god, that has a full gorge and stuffed belly. The
more the body is filled, the more is the mind dulled, and made unapt to receive
any message from god. ii. Cor. iiii.
But albe it y^ outward man decay and be made feeble for a time, yet the inward
man is renewed day by day, and made strong. And this meant the holy fathers and
godly bishops of Christ's church in times paste, when they appointed fasting
on the eue^s of solemn feasts, that the people by their fasting might be
made the more apt the day following, when they came to the temple, to hear the
blessed word of their salvation.

The holy letters do testify, Exo. xxiii^
that when Moses received the law, he was in the mount with God, and fasted.xl.
days and.xl. nights before the ta^les of the law were delivered unto him, Belly
be^^stes are not mete to receive the word of God.
where of we may learn how reverently we ought to take the word of god,
au^ not to come unto it with unwashed fete, as they use to say, And this is to
be noted by y^ way, that as Moses fasting was found worthy to receive the law
of god, so likewise when he came down from the mount and saw the people
droncke and mad, Exo. xxxii
singinge and piping, dau^ci^g and lea^ing, he threw down the tables of ye law,
and brake them on pieces, by this declaring that Epicures and belly gods be no
worthy and mete vessels to receive the new wine of gods word

When the children of Israel ii. Esd. ix.
at a certain time came together to read the book of the law of the Lord, they
fasted the whole day, that they might read the holy scriptures with the more
reverence and be made the more mete to have the holy ghost present with them
to teach them by his godly inspiracion.

Esdras also being greatly desirous iiii. Esd. v.
to have certain secrets opened unto him, was commanded of Uriel the angel
to fast. vii days first of al. Which thing he did, and had his desire
satisfied.

In like manner after the Prophet Daniel had fasted and prayed Dan. ix. x
unto the Lord for knowledge of certain mysteries, Gabriel the angel of God
came and reveled unto him the secrets of Christ's incarnation, passion, death.
etc

When Baruche red his book Baruch. i.
before the king and the kings council and before all the people, they all
wept fasted and prayed before the Lord. Math. iiii.


Before that our sauyoure Christ took upon him the office of preachinge to
declare unto the people the joyful tidinges that he brought from heaven, he
fasted.xl. days and.xl. nights and did eat nothing at all, geuinge us
example by his fasting not to fast the like fast, which is impossible and
above ye natural strengthes of any man, but to come unto the word of god through
fasting with all reverence and humility, whither we read or hear it.

The Apostles of Christ likewise Acts i. ii.
before they universally preached the kingdom of Christ, fasted and prayed, and
as they were fasting and prayinge, the hollye Ghost came down upon them and
endued them with the knowledge of al languages, and taught them the true
understanding of Gods holy mysteries.

To end, (...). x.
Cornelius being very desierous to know y^ true and approved religion before
God, fasted and prayed unto the Lord, and god gracious^^ satisfied his desire

The.xxiiii. Chapter.
TThus le we that all godly men both of the old and new Testament used
abstinence for the most part, We must com to the word of ^^ed reuerentlye.
when they should either preach, hear or read the word of God, that they
might come the more reuerentlye unto it, and be made the more mete to handle
so holy and worthy mysteries. It is convenient therefore y^ we also, if we
will use fasting aright, do follow the examples of these holy men, whenever
we entende either to preach, read or hear the word or God, and not
irreverently to come unto the holy scripture, as unto profane wrightings,
Abu^ers of the word^ of God.
after the example of many ungodly parsons which with out al humility and
reverence read the word of god as though it were an Ethnike chronicle, a book
of man's statutes, of Beuise of Hampton, of Gye of Warwick, of Robinhoode,
and such other like fond and foolyshe fansyes yea there want not (the greater
shall be our plage) which scorn y^ word of god and most shamefullye abuse it,
some unto ^koffynge and jesting, some unto the tauntinge of other, some unto y^
vpholdi^g of their fleshly liberty and corrupt ma^ners, some unto the maint
eining of wicked opinions. etc. whose destruction slepeth not, whose damnacion
is at hand. Math. vii.
For if it be not lawful to cast pearls before hogs nor to give that is holy
to dogs, nether is it lawful for hogs to touch pearls, nor dogs to taste y^
is holy. If they were punished that did eat vnleuended bread at the feast of
the passover, Exodi. xii.
if Uza were stricken unto y^ death for touching the arcke, ii. Reg. vi.
if that geast yt came unto the marriage not having the wedding garmente, Math.
xxiii
was bound hand and feet, and ^ast into utter darcknes, where weping and
gnashinge of teethe is, if the Corinthes were plaged for abusinge the lords
supper, i. Corin. xi
let not those swinish Epicures, doggish papists Licencious Libertines,
ungodly Anabaptists, gross gospellers and wicked worldlinges think that
they shall escape unpunished if they go forth to abuse the word of god or to
come irreverently unto it. For the holy scripture is the message of god,
brought unto us from heaven by his holy Embassadoures the Prophets and
Apostles yea by his own dearly be loved son that king of glory, which sealed
and confirmed it with the sheding of his most precious blud: it may not
therefore be lightly regarded, nor vnreuere^tli handled. For if the yt despyseth
Moses law, ^ebru. x.
says.S. Paul, dies wtoute mercy under.ii. or.iii. witnesses, how much sorer,
suppose ye, shall he be punished, which tredeth under foot the son of god and
counts the blud of the Testament, when with he was sanctifed, as an unholy
thing, and does dishonor to the spirit of Grace.

That we therefore may humbly, reuere^tly deuo^tely and honorably come unto the
preaching, hearing or reading of the blessed word of God, let us not neglecte
this noble virtue of fasting, but after the example of the aforesaid godly men
pr^pare our selves by the diligent exercise thereof, to be mete to handle so
holy and heavenly mysteries. By this means shall it come to pass, y^ god
which is the author of the holy scripture shall always be present with us by his
holy spirit, and teach us the true knowledge of his godly will, unto the glory
of his blessed name, the profit of his holy congregation, and the syngular
comfort of our conscience.

How have we heard first what the true and Christen fast is. The
conclusion of the book.
Secondly, how we ought to fast. Thyrdlye, what the true use of fasting is.
Luke. xii.
It remay^e^h that we be not like that negligent servant which knows his
masters will, and does it not, and therefore is beaten with many stripes, but
rather that we be likened unto that good seed which brings forth her
increase, some an hundred fold, Math. iii^
some threscore fold, some thirty fold. If we now know the true doctrine of the
holy scripture concerning fasting, let us practice it in our conversation,
when so ever any such occasyon is offered, as heretofo^e is declared, Titus.
ii.
and at all times let us live soberlye, ryghteouslye and godly in this
present world.

Let us not with the abuse cast way the use, but let us so much the more
gladly exercise the godly manner of fasting, because the ungodly papists
rail on us, and co^tinnally beat into the simple peoples heads, y^ we which
profess the gospel, abhor and condemn all fasting and prayeinge, all
commendable customs and godly ordinances, that by well doing we may stop the
mouths of folish and ignorant men, and that they, which backebite us as evil
doers, i. Peter. ii.
may se our good works* and praise. God in the day of visitacion, to whom be
all honor and glory for ever and ever

Give the glory to God alone.
Imprynted at London by Ihon Day* dwelling over Aldersgate* These books are to
be sold at the shop at the little Cundyte in Chepesyde.


