A Learned and a Godly Sermon, to be read of all men, but especially for all
Marryners, Captains, and Passengers, which travel the Seas, preached by John
Madoxe, Master of Art, and fellow of All souls in Oxforde, at Waymouth and
Melcombe regis, a Port in the County of Dorsett, the 3. day of October, in
the year of our Lord. 1581.

Esaiah. 55.3. Incline your ears, and come unto me: hear, and your souls
shall live, and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure
mercies of David.

At London, Printed by I. Charlwood.

To the worshipful M. Mayor of Waymouth and Melcombe regis, in the County of
Dorsett, and his brethren the Bayliffes and Aldermen of the same Town, Thomas
Martin wishes increase of grace, with the true fear of God.
WHen I considered with my self, (worshipful and in the Lord beloved) the
manifold and subtle practices, with the malignant drifts, that the man of
sin and his ministers, by the suggestio^ of Satan do daily put in ure, to
bring Gods word being a Lantern unto our steps, and a light unto our feet,
not only into contempt and disliking, but also unto utter ruin and decay, that
he may reign in the temple of men's hearts as God alone: (I could not stay) but
carefully endeavor my self* what way best I might diligently, as well to
supporte and underprop, as to promote and advance the same. And for that of
my self I am not so good a labourer in the Lords Vineyarde, as I wish I were,
yea rather a loyterer, as I wish I were not, for in truth, the good thing that
I would do I do not, and the contrary, that I would not, that do I, yet not
I, but sin that bears sway in me) I thought it good, to set abroad, in
the view of the world, to the constant comfort and joy of the Godly, and to
the griping grief and sobbing sorrow of the wicked, that short, sweet, and
comfortable sermon, which that godly, learned, and virtuous young man John
Madoxe, M. of Art and fellow of all Souls in Oxforde, in your hearing,
preached here in this Chapel of Melcombe the third of October in the year of
our Lord 1581. to all your great comforts. That as then in your hearts, being
by the spirit of God thereunto zealously moved, you dilligently heard him; so
now the same being eftsoons offered unto you to be perused, you may glorifye
God in him. And that, as he, now having reaped the fruits of his faith, is
made coheire with his and our Christ, in the kingdom of our good God: so his
good studyes, in virtuous exercises not buried in the pit of oblivion, may make
him in fame, on earth to live for aye. Which sermon, as by the author at my
mocion, was first willingly unto you pronounced, and at that time of you
thankfully received, so now unto you most gladly the same do I dedicate: and
so much the rather, because you being Merchants, and therefore often travailing
the dangerous salt foam, may, (by taking it with you and recording the same)
learn how to pass in the acceptable fear of God, your idle times at sea, to
the benefit of your own souls, and most of all to the glory of God. So be it.

Your freende in the Lord to command. Thomas Martin.

Luke. 10.18. And when he was entered into the ship, his disciples followed him.
etc.


O Lord God our strength and refuge, which only do great miracles, thou
which art the hope and health of the just, and the defender of the^ in the time
of trouble, thou that buildest thy tabernacles in heaven and have fastened the
joints thereof below in the earth, which call the waters of the Sea, and
powrest them upon dry land: appease the rage of this tempestious world, still
the storms of the flesh, and rebuke the wicked spirits which seek to bring
both body and soul unto shipwreck: Arise Lord in thy mercy and help, for
we are hardly distressed: set our vessels out of danger, that so in safety we
may aryue to the wished Haven, which is heaven it self, the rather to take the
land with Christ which is our cheifest carriage, then to make show or sale of
any other Merchandise of our own. For all other is nothing in comparison of
him, in whose name we assemble together, humbling our selves and aduauncing his
glory, who is our life, our light, and our comfort, even Christ Jesus, to whom
he praise, power, and dominion, for ever. Amen.

BEtter a simple Cook dress the supper, then that the guestes go hungry to
bed: better spread up a Canuase sheet, then to be quite without a sail, and
make no way at all: better a small venture in a little Pynasse, then to sit
out for naught, and to be left quite without a share: and so I trust you will
think, that since this place can not now be so furnished as it should, yet
better take that it may have, then look for that it cannot have: assuring you
that albeit my cookery be simple, yet will I see that the meat shall be good
and wholesome* and albeit, my Bark be not stored with shift of Tackell, yet
shall it bring you to a safe Haven: and albeit, the bottom be but small, and
nothing deeply laden, yet shall it share to every man at least one good lesson.

They that go down to the Sea in ships, Psalm. 107.23.24.
and occupy by the great waters, these see the works of the Lord, and his
wonders in ye deep. For at his word the stormy wind arises, and troubles ye
waves thereof. In as much therefore as this Town is placed so nigh the maine,
that it uses the Ocean as an handmayde to bring in profit, whereby you become
well acquainted with all the knackes and conditions of the salt Foam, how
seruicable it is when it is well pleased, and what bedlam leges it will fetch,
when it begins to be wanton: Therefore have I chosen this text, even from
this Gospel, that you may confess the might and marvelous power of Christ,
by working such a miracle, and also he enstructed how to order your selves
that you may pass the waves without danger of loss. If any man were able to
undertake* the safe landing of all your commodities, and warrant every voyage
that you make, I doubt not but you would gather about him in a throng, and
listen to all his words and admonitions. If therefore the preacher will
warrant the safetye of your souls, with all the heavenly fraught and spiritual
merchandise thereof, be not slack to hear him, for it is the better part: it
is ware that serves in a dear year: yea it enricheth you and all your
children.

Saint Mathewe having declared before ye wonders yt Christ wrought upon the
earth, not in the wilderness only, where few perhaps might be to see them, but
even in ye towns and Cities, where every man might behold them: and not in
the Ualleys alone among the people, but in the tops of the mountains among his
Disciples, now he proceeds to declare a miracle yt Christ wrought upon the
water, that it might be made manifest unto them yt Christ's power was
omnipotent, and that he was the very son of God, because all creatures were
obedient and subject unto him.

In this Gospel therefore are three things especially to be observed, The
division general
(that is to say) the person of the Disciples, and such as sailed: the person
of Christ that sat at the stern, the occasion of the miracle, and the working
thereof. The Disciples were they, for whose cause this thing happened, Christ
was he by whose power it was done, the miracle was that which made them all to
wonder.

Of these three things, that I may speak breefely, and yet so speak as Gods
name may be magnifyed, our understanding lightened, and our lives altered,
being tempered a fresh, by Gods handy work, and renewed inwardly with a right
spirit, let us desire of God the giver of all goodness, who teaches us things
profitable, and guides us in ye way wherein we walk, that the church whom he
has sanctified in holiness, purchased with his blood* and cleansed with the
washing of water in the word of life, may be a glorious congregation without
spot or wrinkle, holy* and undefiled, and acceptable before God, and that it
may so be strengthened by the power of the holy Ghost, that the gates of hell
may never prevail against it, especially let us desire God that the infant
whom with pain of travail and displeasure of the great Dragon, she has
here childed in England and Ireland, may prove a man of might and courage,
boldly to fight the Lords battails, and that our Queens Majesty, Lady
Elizabeth may march with him in comfort and defense, as Debora marched with
Baracke the son of Abinoa, against Sisera the cruel Cananite, and return
again with like victory, and that she may stand unto him as effectually as
Hester stood to Mardocheus against the proud Ammon, and with as much
rejoicing of the people of God, overcome in the end.

And for the more happy success in this spiritual fight, and the more
assured conquest, let us pray that our Bishops and ministers, may (...) a (...)
in their silver Trumpets, that we may be remembered before the Lord our God,
and yt they may hold up their hands in prayer as Moses did in the mountain,
when ^^^sua fought against A^elecke utterly to destroy him.

Let us (...) God also to direct the Lords of the (...) with his wisdom,
that they may be such to us, as Obed was to the Ephrami^es, and Ieh^ida the
Priest to (...) and his people, because all war (as says Solomon) is to be
enterprised by counsel, and in the multitude of them that can give good
advise, is safety and health.

Let us pray for all Schools and Uniuersities, Oxforde and Cambridge, that as
they are like mount Eph^aim, where the Children of the Prophets be (...), so
they may be like Mount Syon, where the Lord is truly worshipped for ever, and
that therein God of his mercy, will beautify with virtue and learning the
College of Allsoules.

Let us not forget to (...) unto God, the protection and defense of all
Cities, Magistrates and Justices, the Mayor of this Town, and Bayliffes, ye
Customer, Con^^^^^^, Sercher, and such what ever, beseeching of God, that both
them and we, and all the Commons may enrowle to God, such an account of our
lives in love, and charity, that he which searches the hearts and the reins,
may find us free from all gawle and bitterness, being full fraught with
humility, bound for the land of promise, having our sails of heavenly hope,
filled with the wind of Gods spirit, being dyrected by the compass of his
word, and governed by the roother of wisdom, with the ancker of faith, and
the mainemast of an upright conscience and smothe conversation in Christ Jesus.

For these things and all other whereof our blessed Father knows us to have
need, let us with one heart and voice, power out unto him, that prayer which
Christ Jesus his first begotten and best beloved son, has taught us saying.
Our Father which art in heaven. etc.

Math. 8.23.24.25. And when he was entered into a ship, his Disciples followed
him. And behold, there arose a great tempest in the Sea, insomuch that the
ship was covered with waves: but he was a sleep. And his Disciples came to
him, and awoke him, saying, Lord, save us: we perish.


I Told you that in this Gospel were three especial observations: The first
whereof is the person of Christ's Disciples, in whom this is worthy the
marking, that they being simple men and unlearned, were admitted even to the
company of our Savior Christ, being ordained before to be witnesses of those
things they saw and heard, and to be messengers of peace and of the glad
tidings of salvation to all that believed, that the wisdom of this world
might be confounded and quayled, through the apparaunt foolishness of the
Cross of Christ, which seemed such a jest to the Greeks, that they laughed
it to scorn, and was such an eye sore to the Jews, that they could not look
straight upon it, and such a stumbling block in their way, that they fell
headlong over it.

In these Disciples yet, though well acquainted and inured both in the manners
and with the might of their master Christ Jesus, we may behold an image of man's
frayltie and weakness, that being but a little. Seashaken with a storm, they
were straight ways at their wits end, ready to give up the Ghost for fear,
not considering that so long as Christ was in the Ship, let the winds rage,
and the Sea roar, let the Cables crack, and the Clouds throw down
lyghtening, let the surges mount up to Heaven, and let the waves open and gape
like hell, yet so long as Christ sits in the stearne, there is no danger: Si
Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos, Roma, ^.
If God be on our side, who can prevail against us. If the sorrows of death
compass us about, and the snares of wickedness make us afraid, yea, though
the whole earth should be moved out of her place, and the Mountains fall
into the midst of the Sea, yet because God is with us, we shall not fear,
God shall help us, and that right early: But the Disciples did, as do
commonly other Sailors, and Seafayring men, nay, I pray God, all that go to
the Sea, do no other ways than did they: while the sky looks clear, and
the water calm, and that they scour the stream with a good forewinde, then
all without care we scarce think upon GOD, but let him once stir the deep
out of his treasures, and ouer-cast us with the black mantelles of the South,
and power the water out of his bottelles upon us, then our soul melts for
very trouble, and we are even hard at deaths door.

But here shall be a good lesson for us to learn, that not only in fair
weather we must look for a storm, and therefore pray unto God before it be
thrown down upon us, but also at the time of our affliction, we must fly
only unto Christ, and cry unto him, Help, help Master, for unless thou
help we perish: The council of man is windy to seek, and all our labor is
nothing worth: Peter is here, and cannot save us: James and John have no
skyll to help us: Andrewe is in as great fear as we: And therefore help
Master, help us O Christ, thou can help, thou will hear. The Saints in
Heaven (we know) do love us, but their arm is too short to send us succor.
Or if there were hope in them, as there is none, yet better fly to the head,
then to the foot, especially, the head being so ready, so willing, so well
able, so gentle: At the head of the Spring, fair water is sweetest, and at the
fountain of mercy, mercy is received with most pleasure. Doubt nothing, it
is better to trust in the Lord, then to put any confidence in Princes.

An other note may you learn by these Disciples, that those whom GOD does
most entyrelie love, them does he exercise in most troubles and fears,
tossing them from rock to rock, and from danger to danger, knowing that
tribulation brings forth patience, and patience experience, experience hope,
and hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts by the holy Ghost, and knowing that the man is blessed, whom the Lord
does chastise: for though he be sore thrust at, yet falls he not, because
the Lord is his help: In two perrils shall he deliver us, and in the third,
shall he quite set us free: heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes
in the morning: Blessed be the Lord that suffers no man to be tempted above
his strength. And therefore (my brethren) if it please God to lay the burden
of his Cross upon any, either through sickness, or shypwracke, or pyracie,
or broken detters, or otherwise, let him not therefore despair of Gods love,
but rather let him be glad, that it pleases him to pick him out as one from
the people, in whom the might of his Majesty might be glorified. For you may
read in the former Chapters, that so long as Christ was among the multitude,
there fell no danger or temptation, but all was quiet and peaceable, without
trouble, without fear: but so soon as he meant to make a trial of their
faith, he calls only the Captains, even his dearest Disciples* and
suffers none else to come with him in the Ship, that they alone might be
brought into fear. This is to us no small comfort, that those he so well
loved, he was content to have them so much endaungered, but yet all for the
best. Silver is not Silver, till it be blown and purged in the fire: Gold
comes to no honor, till by long hammering and chasing, it be forged into a
vessel meet for the Kings service: The corn is ground on a rough myll, and
baked in an hoate oven, before it become good bread. The Lord make us pure
silver, and fine gold, and wholesome bread to be served on the table at the
marriage feast of the Lamb, for his names sake* Amen. And thus much of the
first considederation, which is the person of the Disciples.

Next, comes the consideration of Christ's own person, of whom we may
read, that for this cause was he borne, and for this cause came be into the
world, to save sinners. And because those that had long labored without
relief, under the burden of the Law, not finding therein any salvation,
might set their eyes on him, which is the Law of righteousness, and well
perceive that he was the true Messiah: he therefore did not only preach unto
them a new Doctrine of the Gospel, and gave them a new commandment of
love, but also to their great comfort, and no less wonder, he confyrmed all
his doctrine by Miracles, healing all diseases, both of body and mind, ever
applying the Miracle to make proof of that which he then preached unto them.
As when he would show that man's sins were so fowlie enfected with the
contagion of leprosy, as that no works of the Law could cleanse the same,
but that it must be purified by his Merits, he lets them hereof see an
outward sign, by healing that leaprous body with a touch of his finger, whom
no Physic before could cure. When he would have us to understand how
shrewdly we are all shaken with a burning fever, that distempereth the
lively blood of our souls* and makes our taste so bitter, that we cannot
savor the sweetness of his doctrine in our selves without him, nor serve to
minister in any necessary use: he does hereof make evident demonstration,
by curing of Peter's mother in law that was sick of an Ague. And here
likewise because he would have us to consider, that in our selves there is no
ability to resist the storms and tempests of this world, the rage of the
flesh, and the devil, without his help: he therefore brings his Disciples
into this perrill, and then delyuereth them when they call upon him, that they
may know where to seek help for their souls in time of affliction, by
finding such ready help for their bodies in time of distress.

Yea, but Christ was a sleep at the stearne, yea, but let Christ be awaked:
if he hear not at the first, call to him the second time: if not the second
time, cry upon him the third time: yea, call and cease not, till ye have
awaked him: be sure, he will both hear and help at the last. Christ is not
like one of these testie squiers, or those nice Dames that can abide no noise
in the house, for breaking their morning sleep: no, Christ would be awaked
with our early prayer, yea, with our early and earnest calling upon him. Would
he be glad to be awaked? Yea surely, and more glad to be kept waking still. But
how shall we keep him waking that he sleep not? Give him leave to talk unto
us, and let us dilligentlie hearken and lysten unto him: for he is willing to
talk and tell us of our salvation. But how shall we set him a work to talk?
I will tell you. When we pray (says Augustine) then do we talk with God:
but when we hear the Scripture read, then GOD talks unto us: for the
Scripture is the voice and the words of GOD pearcing the ears of our hearts
by the virtue of the holy Ghost. If therefore you will hear Christ, talk
and so keep him awake: Let the Bible be read unto you, whether it be on
Shipboorde or on shore, so often as you can, hearken unto it, and keep Christ
waking: for it is danger to let him fall a sleep, because while he slept, the
Sailors were in ieopardie to be drowned: While the good man of the house
slepte, the envious man sowed tares among his wheat: while Jonas slepte under
hatches, the tempest and storm with raging increased. Let us watch him well
to keep him awake, nay, let us set him to watch, and wake, and keep us, and
then will he not once so much as nodde: For he that keeps Israel, shall
neither sleep nor slumber.

Another good note in the consideration of the person of Christ, is this, that
Christ is a very good Master to govern the Helm, and take him into the
Ship with you, and let him be Loades man, let him come who ever styres his
course, while Christ is Master, although the tide set on the weather bow, yet
the boat shall never by sincking to leewarde, fall on a wrong coast. And while
Christ is Pilote, it shall neither run upon the flattes by mistaking of the
channel, nor make in against the current by misreckoning of the tides, and
therefore be sure to take Christ aboorde with you.

But how shall we be sure to have him with us? Surely, where two or three be
gathered together in my name, there will I be also, says Christ. If
therefore you would have him in your company, then gather your selves in his
name, take your voyage in hand in his fear: let the chief purpose, be first
his honor, and then a profitable service of your Country in your calling, and
then no doubt God will be with you: Let your talk be of him and of his
wonderful works, by telling of his salvation from day to day: Let the
elder sort show unto the younger, the corners of the world, the North and the
South, and praise his name that laid the foundations thereof: Let them show
the points of the Compass, and the storehouse of the winds, and glorify him
which brings them in and out at pleasure: Let him take his Star with the
Ballasteelie, and show how the hours of the night are descried by the
guardes: Let him show, how the current follows the first moving Heaven, and
how the tides be attempered by the Epicicle of the Moon, and in every thing
let him praise the GOD of heaven, which has created all this for the use of
man. To conclude, let no filthiness, nor evil speaking, nor backbyting, nor
blasphemy, nor corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths, but that
which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the
hearers, and then be sure, Christ will be with you, as he was with the two
Disciples that talked on him in their travail toward E^^aus. And thus much
for the second consideration in this Gospel, which is the person of Christ,
whose company bot^e at Sea and at land, we must chiefly desire.

The last note that I promised, was a view and consideration of the Miracle,
wherein I call you my brethren to witness, which have been in some desperate
plunges on the water, whether it be not a work only appropriate to God, that
when the stormy wind arises, and lifts up the waves of the Sea, when they
mount up to heaven, and descend again into the deep, and hear the horrible
rage and rushinges of the byllowes, when the vehemency of the flawe, renteth
down the tackle, and washes away the laborers from the hatches, when they
reele too and fro, and stagger like dronken men, and their cunning is windy to
seek. I report me then to you, whether it be not a work both of mercy and
might, to make glad on a suddayne the distressed Soul, by turning the storm
unto a caulme, and making the waves to be still, by rebuking the winds and the
Sea, to make all things so temperate and so quiet, that the Ship shall slide
toward harborowe as yare as a Pyke.

Kings may boast in the multitude of their people, and Merchauntes rejoice in
their ware and their money: he thinks himself some body that can command a
whole City: and he that has but a boy to carry his Sword and Targette,
would take skorne to be esteemed of small reckoning. The Captain in a Ship
of war, is a iollie fellow, and thinks himself a little God, because he
speaks prowdlie to the Soldiers, and makes them quayle at the shaking of
his locks: because at his word the Cannons rattle, and the wild fire
fleeeth through the stifeling smoke, the gunnes thunder and spewe out their
pellettes, and the Soldiers muster themselves on the hatches: If any be
unruly, he casts him ouerboorde, or if any be fearful, he binds him to
the Maste: if he cry aloof, the Helmes man dares not go roomer: and if he
bid shoot, the gunner dares not but give fire. But let the Prince or the
Potentate, the King or the Captain, the Merchaunt or the money man, say to
the South wind, cease thy blowing, or to the Clouds, hold your selves dry:
let him bid the Sun shine in a gloomie day, and let him show me the
Stars in a tempestuous night* let him command the tide, to stay till he
be ready, and charge the waters of the Sea to look smoothly, and then I will
say, he is a Captain in deed, and will confess that he is worthy to be
honored and followed. And therefore if our Savior Christ, have done, and
can do it, and does it daily, what is he that will grudge to follow so good
a Captain: but take heed, if we will follow him, we must fight under him:
for we cannot serve both God and Mammon.

It is written of Edgar, a King of the English Saxons, that walking on the
stronde for his recreation at an ebb, so soon as the floodde began, and he
loathe to leave walking, he sets down his foot by the water side, and thus
began to speak: I charge thee thou Sea, to stay thy self, and you byllowes,
that ye recoyle back, touch not my foot, least I be angry, and so thou
perish (for the displeasure of the King is death to the Subject.) I am thy
Sovereign, and Lord of thy streams, and under me thou hold thy water
channel. What? Did the Sea, think you tremble at his voice, or was the
floodde quailed to hear him speak? no hardly. For had he not saved
himself by flight, the salt foome would have washed his tynsell Gown. Which
when the King had well espied, turning to his Bishops and Nobles that stood
by, he charged them all straightly, not to flatter him thencefoorth, with any
lofty title of power or puissaunce, because there was in him no might at all.

Cyrus King of Persia, thought so much of himself, that, because one of his
great Horses was drowned in the river Oetis, he swore in his rage he would
dry it quite up, but yet could not. Well, the time wears, and I will not
hold you long*. The mark that I shoot at, is the greatness of Christ's
miracle, which not without cause made the Sailors to wonder, and to say among
themselves, Who is this, that hoth the wind and the Sea obey him.

But now to turn this Miracle unto our profit. The Ship may well be
resembled to a City or common wealth: the Winds, be those whisperers that
stir up strife, and spread debate between man and man: the waves be such
ambicious desires, as do trouble the peace of the City, and make men's
minds inordinatelie to swell in pride, in vaineglorie, in emulation, in
debate: so wrestling and struggling together, as one byllowe dasheth against an
other: which all do fill the City with the water of their garreboyles,
shaking it so sore, till it be ready to sincke again: Surely, where these
things do happen, either Christ is not at all in that City, or else they
have let him fall a sleep: wake him for Gods sake, that he may still the
tempest, or else the whole town will be in danger to perish. You know the
Ship may hull for a while in foul weather, and brook the rough Sea for a
season: but if the tempest of rage continue without ceasing, what hope is there
other, then either to be supped up of the wide yeaning waves, or to be carried
against a Rock, and so spleeted in sunder. Dissension in a Town is a sore
tempest, take heed, unless Christ caulme it with love, and still it with
agreement, what hope remains but a pitiful wrack. Yea, but why should the
tide yield ought to the wind: or why should not the winds so long strogle for
the pre-eminence, till the title of Sovereignty be allotted to some one of
them? God does know, and not I, which wind has most right to blow: and I
could wish, there were no more bickering, till that were honestly tried. I
mean, I could so wish, and so I request, even in Christ, that the Ship
be not troubled with surges of debate, while the Mariners strive, who shall
sit at the Helm. If other means cannot be found (which Iwis might, if men
would be men) yet let the law try the right of the quarrel: and yet let the
Gospel establish the quiet of your hearts. Let the controversy in Gods name,
be decided by the Law, but let your conversation be approved by love: and let
that love be without dissimulation. For I can tell you one thing, except we
love one an other, we cannot love GOD: and if we love not him, how shall we
look, that he will love us.

More yet I may say somewhat, and more particularly. This body of ours is
like unto a Ship, wherein the reasonable soul, like a mariner sayleth: this
world is naught else but a sea of wickedness: and the prouokementes of the
flesh are tempestuous winds, which of our selves we are not able to assuage:
which if they be not in time appeased, will bring us in danger to be eaten up
of the Sea, and so to make a miserable shipwreck. Let us therefore be sure,
that Christ be in our ships, yea, let his fear be ever before our eyes. If
that through negligence we have let him sleep, yet in time I pray you
heartelie let us awake him: nay, let us awake him while time serves, and that
with fasting, with weeping, with praying, and he shall surely hear us: For he
is our fortress and delyuerer: our God shall make caulme all the unruly
motions of the flesh, that strive against the spirit, whether pride or
covetousness, or lust, or envy, or whatsoever, and shall supple us with the
Oil of his love and heavenly grace, to him therefore be praise for ever and
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

