GERILEON OF ENGLAND. The second Part Of his most excellent, delectable,
moral, and sweet contrived History: continuing his marvelous deeds of Arms,
haughty prowess, and honorable love: with sundry other very memorable
Adventures.

Written in French by Estienne de Maisonneufue, Bordelois: and translated into
English, by A. M. one of the Messengers of her Majesty's Chamber. Patere: aut
abstine.

Imprinted at London for Cuthbert Burbie, and are to be sold at the middle Shop
in the Poultrie. 1592.

To the right Worshipful, Master Ralphe Marshall, of Carleton, in the County
of Nottingham, Esquier: and to the virtuous and most affable Gentlewoman,
Mistres Fraunces Marshall his wife: A. M. commends the kind acceptance of
his translated Gerileon.
IT is not unknown to your Worship, (gentle Master Marshall, how since my
first entering on this History, to translate it: I have been diverse and sundry
times countermanded by her Majesty's appointment, in the place where I serve,
to post from place to place on such affairs as were enjoined me, so that not
having fully finished one sheet, and the Printer beginning almost so soon as
my self; I have been greatly his hinderaunce, and compelled to catch hold on
such little leasures, as in the morning ere I went to horseback, or in the
evening coming into mine Inn, I could compass from company. That I fable
not herein, you are my witness; in that at your own house I wrote a sheet or
two, and elsewhere in your company, as occasion served: and sithence in a long
lingering journey, I have knit up the rest, sending leaf by leaf vnperused to
the Printer, which must needs yield doubt of a perfect Translation. In this
hard case, I hope your Worship will the more favor me, being persuaded it
should have been better, if more respite had been granted me. Yet this dare I
say beside, that except it be a word here and there by me left out, or by
the Printer mistaken, I am assured very little lacks, I am certain not so
much as a line of the History: for in very truth, I followed the French
(welneere) word for word. But howsoever imperfect or unpolished it be, your
kind Acceptance will make it pass for current: whereof, as I make no doubt,
so am I the better encouraged in the success of my fortune. You are a Scholar
your self, and know both how to gratify Scholars labors, as also in
affability of spirit to show them good countenance. I am not unmindful of
the good Gentlewoman your Wife, and although this work were once elsewhere
determined: yet now, both my promise to you and her (at our last being
together) is performed: wishing that Gerileon may prove as delightful to you
both in the reading, as it has been painful and laborious to me in the
Translating.

Your Worships to use. A. Mundy.
To his good friend Ma: A. M.
ABsence, among approved friends disseuers not affect, neither can the change
of air change resolved minds. In absence your kindness toward me has been
approved, which I have studied to requite, but can no way equal: nevertheless
ability shall not hinder endeavor; but I will do what I may, whereby shall
be manifest what I would. But least I seem to call my credit in question
with you by too long circumstance (of which I assure my self you make no
doubt) I will leave protestations, and go forward with my purpose. Sir, so it
is, that in your late employment about her Majesty's affairs, having left the
Translation of Gerileon unfinished, I chaunst to hear of a new part fully
ended, by an excellent Scholar (I assure ye) as ever attained to the
understanding of As in praesenti. His ripe wit, rare learning, and excellent
Science, has plentifully appeared, in sundry invented books of news;
wherein how ever he has audaciously abused sundry well deserving personages,
by attributing to them victories, when they at that time came not near the
enemy; yet has he been liberally rewarded (after six pence a sheet) of the
Book-binder his Arch-workmaister. For this sea-swolne Sycophant, can no sooner
hear the thunder crack, but he interpretes it to be the roaring of Cannons,
the confusion of enemies, a conquest to the English. Then over his Kan of
Canarie wine: nay, soft and fair, his labor gets no such allowance; for
truly, truly, and in good sooth, ye see this world is hard, and better drink
than Barley yields, cannot be spared. Yea, say ye so; well, since we are all
Englishmen, let it be so: and over his Ale-pot let him ruminate. Now, in such
a month at Lisbone, fire consumed so many Hambrough ships of Corn; witnessed
by them that in three year before, never left the Realm of England: them a
valiant Suffolk Gentleman, (as indeed he is) at such a sight took such a
prize; at another, one so rich, as it is almost incredible to report: when God
knows the worthy Gentleman came home, and hardly had saved his own. Sundry
of these could I set down, beside that paltry rude ryme, wherein an honorable
personage of this Realm was so palpably abusde. But what cares he? not a
Barley corn: for he calls himself a Canonier, and in the discharge of
pot-shot, cares not at whom he level, so he fasten on the white, that by
diminutiue degrees is drawn from the strings of his Stationers purse. But I
remember ye told me once, his newes-buyer is no Stationer, yet I am sure he
is a Balladseller, and has a whole Army of runnagates at his reuersion that
swarm every where in England, and with their ribauld songs infect the Youth
of this flourishing Commonweal. I marvel who the di^ell is his Printer: and
but that I am assured, it cannot be done but by some man's help of that
profession, I should hardly be persuaded, that any professor of so excellent a
Science would be so impudent, to print such odious and lascivious ribauldrie,
as Watkins Ale, The Carmans Whistle, and sundry such other. But it may be,
there is some wainscot faced fellow, that is abel to print no good thing,
found out to be his instrument: if it be so, it were not greatly amiss, might
my censure serve for a determinate sentence, that he might dance at a Carts
tail the Car-mans whistle, till his back were as well seasoned as his face.
But this belongs to higher powers: return we to our first man. Who, how ever
his credit may be impaired by the publishing of untrue news, it has not
been a little recovered by the exquisite Translation of Fortunes Defier
Andrugio. For this is to be proved, he so followed his Author, that not the
best Scholar in the world can reprove him of digression. Indeed (as I take
it) it was first written in broken English, and so I am sure it is printed: for
if he had not in some measure the English tongue, he would be utterly mute. But
here may a question be moved, if this that I affirm be true; where shall we
have Gerileon by him Englished, since he understands not French? Why easily. Is
it not a Fiction first devised in French? Yes So shall it be in English. Why
tell me, art thou so impudent to abuse the work of so noble a Gentleman, as
the French Author was; wherein such excelent policy, such morrall prudence,
such singular conceipted passions are included? Go too, let me not take thee
publishing a counterfeit part thereof in print: if I do, I will hang Saint
Peter's Church Corner with such Scutchions of thy shame, that Mannering musing
what it should mean, shall never cease bestirring him with his tip-staffe,
till at Landen Hall all the Ballad-^ingers be gathered into one Assembly; and
there in rhyme doggrell (like thy Winter bitten Epitaph) carroll thy rude
conceits. But whether run I? Let this be (...) for a warning, and so will I
leave him to the mercy of his mother wit. Beseeching you to proceed, as you
have begun in that delectable History, which as it is much desired for the
delightfulnes thereof; so shall you be no less commended for your diligence
therein.

Your friend. T. N.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE PLEAsant History, of Gerileon of England.
Cap. 1.
How the Infant Porphiria, daughter to the Emperor of Constantinople, being
very sick for the love of the Fairie youth that was sent by Ozyris: is brought
(by the means of Sagibell her Physician, in the company of Marcella and
Harderin^ her ^ousin,) to a Castle near Constantinople, for change of air.
Where the wise Sagibell promised to let her see by art Magique, in what estate
her friend was the Knight of the Fayries, with his original and adventures.

THe Princess Porphiria having taken no rest, since the day and hour when
falsely the maid Dynamia, sister to Pharisor, and Amidrea who dearly loved
him, notwithstanding she receiving no love again, came to inform her, how
the Fayrie youth on whom she had fastened such earnest affection, as it was not
possible for any King or Prince like him self, to be belooued of any
Princess, as he was of the Infant Porphiria: was slain, with Pharisor, who
had wun like conquest of the Uirgin Amidrea, and that the murderer was go^e to
make his vaunt in the Emperor her fathers Court, of such a monstrous and
unhappy deed, clad in his Armor, and mounted on the good Knights horse that
had vanquished the Giants, as is declared in the xvi. Chapter of the first
Book of this nistorie. After she had by insupportable grief, swounded many
times, she fell into an extreme burning fever: as what with the violence
thereof, and her balefull passions of love together, she had at this instant
dyed, but that she was continually comforted by the Ladies Harderina and
Marcella, after that the Giant Ergoferant, who followed in quest of the
unknown Knight, and having found him, brought him to the Emperors Court,
where in eight days his wounds were healed. By means whereof, these Ladies
(who knew well the cause of the In^ants disease) persuaded her so much as they
could: with this hope grounded in them, that the death of the Knight and Fayrie
youth, was no more certain or to be credited, then the report of Pharisor: And
that the unknown Knight who rumourd forth these tidings, had done it but for
the advantage of his glory, or to cover the dishonor he received in the
Ioust: which made her somewhat to recomfort her self, so that (but for her
fever) she might easily have recovered her former state of health.

But if she suffered such anguish for her friend, the Fairie youth endured no
whit less for her, in that his love took life at that instant, when she did
him the honor to girde on his sword with her dellicate hands: but he fearing
that their loves were not reciprocal, languished in self same fits as the
Infant did, esteeming him self so unfortunate and flenderlie favored by love:
that he thought their wounds to proceed from shafts of contrary nature,
whereby the cure of either would prove as different. Thus did the fire search
through the bone to the marrowe, and he was so distracted in himself (as has
been touched in the former Book) as wandering from the care he had to seek
the unknown Knight, to revenge the death of his good friend Pharicor: he now
has lost himself, in thinking and contemplating on that heavenly beauty,
which lay nearest his heart, and above all things else he most prefered. So that
in steed of taking the right way, for embarking himself so some strange
country: he returned with his Squire Geliaste toward the City of
Constantinople, imagining (nevertheless) that he rode far enough from it. On
the other side, the Princess Porphiria was even at deaths door, for the love
of her knighth, and so far extended each extremity, as notwithstanding all
sovereign remedies appplyed, from one hour to another, a dangerous end was
still expected.

The Emperor and Empress were wonderful grieved at their daughters sickness,
not knowing whence the occasion thereof proceeded: and therefore wholly
committed her to the care of Sagibell her Physician, a man most expert and
skillful in the art of medicine. This Physician was likewise greatly
experimented in the art Magique, and the Princess of long time discerned in
him very special affection and fidelity toward her: wherefore among diverse
contrary opinions, which day and night combatted in her laboring thoughts,
she imagined how to find some ease for her afflictions, and sent for him by
the Lady Marcella, who knew much better then the physician where the disease
pained her, she being then to Harderina participating these secrets. Right
prompt and ready was she to obey the Princess will, and suddenly went to
find this wise man, who was altogether confounded with grief and pensiuenes,
because he could not attain the mean, whereby the fair Princes might recover
footing again: for to her serui^^ he was entirely affected, considering that
all his happiness depended on her safety and health, and she recured it would
enrich him for ever: for the Emperor had promised him, that if by his skill he
could restore his daughter, he would return him such a recompense, as should
both exalt and content him for ever. But without any such promise Sagibell was
careful enough of the Infants health, and failed not in his very uttermost
endeavors: and Porphiria (for her part) was willing to bestow on this skillful
man, what ever she might enjoy by the Emperor and Empres, provided, that her
amorous sickness might find desired recovery. Whereupon, Marcella having told
him the Princes would speak with him, and that with speed he should repair to
her chamber: without further questioning with the Lady, he went thither
immediately, not a little joyful of this message, which he hoped might presage
some good to ensue, because having so lately left her, he was now so suddenly
sent for. When Sagibell was come to her, he demanded how she felt her self:
When the Princess (breathing forth a deep fetched sighe from the bottom of
her heart) thus spoke unto him. Ah Sagibell, impossible is it I should be well,
considering the estate wherein I am, all your medicines and drugges having no
ability to give me my former strength, health and quietness; yet
notwithstanding, your knowledge might do me great good service, if you were so
pleased. Sagibell was not a little abashed at the words of the Princess, and
knew not what to conjecture of them, because they employed such a contradiction:
for she said all his medicines and drugs could not help her, and yet she might
be highly benefited by his knowledge, which made him to return this answer.
Why Madame, do you think I have made spare of my knowledge, and that I have
not endeavored my uttermost (according to Art) to set ye on your feet again?
Thereof I am persuaded my good friend Sagibell, quoth she, but your art of
medicine is not auailable for me in this case: for were your God Appollo,
Aesculapius, Hipocrates and Galen here present to give me remedy, yet could
they understand no more of my disease then you do. But will ye promise to be
faithful and secret to me, as I did never yet find ye otherwise: and I shall
acquaint ye with the cause and original of my grief, which when ye have
understood, easily by your knowledge may the effect be taken away. The
Physician who was quick conceited, began to wax jealous of the cause,
gathering by her words, that love had made a great breach into her tender
heart: yet making show as though he suspected no such matter, he said to the
Princess. Believe (good Madame) that I will be secret to ye, and continue
such fidelity toward ye, as the Emperor your father and your self have
always found in me. The Princess being in bed, caused her pillowes to be
raised, to the end she might deliver her mind with the more ease: and having
heard the answer of her Physician, with voice faint and weak, entermedled with
a thousand sighs, she thus began.

My sickness is caused by the love I bear to the fairie youth, if he live not,
then think a speedy end will deliver me from this anguish: except you take
pity on me, and succor me in other sort then as yet you have done, I know
you are skillful in the Magique science, and that by Art you can let me see him
alive or dead: he is the man, whose only remembrance gives life and content to
my amorous passions. Then let me see in what estate he is, for nothing else can
ease my afflictions, and all remedies else are utterly in vain, as by the
applying and proof you have hitherto beheld. I had not known above fourteen
or fifteen years, when first his love made seyzure on my heart, even amongst
the Ladies of the Empress my mother, where I was constrained to swoune in the
public assembly: he then that has occasioned this hurt to me, can take it
away and give me help, but it consists in you to give me some ease by your
knowledge, in showing me my friend alive, wherein I desire to be resolved,
because I stand in doubt he is dead. If I be assured of his end, then mine has
no long date of continuance, so shall I be freed from these extreme passions,
which not alone wounds my heart, but deuides in sunder my very soul: leaving me
so disconsolate, as but I was comforted by one of my Ladies, long since had I
pass out of this miserable life into a better.

Sagibell having attentively heard the Princess, thus answered. Madame you
have well seen my faithful seruic^ toward ye till this present, and be ye
assured, that though it valued the price of my life, yet will I hazard all for
the safety of yours: for so must I confess my self bound to do in duty, in
regard ye have discovered to me such a secret, as never could be gathered by
the rules of physic, beside, the many honors done me, in being toward the
Emperor and you, commands me to do my uttermost for your good. Most gladly
then do I yield to satisfy you request, but perhaps it cannot be so soon as
you would, because here I may not make proof of any such practice by art,
for fear of being discovered: it behooues us then to find out, a place more
proper and convenient, and it were not much amiss, the better to couller our
enterprise, that the Emperor were given to understand, that it is needful
for your health to change this air, otherwise your life will be in great
hazard. As for the place, both fair, delightful, and agreeing with your
intent, choose the Castle of pleasure which the Emperor has hard at hand:
and there may ye commodiously without any suspicion, have knowledge of him you
love so dearly, and understand likewise of whence he is.

The Princess entreated him very earnestly that it might be so, and forthwith
to move the matter to the Emperor: which he having effected, she would
requite it with such liberality, as he should have cause to extol his good
fortune. The phi^ition having in this sort comforted her, and given her hope of
knowing what most she desired: took his leave, promising very quickly to
return again, to tell her how he sped with the Emperor. Before whom when he
was come, both he and the Empress demanded of the physician, the estate of
Porphiria their daughter: when Sagibell answered, that he thought it meet she
should change the air, to see if that in any sort would amend her, for he was
of opinion, that the alteration of the air would do her great good, and bring
her to her former health and strength, next to the grace of God. And whither
were it best (quoth the Emperor) she should be removed? To some fair and
pleasant place, replied Sagibell, that her body finding ease by change of air,
her eye might likewise be delighted with pleasing objects. It were good then
(said the Emperor) to convey her to my Castle near at hand, which is
seatedmeruailous fitly for such a purpose. There cannot be (quoth Sagibell) a
place more conuenable, but it were not expedient that any train should
accompany her, for disquieting her head with goers and comers to speak with
her: and I doubt not, but (by Gods help) you shall shortly see her as well and
merry as ever she was, albeit now she is more likely to die then live. God
prosper your attempt then (said the Emperor) and turning toward the Empress,
thus he proceeded. Do you (Madame) cause all her equipage to be provided, and
appoint such Ladies for her company as you shall think meet. In this time of
their conference, Sagibell departed, and advertised the princess how he had
sped, showing likewise what resolution was set down, to transport her to the
place himself before had named. Whereof the princess not a littlle joyful,
though weak, yet hoping to receive some comfort: entreated the physician to
hasten this journey.

Sagibell was scant departed the princess chamber, but the Empress entered,
having her eyes full of tears, and her heart cloyde with grief, accompanied
with her Ladies and Gentlewomen, saying to her daughter: that for recovery of
her health, it was thought expedient she should change the air, and (it she
were so pleased) she should be conducted to the Emperors Castle of pleasure,
which was not far without the City of Constantinople. She answered with a
spent and wearyed voice, that she submitted her self to their good pleasures,
and desired she might have to keep her company, her Coosin Harderina and the
Lady Marcella. You shall have them (quoth the Empress) with all things else
shall stand with your liking: in mean while then be of good cheer, that we
may ^ee ye well again, so soon as possible may be, if ye regard the joy of
the Emperor and me.

Having spoken these words, the tears fell from her eyes in such abundance,
greeuing to see the fair princess of the world in this weak estate: as being
overcome with sorrow, she was constrained to depart the chamber, not saying any
thing, but that she should rest her self awhile, and she would go give order
for her departure. Which accordingly she did, and after all things were in a
readiness, the day being still, calm and clear, Sagibell advised the
Emperor and Empress, that now the time served most f^tly, for conuaying the
princess to the place appointed: without making any longer stay, least any
contrary accident should happen, as ^ight cross their determination so sound
and profitable. Wherefore the Empress, with consent of the princess
Porphiria, (who was pale, wan, and consumed with grief, as nothing was
expected more then her ^uriall, so woonderfully was she weakened and changed,
having lost her vermillion blush, the life and essence of her divine beauty,
which made her loved and honored of the most fair and valiant Knight of the
world, to wit, the man so far renewmed by Ozyris:) caused a Litter to be
brought, covered with green velvet, and lined all through within with the
same, the nails and frindges of bea^en gold, and the arches over head richly
embolished: wherein was laid the languishing and amourous princess, who seemed
therein as a bright shining Sun, such as chased Diana amongst the troop of
her fair Nymphs, and therein was placed with her Harderina, to entertain the
time of journey with comfortable speeches. Each one may imagine (without any
setting down in writing) the woeful sighs and tears of the father and
mother, and the general lamentations on every side at this departure, for they
had neither heard or seen any cause of rejoicing in long time before.

In this sort, and very well accompanied, especially with her physician, she
was conducted to a very fair and pleasant Castle, which the Emperor had
caused to be built five or six miles from the City of Constantinople,
wherein (because it was seated and builded so marvelous strongly) the
Emperors treasure, riches, and most precious jewels were kept. This Castle
was erected very stately to behold, for the walls wherewith it was enui^oned,
was of sto^e, so white as ^ine Iuorie: the enclosures and base courts were on
the one side guarded with the maine Sea, and on the other with ditches so large
and deep, as the space contained three quarters of a mile, rather more then
less, so says the Historian, that saw the measure thereof taken by a
Geomatrician of that time when it was made. It was bodyed with many beautiful
lodgings, in goodly fair Towers and Turrets, every chamber being in most
sweet and wholesome air, and backed with sundry galleries of all sorts and
fashions, the couerings whereof were of lead, wrought and cut into many curidus
devises of workmanship, having standing aloft thereon, fair veins and weather
cocks of gold and silver. The Gardens and Arbours were he^d in with swift
runnings rivers and clear fountains, and to say all in brief, there wanted
not any thing that could be imagined, both to strengthen the place, as also
beseeming such a dain^ie compassed Castle. Heereinto was brought (by the
council of her physician) the most fair princess of the world, for more
assured commodity of knowing and seeing what she most desired, according to
the promise of the wise Magitian: in whom she reposed very great hope and
trust, and there happened to her what ye shall read hereafter, for now we
must borrow a little leave to speak of other matters.

Chap. 2.
Of the Sophie of Persiaes love to the beautiful Porphiria, and how he
forsook and left his kingdom, to go see if her exquisite perfections
answered the report of her renown. And how on the way he met two Pilgrims of
diverse sort, the one whereof recounted to him the prowess, beauty, and high
chivalry of the Fairie youth, during which time they heard a great noise in a
Forest, which caused them go thither. Wherein one may note, how amorous
passions do so master the hearts of the greatest personages, as leading them
from the paths of reason: they forsake what is their duty, and all important
affairs whatsoever, cannot withdraw them from serving their affections. And by
the Pilgrims discourse, we may see how commendable true and sincere
freendship is, and that a good turn ought to be greatly esteemed, and binds
him in no small bond that has received it, especially the heart addicted to
nobleness and virtue.

I Have heereto fore declared, as ye may read in the fourteenth and sixteenth
chapters of the former Book, that the great and puissant king of Persia, was
wonderfully surprised with the love of this fair princess, whom because we so
lately left, ye cannot easily forget: and that by all means possible he
could devise, he sought how he might attain her to be his wife. So that
imagining the contrariety of his religion, might yield some reason of
hinderance, he caused himself to be baptized, to the end all his people might
become Christians, he sent for diverse divines into Christendom, that they
should come preach, and do all the other services of good and faithful
Christians in his kingdom. Notwithstanding this which he did was but
counterfeit and dissimulation, that so (under this pretext) he might the more
easily induce the good Emperor of Constantinople father to the maid, without
difficulty to grant his marriage. And to this end sent he messengers and
ambassadors expresselie to him, to understand his pleasure, attending which
time, transported with impatience of so long delay: one day he determined
secretly to depart himself, that he might behold this so famous beauty, by
whose picture (drawn to the life by some excellent painter of that time,) he
had drunk this sweet sirrop of conceived love. And as he had suddenly thus
determined, as suddenly did he put it in execution, not having any company
with him but a Squire of his own, whose fidelity he never called in question:
to him he gave his Helmet and Lance to bear, is Helmet (I say) which was
beyond all other in temper and goodness, having on the Creast thereof a bright
shining Carbuncle, made in resemblance of the Sun, which an hundred paces
every way about him, gave in the night time such an exceeding cleerenes and
light, as does the Moon when she is in her fullest perfection. He sometimes
wun it from a great and puissant king of Assiria, whom he had conquered in
combat, that for the prize of victory, had set his kingdom against a part of
Persia: but after the conquest, he released him, and in recompense of such
wonderful courtesy, the Ass^^ian gave him this Helmet, which he esteemed more
then all his good. Here upon the Sophie did usually wear it, when he went in
any notable or signal expedition, and especially when he had any occasion to
travail by night about any affairs of importance, as this which now he had
undertaken: leaving his kingdom in weak and poor estate, through diversity
of religions which there he suffered. And this oftentimes is cause of the
entire ruin and desolation, of the very greatest Monarchies and
commonwealths, yet left he the rule to one of his brethren, a young man, void
of exper^^nce in such high affairs. And albeit he was apt to arms, and a
good knight in trial of his person: yet had he not sense and understanding,
to govern the helm of so huge a vessel, as was the monarchy of Persia. Thus
was the Sophie not assured of his suffiencie, and but that his head was
troubled with amorous conceits, he would not have reposed any such trust in
him: but let it be, he did it by indis^retion, or else for more assurance of
his secret departure, not thinking his voyage would be so long as afterward it
proved, suffice it he did not wisely, as you shall perceive by the discourse
following in the history.

Having committed this poor kind of order to his very greatest affairs, he
departed in equipage as ye have heard, riding many days and nights together,
under cleerenes of his marvelous shining helmet, without finding any adventure
worthy the writing, and passed through diverse Cities of his own kingdom,
unknown of any one, and made such quick expedition, as he came to the utmost
merge of Persia: where finding a Barque ready to depart, in few days he
landed in the desert of Arabia, and from thence by great travail, not without
enduring sundry hazards and perrils on the way, he reached the country of
Palestine, still carried on with the inward remembrance of his love, as he
little regarded whether he rode right or wrong. Being thus arrived in this
country, he entered into a Forest thick beset with trees, which contained many
mi^es both in length and breadth, wherein he had not ridden any long while, but
he met two pilgrims conferring together: the one of them being young of age,
and endued with very singular beauty, for his hair was yellow like wyers of
gold, and the pretty down on his cheeks and chin was of the same color, in
his face like wise stood the lively color of the Rose: his stature was neither
great nor small, but indifferent every way: his broad ha^ was garnished with
Scallop shells round about, and Medialles of gold and silver, intermingled with
little pilgrim stones of Iuorie very artificially framed: his Cassock and hose
was of fine linen cloth, and at his girdle hung a little bottle, wherein he
had both wine and water, according as he had occasion to use them, and in his
hand a staff piked at both the ends. The other pilgrim was an old man, the
hair of whose head and heard was of reddish couller, griz^led among with many
white hairs, his visage dry and withered, and tand with blackness almost
like a Moore, flat nosed, the tooth standing in his head very ugly to behold,
of very evil favor was he and disposition: his stature was gross and short,
big bulkt before down to the girdle, and on his back arising mountain: his
garments were of old besmered lether, all ragged and torn, and his hat (in
steed of shells) was garnished with skales of some young Tortoise: his Medailles
were of saffronned lead, where among stood little staves of the bones of dead
beasts. The Sophie drawing near them, saluted them very courteously, and
addressing his speech to the younger man, demanded of whence he was, whether he
went, and wherefore he was disguised in that sort, considering that his
countenance delivered him to be a man of other quality then his garments made
show of: and if I be not deceived (said the Sophie) you are descended of some
noble lineage, and are a man likewise of no mean valor. Sir, answered the
pilgrim, if ye will somewhat slack the pace of your horse, and (withholding
his bridle) make him go according as we do, if likewise ye will vouchsafe such
patience, as to hear my discorsiue answer to all your questions: I shall
satisfy ye concerning the matters enquired, and beside acquaint ye with other
things, whereat ye will not a little marvel. Believe me, said the Persian
king. I am very well contented, and I think my horse would gladly ease his
pace awhile: then the pilgrim thus began. My Lord, because I perceive both by
your words and behavior, that you are a man more accustomed to command then
obey, I would entreat ye not to be offended, if talking familiarlie with ye,
perhaps I have indiscreetly said, that to listen what I conceive worthy of
marvel, you should enforce your Steed to a more gentle pace, that happily
would run so fast as he could, according to the weighty affairs of importance
you go about: which hardly will permit ye to stay my discourse, being (in
regard of your self) not so worthy hearing as I esteemed, but rather may
yield ye more discontent then pleasure. If then I have offended herein, or
shall do by over tedious circumstance: I beseech ye imagine I was not well
advised, which in respect of my submission, may the more easily be pardoned.
Well, well, quoth the king, use no more words concerning me, but answer what I
have demanded: for were I not so desirous to know, I would not show my self
so inquisitiue, and if your discourse be worthy the hearing, as you have said,
it cannot be too long for me to listen, or displeasing any way, but very
acceptable.

First then (quoth the Pilgrim) you must understand, that albeit in this estate
you behold me, yet am I descended of noble lineage, for my father bears the
title and crown of a king, and my mother was sister to the puissant Emperor
of Constantinople, a man that (for his manifold virtues) deserves to be highly
esteemed and accounted of. In whose Court, both in my youngest age, and since
the time of mine infancy, I was carefully nourished and brought up: until the
hour I received knighthood, which is no long time since. Notwithstanding,
after I began to enterprise my first exploites of good or bad fortune, trusting
more to the strength and dexterity of my body, then reason would I should, for
a proof or trial what I could do: I was so hardy one day, to go in person
alone, to adventure on the Den or Cave of Rock Alpine, and there assailed the
horrible Giants Ferclaste, Androfort and Ergoferant, by whom I was vanquished,
and long time kept as prisoner there very mimiserable. For after I had a great
while endured the fight against Androfort, without suffering him to gain the
very least advantage over me: the cruel Ferclaste came trecherously behind
me, and gave me such a weighty blow on my helmet, as laid me well near
dead at his foot: and strange it was that he took not my life from me, as my
over much boldness had deserved. But as the Glead snatcheth up a Chicken in
her talents, so almost dead, and with like facility, did he graspe me up,
carrieng me into a streict and darksome prison: where I endured such misery
and dolor, as hardly could a human creature suffer the like, by reason of the
wounds I had received in the fight, which with the hard enterteinment they
gave me beside, (being bloody enemies by nature, and men in whom no natural
compassion harbored) was insupportable. An hundred times they would have put
me to death, if I had had an hundred lives for them to tirannise on, but that
the remembrance of the grace of God, and his son crucified for the redemption
of man, on whom incessantly I evermore called, was still my succor and
comfort: and their brother Ergoferant, a man of more mild and gentle nature
then the other were, did all that possibly he might, to preserve me from
death. Nevertheless, the cruelty and rigor of the prison wherein I was so
strictly detained, was such, as I knew not whether I lived or no: but the
Almighty, in whom continually I trusted, taking compassion upon my misery,
casting down his eye of pity, sent to deliver me out of this captivity, by
an unexpected help, as I shall declare unto ye.

First give me leave to tell ye, that one (without the knowledge of any man)
arrived in the great Emperors court of Constantinople, a young knight, so
beautiful as an angel in all perfections: yet no one there knew him, neither
did himself know who were his parents, but said he was sent thither by a
Fairie named Ozyris, who from his infancy had nourished and brought him up,
likewise of her he received horse, armor, and all things else beseeming a
young gallant that sought the order of knighthood, without which it was not
lawful for any one to meddle with the search of adventures, or to attempt
exploits of arms and chivalry, whereby renown and honor was achieved, and
religiously observed among the professors thereof. I will not trifle time with
particular discourse, how well shaped, lusty, and fair his horse was,
caparasonned so rich and costly, as all the beholders much admired thereat: it
shall suffice in one word to tell ye, that never was seen in the time of our
memory, a young man, who in countenance, aspect, and assured behavior, could
promise more lovely deeds of arms, and galliardise of person, then he did:
nor was there any one, whose eyes could be glutted, or heart satisfied with
looking on him, imagining that he was sent from heaven by the grace of God, to
do some act of memory for the benefit of the Empire, as it was not long before
it came so to pass. For he who by the advice of the Fairie was thus sent to
the court, to require of the Emperor his order of knighthood, after he had
humbly entreated it at his hand: with great honor was it given him, and all the
worthy observations thereto belonging, the most divine and fair princess
Porphiria, daughter to the Emperor, girding on his sword: in the doing
whereof (a thing worthy noting) the sweet Roseate redness in her cheeks,
suddenly changed to such a lively vermillion hew, that they which before
imagined no addition could be made to make her more beautiful, because she
contained such an absolute perfection, by this effect were drawn to a quite
contrary opinion. For she seemed such as the Knight himself did, upon whose
front sat an assured boldness, with a countenance immooueable, blandished with
such a sweet gravity, as if some alteration had suddenly entered his thoughts,
and that present affection had surprised him, which (as I learned of such, who
take heedfull regard in like occasion, and therefore marked this the more
na^rowly) proved so in deed. The morrow after this young youth was made
knight, for proof of the exterior valor that seemed to be in him, the
Emperor feasting and enterteining him accordingly: gave him to understand of
the manstrous and inhumaine giants Ferclaste and Androfort, who too much
injured and oppressed the whole country. This hardy new knight, presently
determined so go combat^ with them, desiring to atchieue by the price of his
blood and perrill of his life such immortal praise: withal, to express his
thankfulness to the Emperor, for the great honor he had done him, whereto he
was bound by all means possible he could devise: not being ignorant I warrant
ye, that the power of a mighty enemy was not so much to be feared, as the
favor of so great a personage was to be cherished and maintained.

Being then secretly departed from the Court, to put in execution this fair
enterprise, such was his happy fortune, after a long, doubtful and dangerous
fight, wherein he endured more pain then I am able to rehearse: that he got
the victory of the Giants, killing two of them, and the third he took to
mercy. This deed which I have discoursed to ye, was of greatest honor that
ever was heard of in our time: and the Emperor hearing thereof, was driven to
no little admiration, especially when he understood the certain truth in
deed. It is reported, that these news being blazed abroad in sundry countries,
as indeed they were in mo^^ known places of the world: that the great Sea it
self was sore troubled, and the greatest part of the forest of Ardene was
distraunched, and the rest of the Trees stood half rent in sunder, without any
honor of their former verdure. The great flood of Egypt ouerflowed the
banckes, and left the common course where it was wunt to glide, being so
furious and outrageous: as the people of Egypt were more then half part
drowned, and the whole land so covered with water, as many were forced to
endure famishment, others (with conceit of grief) dyed presently. For my
self, I can hardly be drawn to credit these reports, because such insensible
things cannot be moved by any so great a marvel: I rather conjecture, that
this came from some Poets of those times, who (as Painters do take an
audatious license, to justify by their writing and painting what never was) to
make the more ample discourse of this deed so full of admiration, did set down
the history in this manner.

But howsoever it was, to come again to my purpose, I know it well, and that
for a certainty, that the knight having vanquished the Giants, and
annihillated all their forces, that he came to deliver me out of that accursed
prison, wherein I had been so long time enthralled. And when he understood
that I was named Pharisor, a knight of some fame, and Nephew to the Emperor:
most kindly he came and embraced me, suffering me to do the like to him, by
whom I had received so great a benefit. Then began I to remember (according as
I had often times heard talked of before, and that by no mean personages in
times past,) that we should account the day of our desiuerance from any
miserable bondage, much more happy then the day when first we were borne into
this world: because from the day of our birth, we g^ on still forward into
diversity of misfortunes, but on the day of our delivery, we were restored
from such a fear, as we never need to stand in doubt of any more: thus are we
no less bound to the cause of our deliverance, then to our parents from whom
we receive life. And beer upon we contracted together such an entire l^agne
of amity, as death should not separate or extinct our affections: nor was the
love of the valorous Achilles to Patroclus, Nysus to Eurialus, or Pylades to
Or^stes, worthy to be compared with my affection to him. For albeit by ungentle
fortune we are sundered the one from the other, the grief and sadness I
endure for his absence, has constrained me to disguise my self in these
habillements as ye see, thus barefooted as I am, to go and visit the holy
Sepulthre, wherein was buried the precious body of the redeemer of the world:
to which place I am bound, by a solemn vow long since made, to give him
hearty thanks for my deliverance, and with great devotion and humility to
entreat, that it would please him I might soon recover and see again my true
Achilles: to whom I owe not only this office of freendship, but an hundred
lives if possibly I could have so many, and this I doubt not but he will
permit me.

As thus the young Pilgrim continued his discourse on the way, they came to a
place in the Forest which was very spacious and plain, in the midst whereof
stood a great thicket of marvelous high trees: and there they heard such a
clanching of swords upon armor, as all the whole forest ecchoed therewith,
which caused the Sophie and the young pilgrim direct their course thither
ward, to see what it was: but as for the old pilgrim, so soon as he heard
the noise, he set foot forward more speedy then the wind, to seek some
corner where he might hide him. And there will we leave him, and proceed with
the Sophie and the young pilgrim: what happened to them shall be declared in
the other chapter, for in this has been sufficient said already.

Cap. 3.
How the Sophie found in the forest two strong and puissant Knights, that
fought together (at all extremities) for a fair horse, and other things of
great value, exposed as guerdon to the conqueror. And how the Sophie would
have taken and carried away perforce, the horse for which the knights
combatted, which made them run violently upon him, and of the dissension that
ensued between them three, how it took end, and what happened afterward.
Where out may be gathered, how hurtful a thing arrogancy is, to such as
inconsideratly will enterprise more, then they are assured of power to effect:
and how in all affairs whatsoever, it is necessary to place advise and
knowledge in the forefront, ere we undertake to perform any matter of
importance.

THe great King of Persia being come first to the plain, where the noise
caused him forsake his way, to know the occasion of that hurly burly: beheld
two Knights, of more then common stature, being armed capape, who fought very
violently together, to sley each other. The one of them was more mighty of
body then the other, because he was of monstrous and Giantlike composition:
but in dexterity of arms and valor of courage, he went not so far beyond
his enemy, but that the greater part of the day was spent, yet little
advantage was gained on either side. For if the Giants shield were battered in
pieces, his body wounded, and his strength much diminished: the knight with
whom he dealt had likewise his armor sore mangled, and his body injured in
many places, from whence the blood issued in great abundance, and at the time
of the Persians arrival there, they were upon the point to pause a breathing
while, being unable to withstand each other any longer, so were they
ouertrauailed with a sharp and dangerous conflict, which as it had* so was it
still to continue between them. The Sophie, without enquiring the cause of
their debate, or speaking any word to the knights (for he was meruaylous proud
and arrogant) allighted from his horse in great have, and went to untie a
goodly fair horse, which he saw bound to a tree with great chains of ^ron:
but as he was about to do it, being somewhat to near the horse, he smote him
such a violent stroke with his heel upon the sheeld, as made him tumble along
so amazedly, that he lay a good while ere he could recover himself again:
and had not his sheeld been of some temper indeed, he had not lived to
complain of his hurt. But the goodness of the metal saved his life for this
once, when being risen again from his astonishment, he would not desist from
his former en^erprise, which was to take and bear the horse, that so highly
liked him: as well for the beauty and likelihood of goodness to be in him, as
also for the necessity he was in of one at that time, his own horse being
over much wearyed with travail. When the two Combattants perceived what he
intended, they cried to him, that he could not carry thence the horse so
easily, without buying him more dearly with the price of the combat: and that
if he did not forbear and let the horse alone, he should by them be well
beaten, as his boldness did deserve no less.

The King of Persia hearing these hardy menaces, was enraged with such
choler, that having fastened his Helmet on his head, and gotten his sword in
his hand^ he made presently toward them, with resolution to deal with them
both, striking first at the Giants leg with such force, as if he had not
quickly clapped his sheeld before, he had cut it quite off at that blow: But the
Giant who was ready at arms, as any man of his quality in those times, to
defend this stroke thrust forward his sheeld, the greater part whereof was
pared away with the blow, and laid on the ground, which the other knight
perceiving to whom the Persian addressed him self, aiming at a part of his
body, which he saw was bare by loss of some of his armor: but he escaping
the thrust, gave the Sophie such a mighty stroke on the Creast, as had it
been any other Helmet, beside this marvelous one and not to be equalled, as
before I have told ye: he had cleft his head down to the shoulders, but of
such soundness was the helmet, as certain sparks of fire issued thereout,
not receiving any other harm by the stroke, whereat the Giant not a little
enraged, said, that to him alone appertained the chastising of the Persian
king, and not to any other: because he had received the first stroke at his
hands, and besides, himself was the more able man for the combat. Likewise,
quoth the Giant, to me belongs the defense of the horse, and not to thee,
as thou know well enough, and better can I maintain the fight then thou, as
the dealing between us twain has well given thee to understand, and would I
have used my uttermost forces against thee, I needed not have wasted so much
time in vain, for long ere this our strife had been ended. Now because I
perceive there is some more valor in th^^ then in him, I am willing to spare
thee so much as possible I may: wherein (notwithstanding) I would not have thee
ouerweene thy self, in presuming to impeach me, when I shall chasten this
rusticall fellow, who thus ventured to trouble us, when I was upon the point of
giving end to our strife, and thylife together: whereto the knight Combatant
thus replied.

I know well Giant, that commonly the people of thy sort are mighty and
strong, by reason of their greatness beyond other men: but withal, they have
much less courage, valor and virtue, then presumption and arrogancy, as at
this present I may gather by thy words which I find to be more hautie and
proud, then either thy strength or dexterity to arms is, albeit (without show
of fainting) thou have done thy best to vanquish me, and never dealt I with
any one, that held me harder tack then thou have done, since the beginning of
our combat, at the end whereof I am certainly persuaded, that I shall remain
the conqueror: as long ere this I had been, if this knight had not been our
hinderance. And therefore the correcting of him appertains to me, and not
thee, as having more right to the horse, the sheeld, and the Cup, the prizes
of our combat, then thou have: thou ought therefore to withdraw thy self,
and leave the fight alone to me, otherwise I shall be enforced to set my self
against thee with him, thereby to offend thee the more. Much rather had I a
thousand times (answered the Giant) to fight against ten such as thou art, then
to give thee such an advantage: such is the small esteem I make of thee. These
words were no sooner ended, but the Sophie and the knight ran both upon the
Giant: the one to hinder him from dealing alone with the Sophie, and the other
to bear away the horse, and alay the pride of the Giant.

Soon after, the Sophie and the Giant (for the same intent) put them selves
against the knight, and immediately (without keeping any order among them) the
Giant and the knight fought against the Sophie: by means whereof, the combat
was of as long continuance as disorder between them, which was very pernicious
and dangerous for them, had it not been that the young pilgrim, who but newly
arrived there upon this confused bickering, and seeing such an unruly manner of
fight, as in all his life time he had not seen the like, sharp, rigorous,
and cruel, on each side, and one or other must in the end bear away the
woorst: he adventured to separate them with his staff, but the blows fell so
thick, that it was quickly cut in three pieces, which when he saw, and
doubting greater harm might happen to him: he was enforced to keep aloo^e,
and stand as a beholder of this cruel combat. Long continued this reasonlesse
fight, h^e not being able to judge who had the better: saving that the Sophie
seemed more fresh and less we aryed then the other, but at length, with the
consent of the Sophie, who had as then least need of all, they sundred
themselves to breath a while, when the young Pilgrim thus bespake them.

My Lords, it were a great loss, if three such knights of so great valor, and
endued with hautie resolution, as I perceive you all are, that it may be judged
your equals live not in the world: should perish so miserably, as I know you
cannot but finish your days in this combat begun, only through want of due
order to be observed among ye, following such reasonable connsell and advise,
as might be given ye. Already have you spent most part of the day, yet no one
of ye can certainly make vaunt of any advantage over his enemy: neither (for
ought I perceive) does any one of ye know which is his adversary, nor
against whom he ought especially to direct himself: for sometimes two bears
themselves against one, and then that one ioynes with one of the two against
the third: in continuance of which most kind of fight, it cannot be but all
three at the last will miserably end their lives: so that no man shall be able
so say which is the conqueror, or who bears away the honor of the combat,
whereby your intent was to merit commendation: but now on the contrary ye
shall get no praise at all* but rather be esteemed as insensible and
misgouerned, whereas well ye wot, that reputation and account is the
principal guerdon of noble and valiant knights, that make profession of arms.
Thus shall your parents if ye have any be grieved, your friends will be wail
your mishaps, and your country, that challenges your uttermost endeavors, will
lament your wilful loss, beside the sorrow of such as in distress receive
succor by virtuous knights. Rather should each of ye take one of those
lances that leanes against yonder Tree, and try the fortune of the Ioust one
after another, till it may be seen which shall be dismounted, and then to
pursue the combat afterward, when the third may adventure as he sees occasion.
Thus shall the victor be discerned, and who is worthy the honor of the field,
when he that paused while the other fought, may enter the Lists against the
conqueror: but if ye continue in this order ye have begun, the greater will
be your danger, and all three will foil themselves through choler and
ouer-weening.

Thus spoke the Pilgrim, and the Combattants (after they had rested a while)
creditting his council, and liking well of his advise: took each of them a
Lance, and mounted on their horses to begin the Ioust, whereto the readiest
were the Giant and the knight, against whom he fought before the coming of the
Sophie, who could not so soon recover his horse, because he had strayed
aside, and was grasing alone by himself in the Forest. In mean while these
two ran fiercely against each other with their Lances, and met together with
such ^urie, as when two billows of the sea meet violently, when the wind
carries them contrary to their course, and then breaks them aloft in the air
with a most terrible murmour. The Lances being shiuered in a thousand pieces,
flew like a fire through the air, and their horses being shrewdly hurt with
meeting their shoulders together, brake their girts, cruppers, and their other
caparisons, and tombled along on the ground with their masters, each having
the saddle between his legs: making such a terrible noise with the fall, as
the ground trembled and shook more then a mile about the place: and they,
having their Sheeldes battered, and their sides mortally wounded, lay in a
trance upon the earth, without moving either hand or foot, but as though the
life and soul were parted in sunder. Whereat the Sophie abashed, began not a
little to marvel, ^hauing stood a good while waiting when the one or other
would rise and urge the combat: and seeing neither of them stir, he ran to
the place where the horse was tied, which they combatted for. But seeing he
was not there, and could not tell what was become of his Squire likewise, he
followed a path that led further into the Forest, which when he had trackt a
long time, not meeting any one, it happened to him as you shall hear in the
Chapter following.

Chap. 4.
What fortuned to the Sophie, after the hard encounter between the two strong
and puissant knights, that fought the Combat in the Forest. And how he took
away perforce the great Lycocephall from a Damsel, that made a grievous
complaint holding him by the bridle, and how afterward he departed with her.
How the young Pilgrim mounted one of the wounded knights upon his horse, the
succor which he gave him, by conducting him to a place, where remedy might be
given to his wounds. What the old misshapen Pilgrim was, and the speech he had
with the mighty Giant Squamell: how he found the Tree whereof the Pilgrim
told him, and what happened to him. Wherein may be seen, what chastisement
foolish and ouerbold women are worthy of, that misprise and disdain the
service done for them, and with what punishment their ingratitude is often
times recompensed. Then by the young and evil favored Pilgrim, and the
succor they gave to each of the wounded knights: is signified both vice and
virtue, the one evermore accompaning the good, and the other the wicked. They
that are guided by virtue, some matter of worth continually ensues them: and
they on the contrary that follow vice, fall from evil to wursse, and to utter
perdition in the end.

NOw began it to were dark, and the heavens being covered with obscure
clouds, declared to human creatures, that the hour of their rest drew
near: when the great king of Persia, having long sought the proud and goodly
horse Lycocephall, and perceiving that he could not find him, determined to
pass that night under a Tree in the Forest, for he was so tired and wearyed
with going on foot, that he could hold out no longer.

Being thus armed as he was, and couched on the green grass, he had not line
there any long while, but he heard a feeble voice, which he gathered to be the
voice of a woman, lamenting very greeuouslie, using these or the like kind of
speeches. Alas most miserable that I am, in what place or part of this dark
vast Forest may I meet with him, whose absence brings to my desires more
obscure greefes and anguishes: then this black comfortless night, or this
place so hideoue presents to mine eyes. Alas thou hardy and valiant knight,
the most fair and agreeable to my heart that the earth bears: in what nooke
art thou hidden that I should not see thee? I have the eyes of my remembrance
so open, as all the obscurity of this night cannot hinder me, but that I could
and can behold thy image and resemblance before me: but to touch and hold thee
according as I wish, my misfortune and thy cruelty does forbid me. Aye me, if
heretofore when thou soughtest for me, I was any thing offensive to thee:
pardon me I entreat thee. Pardon me (O Love) thou mighty God of heaven, if in
thus doing I have offended thy majesty, that now I should be worthy of so
severe punishment. Tell me fair horse, tell me I pray thee, where have thou
left thy noble master? I am deceived if thou be not the beast he so highly
esteems, and on whom he was mounted the last time I saw him. How happens it
that thou art thus strayed from him? and what is the cause thou have forsaken
him? But foolish that I am, speak I not to a beast, which has no more
ability to answer me then he who is not present whom I so dearly love? O
unkind, perverse, and detestable fortune. O unhappy Lucinda, what deity has
coniured against thee, to make thee so miserable: as he that looued thee when
thou did disdain him, should now hate when thou feel and esteemest more
of him then thine own self, thine eyes, or thy heart? Ah Lucinda, mischaunce
follow thee Lucinda, a Princess most unlucky and unfortunate, thy mishap may
well befall thy friend, because he flies from thee now when thou seek him.
These lamentations in such sort pronounced, as if they had been uttered out of
the hollow of a Rock: or the strokes upon an Anuile: that even as the fire
softneth wax, so must it have been some Hircanian Tigar, or some unnatural
devouring Lioness, but would therewith be moved to pity. But the Sophie,
who was so proud and arrogant as possible might be, was not any thing moved at
all: but having by the clear light of his Helmet discovered a young beautiful
damsel, that held the goodly horse by the bridle, went presently to her, and
giving her a rude thrust, took away the horse from her: whereon being
quickly monnted, he rode to seek his Squire, and the way which guided him the
day before. And riding part of the night by his lightsome Helmet, by this rough
encounter and unmanly injury, the damsel remained greatly astonished: yet
recovering courage and spirit, she followed him, and a hundred times she called
him thief, robber, and discourteous knight, unworthy to ride on such a
horse, or ever thencefoorth to wear armor on his body. And having breathed
forth a thousand such like hateful speeches against him. Can thou (quoth
she) inhumaine as thou art, thus undeservedly wrong me? thou may live to see
the day, that thy Lady shall despise thy tears and entreats, as now thou
disdaynest and make small account of mine: and let a more cruel shaft, then
ever Cupid bare in his Quiver, wound thee thoroughly, to bring thee into the
midst of most violent flames, and then utterly to consume thee to cinders.
But of all these speeches the Sophie made no reckoning, but held on his way, as
I told ^ee before, where we will leave him, and the disconsolate Lady in the
Forest: whose mishap may well serve as an example to young damsels, that
being sometime beloved with true and sincere affection, hold such kindness in
contempt, and oftentimes make scorn of men of great valor, who merit better
favors then hatred and disdain: which in the end they know so well how to
revenge, as they shall repent and bemoue their estates more miserably, then
did this Princess, of whom we have made mention in the former Book, and whom
ye now behold consounded with folly, discheneled running about the fields,
having forsaken the king of high Misia her father, to meet the strong and
puissant Giant Squamell: who thus badly recompensed the services she did him,
by manifold hazards wherein she adventured her life, only for his love. Let
Ladies then be careful, least they fall into any such inconvenience, and so
making like proof, there ensue like punishment: for they are better taught,
that learn to be wise by others harms, then they that fetch wisdom out of
their own follies. So coming again to our history, we will speak of the
two knights, whom we left half wounded to death in the Forest.

The History speaking of them, says, that they both revived from their
trance, the one so soon as the other, and that the Giant was he who first
espied the Sophie to be gone, having carried away the horse with him: wherefore
all wounded as he was, he ran presently (as he had been mad) into the Forest,
wherein when he was but a little entered, he met the old pilgrim we spoke of
before, who ran thither to hide himself, when he heard the noise of the
combat between the Giant and the Knight. This was an old Necromancer, that
could foretell to passengers their good and evil fortune to come, and knew by
the lineature of their hands, till what age they should live, and what day,
what hour, by what adventure, and how they should dye. He knew by heart all
the books of the Sibelles, of Circes, of Medea, of all the old living
Magitians, and the Magitians of former times. And because he knew that the
Fairie Ozyris was his aduersaire, and the greatest enemy in the world to his
charms and enchantments, likewise that she had greater skill and knowledge
then he, and specially that for his ruin, and such as he loved, she had
nourished the only knight the cause of our history: he had opposed by an
anticharme this strong Giant Squamell and his brother, who by their own nature
were endued with most high prowess: yet notwithstanding by deuillish subtlety
he preserved them still from death, and to them often times he gave admirable
and supernatural strength. So that knowing him to be in quest of his horse,
his sheeld, and other adventures, and cheefely, that he earnestly desired to
have the enchaunted Cup, whereof he sometime had heard great report: he had
put them all into the custody of this strong Giant, having withal incited and
persuaded him in a dream, that he should combat against the most puissant
knight on the earth, and so set down (as prizes for the conqueror) the
sheeld, the horse, and the Cup, whereof we have spoken. Hereupon he should
hold open Ioust to all comers and goers in the Forest, causing the Forest
to be commonly called The Forest of great Adventures: and already had he
performed many fair exploits, by means whereof he was much renowned through
the world, and very ^arre were his deeds talked of: whereupon the knight (so
hardly handled) came to combat with him, of whom hereafter we will speak
more liberally, as also by what adventure, and for what reason he was thither
conducted.

But now let us a little while speak of the Giant, who seeing the old man, of
whom he had no more knowledge then if he had never seen him: because he
could disguise himself in diverse sorts, as now he did in the habit of a
pilgrim, to deceive such great numbers as passed that way, and as he had
deceived Pharisor, if the meeting of the Sophie had not prevented it. The Giant
at the first sight of him began to be somewhat afraid, seeing him look so ugly
and hidious: but the old Enchanter that very well knew him, began to reason
after this manner.

Most generous and puissant knight, as this day lives not thy like under
heaven, who now being mortally wounded do trauerse this dark forest of
high adventures: stay thy self, and forbear (if thou be wise) to run thus as
thou do, to find and recover what the destinies will not permit thee as
yet. And if thou art not enemy to thy self, but have regard of thine own
life, hear and credit my council, and do as I shall presently direct thee:
concerning what I say unto thee, who I am, and for what cause I am so careful
of thee, the effect shall acquaint thee withal. Know then that I am the old
and ancient Necromancian Charonifer, father to great Minofoll, of whom (it may
be) thou have sometime heard some speech: such as thou now seestmee, have I
lived and reigned more than a thousand years. It is in my power to make the
black night a fair and bright day, and the fairest day again to make the most
darkesome night. I can make the Moon and all the stars to descend from
heaven down to the earth, by my charms and enchauntments: but a woman of
great wisdom oftentimes hinders me from doing what I would. Iknew thy
graundfathers, who were great kings and Monarchs on the earth. I have seen to
my joy, the mighty Horfella thy mother, who (in her life time) was very dear
to me, and whom I looued as mine own life: for of thy forefathers and great
uncles did I receive my first nourriture, and was brought up from my very
youngest years: in recompense whereof, I have evermore cherished and looued
such as were descended of them, especially thee and thy brother Nabot, whom I
esteem as much as thee, you twain being the most hardy and valiant of all
your lineage and race. So that for your advancement, I have daily preserved ye
from infinite perrils and ^^ortall dangers, whereinto (according to your
destinies) you were ready to fall: but by mine art I have prevented all
inconveniences, which I perceived were threatened against ye. And namely, let
me remember thee of the deuillish spirits that were in the Castle of the
Enchanteresse Melanda, which could not be chased thence but by one of the best
knights in the world: likewise the Combat thou had with them, by
commandment of the Lady whom thou seruest: then may thou likewise be
mindful, of the great sorrow and vexation thou were to endure, before thou
could vanquish them, and from which (for ^ertaine) thou could not have
escaped without death, but only by mine art and by my means, which succored
and defended thee: for there did I so handle the matter, that in the end thou
did obtain the victory, as thy self do very well know: and now again
thou art in far greater danger of death, if thou do not as I shall say
unto thee.

Go then and follow the path which now thou treadest, through the forest,
until that having many times turned by my circle, made in manner and form of
a Laborynth, thou perceiuest thy self to be in the midst thereof, where thou
shall see a great Tree, strait as any Ceder, which never had branches,
leaves, nor fruit, since first it sprang from out the earth. In that tree thou
shall behold a door open, which notwithstanding is now so fast shut, as no one
can discern that ever it has been opened, neither shall such as come near
it, see it, except it please me: those only whom I will, shall perceive it,
but others that by chance light upon it, shall imagine it to be a huge great
Rock, wherein is a strong Cave, full of Lions, Tigars, Bears, and other savage
and cruel beasts. But see that boldly thou enter thereinto, and descend low
under the earth by certain stayres, which thou shall find made expressly for
this cause: and when thou art descended an indifferent way, thou shall find a
flood, the water whereof runs so violently, as the flood is very fearful
to behold. Upon this water thou shall see a black Barque, furnished with oars
and sails, necessary for conueyance to the place where I make my continual
abiding. Enter boldly into the vessel, enter as thou art, without dread of any
thing, and coutching thy self therein, keeping thy self always beneath, and
thy mouth fast closed, remove not at all: for from thence upon the flood
(which continually runs downwards) shall thou be brought to a place, where
thou shall receive help for thy mortal wounds, for in very deed thou art
somewhat dangerously wounded. Afterward thou shall be advertised what is
expedient for thee to do, to merit glory and reputation among the Gods, that
make their abode in the inferior part of the world: and if thou do other
wise then as I have told thee, thou can not any way escape the death.

If the Giant were amazed at the first beholding of this old man, no doubt he
was much more now, hearing his words, and yet was it more meruaylous then all
the rest, that when he had concluded his speech, there appeared in his place a
flame of fire, which being converted into smoke, was carried here and there
through the air, without appearance left of any other thing, which caused the
Giant to stand along while pensive, without aduenturing on any resolution an
indifferent space: but after he had considered with himself the words of the
old Magitian, he gave credit to them, and determined to do as he had willed
him, by reason that the loss of his blood from forth his wounds, made him
feel his strength to diminish very much, and a very great weakness conquer
all his body. In this determination he put himself upon the way, to find the
Tree whereof the old man had told him: in which search we will leave him,
to speak of the other knight so cruelly wounded. He (as writes the Historian)
being come to himself again so soon as the Giant, could not yet arise so
readily, for he was of a more weak and soft complexion. Which Pharisor (who
had beeneah eye witness of their encountering) beholding, went to him, and
having unlaced his Helmet, saw that his visage, which naturally was fair: was
now so spent and discoulloured, as one could perceive nothing of his wunted
perfection. Heereat he began to grieve, for he was of good nature, very
pitiful and succourable to the afflicted, and seeing the knight complained
very much of his wounds, which made him now feel a dangerous and mortal
anguish: he began to comfort him so well as possibly he could. And seeing that
still his blood wasted in great aboundanc^, he despoyled himself of his shirt,
which was so whit^ as heart could wish: and having torn it in p^eces, there with
he bound up his wounds very handsomely. When the knight feeling more ease then
he did before, and that his vigor in better sort increased: he entreated to be
mounted upon his horse, which he did by the help of Pharisor, who leading
the horse by the bridle, guided him by sundry paths through the Forest,
seeking where he might find any village or house, or any one that knew how to
cure the knights wounds: with kind comfortings and other freendly speeches,
he thus conducted him along the forest, when the night being spent at their
entrance thereout, they came to a very great champion plain: when the auaunt
courrer or messenger of the day, began to s^ew his Christalline beautie^ through
his silver locks, whence soon after followed the bright splendor of the
goulden Sun. Then can they discern a far of in this desert, a smoke that
seemed to come from the Chimney of some house: which made the fair pilgrim to
guide the horse that way. But he had not gone much ground, till he saw the
Knight give a sign of falling from his horse, for he was suddenly surprised
with the trembling fit of an extreme ag^^, caused through the deadly pain of
his wounds: which being unbound for ease, let the blood again issue forth,
as thor^w pipes or gutte^s. This was no little grief to the pilgrim, who
took him from his horse in his arms, when setting him to the ground, the
knight began to swoune again: wherewith Pharisor was so troubled, as fearing
he was near his death, he laid him along on the the grass, and bound again
his wide gaping wounds. Then taking him in his arms, he got up on the
Knights horse, and so carried him before him overthwart the saddle: and having
long ridden that way as he beheld the smoke, there ensued as you shall hear
in the following chapter.

Chap. 5.
How the wounded Knight, which the fair Pilgrim conducted, was brought into
the lodging of a good and holy Hermit, where his wounds were healed, by the
prayers which the good Hermit made to God. The great miracle that happened,
likewise how the Knight was baptized and made a Christian. Whereby is
signified unto us, how God disperseth the effects of his almighty power to
such as serve him: who are oftentimes found rather in poor and simple
Cottages, and in desert places, then in the golden Palaces or wealthy
Cities. Likewise is in this Chapter remembered: that the aid and succor of
the meanest, may serve and profit the greatest personages.

PHarisor the fair Pilgrim, so long, and by so many sundry paths in the
desert, conducted (in sort as ye have read in the former Chapter) the half
dead body of the hardy and virtuous knight: that about the hour of midday
he discovered the place, whence he saw the smoke to ascend ^oorth. Thither
hasted he with all the speed he could use, hoping in that place to meet with
some one that could give remedy to the knights wounds: for very great care he
had of him, because of the bounty and valor he had discerned in him. But
drawing nearer to this long expected place, he thought his hope would be
deceived, by reason he saw it to be but a little lodging, covered with Reeds
and Rushes, in which he could not be persuaded to find what he would. This
made him half minded to change his way to some other part, yet something still
houered about his heart, that he should venture to continue on his way, and
see what might be done in this little ^lender habitation, builded in a desert
so barren, for some unlooked for body might (perhaps) abide there. Resolving
thus, he descended from the horse, and brought the knights body before the
door of the house, which having thrust open, he saw an old man, with his head
and beard as white as snow, sitting before a little pan of fire, chafing his
bloodlesse and withered veins, and reading in a book which he held upon his
knee. The good old man was somewhat astonished when he saw the pilgrim, but
much more when he beheld the Knights half dead body before his door. In like
case was Pharisor, seeing the old man's head and beard so vener able, with an
aspect of holiness much to be admired: so that albeit he was an assured hardy
knight, yet was he surprised in such sort, as he durst not open his mouth to
speak unto him, but with more great honor and reverence, yea, with more
regard, then if he had spoken to the greatest Monarch on the earth. Beside, the
historian (speaking hereof) says, that he set his knee on the threshold of
the old man's door, and spoke unto him in this manner.

Father, for that thy white head and beard, with the venerable aspect of thy
countenance, makes me conceive that thou have experience in many affairs, and
that in thee abides more good then in other men, by reason of the holiness of
life which thou leadest in this desert, far from all evil company or
conversation of the wicked, who oftentimes (by their frequenting) induce the
good to do ill, whereby they incur the wrath of God and his indignation:
where contrariwise, he regards with a cheerful eye such as do well, and
(as thou) having repented their sins, despise the manner of dissolute life,
full of voluptuous and carnal concupiscence: lead a life austere and full of
solitude, to temper and appease (by these means) the violence of inordinate
appetites and evil desires, whereby they are naturally incited, and provoked
to do badly, enclining rather to vice then to virtue. If thou have any
humanity, and art not altogether naked of sweet amity, whereby human
society is preserved: I desire thee in the name of God, to have pity and
compassion on the miserable estate of one of the most valiant and brave
Knights, that the Sun ever vouchsafed to look upon, whom thou beholdest
cruelly wounded, and ready to die here before thy door. Father, do thy best
endeavor to cure his wounds, wherewith thou see he is unnaturally injured:
and if the heavens have not so favored thee, that by human cunning thou
can give remedy: or if thou perceiuest them to be incurable, and that he
must needs presently dye: yet to the end the soul may not perish together
with the body, let him receive by thy hands the holy Sacrament of Baptism, by
the mean whereof, and the grace of God assisting, men are washed and made
clean from original sin. For he has told me, that by nation he is a
Pagane, contrary to the belief that Christians do profess: do thou then thy
duty, and God shall yield thee thy recompense in heaven. If my words may not
incite thee to this christian work: yet let the hardness of the pittious estate
wherein thou beholdest him, at the least move thee to human compassion. Thus
spoke the sayre pilgrim, whereto the good old man thus answered.

He to whom all that live and die do service and obeisance, the great Father
of the world, he that created it, and all things that inhabit therein,
commands me (pilgrim) to do what thou requirest: for it is his will that
we do good one to another, and likewise that we should render good for evil,
as well to our enemies as to our friends. And although the contrariety of his
religion from ours, might somewhat withhold me from accomplishing thy desire:
yet will I use my very uttermost endeavor for thy sake, whom I know to be a
Christian, because I am commanded from above to do so. Not that I have any
skill in the art of medicine or Chirurgerie, for I understand nothing tending
thereto, much less knowledge have I in the nature or virtue of herbs: but I
help and give remedy to the body by such means as thou shall perceive: bring
him then into my lodging, and bow thy knees in prayer to God, as thou beholdest
me to make my orisons. Pharisor obeyed the Hermits commandment, brought in the
body of the Knight, which could not move or stir more then a dead man: the
old man kneeling down by him, opening his eyes and lifting up his hands,
having three times made the sign of the Cross upon the body, and softly
uttered certain private suff^ages and Orisons, the pilgime being likewise on
his knees: with an high voice, and a heart full of devotion, he said a prayer of
this substance or effect.

The Hermits prayer.
O Mighty Son of God, Savior and redeemer of the world, whom God thy
Father vouchsafed to leave the essence of thy divinity, and to forsake thy
supreme throne, to come here on earth, taking the habit of our humanity, and
following the same, tookest human flesh and birth, in the womb of a virgin
of long time chosen and elected by thee, pure, white, and immaculate, of the
race and lineage of Iesse: to abide and endure with us the self-same troubles
and adversities, which our miserable life is subject unto: thou God almighty,
all good, and which evermore have thy ^eat full of mercy and love, wide open
to rereiue the prayers and requests, which we make to thee in our necessities,
and art always ready to do us good, receive us evermore in thy mercy. O God
of peace and concord, who being divine, immortal and most mighty, have power
to quench the thirst of the thir^^ie, the hunger of the famished, to clothe the
naked, heal all maladies, and comfort the afflicted. Thou (I say) who have not
only taken human flesh for life, subject to endure many evils and afflictions
amongst men: but also did bear upon thy divine forhead, the cruel sweat of
death, and endure the severe passion thereof, to save us from eternal death,
whereto for our sins we were condemned. Thou (O God) who only have power with
one word, or with one wink of thine eye, to arrest the strong horrible
tempests of the winds, that can trouble the earth, that roullest and calmest
the waters in the Seas, and ridest on the heavens when thou please, or
slackest as thou likest the celestial fiery lights. Thou that long since
having taken humanity amongst us, being in Samaria, had power to give health
to ten poor lepers, they believing in thee, prayed and were healed. Then a
poor man troubled with the pal^^e, and one that was sick of the dropsy by
thee were likewise cured, they being one day of the Sabbath presented before
thee: by the selfsame power and goodness, a poor crooked woman, that could
not help her self, and she that for the space of twelve years was sick with
a flux of blood: were by thee recovered to their former estate and health. The
centurions servant, that altogether grounded his hope in thee. An other Leaper,
and one that had his hand dried up, with the poor widow lamenting for the
approaching death of her Son. And Iayrus, whose daughter was even ready to die:
they all having recourse to thee, and calling for thy aid with a cheerful heart,
and firm belief of thy omnipotent power: were all by thy goodness made sound
and comforted: seeing then that thy power is always one, and asgreat at this
present as it then was, and so shall be for ever, that thou art full of the self
same mercy and goodness: I beseech thee, if ever I have said any thing that
has pleased thee, if ever I have done any thing agreeable to thy liking, if
ever I requested any thing, if ever thou tookest pleasure in this austere kind
of life, which here I lead in this desert, by the entire affection I have
toward thee, and the burning desire in me to serve and honor thee: I beseech
thee O good God, that thou would deigne in pity to regard this miserable
corpse. And if thou see, (as for certain thou see and know all things)
that thou can draw any service to thee from out of it, by suffering it to
live longer time in this world, thy mighty hand being now upon the man, and
the healing of his mortal wounds so near deaths door: give him thy grace,
that he may see and acknowledge for truth, that it is by thy grace, and from
thy hand, that he receives all things he has in this world. If not (Lord,)
but that thou will call him to thee, and that his hour is come: receive and
conduct his soul I beseech thee, into thy celestial paradise, where (for the
rest) give him what thou better know then I, is necessary for him.



Thus prayed the good Hermit, and at the same instant baptized him, in the name
of the Father, the Son, and the Holy ghost: saying and doing all that is
requisite in the holy Sacrament of Baptism, in the presence of Pharisor, who
served as his Deacon. Then suddenly descended from heaven upon the Hermits
lodge, such a clear brightness, more golden then the Sun: that the Hermit and
the Pilgrim had their eyes so dazeled therewith, as they were constrained to
lie flat with their faces on the earth, as if they would have kissed it. And
more astonned were they, then if it had mightily thundered, because they heard
a voice from heaven, uttering these words: Be whole brave knight, to the end
thou may dye for maintenance of the Christian faith, whereinto already thou
art received.

Then suddenly the bright s^lendour vanished away, when the Hermit and Phariso^
arose, and the Knight so soon as they, as sound, lusty and pleasant, as if
his body never had been wounded. Notwithstanding, he greatly merueiled to see
himself in such a place, between two men whom he knew not: he being of the
opinion, that he had been but in a sleep, and all the pain he had felt of
his wounds, was no more then a dream. Yet he remembered all that was past
before, since, and at that instant, especially Pharisors request to the Hermit,
and the prayer the Hermit made to God for him, also the bright cleerenes that
appeared, the baptism he had received, with the voice from heaven, which he
well understood: whereat being not a little abashed, he was strongly confirmed
in the christian religion, for which ever after he determined to employ all
his forces till death, contrary to the promise he made, when he departed from
the kingdom of Phez. Then being well remembered and certain of all these
things, which he had seen and understood, he humbly thanked the holy man: who
told him, that to God only he should return thanks, for his health came
from him, and no other. As for him, he but prayed, and afterward made a brief
S^rmon, wherein he examplified and declared the points of christian religion,
wherein the king of Phez took singular pleasure. This done, the good man and
Pharisor desiring him to tell them, of whence and what he was, and wherefore he
fought so manfully against him that had so cruelly wounded him: he began to
recount unto them all his adventures, in manner as you shall read hereafter.

Chap. 6.
The high deeds of arms and chivalry, done by the Knight Gerileon, how
having taken landing in a desert place, he travailed long time on foot,
before he could any where rest himself. The pleasant talk and devise his
Squire Geliaste had with him in walking, to give him pleasure and pass away
the time. In which may be discerned, how much such ought to suffer as travail
to gain honor. And by the speeches of the squire Geliaste, how ridiculous the
reasonings of the Sophists are, who by outward appearance resemble sound men,
and such as by their faces are supposed of good health: yet inwardlye are
attainted with mortal diseases. Because (at first sight) their arguments seem
to be matter of truth: but being sounded to the bottom, they are found to
be nothing else but follyes, mockeries and mere dreams.

IT is now high time, that we should remember the fortunes and adventures, of
the famous and virtuous knight Gerileon, because of him our history bears
title, and for his sake we have composed in this second Book, following the
former order you read before: the adventures of the loyal lover, of the Sophie
of Persia, and the puissant Squa^ell* By discontinuing a little in speech of
them, with repetition of them hereafter in time and place convenient: we shall
give ye to understand, that this whole discourse is builded to no other end,
then for him, and to his everlasting commendation. To this end, that the
diversity of these things, which are most agreeable to the greater part of
readers, may bring ye the more pleasure and recreation. To come then again
where we left: ye must conceive, that after he had long time sailed on the
sea, with the favor and fortune of the winds that then governed, when he had
conquered the ships of the Giant Squamell, with them that were his Pirates
and thieves, that spoiled Merchants of their goods and treasure, where he heard
tidings of his horse and arms, which he had stolen: he was in the end (by
violence of a sudden tempest) cast upon Armenia, in a place far of from the
Forest of great adventures, and which was as barren and desolate, as that
which before we deciphered unto ye, where by the prayer of the holy Hermit,
the king of Phez recovered his wounds. Being arri^ed in a port of ^lender
assurance for the safety of ships, he minded to go on land a while: till the
tempest (which raged so extremely, and made the Seas unfit for passengers)
were ceased, not for any longer abiding there.

Heerevppon, he commanded the master of the Ship to launche out a Squiffe,
whereinto he entered with his armor and his Squire: desiring the Knight, whom
he had saved from shipwreck on the Sea, as ye have heard, which was he for
whose meeting he enterprised this voyage, to tarry in the Ship for the safety
thereof, and to hinder that the Pirate which brought them against the
adventures and forces of Nabot and Squamell, should do them no more injury,
or fly away with the Ship which he had gotten from him, and so thereby
drive his journey to a further delay or lingering. The knight, who had learned
all his disseignes, the occasion of his search, and other adventures, promised
to fulfill his request: so under this promise going on shore, he was somewhat
abashed, to see a place so great and spacious, to be so desert, barren, and
comfortless, for he could not discern one Tree, where under he might take a
little repose: which he not a little desired, because he was crazie and over
much wearied, with his long continuance in the Ship on the Seas, whereto he
was not accu^^omed, and in soothe it cannot but be yrkesome and tedious, to
such as are not acquainted with that kind of travail. So finding a little
path on the port where he landed, he kept on his way, to see if wandering
further from the Sea, which was inhabitable by the sterilitie of the place: he
could find any bush or shadowed plot, where he might rest awhile and take
the fresh air. For the country of it self was naturally enflamed with
extreme heat, and the shade of the ship which he had so lately left, was
likewise hot and troublesome to him. But when he had gone about the space of a
mile, he found himself so ouercharged with his armor, which till then he
always had worn upon his body: as he was constrained through the extreme
weight be felt thereof, to disarme himself, having desire to walk longer
time, and more at his ease, until he could see some place convenient for him
to rest in. And as Geliaste his Squire was beginning to take off his armor,
perceiving that he must bear this heavy burden on foot, he thus spoke to
his master.

In sooth my Lord, this Armor does so well become ye, as no heat (me thinks)
should cause ye to disarme your self: for in mine eye, seeing you armed by
me, I see Saint Michaell the fair Acchangell, leading me with such security
into paradise: as all the devils in hell cannot get me into their hands: you
are so proper and of so goodly appearance, when you are armed, as ye cannot
meet any Lady upon the way, but presently she will become enamoured of ye. And
it is no small thing, to gain the love of fair Ladies that may be met
withal: for such a one she may be, as is not to be refused. To others likewise
you seem so redoubted, as there is not a beast in all the world, but beholding
you approaching, will (...) far enough from ye. Whereas if ye unarm your
self: I am afraid I shall be driven to try the goodness of my legs, which
were my great sorrow if any thing should so happen. It seems when you are
armed, that you were brought into this world, and fourmed an excellent m^uld
for an armo^r, or that you were borne armed, and made expressly to bear this
ornament. If God had been so gracious to me, as to have made me of such
perfection and property, as that I had been borne to wear armor: I would
never make my self naked thereof for any other clothing, notwithstanding the
greatest heat that might be, but he has not made me apt to bear such honor,
or any way to defend it. If I carry it in mine arms, and any one meet me
therewith, he will say: that I am some Iugler, so decked to make the world
laughter and pastime. And therefore (my Lord) I beseech ye credit my council,
to suffer your Armor still on your body as it is: for what know ye may
suddenly happen, and what but your armor can do ye service. As for me, these
arms will not serve me to do any thing therewith: because I know, as I have
bin a little instructed, that from my birth I should be but faint hearted and a
coward. Whereto the knight, who knew well his squire spoke these words but to
make him merry and pleasant: smyling to himself, thus answered.

My friend, I pray thee carry no such dismay in thy mind, as to vaunt whether
I am armed or unarmed: for I rather doubt this will make thee become over
courragious, whereby I may be held suspected, that I have not ^nstructed thee
as I ought to do, but rather have kept thee fasting wursse then in the time of
Lent. Therefore only do as I command thee, carry mine armor: and thou shall
see, we shall be as merry afterward, as now, and that no furious beast dare
venture to make thee try thy legs.

My Lord (quoth Geliaste) I am most constant in obeying your command, yet do
I esteem it a much better advice, that I should wear your armor on my body,
for the more easy carriage: and that you should come after me, and call me my
Lord, and I to call you my sq^ire Geliaste, yea, it is necessary you should
do whatsoever I command ye. For when you are armed, and I not, I come after
ye, I call ye my Lord, and you call me Geliaste, and which is more, I obey
and do all that ever ye bid me. And questionless, reason requires this which
I say, because there is no other difference between us: for we are both men,
and as you have been armed, so am I now at this present, done by your help
and assistance: it follows then, that you do me the self same honor, and
much more then I can do to you, when you are as I am n^w. For it is but arms
and gaye garments that honors the person, and you will not deny, but that you
are honored by your arms. See I pray ye if the strong Nabot, if his brother
Squamell, if the Sons of the old Grandowin, if the puissant king of Phez and
his brethren, if the great king of Persia, if the brave king Floridamant, of
whom is made such rumor and renown through the world. If the monstrous king
of Scithia, or any of so many other worthy personages, that gained praise and
reputation by arms: had ever w^n such honor and account, if they had not
been always armed: your self, had you ever vanquished the strong Giants,
which I feared would have eaten me, Ferclast and his brethren: if these
weapons had not been in your hands, and this armor on your body? Truly,
without these arms you had been but in bad case: and thereof ought honor be
done to arms, and to such likewise as bear them. Certainly (quoth the
knight) Geliaste my good friend, there is too much sophistry and deep sense
in thine argument, to persuade that which thou proposest. How? sophi^^rie my
Lord? said the Squire: nay rather reason enough, when I receive no sufficient
contrary answer. For there is no other difference between us, b^t that you are
oftentimes armed when I am not, and then I honor ye, when ye make no account
of me, but in doing ye service. It then ensues by like reason, that when I
am armed and you not: you should do such duty to me as I have said: In other
things we are equal and alike, as by reason I will prove unto ye, which (as
ye know) should always be held of greatest truth. For when you laugh, I
laugh likewise: when you weep, I weep also: when you go, I go: when you are
on horsseback, I am not on foot, and when you are on foot, I am not on
horsseback. If you be agreeued, so am I: if you be amorous, I am so as well as
ye, when ye eat, I eat: when you drink, I am thirst^e: when you sleep, I
snort. What will ye that I shall say for further proof? in brief, there is
no other difference between us, then as I have said. By my faith (said the
knight (who took great pleasure in hearing him thus prate like a Parret,) Thou
say true Geliaste: but tell me I pray thee, how can thou save thy self
from this answer, and not confess thy self to be v^^quished?

Thy father, thy mother, and mine: are they one self same persons? are we^ two
as great, the one as the other? thou well perceiuest we are not, for I am far
greater then thou art: we are not likewise of one teiucture, nor of hair
alike. When we dine, when we eat or drink, we ^^t not both at one table, thou
dinest and suppest at my dispense, or by my means, I never dine or sup at
thine, nor by thy help. When I combat, thou do not: I look the enemy in
the face, and stand to him, thou turnest thy back and flyest: when I am
assured, thou art fearful: and sometime when I smite, thou bear away the
blows, or take thee to thy heels, and so escapest.

Continuing these speeches, with diverse other to pass away the time, as the
Knight was highlye contented with this pleasant kind of arguing: they followed
still the path that had conducted them from the Sea, and were come now the
space of two good miles, when a far off the Knight discovered a little thicket,
which was round beset with fair Bushes: this gave him some hope, that there
he should find so^e Spring or Fountain, where be might quench his thirst,
which pained him greatly, and shadow sufficient to take the frew air, and
rest himself as he had some need. Here upon he continued his way thither ward,
and being there arrived, was glad he had found the thing he desired. For this
place was round environed with great goodlye Trees, where under was a most
pleasing shade, and in one part thereof was a most fair clear fountain, the
sourse whereof was engirt with a dainty sweet spring, the greatness whereof
contained three acres of ground. The grass was there so green and cheerful
as possible might be, and cheefely there, more then in any other part
adioining: whereat the Knight greatly meruailed, and without care of seeking
after any other particular occasion, but contenting himself with the natural
fertility of the place, proceeding from the river the only cause thereof: he
went about to behold, and mounting on a higher part of the ground, to rest
himself under a cool shaddowe, he fell a sleep, and so did Geliaste
likewise, where (for necessity sake) we will give them leave to rest a while.

Chap. 7.
How Gerileon being at rest, and sleeping in the wood near the fountain,
which he had so fortunately found: was awaked by his squire, to hear the
pleasing lamentable voice of a Lady, that did sing there hard by, which having
understood, he entreated the Lady to sing the same Song again. The talks
which the Lady had with him, during which time, there came upon them an
horrible cruel monster, called the savage Polippe, wherewith Gerileon began a
fierce and dangerous fight. From whence may be gathered, that there where man
does purpose to be safe and at quiet, sleeping long time in delight and
voluptuousnes: there sin (which is a savage monster, and which changes and
enchaunteth it self into diverse form, yet all most dangerous) comes and
assayleth him so fi^rcely, as he has work enough to defend him self. But if
he can overcome him, then is he greatly to be commended, and merits wonderful
renown and reputation.

THe good and virtuous knight Gerileon remained a sleep, according as you
heard in the end of the former chapter, about the space of two hours: but
Geliaste could not sleep so long, because in his slumber he dreamed that he
heard a sweet hermonie, wherein his thoughts took very great pleasure. So that
when he awaked, he plainlye heard what he dreamed on, no imagination, but a
very perfect voice singing a song. He heard a femenine voice, very sweet and
mellodious, which sang with pleasure to the ear, yet pitifully in regard of
her cause, a song in the Spanish language, the substance whereof hereafter
follows. Nor was there any human heart that heard it: but as it would have
been highly pleased, so could it not choose but compassion would have moved
it. The Song was thus.

The Ladies Song while Gerileon slept.
Blind, cruel bowe-man love,
that with enuenomde dart:
Outragiously enflamest my breast,
and murdrest my poor heart.
Alas, what would thou more?
thou make me lingering stay:
And wilt not send Phinander home,
whom all my thoughts obey.
The promisde day is come,
when fair Ozyris said:
My long distress should have an end
and all my greefes allayd.
Yet am I still detaynde,
within this cruel prison:
Of fierce inhumaine Polyppe,
who keeps ^e against all reason.
Already six times together had the voice sung this song, ere the Squire would
arise to awake his master, who as yet had heard nothing: but the seventh
time, as the song was half finished, or at this place where we have paused, he
well understanding both the words and sense: arose, and awaked the knight that
slept, saying. My Lord, I pray ye take your armor, for I imagine you shall
find some adventure here, that will incite ye to the combat. As for me, I
shall not, because I have bound your armor so long, as I am wearyed therewith.
I pray ye this once stand in my defense, and fight for me and in my place:
because I find my self so spent with choler, by reason of the grief I
conceive at the Ladies song which ye hear, that if I should lay hand to my
weapon in this rage and agony: I am afraid I should kill my self, which I
should be very sorry to do, not so much for the love of my self, but because
if such inconvenience should happen: you should be left all alone, and so have
no body to carrye your armor. Well Geliaste (quoth Gerileon) thou have reason
to be so careful of me, and I take it in very good part: but what Song is that
thou tellest me of? and wherefore have thou awaked me? Listen a little my Lord,
quoth the Squire, and you shall hear what it is. Then the Knight heard the
same voice which his Squire had done, continuing the Song in this manner.

But causeless blame I thee,
fair love that stayest my bliss:
Because Phynander feels like fire,
as in my bosom is.
But cruel, unkind fate,
that holds me servile so:
Infortunat^ Orphyza, when
will time abridge thy woe?
Seven years adventures spent,
as bird and beast from me:
Is it not time then now at length,
my brave knight I should see?
The hardy Champion for my sake,
in dream I did discern:
Fighting in fire with Polyppe,
my liberty to yearne.
The knight hearing in a place so far from the company of men, and withal
(...) desert and barren, a human voice singing with such sweetness and
mellodie, as the best singing birds might ^ease their notes to listen, and the
harp of Orpheus had been but rude to the ears of such, as first had heard
the heavenly hermonie of this song, was no less drouen into admiration, then
overcome with pleasure in the hearing. But when the squire told him, that in
the beginning of the song mention was made of the nymph Oziris, he was suddenly
provoked with an extreme desire, to know on what occasion the Lady song, and
who conducted her into that place. So putting on his armor, except his helmet,
which he left as yet in the hand of the squire, ^rauersing among the highest
trees, he went straight to the place, where he heard the voice, and there he
found a great deep dungeon, which was round about environed with trees,
wherevnder he had before seated himself, there he beh^ld a huge hole into the
earth, the mouth whereof des^ended down into the dungeon, where he saw a
Lady that sometime had been of exquisite beauty, as yet the feature of her
countenance discovered: but the long languishing solitude, which as it seemed,
she had no little while endured, had so extenuated and chafed away her
perfection, as she seemed nothing in beauty to her former estate, Besides, her
garments, that whilome gave her some form, being now old, rent, and ^^rne,
made her seem less beautiful than indeed she was, notwithstanding men of
judgment may easily conceive, that were she reduced to her wonted plight, she
would appear more excellent than ever she did. The knight beholding her, began
to reason and talk with her, as thus. Fair Lady, (quoth he) I wish that once
more for my sake you would sing the song, which not long since ye did, for you
have a voice so sweet and agreeable, that in hearing ye, I conceined
exceeding great pleasure. Or if you think me not of such desert, yet at the
least do me the favor to sing it again, for the love of Phynander, him whom
you have so great desire to see. The Lady was somewhat abashed when she
heard the knight speak, especially when she beheld his wonderful beauty:
then came to her memory, that this was he she had so many times seen in her
sleep, combatting against the cruel savage Polyppe, and of whom she had heard
the fair Ozyris speak: whereupon she changed suddenly into a vermillion
color, like a fragrant gilleflour, when with a trembling voice she thus
answered the knight.

If thou art not he that must be the cause of my deliverance. I pray thee
friendly knight, for the youth and beauty which I behold in thee, and whereof
I have very great compassion, stay not here to listen my singing. For it may
so fall out, that if once more thou give ear to my song, thou will receive
more displeasure, than therein thou tookest delight and contentment. But
without further expense of time in questioning wherefore, I pray thee (whilst
it is yet permitted thee) to be gone speedily, and with the greatest diligence
thou can possibly use, out of this place, assuring thy self, that I would
not refuse to grant thy request, as well (...) the virtue as the beauty which
I conceive to be in thee, (...) also for the love of him in whose name thou
do require the same. For thou must know for certain, that if while I sing,
the savage Polyppe ariue here, he will kill thee though thou had an hundred
lives. Therefore I counsel thee as thou love thy life, to get thee gone from
hence as soon as thou can.

I never feared (quoth the knight) the thing I never saw, nor whereof I ever
heard any speech, therefore you labor in vain in persuading me to flight, I
rather imagine that you use these words, to excuse your self in the request I
made unto you.

The Lady would have spoken something more to him, but suddenly came a swift
foul whistling with her wings, and flying hard by where the knight stood,
pearched her self in one of the highest trees about the dungeon. At the
hearing whereof the Lady was so overcome with passion and fear, that her
tongue stood as fast bound in her mouth, in such sort, that she (not having
the power to speak any one word) was constrained to withdraw her self
farther into the den, tourning her back toward the knight. Upon this
accident Gerileon heard a great and fearful voice, which without customable
order, made a marvelous noise, like unto the bellowing of a Bull, when he is
strayed from the troop of kine that he conducteth. Then presently among the
bushes entered the cruel and fierce savage, carrying a dead beef upon his
shoulder, and in one hand he held two other dead beefes, intending with this
provision to make his supper. The aspect and form of him, at the first sight,
made the knight somewhat dismayed, for he was covered all the body and face
with long shagge hair, as black as a coal, and no manner of white appeared
about him but his teeth. The eyes in his head were like fire, he was of a
Giants stature, and right before his navel he had the head of a dragon, very
hideous and ugly, with a great mouth, whereout appeared two mighty long
hooked teeth, sharply pointed, and very dangerous. On his neck he bare a
great staff, made in the form of a mase, wherewith he was wont to take and
kill both men and beasts of all sorts. So soon as he espied the knight, he
presently laid down his load, and taking his (...) staff from his shoulder,
began to lay at the knight: who seeing the unaccustomed fury of the
monster, quickly caught his helmet from his squire Geliaste, which when his
master had, he ran to hide himself in the hole where he had seen the
Lady. The Savage leaping to the dungeon, which was as large as it was high,
first smote at the knights head with the staff, from which to shield
himself, he turued with such dexterity and lightness, as he was not auie
^^te hurt thereby. Which the monster perceining, redoubled another blow on the
other side so violently, as the knights shield was thereby very much bruised,
and his arm^ stonnied greatly with the stroke. Notwithstanding, he stood
firmly against him, and entered into such coler against the monster, that his
face and body became all red, and his eyes ^parkled as fire, so that the
savage who never before feared any man, and imagined that this was but a sign
of fear in him, suddenly thought that he beheld the knights lady environed
in a flame of fire, that seemed (as it were) to issue out of him.

This happened not to him of himself, but by the succor and aid of his nurse
Oziris, who made him appear in this fearful resemblance, thereby to weaken
the vntonquetable strength of the savage, against whom the knight so abuanced
himself, with his broad brandishing sword in his hand, and reached in fury
such a stroke at him, that had it met with the head of the monster, as it
(...) with his staff, which was as great as the most of a ship, he had (...)
it in two parts.

But the vn^^nted savage, having quickly adua^ced his staff before, was not
hurt by the stroke, only his staff was near cut in sunder, although it was
very hard wood, and beset round about with knagges and knottes, which lifting
up again, he (...) so rigorously upon the knights helmet, as it was broken
through the midst, Gerileon likewise being so a^^^nied, as he knew not
whether it was day or night, and staggering therewith, he was ready to fall
to the earth, yet he fell not, but recovering fresh courage, smote with his
sword to cut off the monsters head, who espying the blow coming, ran
fiercely upon him, and grasping him about the body, strove to overthrow him,
or by his fast hold to strangle him. Then forcing him to the Dragons head,
which naturally was fixed right against his navel, most cruelly he bit him by
the upper part of his thighs, his armor for that part not auailing him, but
the two crooked teeth entered quite through. The knight fel^e very great
pain hereby, and entered into such exceeding fury, when by strong wrestling he
had gotten forth of the monsters arms and withdrawing himself three or four
paces back, he smote five or six terrible blows at his body, all thick
together, not one ^arrying for another. With one of them he cut off his arm,
albeit it was covered with rough and hard hair, which was of great defense
for his body, but that the knights strength was marvelous and incomparable.
By the other blows the savage received five great wounds, as well on his head,
as on other parts of his body, which injured him more then the loss of his
arm, because in stead thereof immediately sprang forth of the same place a
Lions clawe of marvelous greatness, so that he felt no defect of the other
loss: but the pain of his other wounds made him ^rie and roar so horribly,
that the knight saved from shipwreck, and the mariners in the ship at the
sea side, not knowing what it was trembled with fear, some of them swouning
and falling into trances, especially when by this ^oise they beheld the sea
moved with so great a tempest, as the cables that held the anchors were almost
broken in the midst, and Gerilcon himself being amazed, yet not that he
minded to give over the fight, though immediately he felt himself caught by the
shoulders with the Lions clawe, so ^ately risen upon the Polyppe, as therewith
he was very grievously wounded, even to the loss of very much blood. But
being (by meruailo^^ force and vinacitie) gotten once more out of the monsters
hold, he doubled many strokes upon him, slicing the hair and skin away by
great gobbets, notwithstanding the extreme hardness thereof. And the savage
defended himself courageously, wounding and offending with his clawe and teeth
the virtuous nurse child of the fair Ozyris: who in this manner combatted all
the rest of the day, until such time as the night being come, the savage
having lost great store of his blood, and with the loss thereof feeling great
weakening of his forces, changed himself from his first form, into the shape
of a huge marvelous roaring lion, which so soon as he had given the knight
to behold, he fled into the obscure cave, where the Lady and Geliaste were
hidden, whereby Gerileon remained very greatly perplexed.

CHAP. 8.
How Gerileon being in great trouble, and feeli^g mortal pain of the wounds
which he had in combat against the Savage Polyppe, was succored by the Nymph
Olympia: of the talk likewise they had together. And how afterward he
fought again with the same monster, he being in the shape of a Lion, and
being vanguished by him the second time, was constrained to hide himself
again. Whereout may be gathered, that a virtuous man feeling himself injured
and wounded by sin, being in great grief and displeasure with himself, is
evermore succored by the good Angel that comforts him, so that by such good
and speedy remedies, which gives him courage to resist it manfully* he
proceed until he have altogether vanquished and chased it away. By the
diverse mutation of the monster into the form of cruel beasts, is signified
nothing else but sin, what sundry shapes so ever it receives, yet it is
always cruel, only to try the consciences of such good men as itassaileth.

WHen Gerileon saw that the savage had changed his shape, and was departed
from the combat, he knew that he should have somewhat to do to vanquish
him: and withal he considered, that if he could escape this unexpected
danger, he should deserve praise and reputation for ever, which was the
greatest guerdon and ^^compence, that all his aduenturous (...) aimed at, for
which he not at all dreaded the hazard of his life. There upon he determined
to abide in that place, yet not in the cave or dungeon, but above under the
trees, where he had rested himself the day before, attending when the Polyppe
should come forth again in his new received form, to finish the combat he had
begun: yet he not knowing the original or behavior of the monster, nor for
what cause he abode in that place: but in this determination he went from the
cave and laid him down to rest for that night, until the clear light of a
new day should show it self to the world. But it was not possible for him to
take any rest having (as one says) three tinglinges in his ear that hinde^ed
him. The principal whereof was, the continual thoughts, whereby he was
ravished in contemplation of his Mistress. The second was his fear of his
squire, least he was slain or outraged by the monster: for he loved him so
dearly, as he could not sleep, unless he were assured that his Squire was as
well as himself, such was the care he had of him. The third, which was no
less hurtful to his body, then these other twain were to his mind: was the
great pain he felt in his thighs and shoulders, by the teeth and claws of
the monster, by means whereof all his body became enflamed, by reason of the
venim wherewith the nails and teeth of the Savage was infected. Hereby he
became meruailouslie spent and ouercharged, and even ready to fall into a
mortal fever: when suddenly he being in this pain, heard the water (which as
I told ye before environed the dungeon) to move with a great murmr, as if
some one had bathed himself therein. Heerevpon he presently lifted up
himself, as it were to know the cause thereof, when he beheld come forth of
the river the fair Nimphe Olympia, chamber maid to the Fayrie Ozyris. She
having oftentimes seen him, was fresh in memory, and known immediately: when
suddenly running to him, embrasing him louiugly, she entered into these speeches.

My sweet friend, within these two hours am I come hither, guided by the
channels of underground, from whence these waters ascend to this place: even
from the Palace of the Nymphe Ozyris thy Nursse, whom I serve and reverence,
she loving thee extremely, as well thou know. Hither am I come from her to
preserve thee, and to tell thee withal, that if thou suffer me not to embalme
the wounds on thy body with this precious unguent, which she expressly
commanded me to bring in this golden bottel thou beholdest in my hand: thou
art in very great danger of thy life, so that thou can hardly escape the
death, if thou continue in this estate but till to morrow morning. Therefore
disdain not to discover where thy wounds are, that I may put in execution the
command of my lady, whereto I dare in no wise be disobedient. I may not (quoth
he) fair Olympia, and my friend, refuse the succor of my most dear Oziris,
nor of thyselfe likewise, for albeit the necessity wherein I now am did not
incite me to take it, yet the obeisance which I owe both to the one and the
other of ye, marie more great to the mistres than to the servant, commands me
to obey all that you can command in a knight. So saying, he discovered his
wounds to the Nimphe, who applied to them the precious ointments in the golden
bottell: which was no sooner spread upon them, but presently he felt no pain
at all, and became immediately as whole and sound, as if he never had been
wounded. Hereof was he not a little joyful, when imbrasing, colling and
kissing the Nimphe more then a thousand times, who was in part the cause of so
great good to him: he often enquired of the health of her Lady, and the rest of
the company, and cheefely if she had received any charge from her, to tell him
what issue the combat should have which he had begun, whether he should be the
conqueror, or himself he brought under and vanquished. Enquire not at all
gentle knight (answered the nimphe) what shall happen to thee, either in this
combat, or any other enterprises, wherein thou art to hazard thy life: for it
is not lawful that mortal creatures should know things to come. Only be thou
of good courage, and take no grief of the multitude of travails, which thou
must proceed in. Let it suffice that I say to thee in general, howbeit I need
not specify so much before hand to thee: that thou art destined to undertake
and finish before thou die many hautie enterprises. And of all them to behold
the end, it behooves thee to endure much to expose thy self to a thousand
thousand dangers and perilous hazards: especially before thou can know who is
thy father, or may behold the place of thy birth, or what thy cheifest desire
is to see: as often times I have heard the great princess of the Fayries, the
high and mighty Ozyris my mistres say, to whom it is necessary that I quickly
return, because she so commanded me. Therefore I say God be with thee, to
whom I recommend thee, desiring him to guarde and preserve thee from all
mortal dangers. Having so said, she kiss the Knight, and then vanished
suddenly before him, he not seeing her, till she came near the Fountain,
where he beheld her plange her golden tresses into the silver waters, whereinto
likewise she diued her whole body, being for this time seen no more,
notwithstanding the manifold entreaties for return that the knight made:
whereby he continued all the night so displeased, that he could entertain no
thought of rest, but when the vermillion blush of day break began to show his
red locks, and disperse his splendor over the earth: he put on his Armor
again, and wen^ before the Cave, to attend the Polyppes coming to the
combat, whereout if he would show himself this day: yet he intended to
speak with the Lady he saw the day before, to enquire of her the cause of this
adventure, as also for his Squire, for whose loss (which he imagined
unrecoverable) he remained full of grief and sorrow. Long had he not stayed
there, before the Polyppe came forth, in the shape he had taken the night
before, which was like a mighty huge Lion, fierce, ravenous, and very fearful
to behold, far differing from the natural beasts of the same kind, which
ordinarily are not so great, hideous, and monstrous in view: which had
terrified the Knight with fear, but that he remembered the last words of the
Nymphe Olympia, and as they began to quicken his memory, so they made him
become more hardy, fierce and terrible, then the Lion himself, who coming
^ha^ing forth of his den to run upon him, seeing him stand with such resolved
hardiness: minded once to return again into his Cave. But the fire of his
rage was so violent, for loosing the combat the day before, as his heat could
contey^e no government, but that in all fury he would fly upon him: and
snatching at him, strove to tear away his shield that hung about his neck, and
with such vigor did he catch hold thereon, as he brake the arm braces of
strong brass, and the buckles of steel wherewith it was fastened, in doing
whereof, he well near had overthrown him in the place: had not the worthy
knight (more brave then the Lion himself) reached such a blow at his head, as
but it was quickly defended, he had been cleft therewith to the shoulders.
But the sturdie beast, who the day before had made proof of such like weighty
strokes: let go his hold, to make a step backward from the blow. Even as a
mallicious enraged dog, seeing a waff^ing man with an iron piked staff,
passing before a door in a village where he lay sleeping, without any noise or
barking, runs suddenly upon him, tearing with his teeth the flesh from one
of his legs, wherewith the man being agreeued, turns the iron point of his
staff to strike and kill him, which the dog fearing, gives back and turning
again upon the man, enforces himself to run again upon him, to get a
greater morsel from him: and he still standing upon his guarde, threatnes the
iron point more dangerously to the teeth of the Mastie, who perseuering still
in his rage, constraines forth himself still to give him more wounds, yet
being constrained to fly, no less chafed then he was at the first, returns
vanquished into his kennell: and the man ouertrauailed in this strife, feeling
and seeing himself wounded and bleeding, to rest himself, is likewise
enforced to go lay him down in an other place. In like sort, this fy^rce and
inhumaine monster, having left his first hold, fearing to be smitten with the
brandished sword the knight held in his hand, with the point whereof he
menaced fatal death: keeping himself of the whole length of the sword,
turned again, watching where he might fasten his renting paws and enuenomed
teeth, without enda^gering himself: but the weapon being so near him, either
to loppe off a leg, or else to slice his head from his shoulders, as he
perceived how well the knight could handle his sword: yet raising himself
into rage and choler more then before, presses on himself nearer and nearer,
to throw a violent blow on the brave warrior, which (notwithstanding all his
subtlety) could not hurt him. For he beheld the weapon aloft, wherewith the
knight verily thought to spoil the Savage: but the blow missing the aimed
intent, falling to the earth, entered more then half the length of the sword
thereinto, which he being unable presently to recover, was left destitute
again. On which advantage, the cruel beast got opportunity to close again
with him, and getting hold about the midst of his body, he held him so
strongly with his dangerous claws, as with wonderful force they pierced
through the mayle of his haubergeon and his armor, even to the tearing of his
flesh: whereby he felt such exceeding anguish, as he was ready to sinck down,
for the black blood came forth in four or five places, where the claws were
entered even to the entrails: which the knight too well feeling and perceiving,
considered, that if he applied not his very uttermost deuoir^, quickly to
recover himself out of this hold, and lost any jot of courage in this
extreme need, the loss of life likewise would immediately follow.

Heerevpon, he smote five or six strokes with the pommell of his sword on the
Lions head, for otherwise he could not reach at him: and with such wonderful
puissance were these blows delivered, as he brake the scull of his head, and
made his two most hurtful teeth fall out of his mouth, the blood likewise
gushing forth in great abundance. When the Lion felt himself so grievously
wounded, fearing least woorsse should befall him: endeavored all he could to
avoid taking and getting far off from the knight, forbear to turn again as
he did ere be came to those assaults: whereby Gerileon felt himself much
eased, for the beast pressed him in such fort, as he was well near sweltred
and out of breath. Thus continuing still the combat in extremetie of fury,
the rest of the day was spent, when the Lion at one stroke thinking to finish
the combat: let drive a very dangerous blow at the knight, who foreseeing his
mallicious rage, carefully regarded least, he should abide any more gripes,
and therewithal delivered him such a stroke on the crest: as he was compelled
to stagger backward, yet not to give over the fight, when lifting up one of his
paws, he thought therewith to rent away the knights helmet: which Gerileon
perceiving, prevented him with such a sound salutation, as made him fall to the
ground very weightily: then redoubling an other courageous stroke upon his
head, cleft it in the midst, the one half whereof (with the right cheek and
brains) fell to the earth. At this instant the Lion changed his shape again
into the likeness of a Bear, that half breathless and ouerspent with
travail, fled into the Cave again, and there hid himself.

The knight well contented to pause a while, went from the Den, and returned to
the place where he might rest all night, and there fynding the Golden bottell,
wherein the Nimphe Olympia brought the precious unguents, and healed such
wounds as he received the day before: he took and opened it, and applying
the same again to his hurts: in less then half an hour they were soundly
healed. So feeling no anguish or pain at all, save only that his body was
wearied very much: being ouercharged with sleep, he laid him down and closed
his eyes, where two whole hours he took quiet rest, and there will we leave
him, to finish this Chapter.

CHAP. 9.
How the cruel Polyppe came again the third time to assail the Knight, who
was greatly agrieued that the Polyppe waked before him in the morning, How
afterward he entered combat with him again, having vowed not to rest or
sleep, till he had utterly vanquished and put him to death. What was the end
of their combat, and what perplexity (after the fight finished) the noble
Gerileon remained in. From which things may be gathered, what labor a good and
virtuous man endures to conquer sin, when he beholds the frailty of his
own nature, that would make him sleep in fair resolutions and deliberations,
thereby to cause him loose the victory which was before promised him. Then
what trouble and busye care he has to overcome such a horrible monster, that
is provided with sundry sorts of force and defense, to violence the most
courageous and hardiest that shall withstand him. Afterward is shown what
strength and efficacy is in the oath of well minded man, and that it ought not
to be broken for any accident whatsoever that may happen.

I Told ye before, when the Polyppe first came to the cave, and when first he
me^ with our invincible knight, that a foul^ fluttered thither somewhat before,
or even in the same instant was there pearched upon a tree, from whence as yet
(...) not removed, but both while the comba^ endured and afterward, still she
sat upon one branch of the tree, to behold all that should pass between
the two combattants, desirous in her self that the fight should soon be
ended, and that the knight should be the conqueror, for causes wherewith ye
shall be better acquainted hereafter.

Now about two hours after the Knight had begun to sleep, the Polyppe (more
furious in his new shape of a bear then before) came forth of his dark den,
where he reposed himself awhile, now to finish the combat so long since
begun: determining to die himself, or else utterly to exterminate the knights
days, for whom he fought very seriously, both within the Cave and every where
without. The Bird beholding all this, and fearing least the monster should meet
with the knight, he would kill him in his sleep, as he certainly intended:
flew right down where Gerileon slept, and with her be^ake and wings so smote
at him, that he awaked, and rising up took his Helmet, looking every where
about him, to see who had so rudely waked him from sleep. But no where could
he perceive the dooer of this deed, only he heard the Polyppe turmoiling and
rauing on each side, seeking where he was, yet could not find him, braying
with a very hideous and fearful noise: whereby he coniectured, that he was
waked by some other then human providence, to end the combat begun, and now
perceiving he had slept over long, he began to chide himself in this manner.
Unhappie that I am, to sleep so long in this place, where I rather ought
continually to have had mine eyes waking, considering the enterprise I have
taken in hand, whereof now (it may be) I shall never see the end. Am I not most
indiscreet and badly advised, to have so little care of my self, as he^re to
sleep soundly, without dreading the danger and hazard of death, where I have
opposed both my life and honor, for safety of which I ought to watch
continually? Certainly I con^esse, and very well I know it, that I little
deserve to make profession of arms, to and such doubtful and perilous
attempts, as daily I endeavor my self to meet withal: seeing having now found
them, I make so slender account of them: as I adventured to sleep, when
honorable deuoire bids me wake and do my duty. High time then is it for me, by
marvelous diligence, and chivalry, such as beseems a man of virtue and
account, to amend this fault: whereon I swear, that I will never sleep or
take any rest, till I have slain this mutable and inconstant monster, that
disguiseth and changes himself into so many shapes, to deceive and deprive me
of life by an over long lingering combat. Having thus spoken to himself, he
lightly stepped aloft to the large den, wherein was the loathsome kennell of the
savage, whom he found in such manner and form as already I have told ye: to
wit, in the likeness of a Bear, exceeding marvelous in greatness to behold,
yea, more then I dare report unto ye. For in his head, in steed of two eyes,
you would have ^ayd were two burning torches, and you would have imagined when
he opened his mouth, that there ye beheld fire and flaming brands, when his
teeth showed like glowing red fire hooks, and were of such greatness withal,
as he could not contain them within his mouth, but were seen out on each side
the length of more then half a foot. All his body was covered over with very
long hair, unlike such as other bears have, his claws were great and sharp,
and his skin was of such proof, as it could not be pierced through to the
flesh, as the knight well perceived at the very first stroke, which he
delivered at him so soon as he came to the Cave, and with such force did it
fall upon his shoulder, as the sword having sliced away a great quantity of
the hard harsh hair: he might see it fall on the ground, but no hurt at all
was done to the flesh. For the weapon grated upon the skin, as the noise of a
file upon hard metal, when it breaks through the place where it enters:
notwithstanding, the monster felt some pain hereby, for he was no sooner
smitten, but he braied aloud so horribly, as he was heard more then ten miles
from the place. This could not withhold him from running on the knight, against
whom he so bestirred himself, as he fastened his two feet about his neck so
rudely: as the knight had no mean to hurt him, or defend himself. Then with
his teeth he would have bitten him by the throat, in which place if he had
wounded him, he had bin dead though he had an hundred lives. But the knight
foreseeing the danger well enough, got the sheeld from his shoulder right
before him, where against the monster could not any jot prevail, because he
could fasten no hold thereon, so the knight stood wholly covered therewith. Now
strive they to throw one another down, when Gerileons strength against the
Polyppe was to small purpose, such was his wonderful and unmeasurable power:
on the contrary, the monster so roughly shook the knight, as if he had not had
more agilitie and skill, then force, at the very first offer he had bin cast:
but he used such nimblenes and sleights, in succouring that part where he was
most in danger, and containing himself still firmly on his feet: as the
beast thus contended with him more then an hour, and yet could get no other
advantage. In the end having incessantly tormented himself in this manner so
long time, he (for all this) made him measure his length on the earth, even as
the mighty huge Pine tree, long labored with the forcible strokes and cuts of
the Carpenters axe is in the end compelled to fall, and with his fall, leaves
the mark of his goodly branches imprinted on the ground where he lies, by the
noi^e whereof all the beasts in the forest where it is hewn down, stand quaking
and trembling with fear. Even so the valourous knight, making a fearful
thundering with his armor, fell so weightily on the earth, as the mark of his
arms, his helmet, braces, and print of his shoulders, remained engraven on the
ground, he being also sore astonished with the fall. The beast that wonderfully
labored for this advantage, unable to contain himself on his legs, fell also
upon him very fiercely: yet the knight was not so lost in his senses, but that
he took special guarde, how thus lying on his back, he might bestow some
hurtful wound upon the monster, and thrusting fiercely at the arms and legs
of the beast, he made him glad to leap from him hastily, in which leap taking
unadvised heed, he fell with such weight upon his own head, as he became in a
trance with the fall. This gave the knight liberty to recover footing again
when aduauncing himself to this savage disguised Bear, he gave him so many
strokes with the sharp keen edge of his sword: that a great part of his body
seemed to be shorn in like sort, as when a citizen is barbed or polled by a
young apprentise Barber, unskillful in his occupation, his head appeared
circled, notcht, and very evil fauouredly handled: but when he saw no little
gutter of blood was drawn from him he grew into exceeding choler, when
presently he beheld the beast come upon him with wide open mouth, to get hold
of him by some mortal morsel: for since the rec^iuing of this new shape, he
had not yet received any great harm, which made him run likewise at the
monster with the sword point and seeking to pierce it in at his mouth, by
entering further into his body or head, devised how to take away his life from
him: but herein he was deceived, for the monster feeling the sharp weapon in
his mouth, held it with his teeth more hard then the steel it self, in such
sort, that if the knight who (fearing what might ensue) had not quickly
xecouered it thence, he had broken it in many pieces. But he rather intended to
suffer the monster to take hold on him again, then to lose his weapon and be a
naked man, whereof if once he were deprived, he then knew that he could not
escape with life. The beast having thus fast seized on him, wounded him with
his teeth so cruelly on the right arm, as he well pierced quite through: whereby
the knight felt such pain, as if his arm had bin pierced with hot yrons, such
was the venim of the monsters teeth: this anguish provoking Gerileon to anger,
made him thrust violently with his sword at the belly of y^ bear, but it was
as hard as the rest on his body, notwithstanding he still labored that place
with thrust upon thrust, till he had the skin there so soft and tender, as
at last the sword passed in a great way. Now began the savage to be so mad
and fierce, as snatching at the sword which was in his belly with his teeth,
brake it in the midst and then getting forth of the knights power, took his
former shape of the savage again, and ran to hide himself in his den, as
before he was wont to do, when he thought himself to be deprived of life,
leaving nothing in the knights hand with the piece of his sword, the breaking
whereof did not a little grieve him. Nevertheless being so courageous and
magnanimious as possible a man could be, he cheered by his spirits, hoping
that night (which already was come upon him) to imagine some mean whereby he
might victoriously escape the danger, for otherwise he had no care of saving
his life, unless he might have thence with him the honor of conquering the
monster, And such confidence had he in his volour to perform this, as all
fearful doubts were now utterly abandoned, and so he went from the cave, to
the place where he was accustomed to take his rest the nights before: where
being set down, he opened himself to view such wounds as he had received in
this last conflict, and applied to them the precious ointments that were
brought him by the Nymph Olympia, whereof there was now remained very little
in the golden bottell, which made him th^s resolve, no more to hazard the
combat without death or victory, because he well perceived, that to return
wounded from the fight, was but to bring the dart of death with him, being
without hope of help, in that he received no wound on his body but it was
mortal, and which (without the unguents sent him by Oziris) had presently been
his death. Being in this determination ready to lie down on the green grass,
which was embrodered with many beautiful flowers, he remembered that before he
entered the last battle with the monster, he had sworn not to sleep or take
any rest until he had put the savage to death, or else himself to die in
the trial, and so far herein he considered with himself, as thus he began
to parle with himself. Thou have vowed not to sleep or receive any jot of
rest, until thou have slain this monstrous Polyppe, or thine own life to
perish in aduenturing the combat. But unhappy man thou can not do it, and
thy vow so carelessly made in choler, ought not so constrain thee but that
(necessity so requiring) thou repose thy self, in regard of such danger as
hereafter may ensu^: which being other then thou art able to conjecture of,
thou may lawfully excuse thy self, and by good reason take thy rest,
without standing on thine oath, thou abide in any offense of conscience. For
it is said, that a thing spoken in choler and unadvisedly, remains without
effect: because till the humor be past, he has no perseverance to know what
he said. In like sort if I bind my self by oath to do a thing impossible for
humane power, mine oath yields it self as vain and unprofitable, because of
the uncertainty of future events and successiue affairs: in which case to be
quit of mine oath, it ought not suffice that I have done my endeavor, and all
possible I could to do what I have vowed, albeit for the great difficulty
of the thing sworn, I far differed from compassing it in such sort as I
took mine oath. But how now? quoth he suddenly, why seek I reasons to
excuse a matter sworn, where there is none to be admitted? I have vowed to
God, then can it not be that mine oath is vain: for breaking of such an oath,
is a thing that very weightyly charge the conscience, and God is the only
punisher of so great and grievous an offense. For before I swore, I might very
heedfullie and advisedly regard what I do, and the fault committed by folliie
is as punishable as that done by advise, in that all faults are committed
willingly and by knowledge: in that God has given reason to man, to take heed
that he in no wise offend, so that a man not v^^ng reason in the beginning of
his actions, wroght his own knowledge. Moreover. I have sworn voluntarily,
without the compulsion of any one to cause me swear, seeing then I began
thus willingly, it follows of necessity that I keep mine oath inviolable,
without any breach whatsoever hereafter. Nor ought I seek any cauils whereby
to excuse my self, for none at all is to be allowed, in that a man of virtue
making profession of honor and arms, ought to keep his vowed faith, with all
other matters belonging to his oath, even so dearly as his proper life: less
then which we ought not to esteem our conscience and our honor, both which
in me I should account greatly injured, if I should not die rather (a thing
not impossible) or vanquish and put to death this monster before I sleep,
accordings as I have vowed: it behooues me then not to sleep till I have done
the deed.

Reasoning thus a long time within himself, he began to think how in the
mean while he should wear the time away, and thinking (...) go to the first
place of rest, to seek the sword of his squier and companion, he changed
quickly that mind, in that the savage might begin i^ the mean space: beside,
he was uncertain whether the Ships stai^ed all this while at the place where
he left them, and if they were gone, what then might ensue to frustrate their
hope. Nor was ^ee certain likewise, in so dark a night to find the way that
brought him thither, so straying he knew not whether, it would be long ere he
returned again* and so should loose the commodity of gaining so great fame, as
was the victory to come of this monstrous savage, and which most of all
grieved him, he had no reason to forsake Geliaste his faithful squier. Then
comparing these reasons with others, he thought it overmuch boldness to stay
there, ^hinking with hands and nails so soft and tender, to combat ^ith a beast
so cruel, and weeing to do that without his sword which when it was whole and
sharp he could not compass. Then came another opinion into his head, to lay a
great deal of wood on the mouth of the cave, and putting fire there to, so
smoother the savage therein. But seeing he wanted fire, and yet if he had it,
by this means the Lady should likewise die that he heard sing so sweetly:
he forsook that conceit, imagining a new devise, that the den of the Sa^age
had many nookes and corners in it, where happily Gel^ste and the lady were, in
some place not known to the Polyppe. For heretofore he had seen the caves of
underground belonging to the Giants Ferclaste and his brethren, and therefore
he intended to cut with his sword great branches of trees near adjoining,
and therewith to stopp the mouth of the cave, that the monster should receive
no breathing in, but so should die stifeled. So thinking this last
determination to be the best, he suddenly arose to perform his intent. What
happe^ed to him you may read in this discourse following.

CHAP. 8.
How Gerileon resolved to try again the combat against the Savage Polyppe,
for the vanquishing of whom (after he had devoutly prayed unto God) he
determined to get a great staff, and to fashion it in form agreeable for the
combat: wherewith (after a hard and dangerous conflict) he killed the
monster, for which he rendered thanks to God. And how afterward the Lady
Orphyza and the young Gentleman Phynandermet and ioyed together, thanking
Gerileon for their deliverance, and of the conference they had together. Whence
may be gathered, that a man loving and fearing God, putting all his confidenc^
in him: is in the end so inspired, that being assisted with his grace, he
vanquisheth sin, wherewith he has long time been assaulted and tormented.
From which such as receive any fruit, taking it well in worth, and thanking
him with humility: they attain more contentment thereby, then if they had
gained all the treasure and riches in the world.

GErileon being thus determined, to give an end to his last resolution,
remembered that when be parted from the statelye Fayrie Ozyris, above all
things she recommended to him the love and fear of God, saying to him: that if
he had recourse to him in his adversities, and with a good and cheerful
courage, did implore his assistance: he would never fail him, but evermore
(according to his accustomed kindness) would show himself ready to help,
not permitting him to ^arrie long time oppressed. And sundry times before this
virtuous Lady had taught him this fair lesson, which now in extremity the
knight well remembered: whereof lifting his eyes on high, bowing his knees with
great humility, and holding his two hands knit together up toward Heaven,
where, with great admiration he contemplated the disorder well ordered of the
Moon, the Stars, the woorking powers, and generally of the celestial
bodies, according as his eyes were capable of this sight: he began to be
ravished in contemplation, and made his prayer to Almighty God in this manner.

The Prayer of Gerileon before his last combat with the Polyppe.
Almighty God, whose power is infinite and incomprehensible, seeing thou have
created and appointed man on the earth to honor thy divinity, and extol thy
might, which so much the more proceeds from thee, as thou make men
admirable in greatness, in knowledge, in wisdom, in fortitude, and all other
effectual virtues, which thou rainest down on them with thy right hand in
great abundance: making some more wise than strong, others strong and less
provided of wit and knowledge, others (as a principal work wrought by thy
powerful hand) wise and va^^ant, prudent and strong together. And according to
the gettings of a covetous merchant, that counts his debtes with booties,
uses places for each accordingly, so being of of great value, and others of
little, even so have thou ordained, some more high, others in a place of more
low and inferior degree, yet all nevertheless contented with their rooms,
exalt thy Godhead, and render thanks for the good they have received from thy
bountiful hand. In like manner (by thy goodness) each thing is maintained
according to his place, with such providence, as no one ought receue
coffeehouse, or has occasion to be agreued, but to la^d and glorify thy
high name. Ought not I then that am but a little cold earth, yield thee thanks,
for that thou have appointed me in this world, to be in some degree among
humane creatures, yea among such as thou have ordained to fight against
monsters, which the enemy of nature nourishes and maintains to afflict poor
creatures, and hereby to be among the number of those, whom thy almighty
power has yielded most admirable, a thing which I know in my self to proceed
from thy only might and bounty. I yield thee thanks then O my God with all my
heart, for the good I have receued from thy largess, and entreat thee in all
affection, that continuing in me the gifts of thy liberality, it will please
to regard me in this mine enterprise with thy eye of pitti^, and suffer me not
to fall therein with shame and dishonor, but displaying thy grace in me, thou will inspire me with thy goodness, and make mine eyes to behold the beams of
thy holy spirit, clearly to know and discern the mean and way, whereby I
ought to do such things as are pleasing to thee: among which, if the combat
that I have begun may be numbered, vouchsafe that I may by some means return
and escape with victory, being assured that without thy help all my strength is
vain and unprofitable. Hear then Lord with gracious ears, and listen to the
prayer of thy afflicted servant, that craves it in humility of heart, and give
beside what thou know more expedient for him than himself does, and which
the weak cogitations of man are not worthy to know.



With these words he made an end of his prayer, and being risen up, he went
with the piece of the sword that remained in his hand and lopped diverse
branches from the trees, and especially he cut an oak, containing in compass
the bigness of a man's thigh, even of the best membred man that might be found.
This oak was straight and full of knots round about, which taking in one of
his hands, he cut away the little branches or shrigs, that grew on each side:
and when he had shaped it according to his mind^, it came into his head, that
with this staff he should attempt to vanquish the Polyppe by mighty down
right strokes, being persuaded to accomplish and perform with this staff,
what he could not do with his weapon. In this determination he continued
fashioning it in ample form for the purpose, sharpening the knottes on every
side, that as occasion served, he might the better prevail with his blows:
the ^oint likewise thereof made he so piercing, as easily the ^^onster should
not escape both strokes and thrusts. After he ^ad thus busied himself an
indifferent while, he beheld fair Aurora come dancing with the mornings
garland in her hand, which made him not a little joyful, in that he had
assured hope to bring his purpose to pass: such was his confidence in God,
from whose favor only he expected an answer of this hope. Whereupon
immediately he armed himself, and taking his staff, went to look if the
Polyppe were come again to the place, where the days past they had continued
their fight. Now came forth the monster more terrible and furious to behold,
than at any time before, being armed with a huge strong buckler of iron, which
he held in one hand, and a sharp ^^icing Cimetarie in the other, by the keen
edge and point whereof, this day he was promised victory certainly.

The knight also this day showed him self, and appeared more meruaylous and
fearful to the Savage monster, then ever he did before: for looking on him,
ye would have thought, that as the Sun when he goes to rest in the longest
Summer days, is environed with Uermillion beams round about: even so brave
and beautiful seemed our Champion, and presenting himself ready to the
combat, ^e thus spoke to the Savage.

Thou have (enemy to nature) long made resistance against my force and
strength, and by thy most strange disguisings have already three times escaped
the danger of of thy life: but now (such is my trust in Almighty God, by
whose inspiration and power I have chosen a new weapon to overcome and
destroy thee withal) thou shall escape me no more, but shall now end thy
days with utter confusion.

The Savage monster as he was about to answer, showed him the Buckler and the
Swoorde, which he lifted on high, and in so doing, he brayed and cried, so
that it seemed by his cries, that he made the earth to tremble under his feet,
that he menaced the knight so to murder him with his Cimetarie, and with the
assistance of his buckler to perform what he had said. Having thus spoken in
his language, he delivered a meruaylous stroke at the knight with his
cimetarie, who by his dexterity escaped both the stroke and death likewise,
whereof he had been certainly assured, if the blow had fallen upon him, but
being started aside, he would now make proof if he could do any thing with
his staff against the Savage, and thereupon smote at him so lustily, as if he
had not quickly animated his buckler before (which he held with one hand,
though it was so weighty, as two men of this time could hardly stir it from
the ground) doubtl^ss^ the stroke had bin his death: but he covered himself so
well from the blow, as he had no harm, but his hand stonnied a little,
whereat he being exceedingly angry, rodoubled with his Cimetarie such a stroke
on the knights sheeld, as cutting of a great part thereof, it fell to the
ground, very hardly escaping the arm that held it, but no more harm or
offense happened as yet. On the other side, the knight lifting up his staff
with both his hands, having thrown back his broken shield upon his shoulder,
intending either to end his life or the combat: and albeit the Polyppe stood
under guarde of his buckler, yet he received such a violent stroke: as made him
fall down astonished, not knowing where he was, and as he sought to rise
again, the courageous knight bestowed such an other greeting on on him, as he
could not recover footing, so heavily fell the staff upon his stomach.
Gerileon seeing him lie thus along, and weening the latest extremity was come,
ran upon him to wrest the Cimetarie out of his hand, therewith to cut his
thr^at, or otherwise kill him: but the Savage who was not yet so unprovided of
strength, caught him so roughly by the arm, as made him like wise fall to the
ground: when each recovering himself, a great many violent blows were dealt
between them, as it would have required a very sound judgment, to know
whether side should have the victory. But in the end Gerileon, being highly
offended the combat endured so long, within him called upon God very
devoutly, desiring him to strengthen his present stroke: and then lifting his
staff with meruaylous hardiness, the blow fell so peisantly on the monsters
buckler, as made him amazedly turn three or four times about, during which
time he redoubled such an other stroke upon him, as broke the back bone of him
in sunder, with all the joints of his neck, the blood streaming from forth his
mouth in great abundance, likewise out of his eyes, ears and nose, so that
with the loss of this blood, he lost life and all together, though he might
discern as he lay vomitting, how with enraged anger he bit the ground, and the
effusion of his blood made a great lake in that place. Nor can I compare his
fall but to the like noise of a huge pine tree, that being overthrown by the
unmerciful blasts of wind, cast down from the top of an high mountain,
falls to the bottom with meruaylous noise, breaking and renting his small
branches on each side, as all the inhabitants near adjoining, remain
astonished and affrighted very fearfully.

Thus dyed the infernal monster, by the virtue and patience of this brave
knight only, who did more in this exploit, then the puissant king of Siria
ever did in former time, with the assembly of all forces and conquering
armies, which he only brought thither for the taking or destruction of this
monster.

Being joyful of this gracious victory, he felt no pain or labor of this
combat, albeit he was bathed all in sweat, through vexation of long delay in
the fight: like a woman after the hard travail of childbearing, forgets
the anguish of that bitter brunt, seeing her infant well brought into the
world: for then such is her joy, as she remembers no more the pa^^ed storms.
So with great ^umilitie and devotion Gerileon gave thanks to God, from whom
he knew proceeded this worthy work of victory, acknowledging that he was
but the minister or instrument, by whom GOD showed the effects of his
almighty providence.

Soon after he had thus given thanks, the Lady that sung the Song which ye
heard before, came forth of the Den where the Polyppe was wunt to hide
himself: she being pale, wanne, and trembling with fear, came and fell on both
her knees at the knights feet, and embrasing his legs fast in her folded arms,
she thus spoke.

Most noble and virtuous knight, as ever was borne in this world, extracted and
issued of high, princely, and generous lineage: happy ^e the hour of thy
arrival in this country, blessed were the pappes that gave so fair a
creature nourishment, and the mother that bare thee in her womb, likewise the
ship wherein thou saylest to this coast, never may it perish, but with safety
pass into every place, free from vexation of storms or tempests. Longer may
tho^ live then the father of Amphilocus and Thrasimede, the strength and vigor
of thine arms never feeling any weakening, but by the glory and honor of this
blessed days victory, to all posterity may they make thee more famous, and
after death revive perpetually the renown of thy valor. May each season by
thy means taste the flourishing verdure and sweetness of an everlasting
spring time, seeing by thy her^yeall virtues I am this day delivered from most
miserable bondage and servitude, wherein poor desolate Princess that I am, I
have been too long a time detained. Think and consider virtuous knight I
entreat thee, wherein my wretched self may do thee any service. My father has
great store of riches and treasure, beside more store of welthie and honorable
friends: to whom if it may please ye to bear me company, I am assured for
this my deliverance, he will return suc^ recompense, as ye shall have no
cause to be discontented.

Lady (answered Gerileon) riches and treasure are no such recompense as my
travails do expect, neither did desire of any such matter incite me to
knightly deeds, following the execution of dangerous exploits of Arms: but an
earnest affection to do good, and bringing to pass such things as are pleasing
in the sight of God: as is shortning the lives of the wicked, that ordinarily
commit a thousand cruelties, displeasing to his majesty. Nor am I ignorant,
that among men of honor and virtue, I shall bear away more account and fame by
the effects of this affection, then should I be possessed of massy heaps of
riches, the greedy desire whereof (oftentimes) provoke men rather to do evil
then good. And this is my assurance, that thus I shall obtain more easily the
favor of the better sort, and no other guerdon do I require, either of you or
your father: if the pleasure I have done ye, in delivering ye from this
monsters captivity, may merit any recompense at all on my behalf. But I
repute the deed to be of so slender value, in regard of your deserts, as for
all my labor bestowed, I require no other thing of ye: but that ye would tell
me the first effects of this adventure, and especially of whence ye are, how
and wherefore ye have been thus deteyned by this monster, also why ye sung the
Song before the beginning of our combats: persuading your self, that with
this only courtesy I shall hold my self sufficiently requited.

If I should (most virtuous knight, answered the Lady) recount from the
beginning to the end, the whole History and progress of all my misfortunes:
three times would the sun and moon make their course about the world, before
my discourse were ended, and so ye might thereby receive more discontent then
pleasure. But for your sake, I am content to reveal what you desire to know,
and when my tale shall grow yrkesome and offensive to ye, then will I end if
so ye please to command me. As the Lady proceeded in this kind of language,
the knight (who held her by the right hand) espied her cheeks suddenly died
with a Uermillion blush surpassing the Rose, whereby her beauty which was
nothing less inferior there^o, received more splendor then before it did,
when the monster with fear still dismayed her heart, and this inward dismay,
greatly altered and changed her beautiful complexion, making her look pale,
wanne, and coullerlesse. Now began Gerileon greatly to marvel heereat, and
withal stood as amazed, when be beheld the unlooked for company of a young
Gentleman so near him, fair and of good grace, who had procured this loouely
change in the Lady: nor did he take it any jot displeasantly, though with a
smiling and debonnarie countenance, the young Gentleman approached near to
touch her, saluting her with a sweet kiss, humble reverence, and kind
embrace, expressing his inward affection and goodwill, which immediately was
pursued with amiable and gentle speech to Gerileon, full of gratulations and
thankful courtesies, as well for his deliverance, as the Ladies there present,
where to when the knight had kindly replied, as he was not to learn his
court-ship, the Gentleman ran and embraced the Lady in such sort, as they are
wunt to do, that have been long time without the sight and company of such as
they extremely love and affect: and she like wise, as finding no small ease
hereby to her amourous flames so strictly bound the Gentleman in the circle of
her arms, overcome with love and entire affection, as if he had not had more
discretion then the Lady, fearing least Gerileon would be offended at these
ceremonial actions of love: I think they would never have sundered till the
worlds end: but he showing a bashful countenance for these amourous
behauiours, (which nevertheless were performed modestly and comely) winding
himself (though loath) from the anchorholde of his joy, brake forth in these
speeches to the Lady. Sweet Mistress, I heard that you made a promise to this
knight, to whom both you and I remain so highly beholding, as you ought not
delay any longer time, but to reveal what ye have promised: above all things
be so good as your word, and obey whatsoever he shall please to command ye:
being assured that he will command no other thing, then what shall be agreeing
with honor and honesty.

My good Lord and friend, answered the Lady, I doubt not but this worthy
knight will pardon me, if I be a little forgetful of my duty toward him:
considering the sight of you ravished my heart with such joy, that if ever he
knew to love, and what his conquering passions are: he will rather refer the
fault to his power, then to any disgrace or discourtesie on my behalf
committed.

At these words Gerileon sighed and changed couller, feeing to kindle again
within him by this new touch or remembrance, the lively amourous flames which
not long since took beginning in his youthful breast: and so much the more
they increased in him, as he strove to cover and dissemble the same, which the
Lady and young Gentleman well enough perceived, albeit they made no show
thereof, tearing to displease him to whom they were so greatly indebted.

In this time Geliaste came forth of the Cave, quaking and trembling, which
made the knight so glad (fearing he was dead) as he forgot some part of his
late remembrance: for next to his Lady, he entirely looued his Squire, and
would not lose him for any thing in the world. His coming causing pleasure and
content to them all, they went further from the Cave, and lay down in the
shade under a great goodly Tree: where sitting very kindly together, the Lady
began her discourse, in form and manner as ye shall read in the Chapter
following.

CHAP. 11.
Orphisa recounteth the whole progress of her adventure to the Knight
Gerileon, how the King Di^gonde of Lusitania (after long trial of his fortune)
having espoused the Princess of Spain, named Pollyda, and having no issue by
her: she beguiled him with one of her fairest Damsels, called Olympia, of whom
he begat the fair Orphisa, who was carried away by the Savage Polyppe, and
afterward delivered as ye have heard. Whereby we may note, how variable
fortune is in this world, and how after she has (by her inconstancy)
ouertrauayled such as are under the guarde of their good Angel: in the end
they escape with pleasure and contentment, more easily after they are brought
to the port of so many evils, then if they had never been tossed in those
pitiless and dangerous storms.

THe skillful Lady Orphisa, began then to recounte her adventure to the Fayrie
Knight, in this manner. You must understand sir Knight, that I am daughter to
the wise and virtuous king of Lusitania, a man, by reason of his prudence and
valor, sufficiently known to all the world, as having done many things
worthy of memory, the ^ame whereof is bruted every where. He being named
Diegonde, was in his younger years a most accomplished knight, even in the
time of king Dorino, father to the king of Spain at this instant reigning, who
had a daughter in years mariageable, called Pollyda. This Lady, beside her
excellency of beauty, could cunningly twist, spin and sow, as is most proper
to women, likewise she was well instructed in good letters and the liberal
Arts: in such sort, as she was able to disgrace the most wise and studious
Philosophers of those times, so subtillie could she dispute of matters
depending in Morrall and Natural Philosophy concerning her self.

By reason here of she became so proud and audacious, as she imagined no man
then living in the world, was worthy to join with her in marriage, and
therefore despised all: so that there was no one (how worthy so ever) that
durst enterprise to demand the question, no, not the great King of England,
who in those days was the most fair and accomplished knight in the world, and
highly loved of King Dorino, because of his valor. But the King my Father, who
was become amorous of her, would put it in adventure, either to gain her in
marriage, or be altogether refused. And in this resolution he went to the
king of Spaines Court, where within short time after his arrival, the Daughter
having heard the cause of his coming thither, gave him to understand by one of
her Pages: that he could win nothing but loss of time, by seeking to join in
marriage with her, and therefore he should do much better, to employ his
purpose about other occasions. Heereat although the king my father was
extremely offended, yet left he not for all that to pursue the cause, and made
his request to the king of Spain (who would not marry her against her will)
with such importunity: as in the end the Father and the daughter were
constrained to grant the pretended marriage, yet under this condition. That
eight days before the nuptials, my Father should be bound to hold open Ioust a
whole day together, against all knights that should present themselves at this
general tourney, which expresselie was there appointed for honor of that day:
and if he were unhorsed by any knight, he should desist from his importunate
suit and request of marriage. But if fortune smiled so favorably on him, as
that he went away conqueror in this enterprise: then eight days afterward, the
desired marriage should be accomplished.

My father, who was carried away with over hot and ^urious heat of marrying this
fa^re and skillful Pollyda, accounting no danger to be in the enterprise,
willingly yielded to the marriage, under the condition proposed: although he
knew right well, that those times affoorded great number of most hardy and
brave knights, that knew how to behave themselves in the Ioust, and could
dismount such as carried better esteem then themselves. But amongst all, and
beyond all the rest, was reckoned as most strong and valiant in each point of
chiual^ie, the young knight Floridamant, son to the great king Brandismell of
England, and him only my Father doubted, as sundry times before he acquainted
me withal. Weighing then advisedly the valor of this young knight, he began
somewhat to despair of the issue of his attempt, and as in this thought he
stood pensive and troubled, he concluded to put in practice, what heretofore
was said by the great Lacedemonian Admiral Lysander, to wit: that where the
Lions skinn^ fell out to short to piece it out with the Foxes case: minding to
use industry and cunning in these affairs, where he thought strength and
manhood might happen to fail, having to deal with such mighty and puissant
adversaries.

In this determination, understanding that the great king Belligande of Gaul
had a Lance, the iron point whereof was so enchanted, as all such as were
touched therewith should be dismounted: either by sleight or force he resolved
to be possessed thereof, imagining which of these means were lykest to speed,
and to adventure both rather then fail of his intent.

To bring about this stratageme, he went with all speed into the realm of
Gaul, where being, he heard that in a Forest appertayning to that kingdom,
dwelt a certain man, which termed himself a knight, but commonly he was
called the cunning Thief: and so subtle was he in robbing, as nothing could
escape his fingering, and all his attempts were so artificially compassed, as
such as had lost any thing, or were otherwise robbed, presently the blame of
their loss was imputed to him: he likewise seeing each one esteem him such a
famous thee^e, and so admire his sleights and policies, took great pleasure
therein, and oftentimes would sit solemnly smiling thereat.

To this man the king my father forthwith travailed, and promised him very
large sums of money, if he could rob the king of this enchaunted Lance,
which he so safely kept in his Cabinet, as it was thought impossible to get it
thence. The cause why he held it with such vigilant care, was for the love of
a fayrie named Oziris, who thereof had made a present to him: hoping withal
hereafter to leave it to a son of his, which as yet was but a very young
infant. Notwithstanding the great difficulty consisting in this business: yet
in respect of the large sum of money, the thief promised to deliver this
Lance into my fathers hand, as he did the day after my father had this
conference with him, but first he thus bespake him. Knight, quoth he to the
king my father (in that he had no other knowledge of him) it is necessary, if
ye would have this Lance, that to morrow you go with me to the great City
of Poictiers, where the king of Gaul at this present makes his abode, and
where he is determined to hold a general tourney, because as to morrow is
the day, when he wan the victory against the Giant Perceuall, who had long
time before greatly trauayled and molested him with war. I will stay for ye
near the place where the Torney is to be kept, and you shall go to the king,
telling him that I am the Knight Lorgolio, Cosen to the Giant Perceuall, whom
he slew by treason: wherefore I am come to defy him in combat man to man, to
revenge the death of the Giant my Cosen: with which revenge I should think my
self satisfied, might I but break a couple of Lances with himself, no other
in his defense to offer me injury: beside, he shall not strengthen himself
with his enchaunted Lance, whereby my Cosen received his death, and for better
assurance hereof, he shall deliver that Lance into your hand to keep wh^le
we Ioust, which I am assured he will not refuse to do: thus may you depart, and
bear away the Lance with ye: but if this devise should fail us, assure your
self that quickly we will find another: for I will receiu^ no money of ye,
before ye have this Lance so much desired, in your possession.

My father liked well of this council, and (to make short) it came to pass
even as the thief had before devised: for the king of Gaul hearing the
defiance, and weening that all my father told was true, made no doubt of
giving the Lance into his hand, and my father being possessed thereof while
the king of Gaul went to put on better Armor: both he and the cunning thief
departed, so that none could tell what was become of them. The king and all his
Court (at the first tidings hereof) was greatly abashed, but understanding
soon after the cause of this theft, and who was the inuenter of this policy:
it was made but a merry jest of. In the end (notwithstanding) this pleasure
did not so concontinue, but this fine thief, fearing to be taken, was glad to
fly from the kingdom of Gaul, and passed thence into England, where
afterward he lived and remained a long time.

As for the king my father, he returned again by Sea to Lisbone, and from
thence to Saragossa, where the king Dori^o then held Court, where being
arrived, he behaved himself so well with this sly gotten Lance, as all the
knights that Iousted against him, yea, even the brave knight Floridament, were
foiled and dismounted to the ground: where^^t the Princess Pollyda (who bare
no love at all to the king my father) being greatly displeased, would have
re^used the marriage before agreed upon by the king Dori^o: saying that for her
part, she had given no consent, and without the Brides consent, hardly can
any marriage be accorded, especially with such a one to whom she could not use
any affection.

Heereat the king my father being highly offended, in fury flunge forth of
the Spanish kings court, giving him many hard tauntes and injurious speeches,
for the di^^oyaltie that he said remained in him. On the other side, the king
was full of rage and anger against the infant his daughter, whom he ceased not
daily to persuade, that she should like well of marrying with king Diegonde of
Lusitauia, least his credit and reputation should be condemned, in using
treachery and per^idie to so great a Prince. So what through love and pleasing
speeches, as also force and frowning countenances, in the end she yielded to
his will. But this was after the Lady had had conference with a noble and
excellent Fayrie, named Ozyris, who had been greatly helping in her birth,
endowing her with manifold virtues and riches of spirit, for which she was not
a little commended: and after the decease of her mother, Sister to king
Barachen of Scotland, she had sometime nourished her in her rich inuinsible
palace, which was in the realm of great Britain, and ever afterward she
persuaded her, that she should not marie with any living man, which was the
cause she held so aloof from this aforesaid marriage.

After she had well schooled her concerning this matter, the noble and virtuous
Fayrie said, that in respect children by the divine law) ought obedience to
their parents, and it was her fathers will she should match with the king
Diegonde, who already had done so much for her love, and was even ready to
despair if he failed thereof: she councelled her not to withstand her fathers
appointment. And although in former time she had diswaded her from marriage, it
was because she discerned by her skill, that such issue as descended from her
in marriage (if she fortuned to have any) should have hard hap, and prove very
unfortunate, which would be such grief both to her husband, as the greater
part of their youth would be spent in grief and pensiveness.
Notwithstanding, if this marriage must needs be accomplished, she promised to
use the matter in such sort, as by this conjunction she should never have
child. And so found she means to comfort them sufficiently, as hereafter ye
shall understand the manner how, without injury to the beautiful Pollydon:
but my father (by himself and his) should feel the evil and misfortune,
whereto yet she promised a day of final conclusion.

The Princely maid giving credit to her prophetical speeches, was greatly
comforted and satisfied, and so resolved to marie with the king my father:
after which determination once known, soon was he sent for by the King
Dorino, when with great pleasure and content to every one, he espoused Pollyda,
with her he lived more then twenty years, yet could he have no issue by her,
which so grieved him, confounding his thoughts with sadness and melancholy, as
the most part of the time he eat his bread in moan and tears: for I imagine it
a meruaylous heart break to a man that desires to live after his death, and
perpetuate his memory by his children: to see his marriage consumed without any
generation, that might make mention of him when he is dead. And such
(heerefore) was his entire conceit of grief, as oftentimes he meant to
repudiate his Queen Pollyda: but such again was the woondrous love he bare
her, fearing to offend God, and displease king Dorino her father: as he was
still diswaded when such thoughts entered his fantasy. All this likewise the
Queen very well noted, and notwithstanding her former despisings, yet after
her marriage she loved him exceedingly, pitying his grief, but shaddowing her
own so much as possibly she could, seeking by all means to remedy both, as
in the end she did, by the advice and counsel of the wise Ozyris, who every
day and in all places assisted her, persuading her to do as follows. One of
her waiting Damsels, whom my father used good countenance toward, because
she was of perfect beauty, being named Olympia, daughter to he Duchess of
Terciede, a chaste and prudent dame: with her the Fayrie advised the Queen,
that my father should have dalliance. She following this council, one night
when the king my father sent word to have her company in bed: so cunningly
handled the matter, that this damsel lay there instead of her, for the maid
was likewise secretly amourous of the king, which was the cause, that (being
where she would be) she disliked not this sweet and pleasant deceit, but
without any show of displeasure, she gladly endured the kings pastime with
her, seeing the Queen was so well content to afford her her place and
privilege. To such effect grew my fathers labors, who little thought he was
thus beguiled: as the Maid was conceived with child: when afterward the
Queen coming to sleep with the King, said that she felt her self conceived,
answerable to his so long desire, for which good fortune he should applaude
the heavens, from whence proceeded so great good to her. Hereof was the king
my father glad, thinking the Queen had told the truth indeed, as within
short while after, he minded to go on pilgrimage, to pray at the holy
Sepulcher of Jesus Christ, and returning thence, to visit Saint James in
Galicia, at each place to thank God for this fortunate event.

Being thus resolved, one day he secretly departed in disguised garments
(feigning some other excuse) to accomplish his intended voyage, in which time
(being the space almost of a whole year) it chanced that the fair Olympia
was delivered of me, to the great content and pleasure of Queen Pollyda, who
nine months together feigned her self with child, though but mere
dissimulation: and using the Damsels deliverance as her own, gave generally
to be known by some of her, favorites and most familiar Ladies, that this
long expect^d fruit had issued from her own body. And to the end this
mystery might not be discovered, the wise Ozyris took to her invisible Fairie
house or Palace, the fair Olympia my mother, where ever after she continued
of self same nature as her other nymphs and faires, among whom at this
present she is most beloved, as I certainly know by such revelations that her
self has shown me. Now the king my father being ignorant of all these
things, was so glad when he returned from his voyage to see me grown to a
prittie port or stature, and that the Queen was not sickly or felt such
pains as other do after their delivery: as all his care now was for my
education and instruction, not only in curious weauing and sowing, but also of
good letters, especially poesy and music, perceiving my voice apt and
proper for singing.

Herein likewise did the Queens care agree with his, and so dearly did she
love me, as if I had been indeed a branch of her own body: for never
went she to any place, but still I must accompany her, through which
continual association, it happened one day among the rest, that she would
needs ride on hunting, a pastime wherein she took exceeding pleasure. I being
with her, the hounds egerly pursuing the grave, and she chasing that things
fadged not according to her mind, road so fast that we had soon lost one
another.

The space of a whole day almost, remained I thus alone in this meruaylous
great forest, wearyed and spent with seeking to find my company again, till
at length by good hap I came to a fair and clear fountain, from whence
streamed forth a swift gliding river, that made his course quite through the
forest: where alighting from my horse, to rest and refresh my self on the
soft tender herbs that grew about the banckes of the fountain, I had not
long sitten there in this sort, but the fair Olympia my mother appeared in
sight unto me in the habit of a Nimphe, at whose sudden sight I was greatly
amazed. But with her sweet and gracious language, she delivered my heart from
fear and dismaying, recounting to me (as in a dainty compiled history) the
whole discourse of my birth, in manner and form as you have heard, albeit
somewhat more at large.

Moreover she told me, how the mighty and skillful Fayrie Ozyris her
Mistr^sse, had disclosed to her, that by the craft and means of an old
abominable Necromancian, named Charonyfer, should be nourished a cruel and
hideous monster called the Polyppe, whose cruelty and puissance should be
doubted and feared over the whole earth. This beast, to injury both her and
me, should one day steal me from my parents and friends, to keep me in
extreme misery and thraldom, until the best knight in the world, nourished
and brought up by this Fayrie as her own child, albeit extracted originallie
from the best, puissant and most virtuous king alive: should travail to the
place of my imprisonment, and there by his prowess and valiancie (killing the
monster) deliver me out of captituitie.

Beside this, she told me, that during the last seven years of my
detayning and misery, a young noble man, brother to Queen Pollyda, to hinder
the monster from killing me, should follow me to the place where I was
imprisonned, and there each day for six years space, changing into as many
sundry forms as the monster, should combat with him for my liberty: yet all
his endeavors would prove in vain, because the monster was only to be slain
by the knight of the Fayrie Ozyris. And to let me know when the last year of
my misery should ensue, she said, that from the beginning thereof, the noble
man (who loved me with perfect love) should be changed into a Foul or Bird of
strange sort, in which shape daily would he come to visit and see me, even
until the Polyppe were slain, when he should receive his manly shape again,
and the day of the Polyppes death, should be the final extermination of my
misery.

After she had imparted to me all these things, she threw forth such a perfume
of Poppie upon me, as (from the end of her discourse) I slept so soundly by
the Fountains side, that I neither saw or heard when she departed: and as
some while I continued in this sleep, Queen Pollyda not a little displeased
for my loss, having with her train sought through the forest, came at last
and found me where I slept, when gently awaking me, we thence departed again
into the City.

Within a while after, it chanced, that by the advice of the king my father,
and his Queen Pollyda, I was sent to king Dorino my imagined Grandfather, who
desired to have me near him, because he verily thought me to be his daughters
child, by reason whereof he wunderouslie loved me. Having continued certain
years in his Court, this young Prince here present, named Phinander, youngest
son to king Dorino, and brother to king Dorian, that at this day gouernes
over the Spaniards, being equal in years with me, taking me for so near in
kindered to him: spent the time of his infancy with me, and I in like sort
with him.

Among these pastimes and sportes of children, it happened that we became
amourous of each other, and that in such manner, as we could not endure long
without each others sight: which love each one imagined to grow by natural
affection, that so near kin do customablie bear one to another, and the
young Prince verily persuaded himself, that the iouissance of our love might
not be compassed, because of the prohibition of Christian laws, concerning
marriage between so near kindred as we seemed to be. Heerevpon, seeing him one
day very sad and pensive, being alone in the Garden, I faithfully discovered to
him the manner of my birth, according as my sweet mother Olympia before had
told me: which highly, comforted him, causing both in him and me far greater
affecton to each other, if more might be then was commenced before. Our
passions were still worn out with honest sollace and pleasure, expecting that
the long delay of time should minister more entire delight of our loves,
according to the honest desire abiding in either of us: but both our hope and
desire were suddenly squandered, by a new and strange accident that immediately
followed.

Know then gentle Sir, that the day when the Prince Dorian, eldest son to
the king of Spain, br^ught to his fathers court the fayr^ princess Amarylla,
daughter to the King of Gaul, whom he had newly espoused, there was speech
of nothing else but joy and sollace: in midst of which pleasure, this wicked
monster which you have slain, entered the great hall of the Palace with a
most horrible noise and cry, which made the Ladies in such affright, as each
one ^led for safety of themselves, yea, though there were present many brave
and hardy knights, yet being unarmed, and thereby not fit to use resistance,
some ran with speed to get on their armor, and others to save themselves
from death. By this means the Polyppe had leisure to make choice of me, among
all the other Ladies of the court, and after he had caught me fast in his
arms, without any stay, he ran over the land and sea, what of his own nature,
and by the enchauntments of that curssed Magitian, who gave wings to his
course: that in short time (astonnied and near hand dead with fear) he
brought me to this place, where ever since I have remained in grief and
torments, living the most part of this doleful season, with raw flesh, and
other viands, sometime good, sometime bad, such as the monster did eat
himself: but to speak truth, since his first ^aking me, he never made
semblance of any wrong to me: but from day to day I s^w how his rigor
increased, and if he had failed of his pray, or could not get it so
conveniently as he would, I judged that my self at last should have served to
slake his hunger. But at the beginning, my dear mother Olympia so assisted me,
and from time to time gave me so good council: as (by many slight subtilties
and inventions) I appeased his anger toward me, even until this prince arrived
here: for ye must note withal, that from the first day of my surprising, as
I have been assured by my mother, and since by him, that he ceased not to
follow the monster, and to enquire the place of his adode, when (after long
and painful travail) he found it: and one day when the monster was abroad,
he adventured to come see and speak with me, when I advised him, as I did
you, to beegon, least he should chance to be taken or slain by the Polyppe.
He giving credit to my words, went to the king of this country, who is the king
of Assiria, a meruailons mighty, courteous, and debonnarie knight, to whom
making himself known, and my misfortune: the good king (that diverse times had
laid ambushes for this monster, because he had ruined and wasted all this
country, yet by no means could be slain or taken) caused an assembly of most
part of the best knights of his Court, intending to assail this devil, and
deliver me from my misery: but such slender success took this attempt, as in
one day (by force and illusion of his manifold shapes) he slew more then three
hundred of them: and if the king had longer continued his p^rsuite, himself
had likewise perished. Wherefore with this l^sse he left off, and would no
more enterprise my deliverance, whereat this prince conceived such unkindness,
as in tears and grief he went to a forest, which is six or seven leagues
distant from this place, where weeping and lamenting day and night, continually
he called for death to end his affliction. Then appeared to him, the powerful
and wise O^yris, who comforted him with future hope of my release, al^^it it
would be long before, even seven whole years: du^^ng which time, y^ he might
live safe (else had he no hope of continuance) she changed him into the form of
a wild and savage beast, giving him power likewise to alter himself into so
many shapes as the Polyppe changed: saving at his last fight he should receive
the nature of a Byrd, and could no more attain the form of a four footed
beast, but might vary into sundry shapes of Birds.

The Prince being thus transformed, came every day six years together to
combat with the Polyppe, without vanquishing or being vanquished, though all
the day they would not rest from their travail, but fought most furiously,
even to the beginning of the seventh year, when he changed into the likeness
of Foul as you beheld him: for this is the Bird that flutterd on the Tree at
your arrival, who since the Polyppe was slain by your virtue, has now
recovered his former human shape: and for him sung I the song you heard at
your first coming, which in that manner I composed in mine own language. Thus
have you heard sir knight the whole estate of my adventure, what yet remains,
ye may be satisfied in by me: so took the Ladies tale an end, and therewith
will I likewise end this Chapter.

CHAP. 12.
How the Lady Orphisa having ended the discourse of her adventure, there came
into the place before Gerileon and the Prince Phinander, a knight cruelly
wounded, trayled on the ground by his horse: who entreated Gerileon to assist
him, in revenge of the wrong the puissant Adylas had done him. And now after
he had heard of the civil war in Persia, since the departure of the great
Sophie, he took leave to depart from the Prince Phinander, and the fair
Orphisa, and how Gerileon healed the knights wounds.

THe History says, that after the Lady had thus ended her discourse: the
fayrie Knight, who made no little maruayle of the adventure, thus answered.
Lady, right glad am I that I have slain the monster, which offered ye so much
wrong and injury, for some other occasion, that made me so earnest in desire
to combat with him, to wit, desire of acquiring honor and renown, for which
knights valiant do often put their lives in ieopardie: beside, because in
performance here of, I have done something pleasing to the noble dame Ozyris,
toward whom I am, and by whom only I hold my life: if then for the love of
her, and fair Olympia your mother, well known to me, and who in these
combats has greatly succored me, likewise for the love of this prince
here present, and virtue abiding in your self: if I can do any other service
profitable and pleasing to ye, I would make spare of no travail whatsoever,
so I might accomplish any thing to your contentment. And were I not bound by a
solemn vow never to take rest, till I have found a knight whom I seek, which
constraines me God knows how far in his search, to revenge the death of my
friend slain by him: I assure ye, that gladly would I accompany ye to the
Court of your father, the king of Lusitania, where nevertheless one day (by
Gods help) I hope to see ye, with more ease and joy then I have at this
instant, but thither shall this worthy Lord keep ye good and loyal company.

As Gerileon spoke these words, and further would have proceeded, his purpose
was prevented by the sudden course of a goodly horse, that trayled along a
Knight well near ^ead, hanging by one foot in the stirrup, and holding a
Lance in his hand: but the Fayrie knight catching the horse by the bridle,
took of the knights Helmet, where he found a very dangerous wound in his head,
then getting his foot forth of the stirrup, perceiving some life yet remained
in him, and that he was not but in an amazed ^raunce: with the help of the
prince Phynander and the Lady Orphisa he was recovered again. Being come to
himself, he knew well the place where he was, which made him thus speak to
Gerileon. For Gods sake sir knight help us, and let us quickly get us hence,
for here ^wels the most cruel and inhumaine monster of the world, who as yet
(I hope) has not seen us, therefore I advise ye presently to be gone: as for
my self, I had rather be dead then tarry in a place so dangerous as this is.
Fear not the monster you speak of (quoth the Fayrie knight) for if he that
has thus shrewdly dealt with you, had had no more power then the monster at
this instant ^at, you should be more healthful and in better disposition then
ye are.

I see well (said the wounded knight) that you have not heard the inexpugnall
force of the Savage Polyppe, for if ye had once experimented it: ye would
sorbeare to talk of him, and tarry in this place less while then ye do. I
know more of him then you do, quoth the fayrie knight, for you know nothing
but by hear say: and that which I know is by experience, the mistress of
virtue, and true discouerer of all things. And to let ye see that I speak not
by heart, I will give ye some instance. Then taking the knight by the hand, he
showed him the Savage monster dead, which when he beheld, he trembled as full
of fear and astonnishment, as if he knew not whether this (...) a dream or a
certain^ie: and beholding well Gerillions countenance, said. Sir knight, have
you then been one that (...) this monster to his death? surely I believe, that
since you had the stomach to come so near, in using courage against him while
he ^ed, and are one of the brave ^rmie that has discomfited him: you dare as
boldly do something for the Christians, and I judge if ye be a Christian, and
such a one as I imagine ye to be, you will not refuse to revenge the shame and
outrage that has been offered me. Believe me Sir, quoth the Fayrie knight, I
am a true Christian, and to any, be they Persians, Arabians, Syrians or
Assirians, I would give succor according to my power and their necessity:
wherefore I pray ye tell me, in what affairs have the christians need to use
my helps, and who has thus vnmanlie outraged ye: to the end I may assuredly
give them assistance, and also do my endeavor to avenge your wrong, tell me the
truth, without any further fear of the monster, concerning both the one and
other, Sir answered the knight herein will I gladly satisfy ye, but because
I have very much to discover, if I should recount each necessary point
thereto belonging, that ye may the more breefely understand these high affairs:
I will shorten the discourse conveniently as I may, reueling nothing but the
very principal matters.

Know then sir that I am a knight, my native country is the kingdom of
Persia, near to the great city of Tauris, and not long since was I sent in
company of twelve other knights, with the strong and puissant Ariodant, a
knight of great reputation, near coosen to the mighty Mutiuell king of
Persia, who was elected and chosen by the greater part of the inhabitants of
that country (to go to the great Emperor of Constantinople, to entreat his
succor for a multitude of good knights and christian soldiers, whom the
young prince Mauspasian, brother to the great Sophie of Persia, very straitlye
besieged in the cities of Susa and Tauris, beside diverse other places of the
Persians kingdom. And to the end ye may know wherefore we went, ye must note,
that (some while since) the great Sophie, a man worthy of great dignity, for
the high prowes where with he is endued, having seen a portrait curiously
drawn* of the fair princes of Constantinople, daughter to the Emperor: became
so carried away with the love of this most beautiful Lady, as he immediately
resolved to make her his wife, what hazard or adventure so ever stood thereon.
And to compass the same, he sent ambassadors to the Emperors, to demand her
in marriage, but the Emperor at that time made refusal, because he was
contrary to him in religion, and it was not lawful for a Christian to marry
with a Pagan, neither for a Christian to join in any conversation with a
heathen. Which was the cause (to take away this difficulty, which only seemed
to hinder the marriage) that the great Sophie of Persia with all his people
would become Christians, and should be baptized. And because the popular sort
should frame their actions, and fashion their manners answerable to their king:
himself was the first that received holy baptism, and commanded in all the
countries of his kingdom, that the Christian law should be anounced and
preached. Which being done according to his will and command, many willingly
received the faith and religion: others finding the alteration very strange,
withdrew themselves in displeasure: some other that would not at all receive
it, but were constrained thereto, thought better to forsake their houses, lands
and possessions, to live in another kingdom with liberty of conscience, and
so continue the rest of their lives in the Pagan law. After these things were
thus ordered, it chanced that the king absented himself, so that no one could
tell what was become of him: some said, that as in former times he had been
accustomed, so now (like a knight ^rrant) he was gone in search of strange and
perilous adventures, with especial intent to make proof and combat body to
body, with the puissant Nabot and Squamell, who were counted the most hardy
knights in the world. Others said, that being transported with this amourous
passion, he was gone to the Emperor of Constantinople, to demand of him the
Princess his daughter: for if he found her to be of such ^erfect beauty, as
the Painter by his art had discovered, surely by force or fair means he
intended to have her. But which way so ever he took, very true it is, that
soon after his departure, the Prince Mauspasian his brother, whom he had left
to govern the Realm in his absence, would by force of arms compel such as
had abiured the pagan law, and were become christians: to take again their
former religion, saying, that what the king his brother had done and intended
to do, was but only to induce the Christian Emperor, with more ease to
grant the marriage of the princess his daughter. And because there was no
likelihood by that mean to obtain her, by force he minded (after his return)
to have the Lady, and this Mauspasian said that the Sophie had disclosed to
him. But all would not give credit to his speeches, for many resisted to do as
he commanded, thus urging the contrary: that seeing they found the Christian
religion good and profitable to their consciences, as also the salvation of
their souls, seeing likewise their king had caused them to undertake that
religion and belief, and since had given them no command to the contrary: the
present Governor (being but a deputy) ought not constrain them to forgo the
religion, but the same king might do it when he should be present. Beside, what
once he had so freely granted and established, could not so suddenly displease
him, to the prejudice of his people, for as they did owe loyalty and fidelity
to their prince, by submission which they voluntarily made to his power: so
are all princes bound again toward their people, to guarde, defend and keep
them by his power, and to entertain them under the obedience and assurance of
conuentions, made between them and the laws of the land.

Upon this debate rose many particular quarrels and partialities, between such
as had avouched Christianity, and them that continued idolaters to their false
Gods, who having chosen the Prince M^uspasian for their head and governor:
withdrew themselves to their houses, and forciblie would deprive them (of the
other part) of their houses and possessions, whereby is now grown in Persia a
civil war, the most strange and cruel that ever was. For between the
inhabitants of on self same kingdom, has already been seen sundry bloody
battles, where on each side are, slain many Christians and Pagans, especially
two most signal and markable persons: one on the coast of Tyrisir, where the
Christians by the prowess and valiancie of the brave knight Ariodant, wun the
day, and drove the Infidels in disorder: the other near the city of Tauris,
where the Pagans had joined with their forces the aid of the Medes, Syrians,
A^^irians, and Arabes, compelled the christians to fly the field, with great
loss of their men, to make themselves strong in the cities of Tauris, Susa,
and diverse other towns beside, where they are at this instant begirt with very
sharp siedge. So despairing of their former trust in God, the valiant prince
Ariodant, determined secretly to leave the city of Tauris, where he was
General of the Christians, accompanied only with twelve chosen knights (among
whom I was one) to go require aid of the Emperor of Constantinople against
the Pagans, with promise to subject to the Christian Empire, all the whole
Monarchy of Persia. As we were on the way to effect our voyage, by ill hay we
met (about a league hence) a troop of Pagans, consisting of about three
hundred men, all well appointed, and knights of mark, who having pitched their
pauillions in a medowe that butted hard upon our way: we quickly were
descryed unto them, and knowing by our En^ignes, as also the badge of the
cross (which all of us bare open in our arms) that we were Christians: they
cried aloud, that we should pass no further, without speaking to their prince
and conducter, who was the puis^ant king of Thuris, named Adylas, and was there
in a very ^ayre large lion, minding to understand what we were, that he might
make further enquiry of the Per^^an war. Now albeit this rude summons was
grievous to us, yet we durst not refuse to go speak with the king Adylas,
persuading our selves, that although he was a Pagan, yet would (...) be no
enemy to us, as we were advertised a day before, being in quest of his
coosen german the king of Phez, one of the hardyest knights in the world. He
questioned with us concerning the affairs of Persia, wherein the prince
Ariodant truly answered him, as also both what he and we were, with the
present occasion of our journey: whereupon he would arrest and detayne us as
prisoners, a thing very yrkes^me to us, and which we were not able to endure,
but more gladly would loose our lives, then see our selves captive in our
enemies hands, and subjected to their wills. Heerevpon we fell to our best
endeavor, that our foes might get no advantage of us, and in such sort did we
defend our selves, that twenty of them were laid dead on the ground, before
any of us sustained any jot of harm. Which when the king Adylas perceived,
immediately he put himself in arms, and having assembled all his people,
assailed us so fiercely, that six or seven of my companions were slain
outright, the other taken prisoners, and my self escaped in such plight as you
now behold me, but the prince Ariodant I hope is fled like wise.

Thus hear ye (sir Knight) the estate of my misfortune, for relief wherein,
and to reuendge my injury received, I desire that we might have one bought
more with them, assuring ye for certainty, that whatsoever my harm already
is, yet could I imploye and bestirre my self a fresh: but I see we shall be
so feeble, that all our courage will be but frivolous and vain, and accounted
as cowardice.

The wounded Knight having thus spoken, presently fell into a swoune, which
greatly grieved Gerileon, who did his best to help him: and having ransacked
his golden bottle, wherein the Nimphe Olympia brought him the precious vngents,
that healed his wounds received from the Polyppe: he got out a little, which
he applied to the knights wound, when soon after he felt himself of more
able disposition, and this being done, how they resolved, ye shall read
hereafter.

CHAP. 13.
Of the adventures that happened to the knights Gerileon and Taffinor, and how
after they had slain Argontes, and ten or twelve of the best Knights in the
host of Adylas: Gerileon went and took the king himsel^e, and of the
conference they had together.

THe day after the Persian knight had recounted all his adventure to Gerileon,
according as ye have read in the former Chapter: they departed from the
Polyppes Den, to go combat with Adylas and his people, and albeit imminent
death stood before their eyes, yet could nothing withdraw them from such a
dangerous enterprise, as not the entreats of Phynander and the fair Orphisa,
who by many means labored to diswade them to the contrary. For the Fayrie
knight evermore resolved, not for dread of death to let slip any opportunity,
when he might combat or perform any generous act, whence might grow fame and
reputation, the only wadges for a man of valor and virtue. And as for the
Persian knight, it was such despite to him to be vanquished: that as a man
h^lfe desperate, an hundred times he wished the fatal death, so he might in
any sort revenge the shame and injury done him, then fear of death was no
matter for him to stand upon. In this enflamed desire, ta^ing their leave of
Phynander and Orphisa, (who were very pensive for Gerileons departure, both
mounted on the horse of Taffinor, for so was the Persian knights name, having
between them but one Lance, which Gerileon bare that sat in the saddle: in
this sort they rode away, and not far had they trauayled, but they met an
other horse (ready sadled, the bridle lying upon his neck) softly pacing in
the field they rode through. Taffinor immediately knew the horse, and that one
of his companions had been mounted thereon, who being slain by Adylas his
Soldiers, ran now ranging from place to place. Taffinor lightly leaping from
behind Gerileon, made such shift that he took the horse, and getting
quicklye up into the seat, they both spurred away with all possible speed. In
short time they came to the place where Ariodant and his companions had been
discomfited, and Adylas this day intended to dislodge with his pauillions, that
he might meet Mauspasian at Tauris, there to deliver such prisoners to him as
he had gotten from Ariodant.

Being come into this place, they were soon espied by one of the knights of
the king of Thunis, this knight was named Argontes, one of the most faithful
friends to the king, and as valiant as any in all the troop, he being by
chance first mounted in this preparation of departure, sitting with a huge
strong Lance auaunced upon his thigh. This was the first man, that needs
would know what these two knights were, who durst with such boldness come so
near their host. For this purpose, and without speaking word to any one, he
galloped with a swift carrire toward them, and when he was so near, that he
might easily discern them to be strangers: he slacked his pace, when the
first he must needs speak^ to, was the Fayri^ knight, to whom arrogantly he
thus began. Be stir ye fellows, and come after me to king Adylas my Lord, to
tell him of whence ye are, and what ye seek in this place: for I take ye to
be spies, sent hither (to work some treason) by these Christians, that are
mustered up in the City of Tauris: otherwise I would presently slice ye in
such small gobbets, as a Raven might easily bear in his beak the biggest
piece of your bodies. Friend, quoth Gerileon, I think ye mean not so ill as
ye speak, for no such matter appears in your countenance. But setting a
part these terms of bravery, I pray ye go tell king Adylas your master,
that here is a knight errant, accompanied with one of those Christian knights,
whom lately (both causeless and very shamefully) he monstrously abused. Say I
bid him, (if he be a man of worth or any valor) that immediately he come
forth in equipage conuenable for the combat, and accompanied with such an
other: to make this knight amends, and to repair the wrong done to Ariodant,
in charging his troop with too much advantage, and thereby entermedled with
affairs neither touching or concerning him. If he will not do it, I say he is
a villain and a traitor: for were he not so, he would not offer offense to
any one, without habiliti^ of means to make requital. By my faith, answered
Argontes, thou art a very fool, in coming hither to be killed with credit, and
to let thee know, how much better it had been for thee to have kept thee
quiet, then travail to this place with such mallepart kind of language: I
will not suffer that the king my Lord, nor any of his people but my self
only, shall teach thee against another time better wisdom, as also to speak
more advisedly, and therefore stand upon thy guarde. In using these words, he
drew back, that his horse might have his course, and he veil his Lance
against Gerileon: who made so little account thereof, that he reserved his
labor to better effect then the Pagan did, and therefore shrunk aside to
escape the attaint. Heereat Taffinor was greatly abashed, thinking he did it by
cowardice, or fear to meddle with the Pagan, which made him imagine evil of
him, and nothing at all to regard him, as Argontes did likewise: who finishing
his race to no purpose, prepared toward Taffinor, calling him to the Ioust,
which he refused because he had no Lance. But laying hand to his sword for
the combat, he bravely made against the Pagan, who likewise let go his
Lance, and drew out his sword to entertain him: which Gerileon perceiving,
and doubting the length of their fight would grow too tedious, while the
Pagans being so near them, might charge them in greater number, then they
should be able to deal withal, or withstand, seeing himself likewise
unprovided of a sword, for ye have heard how his was broken in combat with
the Savage Polyppe: he forthwith determined to kill the Pagan, because he
would be possessed of his weapon, which he imagined no hard matter to compass,
as in very deed it was not: for running against him with meruaylous violence,
he gave him such a peazant knock with the butte end of his lance, as
overthrew both his horse and him to the ground, and struggling under the
horse, that trampled very heavily upon him, there both his pride, arrogancy
and life ended all together. This done, Gerileon alighted and took his sword,
saying to Taffinor, that therewith he would send more of his companions after
him: which Taffinor being not a little joyful to hear, returned this
answer. Now have I good hope Sir, that (by your means) I shall be avenged of
the outrageous wrongs done me by the Pagans, and were our ^appe so fortunate,
that Ariodant would return to succor us, (as thereof I am assured if he be
not dead, for he is a prince impacient of injury:) we might easilye overcome
and vanquish the host of Adylas. For amongst them all himself is most
redoubted, being so good and able a knight of person, as there are few in
Persia that can equal him in soundnes of chivalry: nor could we have been
conquered by his soldiers, had not he put to his helping hand.

In midst of this talk, whilst Gerileon armed himself with the sword of
dead Argontes, and Taffinor with his Lance, Adylas caused the Trumpets to be
sounded, declaring his departure from the place, where he had been encamped
and soiourned so many days together: at which instant he called for Argontes
his faithful friend, but he could not be found in all the host, then
commanding to understand what was become of him, ten or twelve knights of the
troop took the same way, they saw him gallop before. At last they beheld the
two Christian knights, riding with unconquerable countenance toward the Tents
of Adylas and a little further off they saw Argontes dead, his horse likewise
lying beating with his hooues upon him, not able to rise: whereat they were
enflamed with such rage, (for Argontes was well and dearly beloved of all
Adylas host) as they could no longer contain their fury, but forciblie made
against the Christian knights. Against Gerileon four of them brake their
Lances, without any further injury unto him: but he had better success, for
the first he met, felt so soundly the sharpnes of his lance, as piercing quite
through his body, laid him dead on the earth. Two other that ma^e out after
these four, began very fiercely to assail Taffinor: but for all that they
vnhorssed him not, yet one of them received a deadly wound on his shoulder at
his hand, and so was forced to fall to the ground. They that came after, having
their swords naked in their hands, courageously adventured on the Christian
knights, who being ready prepared, received the valiant strokes of the Pagans
on their sheelds, without any hurt unto their bodies: marie each of them stood
so stiffely to the Pagans, as Gerileon sent one of their heads roundly from
his shoulders, and Taffinor slicing off an others arm from his body, made
both Gerileons stroke and his own agree in an hermonie: for the first Pagan
dyed immediately, and the other caught such a sudden sickness, as his blood
ab^undantly streaming forth, called his life soon after. The rest of their
companions were not a little amazed heereat, especially at the puissant strokes
of Gerileon, with the exceeding virtue, valiancie and address that they
discerned in him, so that six of their fellows lying dead before their faces,
the other fearfully fled to the troop of Adylas, that they might to him
declare their misfortune: but they were followed even thither by Gerileon and
Taffinor, at whose hardiness Adylas stood greatly abashed, and the rather,
because (in his presence) Gerileon ouertaking two of the tardyest fugitives,
from one he lopt the ear, cheek, and shoulder, together, and took off the
others head so neatly, as if the keenest Rasor in the world had been the
instrument.

All the troop standing affrighted heereat, durst not boudge one foot, but
tarried to hear the pleasure of their king, who was surprised with no common
kind of pensiuenes, imagining that Gerileon was one of the Gods whom he
adored, to wit, Mars the God of battles, and (as they supposed) that he was
highly displeased with them. When he beheld what hauock the Fayrie knight made
of his people, he came forth from the midst of his troop, to know for
certainty what he was, and if he were one of their gods, with prayers,
oblations and sacrifices he would appease his anger: but Gerileon that made no
regard of such folly, prepared to endure the brave against all the rest. And
for this cause, he entered further in among them with Taffinor, where sundring
themselves, no one durst stir to approach near them, for in Gerileons
countenance they noted such high resolution, as they reputed him alone able to
foil a far greater host of men.

Even as a lusty Mower in the harvest time, in the midst of a well grown
field, with a sharp Scithe in his hand, cuts down the grass and herbs
about him in very great quantity: even like ^eare had the Pagans of this noble
warrior, verily thinking him to be some celestial deity: and many times had
they been brought into such error, for when they beheld any one, who by his
haughty deeds seemed to surpass the common valor of men, and had some thing
in him to out go other in hardiness: they easily were induced to believe,
that this was one of their imaginary Gods. This false persuasion served very
well for these two Christians, because if all the troop had risen against
them, you quickly may conceive their danger: but the good Angel that
conducted them, by the help of God assisted them in such sort, as Adylas alone
offered speech to Gerileon, and that in this manner. I pray thee if thou be
one of the Gods, whose habitations is in heaven, tell or show me by some sign
if I have offended the^, and wherein I have given cause, that thou should
thus destroy me and my people: assuring thee, that if by prayers, oblations and
sacrifices, thine anger is not to be appeased, and thy fury qualified, thou
shall no sooner be returned to thy celestial mansion, but presently thou
shall in abundance feel, the pleasant perfume and exquisite Sabeene odor,
with large gifts in thy Temple, and offerings on thine Altar, by me bestowed to
thine honor and glory. Or if thou be some mortal creature, that have reason
thus to come and assail me, killing Argontes my faithful Achates, beside so
many of my soldiers: then only tell to me the cause hereof, and assure thy
self, that I will repair whatsoever injury, which thou pretendest to have
received by me, neither shall any of my men once move to offend thee, for the
great valor and virtue I esteem to be in thee. But if without any reasonable
occasion, thou have dared thus boldly to abuse me: thou may be well assured,
that thou shall be chastised according to thy deserts. Knight (answered
Gerileon) I imagine thee to be the most apparent man of al thy troop, and (as
I have heard) thou art called Adylas king of Thunis, a knight very famous and
of great reputation as I gather, because I see thee affable and courteous.
Wherefore I freely tell thee, that I am none of the supposed Gods thou talkest
of, but credit me, I am a knight errant, ignorant of the place where I was
borne, and the parents that gave me life: but travail through the world,
whether fortune and my de^^^^e conducts me, in search of such adventures as
merit fame. Not long since, and not far hence, I slew a cruel monster, called
the savage Polyppe, where I met this knight, who told me what causeles shame
both thou and thy company (being ods of too great advantage) offered a
Christian prince called Ariodant, one of whose train he was: thou having
discomfited him and his men, detainest some of them as prisoners, which injury
he entreated me to revenge, and I have undertaken it both upon thee and thine:
for well thou know, that by the law of chivalry, inuiolably observed among
such as are worthy to bear the title of knighthood, all errant knights
seeking adventures, are bound to revenge the opprobrious wrongs, that the
ouerstrong offer to the over weak, having no just cause or reason therefore,
and to defend them against all forcible violence, indirectly thrown upon
miserable and afflicted persons, maintaining evermore the quarrel of the
wronged that have no help. Beside, the quarrel (for which thou have so hardly
dealt with Ariodant and his people) is public, touching all good Christians,
of which number I am one, and for ever will be: so by consequence it
appertains to me, inciting me to wreake revenge, for the injury done to
my confederates, that are of self same religion as I am, against all that are
of the contrary and adversary faith. Because then thou have nothing else now
to do, provide thee, presently to the combat with me, if thou be so desirous
as thou have expressed: for thou see I have reason to assail thee, and for
whatsoever else I have done beside. Having thus spoken, it happened as ye
shall read hereafter, for now we are to speak of other matters.

CHAP. 14.
Of the war between the Christians and the Pagans that had laid siege
before the famous City of London. And how king Angrafolt, prisoner to king
Floridamant, became enamoured of the princess Polydamie. And how many sundry
sorts of nations, came by heaps to the Pagans Camp for their succor.

IN this place, the Author of this History discontinueth a while, from
speaking of the heroycall gestes and deeds of the knight Gerileon, to take the
discourse again heretofore begun, touching the cruel and bloody war
between the Christians and Pagans, that held siedge before the proud and
famous City of London: ensuing upon that you have read in the former part of
this Book, where already has been told ye, how the hot and fierce assault
against the City, under the conduct of furious Angrafolt was ended.

Now remains to acquaint ye, with what happened after the Pagans were chased
thence, sustaining so great loss and slaughter of their men, beside their
chief heads and conducters Angrafolt and Mycophon being taken prisoners, then
thus we proceed. The night after this meruaylous assault against the good and
virtuous king Floridamant, doing a deed becoming a king that feared God and
looued his people, as every prince that is called to so high dignity ought
do, seeing and knowing, how without help of the celestial bounty, he was in
most great danger of total ruin, (which had been no small hurt to all
Christendom) also that as yet he had some advantage of his enemies, having
subjected one of the principal heads to his will, and an other of the best
knights in all their troop: he would not now show himself slothful, but
perform the act of a good Christian, by yielding thanks and praises to God,
with intreatance to continue toward him and his people, these favorable
effects of his almighty goodness, cheefely in a quarrel so just and equitable,
as was the cause of this severe and outrageous war.

To this end, the same night that each was retired from the fight, he
commanded the belles in all the Churches of the City to be ^noled, to
assemble and call together all his people, from the highest to the lowest that
had knowledge of God: willing them to render dutiful thanks to God, praying
that in mercy he would assist them, against his unbelieving enemies who would
not acknowledge him: which every one did very devoutly, and there was no holy
place thorowout the City, where lamps, torches, and tapers, were lighted,
but the people flocked thither in exceeding number. And for this purpose, the
aforenamed places were persumed with incense and Aromaticall odours, beside the
musical and mellodious voices of Priests, Moonkes, singing children, and other
servants of God, who with hearts full of heavenly devotion, sung Canticles of
praise, with prayers agreeable and pleasing to God. Continuing thus well near
all the night, such as were more apt for war, sailed not to be on the walls
in their glittering Armor, to impeach the enemy, that he should presume so
prowdlye as the day before he had done: in which time, they that were in
guarde and kept the night watch, went to thank God, and afterward to their
rest.

Angrafolt, whom king Floridament had taken prisoner, seeing all these things,
admired the meruaylous foresight of the king, the industry, care and vigilance
he used, for preparation of the Cities defense and people: when well he
perceived, that many of the Pagans should loose their lives, before they could
vanquish the people beloved of God: but beyond all other things, he was
astonned at the sight of the fair Infant Polydamie, who by commandment of
the king her father, entertained him beningly, and showed him good countenance:
because the king had determined to entreat and use him with such contentment,
as the force of his kindness and benignity, might mollify the hard cruelty of
his enemies. And so making them (against their nature) soft and gentle, they
might be induced to use humanity and courtesy, to four worthy Christian
knights, Accial of Surrie, Ramelin of Uuich, Melchior or Ireland, and Frangard
County of Durford, whom the Giant Brisard and Rongemont had taken prisoners in
combatting. For this cause he persuaded Angrafolt, to write unto king Grandowin
his father, to use those four hardy knights so kindly as might be: which he
did, fearing if they misdealt with the Christians, by over sharp or inhumaine
severity, like rigor would be used toward him, and he should be as cruelly
tormented. Here upon the Pagans did not put them to death, as otherwise they
would have done, for the lives of these four valiant knights was desired of
king Floridamant, more then the death of five hundred of his enemies,
considering the present necessity he was in.

And although Angrafolt (before his taking) was abooue all other a fierce and
cruel adversary against him, yet now he was so overcome by the courtesy and
kindness of the king used toward him: as more gladly would he continue in this
prisonment, then return again to his companions, for in such sort was he
arrested by the fair Infants beauty, which in his eye excelled all other he
had seen before, as made him more desirous to abide in this fair prison: so
that when liberty was offered him, he had no will to forgo this sweet
servitude. For ye must understand, that beyond her natural perfection, which
was no less absolute then I have told ye: she was adorned with such
sumptuous garments, jewels and other tricks of embellishment, as like stately
princesses are accustomed to wear, that the barbarous king feeling himself
altogether surprised with her love, desired nothing more, then daily to live in
contemplation of her good graces: and albeit thereby he received some pleasure
and contentment, yet was it a grief and martyrdom to him to enjoy nothing
else, his amourous conceit being unable to compass any other effect, then this
vain imagination and fantastical contemplation, so lying figured in his heart.
And if by chance he dreamed on some little show of hope, that persuaded him he
should enjoy the pleasant skirmishes of love: yet presently again was he killed
and discomforted: not unlike the angry and arrogant boot-haling Pirate, that
was w^nte to tyrannize and triumph over poorer thieves then himself, seeing
he is (for some offense by him committed) bound fast by the leg with a chain,
blames the hour of his birth, exclaming on God and his justice, without any
fear or regard of his supreme greatness.

Even so was this proud Pagan tormented, and in his torment oftentimes to
himself, he imagined some subtle and detestable mean, whereby he might
ravish the young and tender princess, or forcibly carry her away: When she
(good Lady) without any thought of evil or malice, used him most graciously
and courteous, evermore showing him freendly and smilying countenances, and
(according as the king her father had given in charge) would many and sundry
times, entertayne him with honest talk and familiare conference: which more
and more served to provoke forward his love, and from mild amourous conceit to
make him more violent, inducing this cruel enemy to an evil and pernicious
intent, such as hereafter ye shall know more of. For in this Chapter I must
tell ye what chanced (mean while) in the enemies Camp. whether safely were
retired (as ye have read in the first book) the king Guittard of Baccaleos
and the Carybes, who had been in the thickest of the hurly burly: and not a
little offended were they, to be thus shamefully driven and repulsed from their
enterprise.

It is necessary then that we consider, how almighty God does sometime
send afflictions on the good, to make trial of their perseverance in well
doing, supporting with patience the adversities wherewith they are exercised:
so it seemed now, that he would permit the Pagans of all countries far and
near, to assemble together with their inexpugnable forces, to pervert and
ruinate altogether the estate of Christendom, whereof the kingdom of England
was the great and strongest color. For the day after this meruaylous assault,
there arrived in the enemies camp for their help and succor, a great
multitude of their allies and confederates, such as had vowed with them the
euersion and total ruin of Christendom. Among others there came a Captain
sent by the king of the Turks, named Grimoaldo, a man hardy and valiant of
person: who conducted under his Ensigns fifty thousand brave fighting men,
and in good quipage. He with his troop was welcomed and received by the
heads of the Pagan army, especially of the old king Grandowin, who feasted and
entertained him in the best manner he could devise, for he kn^w well, that
this Grimoaldo was a man of mark, as skillful in feats of arms as any in all
the host. He caused him to he lodged in the reregard of his Camp, whereof he
was the head and governor, and this fresh supply made the Heathen so glad and
joyful, as nothing was heard among them but sounding of Tabourines, Trumpets,
and other warlike instruments, expressing no little joy and pleasure amongst
them, with menaces against them of the City, of quick discomfiture and
extermination.

This joy endured a great many days together, and as their succor increased,
so did their iouissance, for beside this Turkish Captain, there came a
puissant and meruaylous Pagan, of monstrous form and Gi^ntine stature, a proud
monster, mutinous, and a mighty drinker. He had three heads or faces upon on
neck that supported them all, and when he entered the Camp, he wore a massy
Crown of gold, triple fourmed according to his heads: the crowns were made
high like the Turrets of a strong Tower, and underneath was written this verse.

I am Triphon, the great and puissant king of Scythia,
The most valiant and strongest, in combat I conquer.
This arrogant and proud subscription was no leasing, for he was so strong and
puissant, as himself was able to foil a whole Army: and therefore to this
assembly he brought with him but ten thousand combattants, with whom he
thought himself sufficient to subiugate all Christendom. And the cause why he
^are these three crowns, was not in respect of his three faces so combine
together: but because he was king of three kingdoms, and held three cruel
kind of people under his obe^sance, to wit the Ge^es, the Seythians, and the
Sarmates or Sauromates. He showed in the midst of his troop, as a great high
Pine tree in the midst of a little wood, where the branches being but young
and tender, do begin to spread: for beside his unmeasurable ^^ature, he was
mounted on a furious bull of exceeding height, more prompt and apt to bear a
saddle, run and carrire, then any horse that was to be found in the world, as
fit was he likewise either for the ioust or combat: because if the Pagan
seated on his back overthrew his adversary, the bull immediately with his
horns would beat down the horse, whereon the knight that fought against him
was mounted. In this manner, enuir^ned with his men, e^^red he the Pagans
camp, many of them being surprised with marvelous fear, to see him of such a
terrible aspect and furious ^orme.

The other that were of better spirit and courage, knew well, that his
arrival would be greatly succourable to them, because his force and valiancie
was unspeakable and invincible, far beyond any other human strength. And he
that ioyed most to see him, was the arrogant and fierce Brandissant, who sent
for him, and at his request he came: for they two had long before been
companyons together, in many robberies and cruelties by them done jointly, and
by their association, forcibly, violently and through tyranny, they had gotten
kingdoms, many rich booties and heritages, which they divided between them as
brethren, that part the common herritage of their Father when he is deceased.

So by reason of the wunted familiarity and acquaintance that the one of them
had with the other, they used many sundry ceremonial embracings to each
other, being glad they had so fortunately met in this place, where they assured
themselves of the pillage and spoil, of the famous and wealthy City of
London, beside the rich treasure of king Floridamant, after they had used
toward him and his people, the like or more bloodier cruelty, then ever the
Grecians in times past did show to Pryam and his warlike Troyans.

And surely this good Christian king was very sad and sorrowful in his heart,
seeing himself so weak against such a puissant army, wherein were so many
hardy and strong knights, as but few like them could be found through the
whole world, and above all the rest this monster of Scythia was most redoubted,
in that he was most to be feared for his force and cruelty: yet
notwithstanding, putting his trust in God, the walls of his city being
strong and well appointed, he was pacient in this peril, expressing
meruaylous hardiness in his countenance, encouraging his people with fair
speeches and exhortations, that by their generous acts and behavior, they
should be vigilant and careful for the defense of the city, giving them to
understand by worthy examples, how religiously every subject stood bound to
their king and country in that behalf.

The enemies on the contrary side (for the reasons already declared) were so
merry and io^^nd, as through their camp was nothing but songs of joy and
pleasure, dronken pastimes, beastly gourmandisings, and such like insolences:
for beside the succor before rehearsed, came to the Pagan host two strong and
puissant kings from the coast of Barbary, the one named Phoas king of Alger,
and the other Orontes king of Marocco, both co^sens german, and kin in the
same degree to Adylas king of Thunis, and to the king of Phez whom we spoke of
before, being of no less force and valor then those two. Withal they
brought in their company a great multitude of armed men, good archers bearing
Persian Bows and arrows, with poysonned heads, the number of their men was
forty thousand.

By these means it seemed, that God being angry and displeased with his
people, would now thoroughly scourge them, suffering in so short time, such a
mighty power of enemies to be assembled: whereof here I purpose to speak no
more, but in the following Chapter you shall hear what happened.

CHAP. 15.
How the Pagans rejoicing for the succor, that thus came daily to them from
all parts: the prisoner Angrafolt had mind of nothing, but the love of the
fair Princess Polydamie. In mean while, the old Grandowin assembled his
council of sixteen puissant kings, who concluded on an unjust resolution:
whereof king Floridamant made no account, but minded to defend himself, and
withstand the furious assaults of his enemies. And how he heard tidings of
help from Spain and France.

ALl the Pagan Arm^e being in this joy and metriment, for the new supplies
that came to them, as before ye have heard, some hoping to load themselves
with rich bootles and pillage, others in the destruction of the English
Cities and towns, which greedy desire made them to undertake this war, and
this they would obtain, or die in pursuit thereof, (as at this day too many
are found of like disposition) others incited and enflamed with desire of
honor, but they were very few in number to the former sort, wishing for
speedy fight with king Floridamants hardy and valiant knights, the conquest
of whom would bring them immortal reputation, and this desire especially made
them be seen in this war, because many of their friends and kindred were
slain in the assault before the City, and for their deaths they had reason
to seek revenge: but above the rest, the old king Grandowin, chief of this
Army, the most ancient and malicious enemy in the troop, appeasing his
conceived grief, for the imprisonment and captivity of Angrafolt his eldest
son: quicklye sent him word of these good news, and how day by day there
came to him from many places fresh supplies, whereof if I should here make
report, it would require a very large discourse: nevertheless, in running
through the progress of these affairs and state of this war, he may gather
some, brief perticularitie hereafter. And to admit comparison, not Alexander,
Darius, Xerxes, no not the Romans, nor the Greeks before Troy, assembled so
many fighting men together at one instant, as now was before the City of
London: so that according to general oppinion, especially of the besteged, it
was held for certainty, that all the kingdom of great Britain was ruined and
lost.

Of all these things was Angrafolt advertised, and exhorted to work some mean^
of secret commotion within the City, if he could devise any way whereby to
compass it: but this two-folde taken prisoner, made full reckoning of all
these news and aduertisements, his thoughts only at some secret cogitation,
how or which way he might most commodiouslie steal away the young princess
Polydamie, or otherwise gain some amourous iouissance, the only medicine for
his languishing passions, which continually maistred his wunted humors: making
sometime a courteous and affable knight contrary to his nature, and sometime
again so drowned in melancholy, as the sight of any one but his fair
mistress offended him. A thing questionless very strange, that he who was
such a savage and cruel enemy to all humanity, not to be conquered by any
kind means, whose former desires aimed at nothing, but to see himself in the
midst of a battle, holding his bloody Lance or Courtla^e in his hand,
burning with enflamed affection of fighting without measure: should now be so
subjected to the looks of a soft and delicate maiden, carrying him daily (as it
were) bound after her, without thinking either on battle, armor, sword,
shield, horse or (...) his mind was how to confer familiarly with
Polydamie, or counting it a chief felicity to be in sight of her, for all
things else were death to his amourous desires.

Grandowin in mean while (being ignorant of this unexpected accident) one day
called an assembly of his kings and such as were the chief of his army, to
the Pauillion where council was accustomed to be holden: to the end they might
deligently deliberate on their present affairs, and by what means they were
likeliest to gain home again their prisoned friends. At this council there
met about fifteen or sixteen puissant kings, all wearing Crowns, and were
placed according to their ancient honor and degrees. The first was king
Brandissant, next, the puissant Tryphon king of Scythia, king Tauladas, king
Guittard of Baccaleos, king Marton of Cantabres, king Phoas of Alger, Orontes
king of Marocco, king Grimoaldo, king Pagotroff, king Salazard, king Kambarell,
the strong king Zorlet, Borant king of Carybe, Maurus king of Bohemia, with the
proud and arrogant king Phorban of Moeotides, a brave Pagan, and a worthy
knight. All these being assembled, to set down some resolution touching their
business, after they had long debated on diversity of opinions, such as were
severally delivered in council: they concluded in the end to write to king
Floridamant, that within three days following he should come unto them, and
bring with him the two prisoners Angrafolt and Mycrophon, commanding him to
be guide to the prisoners himself, accompanied with the best knights that
then were in the City, six in number. Likewise to bring two hundred of the
fairest maidens, all Uirgins, and of mariageable years, not exceeding fifteen
or sixteen^ at the most, that they might use their pleasure with them. In mean
while, to send all the riches and treasure, which both himself and his
Citizens had in their most secret co^fers or cabinets, for search whereof,
they would send five hundred of their Soldiers into the City: and ever after
it should continue as a yearly tribute to the chief of their Army, twenty
Uirgins of noble family and exquisit beauty, beside two Millions of Gold.

Moreover, he and his knights should come bare headed, and without any armor,
to ask parden of great king Grandowin for the death of his sons, in revenge
whereof this war was commenced: withal, that he and his knights should
voluntarily submit themselves to his mercy, that he might dispose of their
lives and goods as seemed best to him: when peradventure he would take pity
on them, not putting them to death so cruelly, nor race the City, nor murder
all the rest of his people, as otherwise he intended to do, (if he denied
their demand) with such ruin and desolation, as never was mention made of the
like.

To carry these news of this fair resolution, was immediately dispatched a
messenger toward king Floridamant, to whom the gate of the City was
presently opened, to understand the cause of his coming: and having performed
what he imagined concerning his deuoyre, delivering the before named Letters
to the king: whereupon his majesty grew presently into exceeding great anger
and rage: yet cunninglye shaddowing his conceived displeasure, he made no
other answer to the messenger, but that his intent was not to accomplish and
perform any of those several demaundes, in that they were over injurious and
unreasonable, and not to be allowed of in any wise.

Beside that (he said) if his enemies either had or should set down such a
resolution concerning his ruin and destruction: he with his council and
Nobles were concluded to stand on their defense, in resistance of the least
evil that might ^e. For the rest, each one should do their uttermost
endeavor, according as himself hither to had done, and never yet could any
enemy compel him to matters against his will, wherefore it was too late for
him now to begin: and so (quoth he to the messenger) ye may return with this
answer. Which presently he did, whereat the Pagans greatly meruayled, that a
man having so few to help him, should contain such hardiness, as to talk to
them of resistance: above all the rest, old Grandowin was extremely e^raged,
saying, that this was not the first act, wherein appeared the effects of king
Floridamants oure-weening, wherefore he would speedily take such order with his
people, as should sharply make him repent his folly and rashness.

Whereupon, within three days following at the most, each one should prepare
himself ready to arms, when such an assault should be made against the
city, as not one stone should be left standing upon another, but be rased
and extermined altogether. In regard whereof, every one should withdraw
himself to his quarter, and give order for all things needful against the day
of assault. Hereof the Christian king being advertised, commanded the Pagan
Mycrophon to be closely locked up, to the end that during this troublesome
time, he might compass no mean of working any treachery or treason. But as
for the king of Corse, he restrained not him of liberty, which he had to
walk within the walls of the Palace royal, where was room sufficient and
very spacious: well perceiving that he was so carried away with the love of
his daughter, with whom and the Queen Bellizene he still kept company,
assuring them, that he would expose himself rather for their defense then
offense: and in respect of the conversation he had had with them, no injury
should be offered to their honor.

In which speeches the Queen reposing some confidence, but the maiden
especially: the more willingly they would converse with him, and among other
familiar conferences, the Queen made him recount the number of strange
nations, the diversity of kings and great captains that were in their Army,
their estate, forces and deeds of chiua^rie, by them in former times
performed* By which reports they cunningly gleaned from this imprudent Pagan,
what best might serve for the defense of the City, and through overmuch talk,
he discovered how, on which side, and by what secret means, the enemies had
concluded to assail and seize on the City: withal he declared to them, the
manner and custom that those nations were wunt to observe and use in such
war, which was most likelyest, and which not.

By these means king Floridamant had knowledge of many things, that served as
special rules of discipline to his Court of guard, and therefore appointed his
men in readiness against the threatened day: continually trauayling day and
night with Grandilaor, Fertand, Candior, Sylban, and other hardy knights of
name that were in the City with him, who (according to his command) busied
themselves very carefully, letting nothing flip that any way concerned their
change. During which time, one night secretly arrived at the City wall, the
two valiant knights, Andregon Duke of Suffolk, and Lampridion County of
Norffolke, both Cosens german, and highly belooued of king Floridamant. The
first came from demanding help for the Christians, of Dorian king of Spain,
and the other from the like affairs in the kingdom of Gaul, whether they
were sent, before the Pagan army had engirt the City with siedge, and both
returning at one self same time, after many adventures befalling them in the
expedition of their voyages, met together on the way, and so travailing in
company, arrived there about the hour of midnight, not being espied by any of
the enemies Camp, who then were in their dead sleep, and coming to the foot
of the wall, on that side, where the king of the Suitzers had charge, and where
as then a good Citizens was Sentinel one of the richest and best Soldiers
of the City, being called Hoaster, that knew them very well, because he had
familiarlie frequented the houses of these two Christian knights, and and they
well perceiving, that Hoaster knew them by their speech, sent presently word
of their arrival to king Floridamant, who caused the nearest gate of the
city to them to be opened, when they safely entered, not being at all
discovered by the enemy. He that came from Spain advertised his majesty,
how king Dorian understanding his war against the Pagans, concluded immediately
to come himself in person, attended on by a strong and puissant army, to
assist king Floridamant his old companion, and the christian people that
inhabited great Britain: for which cause he summoned a meeting of his
subjects, promising to be in England in very short time. These tidings brought
Andregon, and Lamprydion delivered the like from king Belligand of Gaul how
forward he was in deuoire to send him succor, his army being leueyed and
ready to depart, and had ^re then set forward, but that the king daily
expected the Prince Diodamas his son, a man of great valor, who had not long
before received his order of knighthood: being gone in quest of an other knight,
that had in his keeping a Fayrie Lance, where of he had robbed the king his
father, which Lance he heard was again recovered by the young prince, and he
returning home ward, when being come, he should away to England with the
army. For these glad tidings king Floridamant thanked God, trusting in him and
to the speeding supply each hour expected: resolving to defend himself if he
should be assailed, without any issuing forth to the enemy, neither to sight,
except he should be enforced there unto, until these Armies were joined with
him. Attending which time, he thought good to prolong day of the assault,
keeping their enemies in breath, and these affairs in good foresight: which to
comp^sse, he thought on every likely and expedient remedy, as ye may perceive
in the Chapters following.

CHAP. 16.
How the Princess Polydamie, beholding from the height of a Tower, the Camp
and countenance of the Pagans, was shown by Angrafolt, who were the chief
commanders in so great a multitude. And the Princess, seeing the Scythian
monster, swouned with conceit of fear, when Angrafolt conveyed her thence into
the Queens chamber.

Mean while, to find some mean of deferring the general assault, which the
Pagans in their council had determined against the City of London: king
Floridamant consulted with the hardy knights of his council, and other noble
personages, that then were in the City with him to receive advise from them,
what best might be done ^or defense of the Christians against all events,
wanting honest excuses to delay the day of battle, and tarri^ for the supply
which was coming. The Pagans on the other side disposed their men (being many
in number) to assail the besiedged, forca^^ing all the best ways and m^anes
for the same that might be possible. And as these affairs passed on in this
sort, the fair Infant Polydamie being on the top of a high Tower of the
palace royal, where she might behold the confused and bad ordered multitude
of enemies: saw them martching forth of their pauillions, which were erected
a pretty way off from the ^ittie, that they might to rain themselves nearer,
where the Archers, Crosbowes and Slings might eastlie reach the town with
their shaftes and stones: as in those times the Pagan nations knew how to use
the same, as well in assayling as in defending, or where they soonest might
come to handie gripes, or make some sudden surprise in the night, whereat the
beautiful maid was greatly abashed. But had they been assembled there, to
some better purpose then they were, she might have conceived exceeding
pleasure, in beholding so many goodly Ensigns or Guydons, such rich gilt
glistering armor, so many pikes and lances, so many brave Captains well
furnished, so many hardy knights well mounted in equipage, so many Drums,
Fyfes, and Trumpets, which with warlike noise cheered up the soldiers hearts:
as one would have said, seeing the footmen leap and dance so merrily, and the
horsemen carryre so bravely, that they rather were prepared for a wedding then
the fight: yet notwithstanding this pleasing sight, she curssed them in her
mind, desiring bet^ter pastime, and more agreeable to her contentment.

Continuing in this displeased thought and contemplation, Angrafolt the king of
Corse came up to her, having long sought her in many chambers of the Castle,
and not finding her, ye may guess his grief by his humor: for he was so
passionate and impatient in his love, that being absent from the fair Infants
sight, he could enjoy no rest, wherefore finding her by her self, after he had
so long sought her in every likely place: judge ye whether he were pleased or
no, and the Prince^^e contrariwise displeased, to be alone in such a place,
far from the Queens company and the other Ladies, with such a mighty enemy
to her modesty, which (as she well knew) be sought all means to attempt: yet
^eeling himself to be a prisoner, fearing likewise to raise any further
offense in his enemies against him, and especially being ouerruled by the force
of love, which made him so mild and gentle as I told (...) before, he used
such rega^^ of the Princess, as not so much as with a look or a word, he
would be drawn to use any force or violence toward her. Which when the Lady
noted, with a benign and gracious welcome, wishing him to abandon those
melancholy humors, she entreated him to show and tell her perticulerly, who
and what were the cheifest leaders in that multitude. And seeing a chariot
(...) ^edeckt with gold and silver, drawn by four lusty (...) Coursers
bravely caparosonued, wherein sat an ancient knight, his heard white, and
countenance reverend, enuiro^ed with a goodly troop of horssemen, that rode
before him along the field, all showing duty to him, and rainging which way
he pleased: she was desirous to know the estate of this old man, whom first
her eyes had taken view of, wherefore she thus began.

I pray ye sir knight, if ye bear me such love as ye have made speech of:
tell me truly what this old man is, that rides in such rich and fair a
Chariot, to sport himself along the Ca^pe. Lady, quoth Angrafolt, I shall
willingly tell ye without fabling, for in obeying your command, I would make
no spare of my life, much less then deny to satisfy ye in this. Among these
matters of so great importance, know madame, that this is the puissant king
Grandowin my father, chief of all this great multitude of men by him levied,
in his youth he has doon^ many fair (...) and worthy deeds of memory, and
although (by reason of his years) he is not as he has been ready in force
and prowess for the fight: yet is he so wise and pollitique in council,
concerning these affyres of warr^, a Prince (...) rich, opulent and redoubted
withal, as all the Pagan nations stand in awe of him, respecting only his
^ommaundem^nt. All these which you see here, are (...) for his defense (the
renown of his virtue and (...) being so spread through the world) are all at
his direction, to fight, (...) cities, or what else beside, and (...) are they
to learn (...) Then tell me sir, quoth she, what is yonder portly knight of
stature, whose countenance appears so proud and arrogant, that with his great
black Courser fetches such (...) having so rich and fair a plume of (...)
blew and white in the treast of his Helmet, an^wering the same in couller that
are on his horses head: his Beuer being open, makes me conjecture by the small
sight of his face, that he should be a man of high resolve, and in martial:
enterprises a courageous warrior. Beside, if (...) ^ye deceive me not, he
somewhat resembles your self in countenance, the couller of your hair nothing
diffe^ing: for his arms, as I guess standing so far off, he bears in his
sheeld three bloody rampant Lions in a field blewe.

He^ whom ye speak of Madam, answered Angrafolt, ^ee^ing to hardy and
magnanimous, is my brother Brandissan^, a man repleat with wounderfull
prowess, valiant and ready at arms beyond all the rest of the army, a rich
and mighty prince hoth in lands and treasure, who in his tender youth held
such war against his enemies, as ouer^^^^^ing and ^anquishing them, he
conquered with all sundry (...) and (...) rich and fertile, well garnished
with people, borne and brought up to follow the wars. But he (quoth
Polydamie) whom I behold yonde^ a little on the left hand, who priding in the
course of his horse, makes him carrire toward king Brandissant your brother: he
^eares in his sheeld ^oure Giants, and the figure of a monster dead or (...) as
I (...) by the painting, and there stands a knight (...) in the conquest: what
is he? and what are those other three that follow in the same course, all
seeming to be of one mind or disposition. They are (quoth Angrafolt) four
great Pagan princes, the subjects and servants to king Brandissant my brother:
the first of them is called Solazard, that bears the monster and the Giants
slain, as ye perceive by the painting in his sheeld, those in times past he
alone vanquished in a foughten field.

He is a rich and puissant Lord, a man of great valor and address at arms,
and by reason of his prowess worthy estimation: though he were deformed and
of monstrous fashion, as ye might see if he were unarmed. The other likewise
that follow, are knights of mark and great reputation, the one, is king of
Niuarie, a rich and opulant kingdom, that with one Lance, brought to death
thirty Cantabres, when king Brandissant my brother made war upon them,
wherefore at this day he bears them all depainted in his sheeld, as ye might
behold, if the green shadow were away wherewith it is covered. As for the
other two, they are the valiant Cambarell and Pag^traff, Kings of the Iunonian
Isles, in riches and valor they are not equal to their two former brethren,
but in age only and nothing else: and further of in midst of the troop, where
ye see yond multitude of goodly pauillions, are their people, tarrying but when
they shall be ranged in order for the assault: toward king Grandowin are they
now martching, to understand his advise and council, in what place they should
assemble, while the rest of their company being merrily disposed, fall to
such pastimes as martial men are wunte to exercise.

And fronting that troop, ye may behold my six Giants, which show so high
above the other, as steeples in a city ouerpeere the lowest buildings: and
they are prepared (as they were when I maistred them) to resist a very
puissant army. But what is he, quoth the princes, on the right hand, that
rides on the roane Courser, managing a strong lance upon his thigh, clad in
black Armor graven all over with gold, glittering so bravely as he rides to
an other troop some what further off.

You mean he Madame, said Angrafolt, that bears three golden Suns in his
sheeld, deciphered in a green field, and bordered round about with purest
gold? He I mean, answered the Princess, that talks with another knight of
like apparaunce, hard by the multitude, mounted on a sorrel Courser, with a
very strong Lance in his hand, and in his sheeld three Leopards heads in a
Sable field. It is, replied the Corsean prince, the worthy king Tauladas of
Canada, a man wonderful a^^able and debonaire, albeit no less hardy with
sword or Lance, then any other in all the Camp: even so is he with whom
you see him talking* the redoubted Barant king of Carybe, they both being come
to associate this war, rather for proof of man to man in combat, (against
king Floridamant your father, the fame of whose renowned virtues called them
hither) then any desire to do him hurt or damage: but true it is, that to
fortify our Camp, they have brought with them from their countries and
kingdoms, great store of armed men and well appointed. I am much deceived,
said the princess, if he whom I see standing with his face toward us, be not
some Pagan king of great name* he I mean, that now marches (...), all bearing
Ensigns or Guydons of diverse coullers in their hands, and he riding somewhat
aloof^ before them, on a horse more white then any Swanne, harnessed with
^^mosin veluit, the ^^uddes and buckles of perfect gold: and if mine eyes fayl
me not, he (...) three (...) sheeld, and those I take to be his arms.

Madame, answered the Pagan, I did not well note his countenance, beacuse he
suddenly turned back toward his (...) but if he bear such arms as you speak
of it (...) Marton, king of Biscay or (...) (among other things) to conduct men
of war on the Seas, where in our ^omming hith^r he was chief leader of all
our Army, having the whole government and charge thereof, by reason of the
great valor abiding in him, and long experience in many affairs: they that
follow him are all knights of esteem, whose charge is to manage the Ensigns
and Standards in the ships.

I have not yet seen, said the Princess Polydamie, two more brave and comely
knights, then these two that ride hitherward, each on a black Steed, marked
alike with white in their foreheads, their backs and legs richly harnessed
with green velvet: one of them bears two Collomes in his sheeld, figured in
an Azure field: the other a flourishing branch of Roses, carrying their
lively Roses in a golden field, and each has in his hand a Iaueling pointed
with gold, and garnished with silver studdes: their horses trot alike, both
of one (...) and height, I am (...) they are none of the m^anest in your
company, I pray ye sir tell me what they are. These two (Madame) are arrived
here since I was taken, but as I have heard by messages from my noble father,
they are the two princes Orentes and Phoas, the one king of Marocco, the other
of Alger, two neighboring kingdoms on the coast of Barbary, abounding in
riches and treasure, so likewise of their persons they are as hardy and
valiant as any in the world, and as heavy enemies to the Christians and their
religion, the express cause of their coming hither, to hurt and destroy them
so much as possibly they may.

As the Corsean king held on this speech to the princess, the kings Maurus and
Phorbon, and between them the monstrous Tryphon king of Scithia, Gotia,
Sarmata, and Geta, came forth of their pauillions to dorayne their people, and
as the young Lady noted their gestures and countenance, intending to enquirs
what they were, c^^^ing her eyes upon the Scythian Mou^^er, m^unted and
^quipped in such form and manner as before I have told ye: she was so
surprised with fear at the very sight of him, her heart being tender,
dainty and delicate, as giving a loud shrike, she fell in a swoune or trance,
which the Pagan king perceiving, and dreading some wurs inconvenience would
ensue: he took her up in his arms, and carried her thence very gentlye and
modestly into the Queens Chamber, where he declared the occasion of her
fear, and continued to them the discourse of those three before named kings:
which the Ladies heard very attentively, and while the Pagan bethinkes himself
where to break off his discourse, here think I good to conclude this Chapter.

CHAP. 17.
How king Floridamant having assembled his Council, to receive advise from the
chief of his friends, and well wellers, concerning what was best to be done in
this necessity: After he had heard the diversity of their oppinions, in the
end he set down his rest on the council of the wise and aged duke Candior of
Normandy.

KIng Floridamant was all this while in Council, to be advised (as I told ye
in the former chapter) how he might best delay the assault, and by likelye
mean de^erre it, till the expected aid from Gaul and Spain were arrived. In
which council, there were many of different and contrary oppinions, for some
thought good to temporise a while without fighting, until they should be
somewhat stronger, to endure so sharp and cruel an assault as the Pagans
intended against them; because in very deed they were ouer-weake, to withstand
so fierce a charge as was like to be offered, for if their mishap should be
such (as the issue of fightes and batta^les is most certainlye uncertain) to
be vanquished, and the City taken in the assault: the hoped for supply so
long attended, were vain, and would profit them nothing after their death, for
hardlye should they become conquerours after they were conquered, therefore the
counsel of stay was reputed most honest, and without any show of cowardice
of these doubtful means to choose one.

Or else to send a Letter to the heads and chief of the Pagan Camp that if
twelve such knights as they could choose in their Camp, even the very
brauest, where of they had great numbeer, (except the mighty king Tryphon of
Scithia) durst enterprise the combat in field enclosed, with what arms they
would, against king Floridamant, and eleven such knights as he would elect for
his company: if in this combat they happened to be victors, king Floridamant
would obey the decrees and conditions by them before proposed, satisf^yng
whatsoever they demanded by their messenger. But if the conquest turned to
king Floridamant and his Knights, the Pagans should be bound to deliver their
four vallant prisoners, and depart with bag and baggage, not offering injury
or displeasure to any Christian. For assurance of which conuentions, the
prisoners on either side should remain ostages, until the vanquished had
obeyed to such order as they had thus promised by inuioble oathe.

Otherwise they were of opinion, to enforce the Pagan prisoner write to them,
with whom his credit was so great, and whose loss the king Grandowin greatly
feared, because extremely he loved his Children: that so soon as they began
to assault the city, the Christians were minded cruelly to put them to
death. Others humors were far contrary here to, and said, it were more
necessary to incite the Corsean king, to write rather of a treaty of marriage
with the kings daughter, being become so amourous of her, as he could gladly
elect her as his wife: and while they should consider on this marriage
contract, it might be a mean of peace with Floridamant, for the city were
to stand free from the least mollestation, until he secretly understood his
fathers will, whether it should be a marriage or no, for which season they
might lawfully require a truce or peace: thus feigning some forwardnes in
themselves to this marriage, they should induce the Pagan to write the more
willingly. But king Floridamant, who had his spirit more vigilant and diligent
about his affairs, and for the conservation of his honor: reputed these
opinions (of the king Grandilaor and Ferrand, with the princes Andregor and
Lampridion, who had thus conferred together) to be very strange and far from
reason: wherefore he addressed himself to grave old Candior of Normandy,
desirous to understand if he were so minded or no, whereto the Duke thus
answered.

My Lord, I have ever esteemed and accounted the kings Ferrand and Grandilaor,
as also the Duke of Suffolk and County of Nor^^olke, to be hardy and
courageous knights, above all in your court, their deeds have been very
generous, and full of high chivalry, as by very honorable effects they have
been manifested to me: but I tell ye boldly in their presence (seeing it is
your pleasure) without any flutterie, that (...) I had not good and certain
knowledge of them, yea, had not mine eyes seen in many encounters, the
undoubted proof of their valor and virtue: hearing them of such opinion in
these affairs, questionles I should think them other then they are, or else
dreading doubt of the danger wherein we now are, has made them use these
terms of fear, ^ather to the loss of your estate, so many good citizens,
women and young children as are in this city, then any hazard of their own
persons. Therefore whatsouer (...) thereon, I may not follow their advise, for
many reasons and considerations, which if it please you, and all the
assistants, to listen with favorable ears, I will describe unto ye. In the
first place, if we should write to our enemies and defy certain of them in
combat against like number of ours: they presently would conceive opinion,
that all our strength and valor consisted in the hardiness of a doozen men,
which might be easy for them to discomfite, and no other hope remains now
for us, where as yet hither to they have been of a far contrary mind. For
howsoever ready they be to assail us, they imagine us to be a greater
number then we are, as ye may gather by so many likelyhoods lately seen,
disposing their camp into so many and sundry places, all to hinder our
issuing forth upon them by day or night: the rest in far fewer number, are
ranged into four direct places, where best they may make their assault. Far
better it is for us it should be so, then otherwise, because if all were
prepared to assail us, we should find our selves more severely (...), then
we can do by the order that is now disposed: and this will fall out for
certain, if we write to our enemies as these good Lords have advised.

Secondly, whereas we would combat, as it is thought meet to be demanded, or
else we will do or can do nothing: if we be so desirous of the combat, twelve
against twelve, we shall bring our selves into very great hazard. For it is
necessary to consider, as ever more in taking things at the (...), that be it
we gain or we loose the battle, we shall be sure every way to loose:
because in a case of victory, we can take no assurance of our enemies ^aith,
they having none at all. Nor are we anyio^e to trust the (...) prisoners, which
we have in our custodye, by reason they have more of ours, whom we prize and
esteem more them they do or can do theyr^. Beside, they have among them
diverse nations of contrary^ (...), some of them (against the will of the (...))
may (...) upon our twelve knights, and murder them, if they be not
miraculously preserved from so great danger: and which is more* what
likelihood can be gathered, that twelve men, the chief and head of a
sufficient great and puissant army, should go forth to hazard the lives and
liberty of so many persons? where being united together within the City, and
fenced round about with strong walls, me thinks, that although all the Pagans
in the world were here assembled to enforce us, yet should it be impossible
for them. And before they can get entry, their siedge will be longer then that
of Troy was, but we must make no issue out upon them, neither will we any way
condescend to this combat: for it were but a faint hearted trick, if they
should take us at our word, and we our selves afterward glad to refuse it,
this for ever will redounde to our great shame and dishonor, which we should
rather fly then the loss of our lives. Now for constraining the Pagan
prisoner to write any thing thereby to respite and delay the assault, I mislike
that more then the other, because we ought not use any force or violence
against a prisoner, urging him to write any matter whatsoever, that may be
prejudicial to him or his: least that our enemies who are Pagans, and in whom
yet never appeared any spark of loyalty or fidelity (as well we know)
should intend some thing against our prisoner, both hurtful unto them and us,
and I am of opinion, that if unbelieving men contain such good thoughts, as to
use kindness and benignity toward their enemies, the like or more ought
appear in them that profess faith and loyalty. We then that follow the
right path of a far better religion, should think on no fraud or trumperie
whatsoever, and much less in time of a kind entreaty, as we promise to our
prisoned enemy, under hope whereof, they whom our enemies detain of ours, may
receive such favor from them, as they shall not be compelled to do any thing
hurtful to themselves. Let us not then constrain him to any thing against his
will, much less let us speak or once open our mouths concerning any
marriage, in that it will seem a matter incredible to our enemies that against
the laws of our religion, we would permit the marriage of a Pagan with a
Christian: this were but to make them verily believe, that we would altogether
forsake our God, and the con^idence we have hitherto reposed in him, to worship
with them their false gods, Jupiter, Mahomet, Mercury, Phoebus, and such like
idols as they reverence as things celestial, so altogether to take their
part: whereas we ought not show them the least attaint of our thoughts, but
firmly to stand on our strong faithful foundation toward God, who evermore
hitherto has maintained and preserved us, by his exceeding mercy and
invincible dower. And still in his goodness we ought to resolve with our selves,
that all the Bethulians were in times past delivered, from the miserable and
cruel siedge of cruel Holofernes, only by power divine, that for their
deliverance raised up a woman, who by vndauntable stomach cut off the head of
their cheifest enemy: we by the like or greater miracle, by his supreme and
divine grace shall be delivered from our proud enemy: for whose destruction if
our strength be two feeble, or in any sort wants, he can by his will, if we
firmly trust in him, make fly on them again, either the Sword of Gedeon or
Aioth, or else an other Iudeth, to overthrow and exterminate their days
altogether, so to preserve and deliver them that abide in faithful obedience
and trust, continuing their firm hope and assurance only in him.

We see by many holy and sacred mysteries and examples wherewith the divine and
holy Scriptures are plentifully stored and furnished from how many evils and
mischiefs he delivered, and miraculouslie preferued the Children of Isaac and
Israel, that trusted in his goodness and mercy, and did with hearts full of
devotion and penitence, call for his help and succor in their calamities and
afflictions: let us then altogether trust and hope in him, believing that he is
at this present, ever has been, and for ever will be, as gracious and
mighty as then he was, and in this hope let us take pain, valiantlye and
couragionslie to defend our selves: for if we had this resolution in us, though
we were as men without heart or power, I am persuaded that five hundred of us,
shall suffice to impeache the entrance of our enemy, were they as many more in
number as they are, and so attend the arrival of our hoped succor, albeit
they should tarry a month yet longer in coming, when he had concluded in this
sort, the wise and virtuous king Floridamant, seeing by ^xteriour
demonstration, that the greater part of the assistants, approved and highly
praised the good council of the val^ant old Candior Duke of Normandy:
fastened on his words, and thus began himself.

My good friends and faithful companions, if in this aduers^tie (which has
not been common with you or me) I have some cause of grief, to see my self
in extreme danger of loosing my estate and Crown, which my predecessors by
their prudence and virtue, so long time happily preserved in all flourishing
joy and prosperity: yet withal I have now great reason to comfort my self,
seeing so many virtuous and valiant persons embarked in the same ship, ready
to run in like danger of fortune with me, who not only by effects of their
prowess and valor lets me apparently behold, what good will they bear to
the conservation of the christian weal public: but likewise do travail by
their advise and council, to acquaint both mine eyes and certain experience,
with what zeal and affection they embrace the conduct of mine estate, and how
forward they are for the preservation of all Christendom, which would be
meruaylously shaken, if this woeful distressed kingdom (at this instant the
most flourishing estate of all, where the name of Jesus Christ is known,
honored and glorified) should fall as a pray to the enemy, that seek to take
and utterly ruinate it. For which I ought cheefely to thank my God, as
unfeignedly I do, that he has not altogether forsaken me in this calamity
and misery: but not only has provided me of such valiant knights and
warriors as you all are, but withal has lent me men so skillful and advised.
It seems then good to me, that according to the discreet council of Duke
Candior of Normandy, that we should not seek to delay, but patiently endure
the enemies assault, when they shall again with their great number give the
attempt, and without any show of fear either without or within the City,
carry no regard of our lives or goods, but imploye our selves together
manfully, to defend so just a quarrel as this for which we fight. And let us
so behave our selves, that our enemies may know, how the Lord God that
assisteth us, and can (if he please) take our ca^se in hand, is only mighty,
and will by us deliver such testimony of fortitude to the world, as neither
is in their power, or the false idolatrous Gods which they worship, to do, in
vain then shall they think to fear us, or work such ruin to us as they
intended. In this deliberation each of you take courage, and he assured, that
whosoe^dr dies in hardy trial of this fight, it shall be a perpetual honor
to him in this world, and a glorious life to him in the endless world, where
he shall triumph of the fairest victory. Nevertheless, I do not reject the
good council and advise of the king Ferrand, Grandilaor, and others agreeing
with them whereto if we see urgent necessity constrain us, we may use them
as we find cause, to uphold our selves on our feet what ever betide us: marie
yet we must not so slightlie condescend thereto, without further feeling of our
enemies force, then as yet we have, without any great disadvantage. Having thus
said, each commended and agreed on this resolution, and so rising from council,
they went to prepare to withstand the assault, as hereafter ye shall read,
because we must here conclude this chapter.

CHAP. 18.
How the Pagans prepared themselves to the assault, and how the besieged
Christians endeavored to the contrary, in such sort as they withstood it
valiantly. How many brave bickerings passed between them, compelling the
Infidels (after a great slaughter, and on needful occasion) to withdraw
themselves toward their Camp and Pauillions.

WHen the Christian Princes departed from Council, it was almost night, and
having a lighted Torche before him, as is the manner in the Realm of England,
the chief and most noble Lords went to the Palace royal, to take their
repast in company of their king, who feasted and entertained them very
magnificently, the better to encourage them in their deu^ire. After supper was
ended, the guarde and watch was orderly placed, each one of the inhabitants
thus resolving, rather to die the death, then turn their backs on their
enemies, or forsake the walls, which they manned and fortified very strongly,
expressing iuuincible and never quayling courage. The princes were there in
person, and having in the night made sundry roundes about the City, to see
if any thing wanted in any place: they found all well and in good disposition,
through the careful diligence of the Captains by them appointed, and
according as the king had commanded for conduct of the footmen. This done,
they departed for a while to the palace again, that they might take a little
rest, because they had been so ouertrauailed the days before. Not three
hours or thereabout had they slumbringly slept, but they heard a great rumor
and noise through all the City, the cause whereof was, in respect the enemies
had sounded their drums and trumpets, giving an alarm to the inhabitants:
whereupon king Floridamant arose immediately, and all the Christian kings and
Princes that bare him company, who betook themselves as the king had
appointed, to the rampires and contremures severally provided, to withstand
this first and sudden assault of the Pagans. And as each one was come to his
place of charge, they found the enemies already very busy, against four
places of the City at once, with their Trepans, Rams, Bricolles, Scorpions,
Crows, with other such like engines and instruments for war, wherewith in
those times they used to break and beat down the walls of Cities, they saw
withal* that they had erected their high terrasses and platformes that
commanded over the City, and on the principal of these Fortes, they had
builded certain bastils or houses of wood, wherein were placed great store of
Archers and crossebows, who standing with assurance against the enemy, might
greatly injury such as attempted to impeache the escalade, appointed in these
places and for this purpose. For this cause likewise, they commanded their
Elephants to be brought near the walls, to the number of two or three hundred,
carrying little castles of wood upon their backs, wherein also were a number of
Pagan Archers hid. Beside, many were appointed with Torches and burning
firebrands against the gates of the city, where they laid store of pitch
barrels, to make the fire the sooner do his office when the gates being burnt
down, they entered in great number the city, while the christians was busied
to defend the breach or scaling of the walls: when king Floridamant and his
hardy knights had notice ^eereof, with all speed they haste^ed thither, where
seeing how they labored against the high bulwarks of earth, with their pioners
they made new fortifications upon them, casting such deep trenches round
about, as should hold them rougher work then the wall had done: for the trenche
was made with special good soldiers (...) the number of three or four
thousand, being armed with pikes and steeled cuirasses, so worthily stood upon
their defense, as the Pagans, who verily thought they had won the day
already, were quickly repulsed from that bridge, for king Grandilaor, Andregon
and Lampridion, who were appointed to keep that quarter with their companies,
drove them so furiously over the false rouered deep trenches, as at this first
onset fell therein wounded, slain and spoiled, fourteen or fifteen hundred
Pagans together, that were striving, who should be foremost before his fellow.
Whereat the f^erce and proud Brandissant chafed out of measure, when being
followed by the four Pagan kings his vassalls, all armed in most goodly
glittering armor, each having in his hand a mighty mase, garnished with
sharp steel points round about: they laid upon the Christians so
outragiously, as the port of the bulwark (where into the greater part ran for
safety of their lives) being too straight to let them in so fast as they came,
there were presently slain outright in this brunt more then five hundred men.
Brandissant pressing still on, by chance met with the Citizen Hoaster, who had
charge of a brave armed troup in the city, and such was his unconquerable
courage, as he would resist this bloudthirstie pagan: but he received such a
stroke on the creast of his morion, where stood a fair plume of snowie white
feathers, as pearcing quite through the harnes into the brains there this
worthy citizen yielded up his soul to God: which when his son behold, the
sole heir of a marvelous wealthy patrimony, which his father had heaped
together for him, being a valiant young man and of towardly hope, he was
overcome with such extreme rage and despite, as in the heat of his ^urie
(not dreading the force of this stout pagan) he ran upon him to revenge the
death of his father, and having his sword drawn in his hand, he delivered such
a stroke at the pagan, as (but for the goodness of his shield) had deeply
wounded him, for the swords point brake of with out any further harm to his
enemy, but the Pagan making no account of the blow, thought in scorn to pass
by him, and meddle no more with him, whereat the young man called Dondye, was so
vexed, as running again at Brandissant, he challenged him the combat: when the
Pagan entering into his wonted choler, made him die the same death his father
had done before, and holding on his way in this fury, made such havoc of
the Christians, as before he would take a breathing, he slew five and twenty
or thirty men of mark, as brave and hardy as any in that company. Agaros a
man of authority, who before time had lead men in the wars of the de^eased
king Brandismel, was slain as he fought very courageously; for after he had
killed four pagan soldiers hand to hand, himself fell down dead by the
hand of this cruel and bloody Brandissant, So likewise did Taurisque the
brave leaper and the good drinker Grinos albeit he took not his drink well
enough that morning, for which it seemed he was so sorrowful in dying as he
yielded forth his soul at his mouth, crying for some friend to bring him his
liquor. With them bare company Anglidor King Floridamants player on the Lute,
and the valiant knight Andron, who sometime had been his page, with his two
brethren Iumeaux Marcis, and Mausis, goodly young men of the wealthiest family
of the city of London, greatly affected to the good and safety of the weal
public, and so many beside of special name, as if I should particularly
set them down in writing, it would require more time than in this case is
limited me. For if the fierce pagan put ten to death, his followers apparently
imitated his valor, in murdering seven or eight at the least, according as
they could possibly reach them. Salazard with his semitarie smote off the head
of Norgal among others, and quickly did the like to Longaro his cousin, two
lusty young men, that were counted the best Fencers in all the city, but
albeit their cunning and ^encing made a fine show in their masters hall, it
little auailed them against the unspeakable force of this valyant pagan, who
(with them) sliced through the midst of the body. Aridos the good pilot, he
that in his life time had made many a voyage on the mediteranean sea, and from
one side to another cut through the wide Ocean, to places whereof the names
were never known. Cambarel cruelly slaughtered Medion a gallant disposed young
man of the city, whose father dying not long before left him abounding in goods
and riches, and he being at liberty was affianced (for her beauty and
virtue) to the fairest maid in the City, albeit she had no great dowry to her
marriage, because her parents and friends were very ^oore. But this rich
citizen being amorous of her, minded soon after to marry her, and so living
in this sort, the pagan gave end to his love and hope at one s^roke, which so
grieved Caluis, the brother germayne to fair Auciana, the affianced maid, as
he would do his deuoir to revenge his death, but Cambarel (...) him with his
sword from the head to the middle, and likewise slew Amiris the good Archer, as
he was sending an arrow toward the fierce Zarlot, who on the other side made
great spoil of the poor christians: but he had not the leisure to do it, for
as he held up his brasi^l bow, tipped at each end with good hearts horn, he fell
down dead to the earth, the black blood issuing abundantly out at his mouth,
through the cruel stroke the pagan gave him with his sharp skein. Not
contented herewith, he smote the cunning cook Piscan on the flank, he that was
woonte to keep the keys of the gate of the City, to open them in the
morning and shut them at night, and so the good soldier fell dead to the
ground: as likewise four german brethren, who all that morning had labored
to repulse the enemy, and in the first shocke flew half a dozen with their
gilded pikes, but when they brake through the throng, to drive the puissant
Phago^roff back again from the breach, all striving to avenge the death one
of another, were in the ends slaughtered and spoiled in the breach by the
right hand of this strong pagan Phagotroff, which proved very great loss to
the christians, for besides that they were descended of very noble race, their
virtues and hardy courage made them worthy of high commendatious: the (...)
being named Flexin, the next Lampos, the third Artaxe, and the youngest Robly,
the four sons of the loyal knight Tamiris, who long time served king
Floridamant, as master of his household, and died in his service, as now did
his four sons, in the defnce of their lives and Countrie-King Grandilaor
that beheld this blodie slaughter and merciless murdering of the Christians,
as well by these accursed pagans before named, as also the six huge gyantes
belonging to Angrafolt, became so passionate in his thoughts, that to revenge
the death of these four hardy Gentlemen, he put himself forward against the
pagan Phagotroff, who thinking to handle him as he had done the rest, was
greatly stonned when he saw and knew by effects, that he had made an
ouer-rash account, the christian prince laying such strokes on him with his
sword, as in his life he had not felt the like. Wherefore looking more narowly
to his business, he covered himself with his shield, whereof Grandilaor had
pared away a great part, and to began between them a very hot skirmish, for
if the christian prince was valiant and ready to arms, the bold pagan was no
less than he. Which Zarlot and his brother perceiving, travailed so greedily
to kill this Christian, as in despite (lea^ing the conflict where they were
dealing) they made great have to run furiously upon him, but one of the
ar^hers sent an arow so right from off the rampart, as entering the ^ight of
his helmet, was soundly planted in the midst of his eye, whereof he felt such
exceeding pain and anguish, as he f^ll down in the place where he stood. Now
is it not to be doubted whether Brandissant and his three brethren were
offended hereat, for ye must think the^^ a^ger to be such, as they laid on
the Christians ten (...) than they had done before. And the Christians withal
were so joyful, to see one of their enemies chief pillars laid along, as they
began likewise to use better defense for thems^lues then they ^yd before, and
the rather, for that the princes Andregon and Lampridion (being near on the
other side) had slain the two fierce Giants Astort and Morganos, beside
Rogemont that ventured first on the wall in the esca^ade, was by them so
shamefully repuls^d, as falling plainly from the top of the breach, he was
glad to get him out of the fight, with his leg broken in the midst: but the
multitude of the pagans was so strong and valiant, as no man was able to stand
before them, for as they sought to carry away the wounded body of Zarlot, the
Christians strove to take it from them, in which attempt to many of them were
slain, as they were feign to let them have the pagans body half dead, and
fly for assurance of their own lives, behind the rampart and bulwark, which
their laborers had raised before the breach, and thence to repel the enemies
access was very difficult. When King Floridamant noted this, he went and
came from one breach to another, even where he perceived the fight to be most
vilent, and where a soldier might best set himself to work: and holding his
bloody curtelar in his hand, seeing Grandilaor, Andregon, Lampridion, and
others sustaining the assalt on the side half vanquished, the breach being well
near lost, such was the strength of the pagan kings, princes and abounding
multitude, he cried and called out unto them in this manner.

A^ valiant knights and worthy men at arms, in whom gloryously shines such
prowess and valor, as under the vault of heaven was never seen the like, now
experience tells me, that your virtue is invincible, and albeit the force of our
enemies is most great, ye have notwithstanding such unconquerable spirits, as
the dread of death cannot cause ye to forg^t your deuoir, being so long since
^aught, that it is much better to die with (...), then live with shame and
disgrace, which your generous minds could never brook, to have your fame by
the very least mean impaired. If already you have and still do give such
terror to to the enemy, as he knows not whether he were best forsake the
place or no, delivering you the signal of victory in y^elding you his room:
assure your selves that whatsoever countenance they show of having the better,
yet in this extremity they know not to which of their Gods they should now
make recourse. Courage, courage then most valiant knights and Gentlemen,
boldly beat back these heathen Infidels, I am here yet whole and sound to
give ye succor, and as your faithful companion will live and die with ye, not
budging one foot from it, till either I be slain or you ^onquerours.

These words pronounced most cheerfully, and coming from so great a
personage, gave such courage to the Christian princes and soldiers there
about him, especially when they saw the king not only in words, but in deeds
endeavored for their assistance: as king Grandilaor so rudely charged the pagan
Phagotroff, who was climbing up the top of the rampire, that he made him come
tumb^ing down again so loutishly, as he mist but very little of breaking his
neck: nevertheless he was so astonished and amazed, as his brethren and the rest
which saw him thought he had been dead indeed. This ^o inflamed their chief
leader Brandissant, that he ran with such fury on this valiant prince, as
but for the speedy help of king Floridamant he had there bin slain out
right, for he had given him such a peisaunt stroke with his ^ace, as shiuering
his ^hield had almost broke his arm, and withal made him fall in a trance to
the ground, which the pagan well no^ing, ran to finish up the last accent of
his life, but king Floridamant steped before him with such force and hardy
courage* as the pagan feeling four or five good strokes well and soundly laid
upon him, was glad honestly to get him gone, and forsake the rampyre which
he thought to have won, showing notwithstanding in his recoyling some valor
in his countenance. Nor can I compare his retire to any thing better, than
that of a mastiue dog, that being well bitten with the teeth of one that is
stronger than himself flies without making semblance thereof, showing his
teeth for all that to the other that (...) him.

Thus threatened the pagan, when he was forciblie beaten from the rampire,
showing back his mighty mase with some mean ostentation, as though he would
kill him that durst presume to ^ollowe him. But king Floridamant, seeing that
it was not so ^xpedient to follow him, but rather to help Andregon and
Lampridion, who were strongly beset by Salazard and Cambarell, as also a great
number of their company, against whom (^auing so few soldiers) it was very
hand for them to make resistance* therefore presently he directed his course
thither, leaving the pursuit of Brandissant, and there so bravely behaved
himself, that the Pagans perceiving their chief leaders driu^n from the
rampart by the renowned Christian king, the tr^nche likewise (...) again, and
many Pagans of name lay weltring in their blood: they also took themselves to
flight, wh^reat the old Grandowin, who galloped with his Chariot hithe^ and
thither, to courage and harten up his men, remembering how forward they were at
the first* and no^^e to fly with such manifest disgrace and shame, especially
the king of T^uariffe his son* How n^we Brandissant? (...) I thought the
place where you would give the first assault, should be our undoubted entrance
into the City: yet now to the contrary I behold, that you who should serve
for an example of valor and ha^dines to all our h^ste, are the first that
inciteth them to take their heels, thereby to desist from so fair an
enterprise, begun and hitherto continued hapily. If thou turn not once again
with thy men to the place from whence thou camst, I will flatly say thou art
not my son: never more will I think on thee or Angrefolt thy brother, if
thou revenge not their death slain by the christian king, and this notorious
injury offered us. Return thou then with speed upon the enemy, without hope
of ever coming back again, except thou bring the victory and spoil of the
Christians, for this is the day or never, that must needs make us Lozdes and
commanders in this strong and well defended city.

The magnanimious Infidel strouting himself, and having with marvelous
gravity delivered these words, his cruel son (followed by all his people
at once) moved with exceeding rage and auger, returned so ^uriously upon the
Christians, as quickly made them re^ire within their rampires, so y^ to behold
their sallying forth, flight back again, and eager pursuit of their greedy
enemies, I may well resemble it to the merciless flotes of the Caspian sea,
when the waters driven by violence of the winds, beat fiercely against the
hard (...), wherewith it is environed, when the ^lames and billows extremely
thereon rent asunder, con^usedly r^turne back again into the midst of the sea
whence f^rst they went, and then re^ouering fresh vigor, again and again
run on the rocks more violently then before, so by going and coming still
in vain, their labor is bestowed to no purpose or benefit. In like manner
began and continued this new assalt, both by the scaling ladders, and in at
the (...), as I will declare unto ye in Chapters following tending to such
matter. For the ^rueltie of this war has now surprised me with such grief of
mind, as I am constrained a while to discontinue the history, to speak of
matters more pleasing, and which deliver more sweetness.

CHAP. 19.
How the Princess Porphiria being in a castle near to Constantinople,
overcome with amorous thoughts, and desirous to hear some tidings of her
lover, importuned the Physician Sagibell, to tell her by his Magical art,
whether he were alive or dead. Which he could not then perform, albeit he put
his skill in practice, and withdrew his spelles, by reason of far geater
knowledge that remained in another. Notwithstanding, soon after she had some
consolation concerning her love.

I Stand in doubt I shall be greatly blamed, for having so long time let
sleep in silence, the success of the amourous sickness of the most fair
Princess in the world, whose history I have discontinued since the first
chapter of this book, by reason of the sundry occurrences of wars,
combats, and other adventures, which compelled the flight of my pen to take
that course, following a path not before trod or beaten, as ye have read:
wherein if your judgments find that I have any thing failed, I will at this
instant make amends for that fault (if you account it a fault in so doing) and
speak so sufficiently thereof, as you shall have reason to be contented. If
then I forget not the scope of the story concerning her, and the last speeches
we had in her cause, it may appear, that we left her from the City of
Constantinople, in a Castle of pleasure or recreation belonging to the Emperor
her father: where (to find some ease for her amourous passions, though
shaddowed under the change of ayr^) the Physician Sagibell wrought the means
of conducting her thither, as ye have read in the place before expressed. You
remember likewise, in what ^quipage she was conuayed from the Court, and how
the Emperor kept the treasure and wealth of his Empire in this fortress,
impregnable of any force: it remains then that I tell yes at this present
what happened while she soiourned there, and how her inflamed des^res were
satisfied.

It behooves then that ye call to mind, how earnest she was to know certainly,
whether her lover were alive or dead, for which without ceasing, she importuned
her physician, who, as well ye remember, was excellently skild in the magique
art, whereby she should present to her eyes alive or dead, the figure of him
that gave nouriture and some contentment to her amorous thoughts, that she
might perceive in what estate he was. The skillful man overcome with
importunity, prepared himself heereto, and settin^^ own such parcels as he
thought meet for the purpose, he found^ by rare chaunges and contradictions,
that o^efarre better experimented in this art than himself, meddled with the
same matter, whereby he was compelled to leave his enterprise imperfect and
without ^ffect. Wherefore, if while the more skillful party called on the
spirits, he should have offered to pr^ceed further therein, the double strife
would have grown to such a confusion, as the smoke and tempest would have
overthrown or carried away the castle, wherein the princely maid for her
pleasure was enclosed. To prevent so great an evil, the physician gave over in
time, and withdrew his charms in very good season* declaring the occasion to
the princess, why he could not then bring to pass the thing she so much
desired: yet assuring her withal, that very sone she should hear news in
some sort, for which she should not tarry any long time, which proved true
and came to pass as Sagihel had foretold, for fifteen days after or
therabout, one night when the princes was in her chamber, disrobing her self
to go to bed, between the hours of nine and ten at night, she heard a voice,
and the sound of a lute, agreeing together so mellodiously, as among humane
creatures was never heard sweeter harm^^ie. And the song seemed to come from
some ship on the sea, at the foot of the castle, where then was appointed the
princess chamber, the effect of which song hereafter follows.

The song which the Princess Porphyria heard in the Castle.
THou that within this tower art enclosed,
And with loves cruel fire all inflamed:
This night give rest unto thy languishing.
For Atropos as yet minds not thy murdering.
The destinies as yet consent not to end thy life,
But these black hours must change of amorus strife
And thou before thy death shall see quite ended,
The strong assaults of grief that has offended.
Love vowed not thy ruin though unrest,
A golden shaft he shot into thy breast,
He for whom thy heart indures this sickness,
Triumphs not over thee, for thou art mistres.
Even with the self same shaft his heart is maimed,
And plungd in sharper woes, of joys restrained,
Fair maid then grieve not, this is but loves finger,
They find rest in the end that love and linger.
Cease, cease thy tears, complaints and sorrowing,
Cherish up thy beauty fairer than the morning,
A day will come if thou will give me credence,
That of thy loyal love thou shall have recompense.
Angelical beauty, live thou then happily,
And in thy sweet passions use no extremity.
As the fay^e Porphyria heard this Song begin with such an hermonio^s sound,
she was so ravished in conceit, as suddenly she ran and laid her head to the
window, albeit she was near disro^ed of all her garments* so s^e by the
silver shining rays of the Moon, that this calm night showed her bright and
argentine face over the vauts of heaven, who it was that sung and played so
sweetly, and came at such a late hour to perform the same. But she could not
discern any thing, neither beneath the Tower or any where else, whence this
most heavenly voice might proceed: only she understood the dainty mellodie of
the Lute, and the voice very perfectly which sung the song, the words whereof
made her the more to muse, in that they better agreed with her disposition,
then the sweetness of the music could give her pleasure. Especially when she
heard what consolation this unknown musician promised, by the certain hope of
a future felicity, of seeing him whose sight she so extremely desired: and
withal, to have her amorous torments assuaged, which she had so long time
impaciently suffered, and still enflamed her heart with most ardent desire of
his love.

Heerevpon, having forsaken the window, and being laid in her bed, all this
night she could think on nothing but this song, imagining with her self,
whence this knowledge of her passions should proceed: then again conceiving
this opinion, that the matter contained in the Song was most certain and true,
delivered from some person that bare her entire affection, and who (for her
pleasure) was thus sent to comfort her amourous oppressions. Then remembering
how little assurance was to be reposed, in the credence of such things as
carried no apparaunce of true similitude, nor having any foundation on reason:
she was on the other side carried away with contrary opinions, verily
believing, that this was but some charm done by her Physician, or else some
other appointed by him, to make her hope well in her despair, and freed her
self with vanity in the midst of her misfortune, ^herein she was so
soundly and surely intrapped, which humor bearing stroke with with her more
this way then the other, enforced her to renew her former tears, fighs and
entire lamentations. Then tourning again to remember what few days before
her physician had told her, how one better skild than himself, had contraried
his spells, whereby he sought to give her assurance of her desire, comparing
this with her first conceived imaginations, she then remained as doubtful as
before. These diverse and contrary opinions thus hammering in her head, made
her toss and tumble every way in her bed, with great impatience, and these
amorous torments compelled her to breath forth such vehement sighs, as her
cousin Harderina (lodging in the same chamber) hearing her, demanded what new
disease had so surprised her, for i^ she would begin again her former
immoderate vexations, especially at such a time when she had so great
occasion of comfort, by so late good hope prophetically delivered in the the
song, which with such admiration they had heard that night, in her opinion she
was well worthy to be chidden. Ah sweet cousin, answered the princes, I know
not what I should say or think thereof, this is my fear, that I have heard,
are but abusing charms to deceive me withal, to make me in the mean while
lie languishing before my death, which ever yet and at this instant I earnestly
wish for, for no way can I devise to turn my self to find my rest, wherefore
I pray thee dear cousin, tell me faithfully what thou do immagine of all
these passed events, think^st thou there is not some body in the world, that
by one mean or other either general or particular, can tell me what shall
happen, or else show me some proof, wherein I may repose some trust, how
little to ever it be? Madame, quoth Harderina, I will tell you truly what I
think, agreeing with what I haue^often here^ofore heard.

There are certain malign spirits deceivers of men, which through the means
of many Magitians, as there are too many: by a thousand illusions know how to
deceiu^ such as are less skild in that wicked science, making them to believe
what is not, and so deceive the senses of men or women, in causing them to
credit certainly what they hear or see. The charms of such do vanish away
like smoke, having no more vigor or efficacy then a dream, so that the
memory thereof is as soon lost as found. There are other called bonum Genies
or good angels, which by the means of good persons that call them in better
sort, they are commanded in general what shall happen, without spe^ying any
thing: and to reveal perticulerly what is to come, which kind of spirits I
have often times heretofore heard, that a Fayrie of good disposition, dwelling
in some part of great Britain, which place of her abode could hardly yet be
found: she (I say) knows very well how to command them, as also so skilfully
to employ them, albeit by divine permission as is said: that she makes them
go whether she thinks good, locking them up as she list, and by charms
enclosing them in the bodies of beautiful damsels, that inuisibly are
transported hither and thither, wheresoever she commannds them, and not else.
These damsels are called Fayries or Nymphs, one whereof perhaps by her
command, did sing the Song to give you some comfort: which if it were so, then
verily I dare credit whatsoever the song disclosed: but for better knowledge of
the truth herein, it is necessary that to morrow you confer with Sagibell,
to understand what in this case he will reveal to ye. Trust me Cosen,
answered the Princess, I think ye may say true, for one reason which as yet
you touched not, and whereof I was remembered by your speech, to wit, that my
knight (if mine I may name him) is commonly called the Fayrie knight, because a
certain fairie (as he said) dwelling in the same country you named, and
called Ozyris, as he told us, had given him nourishment, and sent him
likewise to my fathers court, there to receive his order of knighthood. But how
can that be? (quoth then the fair princess again, continuing her speech and
doubting what reason should move her so to do) what knowledge has she of me?
can she tell whether I love or no? who should reveal it to her? or how can
she divine on matters so strange? this can never enter into my understanding.

Well Cosen, well (replied Harderina half a sleep, wearyed to hear her talk
so long in a place appointed for rest) sleep, sleep with patience, till to
morrow your physician tell ye other news, and in the mean while trouble not
your self: but sleep, and let me do the like, for all this night you have
not suffered me to enjoy any quiet. When the fair Uirgin perceived her cosen
and dear companion weary of talking, she held her peace, and soon after
falling into a slumber, she soundly slept until the next morning: when the
sun arose a little more earlye then she did, on which day what happened, ye
may read in the Chapters that follow hereafter.

CHAP. 20.
How the Princess was instructed by Sagibell, in the mean to know who sung
the Song at the foot of the Tower: and how she had resolution, in what she
most desired to know and understand concerning her love, even as she would, by
the means of the Nymphe Aegle, servant to the Lady Ozyris.

WHen the clear morning had showed her fair countenance over the world,
according as she was wont, and already the steads that drew Phoebus chariot, were
well entered on their way, to deliver abroad the splendour of his looks, the
beutifull infant Porphyria awaked, dreaming yet on the past song, and of the
conference she had with her fayrie cousin and faithful companion Harderina,
especially of that she told her, for resolving of her doubt, which was, to
talk with her physician Sagibel, and understand his opinion. For this cause
with all speed she sent her damsel Marcella to seek him, at whose command the
good and skillful physician failed not to come presently, and being entered
the chamber, finding the princess as yet in her bed, she discoursed unto him
all that happened the night past, as also what speeches passed between her
cousin and her, in self same manner as ye read in the Chapter going before,
earnestly entreating of conclusion of all, to tell her his advise, what might
be gathered thereby, most agreeing with truth, if by his art it were possible
to comprehend any matter certain, whereunto the physician (having noted every
circumstance) thus answered.

Madame, I cannot presently give ye any certain resolution in these affairs,
but between this and mid day I will promise to tell ye truth of all, or at the
least show ye some means whereby to know it. I pray thee then my good
Sagibel, quoth the princess, that thou have precise regard of the promised
hour, or sooner, if it may be possible, go then and in the mean while use
what diligence ye can best devise, that at least I may know what thou
coniurest, or else can gather of this wonderful accident. Immediately the
wise man departed the chamber, to compass that she had enjoined him, for the
intreates of the mighty are strict commandments to the meaner sort, and so
diligently herein he behaved himself, that at the hour promised, he failed
not to seek his Lady and mistres, finding her new risen from the table,
having this day dined with her cousin Harderina.

Not a little joyful was she to see him, being persuaded in her thoughts that
her physician had now promised some cataplasme for ease of her grief, but the
consolation she received was not ^erie great, for the physician only told
her, that he could know nothing of all that was done. But his spirits had
revealed unto him, that to know the certainty in this case, it was expedient,
that the Lady which desired such sound knowledge in these affairs, should
one night play on some instrument, and sing at the same window where she
heard the song before: withal, the effect of her song should be, to ask the
voice that had song what it was, the words and circumstance whereof should
agree with one that he had made for the same purpose, which he opened and gave
her, and she learned it by heart even at that instant. Now albeit the
princess received not such entire comfort, as then presently she expected, yet
were her passions somewhat mittigated, and this song served her as a pastime
all the after noone, to learn the lines perfectly and sing them well, as
before night with her lute she made it agree very excellently, and so
cunningly could she touch every string, that both the dittie and music
fitted passing well her own desire.

When the day was passed, and night approached, for that she could not with
patience tarry till the next morrow, she took her Lute in her hand, and going
unto the window, playde thereon marvelous sweetly, and shaping her sweet
voice to the dainty melody, sung this song as hereafter follows.

The Princess Porphyrias Song to the voice.
TEll me celestial voice,
if thou be that voice pitiful,
Which did reply Narcissus plaints,
from out the woods so merciful.
And playing so pleasantly,
upon the skillful Thracians instrument,
Would with thy pleasing harmony,
Assuage my amorous languishment.
When she had song these two verses of this song, she suddenly ceased,
according as the Physician had instructed her: to try if the voice would
begin again to answer as immediately it did, playing and singing in the
very same tune she did, and thus was the voices answer.

The voices answer to the Princesses Song.
Understand thou fair Princess,
that I am not the Goddess called Echo,
Who did resound Narcissus death.
through all the world with sorrow so.
Nor am I as thou think,
Orpheus that skillful man of Thrace,
But I am Aegle the fair Fairie,
whose golden locks hang dangling down her face.
This made the Princess continue on her song, being very glad that she had
answer to her interrogations, and des^rous to have further matters told her,
in her song she began again in this manner to question with the voice.

Porphyria.
I would not wish more happiness,
fair Nymph, but to have knowledge of thee,
As thou can soundly give assurance,
herein then show such favor to me.
And likewise grant me but to know,
what most afflicts me with contagion,
If he live whom my thoughts obey,
and makes me feel this love passion.
The Nymph Aegle replies.
I am the voice of Nymph Aegle,
the fair and faithful damsel,
Unto the great and powerful Fairie,
that underneath the heavens does dwell.
One day when thou do sleeping sit,
hand by a streaming fountain,
The rest shall be reueald to thee,
that will assuage thy amorous pain.
Porphyria.
Alas then will thou fly from me,
Nymph with fair eyes behold me still,
And as thy promise let me know,
what else my tender heart will kill.
So breaking off her song in this sort, the voice would make her no more
answer, which made her more curious and full of grief then before: yet
remembering what the voice had said, that one day when she should sit alone by a
Fountain, she should be satisfied in the rest of her demanud and find ease
for her languishing: heervpon seven or eight days together continually,
without letting escape any day, she went and lay down in the Arbor or Garden,
where were three or four very stately fountains, and by every one she sat
down to sleep, that she might have answer according as the voice had
promised: but this desire was so profoundly advanced within her thoughts, as
she could compass no way to forget it, and the remembrance thereof compelled
her as far from sleeping, as she most coueted to come near it: for the restles
humors and fantacies did so continually beat upon her heart, as would not
permit her the very least moment of quiet, and the nearer she approached the
Fountains to fasten on a sleep, the more did these abounding vexations
torment her. Having continued in these insupportable agonies the space of eight
days, the length and vehemence of, which travail had so ouerweakened her, as
now she wexed heavy and desirous of sleep: one day when she least thought
h^ereof, she was sequestered from all her company, and going alone into the
Garden (not perceived by any one) about the time of midday, she sat down by a
Fountain in the midst of the Garden, which was round beset with dainty.
Arbours and Cabinets of Gessemine, Rose trees, with flowers and herbs of all
sorts that smelled most sweetly: and excellent pure water flowed from the
fountain, being brought thither in pipes from four fair Griffons, that were
placed in the four corners of the Garden, which was equal square every way.
On the side of this fountain sat down the young Princes who had past so many
nights without receiving any rest, and thinking now but to ^lumber a little,
she slept there soundly the space of two hours, without knowledge to any of
her attendants what was become of her: each one supposing verily she had locked
her self into her chamber, as diverse days before (to cover her melancholy)
she was wunt to do. It so happened, that about the very latest moment of her
sleeping, the water of the Fountain murmured and made such a mighty noise, as
oftentimes the troubled sea does, when being stirred with great and most
tempestuous winds, the fierce billows beat either against some stony rock, or
drives up the sands against some promontorie, aspiring up sharp pointed from
the midst to the top: by means whereof the fair Infant quickly awaked,
dreaming that she was not by the side of so fair a fountain, but on the
raging of the sea, which leaped against the foundations of the Castle wall,
and moved very extremely as seemed to her.

Being thus awaked, the brute of the water ceased, and appeared before her the
most fair Nimphe Aegle, resembling in beauty not any human or living
creature, but rather some deity or matter celestial: such as coming near
the new built walls of Carthage, appeared to the Troyan prince her son.
Even so this beautiful Naiade seemed to the princely maid, who at the first
sight of her was some what astonished, doubting whether she should take her self
to flight, or tarry still there, or whether this apparision was to increase her
heaviness, or bring her comfort. This being well perceived by the fair
Nimphe, who heertofore had amazed the most assured by her presence: she spoke
to her in this manner: be not afraid (O princess of rare virtues, and the
fairest creature in the world) nor be a^ashed at my unexpected appearing into
your presence: for I am the Nimphe Aegle, servant to the fayrie Ozyris your
knights Nursse: by her commandment, and according to the promise I made ye
eight or nine days since, I am come to ye in this place, not any way to
astonnish or affright ye but rather to bring ye joy and consolation, by giving
ye certain resolution in a doubt, wherein ye have lived and languished too
long, to wit, whether your knight be dead or alive: to acquaint ye moreover,
with what I knew of his birth and valor.

The young princess lending ear attentively to these words, cheered up her
thoughts, and took great pleasure in contemplating the excelling beauty of
this fair Noiade, as also to hear her sweet and gracious language, the sense
and substance whereof concerned the thing she most desired, and was so
agreeable to her. So that longing to hear what the Nimphe had promised, after
a modest and civil kind of questioning, she thus made answer. Whatsoever
thou be (most fair and gentle Nimphe) right welcome art thou into this place,
and albeit thy presence at the first brought me some cause of fear and
displeasure: yet now on the contrary, I am as glad and joyful here to behold
thee, for reasons as yet known to thy self: and this joy I receive by sight
of thee, procured the motion and change thou did note in my countenan^e, not
any fright, fear, or discontent, received through thy being with me. If then
thou have any thing to tell me, cheefely concerning that I most desire to
know, I pray and entreat thee again and again, by the reverence and respect
thou bear to thy Mistress Ozyris, by these Fountains and waters which thou
hauntest, and wherein thou delightest usually to bathe thy self: likewise, by
the love and honest affection thou bear my knight, by the golden tresses of
thy hair, with the sweet favor and beauty I beheld in thy face: I conjure
thee not to depart from me, until thou have told me, who and what the knight
is that bears name of the Fairie, of whence he is, where and in what part
he is at this present, and whether he be dead or living. Tell me withal, if
his affection be such to me, as mine is to him, what ease, help and comfort,
or love like recompense, I shall receive in the end for the loyal affection I
bear him, and what will be the issue of both our loves.

Thy knight (fair princess) answered the Fayrie, is a man virtuous and of
great valor, for he is the only valiant, and most accomplished knight in all
perfections, that at this day lives, or hereafter shall live upon the earth:
in like manner, his exhor^ation or original has he received from a father,
that is the most hardiest king on earth, no one so worthy to wear a crown
royal, namely, the great monarch Floridamant of England, a prince so perfect
and accomplished as may be possible. He being in quest of sundry strange
adventures, which long time he exercised as a knight errant, only to acquire
honor and reputation: left his queen conceived with child, whereof she was
delivered in the absence of her king, and he was nourished under the wing and
government of the queen his mother, until the age of seven or eight years:
when the skillful Fayrie Ozyris, who all her life time bare good affection to
the king, in the country where she her self inhabited, as also to all that
were of his family: knowing and perceiving well by her skill* that if the
young prince should remain long time in his fathers Court, he was destined to
incur some great mis^haunce, even no less then a strange and cruel death: by
sudden invention she found the mean to rob her of her Son, in respect, that if
this misfortune had happened, it would have proved such an exceeding damage
and prejudice, not only to all the realm of great Britain, but likewise all
the Christians that live under heaven never felt the like, in regard of the
good they should one day recei^e by him. Having then so subtly gotten him
away, I will not tell you how or in what manner, because it requires too long
a discourse, and I intend to tell ye but breefely, the principal points of
this history.

She nourished and brought him up long time, in her rich and opulent Fayrie,
which is as huge and big or rather greater, then the wydest kingdom in the
world, and there enstructed him in all good manners, until he was of able
age, and capable to bear knightly arms, whereby he might discover what he
was. She providing him of all things necessary for a knight, choosing and
appointing him as her loyal and faithful servant, she being the wisest and
most fair princess living, as likewise he is the most valiant and virtuous
knight in the world: directed his course, sending him as thou know and can
very well testify and witness, to the princely Court of the great Emperor
thy father: where what befell him, thou can tell without my reporting, as
also thou wast not ignorant of his departure.

What is become of him ever sithence his departure, would require a long time
to recount, and the hour of my departure so vrgently presses me, as at this
instant I can tell thee no more, because I am constrained to leave thee. But to
morrow, at the self same hour I came this day, I promise to return again,
not only to tell the rest of his adventures, but to let thee see them all, to
thy great pleasure and contentment. Having thus spoken, the Nimphe plunged her
head at the first into the water of the Fountain, and so departed, where
likewise I mean to finishe this Chapter.

CHAP. 21.
How the Nimphe Aegle (by the will of her Mistress Ozyris) appeared another
time to the fair Porphyria, and made her for to see her knight in a Sphere,
withal the adventures that happened to him, since the time she saw him last.

THe nymph Aegle having thus left the company of the young princes, she remained
very pensive, and more desirous than before, to know the news of her knight,
for now she would feign be acquainted with what the nymph had concealed, not
contented with what was already revealed, though in some sort pleased, by
knowing that her part and amorous desires aimed at no mean or base object, but
so sortable and worthy as she could make choice of. And very certain it was,
that in those times there was no Empire or monarch more renowned nor any king
or Christian prince more esteemed, then was the realm of great Britain, and
the worthy king Floridamant. For his predecessors and himself had enlarged
and augmented their government further a great deal then the continent of
England, not only by their force and prowess, but likewise by their sweet
curtesse and benignity, so valiant did they evermore show themselves to be,
as also humane and affable withal, yet all this advantage was not sufficient to
satisfy the princely maid, but rather urged her to more pensiuenes and
impatience, understanding him to be of such raze and original, whom before
she reckoned and esteemed but as a simple knight arrant: now proouing to be of
so high extraction and great birth, having seated her affections in place of
such dignity, she remained still doubtful whether he were alive or dead, for
so long absence might very well raise great and vehement suspicion thereof.
Here upon she withdrew her self secretly into her chamber, being much
discomforted and very passionate as before, musing and pondering much more
profoundly on her new and fresh conceits, than on the discourse of the
beautiful and fair Nymph Aegle: and albeit she was indifferently comforted
thereby, yet made she no sign or semblaunce thereof to her cousin. Wherefore
when the night was come, thinking in the dark shade the nymph would come
again, and resolve her in the rest of her desires, she went to the window and
song the same vearses which the physician had taught her, but all was in vain,
for she heard no song but her own, nor any mellodie but her Lute, which
made a heavenly concordance with her voice. Fair Aegle was deaf for this
night, and would not make answer to her musical questions, but when the
morning was come, and the rising Sun made show of a new day, the young
princess having enjoyed no rest all that night, amorous imaginations had so
carried her thoughts to and fro, with wishing and rewishing for the midde day
hour. So wearing away the tediousness of the time with as great patience as
he could, at the last she got her again to the same fountains side, where she
had slept the day before, and the nymph Aegle returned thither again while
the princess slumbered, making like noise as at the first she did, wherewith
the Infant awaked, marie not so much afrighted as erst she had been, but
being very glad to behold and see the fair face of the demie goddess,
from whom she hoped to receive greater consolation then she had done in the
day before.

Now the Fayrie had brought with her a sphere, or for your better
understanding, a bowl of pieces of engraven wood, made in form round like a
sphere, wherein appeared the whole universal world, how it was enclosed, and
namely the earth, with all the provinces contained therein, painted after the
life, and in such sort, as within it ye might behold the moving of the
stars of heaven, the foundation of the massy earth, the cloudie air, with
the flux and reflowing of the Ocean, the other seas, and the rivers that bind
in the earth, with all the roundnesse of the terrestrial globe.

These things might there be discerned with more pleasure and contentment than
they can conceive that travail far, to see a little portion or many
particulars, of that which this fair Nymph showed at one time to the Infant
Porphiria. For you must understand, that having drawn from forth the silver
waters of the clear fountain, this divine piece of workmanship so lately
named, she opened a certain little couerture, which was expressly made to
discover all the rest within, at the opening whereof she used these words to
the princess.

I will let thee see herein, virtuous and fair princess, all the universal
world, presented in the proper life and figure, wherein likewise thou shall
behold thy knight, and all his adventures, which happened since his departure
from thee.

Speaking these words, having opened the door that was above, wherein was
contained the figure of heaven and the stars, she parted in three parts the
rest of the round Gloabe, which when the princess saw discovered, she cast
her looks on that part where Africa was represented, and questioning thereof
with the fair A^gle, she sa^^e, I pray thee beauteous Nymph, favor me more
than with the bare sight of the wide world, before thou shifte to any other
place, tell me what part is this here first described, inhabited with people
so barbarous, gross and rusticall, because they come first to sight, and tell
me what deserts these are, that nourishes and breeds such infinite number
of savage and cruel beasts. This is that part, answered Aegle, which is named
Africa, defenced on the one side toward the Sun rising, with the great
flood, which ye hear with such merciless noise come from the mountains, and
by seven channels or mouths runs into the bosom of Thetis, called Nylus. On
all the other sides it is environed with the sea, especially on the North coast
with the Libique sea, whereon the ancient people called Penes, exercised many
outrageous and extreme piracyes, these people came of the ^henicians, that
passed thither with Dido Qu^ene of Carthage and the Greeks, more ancient than
they that passed thither before with Hercules. And to tell thee in few words
(least I should offend ye with tediousnes) with what other regions this land
is inhabited, ye must understand that Ethiopia is this which ye see rising from
the red sea, and butting on Arabia, neighboring toward the North with the
Egyptians and Lybians, who were so called after a man named Aethipos, that the
old Pagans said was the son of Uulcan: he being the first king, all the
region took the name of him. Then may ye discern here on the other side, the
habitation of these old idolatrous Egyptians, a very fertile region, which in
elder time was called Aeria, and since the^ cleped Egypt, by a brother to
Danaus so termed. On the west is the limitrophing borders of Cyrena, toward
the east it beholds Palestine, and on the North side the mediterranean sea.
The great city which ye see in this region so well seated, with walls so
ancient, and whose proud palaces are now like an old ruined mazure, is the
ancient city of Thebes, whereof Amphion is said to lay the first foundation,
and the king to whom Andromache, wife to the hardy Hector, was daughter, being
there slain when cruel Achilles entered to sack and spoil the town,
murdering seven of his children, the future hope of his genealogy: since which
time this ancient city has continued in such had estate as ye behold it. But
afterward in this other place was builded by king Alexander the great this
other beautiful city, the walls whereof are not so ancient as the other, and
according to the name of the edifier, it is named Alexandria. See on the other
side in the same province the city called Abiros. Here is proud Babylon and
the city of Memphis, renowned by reason of the meruailes which Queen
Semyramis there builded and erected.

This other great City and wonderful strong, whose walls are more fresh, as
also being more newlye builded then all the other: is the famous City of
Hieropolis, so called in former times, but at this present is named the graund
Cayre, which signifies a Fortrosse in Egyptian language: in this City lies
the king or Sultan of all the country. Here in this part, not far from the
people I told ye off before, that made many courses and piracies on, the Lybian
sea, I mean the Phoenitians, which are divided into sundry regions and
provinces: for here are the Namasones in Lybia and Marmarica, drawing toward
the kingdom of Barcha near the sea: there are the Guydanes their neighbors,
who in steed of bearing bucklers with them to the wars, do carrye the
Skins of Cranes.

On the other side, countenauncing the sennes Trytonia, are the Machlides, that
wear their hair (as there ye may behold one) long behind, and are powled
short before, contrary to these other called Anses, who as the painter
discribes, wear their hair long before and short behind: their daughters
once a year fight extremely with stones, in honor of the Goddess Minerua,
whom they adore. The great mount ye see not far from this place, is the mount
Atlas, whereby the neighboring people are called Atlantide, which in the
greatest heat of the day rail the sun, and cu^sse it with many injurious
speeches. They that are on this side, having the right side of their heads
shor^e, and raced toward the-left side: are called Maxes* that usually paint
their faces with Uermillion, and make vaunte of their descent from the Troyans:
as likewise do these Zigantes, being not far off from them, and they live by
the flesh of Apes, wherewith the country meruailou^^ie abounds.

These other abiding in the region of the Hesterues, are named Troglodites,
otherwise Megauares: people that being dead make no account of burial, but
after the decease of burial, but after the decease of one of them, they
usually come to the place where he is, and being laden with stones, in a great
laughter they throw them at him, and so retur^e again without any thought of
death. To these are next neighbors the Hylophages and Spermatophages: the
first are so called, because that for their nourishment or food, they climb
and craule up Trees like Squirrels, and there cutting the tender sprigs or
branches, feed thereon and so live. The other are so named, because they
substantiate their bodies with many seeds of herbs, that come from the midst
of the marishie grounds in that soil. There hard by likewise are the
Ceneigdes, which inhabit the woods, and sit sleeping all the night on the
trees, like birds. Furthermore concerning such like people, in the deserts of
Lybia, are the Acridophages, which live only but by Locusts that are found is
those deserts, and thereupon they are so called. In the extreme being of this
part of the world, are the Cynanimes, so called by the Greeks in their
language, but we call them savage men. They which ye see hear all naked, are
the Ichtipophages, and there is the place called the cape of Gardafuni, which
looks on Arabia named the happy, where are the kingdoms of Adel and
Barnagas. In this marshie Isle, neighbor to Aethiopia and mount Atlas, named
Hesperia, within the Tritonian ^ennes: dwell the Amazones, women experimented
in feats of war, and which only manage the affairs of their common wealth,
with out men meddling or inhabiting among them. I leave all the other people
that are here in this part, because it would be over long to express their
names, life, manners, and daily behavior: wherefore passing over this strait,
that seperates the great Ocean from the Mediterranean sea, called Gibaltare or
Hercules pills: is the kingdom of Hea, which has on the north side the Ocean
and Athlantique sea, and toward the midst, the great mount Atlas I showed ye
before: there also are the kingdoms of Phez, Marocco, Alger and Thunis,
inhabited with terrible and cruel people, and sour Pagan kings all cosens
german: in their possessions they are very mighty men, well skild in warring
against their enemies. But above all, the king of Phez is of high resolve and
marvelous valiance, as I will declare to ye anon, when seeing the place where
he is at this present, I shall recount the marvelous adventure happening him,
so long since forborne: and with speech of him, I will likewise tell ye tidings
of your Colen Pharisor, who is as sorrowful as you for the want of his
companion. They that govern these two kingdoms of Marocco and Alger, the one
named Phoas, and the other Orontes, have led in their conduct a great multitude
of the barbarous people of their Realms, to sight against the Christians, and
with huge numbers of Pagans expressly assembled, seek to destroy the great
and famous City of London, wherein king Floridamant father to your knight, is
cruelly besieged, in danger to loose his li^e, or see himself disposest of
crown and kingdom: but God of his infinite goodness will provide some help,
that such misfortune shall never befall him.

As for the third, under whose laws and commandments they of Thunis are
governed, to wit, Adylas: I will likewise tell ye more when we meet him in
place where he is, to let ye know what he has done, and then shall ye see
him that ye are so desirous of. But before this may be done, or you attain
to behold the long wished place: I will tell ye what these fair Islandes are
which you see within the Sea, the near bordering neighbors to this kingdom.

Know then that these are the Hesperides, otherwise called Fortunate Isles,
and commonly Canaries, not such as many have esteemed them to be, they are
greatly abounding in Dogs: but much more fertile are these aforesaid Isles
abounding in store of Reeds or Canes, from which are made the Melasses
Cassonades, and then Sugars most fine and sweet, abounding in very great
quantity. The people there dwelling, are subjects to a puissant Pagan king,
who at this day swayes the scepter thereof, named Brandissant, that chased
thence sometime Argamor, the cruel father to four sons, who succored king
Brandissant in so doing, because the king had promised to each of them, one of
these Isles for his part, and severally they should wear kingly crowns, such
was their greedy desire to reign before their fathers death, whose life was
more offensive to them, then any infectious disease to a healthful time:
according to which promise, after that Argamor was then chased thence, who
afterward dyed with extreme grief: the four brethren, the eldest whereof is
named Salazard, the second Zorlot, the third Canibarell, and the fourth
Phagotroff, had the government of the four isles by them demanded,
conditionally, that thence^foorth they should be obedient to the commandments
of great king Brandissant, and lives as they ought under his Empire: all these
are likewise at this instant in these wars, with great multitude of the
Islanders, and other neighbors that owe tribute and allegiance, in company of
the father to Brandissant, who has engirt with siedge (as I told ye before)
the famous City of London, assisted by many more whereof ye shall know anon.
Thus breaking off, the fair Nimphe Aegle turned and quickly joined together
the separated parts of the sphere, which being inuisibly closed and brought
into the former estate, and casting it into the Fountain, immediately she threw
her self in after it: promising to return again upon the more owe, to tell
what remained to the princess of Constantinople: she sitting still by the
fountains side, ravished with joy and delight for seeing such are sights, and
here because the day continued no longer* we gave great reason to knitte up
this Chapter.

CHAP. 22.
How the Nymph Aegle appearing again to the Princess Porphyria, daughter to
the mighty Emperor of Constantinople, made her see in her Globe of all world,
all that which Asia contains, and in what part her lover was, with the
pursuit of his high enterprises and aduentur^.

GReat pleasure took the fairest of fair Princesses in the world, daughter
likewise to the most mighty Emperor in the world, to behold so many notable
things in so small a time or space, as I have declared to ye in the Chapter
going before: and desirous to know with all what yet remained, the next day
she failed not to be at the self same place, experting the coming of the
Nymph Aegle, who should discover the deapth of her desire. In like manner, the
Nymph, according to her promise, came in such equipage as she had done the day
before: and being there arrived, found the princess willing to see the other
meruaylous strange and arteficial matters, that were divinely engraven within
the round bowl, where before she had noted so many singular things already
exercised. The fair Nymph opened again that rare piece of workemanshippe,
bidding her behold and touch with her finger all that which Asia contained, and
first on the East side leading toward the North, she showed her the second
part of the world* bounding on the great flood of Nylus, which waters Egypt
from Tanais to Mors mayor or the Euxine sea, and one part with the
mediterranean, but on all sides it is environed with the hoge Ocean: in showing
whereof, the nymph thus spoke. This land which ye see is named As^a, being of
such gret^es, and comprehend such spacious circuit of ground, as it contains
more under the name than does Africa or Europe. It is under a calm and
temperate heaven, the soil being very fertile and fruitful, in bringing forth
all sorts of herbs and plants, the reason thereof is, because it ab^undeth in
all kind of beasts. It is also enriched with gold and silver, and such drugs
as are not common to other countries or parts of the world: likewise with
brass, iron, wool, saffron, and many other things of great price and value,
especially in this part of Arabia which is called happy, containing within it
^elf an I Will called Pauchaia, upon the gulf of Persia, enriched with three
fair and stately cities, to wit, Dalida, Hirracida, and Occeanida, where the
country is also most fertile, abosiding in wines, myrrh, incense, gold,
silver, lead and other like metals, which by particular ordinance, the
Pauchaians will not permit to be transported forth of other countries.
Assyria, that long since was named Assure the son of Sem, is this region which
ye see here, having the countries of India and Media toward the East, and
westward the violent flood that passes by the city of Rome, called Tigris:
about the midst it regards the soil of Sus^an, and by North it is neighbor
to mount Caucasus, where rain fails, this country is watered by the river
Euphrates, as Egypt in like manner is by flowing Nylus: not by natural
property or abounding of the river, but by industry of the inhabiting people.
Here southward to the Egyptian or meterranean sea, ye see the country so far
famed and renowned, called Judea or the land of Chan^an, and here is Palestine,
which by help of the flood Iordane is made very fruitful in many things for
the life of man, especially in producing the best balm in the world. The
midst of this region is so seated as ye may behold it, that neither heat or
cold are at any time more over vehement there, but the air is so temperate,
as the Israelites sometime imagined this to be the land of promise, even the
same that God had promised to Abraham. In this country may ye see your fair
cousin Pharisor for the gentle knight, who disguised like a pilgrim trauayleth
in search of your knight: but going on full of devotion to worship the holy
sepulcher of the worlds savior, he has met with the brave king of Phez who
has a little hindered his iourny. In speaking these words the nymph showed the
princess her cousin Pharisor, in the same place where we left him, listening to
the good king of Phez, who recounted his adventure and genealogy to the holy
hermit, by whose means he received cure of his wounds, which brought her such
exceeding pleasure as is impossible to be imagined, much less to be written
And had it not been for earnest desire to see her own knight, she would have
entreated the nymph to tell her by what adventure he came thither, and likewise
what the king of Phez was: but she was so earnest in her own affections, as
having a while pleased her eyes with loking on her cousin, she importuned the
fair nymph more pearcingly then before, to show her speedily the place where
her own knight was, being now in far better hope of seeing him, then at any
time else: the nymph willing to satisfy her lo^ging, thus continued on her
speech. If your affection drew me not so so soon from this Land, I would
show ye therein many more marvelous things, as the behavior and manner of
life, of the ancient Jews that inhabit it, with sundry other strange
occasions, worthy to be understood: but being sent hither only to
accomplish your will, and to let ye see what is most agreeable to ye, let us
pass on, viewing awhile the Medes and Armenians. The country of the first
took name by one of the sons of Medea, and king Aegens that long since
commanded in Athens: albeit it is more likely, of one Medos, son to Iaphet,
one of Noah's children. This neighboring sea on the north side, is the Caspian
sea, and that to the weast is great Armenia and Assiria: to the south are the
Persians, of whom we will speak anon, to the East lie the Pa^theans and
Hirceans: these people have bin mighty in war, and had large domination over
diverse regions as credible histories do amply bear witness: but at this
present they are as slaves and subjects to the mighty and puissant monarch of
Persia, who in former time conquering their king, made them tributarie to his
own Empire. Marie that will be but of slender continuance, by reason of your so
far famed beauty, which will prove as hurtful and dangerous to them, as
Helens did to the Greeks and Trojans: and seeing now we are in talk thereof,
I will let you know both the present and future adventure, and, by the same
discourse, the fairie knight your long desired and wished love.

The great monarch, who by his valor has daily augmented and enlarged his
monarchy, showing himself in all places inuinsible to his enemies, having by
fortune seen the portraite of your beauty somewhat figured nere the life
became so surprised with your love, as never since has he inioied any rest,
which was the cause (as not long since you understood) upon amorous constraint
he required you in marriage of the Emperor: but by reason of his difference
in religion, the Emperor ^ound an excuse to refuse the marriage. But
notwithstanding this refusal, he is grown so obstinate in his opinion, of
inioying ye either by force or fair means, thinking he cannot live without
ye: as having caused his people to change their religion, to take away the
former allegation of refusal, he is departed long since from his kingdom, and
comes in person into this country, only to require ye once more in marriage:
when if he be denied, he means to carry ye hence, whereof it behoues ye to take
heed, for he will do his uttermost, which, ye must persuade your self, will
prove no little matter. But I hope my Lady Ozyris will assi^t ye wi^h such good
council, as in the end ye shall escape the hands of this tyrant, who, to
speak s^oth, bears ye entire and earnest affection. But soon after, when
once he might glut himself with the sweetness of your love and favors, he will
so hate and set^e his heart against you, as the most foul woman in the world,
shall be more fair and amiable in his eye, then (...), such is the nature of
this barbarous king.

Now while he travails in vain about these affairs, he shall one day see
himself deprived of Crown and Scepter, which he will take from him, whom he
seeks to rob of his greatest good for this effect. See here already his
kingdom troubled and divided, for you must note that all the people in his
realm are revolted one against another, because some are good and true
Christians, and others, only governed by frenzy, fearing that their king will
renye his Christianity: and by force of arms seek to reduce the rest to
their former religion, which being unable to compass, such venomous hatred
and despite is kindled amongst them: as he must hope of another remedy for
so great an evil, but even a new mutation of the kingdom and government, which
will so come to pass in very short while. For your knight, who is arrived
here but lately since, shall prove to be their new Lord and king, after he
has somewhat more travailed and suffered for the same. Then when he has
brought all into quiet, and gathered the people under his obeisance: the
destenies, who will not stay his course from better fortunes, in a place so
strange, and with so few exploits of his virtue and prowess: shall fill his
sails to more high desires, especially the incomparable love he bears you,
and extreme affection in him, to let you see by effects, the service he has
vowed to your diuins beauty: this shall make him (for some while) abandon this
famous Monarchy, for ever to continue in doing deeds of virtue, laudable and
worthy of great admiration. During which pursuit, these people being again
revolted, he shall send hither a strong and valiant knight, who with great
pain and travail, shall once more bring these mutinous rebels under his awe
and obedience: his name, by reason of his generous acts and brave enterprises,
shall be known from this part to the other side of the Pole, yea, he shall
be so redoubted and feared, as the very hardiest shall tremble to hear him
spoken of. In this time, the Sophie, transported with amourous affections, not
able to compass his desseignes and enterprises: will unfortunately end his
days, as your self in time shall perfectlye behold. You tell me meruayles,
answered the princess, but yet ye show me not where the knight is, according
to your former promise: of whom though I was desirous to hear, yet should I be
much more pleased so behold him. Lady, quoth the Nimphe, it is as necessary
for ye to know all these things, as it is expedient for you to see him,
because I am assured, both the one and other is agreeable to ye. Look now
then on this Oriental region, which is called Persia, of Perseus the son to
Jupiter, and fair Danae daughter to Acrisius, king of the Argiues, according
as poetical fables testify. Regard I pray ye, how many thousand armed men are
here assembled, even for the occasion so lately expressed. See this famous
City called Tauris, neighbor to the Medes, a people not long since spoken
of: behold how it is besieged by the Persian pagans, under the conduct of a
young fool named Mauspasian, brother to the Sophie, he that has caused all
this war: behold into what extremity these poor Christians are brought,
that are within the City, they have nothing left but bread and wine to
preserve life withal, and within these few days they were constrained, to
^eede upon the flesh of their horses, which was openly sold in the
butcheries of this fair goodly city: yet will they not (for all this) yield
to their enemies, or forsake their religion, but trusting in succor from
above, because elsewhere they cannot expect any, rather desire here to
finish their lives miserably. See the other goodly City of Susa, almost in
the same necessity: look on distressed Ariodant, the prop and sole comfort
of the Christians, who by flight escaped the hands of Adylas king of Thunis,
that would have slain him by treason, because he refused to yield him self
prisoner: On this other side, behold the brave minded knight Taffinor, who
half dead, by good hap fell into your knights company, and he healing him of a
mortal wound, undertakes to revenge the injury done him by the traitor
Adylas: O inestimable, and (not to be comprehended) courtesy, of so brave a
knight. See I pray ye, with what deuoyre he begins to pursue this vengeance,
see Argontes, the fauourits of king Adylas, dead on the ground under his
horse, slain by the valiant right hand of this renowned knight, with many
other of his accomplices, the most apparent and best knights in the host of
Adylas. Not contented heerewith, note with what fierce hardiness he assayles
the mighty pagan, even within his Tents, notwithstanding he is accompanied
with three or four hundred knights of name and mark, even the men of greatest
valor in all the kingdom. It will not be long, before a hot and dangerous
fight happen between them, from which Adylas shall not escape (by my advise)
so well as he wee^eth, Thus spoke the fair Nimphe, and evermore as she
discoursed, showed all these things unto the princess, who was so joyful,
seeing her knight represented to the life, as she forgot to use any more
questions: and albeit the figure of him was very little, yet I think no tongue
can express, no pen can set down, neither has any heart the power, to
comprehend the surpassing c^ntentment she enjoyed at this instant.

The history reports it to be so great, that she wept with conceit of joy,
and loosing all countenance, so far forgot her self, that she offered to run
and embrace him in her arms, yea, to salute him with a sweet kiss: but her
labor was in vain, as well in regard, that the workmanship and vis^on of all
these things, were not to be touched by human creatures: as also because the
fair Nimphe hindered her, and would not permit her to come near it. Over and
beside all the former representations, she showed her the dead figure of the
Savage Polyppe, recounting the wonderful combats Gerileon had with him, in
such sort as ye have read in the Chapters treating thereof. The shape hereof
was so fearful to her, as she became troubled in mind out of measure: which
made the Nimphe quicklye remove it from her sight, and plunging into the
Fountain water, vanished away, with whose departure we knit up this two and
twenteth Chapter.

CHAP. 23.
How the king of Phez recited his genealogy and adventure, to the holy Hermit
and the fair Pilgrim, and how the Hermit told him a goodly discourse, to
confirm him in the Christian religion. Moreover, how Squamell was conducted
by diabolical arts, into an obscure Chamber hard by Auernus, hoping to be
healed of his wounds by the help of devils, with that which happened to him
afterward.

BEcause the change of discourse, brings no less delight to the Reader, then
the variety of dainty viands contenteth such as take their repast: for a
while I intend to change our purpose, leaving a part the amourous flame of the
fair princess Porphyria, to come again to the history of the valiant king
of Phez, not long since made a Christian miraculously, as ye have heard
before. To let ye understand withal, according to the truth in writing of him,
his genealogy and adventure, whereof himself makes recital to the holy
Hermit and fair pilgrim, when he was thereto by them required, beginning in
this or the like manner. It is a long while since, that Artabaz sometime king of
Persia, was enamoured on the ^ayre Queen Lyxandra, the most fair and wealthy
Lady in riches and other goods of fortune, that was in those times: for under
her obedience and Empire, as also her laws, lived in flourishing prosperity
the people of four opulent kingdoms, which are on the coast of Barbary, to
wit, Phez, Marocco, Thunis, and Alger. But Love had not touched with self
same shaft the heart of Lyxandra, as he did the heart of Artabaz, because the
more earnestly he loved, the more mortally she hated: ^y reason, that in the
life time of king Brunon her father, he had daily vexed him with wars,
seeking to deprive him of his kindomes and Signories. For this cause he
travailed and molested him, as no man in the world could do the like: so that
being overcome with wea^ines of the passed wars, Brunan finished his days,
after he had made some treaty or accord of peace with the king of Persia,
even then when first he began to love the fair Lyxandra: who having ancient
malice engraven in her heart, continued daily in resolution to hate him more
and more.

Heerevpon, she not willing to grant marriage with the Persian king, nor to
listen his solicitings, requests, and temptations, which stretched so far as
he could devise, the particular discourse whereof were too long to rehearse:
he concluded to win her by force of arms, and to renew the former wars
against her, more sharp and cruelly then ever he did, against the deceased
king Brunon her father. Which being thus pursued, he brought the virtuous
princess into such necessity, as he left her neither kindome, City, town,
nor borough, place nor Castle, but all was brought under his obeisance, and
all of them spoiled, the strong City of Phez only excepted, wherein being
constrained to shut up her self, he so long time continued the s^ege against
it, as she was on the point of yielding to his mercy, or else to take away
her own life: but then (by good hap) a young Knight, so highly accomplished as
any other whatsoever, arrived on the coast of Barbary, even as the Queen was
in this great perplexity, devising with her self what she were best to do:
he hearing by the common report blazed abroad, what hard hold the Queen
Lyxandra had against the Persian Tyrant, being brought so near the place, by
violence of the winds that drove him on the seas: was willing to succor her,
being touched partly with pitiful affection, which the goodness of nature had
endned him withal, and partly provoked on by fair desire, to make appearance
of his hardy valor, the fame whereof already was bru^ed through most places
in the world: but seeing at this first attempt, that his access and entrance
into the City (so narrowly besiedged on eueri^ side) would prove very
difficult, the gates being ramd up, and the walls environed with Persian men
at arms. An indifferent while he devised with himself, by what mean both
easily and covertly he might get entrance. Having some space considered
heereon, the History says, that he especially noted one side of the city
wall, where the enemies had made a very great breach, to enter thereby on the
morrow, upon the answer Queen Lyxandra should return to king Artabaz: and
this breach was guarded by certain armed men of the City, while the Queen
assembling her council, should agree on some express resolution of answer
concerning her submission to her enemy. The assaylants on the other side of
the breach, were making banquets, passing away the time very merrilye, under
certain assurance, that now the city should be yielded or taken, upon their
request within of composition: and well ye wot, that a City coming to
composition, is more then half taken. This was the cause, that the young
knight being come near the breach, and seeing they that kept it were very
careful of their charge, he softly whispered with them, to know by what
means he might enter the city, to have some speech with the queen
Lyxandra, concerning matters of importance that would prove profitable to her,
desiring them to let her understand thereof, in that the cause of his coming
thither, was earnest desire to imp^oy himself for her defense in this war.

The Soldiers made him answer, that one should presently go do his errand,
and the Queen being advertised hereof, was very glad, knowing well by his
renown and valor, that he was the gentle knight of the Flower, (for so was he
called, because as then he loved a Lady named Florixa, in regard of whose
name, he bare a Uermillion Gilliflower painted in his sheeld) a man so hardy
and valiant, as he was esteemed beyond all the knights of that time. Here
upon she gave comman^dement, that he should be let into the City, by a door
that passed from her Castle* to the Town: marry it was to be done in the
dead time of the night, and that so covertly or closely as might be: thus
escaped the knight in, unseen of the enemy, with his armor and horse, and
one Squire that bare him company. In brief, to tell ye what passed between
them, the queen letting him understand the occasion of this war, the
success thereof, and the extremity whereinto she was brought far more in
effect then the knight had heard reported: she fell down on her knees before
him, and with the tears trickling down her cheeks, entreated him, to help
her both with council and valiance, promising to deliver up all the treasure
of her kingdom into his hands, if in this darkness he could illuminate them
with some means, whereby they might escape the tyrants power, that forciblie
sought to make a rape of her, whereunto before she would condescend, she
minded to murder her self with her own hands.

When the knight of the Flower had noted his words, desire of honor provoked
him rather to fight for her, then all her tears, and promised her, with the
help of God, that dread of death, should not with-hol^ him from defense of her
case, which according to her recital, seemed to him most just and reasonable.
In this resolve, he thus advised the Queen to answer the Persian tyrant, that
she would not yield her self to his mercy, before she made some proof of
the love he bare her, and whether it were so effectual, that he durst on the
morrow adventure the combat, against one knight, man to man, with what arms
himself would choose. For one should be sent forth of the City, armed at
all points, whom if he could vanquish, she would condescend to his will: but
if the contrary happened, and he were conquered he should raise his siedge, and
depart with his host from before the City, delivering and restoring into her
repossession, all such Cities, towns, borroughes, places, castles, lands and
seigniories, as he had taken and ruined, rendering and restoring to her
likewise, all the treasure, which she spent to maintain her resistance in
war, the vale we and sum whereof he should credit and believe upon her own
oath.

If he pleased not to accept this offer* she was determined to kill her self
with her own hands, rather then she would grant what he so earnestly
desired. This council was so agreeable to the Queen, that presently she
dispatched a messenger to Artabaz, to hear from him some answer or
resolution. At this message he did nothing but smile and laugh, in derision
and mockery (as it were) assuring himself of the victory: and therefore
accepted the Combat, with knights ordinary arms of Lance and Sword: but
to make short, the knight of the Flower and he combatted the next day man to
man, in such sort and so long time, as (after a fierce and extreme cruel
fight) Artabaz was vanquished, and yielded prisoner to the Queen Lyxander:
where by means of the knight of the Flower, he forcibly was compeld to
perform the articles and conuentions, sollemnly sworn on either part before
the combat. When Artabaz was enlarged from the Queens prison, conquered
despite and despa^^e, he ran himself upon his own sword, to let out the
love he before had conceived toward the Queen Lixandra, who thus was
delivered from misery and captivity, as also the violent fury of so great an
enemy. Nor failed ^he to thank the young knight the mean of her deliverance,
entertayning and feasting him there the space of a whole year, even perforce,
as it were, causing him to tarry with her, so that in the end she became
enamoured of him, and but that she was a Pagan and he a Christian, he being
likewise else where vowed, she would have joined with him in marriage. And
notwithstanding this prohibiting bond, both of the one and other religion, she
could not support the extreme flame of this amorous fire, but being overcome
with incontinencie, was constrained to yield her self in such sort, as she had
knowledge of him almost against his heart and will. How often this continued I
know not, but within short time she was conceived, which the young knight
perceiving, being weary of these amourous sportings, which else where ought
to be employed, even in place where his heart served, one day secretly getting
from his company, and being disguised, he went whether the wind and fortune
would conduct him. At his departure she was meruaylously discomforted, causing
diligent search to be made for him in all places her land, as also far and
near to enquire after him, being willing to change her religion and become a
Christian, only to marry with him, or once more to get him in her custody.
But hearing by credible report, that he was the valiant Brandismel, king of
great Britain, who being a young knight, so changed his name and disguised
his arms, having espoused his Florixa, from whom came the king Floridamant,
of whom at this day is held such account: she comforted her self so well as
she could, and covered her fault so cunningly, that albeit she was great with
child, she married with the worthy Knight Florinor, at that day king of
Armenia, in time of whieh marriage, by about seven (...) after, she was
delivered of a goodly son called Florant, in remembrance of the knight of the
Flower his father. Within three years after she had three other sons, one named
Adylas, the second Phoas, and the third Orontes, all found such hardy and
aduenterous knights as ever lived in any time.

Now because Ferramond was chased forth of Armenia, by Clarion brother to
Artabaz, who was king after him and father to Mutinel at this time reigning, a
long while he vexed him with wars, to recover home his kingdom again, but
he could not compass what he intended, until Florant grew strong and abie to
carry arms, who being assisted with a mighty and puissaunt army, and
especially employed in these affairs, went forward with his charge so
effectually, that he expelled thence Clarion and his people, who grew into
such vexation heereat, as seeing he was no longer able to stand against him, he
caused him traitorously to be slain by four Persians, who counterfeiting to
come in embassage to him, with letters pretended from Clarion, as he talked
alone with them in his chamber, they c^uelly murdered him with certain
pistols, which for the purpose they had closely hid under their ma^tles.
Florinor who took himself to be his father, was so offended and grieved
hereat, as a good father will naturally be for the death of so valiant a son,
and sent Adylas his other son, with a far more great and stately army, to
revenge the death of Florant his brother, but he followed his business so
slenderly, that albeit he was a valyant knight, there he lest his life and his
army discomfited, which went so near the heart of Florinor, that with conceyt
of grief he dyed, being then aged in years, as likewise was his Queen
Lixandra, who carefully nourished me up being the son of Florant, and endued
with his name, as also young Adylas, bearing likewise name after his slain
father. In this time or soon after the death of Florinor, Phoaz and Orantes,
seeking after adventures as knigh^es arrant, pricked forward with desire of fame
and honor, were slain in two several encounters by king Floridamant, being
then as they were, a young knight, and following the same affairs. Each of
them left a son behind them bearing their own names, who likewise remained
in the charge and keeping of Queen Lixandra our grandmother, she very
carefully nourished and brought us up, especially me, to whom very often she
discoursed these accidents: and little before her death (which rather was
through age than any other extremity) she parted and diu^ded the kingdoms
between us, appoynting to one the realm of Phez. Adylas, Phaos, and Orontes,
my cousins, had given to them the three other seigniories, to wit, Morocco,
Thunis and Alger, wherewith we all have been well contented, without
quarrelling or falling at debate for any cause whatsoever.

But we being as yet very young, were assailed again by Mutinel the king of
Persia, in revenge of Artabaz death his predecessor, and would have deprived us
again of our kingdoms: but we so well defended our selves, as he could not
altogether defeat us of our right, but in regard of our over young years, we
promised him certain yearly tribute, and obeisance or homage, when he would
command us to have it done, which ever since we have daily continued, and in
consequence hereof, being charged by him to arm themselves against the king of
great Britain, in company of king Brandissant and his brethren, to ruinate
and destroy all christendom together, we entered on the seas with a goodly
great army thitherward, and sailing merrily certain days in our voyage, we
were surprised with a great tempest, which separated us one from another, in
such sort, as I know not what is become of the rest. Well wot I, that my ship
was wrackte against a huge rock, and none saved alive of all that were with me
but my self alone.

Since when, having recovered horse and armor, such as by fortune I brought
with me into the forest of great adventures, where meeting a proud and arrogant
knight, that challenged all passengers to combat with him, promising for prize
of their victory a goodly horse, a fair armor, and a golden cup of
inestimable value: desirous to gain these three if I could, I entered the
combat with him, and all day we fought together, without appearance of
victory on either side till the very declining of the day, when we were
even on the point to know where the lot would fall, when another knight no
less valiant than proud, came to trouble our intent, very suriously assayling
us both. In which sirange conflict it chanced that this courteous Lord came, and
seeing our confused order of fighting, beheld how I was wounded, of which
hurts, through the mighty and supreme divine virtue, I am now healed.

Thus good Father, have I fully sat^sf^ed your request, if ye will command me
any other service, assure your self I will do it very gladly. Thus king
Florent of Phez ended his discourse, when the old hermit began an excellent
exhortation to confirm him soundly in the christian faith, charging him to
live and die in defense thereof, and not to persecute it as before he had done.
Taking occasion by the example of Saint Paul, to incite him forward to his
duty, according as he proceeded in Gods soruice after he was so divinely
called. When he had finished his sermon, where with the king was highly
satiffied and contented, after he had humbly thanked him for so great good
received, he departed in company of the fair pilgrim, with him to go visit
the holy sepulcher of Jesus Christ: where what happened to them afterward, you
shall read at large in the third volume of this worthy history, which (if God
permit) you shall see very shortly.

The discourse of the Giant Squamell.
SQuamell the over weening proud knight, mighty in strength and of Giantine
stature, was conducted on the black river (as ye have heard) very far under
the earth, by the diabolical art of the Necromancer Charonifor, even into a
dark chamber full of fire and smoke, the very next neighbout to black
Auernos: wherein he was no sooner arrived, but certain young spirits or
devils, the waiting servants on the sorcerer, came quickly about him, four
bringing unguents, others clothes, another a candle of Rosen to light their
master, that he might make ready his necessary emplaisters, wherewith the
Giants wounds should be healed. And he being half dead, was laid along on a
bank before a great fire, that burned extremely within the chamber, which
only served to give them light night and day: three times he swouned, while
Chironifer his surgeon felt the depth of his mortal wounds, which
notwithstanding, by his speedy help, succor, and diligence, within few days
after were made very whole and sound. Right well he knew how to thank the
Necromancer, vowing his love for ever after to him: and Charonifer likewise as
glad of his health exhorted him still to follow his adventure, and return to
the Forest where he was wounded, there to stay till he met a knight in black
armor, mounted on the horse which was one of the prizes of the combat,
assuring him, that he was one of the best knights in the world. If therefore
he (...) at honor and reputation, such as beseemed ^he order of knighthood, he
should not rest till he had fought with him and slain him, otherwise it he
failed in this (...) great (...) perform (...) departing from his nightly
shade, after he had taken leave of the Necromancer: he was conducted back
again by the same way he went, entering the black Boat, to go view the light
of the sun, which he had never seen since he ^ame thither. Being in
little while arrived in the forest of high adventures, and riding by the
morning light, the space of an hour: he found a Lady of marvelous beauty
hanging by the neck on a Tree, the fatal instrument, being the laces that
bound up her hair, which being discheueled round about her, hung down to her
very feet. The Giant presently knew her to be the Lady Lucinda whom sometime he
loved, and now so mortally hated, as he was not a little joyful to behold
this sight: lauding his gods, especially Cupid, who so meritoriouslie revenged
the rigor, which she in former time had used toward him: for when he
entirely loved her, she scorned him, wherefore in ^esting manner he embraced the
dead body, swinging her about from one side to another: but at last he was
ware of a paper, which with a small thread was fastened on her bosom, which he
taking down, and seeing them to be verses, read them to himself in this
manner.

The verses written on a little Labell, and fastened about the Ladies neck, as
she hung upon the Tree
THou that go by, if pity thee possess,
then take compassion on this noble dame:
Who foyld by love, and fortunes forwardnes,
here (as thou see) has done a deed of shame.
Making her hands the engines of her death,
And on this Tree sent forth her latest breath.
If ^hou be knight, and valor do contain,
do thy deuoire, to wreake her hapless end:
On cruel Squamell, honors foulest stain,
whom tears nor treates could make a Ladies friend.
But full of rancor, pride and high disdain:
Still made her breath her sighs and suits in vain.
If thou be Lady, or some virtuous dame;
and know the man that holds thy favors dear:
Love him again, and think not on my name,
in whom the effects of scorn does well appear,
I was beloou'd, and then I would not favor,
I sued for love, and have this for my labor.
As when he loved, I coyly made refuse,
so when I loved, he did disdain my sight:
I would not yield when liked him to choose,
he would not grant when I would if I might.
Let this vile death for my contempt suffice:
And my example make all other wise.
When Squamell had read these lines, he was so overcome with choler and
despite, as letting fall the writing, he set hand to his Semitarie, where with
he smote at the Lady, and cut her quite through in the midst by her girdle:
so that the one part of the body, to wit, the head, neck, shoulders and sides
remained hanging on the tree, and the belly, flanks, thighs, legs and feet
tombled on the ground, a thing very cruel, hideous, and ghastly to be seen.
Having in this sort some what appeased his anger, he did nothing but laugh,
breathing forth many injurious speeches against her: at which very instant, an
other Giant of marvelous stature, exceeding Squamell in height by the head,
arrived there, who hearing him speak such vile words, and seeing withal such
an inhumaine deed: thought good to check and reprove him for it in this manner.

Knight, thou may well blush with shame, that any one should ever see thee
bear mark of chivalry, and the arms which thou do wear: employing them
so hadly as thou have done, upon a poor and miserable creature, whose
unhappy destenie brought her to this end. I think if thou would show thy
self so virtuous and valiant, to so many brave knights, which ordinarily pass
thor^w this forest, as thou have witnessed thy self most monstrous and cruel
toward this poor body: thou should find other affairs better beseeming a
knight then this^, and wherein thou might with greater honesty spend thy
time. How now companion? answered Squamell, dare thou be so bold as come
hither to reprove my actions, which are so virtuous and worthi^, as heaven,
earth, and all contained therein do admire them? especially this last deed by
me done upon this Lady, is so deservedly to be praised, as if thou knew
the occasion thereof, thou would commend and reckon me among other knights of
virtue, that do daily make high esteem of me, and that more worthily, than
thou can dare thus rashlye to reprehend me: but because I repute thee
unworthy to know this occasion, I have nothing else to say unto thee, but if
with speed thou get thee not gone: I will learn thee against an other time to
speak more wisely, in that I have the power both to tame and teach. And
albeit thou art of bigger constitution then I, yet will I show thee, that in
all the rest thou art far less and inferior to me: and for I am loath to
lay any hand upon thee, but only the very greatness of my name, which is
sufficient to make thee fly quickly out of my pro^ence, know that I am the
great and puissant knight Squamell, the renown of whose virtue enuirones all
the world, and serves as a terror to the most audacious and hardiest knight.

Knight, replied the Giant, I have heard speech of thee, and the brute of thy
name has often heretofore pierced mine ears: yet (for all that) I am nothing
hasty of flight, because I do not imagine thee to be so hardy and valiant,
as the thundering report that has been blazed of thee for if thou have heard
report of the mighty Ferclaste, Androfort and Ergofe^ant, thou have well
understood, that never might any knight be equalled in force and prowess with
them: but the hardyest and stowtest indeed have fled at the ^^nowne of their
names.

Their ^ame while they lived was noised far and near, so likewise was the
worthy ^^abot: then may thou well think and assure thy self, that I who am
Ergoferant, the only suruiuer of those three, do greatly scorn to fly from
thee, except some greater matter enforce or constrain me. What, answered
Squamell, art thou one of those three huge Colosses, that serned as a terror to
all Greece? and of those three remains none alive but thee? Tell me what is
become of thy brethren, for if they be dead, assure thy self I am greatly
displeased, in respect of the earnest desire I had to combat with them, and
conquer ye all three one after another, not for any love I did ever bear ye,
or doubting any hatred ye all durst bear me. Content thy self, said
Ergoferant, that thou know^st there were such three, thou must now enter the
combat alone against me, I shall be sufficient to break thy foolish pate,
and cause thee quickly give over this proud daring speech. To know what is
become of my brethren, how they were slain, and by whom, I am not to tell
thee, because thou have shown to little courtesy to me, in scorning to tell me
this. Ladies misfortune, and the occasion of thy hatred to her, urging thee to
commit such a monstrous and inhumane act, in this respect I think thee
unworthy to know their mishaps. I perceive well (quoth Squamel) why thou
dare not tell me, because their end was with such shame and reproach, as it
were thy dishonor, being their brother, to make report thereof, for perhaps,
as it is no other like, some knight of small valor has slain them, and by
conquest brought thee likewise under his obeisance. Thou lie in thy throat,
answered Ergoferant, for a knight of slender valor could not conquer them, nor
yet subject me to his obedience, but if I yielded my self to any one, assure
thy self he was no mean man of virtues. And that thou may bear record
thereof, we trifle too much time in prating, let the effects declare which of
us two proves most valiant, otherwise thou do but seek occasion to shun
the combat, which take as thou will, for I will dally no longer. So saying,
with a mighty mase which he bore, he let drive at his adversary, and the
stroke fell with such violence, he standing with his semitarie drawn to defend
it, as had he not withstoode it with wonderful strength, it had laid him on
the ground. But Squamell well awarded this horrible blow, without receiving
any great damage thereby, and delivered back a sound answer for the same with
his semitarie, which the gyaunt escaped in as ample manner: and thus began
between them a sharp and cruel fight, continuing the space of two hours,
without discovery which side had most advantage, but in the end it so fell out,
that Squamel was readier to fight on horsbacke than the other, knowing how to
turn and manage his horse for most harm to his enemy, mary Ergoferant was
nothing so nimble, only his strokes were more weighty than his adversaries,
but he was nothing comparable in dexterie and nimblenes, which is the only
thing required in a combat. At length Squamel began to be very sore travailed,
when suddenly arrived in place a knight of so little stature, as he might
easily stand under the cleft of either of them, he galloping with the full
carrire of his horse, having a fair broad glistering sword in his hand, which
he handled so lightly, as if it had bin a little riding wa^d, yet was it in
sight so heavy, as it he could not have lifted it with both his hands. To each
of the combattants he gave a meruaylous stroke, saying, hold and cease your
fighting, to tell me forth the occasion of your combat. Ergoferant was astonned
here at, as giving his horse the bridle, without conduct or government he ran
away, keeping no direct course, but here and there over the forest, as in
short space he was far enough from his enemy. Squamel likewise was so amazed
with his stroke, as albeit he rained his horse as strongly as he could, yet
ran he away with him swifter than the wind, carrying him also as far off the
other way. Heereat they both meruailed not a little, especially the short
knight, who seeing them fight so fiercely, reputed them of greater valor than
to fly away so speedily. But kn^^^ng as then no reason hereof, he fell into a
great laughter, til suddenly he espied the lady hanging, when having a pretty
while beheld her, both the mangled trunk and the rest lying on the ground,
perceuing she had been of singular beauty, he took some ^ompassion on her
misfortune, especially after he had read the verses, which he found on the
ground where Squamel had thrown them: and so entirely was he moved with pity,
as he resolved to know who had caused her mishap, to the end he might work
some re^enge therefore. Hereupon he would ride to meet one of the two
combattants, by force or fair means to know how this happened: now while he
is searching them, not only will I here conclude this Chapter, but also the
sceond book of this famous History.

Thus Gentlemen, here knit we up the second part of Gerileons history, if this
may find but wished entertainme^t, the third partshall follow with all speed
possible. In mean while an old promise remains to be performed, namely, the
first book of Primaleon o^ Greece, which by Gods permission ye shall have the
next Term, if it may be finished so soon. Let then Gerileons welcome hasten
on Primaleon.

A. Mundy.
FINIS.

