The Demaundes of holy Scripture, with answers to the same, wherein are
defined, and declared the chief, and principal points of Christian doctrine:
very profitable for the right understanding of holy Scriptures: made by T.
Becon, and drawn out of his great works.

Matthew. 7. Ask, and it shall be given you. Seek, and ye shall find. Knock,
and it shall be opened unto you.

James. 1. If any of you lack vvysdome, let him ask of him that gives it:
even God, which gives to al men indifferently, and casts no man in the
teeth, and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith, and waver not:
for he that doubts, is like a vvaue of the Sea, which is tossed of the
vvindes, and carried with violence. Neither let that man think, that he shall
receive any thing of the Lord. A wavering minded man, is unstable in all his
vvayes.

AT LONDON Printed by John Day. 1577. Cum Priuilegio.

1. Peter. 3. Be ready alvvayes to give answer to every man that asks you a
reason of the hope that is in you, and that with meckenesse and fear, having
a good conscience, that where as they backbite you as evil dooers, they may
be ashamed, that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.

Apocalips. 3. Thou say, I am rich and increased with goods, and have
need of nothing, and know not how thou art vvretched and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked. I counsel thee to bye of me, gold tried in
thesyre, that thou may be rich: and white raiment, that thou may be
clothed, that thy filthy nakedness do not appear: and anoint thine eyes
with eye salve that thou may see.

To the godly, and right woorshipfull Senate, the Mayre and his brethren of
Sandwich in Kent, Thomas Becon vvysheth long life, continual health, and
prosperous felicity.
SO often as I consider the blessed state of your town, whereof God by his
divine providence and unsearchable counsel, has made you rulers under the
Queens Majesty, our Sovereign liege Lady: I am entirely provoked and stirred
up to give most entire thanks, to the Prince of Princesses, and Lord of
Lords, that mighty GOD of Hosts, for his so great and singular benifites, so
bounteously and largely poured upon you, and other the inhabitauntes of your
town. For I do not well know, if any thing may any where be found, meet
to beautify a common weal, that justly may be counted to lack in you, so
plentifully has GOD poured his blessings upon you. Who is able to express,
what a goodly ornamente, precious jewel, and noble ouche, Christian doctrine
is, to a Christian common weal? The sage and prudent Philosophers, and other
wise and expert men of this world, judged these common weals most blessed,
happy, and fortunate, most noble, beautiful, and flourishing, where the
Princes and Rulers thereof, were either Philosophers, or studious of
Philosophy. But how much is that common weal to be counted happy and
blessed, where not human Philosophy, whether we respect natural, or
moral, but divine Philosophy, brought from the hie Heavens, by him which is
the vvysdome of the father, prospers, florisheth, triumphs: where also not
vain and curious Philosophers, but true, faithful, and godly Philosophers
reign, and bear rule? Whatsoever the Philosophers taught, although never so
much enforced with sugared eloquence, probable reasons, and apparent
arguments, it was the fruit of the earth, and of man's brain: but that
which Christ delivered unto us, came out of the bosom of his Father, so
that look how much the noble Heavens surmount and pass the vile and base
Earth in higth, and indignity: so much, and incomparable wise more, does the
heavenly Philosophy, whereof the holy Ghost alone is the aucthour, exceeds
the earthy Philosophy, whereof man is the deviser. He that comes from an
high, says that blessed John Baptist, is above all. John. 3.
He that is of the earth, is earthy, and speaks of the earth. He that comes
from Heaven, is above all, and what he has seen and heard, that he
testifies: and no man receives his testimony. He that has received his
testimony, has set to his seal, that GOD is true. For he whom GOD has
sent, speaks the words of God. What other thing is this divine
Philosophy, vvherof we now speak, then the holy word of God? And what
other are these faithful and godly Philosophers, then the true preachers and
professors of the sacred Scriptures? All these are to be found among you
plentifully. The Christian Philosophy, I mean the word of GOD, reigns,
rules, and triumphs among you, so that according unto to it, all things are
ordered among you in that your Town. In other places, this divine and
Christian Philosophy, is counted heresy, nevve learning, strange doctrine,
the mother of errors, the cause of rebellion, sedition, insurrection, etc. and
the plain subuertion of common weals: but with you, and that most justly it
is reperted and taken for the alone truth, for the ancient doctrine of the
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, for the mother of all godlynes and virtue,
for the only and alone cause of unity, concord, quietness, amity,
obedience, and for the alone stay, upholding, and maintenance of all Christean,
and well ordered common weals, so that where this is not, there is a Chaos,
and plain confusion of things. This holy word of GOD among you, svvimmeth
not in your lips only, but it also shines in your life and conversation,
unto the good example of all them that are conversant with you. By this
word, according to the commandment of GOD given to Joshua, ye do not only
frame your own life, but ye also govern your Town, and judge al causes
that come before you, as a rule, from the which it is not lavvfull for you by
any means to depart. Of this word ye reverently talk, commune, confer,
sing, and have continual meditation, as your chief joy and comfort. Matthew. 13.
This word is unto you, that noble treasure hid in the Feelde, the which
a man found and hid, and for joy thereof, goes and sells all that he has,
and byeth the Feelde. This word is to you more svveete, then the Honey, or the
Honey Comb, and more precious then Gold, or Precious stone. And as this most
blessed and holy word does occupy the principal and highest place among
you: so have you both godly professors, and faithful preachers of the same,
unto the great joy and singular comfort of all the inhabitauntes of your
Town. For as there can not be a greater jewel in a Christian common weal,
then an earuest faithful, and constant preacher of the Lords word: so can
there not be a greater plague among any people, then when they have reigning
over them blind guides, dumme dogs, wicked wolves hypocritical hyrelinges,
popish Prophets, which feed them not with the pure Wheat of Gods word,
but with the VVoormevvod of men's tryfling traditions, and with the sovvre
leaven of the Papisticall Pharisees, as Solomon says: When the preaching of
Gods word fails, the people perish, and come to naught. Verily as there is
not a greater blessing given of GOD to any nation, then the gift of his word:
so I know, not if a greater curse from GOD can be cast upon any people,
then when the word of GOD, and the true preaching thereof is taken away
from them, as these words of GOD spoken by the prophet, Amos. 8.
do manifestly declare. Behold, the time comes (says the Lord GOD) that I
shall send an hunger into the earth, not the hunger of bread, nor the thyrst of
water, but an hunger to hear the word of the LORD: so that they shall go
from the one sea to the other, yea from the North, to the East, runnyng about
to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it. In this behalf
therefore, are ye the inhabitauntes of Sandvviche greatly blessed of the Lord
our God, which has not only very richelv given you his word to be
preached, taught, and read among you, but also hearts to receive and believe
the same, as if we read of Lydia, Acts. 16.
whose heart (says blessed Luke, the Lord opened, that she attended to the
things which Paul spoke. Out of this your fervent zeal and burning love
tovvard this divine and heavenly Philosophy, many godly and Christen fruits
of Gods spirit, have issued and plentifully come forth, as brotherly concord,
and unfeigned amity among your selves, not your selves only, but also among
all the inhabitauntes of your Town, so that all contention, strife, debate,
discord, emnitie, variaunce, tumultes, quarelles, lavvynges. etc. banished, and
avoided: benevolence, love, concord, agreement, unity, amity, freendship,
gentleness, humanity, and whatsoever makes unto the bond of peace, rules
and reigns among you, which godly unity and concord does so evidently
declare you to be of God, John. 13.
as nothing more. In this shall all men know, that ye are my Disciples (says
Christ) if one of you love an other. As discord brings al things to
havoc: so does concord conserve, keep in good order, and make to increase
what so ever is good and profitable to a common weal, or to any part
thereof. As Salustius says: By concord, small things increase and grovve: but
by discord, mighty and great things decay, and come to naught. It was very
vvittely and learnedly ansvyeared of Terence, when the noble Senate of the
most noble Romans demanded of him after the destruction of Carthage, what he
thought to be the cause of the subuertion if so ample, populus, and flourishing
city, whether the puissaunce of the Romans, whose force seemed to be
incomparable, or the feebleness of the Carthaginenses not being able to
resist, No, says he, neither your valiance, nor our want of puissance, was
the subversion of our city, but the discord of the Citizens. The mightiest
fortress, and strongest Bulvvarcke, that either City or Town can have, is
the concord of Citizens, without the which, all puissaunce, all force, all
vvytte, al policy, all castles, all martial armonies are vain, and
unprofitable, verily in this behalf, are ye also greatly blessed of God,
which both in godly and vvorldly affairs, are of one mind, and of one
meaning, without al diffencion among you. O blessed fruit of Gods spirit.
Moreover, how idleness that chief maistres of vices all, utterly exiled,
and banished out of your Town? No man lives there idly. All degrees of
persons are godly, virtuously, and profitably occupied, every man according to
his vocacion and calling. All study to be quiet, Luke..3.
and to meddle with their own business, and to work with their own
hands, that they may not only eat their own bread according to the
commanndement of God, but also through those their labors have whereof they
may give unto such as have need, as Saint John says, he that has two
coats, let him give one to him that has none. And he that has meat, let him
do likewise. Certes diligent, and virtuous travail, vpholdeth the City: but
idle and sluggysh hands, root up the foundacions thereof.

Furthermore, who can yenough praise and sufficiently commend your studious,
carfulness, and painful travail, in making provision for the poor members
of Christ, which have not of them selves, whereof to live? Verily ye have a
fatherly care for your poore', that none of them should want. Ye count their
lack, your own lack: neither are ye less moved with their miseries, 1.
Joan. 3.
then if ye your selfs were touched with the same, according to this saying
of Saint John. He that has the substance of this vvoorld, and sees his
brother have need, anb shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the
love of God in him? Unmercifulness tovvard the poor, was one of the chief
causes, why that flourishing and to much vvealthy City Sodom (as the Prophet
teaches) was destroyed with fire, an brimstone from heaven. Ezech. 16.
Verily even so contrariwise, where the works of mercy are diligently
practiced upon the poor, there is the blessing of God, conservation of the
Town, or City, increase of goods, and fortunate success in all honest and
godly trauayles, as Solomon says: He that gives to the poor, shall not
want. He that lends to the Lord, that shows mercy to the poor, and it
be recompensed him to the uttermost, as our Savior Christ says: Give, and it
shall be given unto you: good measure, and pressed down, and shaken together,
and runnyng over, shall men give into your bosoms: For he that gives but a
cup of cold water for Christ's sake, Luke..6.
shall not loose his revvard. If thou vvylt break thy bread to the hungry,
says GOD by the Prophet, Esaias. 58.
and lead the needy vvayfaring man into thy house, and cover the naked man,
and not turn away thy face from the poor: thy light shall break forth as
the morning, and thy health florishe right shortly: yea, thy righteousness
shall go before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall embrace thee. Then if thou
call, the Lord shall aunsvvere thee: if thon cryest, he shall say: Here I
am. O blessed is the man, says the Psalmographe, that considers the poor
and needy: the Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble. The Lord shall
preserve him and keep him alive, that he may be blessed upon earth, and not be
delivered into the will of his enemies. The Lord shall comfort him, when he
lies sick upon his bed, yea and make his bed in his sieknesse.

Again, what shall I speak of your gentle and loving enterteynement of
strangers and forreners, which for the testemony of Christ's most glorious
Gospel, and for the quietness of their conscience, that they may the more
freely serve GOD with a pure mind, are not only content to suffer unworthy
banishment with the loss of their goods, but also day and night to labor
with their own hands for their living, that they may be no burden to any
man. These most vvyllyngly and gladly ye admit, receive, and embrace, cherishe,
entertayne, and comfort. These ye lodge and place among you, not as strangers,
but as Citizens, not as forreners, but as your dearly beloved Christian
brothers: for whom also ye are no less careful then for your selves, that
nothing be lacking unto them, but that they may have sufficiently of all good
and necessary things. This is the true hospitality, I mean, the gentle
enterteynement of godly strangers, vviche are afflicted for the words sake.
Of these speaks GOD on this manner: Exodus 22. Leuit. 19.
If a stranger soiourne with thee in your land, ye shall not vex him. But
the stranger that dwells with you, shall be as one of your selves, and thou
shall love him as thy self. Of these speaks Christ on this wise: Matthew. 25.
Romans. 12.
I was harbourlesse, and ye took me in. Of these speaks Saint Paul thus:
Distribute to the necessity of the Saints. Hebru. 13. Gene. 19. 1. Peter. 4.
Be ready to harbor. Again, Be not forgetful to lodge strangers: for there
by have diverse men lodged. Angels vnvvares Of these speaks S. Peter on this
sort: Be ye harberors one to another without grudging. Leuit. 19. and. 23.
Deuteronomy. 24. 1. Tim. 4. Titus. 1.
Of these speaks Saint John on this manner. Thou dooest faithfully,
whatsoever thou dooest to the brethren, and to the strangers. Of these, GOD
in his laws gives a special charge both to the rich men, and also to the
Bishops and spiritual Pastors of his congregation, that they should see to
them, and make provision for them, that they lack nothing. Highly in Gods
favor must the godly strangers be, seeing GOD gives to his people so great
charge over them. Who therefore can otherwise, then highly commend the loving
gentleness, and gentle love, the bounteous liberality, and liberal bounty,
which ye shevve to the poor scattered members of Christ? These be worthy
fruits of the Gospel. These works shevve, that ye have not received the
grace of God in vain: and that ye be not of the company of those Gospellers,
which with their mouth profess GOD, but with their deeds deny him, being
abominable, and disobedient, and unapt unto every good work. Such
professors or rather peruersers of the Gospel, are like to that Son, which
promised his father to work in his Vineyard, and wrought nothing at all. Yea
they are, Jude. Epist.
as Saint Jude terms them in his Epistle, clouds without water, trees
without fruit, raging waves of the sea, foming out their own shame,
vvandring stars, to whom is reserved the mist of darkness for ever,
fleshely, having no spirit. etc. and in deed like to those five foolish
Virgins, which had Lamps, Matthew. 25.
but in their Lamps no Oil, and not unlike to the Fig tree without fruit,
which Christ cursed for her barrenness.

But God (right worshipful and dearly beloved) has given you an other mind,
and grafted in you a better spirit, that ye do not only know God, but also
earnestly labor to do his holy and blessed will, that by this means, ye may
be found not only favorers, but also followers, not only talkers, but also
vvalkers, not only lovers, but also livers, not only professoures, but also
practisers, not only vvorders, but also workers of the holy scripture, and so
become blessed, as our Savior Christ says. If ye know these things, and
do them, blessed are ye. For not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of the
father, which is in heaven, he shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. Ye are
my friends, if you do those things that I command you. He that has my
commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me. Romans..2.
For in the sight of god, as The apostle says they are not righteous, which
hear the law, but the doers of the law shall be justified. If any man be
in Christ, Galat. 5. Ephe. 2.
he is a nevve creature. They truly that are Christ's, have crucified the
flesh, with the affections and lusts. We are the workmanship of God,
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has ordained, that we
should walk in them. Tit..3.
Let our ears learn says Saint Paul, to excel in good works, as far
forth as need requires, that they be not unfruitful. Joan..15.
Herein is my father glorified (says our Savior Christ) that ye bear much
fruit, and become my Disciples. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you,
and ordained you to go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should
remain.

Go therefore forth (right worshipful and dearly beloved) as ye have
begun, in the way of righteousness. Receive the Gospel of Christ, which is
the word of your salvation, and bread of life, with greedy, and desirous
minds. Call on God daily (as ye do) with fervent prayer, and cease not to be
thankful unto him, for his benefits. Be an example in life and conversation,
to them that are under you. Seek the quietness, and commodity of your Town,
and of the inhabitauntes of the same, rather then your own gain, and
profit: study rather to be loved, then feared. To the wicked and sinful, be
severe and sharp: but to the good and godly, be gentle and loving. Continue
your goodnesses and liberality to the poor strangers which are exiled for
the testimony of the Lord Jesus, and tender them, as your selves. Suffer not
idleness to creep within the bounds of your town, but rather provide that
al be well and virtuously occupied. Of the poor, have diligent consideration,
but as for the sturdy and lasie lubbers, which gladly live of the labor of
other men's hands, and hate to be well occupied them selves: either compel to
work, or else banishe them your town. Look diligently to the bringing up
of your youth, either in good letters, or else in some virtuous exercices, that
in time to come, they be not unprofitable members of the common weal. But
above all things, see that they be brought up in the nurture and fear of the
Lord, and in the knowledge of his holy word, that they may learn even from
their Cradles to serve their Lord GOD in holiness and righteousness all the
days of the Lord. And that this thing may the more conveniently be brought to
pass, as ye have earnestly intended, and to that end have provided large
sums of money among your selves: so with al expedition provide, that your
School may be erected and set up, for the godly and virtuous education of your
youth. So shall you both do a noble sacrifyce unto God, deserve well of many,
and also leave to your posterity a worthy monument of a most worthy
enterprise. And to help forwards some point of godly doctrine to be taught in
your nevve erected School. After I had finished this little treatise,
entitled, The Demaundes of holy Scripture, I thought it not unsitting, nor
unworthy our friendship, to dedicate the same to your vvoorships, and so by
you, to commend it to the Christian youth of your School. In it they shall
learn to know and understand, the principal and chief points of Gods
doctrine: so that by this means they shall be able to render a reason both of
their faith, and doctrine, which they profess, and not be like Horses and
Mules that have no understanding. The book is little, if the number of the
leaves be considered: but if the matter thereof be diligently pondered, it
shall be found both great, and profitable. Thus for this present, taking my leave
of you, I vvysh to you, and to the whole Town, all good and prosperous
things, both for your bodies and souls, most humbly beseeching God, to finishe
that good work, which he has begun in you, unto the glory of his name, and
unto the profit of his holy congregation. Amen.

From my house at Caunterbury, the first of September. 1563.
The Demaundes of holy Scripture.
WHO did create us? Gene. 1. Eccle. 18. psalm. 146. Act. 14.17. Romans. 5.
Gene. 3.
God who also made al ye world of naught.

What things damned us? Sin. In so much as Adam did eat, What sin is.
by the persuasion of Eua, of the Apple forbidden him of God. For sin is the
breaking of the commandments of GOD.

Who redeemed us, and set us in the favor of GOD again? Gene. 3. Romans. 5. 1.
Timoth. 2. Romans. 5. Ephe. 1.2. Collossi. 1. 1. Joan. 3. Joan. 1. Galathi. 4.
Jesus Christ, by taking our nature on him.

What is God unto us? Whereas before he was a severe and straight Judge:
through Christ he is become our most loving, tender, and merciful father.

What are we? His dearly beloved children.

What thing is GOD? An infinite substance, What God is.
which only with his word of might, did create and make all things, and with
his most high and incomparable wisdom governs all thing, and of his
inestimable goodness, suffers and preserves all thing. God is infinite.
I call that infinite both which has neither beginning nor ending, and that
which can not be comprehended, nor compassed by man's brain, what thing it is.
And in both these significacions God is infinite. Furthermore that is to every
man god or a god, that he loves, dread^th, and worshippeth with all his heart.
Exodus. 22. Psalm. 82.
The Scripture also calls the Judges and Officers of the earth gods.

What a strange God is.
What is a strange God, or an other God? What soever thing we worship besides
the very living God. And that also that does alienate and turns our heart
from Gods word, is called a strange or an other God.

What faith is.
What thing is faith? It is a full and perfect confidence and trust in God
through Christ, Romans. 10. Hebru. 11.
engendered in our heart, by hearing the word of God, and as Paul defines
faith: Faith is a sure confidence of things which we look for, and the
certainty of promises.

What hope is.
What is hope? A styffe and firm expectacion, of such things as be promised
us of the word of GOD.

What charity is.
What is charity? The principal fruit of faith, a prompte and ready will to
do good to our neighbor. Math. 25.
Otherwhyles the works of mercy are called charity.

What is the law? What the law of god is.
It is the lively will of God, given us by commandment, as well in the new
testament as in the old, whose work and operacion is to show sin, The
office of the law.
to show that God is angry with us for our evil doing, Joan. 7. Romans. 7. 2.
Cor. 3. Galat. 3.
and daily transgression of his commandment, whose duty is to accuse us in
our conscience, to cast us down, and make us seem vile and naught worth in
our sight, and by this means, either brings us to utter desperacion, or else
leads us (as it were by the hand) to Christ, the only true pacifier of the
conscience.

What is the Gospel? What the Gospel is.
It is a glad tiding. Or else you may call it every promise that God made of
Christ, and of other his good benefits, whereby the clouds of the conscience
be put away, and man's mind erected and made merry, whether these promises be
in ye new testament, or in the old: Paul, Romans. 1.
says it is the power of God, where by all that believe are brought to health
and sauegarde.

What is it to be a godly man, or who is godly? Who is godly.
He or she that has faith, and the fear of God before their eyes.

Who is ungodly.
Who is wicked, or ungodly? He or she that believes not the promise of God,
and that has not the dread of God before them.

Who is a Christian.
Who is a Christian man? He that believes on Christ, and lives according to
his word.

Who is an Ethnike.
Who is an Ethnike or Miscreant? He that uses not those laws, and
ordinances, and has not the faith that we have. Or else he that seeks to be
saved by some other means then by Christ.

An Heretic, who.
Who is an Heretik? He which thinks, and styfly mainteineth any thing against
the doctrine of faith (that is to say) the word of God. The word of God is the
doctrine of faith.
Mark here the word of God, to be called the doctrine of faith, because faith,
draws from no whence else her principles: then from the word of God. Because
she only learneth, marketh, and bears away the word of God.

The kingdom of Heaven what it is.
What is the kingdom of Heaven? It is where the word of God is truly preached
and received, and where it bears fruit meet for the doctrine, whose king
and Lord, is Christ.

What is the world? The world what it is.
An heap and mustre of men, without the word of God, among whom the word of
God is despised and persecuted: where is a rablement of al vices, whose Prince
and God is Satan. In some place it is called an hot boiling Sea, which can not
rest and be assuaged.

What is the word of God? The word of God what it is.
It is the decreed sentence, word, and will of God, expressed and left behind
of the Prophets and Apostles to us, in ye canonical books of the new
testament and the old, which word he that reciueth (that is to say knowledgeth
in his heart to be true and holy, and lives according to it) receives God, and
he that refuses it, despises God, and as much as lies in him, he makes God
a liar. The nams of the word of God.
The word of God has sundry names in Scripture: as the sword of the spirit, a
two edged sword, a fire sword, an iron wall, a strong hold, a well fensed tower,
consuming fire. Ephe. 6. Heb. 4. Iere. 22. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
It is also called whete, the rod of the mouth of the Lord, the breath of the
mouth of the Lord, a mystery, an oracle, the print or secreat will of the
Lord.

What are man's tradicions? What men's traditions are
What soever man's reason has or does imagen without the word of God, and
ordeyneth and wylleth it to be reputed and taken as good, Math. 13. Iere. 23.
Math. 15. Mark. 7. Math. 19
godly, and pleasant in the sight of God. They be called in Scripture Cocle,
and Chasse. Of these speaks Christ, where he says. They do serve me in
vain, while they teach such doctrine as are nothing but the commandments of
men.

How men are good.
Who be good? Only God is good. Notwithstanding, because all they that have the
spirit of God, and are ruled by his word, be of the flock of God, and under
his keeping: therefore God does communicate and imparte his goodness to them,
and so they be called good, as their Father, Lord, and Governor is.

Who be evil.
Who be evil? They that have not ye spirit of God, nor be ruled by his word,
whether they live upright outwardly, and according of the letter of the law:
as Cato, Socrates, and they that be counted good and virtuous among the Turks,
and Jews, or else they that be open transgressors of the law. Act. 4. Ephe.
2.
For in Christ only is salvation and remission of sins. And unto that time
that our sins be remitted, we be evil, unclean, and under dampnacion. And
on this fashion we are all evil, and sinners by nature.

Who is just or righteous? Who is righteous.
He that has faith. What it is to be justified.
For through faith we are justified. To be justified is to have our sins not
imputed unto us, but to have them forgeuen in Christ, and for Christ. Even as
David says: Psalm. 32. Romans 4.
blessed are they whose vnrighteousnesses are forgeuen, and whose sins are
covered. Blessed is that man to whom the Lord imputes no sin. Now because
the faithful man only receives and enjoys this mercy forgiveness, and this
no imputing of sin through faith, therefore he is called just, and we through
faith said to be justified. Romans 4.5. Gal. 2.3.
Sometime in Scripture the Hipocrites, and they that think to be saved by
their works, are called just or righteous as we read. I came not for the
righteous, etc.

Who is unrighteous? Unrighteous who.
He that has no faith.

What is everlasting life? Everlasting life what.
It is the taste of the favor and manifold mercies of God, the peace of the
conscience, a fervent desire of heaven, and to be with Christ, which the holy
Ghost does kendle in the hearts of the faithful. Joan. 17. Joan. 5.
Otherwhiles everlasting life is called to know the very living God, and Jesus
Christ, whom he sent down. As it is said: He that has the Son and
believes in him: has everlasting life.

Hell, or everlasting death, what it is
What is everlasting death, or hell? In this life it is the perpetual grudge
and horrible fear of conscience, the distress and tediousness of the mind,
dreding the wrath of God, which the devil increases in the unfaithful: Hell
diversely taken.
as it is plainly declared. Also hell is taken for extreme temptacion, which
almost ledeth us down to desperacion: as we read: The Lord leads us down to
hell, 1. Reg. 2. Esaias. 66. Apoc. 22. Math. 13.22.25.
and brings us up again.

After this life it betokens the fire of Hell, where the damned souls be. It
is called also a fyrie furnesse, and the utter darkness, where is wayling and
gnashing of teeth, and utter desperacion of the mercy of God.

What the blessing of God is.
What thing is the blessing of God? It is the favor, the grace, the help and
beneficence of God* etc.

What is the curse of God? What the curse of God is.
It is the anger, extreme wrath, and the lack of all the good benefits of God.

What is a good conscience? What a good conscience is.
It is the peace of the mind, a spiritual joy, and a plain feeling and
perceiving of the goodness of God toward us, through faith in Jesus Christ,
which is described and set out. And is no more to say, but that when we
perceive that through faith in Jesus Christ, Romans 5.
our sins be forgeuen, Esaias. 57.35.
and that we be in the favor of God: we be heart hole, merry, and found.

What is an evil conscience? What an evil conscience is.
It is an inward boiling heat, and tossing of the mind, for a man's
wickedness, and when for pure anguish of the sight and horrore of sin, the
heart faints and failleth him. It is called in Scripture the worm of the
conscience.

What is verity, and truth? Christ himself, the word of God, and what soever
else agrees with the word of God. For as Christ says I am the way, the truth,
and the life. Also, thy words be the truth. There is also a Civil truth, or
verity (as it is called) and that is when with that which is said, Joan. 14.
Joan. 17.
the thing agrees, and when we find words agreeing with the thing itself.

What falshod is.
What is lesing, or falsitie? What soever thing is enemy, and not agreeing to
the truth and the word of God: as man's tradicions, or doctrines that serve not
to the same word of God.

The fear of God what it is.
What is the fear of God? Such an humblenes and low behavior as natural
sons have toward their loving fathers. It is also a ready, glad, and wylfull
warenesse in ordering our selves, that we do not commit any thing against God,
and his word, for fear least we should offend so loving and tender a father.
Which fear as it springs only out of faith, so it is only in y^ faithful.
Then we fear God wisely: when with heart and mind, we so endeuer to live and
order our selves: as if we had God a witness and looker of all our deeds,
words, ye and of our preuie thoughts and cogitacious. This loving dread
ingendereth wisdom and brings Gods blessing on us, and drives out sin
out of the breast. The servile and bond fear, is the amasing, dread, and
abasshing of the mind, Romans 8.
that the wicked men have of the wrath of God, engendered by laying the law to
their evil living.

What is the contempt of God? What the contempt or despysing of God is.
A dispising, or a light regarding of the doctrine and the commandments of
God, proceeding of an unclean heart and wicked mind, a pleasure and delight in
sin and ignorance, the root of all mischief, which fruit of incredulity,
God never left unpunished, as it appears. Exo. and Nume. etc.

What is thanks giving? Thanks giving what it is.
It is a remembrance, and a thankful acknowledging of the benefits of God:
Psalm. 50.
when we surely think all that we have comes of him It is called in the
Scripture, sacrifice of praise giving.

What is unkindness, Unkindness and murmuring against God what it is.
and privy murmuring against God? It is to grudge, and not to be content with
the works of God, and to forget his benefits. Examples hereof we read.

What is it to have the holy Ghost? Exodus 16.17.
To be godly disposed, and to have an heavenly burning in the mind, To have the
holy Ghost what it is.
ever upright, whole, sincere, and pure, virtuous, always judging the best,
willing and wishing well to every body, the fruits of whom be all virtues,
Galat. 5.
which ye may see in the Galathians.

To be evil minded, or to have the devil what it is.
What is an evil mind, or to have the devil? It is to have an evil concard
mind, to be against God and his word, to be given all to wickedness, to
misdeeme and judge all to the worst.

A good Angel, what it is.
What is a good Angel? The messenger of God, or what soever ye will, by which
God works us, and in us that that is good, profitable, and commodious.

An evil Angel what it is.
What is Satan, or an evil Angel? An adversary and enemy of God, a worker of
al mischefe and death unto us. Otherwhiles it is put only for the devil.

The Cross what it is
What is the Cross? It is all manner of greuaunce given to every manner of
vocacion and kind of life, grounded on faith and the word of God, and what that
we do, goes not forward as we would. It is also the teaching, warning,
chastising rod, and staff of the Lord, which names be for to be seen in the
proverbs and psalms. The Cross of Christ, What the Cross of Christ is.
is his Passion and the preaching of the same, and the persecution that
follows the preachers and believers of the same.

What is pleasure, and the ease of this life? What the pleasure and ease of
this life is.
It is when we have all at will, when God leaves us to our selves, and
troubles us not with any adversity for faith and the word of God.

What is sin? What sin is.
It is the transgression, and breaking of any of Gods commandments. It is
also a natural propencion and inclinacion to noughtinesse, engendered with us
at our birth. What soever is not of faith, is sin. It is also the distrust in
God, and the ignorance and contempt of him, and a trust and confidence in our
own works.

What is original sin? Original sin what it is.
It is the poison and corruption that we have in our birth, through the
infection of our nature in Adam, which does bring forth in us the fruit of
incredulity, and all wickedness, and makes us unable to the works of the
law, as the law requires them to be done of us: until Christ and his word
has made us a new creature.

What is original Justice? Original justice what it is.
The integrity, holenesse, and soundness of the powers of the body and the
soul, whereby both the soul and the body could verily obey, do, and fulfill
the law of God. Wherefore after the poison of sin entered: nature lost her
integrity and soundness, and the venim of sin made weak, faint, and feeble
the whole nature of man, so that it could not in no wise will or do the work,
that it whole before could do. Romans 7.2. Cor. 3.
And not this only, but it infected and corrupted the flesh and the soul, and
all the powers of them both, which infection engendered in the nature of man hus
febled, the ignorance and contempt of God, The corruption of the nature of man.
the distrust in God, the murmuring against God when he sends adversity, or
sickness. It causes furthermore man to be without the fear of God; to hate
the judgment of God, to flee and run away from God when he chasteneth us, to
be angry with him and despair, and to trust in things corruptible, etc. These
be the horrible biles, sores, pockes, and carbucles that disfigure the face of
man. Which though they be never so high, yet our schole men and canonistes (I
mean the professors of the Bishop of Romes laws) coule never see, or
perceive. These Chiste through faith at our baptism does suppress and abate
their power, and at the last by death does utterly vainguishe and kill.

What mean you by these words, What this word Culpa signifies.
Poena, and Culpa? This word Culpa, which is in english a fault, or trespass
properly, in this place betokens the gilt (as we call it) or the trespass,
and that which the law punishes in the deed or fact: as in an act of felony,
the law punishes not the coming to the Horse, nor yet the brideling, no nor
the leading of the Horse from the stable, medowe, or common, for all these may
be done without the evil and unlawful desire of the Horse, and again with
the owners leave. But the law punishes the coming, the brydeling, and taking
away the Horse against the owners will, and with the mind of stealing him, and
calls the fact theft, or felony. This word, What this word Poena signifies.
Poena (which is in English pain) is the wages and punishment taken for the
fault. And thus some kind of vices, al hurtes, damages, sickness, pest
ilences, perils, errors, and the lack of Gods word that we have among us: be
pains, and punishments of sin. That God punishes sin with loss and
danger both of body and goods, with sickness, pestilence, and such other
(none I think doubts) but that he punishes sin by sin, and sin by
errors and heresies: the world can not so clearly perceive. How be it Paul,
Romans 1.
does plainly declare it, where he says: because the Gentiles turned the glory
of God, and worshipped the creature more then the maker, etc. Therefore (says
he) God gave them up unto shameful lusts, etc. Which iustes be there straight
after expressed. And this punishment (I mean to punish sin by sin) is a
very sore punishment.

He punishes sin by errors and heresies thus. When the word of God is
plenteously and sincerely preached (as it is now) and yet men still kick
against it, or in case many receive it, yet few or non regard it, or live
according to it, but with their words make on it only for a fleshly liberty:
then (I say) God takes his word away from thence (as who be not worthy of it)
and lets the world prevail against his preachers, and suffers Antechriste
(who must needs succeed Christ) to kill them, Math. 5.
so that Antichriste peaceably enjoys his kingdom (as he has done all
ready this great while) and he must needs have like doctrine to him self. So
did he punish the Jews his own elected people at sundry times more then.ii.
M. year, Note well.
and suffered them to worship false Gods, or else to set up their own
tradicions, Gods precepts neglected. So also has he punished our fore fathers
these viii. or ix. C. years. And now except we thankefully receive his word,
and live thereafter in the newness of life, according as we are called (no
doubt of it) he will, not only revolue and cast us down again to our old
ignorance, captivity and bondage: but also shortly take such vengeance on
us, as he threatened Bethsaida, Corazin, etc.

Now God remitteth the crime, gylte, and trespace to his elect through faith
in Christ: but he reserueth (after a certain manner) a little portion of the
pain (not to counterpeise therewith, or satisfy his justice for the crime, as
the Bishop of Rome with his accomplices has taught us this great while) but to
chastise their flesh with all, God punishes sin in this world, not after
this life in purgatory, as the Papists feign.
and sometime to be an example unto other to forbear like crimes, for fear of
like punishment, or to declare the ire of God for such crimes. So that what
trouble, vexacion, grief, loss, sickness so ever the best men that be, have:
they deserve it with much more. Howbeit (no not thus) GOD would beat, scourge,
and try his: and it were not for their own profit and avail. For by this
means he nourtereth, reineth, and humbles his elect, that they may know
them selves the better, and lest they run at large after the world: as it
appears by the aduoutry of David, 1. Cor. 11. 2. Reg. 12.
and many other stories in the Bible.

Innocence what it is.
What is innocence? The pureness of the mind, and when the conscience is not
guilty, or finds it self culpable in any thing. This innocence only the
faith in Jesus Christ ingendereth in us. In this state was Paul (after many
interpreters minds) when he said. I know naught by my self. etc. He said not
this, that he thought not him self a sinner, and that he trespassed not before
God (for then had he ben a liar. 1. Cor. 4. 1. Joan. 1. Exodus 34.
For Moses says to the Lord: it is thou that take away trespass,
iniquity, and sin, and none innocent before thee) but he means of his
conversation. In this state also was Ezechias the good King, when he turned him
to the wall, and wept. 4. Reg. 20.
Here we call, not to be guilty, or culpable, to have the peace of the
conscience, and ye is when we believe through Christ that our sins be hid,
for unto that time, the law cease not to accuse us in our conscience.

What is the spirit? What the spirit is.
It is a Heavenly sense, or understanding, springing out of the word of God
(or else the self word of God) exceeding the sense of the flesh and reason.
Joan. 6.
The words that I speak unto you, they be spirit and life: meaning they
amount and pass the flesh and sense of reason, they be spiritual and
heavenly. It is sometime put for what so ever lives and breaths: Psalm. 150.
Joan. 3.
as all the spirits praise ye the Lord, sometime for the breath and wind

What is the flesh? What the flesh is.
Every affection, the heart, the mind, and thought of man, and what so ever else
man does, or can do by all the powers of his reason, destitute of the word of
God. Joan. 3.1. Cor. 2. Joan. 6.
For Christ says. That which is borne of the flesh, that is, it
understands not things that be spiritual. Flesh other while betokens the
letter and fleshly understanding. The flesh profits nothing, it is the
spirit that quickens.

What the new man is.
What is the new man? It is the man that is renewed and borne again by faith
and the word, through the spirit of God. Except a man be borne a new, Joan. 3.
he can not se the kingdom of heaven. To be borne anewe he calls, where as
before we were but carnal and fleshly, not understanding the misteryes of the
spirit, we must be borne again in spirit (that is) to become spiritual and
more meet to vnderstan^e espirituall things.

What the old man is.
What is the old man? Our affections, appetites, and understanding according
to reason, without faith: even as we be all naturally borne of our mother, as
it appears in diverse places of the Scripture. Also the whole body of sin is
called the old man in Scripture, and they live according to the old man, Psalm.
51.
that live in ignorance, and follow the lusts of their heart, Ephe. 2.
Coloss. 2.
not walking in the newness of life.

Who is blessed, Blessed, or happy who.
or happy? All be it I may answer with Christ: blessed is he, that hears
and keeps the word of God: Luke. 12.
yet is he otherwise defined in the Scripture. As he is to be thought happy,
who holds him self well content with his fortune, and thankefully receives
whatsoever God sends him, and who is at one with God and al creatures, that
is, does not murmr against God, and on the other side enuieth nor dispiseth
any man.

Who is a wretch, Who is unhappy.
or unhappy? He that holds not him self content with that that God has sent
him. He with whom nothing goes forward, nor agrees not with God nor man.

Who is poor? Poor who is.
He that can not make any great boastes, or crakes of himself, and who is
destitute of all help, as be they, of whom Christ says: blessed are the
poor in spirit, in Scripture he is called low, Math. 5.
humble, and hungry, and he who is now in adversity.

Who is rich? Rich who is.
He is called rich in Scripture, Luke. 1.6.
which needs no help concerning his salvation, but has works enough, and
more then enough to bring him to heaven. Luke. 16. Iac. 5.
And (as a man may call it) full up to the throat of the righteousness: as be
all Hipocrites, Phariseies, and iustifiers of them selves, they also be called
rich in Scripture, which be proud, mighty, and dronken with fortune and
prosperity, ever polling the poor.

Wise and circumspect who.
Who is wise, and circumspect? He which knows God and his word, which (when
he doubts) as keth counsel, and does all thing thereafter.

A fool who.
Who is a fool? He that rashly is carried hither and thither, with every
mocion, that considers nothing, regards nothing, nor suffers himself to
be corrected, and warned of his evil doing, but headlong runs as he began:
forsing not whether he sink, or swymme, or what becomes of him, and who as
he knows not the word of God, so he passes not on it. The wisdom of God
taken as foolishness before the world, is the preaching of the Cross of
Christ, and the iustifiing by faith (that is to say) though to suffer
persecution for the word of God, and to preach that we justified by faith, be
godly and the wisdom of the spirit: yet the world laugheth it to scorn, 1.
Cor. 3.
and counts it high foolishenesse. The wisdom of the flesh, is
foolishness before God.

What is a child, A child what.
or to be a child? A child in Scripture, is a wicked man, or he that is
ignorant, and not excercised in godliness and Gods word be he old, or be he
young. Or he that lacks spiritual judgment in discerning and chosing
things. Woe be to the country whose King is a child. Eccl. 10. Esaias. 65. Math.
18.
And he shall die a child of a.C. year old. A child also is sometime taken
for humble or meke. Who soever hu^bleth him self as this child, is greatest
in the kingdom of Heaven.

What is an old man, What an Elder is.
ancient, or elder? He which is well taught and instructed in the word of
God, and exercised therein. He which lives honestly, and without reprose
having horenesse of manners, authority, gravity, What Christ is.
and high knowledge in the word of God.

What is Christ? The anointed king and priest of God, sitting on ye right
hand of the father, Exodus 19. 1. Pet. 2. Apoc. 1.
having full power to defend and warrant his flock, and being a ready advocate
for his at their need. And by him all Christen men be anointed kings and
priests. They be called kings, when in Christ, and through Christ they
subdue their wild affections, the devil, and death. They be called priests,
and sacrificers, when they offer up their bodies into a lively, holy, and
acceptable sacrifice unto God, Romans. 12.
which is our reasonable serving of God.

What Antichrist is.
What is Antichriste? The adnersary of Christ, and he which goes about to
obscure, or utterly to abrogate and pull away his glory: teaching, defining,
and determining, that Christ is not the king, priest, and advocate of his
flock.

Prayer what is is.
What is prayer? A brenning desire, or peticion of the mind, lift up and
directed unto God (springing and coming of the need and lack that we find in
our self) as far forth as faith and the promise of God suffers and
permits us, where mark that we ask such things as be honest and lawful.
Sometime it is taken for the lifting up of the hands, the desire, trying and
sighing of the poor, and such as stand in need. And some does call it more
generally the lifting up of the mind to God.

What is temptation? Temptacion what it is.
The proof and trial of our faith, and an exercise and practice of the word.
Otherwhiles it is called the rod and staff of the Lord, and the discipline
whereby we see our selves, and perceive how well we have profited and gone
forward in the word which may best be tried, then when that we go about does
not go forward as we would.

What is desperacion? Desperation what is is.
It is when in temptacion, and such trying of us (wheither it be by adversity,
or any other thing) we fall down distrust, and cast away all hope of the
mercy and goodness of God: then (I say) when of no side appears any hope,
or succor, and when we be, as seems to us) utterly forgotten and cast away of
God. Job. 7.
Of which temptacion we may see a manifest example. To speak properly
desperacion is the utter and final despair and distrust of help.

What is vocacion, Vocation, or calling what it is.
or calling? It is the manner of life, unto which God has called thee. Or else
the common consent (as Mayres and other Officers) or else thou have appointed
and purposed thy self unto, by thy own accord. Or else ye may call it every
kind of life, in which we exercise faith and charity. Math. 20.
To be called to the kingdom of heaven, is to hear ye word of god. To be
chose^ or elected, is to believe it.

Predestination what it is.
What is predestinacion? It is the secret election of the wisdom of God to
eternal life, Romans 9.10.11.
without our deserving. They be predestinate and called to everlasting life
which hear and receive the word of god.

Free will what it is.
What is free will? It is the liberty that man has in doing outward things,
and the natural work of man in such things as be not spiritual: as in
ordering him self after a civil and political fashion, and outward
fulfilling of the moral virtues. Howbeit, he has not the power, no nor yet the
will to love God, dread God, and to know him: until that he be renewed, and
that Christ has set him at liberty. For then (as John says) If the son
has made ye free, then are ye free in deed. For unto that time that we know
God, Joan. 8.
we can not love him nor dread him. And when we love him, Eccl. 1^.
and dread him, then have we power through him, to keep the law. Yet when man
was in the state of original justice, that is to say, when he had the
integrity, wholenesse and soundness of the powers of the body and soul, then
might he obey, do, and fulfill freely the law of God, but after the poison of
sin entered, it made weak and feeble the whole nature of man.

What is the temple of God? The temple of God what it is.
A pure, clean, and single heart, without all gyle, fraud, and doubleness.
Also the Church, wherein God is worshipped. 1. Cor. 3. 2. Cor. 6.


What is the Church, The church what it is.
or congregation of Christ? It is the company, assemblement, and consent of
good men on the word of God, and in the faith of Jesus Christ. The church of
Christ.


What is the Church of Satan? The Church of Satan.
It is the multitude of wicked men conspiring against God and his word.

What is the Sabbath day, To keep holy day what it is.
or to keep holy day? It is to abstain from the outward works of the flesh,
and to pray unto God in spirit, hear his word, and to have our mind set on
his law, Esaias. 56.
after what manner true Christians ever keep the law. You may else say, that
the holy day is wherein we remember the benefits of God, and give him thanks
for them.

Grace, what it is.
What is grace? The good will of God toward us, his favor and bounteous
goodness, freely employed on us without our deserving.

Merits and works what.
What be merits and works? They be called and counted in Scripture to be the
refusing and contempt of the favor of God, and a confidence to be saved by a
man's own power, strength, and deserts.

The name of God what it is.
What is the name of God? It is whatsoever pertains to God, or else to every
name which we assign unto God and call him by: as the God of hosts, the strong
and gelous God.etc. Also his glory honor and majesty. To show the word of God,
is to preach sincerely the Gospel, What it is to show the word of God.
that is to say, that all that believe have their sins forgeuen them, that
they be delivered from death and hell, and has given them everlasting life
freely through Jesus Christ.

To serve God what it is.
What is it to serve God? To live according to his word, to believe and put
trust in him, to refer all things unto his glory, and to love and help our
neighbor.

What is it to serve the devil? To serve the devil what it is.
It is to resist the word, to serve Mammon, his belly, his fleshly appetites,
the world, and carnal affections.

What is to worship God? To worship God what it is.
It is not only to pray unto him, but also to show and exhibyte in the outward
gesture honor and reverence unto him.

What is to believe in God? To believe in God what it is.
It is wholly to commit a man's own self in all matters to him, and to have a
sure hope in him self, that what soever God promises shall be performed.

What is to fast? To fast what is is.
To beware lest we over lade our body with surfeiting, in meats or drinks,
Luke. 21.
that we live chastely and soberly, to abstain from vice, to keep our body
low, giving it that only that is necessary.

What is it to follow Christ? To follow Christ what it is.
It is to believe in him, to mark and follow his doctrine, and to follow him
whether soever he leads us, or calls us, and to suffer wyllingly what
soever he lays on our backs.

What it is to leave all things for Christ's sake.
What is to leave and forsake all that a man has, to sell all, and to deny a
man's self? To leave, forsake, and sell, is to repute and reckon such things
as we have, as none of ours, yea, gladly to forsake and leave for Christ's sake
(if the matter came to that point) wife, children, parents, country, house,
land, and all other such, in so much that (if need required) we would (for
Christ's sake and the Gospels quarrel) offer our self to all dangers, and
death at conclusion. To deny a man's self what it is.
To deny a man's self, is frankely and freely to grant his works, and all his
other good indeueringes to be unable to his salvation, and utterly to kill the
old Adam in him with all his affections.

To visit what it is.
What is it to visit? When it is taken in the good part, it betokens that
God looks upon, and sends his benefits some whether. The Lord has visited
his people. Luke. 7.
When it is taken in the evil part, it betokens as much as the Lord
punishes and scourges wicked and cursed, when he takes vengeance on them
for their wickedness: Exo. 20.
as I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the sins of the fathers
upon the children, unto ye third and fourth generation of them ye hate me.etc.

What is the hand of God? What the hand of God is.
It is the power, or strength of the Lord, whereby he helps and does good
unto the godly, and whereby he works mischief and takes vengeance on the
cursed.

The arm of God betokens the power of him, The arm of God.
and Christ him self, whereof ye may read abundantly. Esaias. 54.


The finger betokens the holy Ghost. The finger of GOD.


What be the eyes of God? Luke. 13.
The respect, care, The eyes of God.
and regard that he has upon the good, and his gentilnesse, mercy and
readiness to defend them.

His countenance is taken for ye straight and narowe looking of the wicked to
their destruction and perdition. The countenance of God.
The eyes of the Lord be on the righteous, and his ears attend unto their
prayers. But the countenance of the Lord is upon the sinners. Psalm. 33.
His face betokens favor, benevolence, and the gladness in the Lord. But as soon as thou have turned thy face, The face of GOD.
they shall be confused, and will turn again unto their earth. Psalm. 103.
The mouth of the Lord has great vehemence and pythe in it, The mouth of the
Lord.
for the Prophets when they will have their words marked and regarded say:
the mouth of the Lord has spoken this. Esaias. 1.


The outward appereaunce of any thing is also called the face: as we say,
Judge not according to the face and outward sight.

What the face of the anger of God is.
The face of ye anger of God, is ye feling of the curse and wrath of God, also
ye presence, sight, and judgment of God is caled his face as. Let al ye earth
hushe or be still before the face of the Lord. Abac. 2. Psalm. 67.
As the Wax vadeth and consumes in the face of ye fire: so shall all sinners
perish before the face of God.

The eye of man, what A single eye.
What is the eye of man? It is reason, or the wisdom of the flesh. A single
eye, is reason instructed with ye word of God.

A wicked eye, is reason depraved and corrupt, A wicked eye.
and envy engendered against their neighbor for the gifts of God.
Otherwhiles the eye, Math. 21. Math. 5.18.
hand, right foot. etc. betoken our kinsmen and best belooued friends.

Feet what they signify.
What betoken feet in Scripture? The feet be and betoken the affections,
desire, and will of the heart. Psalm. 25.
My foot stood straight forth, Psalm. 25.
that is to say, I have neither hurt any man, To wash one an others feet what
it is.
nor would hurt. And though perchance I have hurt any: yet I willed none
evil, or hated any. etc. To wash one an others feet, is one to love an
other, and to will well one to an other.

What is a slander, Slander, or offendicle what it is.
to offend, or to be offendicle to any man? It is whereby the faith or
charity of our brother is offended or hurt. The faith of the brother is
offended when any man preaches and teaches other things then the word of
God. Of this kind of slander speaks Christ. Math. 18.
Who soever offends one of these little ones. etc.

The charity of our neighbor is offended or hurt, when we help not the
poor, when we be not glad of our neighbors prosperity, and sorry in his
adversity. etc.

It is the obstacle and let, whereby we fall and stomble in the way of the
Lord, that is to say, we have not a life upright and worthy the Lord, I mean
when we stagger in the faith or love toward our neighbor, in which two every
christian ought stoutly and still to walk. Phil. 3.
Forgetting with saint Paul the things that be behind our backs, endeuering
to come to the mark set before our eyes.

Math. 13.14.15.
Otherwhiles slander, or offending is taken in Scripture for the offending where
by the wicked can not bear the word.

Hipocrite. Envious man.
What is an Hipocrite? It is the wicked man colored and cloked with
godliness. Wherefore hipocrisy is called feigned holiness.

Genesis 4. 1. Reg. 18. 2. Reg. 20. Joan. 3.1. Reg. 18.
What is an envious man? He whose heart for anger burns at an other man's
prosperity, nor can suffer (with his will) any other to be enriched with the
benefits of God. So did Cayn envy Abell his brother, Saul David, and Ioab
Amasas. But John did not envy Christ his successor, when he said. He must
increase, and I decrease. Nor Ionathas Saules son did not thus hate David his
loyal and trusty freende and companion.

God to sleep what it is.
What is for God to sleep? When he seems to us to forsake us in our
temptation, nor helps us. So slept Christ in the ship, his Apostles being in
danger and ieoperdye. Math. 8.
And so does David call upon God to awake: saying arise and wake Lord, Psalm.
44.
why do thou sleep so long?

What is it for men to sleep? Men to sleep what it is.
When they without all care of the word of God, slugge and sleep in sin and
ignorance, when they refuse, contemn, and regard it not.

To rest and sleep in the Lord: is to dye in faith. Math. 13. Joan. 7.
etc.

What is to be awake? To be awake.
To exercise and put in ure the word of God, and our faith.

What is fortune? Fortune.
It is fate, or destiny chaunsing to any man by the will of God, without man's
providence.

Who is my brother? Brother.
He that has one father with me, Math. 23.
that is to say, God.

Who is my weak brother? Weak brother.
He that has one faith with me in God, and favors the Gospel: Romans 14.
but yet wauereth and doubts in his conscience of some things: as meats and
difference of days.

Who is my neighbor? Neighbor.
He on whom I exercise charity and love, or he who needs my help.

Who is a Lord or master? Lord, or Master.
He that has a servant, governs and rules another: as he which keeps
under vices and lewd appetites, is Lord and master over them, so through
faith in Jesus Christ, we be Lords over the Devil, Death and sin. Also he
that uses the Sabbath or holy day as he sees need: that is to say,
doubts not (if he see the love of his neighbor requires the contrary) to
break it, Mark. 2.
that man I say, is the Lord of the Sabbath day.

Servant.
Who is a servant? He that has a master, and is not his own man: Joan. 8.
or else he that is at the beck and commandment of another.

Thus Paul calls himself the servant of Christ, as he that does and
accomplisheth the will of sin, he is a servant to sin.

A true and faithful servant.
What is a true and faithful servant? He that has faith, and does his duty
with all diligence, Matthew. 24.
according to his vocation and calling.

A slothful and unfaithful servant. Magistrate.
What is a slothful and unfaithful servant? He which believes not in God,
negligently orders himself in his vocacion, and refuses to bear his cross.

What is an officer or ruler? Every lawful power among men, ordained of God to
the defense and protection of that that is good, Roma. 13.
and to prohibit and to punish that that is evil, according to right and
equity.

Tirant.
What is a tyrant? An unlawful and unjust ruler, which administreth all
things as he list, and lays great burdens and yokes upon ye people, doing
against all conscience and equity. Exodus 1.
Such a one was Pharao to the children of Israel. Note well.
Howbeit, such be not to be resisted of Christian men, but obeyed in all
things save where they will have us do that that God forbids us, and have
us not to do that that god bids. And we must tarry till God deliver us out
of such tyrauntes hands: as the children of Israel did.

What is matrimony, or wedlock? Matrymony.
The lawful coupling and resort of man and woman, Genesis 3.
according to the ordinance and commandment of God.

What is adultery? Adultery.
The unlawful company of man and woman: as is the marriage with the mother,
sister, aunt, brothers wife, and such other, wherein Moses treats. To that
perteyneth stupre, incest, fornicacyon, and like abhominacions, touched in the
foresaid Chapiters.

What is properly man's work, Man's work.
or that man can do? What soever that reason and the nature of man can invent
and do: as to rule his house well, to govern the common weal, build, and
search the nature of things, and dispute and reason upon them.

Works passing man's power.
What is that that is above man's power, otherwise called spiritual and
heavenly? What soever surmounteth reason, and that man can not attain unto,
except God grants it and gives power to obtain it: as that our sins be
forgiven through faith, and that we be saved by Jesus that dyed on the cross.
That God is our defender and loving father, yea in adversity and trouble. That
God is just, yea when he suffers the good men to be persecuted and troubled.
And on the otherside, lets the evil men to enjoy and have all their
pleasure and will here, and prevail against the good men.

Flesh and blood, what it is.
What is flesh and blood? The circumlocution and very descripcion of man. For
man of him self is nothing but fleshlye and carnal. Blessed art thou Simon
the son of Jonas, Joan. 3. Math. 16.
for flesh and blood has not opened this unto thee, but my father that is in
heaven, says Christ.

What is care and thought? Care and thought, what it is.
A plain token of diffidence and distrust in God. It is an unfaithful care
and pensifenesse of the mind for meat, drink, clothing, and such other
necessaries, which, in whom soever you do see it: surely it can not be
denied, but that he is destitute of faith in God, and that his mind is set
overmuch to worldly things. Therefore I say unto you, be not careful for the
life, etc. After all such things do the heathen seek, Math. 6.
says Christ.

The care and thought of faith is prohibited by Gods word. For faith only
looks and leans to Gods word and promises.

Now to take thought and care least God will not fulfill his word and
promises, is to mistrust and not believe God, and so much as lies in us, to
make God a liar. Wherefore, as I said before, all thought and care of matters
pertaining to faith, is utterly to be put away.

The care and sorrow in things belonging to charity and love in every man's
vocation, is commanded by Gods word, as one to be sorry for another
mischaunce and misery.

Gladness of heart what it is.
What is the gladness of the heart? A token of confidence in God, when in
adversity, trouble, or affliction, we wayle not, frown or fret within our
selves, but rejoice, look stoutly on it, and hold our selves well apayde,
having this ever before our eyes: Proverb. 3. Heb. 12.
The son whom GOD loves and receives, he uses to chasten and beat.

Contrariwise, it is also a token of worldly welthinesse, and delight in
pleasures of the flesh, Luke. 6.
whom God threatens: Woe be unto you that laugh here, for ye shall weep and
wayle, says Christ.

Sin against the father and the son.
What is to sin against the father, and the son? It is to resist and
persecute the word of God: but yet by ignorance, and of a good zeal: 1.
Timo. 1.
as Paul did before he was converted.

Sin against the holy Ghost.
What is the sin against the holy ghost? It is when any resists the open,
manifest and known truth, when any believe not the open and plain promises of
God, and when any dispaireth finally in the mercy of God.

Zeal what it
What is meant by this word Zeal in Scripture? Zeal, signifies.
is anger meddled and mixte with love: as when the loving father is angry with
his child for doing amiss: he does it not because he hates his son, but in
doing so he signifies his fatherly love toward him, willing by that, that
shall do no more so, but endeuer to better. For when the child is thus chidden
or beaten, he takes heed that he does not so again, for fear of a more
grievous punishment. It betokens also the anger that chaunseth betwixt them
that love heartily together. etc.

From hence comes iealousy, Iealousy. Why God is called a iealouse God.
which springs out of vehement love. God is called in Scripture a jealous
God, not that because any should think that any such affections were in God?
But that we might learn that God does all the things that are done, for
nothing else, but for their sake only, whom he loves so tenderly, even his
elect. Not because he looks for any vauntage by it, but that they may be
saved, and enjoy the kingdom prepared for them.

What is the body of Christ? The body of Christ what it is.
The congregation of all faithful, and of all that (...) dinesse of the will
to naughtiness. Romans 7. Iac. 1.
There dwells not in me (that is to say, in my flesh) ought that is good.
Wherefore what soever is in us that is good, comes of GOD.

Sacraments what they are.
What be Sacraments and Signs? Good assurances and confirmations of the word
of God.

Some define them thus: Sacraments be signs and witnesses of the will of god
toward us, by which he moves and stirs our hearts to believe. Genesis
3.9.17.
Such were the skins wherewith God clothed Adam and Eua, the Rainebowe,
Circumcision, etc. Such be with us, Baptism, and the Sacrament of Christ's
body and blood.

Baptism.
What is Baptism? The dipping into ye water, in token of repentance, and
newness of life to follow. Tit. 3.
It is also defined to be the badge and cognizaunce whereby not only we be
known to be of the flock of Christ, but that also we be stablished in our
conscience, that we be in the favor of God, and our sins forgiven. It is
called the clean and pure water, the lauacre of our regeneration, or fountain
of the new birth.

What is the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, The supper of the Lord.
or of thanksgiving? An holy mystery of the body and blood of Christ,
institute of Christ, to be eaten of all Christian men, in token of remission of
sins through Christ: That even as sure as we take the bread, and eat it with
the mouth of the body, and drink the wine: so verily and certainly eue^ at
the same instant, with the mouth of our faith, we receive the very body and
blood of Christ, and there it does as actually comfort and sustain the
soul, as does the bread and the wine nourishe and comfort the heart, and the
outward man.

And as verily as the most souereign plaster and salve laid to a wound or
sore, draws out the filth, and heals it: so verily and really does the
body and blood of Christ thus received, put away the sores and deformities
of the soul, and not alonely makes it whole, but also pure, clean, without
scar, wrinkle, and spot, and so makes it a delectable, lovely, and fair
spouse in the sight of God. Lo what it is to receive the body and blood of
Christ in faith.

Repentance.
What is penitence or repentance? We read of two manner of kinds of
repentances. One was a Legale in the old law used of the Jews and
Israelites, This kind of repentance is a certain contricion of the mind,
Jonas. 3. 2. Par. 33.
and hatred and detestation of our sin, with a sorrow and compunction of the
heart, which springs and ryseth as soon as we begin to feel and perceive the
abomination of our sin, by laying our deeds and desires of our heart to
Gods law. Such was the repentance and penitence of the Niniuets, and of
Manasses, and of other, which were greatly sorry and compunct in their heart,
what by considering their offenses on one part, and the anger and just wrath of
God hanging over their head for these offenses.

The signs of repentance.
The tokens and outward signs of which repentance amongst the Jews, was
commonly clothing in sack cloth, sprinkling and casting ashes upon their
hear, and fasting a day, two or three. This kind of penitence may also the
wicked men have. Math. 27.
For Judas that betrayed Christ, afterward when he perceived how wickedly he
had done, took such care, sorrow, and pensifnesse, that for pure anguish he
hanged himself. So horrible and dreadful were in his sight hell gates, the
wages and payment of his iniquity. There is also an evangelical penitence:
which is a continual study, purpose, and endeuerment, and wilful meditacion
of mortifieng our flesh, and fashioning our lives to the will of the Lord.

And this kind of penitence is only in them that are renewed, and unto whom the
forgiveness of sin through Christ is given.

As for this word penance, because the Popes clergy has iugled with it so
craftily, and deceived the poor innocents eyes, it is well done to reprove
the evil use and handling of it, as the mainteyning of the same is wicked.

What signify the latter times in Scripture? The latter tims what they
signify.
The Prophets signify by them commonly the days wherein the prophesies, and
the figures of the old testament going on Christ, took effect, and were
performed. For when Christ came, both the prophesies and figures ceased. And
ever sense, Christ is openly sincerely, clearly, and without all shadows set
out and preached, and so shall continue unto the worlds end.

1. Timo. 4. 1. Cor. 10.
Paul calls The latter days, ye time a little before the end of the world,
and the day of the judgment of the Lord. In which we be even now.

The end of the world.
What is the consummation and end of the world? It is when the state and
form of the world shall pass by. And when this change of Winter, Summer,
and spring shall cease: when there shall be neither night nor day.

The day of the Lord.
What is the day of the Lord? The great assemblement, court and paritament of
all men that has been from Adam to the last man: at what day our Lord Jesus
Christ shall come with great power and majesty and pronounce the last sentence
and dome, Math. 25.
both to the good, and to the evil, adiudging the evil to everlasting
punishment with the deuilles, and granting the good and godly man everlasting
joy and felicity: to the which that we may come, God through our Savior
Jesus Christ grant, to whom be all honor and praise. Amen.

Give the glory to GOD alone.
An other book of Demaundes of holy Scriptures: very profitable to all
Students of Divinity.
WHO is the author and maker of the most beautiful frame of this world? Gene.
1. Iere. 10. Eccle. 18. Act. 4.
God: which by his almighty power, wisdom, and goodness, does now also
order, govern, and preserve the same.

What is God? Joan. 1.
An endless uncreated substance, without both beginning and ending: Which by
his word alone first created all things, and now disposes and rules* yea,
and conserueth all things: one substance distinguished, Math. 3.28. 1. Joan. 5.
but not divided into three sundry persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, and notwithstanding remaining one alone, true, and perfect God.

What is his word, Joan. 1.
whereby he first created, and now preserves and governs all things? It is
the decreed sentence, appointment, will, Psalm. 41.
power, and wisdom of God. Eccle. 40. Esaias. 55. 1. Pet. 2. Psalm. 119. Joan.
10. Psalm. 80. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Joan. 6. Math. 13. Genesis 2. Sap. 2. Eccle. 15. Genesis
3. Romans 5. Romans 14.
The Son is also called the word, because he is the wisdom and might of his
father, the word in the Scripture is oftentimes called by a metaphore, or
similitude, water, wine, milk, a lantern or candle, the voice of the
shepeheard, the right hand of the Lord, the breath of the Lords mouth, the
bread of life, a pearl or precious stone, and such like.

In what state did God create man? Perfect, righteous, and good according to
his own image and likeness: having fire and water set before him to take
which he would, being endued with free will to do evil, or to continue still
in goodness,

What then condemned us? Sin by the law.

What is Sin? Sin is the transgression, or breaking of the whole law, or
of any one commandment of God. And all that is done without faith, is sin:
and therefore the good works of the infidelles do nothing profit them.

What is the Law? A learning teaching us with authority what ought to be done
or avoided, Gal. 3. Ephe. 2. Joan. 1.
in thought, word, or deed, with rewards and punishments for doing or
omitting the same. This law is our schoolemaister to teach us the way to
Christ, by whom the violence, sting, power, and the shadows of the law be
taken away: in whose place he has brought in grace and truth.

How chanced we to sin? Eccle. 15.
By the choice of our free will, granted to us either to do good or evil:
whereby we lost both our felicity that we were first placed in, and that our
free will also.

How then were both we and our forefathers reconciled to the favor of God,
which we lost by our disobedience, Romans 4^
being as vnfruite full branches of the rotden root of Adam? By the
performance of the merciful promise of God given to Adam, that the seed of
the woman should break the serpents head: Genesis 3.
Renewed to Abraham, that in his seed all Nations should be blessed and
performed by Christ, which by his death paid our ransom: which promise and
perfourmaunce conveyed unto our forefathers and us, and unto all the Church by
faith, has been and is the common and general mean of salvation: 1. Timo. 2.
they (that is to say, our forefathers) believing that Christ was to come by
whom alone they should be saved: and we with no doubtful faith confessing
that he is come, 1. Pet. 2.
dyed and rose again for to regenerate us to God, to mortify us to sin, the
flesh and the world, to raise up again at the last day, and so to take us
unto him self, placing us in the glory of his father.

Who receives this benefyte? The church of Christ only.

What is the church of Christ? The whole number of the faithful believers in
Christ's coming, 1. Pet. 2. Ephe. 1.5. Coloss. 2. Psalm. 118. Ose. 2.
sufferance and resurrection: members of the mystical body of Christ, Grains
to make one loaf, Graps to make one wine, lively stones to build on a
spiritual house, in Christ to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God
through the same Christ Jesus, which is the head of the same body, the corner
stone of the said house, Joan. 1.
the Lord and husband to the said church his spouse married to him by faith.

Who bestows this benefyte upon us? God through Jesus Christ his son,
Galat. 3. Romans 8.
by whom he has made us his children also and fellow heirs with Christ of
his (...)

What sygnifyeth this name JESUS? A Savior, Math. 1.
which is the chief point of his office, and cause of his coming into this
world, as appears by the words of the Angel to Joseph, she (meaning
Marie) shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name Jesus: For he
shall save his people from their sins.

What signifies this name CHRIST? Christ is. our king.
Anointed whereupon it may be gathered that our Savior Christ is a king, Heb.
2,
a priest and a Prophet, which.iii. were accustomed by the law ceremonial to
be anointed. A king, because by inheritance he being the son of God, ought
to be Lord, and Ruler of all things, and because he has conquered and subdued
unto him self by death, by bearing our sins, by redeeming us his inheritance
out of the power of the devil, all the whole kingdom, power and aucthority
over death sin and the devil. A priest because he once for all has entered
In Sancta Sanctorum into the most holy and innermost tabernacle of God, Christ
is our priest.
and has offered once for all a perpetual sufficient facrifice to satisfy for all men's sins, Heb. 7.9.10.
and to purchase all men's redemption, not ceasing now still to be a perpetual
Mediator and Intercessor to God his father, for man, he himself being both God
and man, making an end of, and abolishing all sacrifices and ceremonies, which
were but shadows and significations to put the Jews in remembrance of his
coming before he came. Christ is our Prophet.
A prophet, for the true and only sufficient doctrine which he preached being
here in earth, and left behind him, written by his Apostles for our learning,
binding our conscience to be subject to none other doctrine, but to his alone.

2. Pet. 2. Apoc. 1. 1. Cor. 15. 1. Pet. 2. Heb. 13. Romans 12.
By his kingdom he has made us kings, and heirs of his kingdom by adoption,
and conquerors through his most valiant victory of our enemies, sin, death,
hell, and the devil.

By his Priesthood, with the holy oil of his spirit he has made and
anointed us Priests, to offer to God the father acceptable sacrifices through
him, which are ye sacrifices of righteousness, of praise, of thanksgiving, of
an humble and contrite heart, of faith, and wholye to crucify and offer up our
selves unto him: and by the same office, we being made partakers by him of the
same, may be bold to come to the sight of God, to offer up our sacrifice and
prayer.

By the office of his prophecy or scholemaistership, he does lighten us with
the true knowledge of his Father, instructs us in the truth, and makes us
the Disciples of God. By this annoyntment receives he these three offices to
communicate them with us, whereupon we are called Christians.

What is a King? Romans 13. 1. Pet. 2.
A rightful magistrate, or head power under God among men, ordained of God
for the defense of the good, and keeping down of the evil, according to right
and justice.

What is a Priest? Heb. 5^.
An officer appointed and licenced of God, to present himself to the sight of
God, for to obtain his favor by intercession, or to pacify his wrath by
offering up of sacrifice acceptable to him.

What is a Prophet? A messenger of God, to declare the will of God, either in
showing the threatenings, or opening the promises, or expounding and declaring
the mysteries contained in his holy word or will to us his children.

Christ by nature is the son of God, we by adoption.
Why do thou call us his children, seeing that Christ is his only son? We
are not by nature the children of god, as Christ only is, but by adoption and
grace, or favor of God. As for Christ he is of the same substance and essence
with his father.

By what means do we receive at the hand of God these heavenly treasures:
Or by what means are they conveyed unto us? By Faith.

What is Faith? An assured confidence and trust in the truth of God, in the
merits and promises of Christ, conceived through Christ, Romans 10.
by hearing of his word, hoping still for the performaunce of the said
promises, in the mean season not idle, but still working by charity: Or as S.
Paul defines it in his Epistle to the Hebrews: Heb. 2.
Faith is a sure confidence of things that are hoped for, and a certainty of
things that are not seen.

What is Hope? A constant looking for of those things, which we have conceived
through faith by the word of God.

What is Charity? A godly virtue, a lovely and gentle affection of the mind,
Math. 25.
whereby we love God above all things, and our neighbor as our self.
Charity also is taken for the fruits of faith, and works of mercy.

Who is my neighbor? Luke. 10.
Any man, upon whom I do execute the works of mercy, or that stands in
need of my help.

Were we predestinate by the grace of God through Christ to his vocation, Ephe.
2. Romans 8.
election, justification, and salvation before the beginning of the world. Yea
verily: so says S. Paul, he chosed us in Christ Jesus before the foundacions
of the world were laid. Again he says: we know, that al things work for the
best unto them that love God, which also are called of purpose. For those which
he knew before, he also ordained before, that they should be like fashioned
unto the shape of his Son, that he might be the first begotten son among
many brethren. Moreover, whom he appointed before them also he called. And
whom he has called, them also he justified: and whom he justified, them he
also glorified.

What is the grace of God? Ephe. 1.
Gods favor, benevolence, and kind mind, that of him self without our
deserving he bears toward us, whereby he was moved to bestow upon us his
Son Christ, and all other his good gifts, with free imputacion of his
goodness, and undeserved remission of our sins.

What is Predestinacion? The secret^ unchangeable appointment of God before
all beginninges by his counsel and wisdom to life everlasting concerning his
elect and chosen people: or any other beginning, ordering, or ending of all
things.

Math. 11.
What is vocation? To be called of the Lord to any manner of benefit, office,
or ministracion. There be two kinds of vocation: general, as thus in S.
Mathewes Gospel: come unto me all ye that labor and are laden, and I will
refreshe you. Particular, as the calling or appointment of Kings, Prophets,
Apostles. etc.

What is election? The choice or appointment of God to any ministration,
office, dignity, or pre-eminence, which immediately follows the particular
calling, as for an example: He that hears the word, Math. 22.
is called: but he that believes, is chosen. By this hearing and believing may
this place be expounded: Many are called, but few chosen.

What is Justification? Of unrighteous to be made righteous by the
rigteousnesse of Christ, which we conceive by faith.

What is Salvation? To enjoy the felicity prepared of Christ for the
faithful: to be of the number of the glorified saints.

Whereby art thou certified of this liberality, and of these benefits of God
toward mankind? By the office of the Apostles and Preachers appointed for the
same purpose.

What is the office of the Apostles and Preachers? Math. 28. Marc. 16. 1. Cor.
4.
To preach the word of God, or the Gospel of Christ, and to minister the
sacraments, which Christ himself has ordained to be used in the Church.

How is that proved? Christ said to his Apostles: Math. 28. Mar. 16. Math. 26.
go and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Again: Go throughout the whole world, and
preach the Gospel to every creature. And of the Supper of the Lord, Christ
said: Do this in the remembrance of me.

What is the Gospel? It is a doctrine containing the promise of free remission
of sins purchased by Christ alone.

What is a Sacrament? A visible sign of an invisible grace: or an outward
element or corporal substance, appointed of God to certify our faith,
wherewith only we receive it, of the promises of God annexed thereunto.

Of how many parts does a Sacrament consyst? Of two parts: that is to say,
of the element and of the word.

How many Sacraments are there? Two: Baptism, and the Lords supper.

What is Baptism? The washing of every believing Christian in water, 1. Pet.
3. Tit. 3. Joan. 3. Romans 6.
that takes upon him to profess the name of Christ, which water certifieth
our faith of the inward washing and clensing of our souls by the spirit of
God: a token of our regeneration, of the mortification of our flesh, of our
burial with Christ, and of our resurrection unto a new life.

Mark. 16.
If the believing Christians only be baptized, according to this saying of
Christ: He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved: Why should the
Infantes be baptized, which for imperfection of age are not able to believe?
Though Infantes have not power to believe, or to confess their belief, yet
have they faith imputed unto them for the promise sake of God, because they be
the seed of the faithful, as he said to Abraham: Genesis 17.
I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. Seeing then that they also have
yt promise of salvation, why should they be forbidden ye promised pledge, or
seal of yt same promsied salvation: The Sacraments of the Jews diffred
nothing from ours in effect, but only in the outward element, and form of
executing the same. Why then should our Infants be more forbidden Baptism,
than the Jews infantes were forbidden Circumcision at the eight day: Genesis 17.
Seeing we read that the Apostles baptized sundry housholdes, as of Stephana,
1. Cor. 1. Act. 16. 2. Tim. 1.4.
Lidia, Onesiphorus. etc. (if a man may guess at a thing, whereof we have no
certainty) it is like inoughe, that they baptized some Infantes also. But to
leave all gesses and uncertain conjectures, we are sure, Exodus 13.14
that the Jews infantes passed with their parents out of Egypt through the red
sea, 1. Cor. 10.
and under the cloud, which were tokens of our baptism.

What if the infants die, before they receive the Sacrament of Baptism? Gods
promise of salvation unto them is not for default of ye Sacrament, minished or
made vain, Genesis 17.
and of no effect. For the spirit is not so bound to the water, that it can
not work his office, where the water wants, or that it of necessity must
always be there, where the water is sprinkled. Simon Magus had the Sacrame^tal
water, Act. 8.
but he had not holy Ghost, being in deed an Hipocrit and filthy dissembler. In
the Chronicle of the Apostles Arts we read, Act. 10.
that while Peter preached, the holy Ghost came upon them that heard him, yea
and that before they were baptized: by the reason whereof Peter brast out into
these: words, and said: can any man forbid water, that these should not be
baptized, which have received the holy Ghost, as well as we: True Christians,
whether they be old or young, are not saved because outwardly they be washed
with the Sacramental water, but because they be Gods children by electron
through Christ, yea and that before the foundacions of the world were laid, and
are sealed up by the spirit of God unto everlasting life, Ephe. 2. Romans 11.
the gifts and calling of God being such, that it can not repent him of them.
Note well.
Notwithstanding, the Sacrament of Baptism ought not therefore to be
neglected, but with all reverence to be embraced both of old and young. For he
that despises the Sacrament, despises not the Sacrament only, but the author
of the Sacrament, which is Christ Jesus the Lord.

What is the Supper of the Lord, or the Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ? Bread and Wine consecrated, that is to say, made and appointed of God
to be a Sacrament to put us in rememberance, that as the bread is broken, and
the wine powered out: so Christ's body was broken, and his blood shed for our
redemption. And as the bread received through our mouth, and digested in our
stomach, drives away our hunger, and norysheth our body: the wine likewise
received and digested quenches our thirst, and quickens our blood: so
Christ's body and blood received by faith, digested with worthy continuance
therein, not disagreeing from the right receiving thereof, slaketh our hunger
and thirst, that is to say, our emptynesse of grace, and dryness of faith,
nourysheth and quickens both our body and soul, making us partakers of the
whole merits and dignity of the body and blood of Christ. And as the bread
of many granes is made one loaf, 1. Cor. 10.
and the wine pressed together of sundry grapes: so we being many, are one
body in Christ: And because we are of his body, we must needs also be
quickened by his blood, and live of his spirit.

Remains there the substance of bread and wine after the words of
consecration (as they term them) or but the accidents of them only, as the
authors of Transubstantiation have heretofore taught? If the substance of
bread and wine should be denied to remain in the Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ: so should it cease to be a Sacrament. For every sacrament,
as we have tofore heard, consists of the word, and of the element. Now if we
take away water from Baptism, so is there no Sacrament: verily even so in like
manner take away Bread and Wine from the Lords Supper, so cease it to be a
sacrament. To declare that bread remains after the words of consecration,
Saint Paul calls it bread diverse times, as we may see in his first Epistle
to the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 10.11. Act. 2.20.
S. Luke also in his Chronicle of the Apostles acts, whensoever he makes
mention of the Lords Supper, calls it ye breaking of bread. And it is to
be thought that so worthy learned men would have presumed to call, so
honorable a mystery, bread, if there had been no bread remaining but only
the accidents of bread, as our Transsubstantiators teach: Matthew. 26. Marc.
14. Luke. 22.
Does not our Savior Christ after the words of consecration call the
mystery of his blood, the fruit of the vine: And who is so far estraunged
from the right rule of reason, which knows not that the fruit of the vine
is wine: Here does it evidently appear by the authority of Gods word, that
in the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, there remains after the words
of consecration, the substance both of bread and wine: whereof it truly
follows, that the Popish doctrine of Transsubstantiation is nothing else
than a vain dream and foolish fancy brought in by Antichrist, never known
of ye ancient fathers of Christ's church, nor yet received of the Greeks unto
this day.

Why say thou there but two Sacraments, when we have heretofore been taught,
that there are seven Sacraments? Because Christ in the new Testament left
no mo to be occupied in his Church. As there were given to the people of the
old law but two Sacraments: That is to say, Circumcision, and the Passover:
so likewise in the new Testament, Christ appointed but two Sacraments: that
is, in stead of Circumcision, Baptism: and in the place of the Passover, the
Lords Supper. Therefore as for the rest, they be not aptly called Sacraments.
They be honest trades, godly orders of life, and virtuous, meet to be
exercised of Christians, as Matrimony, Order, Penance, Confirmation, and
extreme unction.

Genesis 2. Math. 19. 1. Cor. 7.
What is Matrimony? A lawful joining together of one man and one woman to
live chastlye together, forsaking all other, for to bring forth children in the
fear of God, and to avoid fornication, containing an inseperable fellowship
of life together.

What is Order? Order has been wrongfully taken both for a Sacrament, and for
the anointed order of Priesthode, which Christ took away. But in deed, a
godly, holy, and reverend state of Ministers, Preachers, Pastors, or Apostles,
is of Christ allowed in the new Testament, to be lovingly and reverently
received of us, as shepeheardes of the flock. Of whom says Saint Paul:
They that rule well, are worthy of double honor, 1. Tim. 5.
but namely they that labor in word and doctrine.

What is Confirmation? A godly allowance by the Bishop or Preacher, of the
children when they came to age, into the congregation of Christ, as a due
examination or trial of their continuance in the same faith, which their
Godfathers or sureties in their name professed and promised for them at their
Baptism to keep. And this Confirmation is as it were a discharge of the
Godfathers bonds.

What is penance, or repentance? A (...) now, what is our duty toward him.
To love him, fear him, honor him, follow him, serve him, believe in him, to
fight under his standarde with all faith, charity, truth, despising of
worldly things, thanksgiving, innocence, fasting, prayer, obedience,
humility, and patience, to put of the old man, and to do on the new, to
deny our selves, to take the Cross upon us: to forsake all that we have for
his sake, and to set forth the glory of his name, that we may become a
worthy Temple for the holy ghost, and meet heirs for the kingdom of
heaven, the true land of promise flowing with milk and honey.

What is it to love God? To cast our whole mind and affection upon God with
all reverence, and earnestly desire to follow his will.

What is it to fear God? The fear of the Lord is a like reverence as
children owe to their parents: a willing and faithful heed, that we commit
nothing against him or his word, that we offend not so loving a Father, but
rather diligently apply our selves to live according to his commandment,
always thinking that God does presently see and behold all our deeds, words,
yea, and thoughts. This fear is the beginning of wisdom. This fear makes
him blessed that has it. This fear is the fountain of life. This fear
keeps us from sin. Prou. 1. Eccle. 25. Pro. 14. Eccle. 1. Esaias. 29. Jonas.
1.
And besides a number of other commodities, this fear makes us more warely to
take heed of the craft of Satan. The fear of the Lord is also taken for the
worshipping of the Lord, as it is written: They fear me in vain with the
commandments of men. Jonas the Prophet also said: I am an Hebrew, and fear
the God of heaven.

If these many profits and commodities come of the fear of God: Iac. 2.
how chances it that the deuilles do not enjoy the same, which fear the
Lord as much as we? As much in deed, but not as well. For there be two kinds
of fear: A childishe or reverent fear, Two kinds of fear.
whereof I have already spoken: and a servile, bond, or slauishe fear. The
fear of the ungodly by the consideration of the law, and fear of
punishment, as likewise is the fear of the devils, is bond, servile, and
thrall. 1. Joan. 4.
Of this fear speaks Saint John in his Epistle, on this manner: Fear is not
in charity, but perfect charity casts fear out of the doors. This fear
is called a mighty fear in the Psalm, Psalm. 90.
because all things by it are done in unfaithfulness, in such ignorance and
lack of knowledge of the mercy of God, as though God were no natural
fatherly God, but a severe narrow eyed Judge, or cruel tyrant. These two
kinds of fear are well described of the Poet Horace on this manner: Oderunt
peccare boni virtutis amore:
Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae.
Which may thus be translated into English: Good men do well of a virtuous
intent:
Evil men do well for fear of punishment.


What is it to honor and worship God? Both with our whole mind and strength
thereof, and with the body and power thereof, as subject to the mind, and
both to God, to reverence and praise God, to to declare our love and fear
toward him.

What is it to follow God? To believe in him, to keep his doctrine and obey
it, to follow him whithersoeuer he leads or calls us, to bear what burden
soever he lays upon us, to do as he has done before us, and given us an
example to do after him.

What is it to serve God? To live according to his word, to believe in him, to
refer all things to his glory, to help our neighbor, to obey him as our
Lord and master, whose service is no bondage but freedom, Math. 11. 1. Joan.
5.
whose burden is light, whose yoke is pleasant, as Christ says: take my yoke
upon you, and learn of me: for I am mecke and lowly in heart, and ye shall
find rest to your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. Saint
John also says: his commandments are not grievous.

What is it to believe in God? To receive his seed and doctrine into our heart:
to commit our selves wholely unto him in all things, and certainly to assure
our selves that all things are true, and shall undoubtedly be performed, which
he has promised.

What is it to fight under his standarde? To follow the example of our
captain Christ. As he by death has conquered sin, death, hell, and the
devil: so we by mortifiing of our flesh ought to suppress, subdue, and
conquer the same, with the help of our savior and captain, whose standarde
the cross unless we follow, we perish and become a pray to our enemies, never
to be redeemed, if he do not ransom us.

What is truth? Christ him self the word of God, and what soever agrees with
him, Joan. 14. Joan. 17.
which can neither deceive, nor be deceived. I am the way, the truth, and the
life, says Christ. And in his prayer to God the father he says: thy word is
the truth. The civil truth is an agreemente of words and deeds, to say as
the thing is, and as we know it to be. Ephe. 4.
Of this truth speaks the Apostle in his Epistle to the Ephesians, saying:
put away lying, and speak every man truth unto his neighbor, forasmuch as we
are members one of an other. Zach. 8.
Also the Prophet Zachary: speak every man the truth to his neighbor: let
none of you imagine evil in his heart against his neighbor, and love no false
oaths. etc.

What is it to despise worldly things? Wholly to set our mind upon heavenly
things, not regarding the transitory and uncertain vanities of this world,
1. Pet. 1. Esaias. 40. Iac. 1. Heb. 13.
according to the words of S. Peter: all flesh is as the grass, and all
glory of man as the flower of the grass, etc. Knowing and acknowledging with
S. Paul, that we have here no certain abiding place, but seek for one to
come: again, that as we brought nothing into the world, so shall we carry
nothing out of it: 1. Tim. 6.
but having meat, drink, and cloth, we ought to be content and abundantly
satisfied, forasmuch as godliness is great riches: if a man be content with
that he has.

What is thanks giving to God? To remember the benefits of the Lord,
confessing and acknowledging al to come of him, offryng him our whole heart,
love and service for the same.

What is innocence? A mind or conscience guilty of no sin, which comes
through faith in Jesus Christ, as the Apostle says: we being justified by
faith, are at peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: Romans 5.
by whom also it chanced unto us to be brought in through faith unto this
grace, wherein we stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God.

What is fasting? To beware that we oppress not the body, and so by that
means the mind also, with surfeiting, drunkenness, and excess, as our
Savior Christ says: Luke. 21.
Take heed to your selves, least at any time your hearts be overcome with
surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life. etc. Again, to live
chastely, purely, and soberly: to abstain from vices, to bring our body into
bondage to the spirit, and the spirit to God: to minister to the body only
y^ that is necessary, to mortify the flesh with the affections and lusts of
the same. The right abstinence from meats taken as a way or help to the
abstinence from sin, consists not in the quality, but in the quantity of
ye meat, not what, but how much meat and drink thou receyuest. For whether
fasteth more aright, he that moderately receives of flesh, or he yt cloyeth
himself with fish* Tit. 1.
All things are pure to them yt are pure, says the Apostle. All the creatures
of God are good, 1. Timo. 4.
and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving. For it is
sanctified by the word of God and prayer.

Why then is this law so earnestlye established with such penalty upon it,
that we eat no flesh on Fridayes, or other days appointed to abstain from
the same? I take that as a civil positive Law, like to the acts of
Parliament, made for sundry and diliers purposes concerning the state of a
Realm, and for the wealth of the same. For if it were any law of God binding
our conscience, no King nor Pope might dispense with the breaking of it.

What is prayer? To call upon the name of the Lord, assuredly trusting to
obtain that we require, so that we ask of him in his sons name and none
other, that thing which he will to be required and none other, that either
for obtaining of good things, avoiding of evil, or releasing and forgiveness
of evil and sins past. Whatsoever ye ask in my name, says Christ, that
will I do, Joan. 14.
that the Father may be glorified by the Son: If ye shall ask any thing in
my name, I will do it. Again: verilye, Joan. 16.
verilye, I say unto you: Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he
will give it you. And Saint John in his Epistle says: 1. Joan. 5.
This is the trust that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to
his will, he hears us. And if we know that he hears us, we know that we
have the petitions that we desire of him.

What is obedience? A lowlye and hearty submission of our selves to God, and
afterward to our Parents, to the Magistrates, to our Superiors, and to all
those, to whom God has committed the rule and governance of his flock and
people in this world, or in just causes, to all them, to whom we be by any
title inferior.

But what if our Superiors will enforce us to obey them in unjust causes? In
this behalf we owe them no obedience. God is the highest Magistrate. If any
inferior Magistrate commands any thing, contrary to his godly commandment
and blessed will, we must answer with the apostles. Act. 5.
Oportet deo magis obedire quam hominibus. We must obey God more then men.
Examples hereof we have many and diverse both in the old and in the new
Testament.

What is humility? A subjection of the proud hauty courage of our mind,
showing our selves inferior to all men, presuming in nothing, esteming our
selves worse then all men in our own conceates. And this is that, Romans 12.
which the apostle says. In giving honor go one before an other. Again, be
not hye minded, but make your selves equal to them of the lower sort. Be not
wise in your own conceates. Hereto agrees the saying of S. Peter: submit your
selves every man one to an other. Knit your selves together in lowlynesse of
mind. 1. Pet. 5.
For God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. Submit your
selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you when the
time is come.

What is patience? Willingly without resistance either in thought word or deed
to suffer undeserved punishment after the example of Christ, Luke. 23.
which prayed for them that persecuted and most cruelly tormented him. This
patience is described of S. Peter in his first Epistle, 1. Pet. 2.
where he says: servants, obey your masters with fear, not only if they be
good and courteous, but also though they be froward. For this is thank worthy,
if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, and suffer wrong undeserved.
For what praise is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye take it
patiently. But and if when ye do well, ye suffer wrong, and take it patiently,
then is there thank with God. For hereunto verily were ye called: for Christ
also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps,
which did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth: which when he
was reviled, reviled not again: when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed ye vengeance to him that judges righteously etc.

What is the old man, that we must put of? The naughty, corrupt, and rotten
nature, which since the fall of Adam we have lineally at our first generation
received of our parents through the corruption of the first root Adam. Or
thus: the noughty concupiscence, lust to sin, and affection of our flesh,
without faith, of this old man speaks our Savior Christ on this manner:
Joan. 3.
That which is borne of flesh is flesh. And except a man be borne from above,
he cannot see the kingdom of god. Also the Apostle: Ephe. 4.
Lay from you the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceauable
lusts. Coloss. 3.
Again, put of the old man with his works.

What is the new man, that we must do on? The renewyng of man by faith and
the word of God: the spirit of God given by Christ our spiritual and second
Adam: Again, to tame the old man our fleshely and first Father Adam: to beget
us again and adopte us to God, which Spirit we receive by Christ at our
regeneration. Of this new man speaks our Savior Christ thus: Joan. 3.
That which is borne of the spirit, is spirit. Also S. Paul: Be renewed in
the spirit of your mind, and put on the new man, which after God is shapen
in righteousness and true holiness. Ephe. 4. Coloss. 3.
Again: put on the new man, which is renewed in the knowledge and image of him
that made him.

What is it to deny our selves? Plainly to profess, that all our labors and
works profit nothing unto salvation: to slay the old Adam with all his lusts and
affections.

What is it to forsake all that we have for Christ's sake? To esteem all that
we have not to be ours for his sake, and willingly (if need so require) for
the profession of his name to depart from wife, children, parents, friends,
country, house, lands, and all things else that we do or may enjoy, yea and
to put our selves in danger of all peril for the name of Christ, and
profession of the Gospel. He that loves father or mother more then me (says
Christ) is not worthy of me. And he that loves son or daughter more then
me, Math. 10.
is not worthy of me. And he that takes not his cross and follows me, is
not worthy of me. He that finds his life, shall lose it: Luke. 14.
and he that loses his life for my sake, shall find it. Again, if a man come
to me, and hate not his father and mother, and wife and children, and brethren
or sisters, yea and his own life also: he cannot be my disciple. And whosoever
does not bear his cross, and come after me he cannot be my disciple.

What is the cross, that we must take upon on us? Any sorrow or pain that
belonggeth to any vocation or trade of life for the trial and proof of our
faith and patience. Also it is the correction, chastening rod and staff of
the Lord, wherewith he punishes them, whom he loves, not to their damnation
or utter casting away from his favor, but to salvation, and to teach us to
fly unto him in our trouble and adversity, as children to our most dear and
loving father.

What is meant by the name of the Lord whose glory we must set forth? The
glory, praise, wisdom, might, power, worship, honor and majesty of the
Lord. Or the knowledge, preaching and advancement of his holy word.

What is the temple of the holy Ghost? An honest, godly, and faithful
christian heart, Joan. 4.
in the which God is rightly worshipped in spirit and truth: wherein are
offered spiritual sacrifices of praise, innocence, thanks giving, of an
humble and contrite heart, whose chief corner stone is Christ. Know ye not,
says Saint Paul, that ye are the temple of God, and how the spirit of God
dwells in you* 1. Cor. 3.
If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy. For the temple of
God is holy, 1. Pet. 2.
which temple ye are. Saint Peter also says: Ye as living stones are made a
spiritual house, an holy Priesthode, for to offer up spiritual sacrifices,
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

What is the kingdom of heaven? The kingdom of heaven is diversely taken in
the Scriptures. First, for the holy Gospel and word of God, because that is
the scepter and iron rod, whereby God rules, reygneth, and dwells in the
hearts of the faithful. Of this kingdom speaks Christ in the Gospel on
this wise: I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, Math. 16.
that is to say: I will commit unto thee the office to preach the Gospel of
salvation, which opens and vnlocketh unto men the way and door, Math. 13.
by the which they may be saved, and enter into the kingdom of heaven. Item,
the kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a woman took and hid in
three peckes of meal, till it were all leauenned.

Romans 14.
Secondlye, the kingdom of heaven is taken for faith it self, as Saint Paul
says: The kingdom of heaven is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the holy ghost.

Thirdlye, the kingdom of heaven is expounded the whole congregation of the
faithful abiding in this life, in whom the Lord by his word and spirit,
does inuisibly dwell and reygne. Of this kingdom speaks Christ in the
Gospel on this manner: Math. 25.
The kingdom of heaven is like to ten virgins, which took their lamps and
went to meet the Brydegrome. Five of them were wise, and five were foolish.
etc.

Fourthlye, the kingdom of heaven is taken for the joy, felicity, and
pleasure, which the souls of the believers enjoy, when they are departed out
of this world: and their bodies also joined with the souls at the day of
Judgment shall enjoy, even in that place, which Christ has prepared for them
to possess: where they shall be comforted with the sight of his Majesty and
Godheade, and with the fruition of his perpetual felicity with him. Of this
kingdom speaks Christ in the Gospel: When ye shall see Abraham, Isaac, Luke
13.
and Jacob, and the Prophets, in the kingdom of God, and you to be driven out
of the doors.

Finallye, the kingdom of heaven is wheresoever Gods word is preached: from
which kingdom they only are excluded, Joan. 8. Joan. 10. Joan. 19.
which believe not the word, according to this saying of Christ: He that is
of God, hears the words of God. But ye hear not, because ye are not of
God. Again, My sheep hear my voice. Item, Every one that is of the truth,
hears my voice.

What meanest thou, by a land that flows with milk and honey? Pleasant,
abundance of all things, both sweet and profitable. By the honey is
understood sweetness, joy, gladness, and pleasure. By the milk, pure
nourishment, whereby we still continue, grow, and increase in faith and
godliness unto the measure of Christ.

When shall we enter upon, and enjoy this kingdom, this promised land, that
flows with milk and honey? The church militant in this world, governed by
the spirit of their most mighty, valiant, victorious, and triumphant Captain
Christ already enjoys after a certain manner in spirit, through faith in
this kingdom and blessed land, as it is written: He that believes on the
Son, Joan. 3.
has everlasting life: He that believes not on the Son, shall not see
life, but the wrath of God abides upon him. But when they are joined together
both body and soul with the reast of the faithful congregation, which are
departed out of this world in the faith of Christ, to make one whole tryumphant
congregation, when they have by the power of Christ conquered the malignant
church of the devil, which shall be at the last day of judgment, which we do
daily look for now in these latter times: then shall they truly and
perfectly enjoy and possess all the joys and pleasures of that most ioiful
and pleasant land: Psalm. 17.
whereof David speaks on this manner: I believe to see the good things of the
Lord in the land of the living. Now we see in a glass, says the Apostle, 1.
Cor. 13.
even in a dark speaking: but then shall we see face to face. And as S. John
says: It does not yet appear what we shall be. But we know, that when it
shall appear, 1. Joan. 3.
we shall be like him. For we shall see him, as he is. The eye has not seen,
1. Cor. ^.
and ye ear has not heard, neither have entered into the heart of man the
things, which God has prepared for them that love him. And all these things
shall the elect congregation of God enjoy and possess immediately after the
end of these latter times wherein we now live.

What call thou the latter times? The first times were under the law of
nature, till the law of Moses. The second under the law of Moses, till (the
kingdom thereof abolished) Christ entered into this world. Now the third and
last time is, and has been, sithence the entering of Christ into this world,
to take out flesh upon him, by joining in him together both Godheade and
Manheade with an inseperable knotte to reconcile and knitte together God and
man, now that all the prophecies and figures of Christ be brought to an end.
The last times also are the times, that go immediately before the day of the
Lord, and end of the world. Saint John says: 1. Joan 2.
Little children, it is the last time. 1. Cor. 10. Iac. 5.
Saint Paul says: We are they, whom the ends of the world are come upon.
Saint James says: The coming of the Lord draws nigh. The Judge stands
before the door. And our Savior Christ himself says: The time is at hand.
Apoc. 22^
Behold, I come shortly, and my reward is with me, to give every man
according as his deeds shall be.

How far think thou that day to be hence? No man can pronounce any
certainty of the time, when that day shall be, as our savior Christ says*
Math. 24.
Of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels in heaven, but my
father only. Again: Act. 1.
It is not for you to know the times and seasons, which the father has put in
his own power. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
Saint Paul says that the day of the Lord shall come even as a thief in the
night. For when they shall say: Peace, peace, all things are safe: then shall
sudden destruction come upon them (as sorrow comes upon a woman trauayling
with child) and they shall not escape. Notwithstanding although the holy
Scriptures do pass over with silence the certainty of the time when Christ
shall come to judge the world, as a thing more curious than profitable for our
salvation, that by this means we might set our selves in the more readiness
against his coming, Math. 24.
because we are not certain of the day and hour: yet we may plainly
perceive, that it is not far of, both by the comparison of our days with the
days of Noe (For thus says Christ as it happened in the days of Noe: so shall
it be also in the days of the Son of man. Luke 17.
They did eat and drink: they married wives and were married even unto the same
day that Noe went into the Arc: and the flood came and destroyed them all.
etc. Even so shall it be in the day, when the son of man shall appear) and
by the shortening of the days promised in the Scripture for the electes sake,
Math. 24.
and diverse other arguments besides. Now when that day shall once come,
(which undoubtedly shall come out of hand) then shall the Lord separate the
Sheep from the Goats, Math. 25.
reward the ungodly with punishment due to their unbelief: and the godly he
shall put in possession of that most glorious and blessed kingdom, which he
purchased for them by the crucifying of his body, and shedding of his blood.
To this Lord Christ, our alone Savior, with the Father and the holy Ghost, be
all honor and praise, both now and ever. Amen.

Give the glory to God alone.
To the Christian Reader.
Upon vewe of these our demands, Christian reader, if thou further demand
some question of the book, of the town for which it is, of the Author, and of
the Printer, no answer I suppose so fully just (be it that the question double
it self twice and again) as to adiudge the one both in name and deed holy,
the other in life godly, the third in his work learned, the last in his intent
careful for them, and not unmindful of thee. For in whatsoever true
religion, christian example, godly invention, and studious enterprise could be
beneficial, in that have they all jointly, and severally each, by doctrine,
practice, wit, with paynfull and no less chargeable endeavor, served, if not
satisfied thy godly contentation. And for that in doctrine, all things are
written for instruction, rightly to understand, faithfully to believe, and
readily to confess that reason of hope which we have, demand who will friend
or adversary, answer who shall skillful or unlearned: to each of these
Christian duties, with respect of their person, and each capacity, this
little Pamphlet ministers, readilye sufficient furniture by plain explication
of the principal grounds of our religion, worthy of thy diligence, thou if not
unworthy of the knowledge. But I lament with alas. What is it to talk rightly
or smothly, and to walk crookedly? Is not the sweet Christian harmony in
consent of saying and doing? For what discord makes either of these by it
self, or what agreement? To apply or plead very old and almost dead
example, has some force to vice or virtue, in private talk, or public
sermon. And the late allegations of France or Flaunders, purporting novelty,
do spedily quicken our dull sense of hearing: but the home made mention of our
familiars, whose affection does it not move to either side? What can you more
greedily hear, or I long, as with child, to tell. The great grace and gift of
God on Sandwich town, by the sound of the Gospel, has it wrought in vain with
the townsmen? are they taught well, and not well governed? show they forth gods
prais with mouth, and pluck it down with hand? or rather they express their
faith by their works, and their works by faith, in brotherly love each to
other, in liberality to the poor, in hospitality to the Stranger, in
erection and maintenance of schools, in most careful provision that no one
among them live idle. Which godly proceedings, when the father of this book,
that painful and godly instrument of Christ his church, master Thomas Becon
did with private comfort behold, be could not with safe duty but
acknowledge and sound out the same publikly, to the great praise of God, the
increase of their beginnings, and example of all others, who by reason of decay
through sand and shelf albeit they cannot so happily e^ter their welnere
stopped haven, yet by view of their race in Jesus Christ, may finishe the same
course by repaired life to their hoped heaven. And therefore this work he
took in hand, in order and matter excellent, edifying by question, plain for
capacity, and brief for memory, not as the Seraphicall and Sorbonicall
Doctors of the schole, who give sucklings in religion vinegar for milk, the
stronger hard stones for hearty meat: but following the precept of Saint Paul,
teaches and confirms them in such as be good and profitable. But least the
author of his intent, the Senate and town of Sandwich of their benefit
should be frustrate, and the commendation of their godly example hidden from
such as contend to follow, we have thought it good now first separately and
alone to print the same, which before, without greater charge in buying the
whole works of Thomas Becon, could not be bad. This our labor if thou shalt
accept, it cannot be otherwise, God giving grace, but that in all profitable
manner we shall be further careful and diligent for thy Christian utility.
Farewell in Christ.

R. D.


