News from Mamora, OR, A Summary Relation sent to the King of Spain of the
good success of a Voyage, which it has pleased GOD to give in taking, and
surprising, of Mamora, a Port in Barbary.

By the Armado and Host Royal, of the Ocean Sea, whereof was Captain General
Don Luis Faxardo:

ASSISTED With three Galleis of Portingall, under the command of the Conde de
Elda, and five Galleys of Spain, under the Duke of Fernandina.

fleur-de-lis

LONDON Printed for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at his Shop in Pope's Head
Palace, near the Royall-Exchange. 1614.

To the Reader.
GENTLE Reader,
of late there came unto my hands a Relation, written in Spanish, of the
surprising of Mamora, a Port in Barbary, by the Army of the King of Spain, as
by that which ensues more at large appears, which at the request of some
friends I Translated, and with all thought it necessary to advertise thee, that
herein I respected not so much exactness in Translating word for word out of
the Original, (whereby the matter must perforce loose its garb and grain) as
I have endeavored to declare the precise truth of each passage, according to the
authors method and intention.

I was the rather induced to give thee notice, for that, happily, some that are
curious, and intelligent, in that language, comparing this with some Copies, or
Manuscripts of this business, might tax my fidelity, or understanding: which
to prevent, I inserted this brief aduertisment, which with the discourse it
self, I refer to thy perusal, thy self to GOD, and my self to thy good
opinion:

London the 28. of September: 1614. W. Squ.

A Summary Relation sent to the King of Spain of the good success of a
Voyage, which it has pleased GOD to give, in the taking and surprising of
Mamora, a Port in Barbary.
THE first of August, 1614. there set sail out of the Bay of Cadiz 99. Sail
of Vessels of war great and small, the said Galleys being part of them.

Within two days After they came in the fight of Alarache, white the said Army
was discovered by the natural Inhabitants of the Coast, which could not be
avoided by reason of calmes and contrary w^^ds And hereaboutes there was advice
given by Garsper de Valdes, master of the fie^^ a shore, unto those of the
Army, that as yet there was not any news or suspicio^ a shore of any thing.

The day following, in the evening, the said Army arrived before Mamora, and
came to an Anchor without reach of Shot, a^o^t a league of, for that the tide
served not to go in. At the said ancoring place, the army found three ships of
War appertaining to the States of Holland; the General whereof was John
^^rs^^^, who (...) his (...) to the Kings Armado, and did such other courtesies
and salutations as any Vassals of his Majesty ought to do.

Then the General of the Hollanders gave to understand to those of the Armado,
that there were within the Port of Mamora 15. Sail of Pirates, who perceiving
themselves shut up within the said Port, so long time, began to grow
desperate, and sent forth a messenger with words and threatenings, that they
were now resolved to come forth and fight with the said Hollanders, with which
message the Flemings were not very well pleased, notwithstanding there came
then a fourth ship of their company (which the said Army left riding in Cadiz
at their setting forth) and joined with the aforesaid three Hollanders.

Indeed the Flemmings forces were but weak; and therefore they seemed to be
well contented to see his Majesty's forces so strong, and by that means to be
acquitted of their obligation and attendance there, which was for the letters
of the King Muley Sydan, in answer to certain letters, written unto him by
the Grave Maurice, who as is thought had written to the said Muly Sydan, that
with his consent; hel^e, and fa^our, the Hollanders might possess that Port
for the States: For such, or like considerations, the said General of the
(...) of the (...) ^uented: for ^oy^ing with (...) (contrary to his own^
desire) and (...) he (...)

^

Now seeing the great imposs^^^lities and difficulties falling out that day, it
was thought fit to retire, and the rather, for that in attempting to land men
in the plain, or sands of the shore there was found the like inconveniences,
(...) so much as they were almost out of (...) in the (...) considering that by
occasion of the aforesaid lets and impe^iments the enemies on land had three
days time, to (...) and bring down the Inhabitants thereabouts as indeed they
did, howbeit in such actions oftentimes, the Almighty power yields hope, and
help, beyond ^xpectation.

The fifth day dito, being the day of our Lady (...)* the sea ^al^ed, so as the
Army began to view and attempt the bar and landing places, and committed
the effectin^ th^r^of for the side toward Ala^ach, unto Captain Iosephide
Men^; Captain of the General Gallio^, whom notwithstanding he was (...) three
times in great danger of drowning did find out amongst the sho^les and s^nds a
place of about some 100 yar^s where in a calm, men might get on land* Howbeit
it is presumed never any landed there before. Now seeing the weather somewhat
fair, he returned, and propounded to the Army to land there, where the d^nger
might be (^^^^ely) the drowning of some men; whiles others might land, by
wading up to the middle, and per^^^es some Bo^tes might be (...) in the
landing* Upon the said information, they resolved upon that course, and
therefore did take occasion presently to depart and take leave of the General
of the Hollanders, and his Captains, who at that instant were visiting and
saluting the General of the Armado aboard the Captain real, and now ready to
return aboard their own Hulkes; those of the Army not once acquainting the
said Hollanders of their last resolution, although the Flemmings omitted not to
enquire thereof, as judging now that the opportunity was utterly for further
attempt in that enterprise.

This done, those of the Armado went every man about their business, with such
speed and endeavor, that almost before the Hollanders had gotten aboard their
ships, there were suddenly landed, a thousand Spaniards, without the loss of
more then one man, and not a Boat, which seemed a miracle, seeing the great
dangers and diffculties occurring.

Then a Master of the field called Iero^^mo de Augustine, and Captain
Christopher Lechuga, (who executed the office of Maistro de Campo General)
lead forth the Vant-gard, both of them showing great valor and diligence.

The first of the Army that leapt a shore, was Captain Bartholmew Garcia de
Nadall, Captain Joseph de Mena, and Don Fermyn de Codoza, and Anducha: And the
first Ancient that got on land, was that of Don Charles de Ibarra together with
his own person.

Then did the Conde de Elda, and the Duque de Fernandina, place the prowes of
their Galleys, so near the landing place, that with their Artilery, they might
clear and command all the Morish Horsemen a shore, in such sort as they
retired and gave place to those of the Armado to form their squadron, which
done, they hoped the business well near effected, then the said Squadron
marched swiftly toward the aforesaid small Fort, where finding but little
defense of the entry, they took it presently.

The Captain Don Charles de Ibarra, and Gasper Gonsalues, with their
Companies, lead the Vant-gard, and the first that entered the Fort, as is said,
was Captain Peter de Garreta, an entertenido or Soldier belonging to the
Kings Armado. There they won three pieces of Ordinance which the Pirates had
left spiked up, but not so well but that the said Joseph de Mena, began
presently to make use of them, discharging upon the Moors that lay upon the
other side of the River, and being horsemen did great spoil amongst them. At
the time that this was doing it fell out as if it passed in fight the one of
the other, that the Captain Videsaball shot also from aboard the Admiral: and
about evening the news hereof came to the Moors that were on the other side
defending the bar with a great number of Muskets, and Harquebushers, in so
much that they left their Trenches and Ordinance, and burnt (...) s^ips and not
a man (...).

The day following which w^^ the day of the Transfiguration, and the sixth of
August, possession was taken of the Port, and the Vaunt-gard of the Fleet was
led by the Galleys of the Duque de Fernandina, and the Rear by the Conde de
Elda, accompanied with fifty Sail of ships great and small.

There were riding in the River ten Sail, or Vessels more which the enemies
could not burn: Aboard them (...) as some goods, but of small importance, the
enemy having carried all away that was of value; And for the Pirates although
they were sent unto, and proffered, in his Majesty's name to accept of usage
correspondent to good wars, they would not accept thereof, nor trust
thereunto, Rather in steed of showing gratuity they dealt ill and did put to
the sword ten or twelve persons that were sent unto them under assurance to
treat with them, which ill dealing they have paid, as it is reported by diverse
prisoners of s^^dry Nations found here, for that the Moors did by and by set
upon the said Pirates, and robbed and spoiled them most cruelly.

This done, those of the Army possess themselves of the Mountain or high
ground on Saly side, which is the most eminent place: And from thence the same
evening, Trenches were opened to succor and lodge the soldiers, and care
taken in the choice of the conuenientest place for fortification and keeping of
the bar and ancoring place.

There a Well of reasonable good ware was found, and more they look and hope
for.

This Port of Mamora, is the best and most Abrigado, or well situated, of any
in Europe, howbeit the bar it self at high water is not above eight Godos in
depth, which is not draught sufficient for great Gallions, but there may well
enter ships of three or four hundred Tons, such as is one of those we
took, and as another which a Frenchman stole out of Carthagena.

The Admiral General. Don Ino. Faxardo de Gueurra, the Admiral Diego de S.
Turbe. The Governor Int. de Lara, Captain Sebastian Granero, Lieutenant of
the Captain General of the Artilery, have done and performed what concerned
them with great care and deligence, the Countadors Signior Ino. de Barundial,
and Fransisco Beltran de Baronda and all the other Offirers have not been
slack, but have performed their duties.

This day Mass was said a shore, and thanks given to GOD, to whom all ought
to be attributed, whom no doubt will favor this action, as his own.

Of what else occurreth account shall be given.

Written in the Port of Mamora, the seventh of August. 1614.
Translated out of Spanish by W. Squire.
FINIS.

