David's Harp full of most delectable armony, newely strynged and set in tune
by Theodore Basille.

Psalm. 97. Praise the Lord upon the Harp, and sing to the Harp with a Psalm
of thanks giuynge. With Trompectes also and Shawmes, oh show your selves
ioyeful before the Lord the King.

The principal contents of this book.
i. Of faith. Of the confession of faith, and of good works. ii Of the
cross, persecucion and trouble for the truethes sake. iii Of the vanite,
falsehode and unrighteousness of man. iiii Of the benefits and great gifts of
God. v Of bearing the Cross, and calling on the name of the LORD. vi Of
vows to be paid, and what they vii Of ye death of saints, and how (are
precious it is in the syghte of God. viii Of the Church of Christ, and y^ Sy
nagoge of Antechrist. ix Of the free delyueraunce from the bonds of Satan
through Christ. x Of the Sacrifice of praise.
Read and thou shalt rejoice
For hearing this heavenly voice.
To the right honorable Sir George Broke, Lord Cob ham, Theodore Basille wys
sheth long life, co^tinu al health and prosperous felicite.
Although in the whole psalmody of Da uid, there can not be fo^e one Psalm,
whi che is not able to replenysh the spiritual and true Christen man with
such and so great joy, as is ineffable and can by no means be expressed, yet
in my judgment and opinion this Psalm, which I have now from all the other
selected to declare, being in number the hun The excellency of the Psalm,
which here after shall be expounded.
dred and fyftene after the common Laten translacio^, far excellethe and
chalengethe the preeminence, as I may so speak For verily so often as I rede^t
me thik I am in a ioyfuland delectable Paradyse, where al kind of pleasures do
abound, and so often as I taste of it, it seems unto me like a golden floude,
which flows forth with most goodly and pleasant stremes, to conclude, this
Psalm, so often as I hear the words of it, beteth and replenyssheth mine
ears with such sweet and delectable armony, as none may justly be compared
unto it, so that neither Mercurius, David excels all musicions.
Apollo, nor his son Orpheus, nor yet any other, whom the ancient Poets do
so greatly commend and exalte with incomparable encomies and praises in their
most eloquente lucubracions and ornate monume^tes, are able to compare with
this our Mynstrell David, being not only an excellent Musicion, but also a
puyssaunt king and a divine Prophet Although they shame not to write that with
their musical instruments they ware able (their melody being of so great
efficacye, The fanta sies of y^ old Poets con cerni^g their musicio^s.
virtue, strength, might and power) to make the great Oaks to shake their
tops, to cause whole flocks of sheep, goats, oxen. etc. to follow them
daunsyng pleasauntly, to move mountains, to make the swyfte streams of the
runnynge floudes to stand still, yea and to fetch out souls even out of hell.
For all these things does this our mynstrell David also much more truly tha^
they feign of their old Musicions. What other thing, I pray you, dreamed they
by the shaking of the great and hard Oaks tops, What the shaking of the
Oaks tops signifye.
but only to show, yt the word of God is of so great strength, that the
Princes and rulers, yea even y^ mighty Tyrauntes of the world can none
otherwise then shake, tre^ ble, bow and do reverence unto it, and grant that
it is the almyghtye word of truth, life, health and salua cio^, whereto they
must needs obey and submyt the^ selves, seeing yt agenst it they can never
prevail neither by act, counsel, wysdo^e asse^bly, synod, congregation, or
any other humayne polecy, as Solomon testifiethe, there is no wysdo^e there is
no forcast Pro. rri. Esa. viii.
there is no counsel y^ ca^ prevail agenst y^ LORD, or else y^ what so ever
they go in hand with all, shall come to naught and shall not prosper, yea that
they them selves also shall be destroyed, as Christ says: Who so falls on
this stone, shall be broken Matthew. xxi
on pieces, and look upon whom it falls, it shall grynd him to poulder.

Again what meant they by the followynge and daunsynge of the What the
daun^ynge of the beasts signify
shape, gotes, oxes. etc. but only to de clare, that at y^ preaching of God
des word all people rei^se and are merry, as we may se in the most blyssed
virgin Mary, which replete with y^ great joy of this word, song on this manner:
My soul magnifyeth Luke. i.
the LORD, and my spirit has reioy sed in God my savior. S. Elizabethe
also wife to the most virtuous priest ^acharias and mother to the holy man S.
John^ Baptiste, said unto Mary her Cosyn, when she came and had saluted her:
Behold when I heard the voice of thy salutacio^, the babe did skyppe in my
womb for joy. The Angels also said to the Sheppardes: Behold I show to you
great joy. For there Luke. ii.
is borne to you this day a Savior, which is Christ the LORD in y^ City of
David. What can make us sooner to be merye, to daunse, to A christen man's joy,
and what it is.
skyppe and to leap for joy, than to hear that by Christ the alone savior
of the world we are delivered from our spiritual enemy Pharao the dyuell, and
that by him we are Oz^, (...) i. Cor. xv. Heb (...). i. Joan. v.
made safe from sin, death, hell, desperacion. etc. to whom all through the
sin of our father Adam, we ware made servile, captive bond and thraull, and
that we are now replenysshed with life, joy, pleasure, felicite, wealth,
rest, peace, tra^quilite quietness of conscience, and al kind of gladness.

Moreover what is signified What the mouyng of the mountains signifye.
by the mouynge of mountains, but the conversion of men of power from
infidelite unto faith, from ydolatry unto the true worshyppynge of God from
supersticion unto god ly religion, from the deeds of the flesh unto the fruytes
of the spirit, from affiau^ce reposed in their own carnal and politic
works, unto ye trust in the true and living God.

Furthermore what other thing What the stondynge still of the swyft floudes
signyfye
did they figure and shadow by ye sto^dyng still of the swyfte floudes, but
only the great admyracion, merue lynge, stupoure and wonderynge of ye Gentyles,
when they heard a new kind of religion taught them, as we may se in the
Acts of the Apo stles? To be short, as towchynge y^ fetchyng of souls out of
hell, what other thing mente they, the^ that What the fetchyng of Souls out of
hell mean
by the preaching of Christ's Gospel the very dead in sin shall revive and
be made alive again, as David says, the law of the LORD is pure, it turnethe
souls. The wytnes of the LORD is faithful, and gyuethe wisdom unto babes.
The statutes of the LORD are right and Psalm. xviii.
rejoice the heart, the commandment of the Lord is pure and gives light to
the eyes. Christ also says, I am ye resurreccion and life, he yt believes in
me, although he be dead, yet shall Joan. xi.
he live, and every one that lives and believes in me, shall never dye. Is not
the Gospel of Christ called the Phil. ii.
word of life in diverse places of the holy Scripture because it quickens and
gives life to them, that be fore were dead and lay buried in the stynckynge
donge hill of sin?

Thus se we, that what so ever the old Poets have written in ti mes past
concerning ye excellency of ye music of their Minstrelles, it is altogether
nothing else than a very type, figure, cloud and shadow of this our Mynstrell
David, which does y^ very same thing in deed, which they feigned in words. So
that all the glory and praise of true Musyke ought of right only to redowne un
to our most excellent Musicion David. And although he shows himself a
very perfect Musicion and conning Mynstrell in all his other so^ges and
Psalms, yet me think in this our Psalm he far excels and almost
overcomes himself, his Harp sounds so pleasauntly and his song is so full
of most sweet and delectable armony. Neither does he entreat of vain,
childish, light and tryflynge thiges, but of serious, Note how many godly and
goodly things are entreated of in this Psalm.
grave, earnest and weyghty matters. For he syngeth of faith, of the confession
of his faith, of good works of the cross, trouble and affliccion, of the
vanity and noughtynes of man, of the benefits of God, of the inuo cacion and
calling on the name of y^ LORD, of the vows to be performed unto the LORD
before his peo ple, of the death of Saynctes and how precious it is in the
sight of God, of the free delyueraunce from Satan, sin, death, hell,
desperacion. etc. through Christ, of the Sacrifice of praise, and, as I may at
the last make an end, of the right institucion of a Christen man's life in
this world. What song may be compared unto this our song? What Harp makes
so goodly and plesau^te melodye, as this Harp of David does? Let all mynstrels
give place to this our Mynstrel. Let all Harpes and other musical instruments
be silente and hold their peace, when David's harp enters and comes in
place. Let all songs be banysshed, when David's Psalms be song. For what so
ever David syngethe, it is excellent and incomparable. He with Behold what David
does.
his songs exciteth, provoke and en flameth ye minds of the faythefull and
diligent hearers unto the love and desire not of tra^sitory but of heaven ly
things. He conforteth the conforteles. He exhorts the synnner unto amendme^t
of life. He lyfteth up the desperate unto the hoope of Gods mercy. He
corroborateth and makes strong the weak. He heals the diseased. He rayseth
up the dead unto life. He makethe the sad merry. He exhilarateth and reioycethe
y^ merely disposed. To conclude, he is a Mynstrell fytte for all kind of
parsons, so y^ they be bent unto god lines. Ah would God y^ all Mynstrels in
the world, yea and all sort of parsons both old and young, would ones leave
their lascivious, wanto^ and unclean balades, and sing such god ly and virtuous
songs, as David te cheth them, whereby they might be auocated and called away
from sin and excited and stored up unto virtue and goodness. For it is not
uncomely for Not^.
Christen men to sing Christian songs, yea and that in all places, so that it
be done reverently, and wtoute any jesting, scoffing, raylynge, or reproach
of other persons.

Moreover who can deny y^ there The great virtue of David's harp.
is much and great virtue in David's Harp, seeing that the sound there of did
chase and drive away the unclean and wicked spirit out of king Saul,
wherewith at other times he i. Reg. xvi.
was miserably afflicted and troubled? Again must not David's songs be of
great excellency, seeing that y^ son of god came down from the glorious
throne of his heavenly fa The excelle^ cy of David's songs Luke, xxiiii Ephe. v.
there to accomplish and fulfill the^? Does not. Paul also say, be ye filled with
the spirit, speaking among your selves in Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual
songs, syngyng and making melody in your hearts to ye LORD ever gyuyng
thanckes for all things in the name of our LORD Jesus Christ? Certes the
Psalmody of David may well be called y^ Trea The Psalmody of David is (...)
tresure house of the holy Scripture.
sure house of the holy Scripture. For it contain the what so ever is
necessary for a christian man to know: There is nothing in the law, no thing
in the Prophets, nothing in ye prechyng of Christ and of his apo stles, yt
this noble Mynstrell, King and Prophet does not decantate and sing with most
goodly and manifest words. He syngeth all the works and wo^derous miracles
of God from the beginning of the world, until the rede^pcion of mankind by
Christ. He syngeth Christ's incarnacion, preachinge, workyng of miracles,
passion, death, resurreccion ascencion, glory, the blessing of all nations,
the conversion of the Gentiles with all other mysteries that pertayne to our
health. He syngethe the judgment and mercy of God. He syngeth the
disco^mendacion of vice and auauncement of virtue. He syngeth the vanite and
unrighteous of men's stre^gthes without ye help of God. To be short, he
sigeth what so ever is expidiente for a Christen ma^s knowledge. So that eue^
this one book alone of David's songs had been sufficient truly to instruct a
man in the ryghteousnes of God but yt the goodness of God would, y^ our
fragilite, weakness and ignorancy should be helped with mo scriptures. O the
wonderful and marvelous strength of David's Harp. O the great and excedyng
virtue of David's songs. Happy is that man that de lyghteth and has a pleasure
in them for he shall never be vexed wtan euel spirit. He shall always abhore
vice and enbrase virtue. He shall never be sad, but ever rejoice with a godly
and Agood lesson for all men of honor.
spiritual mirth. Would God that all men of honor would noryshe such
Mynstrelles in their houses, as David is, and that might sing un to the^ both
at dinner and supper, yea and at all other times these most sweet and
delectable songs of David So should both they and all their family be desposed
to live more virtuously, than many be now a days, and be provoked to leave
their po^pous, gala^t, wicked, venereal, fleshly, beastlyke and unclean manner
of living. Would God also that all Behold and follow.
fathers and mothers, al masters and mastresses, would bring up their children
and servants in the singing of these most godly songs. Again, would God
y^ all Scholemasters and teachers of youth, would instead of Uirgile, Ouide,
Horas, Catullus, Tibullus, Propertius. etc teach these verses of David. For so
should they not only obtain eloquence, but also divine erudicion, godly
knoweledge, spiritual wisdom, and increase in all kind of ver tue, unto the
great glory of God, y^ salvation of their own souls, the right institucio^ of
their own life the great joy of their parents, y^ good report of their
techers, and to the high co^modite of the Christian public weal. God grafit
that it may once thus come to pass. But I will return unto our Psalm, which
I have entiteled i^ the forhed of my book, David's Harp.

Some man will marvel peradventure why I call this Psalm David's Harp*
rather than on y other. The reason is this. There are contained in this Psalm,
besides Why this Psalm is called David's Harp
other, ten special things, most worthy to be entreted of. The first is,
faith. The second, confession of fay the, wherbye are vnderstandde all good
works. The third, persecucion. The fourth, the vanite of man. The fyfte, y^
benefits of God The syxte, bearinge of the Cross, ye inuocacion and calling
on the name of the LORD. The seventh, vows to be performed unto the LORD be
fore all his people. The eyghte, the death of saints, and how precious it is
in the sight of God. The nynte, fre delyueraunce from the bonds of Satan
through Christ. The tente y^ sacrifice of praise. These ten are equal in number
with the strings of David's Harp, which also ware te^ as it appears by his own
words where he says, praise the LORD with Harp, and with a psaltry of ten
strin Psa. xxxii.
ges sing ye unto him. Again, O God, I will sing to the a new so^ge, Psalm.
cxii^
yea wc a psaltry of ten stringes will I make melody to the. What kind of
musical instrument this psaltry was, which the Greeks call Nablo^, of the
Hebrewe word Neball, it is uncertain to the writers. But y^ it was an
instrument of ten strings, much like unto an Harp, it is evident enough.
Where of it came to pass that it is now commonly called David's Harp. But for
as ^nuche as it is no matter of weyghty importauuce, and only signifyethe the
true and spiritual gladness of the mind, where with a Christian man is re
plenished of ye spirit, I will omit and let it pass, and after y^ common
usage call it David's Harp, yea and so enti tle this our psalm, desyryng all
me^ diligently to mark not the name of David's Harp, but the sweet sound and
delectable melody that it makes yea and the goodly and comfortable song, that
he syngethe unto it. So shall they acquire and get to them selves much
spiritual joy, great knowelege, godly wisdom, and be very much edified in the
doctrine of Christ's religion.

Now for as much as I am not only credibly e^formed of other, but also
perfectly persuaded that your right honorable Lordeshyp delyghteth in nothing
so greatly as in y^ holy scripture, which is the word Phil. ii. Joan. viii.
Psalm. xviii. Jacob. i.
of life, the light of the world, the only treasure of christianite and is
abundantly able to save the souls of so many as hear it* believe it, and work
thereafter: I thought it not vnfyttyng, nor unworthy your honor to dedicate
this my labor to your name trusti^g y^ by this menes many other shall be allured
to y^ hearing of David's armonye, and be so enflamed with the fervent love and
perpetual desire thereof, that they shall wysh like pains to be taken in the
declaracio^ of y^ other Psalms, that they might be red with the more fruit.
And would God that this my labor might excite store up Set hand to it, o
ye y^ be learned.
and move other that far excel me in all kind of divine knowledge, and that
can handle the scriptures more learnedly tha^ I, to travail in the business of
Gods word, and so to set forth the sincer intelleccion and the right
understanding thereof, that the veil might be taken away from the eyes of all
men, and the true light shine universally without any impediment ii. Cor. iiii.
or let. There is much har Math. ix. Luke. x.
ueste, but few workmen. We had need therefore to pray unto ye Lord of y^
harvest, to send out laborers into his reap.

But me think, I se your Lord ship very desirous to hear some of David's
melody. I make an end desiring you most intierlye, fauourablye to accept
this my little gift, if not for my sake, yet for the love y^ ye have ever borne
unto Da uid, being not only an excellent Mu sicio^ and co^nyng Mynstrel, but
also a puyssau^t King and divine Prophet. God, whose holy word you most
feruentely love, and most earnestly practyse in your daily conversation,
moughte vouchesaufe to preserve your right honorable Lordshyp and that ver
tuous Lady your wife, with all your most sweet chil dren and family in
perpetual health and prosperous felicite.

Ame^.
David's Harp, The hundred and fyftene Psalm, call led in Latin, ^redidi
propter, with a fruytfull exposicio^ and godly declaracion of the same.
The first verse.
I believed / and therefore have I spoken / but I was very sore troubled.
THis first verse co^tayneth three striges of david's harp, which are theyse,
faith, confession of the faith, whereby are understand al good works, and
persecucion. These three therefore will I now, through the healpe of Gods
spirit, set in tune by right order.

The first string.
I Believed. Our first ^ayth is y^ first string of David's Harp, and y^
foundation of y^ chri sten religion.
yea and base string is faith, and that not with out an vrgente cause. For
here se we, that as the base part is the ground of the whole song, so is
faith the founda cion of all the christen religion. And as without the base, the
song is im perfect, and nothing worth, so like wise without faith all the
works that we do, are unprofitable glister they never so pleasauntly before y^
eyes of carnal men, and what so ever we sing after that sort, is clean out
of tune, as saint Paul says, what so ever is not grounded on Romans xiiii.
faith, is plain sin. Therefore says he in another place, it is not
possible to please God without faith. ^eb. x^
For he that commethe unto God, must believe that God is, and that he is a
rewarder to the^ that seek him. In these aforesaid textes of saint Three thyn
ges to be no ted.
Paul three thiges are to be noted. One is that he says, all that is not
grounded on faith, is sin. Where of we learn, that faith is the foun dacion
of all goodness, the mother and nourse of all good works. Another is, that
without faith it is not possible to plese god. The third that who so ever
comes unto god, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder to the^
that seek him. These thiges show manifesteli how connyng and excellent Musicion
our Mynstrel David is, which first set teth his base stryng in tune, before he
medlethe with any of the other. He follows not the manner of Antechrist,
Antichrist turns the roots of trees up ward.
which turns the roots of trees upward, neither is he like to them, which
begin first to bylde in the top of the house, and afterward lays the
foundation, or y^ would have the fruytes good, before there be any goodness
in the tree, but he does all things orderly. For he be ynge enspired with the
holy Ghost and doing al things by the instinct thereof, begins orderly of
faith, seeing yt what so ever is not groun Romans xiiii. Heb. xi.
ded on faith, is sin, seeing also yt without faith no man can please God, be
he never so glysteryng an Hypocrite before ye world, and put he on never so
glorious a viser of godlyke holiness. Faith must needs be ye base stringe and
foundation of the Christian religion, seeing that infidelite and un faythfulnes
is the destruction and utter decay thereof. For so long as faith remains, so
long does the Christen religion continue and prosper Mark well
well, but let faith be exiled, and unfaithfulness once invade the har tes of
Christen men, and the^ goes all to havoc, as we may se in our first
parents Adam and Eua, which so long as they believed the word G^n. iii.
of God and walked thereafter, prospered and lived right well, but wha they once
gave over yt, and fell unto incred^ lite, beleuyng the words of ye crafty
serpente, rather then the gentle admonicio^s of so bou^teous a lord, they
became subject, bo^de and thraul to all kind of miserye and wretchedness, so
that through their unfaithfulness co^ioyned with like disobedience, Roma. v.
not they them selves only fell into captivity, but also all their posteri te.
Now to be made free from this thrauldome, and to recover the liberty, which
before we lost through disobedient unfaithfulness, ye next and most redye way
is to believe, as David teachethe here, or else by no menes can we come unto God,
nor yet please him. For he yt comes to godsayth s. Paul, must believe. So
Heb. xi.
yt if we will come again to God, we must believe. But what shall we believe?
certes not only ye god is which thing the dyuels also do, but that Iaco. ii.
Marc. i. Ephe. ii.
he is a rewarder and beneficial father to the^ that seek him, as the Apostle
teachethe. For although we were dead through sin, and walked after the
fashon of this world, eue^ as me^ altogyther ungodly and whollye estraunged
from all goodness, yet has God, which is rytche in mercy, for his great
charity, wherwithe he loved us, quickened and made us alive again, yea and
that through Christ mat. iii. xvii Marc. i. xi. ii. Pet. i. Joan. iii. Romans
viii. Heb. ix. x. Psalm. cix.
in whom he has showed the exce^ dynge abundance and rytches of his grace,
for whose sake also he is well pleased with man, so that he spared not his own
soune, but gave him even unto the very death for our sake, that by that one
oblacion of his most blyssed body, an omnisufficient and perpetual sacrifice
for ever to endure all alone sufficient, should be offered for them that are
sanctified. These things to be true the holy scriptures show evidently
Therefore if we will be of God, and come unto him, we must not only beleu^ ye
God is, but yt al these thyn ges are true, and shall undoubtedly chaunse unto
us, as God has promised. For the true and christian faith cleaves fast to the
word of God only, and doubts nothing thereof, as S. Paul says, faith
co^methe Romans x.
by hearing, and hearing by ye word of God. Now as we ware lost before by
beleuynge Satan's deceatfull promises, so the only way to be saved is to believe
the sweet comfort a ble and infallible promises of God, which he has made to
us so plente ouslye in ye most precious blood of his derely beloved son o^re
Lord and savior Jesus Christ. For this faith makes us of the children of the
di uell, the sons of God, as S. John^ Joan. i.
testify the, so many as received hi^, he gave the^ power to be made ye son
nes of God, in as much as they be let on his name. Also S. Paul Gala. iii.
ye are all ye sons of God, because ye have beleuedi Christ Jesus. Now if by
faith, we be ye sons, of God than are we also heirs. Yea verily we are ye
heirs of god, and fellow hey res with Christ. Again by faith, Romans viii.
Gala. iiii. Oze. ii.
are we married unto god, as god himself witnesses by his Prophet say enge, I
will marye the unto me in faith. By faith also are we justified and made
ryghteous, as S. Paul Roma. v.
says, we bring justified by faith have peace with god through our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Thus se we what an excellent tresure this true and christen faith is, and how
by y^ all good things chau^se unto us, and without yt, all that ever Roma.
xiiii.
we do, must needs come to naught, and work to us damnacion. But seeing that I
have spoken much of faith in all my works almooste, which I have hitherto
set forth, I will now cease to speak any more Search the Christmas Ban^ket
in ye third dysh the Pathewaye unto Prayer in ye xvi. Chap. and ye Nosegaye in
the Second flower. etc.
of it at this present, and go forth with the residue of David's Harp, only
adding this one thing, that the faith, which the scripture so
hyghlyauaunceth, is no dead and vnfruit full faith, but lyuysh and mighty in
operacion, being always bent and seakynge an occasion to do good, and wha^ time
comes, is no less ready to bring forth good works, than a woman bygge with
child is ready to bring forth her child, when her time of delyuerau^ce is
once come, as it follows.

The second string.
And therefore have I spoken.
VUe heard before that faith is the foundation of the Christian Faith brin geth
forth good Worcester kes.
religion, the mother and nourse of all godly works. Which thing to be true,
our Mynstrell prouethe here. For after he has made mention of faith, he
syngeth also of good works. I believed, says he, and therefore have I spoken.
Here se we, that the true and christen faith works ever by charity, which
extends both Gala. v.
unto god and our neighbor. What was ye cause that David did speak? Uerely
his faith. I believed, says Faith is ye cause of all goodness.
he, and therefore have I spoken. Faith goes before, and works follow. For
first he believed al things to be true, which god promised him in the holy
scriptures or otherwise, as by ye mouth of his holy Prophets, and thereof
afterward ensewed a very earnest and fervent love toward god, which made him
to love god again, and to speak those things, whereby the glory of god was set
forth, and the health of his neighbor sought, so y^ by this menes he showed
himself perfectely faithful both before god and man. And this is it, that
saint Paul writes, it is believed with Roma. x. Mark well.
the heart unto ryghteousnes, but with the mouth is confession made unto health.
A christen man setting before the eyes of his mind the un mesurable goodness of
God toward us through his son Christ, and gyuynge earnest faith thereunto,
can none otherwise but love God again and seake all means possible to please
him, to work his will, and to do that which he requires of him. He is re die
at al times to bring forth good works after the example of David, as to speak
the mysteries of God, to set forth ye glory of God, to publysh his most holy
word, to bring all men to the true knowledge of God and even to engraffe the^
in the body of Christ. All these things works y^ quick and lyuysh faith in
him through the spirit of God. For faith Behold the nature of true and
christen faith.
will not suffer him to be idle, but al though through faith he be deliue red
out of captivity, made the son of God, justified already in the sight of God,
before he brings forth any outward good works, yet does this true and
christen faith kyndle such a love in his heart toward god and the fulfyllynge
of his commandments, that he has a perpetual desire in his mind to work
that which is good, and wha^ occasion is gi uen, he falls streytwayes to
workynge, not his own fantasy, but ye will of God. So that now he does not
only believe in God, and love God in his heart, but also bring for the those
works, which God has appointed him, as David says, I be leued, and therefore
have I spoken: As though he should say, for as much as I am fully persuaded of
ye bou^te and goodness of God toward me, and believe that all things are true,
and shall come to pass undoubtedly according to his promise, I can none
otherwise do but work, and speak those things that pertayne unto his glory,
do what so ever should make unto the magnifienge of his most blyssed name,
and the edifienge of my neighbor, though an hundred deaths were im^inent and
han gynge on my head for so doing. Every tree is known, says Christ, Math.
xi^. Luke. vi.
by his fruit. For there is no good tree, that bri^geth forth euel fruit,
neither is there any evil tree, that brings forth good fruit. A good man
bryngethe for the good fruit out of the good tresure of his heart, and an evil
man out of the evil trea sure of his heart, brings forth evil things. For
of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks.

We read in the Acts of the Apo stles, that when Peter and John^ were
commanded of the Bishops and prestes, yt they should speak no more to any
man, nor teach in the name of Jesus christ, they au^wered bold ly and said,
whyther it be ryghteous in the sight of god to hear you ra there than god,
judge ye. For we can Act. iiii.
none otherwise do but speak those things, that we have seen or heard. Mark
that they said, we can do none otherwise but speak. How chau^sed it yt Peter
(as I may speak nothing of John^) was now bold Math. x^vi Mar. xiiii. Luke.
xxii. Joan. xviii.
to speak, and confess the name of Christ without fear before the head
prestes and magistrates of ye Temple which not many months paste, was not
only afearde to confess him before a poor maid, but also forsware Christ,
denied him utterly, and said plainly he never knew ye man? How commethe it
to pass, yt Peter is now become another man? Before he had no commaundeme^te
of the Bishops to speak no more of Christ, and yet he utterly denied him, and
now when he is commanded Act. iiii.
to hold his peace, he will not, but answers boldly, we can none otherwise
do but speak those things, y^ we have seen and heard. How comes this to
pass? Uerely of the great efficacy, virtue, strength, and power of his faith,
which God had given him by his holy spirit. His Math. xvi.
faith was now so steadfast on God and his love so ferue^te, that the gates of
hell could not prevail against him, nor drive him from doing those things,
that should make unto ye glory of God, and the health of his neighbor, as we
may perceue by the History. For notwithstondyng the commandment of the
Bishop ^es, he went forth and preached in y^ name of Christ, and converted
many unto the christen faith, and when the head prestes said unto him and unto
y^ other Apostles, did not we straightly command you, that ye should not teach
in this name? And behold ye have filled Jerusalem full of your doctrine, and ye
will bring ye blood of this man upon us. Peter and the Act. v. Gene. xxvi.
Exo. xv. Deu. xi. xxx Actum. v.
other Apostles answered and said: We must obey God rather the^ me^.
Afterward also when they were whypped, and so sent away, receauig a
commandment, that they should no more speak in ye name of Jesus, they went
away from the sight of the council, reioycynge and being glad, that they ware
counted worthy to suffer rebuke for the name of Christ. And for all the
co^masideme^t of y^ Bishops they ceased not day ly both in ye temple and in
every house to teach and to show Jesus Christ.

Here se we both by our Mistrell david, and the apostles of Christ, how Note.
mighty in power the true and christian faith is and that it is never without yt
consent of doing good works, and when occasion is offered, it works in deed,
yea and that those works, which are commanded of God.

Let every man now consither his own faith, and take heed he be An admoni
cion for Faith.
not deceaned. Many in these our days glory much of the name of faith, and
contend maynly, that we are justified only and freely by faith, yea and that
without works. Let no man deceive him self. Faith, I co^ fesse, is an
excellent treasure, and the gift of God, without the which no man can be
saved, nor obtain onye part of Christ's merits, butte yette for all that, if
it be not accompanyedde with a continual purpose of doige good works, yea
and also bring the^ forth, when occasion is given, surely it is but a vain
and dead faith, as S. James wryghteth, Ia^ob. it Galla.. v.
yea to say the truth, it is no faith in deed, at the least no true, li uish
and christen faith, which is migh ty in operacion and works by chari te. We
se manifest fruytes follow the faith of David and the Apostles. Let us also
bring forth good works, and so may we be sure, that we have in us the true
and christian faith, which is so precious a thing in the sight of God.

Art thou a magistrate and gouer Rulare.
noure of the common weal? If you will show thy self to have true faith in
god, bring forth good worcester kes, and such as become thy office and calling.
Exercise justice. Do no wrong. Be merciful. Spoil not the poor man. Help
the conforteles. Ponyshe vice, maintain virtue. So shalt thou be assured to
hau the true and christian faith in the.

Art thou a Bishop or Priest? preach the word of God purelye. Bishop or
Priest.
Set forth the glory of God above all things. Seake the salvation of Christ's
flock. Be an example to thy parishners of honest and godly co^ uersacion.
Exhort unto virtue. Fraye away from vice. If you doste this, than nedeste thou
not doubt of thy faith.

Art thou a father or mother, Father or Mother. Master or Mastres
master or mastres? Bring than up thy family in the nourtoure of the Lord, and
so art you truly faithful.

Art thou a married man? Look Married man.
thou cleave only to thy wife, love her as thine own flesh, and as christ
loved the Congregation. So shall thy faith appear to be unfeigned.

Art thou a married woman? Be obedient to thine own husbonde, Married woman.
and seake above all things to please him, and so shalt thou show thy self
to be truly faithful.

Art thou a subject or servant? Subject or servant.
Obey than with a glad and humble heart thy superiors, rulers and masters. So
shalt thou be found not unfaithful.

To be short, i^ what so ever state God has set the, live according A
general admonicion for all estates.
thereunto, and in thy office and calling seake evermore the glory of God, and
the health of thy neighbor. If you doste this, tha^ shalt thou show thy self
to be no vain man, but faithful and true in thy profession. But if thou doste
the contrary, crake thou never so much of thy faith, yet te does it profyt
the nothing at all, but rather increases thy damnacion, seeing thou art an
Hypocrite and dissembler both before God and man. Certes if thou have the true
faith in the, thou shalt be so enflamed with Behold^ what. (...) true fay^
worketh^ Christ^n ^an. Rom viii.
the love of God, and disposed unto all goodness that thou will not fear to
say with S. Paul, who shall separate us from the love of God: shall trouble do
it? or anguysh? or persecucion? or hunger? or nakedness? or perrell? or sword?
as it is written, for thy sake are we killed all y^ day long, y^ we are
counted as sheep appointed to be slain. Nevertheless Psalm. ^iii.
in all these things we ouerco^e far re, for his sake yt loved us For I am
sure, yt neither death nor life, another Aungel, nor rule, another power, no there
things present, another things to come, another height nor low eth, nor any
other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. Again he says, I am not Act. xxi.
only ready to be bound, but also to dye for ye name of the Lord Jesus. So
mighty a thing is faith, that it neither fears manacinge words, cruel
threats, sharp looks, empresoning, fetters, chenes, faggot tes, fire, nor
what so ever tyranny all the tyrauntes of the world can invent. It makes ye
parson, whose heart it occupies, to be so^ flamed and set on fire with the love
of God, and the Persecucio^ follows y^ confession of Gods word.
desire of doing his will. Will you hear me? If thou believe aright in God and
workeste according to thy faith, co^fessyng Christ and his word boldly and
unfeignedly before the world, thou may be sure to find little favor at the
hands of carnal and worldly men, as thou shalt easly perceive by that which
follows.

The third string.
But I was very sore troubled.
AFter that our Mynstrel has made mencio^ of faith and of spe king the word
of God (whereby are to be understand all good works that proceed and come
forth out of faith) he now syngethe of the Cross, and shows that he was
very sore troubled, grievously thretened, uncharitably blasphemed, evil
reported, maliciously persecuted, cru elly handled, and suffered al kinds of
torments for vtteryng and declaring ye word of God. I believed, says he and
therefore have I spoken, but I was very sore troubled. Here se we that as good
works follow faith, so does persecucion follow the confession of Gods word.
For this cause does S. Paul caull the gospel of i. Cor. i.
Christ, the word of the Cross, because it brings persecucion, trou ble,
blasphemies, slanders, evil re ports, empresonme^t, ho^ger, thirst, cold,
nakedness, pouerte, loss of fren des, yea and at the last very death oftentimes
to so many as cleave unto it valeauntly. Christ's word and the Cross are
co^pagnions insepera Note.
ble. As the shadow followethe the body, so does the Cross follow the word
of Christ. And as fire and heat can not be separated, so can not the Gospel of
Christ and the cross be pluc ked asunde^. Let us call to remembrance so many
as from the first age of the world favored god and his word, and howmanye
shall we fid y^ escaped wtoute the Cross one way or other? as I may leave of
to speak of all the other old and aunciente Patriarchs, and at this time
only take ryghteous Abell for an example, which of all men showed ye first
example of pure innocencye and of a thankful heart toward God for his
benefits, was not he shortly Gene. iiii.
slain of his bloody brother cruel Cain, yea and that only because his own
works were naught, and his i. Joan. iii.
brothers good, as ye scripture testi fieth As fire and water put together The
good and the evil. can (...) agree.
fight, strive and are ever at debate, till one has swallowed up another
devoured one another, overcome one another, so likewise so long as good and
evil dwell together in this world, there shall be a perpetual discension
between them. The euel will ever hate the good, and never be at rest till the
innocent be had out of the way, not that the good does Note this well.
any displeasures unto the euel, but that the evil can not away with the
good, no more the^ the ravening wolf can away with the poor harmeles
sheep, or the ho^gry hawk with the simple dove, as Christ says, The Prince of
this world comes, Joan. xiiii
and yet has he nothing against me How little favor also did Moses and
Aaron find among the diso bedient Jews after they brought Exo. xvi. and.
xvii.
them out of captivity from ye land of Egipte? Were not they many ty mes in
danger of their lives for all their labor and pain that they took for their
health and salvation? How ware the Prophets handled, Math. v. Luke. xiii.
iiii. Esd. i. Mat. xxiii. Heb. xi. ii. P^ xxiiii
which preached in the name of the Lord? Were not so^e stoned to death? So^e
slain with swerd? Some sawne in pieces? As I mayepasse over ma ny holy me^, Jacob,
Joseph, David Helias, Ananias, Azarias, Misael Tobias, Eleazarus, the mother
among (...). Man. vii. Exo xii. Joan. i. i. Petre. ii. ^say. liii. i. Joan.
iii. ii. Cor. v Math. xi. Luke. vii. Joan. viii. x Mat. xvii. Mark. xv. Luke.
^xii. Joan. ix. Mat ix. xii Marc. i.
the Machabites, and her seven sons, with other innumerable, which either
suffered death, or else great trouble and persecucion for the glory of God:
How was Christ yt lamb of God without spot which did never no syn, in whose
mouth there was never any gyle and deceat found handled in this world? How was
he rayled upon so sone as he began to speak and preach the word of his
celestial father? Was he not called a glotton? A wine bybber? A friend to
Publica^s, harlottes and sinners? A deceyuer of the people? A mad person? A
Samaritan? A breaker of the Sabbath day? A Heretyke? A destroyer of the Temple?
An ene my to our mother the holy church? A Traytoure? A forbydder to pay
tribute unto Caesar? And such a one as would mar altogyther, if he were
suffered long? Was he not reported to work his miracles and to cast out devils
by the help of Beel zebub prince of the dyuelles? Was not his doctrine counted
new lear nynge? What did he at any time, although never so good and godly, yt
the world did not disco^mend and condemn? Did not their malice at the last
grow unto such fury, that they never ceased, until they Phil. ii. Mark.
had put him unto death, yea and that the most spiteful death, yt could be
invented, even the death of the cross, hanging him between two thieves, as ye
principal malefactor and chief captain of all wickedness? Again how were the
Apostles of Christ entreated? Uerely even as their master was before the^.
How often were they slau^dered, laid watch Act. iiii v. xiii. xiiii. Act. xii.
Act. vii.
for thretened, beaten, whypped scourged, put in preson, cast out of cities,
stonned, and dragged out of the towns for dead? How many also of them were
slain? Some with stones, some with sweard, some other wise? How were both they
and their doctrine blaspemed and evil spoken of? Were not they reported and
accused Ac. xvi. xvii.
before the magistrates, princes and rulers, that they were such pesti ferous
fellows, as troubled the common weal, yea all the world, made insurreccions,
raised up sedicions, gathered together unlawful assem blies, wrought contrary
to the decre es of Caesar, making another king even Christ? Were not they
called vain bablers? Tidings bearers of new dyuels? Sowers of strau^g and
new doctrine? It is therefore no new thing for the prechers of god des word
and the earnest lovers of ye holy Scripture to be thus rayled upon,
slaundered, evil spoken of, per secuted, and put to death even for the glory
of God and showing of ye truth What need I rehearse the innume rabble companies
of ye holy martyrs, Martyrs.
which syns the Apostles time for ye testimony and witness of Gods word have
suffered great persecucio^, and at the last cruel death? Read ye Hystories,
who yt lysteth, and he shall sone perceive, that persecucio^ has ever
Persecucio^ makes Gods word and the church of Christ to floryshe.
followed the true preaching of god des word, and that ye church of Christ
has tha^ most floryshed in all kind of virtue, and the christen faith been
most strong, wha^ there was most extreme persecucion. For the blood of the
holy martyrs is the water, wherewith ye gospel of Christ is wa tered and made
to grow. So that per secucion hyndreth not the glory of the gospel, as the
Nerolyke Tyrau^ Behold.
tes judge, but furdereth it greatly And where most persecucion is, there
does Gods word most of al florysh. Nothing hyndreth ye faith of Christ so
much, as carnal securite and flesshly quietness. For where all things are
according to the appe
tite and desire of ye flesh, there raygne beastlyke ma^ners, there is no care
of God, no inuocacion of the LORDS name, no study of divine religi on, no
meditacion in the holy scriptures, no regard of the poor people, no desire of
innocent life. But when persecucion once comes for the word of God, than is
God called upon with most hearty and ferue^prayers, than are the holy
scriptures searched, than do men study for the amedment of life, than do they
seek ye acco^plishment of gods most holy will, than are they altogether
desirous of celestial things, and utterly contemn and set at naught We
ought to reiose in the time of persecution.
what so ever pleseth the eyes of carnal men in this world. Therefore when
persecucion comes for righteousness sake, let us not despair, but make our
selves conformable to the will of God, rejoice and be me ry. Let us set before
our eyes the ex amples of Christ and of all his church, even from the
beginning of the world, Abel, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the people of Israel in
Egipte, David, Josias, the Prophets and apostles. We must, says S. Paul Romans
viii.
be made like unto the image of the son of God. If our elder brother Christ
possessed not the eternal enheretaunce, but by the Cross, shall we that are
of a meaner sort thike to enjoy it after a more easy sort? To whom is this
saying unknown. By many tribulacio^s we must Act. xiiii.
enter into the kingdom of God. Christ bare the cross, but he bare it not
away with him, but left it here behynd him to be borne of us also, if we will
be his Disciples, as he says, if any man comes unto me, and hatethe not his
father and mother, Luke. xiiii.
wife, children and systers, yea and his own life, he ca^ not be my disciple.
And who so ever bearethe not his Math. x. Luke. vi. Joan. xiii. xv.
cross and comme the after me, he can not be me disciple. The disciple is not
above the master, nor the servant above his Lord. It is enough that the
disciple be like his master, and the servant like his Lord. If they have
called ye father of ye house hold Beelzebu^, how much more shall they so call
them, that be of his household? If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me
before you. Because ye are not of ye world, but I have chosen you out of ye
world, therefore does the world hate you. Remember the word that I said unto
you, the servant is not greater the^ his Lord. If they have per secuted me,
they shall also persecute you. If they have kept my word, they shall also
keep yours. But all these things shall they do to you for my names sake,
because they have not known him, that has sent me. Uerely verily I say
unto you, ye shall weep and lamente, but Joan. xvi.
the world shall rejoice. Ye shall be sad, but your sadness shall be turned into
joy. In the world ye shall have affliccion and trouble, but be on a good
comfort, for I have overcome the world. Blessed are they yt suffer persecucion
for righteousness sake, for unto them belongs the king dome of heaven.
Blyssed are ye, when me^ shall revile you and persecute you, Math. v.
and speak every evil word against you, lyenge for my sake. Rejoice and be
merry, for great is your reward in heaven. S. Peter also says, dear i. Pet.
iiii.
lie beloved marvel not, when ye be proved by fire, which thing is done to
try you, as though some strange and new thing chaunsed unto you, but
rather rejoice i^ that ye are partakers of the passions and troubles of
Christ, that when his glory shall appear, ye may also be merry and rejoice.
If ye be reuyled for the name of Christ, blyssed are ye, for the spirit,
which is the spirit of glory and of God, rests upon you Hereto pertaynethe
the saying of ii. Tim. ii.
S. Paul, this is a true fayenge, if we be dead with him, we shall live with
him also. If we suffer together we shall also reygne with him. If we deny him,
he also shall deny us. If we be unfaithful, yet abydethe he faithful, he can
not deny him self.

Of all these scriptures it is evident, Persecucio^ is a token of Gods love
toward us.
that it is no sorrowful, but joy full thing to suffer persecucio^ for
ryghteousnes sake, for the glory of God, and the promocion of his most
blyssed word. Neither is it a token of gods wrath, but rather of his sin
gulare benevolence and high good will toward the^, which are troubled for his
sake. For if they be hap pie, to whom it is given to believe in Christ, how
much more happy and fortunate are they, to whom it is not only given to
believe in him, but also to suffer for him. S Paul Phil. i.
rejoiced greatly in the Philippia^s because it was given them, not on ly to
believe in Christ, but also to suf fer for his sake. For hereby are they assured
to be Christ's disciples, and are abundantly certified that God loves them,
carethe for them, and has prepared for them a glorious and celestial
mansion. Read the. xii. chapter to the Heb. for thy comfort.

Therefore as David techethe us here, let us first believe steadfastly in God, and
afterward confess that open ly before the world, which we believe Math. x.
Marc. viii. Luke. ix. and. xii.
in our hearts, remembrynge these words of Christ, who so ever shall confess
me before men, I will confess him also before my father, which is in heaven.
But who so ever shall deny me before men, I shall deny him also before my
father, which is in heaven. And if it be the will of our heavenly father, that
we be persecuted, troubled, and greuouslye vexed for y^ confession of his
truth, let us not therefore fear to confess the Lord Christ, but as good
soldiers ii. Tim. ii.
of Jesus Christ, valeauntly suffer affliccio^, yea very death, if the glory of
God so requirethe, being assuredlye persuaded, that by this means not only
God shall be great ly glorified, and his holy gospel large ly promoted, but
also yt we for this short trouble shall receive perpetu all rest, for this
corruptible life, im mortal glory, for the vain pleasu res of this world
eternal felicite and everlasting joy worlds with out end. Amen.

But let us hear what David spoke, that he was so sore troubled.

The second verse.
I said being as it ware in a traunse / every man is a lyare.
The fourth string.
NO marvel in deed though our Mynstrell David says, What the occasion was
yt David was so foretroubled
that he was sore troubled for speaking. For he syngethe a very homely song
little pleasant and sweet to the ears of beastlyke, carnal and flesshely
men. Who can abide to be called a liare, yea and that without any reverence
taken? yet he shameth not to speak universally, and to say that every man is
a liar, without excepcion. Surely me thyncke that David wants here ye chief
point The chief point of a Mynstrel and of a syn gynge man is to lie and
flatter.
of a Mynstrell and of a syngyng man, which is to lie and flatter, or at the
least to fasshon his song according unto the audience, and with his singing to
please so many as hear him. Is David now become a man of so ly tle
experience, that he thinks the holy Pharisees, the wise Scribes, the learned
Bishops, the devout Prestes, the godly rulars of ye temple. etc. could be
contented to be called liars, which would be noted tho row out all the world
to be ye pri^ci pall teachers of all verite and truth, and alone to have ye
key of knowledge Undoubtedly David kept sheep to long for to be a Mynstrell to
such delycate and soft religious parsons. But David was a good plain, si^ple,
and homely man brought up in y^ country, and endewed with that spirit, wherewith
S. Paul was, when he Gala, i.
said, If I did please me^, I should not be the servant of Christ^. For eue^
as John^ Baptist, when he saw many of ye Pharisees and Saduces co^ Math. iii.
Luke. iii.
myng unto his baptism, called the^ the generacio^ of vipers for all their
glysteryng hypocrysy and feigned holiness, and as Christ called y^ Scribes Math.
xxiii
and Pharisees blind gydes, strayning out a gnat but swalowing up a ca mel,
painted sepulchers, outward ly in apperaunce righteous before me^, but
i^wardly full of hypocrisy and iniquite, and as S. Paul called Ana Act. xxiii.
nias ye high priest a painted wall, because more like a bocher than a Bishop,
he commanded them that stood about him to smite Paul on the mouth contrary
to al equite and justice, when he should have pour ged himself before the
council of the Articles laid against him, eue^ so David can none otherwise but
call him yt is a liar, a lyare in deed. He can not bear fire in one hand and
water in the other. He can not play placebo. He is none of those, that say
all is well, when altogyther is stark naught. He is no dissembler, his heart
and his tongue goes together. He is as plain as a pack staff. For as the
truth is, so speaks he, having respect neither to the parson nor to the
time. He seakethe the glory of God, and not to satisfy the vain fantasy of
man. He had rather suffer great rebuke, much trouble, extreme persecucio^,
yea very death, than that Gods glory should in any part be obscured through
his faynynge flattery. God send us fewer gnathos and mo AMEN. good Lord
David's. But let us return to our song.

I said being as it were in a traunse, says he, every man is a ly are.
Before David confesses that enery man is a lyare, it is to be noted that he
says, he was in a trau^s that is to say, in a da^pe, a stupour, abasshement,
and soden preuacion of sense or fealyng, as when a man is so rapte into another
kind or state that he forgets himself, or seems to be in another world, as
they use to say. For all this does the greek word Ecstasis sound. A like
thing we read of S. Paul in the second Epistle to the Corinthians. ii. Cor.
xii.


It is necessary in deed, y^ David What David's tra^s signyfye.
should be in this Ecstasy and trau^ce that is, that he should be transformed
into another man, renewed by the holy ghost, illumined with divine knowledge,
lyfted up to y^ co^te^plac^ on of heavenly things, and have his mi^d wholly
rapte and plucked from carnali te unto spiritual and ghostlye matters, or
else could he never have confessed this infallible truth, that every man is
a lyare. For a natural man does not perceive those things that pertayne unto
y^ spirit of God. For they are folyshnes unto him, neither ca^ he understand
the^, because they be spiritually iud i. Cor. ii. Math. xii.
ged. How can a man speak good things, wha^ he him self is evil? Can
blessyng and cursyng come both out of one mouth? Does a fou^tayn Lnke. vi.
Jacob. iii.
send for the at one place sweet water and bitter also? Can a fygge tree ^eare
Olyue berys, either a vine bear figs? Of the abundance of the heart, the
mouth speaks. He Joan. iii..
that is of the earth, is earthly, and speaks of the earth, but he whom god
has sent, speaks the words of God. Every man speaks, as he is. The
children of truethe, speak truth, and the sons of a lying seed speak lies
and falshode. Now is david no moresuch a man, as of nature is a lyare, butte
he is regenerate, and borne anewe of ye holy ghost, and is no moreof yt false
and lying seed, which de ceyueth according to the nature, Joan. viii.
ingeny and proper^e of Satan, which is a lyare, and the father of all lyinge,
and therefore confessethe he now another tale, than he would have done before
his regeneracio^ and new birth He would before have glorified in The nature of
flesh.
himself, in his flesh, in his blood, in his strength, wisdom, polecy,
riches, holiness, good works, and all that ever he did, (for that is the na
ture of al flesh) and have fought man fully against them that condemn the
Hypocrisy, feigned holiness, iniquite and unrighteousness of the flesh but now
being nourtered in the discipline of Gods truth, he freely grauntethe every
man of his own nature to be nothing but a lyare which thing S. Paul also
affirms in his Epistle to the Romans. Romans iii. What we are of ou^ selves.


Hereof may we learn what we are of our selves, how blind and unapt of
our own nature to aspire, breath, or come to any point of true godlynes and
godly truth with out the inspiracio^ of Gods spirit. It is not without a cause
said of Genesis vi.
God, My spirit shall not dwell for ever in man, for he is flesh, If we be
left unto our selves, than are we nothing but liars, that is to say Note.
beastlyke, wicked, folyshe, ungodly, thinking all abhominacion, breathynge
all noughtynes, speaking all wickedness, doing all mischefe, and even such
without faynynge as we were leafte of our first father Adam after the
tra^sgressio^ of Gods Gene. iii.
precepte, that is to say, naked, void of all goodness, replete with all evil.
Therefore before we can sa Search the News out of heaven.
uour aright any godlynes, and work yt which is accceptable in the sight of
God, and healthful to our souls, we must be in this trance, into the which
David was cast, we must be tra^sformed into another nature, and lyfted up unto
the contemplacion of divine and celestial things. But Psalm. ^xv. Romans iii.
ii. Cor. iii
this can not come to pass of our own strengthes, which are liars of our
selves, and not able to thyncke a good thought, but by the help of gods
spirit, which workethe in us both the will and the deed. For Christ Phil. ii.
Joan. vi. Esaias. ^iii. iii Iere. xxxi.
says, no man can come unto me, except my father drawethe him, and I shall
reyse him up at the last day. It is written in the Prophettes, Al shall be
taught of God. Every one therefore that has heard of the father, and has
learned, comes unto Joan. xv.
me. I gain, without me ye can do no thing. When Peter confessed Christ to
be the son of the living God, he said unto him: Blyssed art Math. xvi.
thou Simon the son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has not openned that unto
the, but my father which is in heaven.

Here se we that flesh and blood, y^ is, all that ever we have of our selves,
and of our forfather synful Ada^, ca^ not: attain unto the intelligence of the
divine mysteries, and understanding of Gods truethe, except we Joan. vi.
be drawn of the father by his holy spirit. Now that we may therefore come
unto this true knowledge of God, and of his truth, let us pray with that
spouse. Draw me after y^ so shall we ron in ye sweet sauourof Cant. i.
thine oyntme^tes. So shall we be su re not only to beco^e new me^, but al so with
a free and wylling heart grant with David that every man is a lyare.

Every man is a lyare, says he. This is to be understand before he How every
man is a ly^e.
be regenerate and borne anew by the second birth, not in Adam, but in Christ.
For so many as have put of the old man Adam, and put on y^ new man Christ, so
many are no more me^ if we have respect unto their spiri tuall regeneracion,
but Gods, as y^ holy scripture says ye are gods and all of you are the sons
of y^ most Psalm. ^xxxi Joan. x
hygheste. But all that have not on the Lord Jesus Christ, remain still
liars, and all that ever they do or speak wtoute Christ and his most holy
word, is nothing but a very lie, and mere fansy, a mad dotage, seems it never
so true in ye judge me^t of carnal reason. And this false and lyenge corrupcion
comes not of God (for God is not the Author of Psalm. v. Jacob. i.
sin, nor one that wylony vnrigh teousnes, neither tempts he any man unto
evil, as s. James says) but of Satan the mortal enemy of mankind, which
lying full craftily Genesis iii.
unto Eve, and sowyng this seed in her, and she in Ada^, and Adam in all his
posterite, brought us into this damnable and false lyinge state, so that by
nature, as S. Paul says. We are all borne the sons of wrath, and all Ephe.
ii.
that ever we do of our selves without the spirit of God, is lyinge, false,
Joan. iii.
wicked, unfaithful, and detestable be fore God, as Christ testifies, That
which is borne of flesh, is flesh. Also S. Paul, All that is not grounded on
faith, is sin. Romans xiiii.


Of this salse and lying seed was Genesis iiii.
Cain, which s^ewe his brother Ab^ Liars of ye old Te^tament.
with innumerable mo of ye old Te stament, even so many as attempted any
thing at all contrary to God des most holy will, as banyshyng Gods word,
sheddyng innocent blood, killing the true Prophettes of God, setting up
straung worcester shyppynges of new Idols, proclamynge other gods, tha^ the one and
alone God of Israel. etc. In the new Testament also there ware many li Liars of
y^ new Test.
ars, as Bishops, head prestes, pre stes, masters of the Temple, Lawers
Scribes, Pharisees, Saduces with an innumerable company of Jews, which all
resisted Christ, condemned his preaching, obscured the glory of his miracles,
hyndred y^ honor of God, belied the verite of Gods word, slaundered the
gospel, blasphemed Christ and his Apostles, never ceasyng until they had
brought both him and his unto their final destruction as they thought. After
Liars after the apostles time.
the^ did there arise a great swarm of pestilente liars, as Heretykes,
Schismatykes, and false Christians. Of this number was Ebion, Marcion, and
Cherinthus, which denied Christ to be God from everlasting agenst whom S.
John^ did write his Gospel: Catarus and Nouatus, which affirmed, that they
which did fall after Baptism ought not to be received again, neither can
they obtain remission of their sins: Eutiches, which denied Christ to be
both God and man: Montanus Marcion, and Manicheus which condemned both
marriages and meats, as things vnpure: Arrius, Pelagius, Artemo^, Sabellius,
Paulus Samosetanus, with other i^numerable, which did sow much division in the
church of Christ, and brought in many pestilent and detestable heresis. All
theyse ware liars, because they were without the spirit of god, and invented
sects and opinions of their own brains without y^ authorite of Gods word,
so easy a thing is it for men to err, to deceive and to be deceived, when
they lean not to ye holy scriptures, but to their own judgments and
fantasies.

And would God that all lyinge were only found in them, whom I have rehearsed
hitherto, tha^ were it well with Christ's church. But who that ever lived,
Christ alone except, has not showed himself in some point to be a man,
that is to say, a liar? Peter confessed christ to be the son of the living
God, Mat. xvi.
and therefore was he called blissed, and promised that against that confession
of his faith, hell gates should not prevail, yet when he afterward Math. xxvi
denied Christ and forsware him, he showed himself to be a man, that is, a
very lyare, so feeble and of no strength are we, if we be not endew ed with
valeaunce, might, and power from above. I here freely confess, yt next unto
the holy scriptures, I The myud of ye autho^ concerning ye Doctors
owe the chief and principal honor to the writings of the Catholyke
Doctors, to whom I cleave as un to an holy Ancker, whom I follow as great
lyghtes to show me how I may walk in ye way of truth, whom I reverence
as my most faythefull teachers, yet dare I not approve and allow them in all
things, The Doc tors also are liars in so^e points
because in some points they have showed themselves men, and have manifestly
erred against the open truth of Gods word, as it is not unknown to them,
that be dilligent ly exercised in the readyng of their works. And for an
example I will here rehearse. ii. or. iii. not to their re proche, but to
admonysshe all men, what we are of our selves and that no man should be sworn
and wholly addicte to the doctrine and teaching of any man, be he never so
holy and learned, except it agrees with the holy Scriptures.

Orige^ was undoubted a famous Doctor, and did write very excellent Origin.
ly of diverse matters concerning ye purite of christen religion, yet showed he
himself to be a man and very lyare, when he feigned that the pay nes of the
dyuels and of the damned should cease in time to come, and that they should be
saved.

Tertullian was a man of great Tertullian
learning, and did write many things very godly, yet did he err, when he
condemned the second marriages in a christen man. He makes his argu meant on
this manner: Thou may not mary the wife of thy brother being dead. He that
maryeth a wy dowe left of a christen man, maryeth the wife of his brother
being dead. Ergo he does not well. This and certain other things he writes
not very godly, showing him self to be a very man, that is to say a lyare.

Cypriane was an excellent clar ke, and died for the faith of Christ Cyprian.
leaving many godly worckes behynd him, yet did the ancient fathers of
Christ's church condemn this his opinion, that they, which were baptized of
Heretykes, ought to be baptized again.

I pass over many other ecclesiastical writers, which want not their
errors, neither have they in all points so circumspectely writ ten, but that
their faults may easly be perceived of them, that have whole, true, good and
pure iudgemen tes in the holy scripture. For they have declared the^ selves not
in few things to be men and liars, therefore are they to be believed no further,
Mark.
than the word of God mayntayneth them. That which they have written well,
let us receive and give God thanks for it, confessing that it came to pass by
the instincte of his most holy Spirit, and not by their own polecy, wit,
reason, eloquence and learning. But y^ wherein they have erred, let us
charitably^ enterpret, take it into y^ best part, and cover their faults,
consythering that they were men, and both might and deed err, as S. Austen
with other dydboth confess, grant and write of them selves.

And this I desire all men that be ghostely learned, and walk after y^ order
of charity to understand also The protestacion of the Author concerning his
works
of all my works, which I have hy thereto written, or shall here after, if the
will of God so be, and to believe them no further tha^ the holy scripture
testifye that they be true.

For I am a man and a lyarre of my self, and therefore may I err so well as
mannye learnedde and ancient Doctors have done before me. Let God alone be
true, and every Romans iii.
man a lyare. Let the spirit of charity and not of co^tencion reygne among
us. If we err, let us charitably monysshe one another, bear one with another,
instruct one ano there, and not streightwayes furiously condemn what so ever at
the first blushe lyketh not our carnal judge mentes, no nor yet at every little
fault be ready to cast the ignorant offenders into preson, chenes, stocks and
fire. If any man does not of ^end with his tongue, says S. James Jacob. iii.
he is a perfect man. Let us follow the long sufferaunce of God, which
^acie^tly abides our amendment. Act. viii.
If God had taken away Paul out of this life, when so tyrau^tlyke he
^ersecuted the Church of Christ, ^aule had never be made of a wolf a lamb,
of a persecutoure an Apostle, of a blasphemer a true precher, of an Heretyke
ketcher, a faithful Evangelist. They that are strong Romans (...) ^ia. vi.
ought to bear the weakness of the^ that be infirm and weak and not to stand
in their own conceates. They ought so to order the^ selves, that they should
please their neygh bour unto his wealth and edifienge. For Christ pleased not
him self. Wherefore we ought to receive one another, even as Christ has recea
ued us unto the glory of God, and to bear one another burden, seeing that we
be all members of one body, and have one head, which is Jesus Christ.

Besides these aforsayd, the ungodly Liars of out time.
Bishop of Rome and al his wic ked kygedome are liars, and all their decrees,
acts, laws, constitucio^s, councelles. etc. that sight with god des word,
are lies, and very mad ^an tafies, by no means to be believed of any faithful
heart.

Again all Hypocrites, Sacramentaries, Anabaptists, and all authors of false
sects, are liars. To conclude, so many as dissente from God and his most
blyssed word, are liars, whither it be in doctrine, tea chyng, living,
manners, conversation or otherwise.

Thus se we what we are of our selves, eue^ very liars, and into what great
captivity we be thrown tho row Ada^, and that we can not by our own
strengthes be delivered from this bondage, but only by the spirit of him,
which says. If ye son ma Joan. viii
keth you free, tha^ are ye fre in deed. For where the spirit of the LORD ii.
^or. iii. Joan. ^iiii. and ^vi. 1. Joan. ii.
is, there is liberte. Therefore that we may have that vnccion and an noyntyng
in us, I mean the holy Ghost, y^ may teach us all truth, we must with
continual prayers resort unto our heavenly father: Luke. xi. Math. vii. Romans
x. Joan. iiii.
which undoubtedly will give a good spirit, to so many as ask it of him.
For he is a beneficial Lord sufficiently rytch for so many as call on him in
spirit, and truth, as it follows.

The third verse.
Uvhat shall I give again unto the Lord for all those things / that he has
given me.
The fyfte string.
AFter that our Mynstrell David has diligently pondered with hiselfe, what he
is of his own nature, even a very lyare, and one that is replete with all
sin and iniquite, thynkyng, breathynge, speaking and doing all that ever is
naught and unthankful in the sight of God, and when on the othersyde he has
again considered how that God of his mere marcy, fre bounte and unspeakable
goodness has deliue red him from all these greuo us enor mities without his
merits or deser tes, he begins now to delighte no more in carnal and
tra^sitory thin ges, but in spiritual and heavenly things, and weyeth,
pondreth, and con siderethe how he may show him self thanckefull again
unto God for ye innumerable benefits, which he has received at y^ hand of
God. What shall I give again, says he, unto the LORD for all those things,
that he has given me? O kind and thanckefull heart, far estraunged from al
ingratitude and vntha^ke fulness. He knowethe full well, that to recompense and
make God amends for y^ kyndnes that he has showed unto him, it lies not in
his power, notwithstanding he desires very greatly to do somewhat, whereby he
may show his thanckefull heart again toward God. For he confess seth that all
that ever he has being good, he received it of God, as S. Paul says: What
have thou, y^ (...). Lor. iiii.
thou have not receued? If thou have received it, why doste thou rejoice as
though you had not receued it? S. James also says: Every good Jacob. (...).
and perfect gift is from above, com mynge down from the Father of lyghtes.

On this manner ought we to We ought^ ^ut to set before our (...) ye been
fytes of god
po^der with our selves the inestima ble benefits and great gifts of God
toward us. First that he made us not like to brute beasts, but like unto his
own image, neither did he place us in hell, or in some other dolorous and
sorowefull place, but in joyful Paradise, where all kind of pleasures did
abound. He endewed Genesis 1.
us with wit, reason, discrecion, pru dence, wisdom, knowledge and with al
other things, that should move Gene. (...).
us unto godlynes and virtue, setting us at our own liberte to do what so
ever we would, only he gave us a commandment to abstain from the tree of
life, and told us like a mer cifull father before, that when so ever we did
taste of yt, we should dye the death. Notwithstondynge this his most gentle
premonicion through Gene. iii.
y^ subtilite of Satan, we brake his most godly precepte, and throw our
selves into ye death, whereof he told us before, so that no we of all earthly
creatures we ware become most miserable. Yet behold again the great goodness of
God toward us, wha^ we had worthily deserved to be damned for evermore, he did
not, as he handled the Aungelles, Job. iiii. ii. Petre. iii.
streyghtwayes cast us ito hell fire, but marcyfully sent us into this world,
that we might here repent, deplore, lament, and bewail our sinful and
abominable offense, that by this means through the divine pro uidence we might
afterward be re stored to our old innocence and be sa ued. Neither sent he us
hither as into a salt, barre^, and desolate place, or wyld forest, but rather
into such a kingdom, as florysheth with all kinds of rytches, treasures,
pleasures, and most goodly possessions, so that we can desire nothing, but yt
we have it here ready at hand. He has garnysshed the earth with grene grass,
sweet herbs and most pleasant flowers. He has given us all kinds of grain
to sow in the earth for our sustenaunce. He sends us rain and temperate
heat in convenient time for ye fortunate increase thereof. He has planted us
trees, and garnysshed the^ in time of the year with most goodly grene leaves
and fruits to serve our necessary businesses, for diverse causes. And as he
has replenyshed the earth with all kinds of beasts, so has he stuffed the
sea and other waters with inumerable sorts of fysshes. And of all these
things with many other mo Psalm. viii. Heb. ii.
has he made us Lords, rulars, go uernours, owners. Neither do the his
kyndenes here cease concerning temporal things. For he has also set over us
as a most beautiful roof and goodly seelynge, the firmament or air, which in
the day time shows us light through the clerenes thereof, wherein for our great
co^ solacion and comfort, he has also set a goodly great light, which we
call the son, by the virtue and operacio^ whereof, ye earth brigeth forth her
fru ites in due season, yeldyng them to us both ripe, apt and mete for our
use, when convenient time requires. For the night time again, because we
should not be dismayde through the great darkness, where with ye earth is than
overwhelmed seeing it is a time appointed not to labor but unto rest, not
unto trouble, but unto quietness, not un to watchynge, but unto slepynge, God
has most gorgiously garnisshed the firmament with a goodly great light,
called the moon, and with innumerable Stars mo for our great joy, pleasure
and comfort, so yt no garden, be it never so plesau^tly refer ted and stuffed
full of herbs most amiable in aspecte, may be compared unto it. And al these
things has God wrought and done not for his own sake, but for ours, not for
his own wealth and felicite, but for our profyt and commodite.

Hitherto have I spoken of his temporal gifts, which though they seem to be
much precious, as they are in deed, yet are they nothing to be compared unto
those that fol low. For look how much the spirit excels the body, so
much do these gifts excel the other being incomparable, and not able by any
mea nes to be reco^pe^sed of any creature neither in heaven nor in earth.

First what an exceeding gentle nes of God was this, wha^ we were worthily
condemned for our offense, and had no hope of health, to promise us
streightwayes, because we should despair, yt his only begotten son the
highest treasure that he had, Genesis iii. Esa. vii. Math. i. Luke. i. Colloss.
i. Ephe. i. Esa. ^iii. Ephe. v. i. Joan. i. Math. i.
should come down from his right hand, be conceived by y^ holy ghost, take
very flesh and be borne of y^ most pure virgin Mary, yea and yt with out the
seed of any man, reconcyle us to his favor, make an attoneme^t for us,
purchased grace, mercy, and remission of our sins, offer his most blissed
body a sweet smellyng sacrifice for our iniquite, sufferhis most precious
blood to be shed for the purgacion and clensynge of our sins, and become a
perfect and full satisfaccion for all the sins of his people, that is, of so
many as repent, believe in him, and lead a godly and innocent life. This
promised God the father oftentimes, and according to his promise at his time,
predefined and tofore appointed he most faithfully performed it unto y^
perpetual joy and conforte of all true Christians. But in the mean season
how great sees of kyndnes did he open unto us? After that he had set us in
this world, how did he prosper us in all things, that we went about? How did
he give us y^ victory of our enemies? How wonderfully did he deliver us from
our Exo xiiii.
cruel enemy Pharao? How maruelously preserved he us when he made the red see
to give place unto us? How favorably dealt he with us, Ex. xvi. xvii
when he gave us meat from heaven and water out of the hard rock? What a
land did he give us flowynge with milk and honye. And because we should live
an honest and godly life before him, did not he Exo. ^x. ^ere. xxxi.
give us his most holy law, yea and that not only (...) tables of stone, but
also written in our hearts by ye holy Ghost? What goodly ceremonies also
received we of him, which were mysteries, figures types, clouds and shadows
of good thy ges to come, even of Christ, of his most holy passion, glorious
resurreccion. etc. All these things ware great consolacion to the true,
spiritual, and christen men, in as much as they preched Christ unto the^,
which according unto their faith whole ly fixed on ye promise of God, came at
the time appointed ito this miserable world took flesh of the most glorious
virginne Marye, became like to us in all things, syn alone except, preached
unto us the will of his heavenly father, wrought mi racles, suffered and dyed
for our sins, and on the third day rose again for our iustificacion.
Certain day es after he ascended into Heaven, Mar^. xvi. Luke. xxiiii. Act. i.
H^. ix. i. Tim. ii. i. Joan. ii. Math. xxv. i. Cor. xv. i. These. iiii.
where he now sytteth on ye right hand of god the father almighty, being
there not idle, for he incessauntly prays for us, being our mediatoure and
advocate, apeasynge daily the fathers wrath and purchasing for us all good
things. And at the latter day, he shall come age^ to judge both the quick
and the dead, both the faithful and unfaithful, both the sheep and the
goats, and than shall he take us both body and soul enunied together with him
into eternal glory, where we shall remain with him for evermore.

If any man desyrethe to know more of the benefits of god, and of his
unmeasurable kyndenes toward us, let hi^ resort unto ye Pathwaye of prayer, and
read, where I entreat Search the Paythway unto prayer
of thanckes gyuyng from the xlii. Chap. unto the xlix. and there shall he se
this matter entreted of at large.

If we did consider on this wise the inestimable benefits of god to ward us,
undoubtedly we would leave our vnthanckefulnes, and say with David, what
shall I give again unto the Lord, for all those things, that he has given
me? But let us se what our Mynstrell entendeth to give again unto god, that we
may follow him and do so likewise.

The fourth verse.
I will take the cup of health / and caull upon the name of the Lord.
The syxte string.
HEre David expresses two thi^ ges, yt he entendeth to do. One is to take the
cup of health. The other to caull on the name of the LORD. These are two
things, What the cup of health signifye.
wherein God very much delights. First he says, he will take ye cup of
health, whereby is understand af fliccion, trouble, persecucion, morti ficacion
of old Adam, killing of carnal affectes, slayenge of fleshly lusts, bearyng
of the cross, and at the last death, as it appears by ye words of Christ to
the sons of Ze bedeus: Can ye drink, says he, of Math. xx
the cup that I shall drink? Also to his father, Let this cup depart Math.
xxvi
from me, whereby he understands his passion and death. To recompense partly
ye kyndenes of God, David says, that he will mortifye the ra gi^g lusts of
his own flesh, yt fight against the spirit, and never leave until he has
made ye body subject to the soul, that in all points it may be obediente to
the law and will of God. For this is an high and acceptable sacrifice to God
as David Psalm. l.
witnesses i^ another place, a sacrifice to God is a troubled spirit, a
contrite and humble heart God will not despise. S. Paul also says, Romans xii.
I beseech you brothers by the tender mercyes of God, that you give your bodies
a sacrifice, yt is quick, holy and acceptable to God, which is your
reasonable serving of God. And God himself says by ye Prophet, unto whom
shall I look, but Esa. lxvi.
unto the humble and broken in spirit, and unto him yt fearethe my words?

Again he confessethe here that he will not only mortify his carnal lusts,
that he may be truly spiritual, but he will also patiently suf fer, what
soever cross, that is, trou ble, persecucion and affliccion God lays upon
him, yea though it be very death. His heart is now so en flamed with the love
of God for the be nefites that he has showed unto him, that he recositeth not
only all that he has, but also his very lyte to vile and of to small a price
to give again for the glory of God, that he may at the least in some part show
himself thankful unto so bounteous and gentle a Lord, as S. Paul Act. ^x.
and. xxi.
says, The holy Ghost wytnessethe and layth, y^ bonds and troubles abide me
in every City. But I care not for it, neither is my life dear unto me, so that
I may fynish my course with joy, and the office that I have re ceaued of the
LORD Jesus to testify y^ gospel of ye grace of God. For I am not only ready to be
bound, but also to dye for ye name of ye LORD Jesus.

It is not without a cause, that he calls affliccion, trouble, or per Why
afflic ^ion is called the cup of health.
secucion, the cup of health or salua cion, for it brigeth i deed health and
s^l uacio^ to a true Christen man. And though the cross be bitter to ye flesh
yet is it sweet and healthful to the spirit. And y^ more y^ body be depres
sed and made low, y^ more is y^ spirit ex alied and made high, as s. Paul
says though our outward man be broken, ii. Cor. iiii.
yet y^ iward is renewed day by day. Again, we are not detters to y^ flesh, y^
we should live after y^ flesh, For if Romans viii.
ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye. But if ye mortifi y^ deeds of ye body
in y^ spirit, ye shall live. For they that are lead with y^ spirit of god,
are the sons of GOD. Therefore Luke. ix.
says Christ, If any man will come after me, let him deny and forsake hi^ self,
and take his cross daily and follow Act. xiiii.
me. For by many tribulacio^s must we enter into y^ kyngedome of god. And all
y^ will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecucion. It was necessary,
says the scripture, ii. ^im. iii. Luke. xxiiii. ^b. (...).
that Christ should first suffer, and so rise again, and enter into glory.

But for as much as it is an hard thing for a man of his own strength pacie^tly
to bear the Cross, and to suffer rebuke, slander, ignominy, blasphemy, euel
reports, empreso^me^t loss of goods, yea and percuau^se very death for Gods
truethe and y^ glory of his word, seeing yt though the spirit be redye, yet
the flesh is Math. xxvi ^arc. xiiii
weak, therefore David says, He will call on the name of the Lord. Wherefore?
Uerely for strength, that he may be able to bear the cross y^ is laid upon
his back, y^ he swerve not when persecucion comes, and so slander y^
truth, which so bold ly he professed before. For without the assistence of
Gods spirit no man is able to abide in the time of persecucion, seems he
never so valeaunt a soldier at other times, Math. xxvi. Matt. xiiii. Luke.
xxii. Joan. xiii.
as we may se in y^ Apostles of Christ which before their master was in onye
danger, promised that they would never forsake hi, but stick unto him even
unto the very death, yet when they came to the bronte, well was he that could
run away fastest, in so much that he, which be fore craked most, and showed
himself boldest of all the other, I mean Pe ter, did not only fle away from
his master, but also shamefully denied him unto a poor maid, and swear yt he
never knew him, so impotente, weak, frail, and full of all imbecilite is man,
if he be left unto himself, and not endewed with strength from above.
Therefore our Mynstrel Da uid, king and Prophet, not crakyng of his own
stre^gthes, nor boasting of his own free will without the healpe of Gods
spirit, says that he will call on the name of y^ Lord for strength and
valeaunce, yt he may manfully abide in the time of persecucion, confess the
truth of God des word, and publysshe his glory before all me^, yea though a
thousand deaths should follow. It is very profitable for adflicte and
troubled co^ sciences to caull on the name of the Lord. For as Solomon says,
the name of the LORD is a mighty Pro. xviii
toure, and very strong Bulwark, un to that does the ryghteous man fly, and he
shall be exalted and find socoure. Blissed is that man, which puts Psalm.
xxxix
his trust i^ the name of the LORD, and regards not vanities and false
ymaginacions. Call on me, says God, in the day of thy trouble, and Psalm. xiix.
I will deliver the, and thou shalt honor me.

Thus se we partly how David goes about to show himself thank full again
unto God for the inesti mable benefits, that he has given him. He will
mortify his carnal af fectes, and patiently suffer what so ever cross,
persecucio^, trouble or affliccion be laid upon his back for Gods truethes
sake. And that he may be the more able to do theyse things, he will caull on
the name of the LORD. All these be very acceptable things in y^ sight of god.
And God thyncketh his benefits well bestowed, where such gifts be given again
unto him, procedyng from a gentle and thanckefull heart.

Now we being no less bound unto God for his gentleness tha^ Da uid was,
ought to show our selves no less thankful again to him, the^ David did, or
else are we much unworthy this inestimable beneficence of God. We ought
therefore to Romans vi. Colos. iii. i. Cor. vi.
provide y^ no sin reygne in this our mortal body, but that we mor tifye our
earthly members, whoredom, fornicacion, uncleanness, wan tonnes, evil
concupiscence and covetousness, which is the worshypping of Idolles, for the
which the wrath of God is wont to come upon the children of unbelieve. All
wrath, indignacion, maiyce, cursed speaking fylthy co^municacion, lying ought
Colos. iii. Ephe. ii. Romans vi. Ephe iiii. Galla. v. Collos. iii.
we to lay aside, and put upon us ten der mercy, gentylnes, honest behauour,
mekenes, softenes, goodness, charity, peace, joy, faith, te^perau^ce, with all
the other fruytes of y^ spirit. For they y^ are of Christ, have crucified the
flesh, with the lusts and concupiscenses thereof, yea they are dead to the
world, and their life is hyd with Christ in God.

Moreover we must be contented to take the cup of health at y^ LORDS hand,
and patiently suffer what soever cross he lays upon us, yea and praise him
in the mids of our trouble, recountynge our selves so much the more blyssed,
seeing that Phil. (...). Act. v. (...). Tim. ii Psa. xxxiii.
it is given unto us not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for y^ glory
of his name, being thoroughly persuaded, that if we suffer wyths Christ, we
shall reygne with him. For many are the troubles of the ryghteous in this
world, but from the^ all shall the LORD deliver the^, if none otherwise, yet
at y^ least by death, which is the next way unto the very true life.

And because it is hard for ye flesh to away with the cross (which seeks
glory, wealth, ease, rytches, ho nour, and not ignominy, scasenes, dis
quietness, poverty, shame and opprobry) therefore must we fly with fervent and
continual prayers unto God and unto his most holy name, y^ we may have
strength sent us from above, to do these things aforsayd that by no means we
be found ingrate, unthankful and unworthy ye great and unmeasurable
kyndenesse, which God has showed unto us. So shall God not only not take away
his gifts from us, but also en Matt x^.
crease them daily more and more, as the Scripture says, to every one that
has, it shall be given, and he Make. iiii. Luae. viii.
shall have abundance. But who so has not, from him shall be taken a way,
even that he has also.

But let us hear more of our Mynstrelles song.

The fyfte verse.
I will pay my vows un to the Lord before al his people.
The seventh stryng.
David goethe forth to declare what he will render unto God for all those
things that he has given him. Before he said, that he would take the cup
of health, and caull upon the name of the LORD. Now he addethe, that he will
also pay his vows unto the LORD, What the vows are y^ David will fulfill and
perform
yea and that before all his people. But what vows are these? Uerely not
unfaithful and folyshe vows, which displease god, as y^ scripture say the,
but y^ earnest promises that Eccl. v.
he made unto God for to fulfill his most holy Commandments. These vows
will he pay. These promises will he perform. For they make unto the glory of
god, the edifienge of his Church, and the health of his own soul. Therefore
will he stycke to them, even unto the very death.

God gives a commandment Exo. xx. Deuteronomy. v.
and says, hear Israel, thy God is y^ one and alone God. Thou shalt have no
strange Gods in my syghte. Thou shalt make the no graven Image. etc.

David being one of the true The first command meant.
israelites has made a vow to keep this most holy precepte. And as he has
this vow, so will he labor to pforme it. For it is not unfaithful nor
folyshe, but agreeable to the scripture, neither does it provoke the keeper of
it unto much inconue niece and absurdite, but rather unto great virtue and
holiness. So that he is fully bent to perform his vow Let the unfaithful
Idolaters worcester ship what Idol or false God they list. David will surely cleave
to this one and alone true God. For in his heart shall none sit but this one God
alone, neither will he admyt so much as the shadow of any other to be joined
with him, and to have fe lowshyppe with his God. This his God alone will he
worship, honor and lerue. This his God alone will he how and do reverence unto.
This his God alone will he love with all his heart, mind, soul, and with all
his powers. This his God alone will Deuteronomy. vi. Math. iiii. (...). x.
he magnify and praise for ever and ever And because he may not once be mo ued
by any vain spectacle, and seduced from the honor, worship and service of
this god unto any image service and Idolatry, he has made a sure vow and
faithful promise, that he will make no graven Image, ydoll, or mawmet, but he
will only cleave to this his one and alone God, and serve him not in external
ceremo Joan. iiii.
nies, but in spirit and truth. For co^ founded be all they, and shame
lyghte^ on them, says he, that worship gra Psalm. xcvi.
uen images, and glory in their mawe mettes and Idolles.

Again God commands, saying. Thou shall not take the name The second
commaside meant.
of thy Lord God in vain. David has made a solemn vow and ear nest promise,
that he will keep this most blyssed Commandment of God also. He will not abuse
ye name of his Lord god by no means. He Math. v Jacob. v.
will swear by nothing that ever god made, another by heaven nor by earth, nor
any other oath. His communicacio^ shall be, yea, yea, na, na. In his aduersite
will he fly unto ye Pro. xviii.
name alone of his Lord god, as unto a strong Castle and mighty Bulwark, and
caull on that for healpe and refuge. And i^ his prosperity he will not forgette
the name of his Lord God, but celebrate, magnify, co^me^d and praise it, yea
and lift it up with perpetual encomies, lauds and praises.

Moreover god says, thou shall The third commandment.
sanctify ye sabbath day. This has David also vowed to observe and keep. He
will not therefore spend the sabbath day in ryotynge, bankettyng, playeng,
dauncyng, syngyng and such other vain pastimes, but in the meditacion of Gods
law, in readyng the holy scriptures, in hearing godly sermons, in lyftyng up
his heart unto god with fervent prayers, in gyuyng thanckes to y^ Lord for his
benefits. etc. He will also expulse all sin out of his breast, and be at
peace with God.

Furthermore god commands The forth commandment.
saying, Honor thy father and mother. Here again has David made a vow to
fulfill this precepte also. So that he will give honor, reave rence, and worship
to so many as this law requires, yea his inferiors will he not dishonor.

God gives a commandment and says. Thou shalt not slay. David The fyft co^
mau^deme^t.
has earnestely vowed to keep this. So that he will shed no innocent Math. v.
blood, hurt no man, seake no man's death, but favor and love all men, yea
even his very enemies.

GOD says, Thou shalt com The firt co^ mau^d^ment
^yt none adultry. Solemnly has david vowed to observe this most godly
precepte. So that he will be no unclean fornicatour, nor fylthy i. Cor. vii
adulterer, but to avoid all uncleanness he will couple himself with Heb. xiii.
Phil. iiii.
an honest wife, and faithful yokefelowe in holy wedlock, which is honorable
among al men, and bed vndesy ed, to her alone will he cleave, and for her sake
refuse all other woman, be Math. xix. Ephe. v. Colos. iii.
they never so beautiful, fair, proper, myuyon, tall, eloquent, rytche,
worshypfull, honorable, noble. etc. loving her as his own flesh, yea even as
Christ loved the congrega cion.

Moreover God commanded, saying, Thou shall do no theft. As The seventh
commandment.
for this precepte, David has earnestly vowed to keep it unto the vt termoost.
So that he will not only not steal, but also bou^teously give to so many as
have need of his help

And where as God says, thou shall speak no false wytnes agenst The eyghte
commandment. Prouer. (...). (...). P^. iiii. Mat. xi. vi. (...) xviii.
thy neighbor: David had vowed and made a faithful promise, that he will
rather, as charity requires, co uer the multitude of sins, forgive them that
offend him, and seake to profyt all men no less then him self.

Finally where God says, thou shall not couytte thy neighbors Mar. xi The
nynth and x. Co^mau^ dement.
wife, nor house, nor feld, etc. David is fullye at this point not once to
couyt any part of his neighbors goods, but rather to help him for ward and
to do for him, what soever lies in his power.

These be the commandments of God, and these has he vowed to keep. These
vows therefore will he Mat. v.
pay unto the LORD, yea and that be fore all his people, that men seeing the
light of his good works, may glorify his father, which is in heaven

And for as much as David is a king, and has vowed unto God to The office
of a king
do the office of a true king, which is to maintain virtue and to expulse
vice, he will not only provide that he him self keep these commandments,
but that all his subjects also keep them even from the highest to y^ lowest. He
will do his diligence that there shall no God be worship ped in his kingdom
among his Wo^ god y^ al kings and rulars would do thus.
people, but the one and alone true God of Israel. Him only shall they honor,
worship, praise, serve and love. Another shall any graue^ image be suffered to be
made in his Realm for to obscure and blotte the glory of this almighty god.
On the name of this God alone shall all his people caull, and fly unto in
their aduersite praise and commend it for ever and ever, nether shall any of
them be so bold as once to swear vnistly by it.

The Sabbath day shall all his subjects sanctifye. They shall not spend it
vaynely and ydelly, but virtuously and godly, in reading y^ holy scriptures,
in hearing Gods word sincerly preched, in prayeng ferue^tly unto god, and in
such other god ly meditacions. Their superiors shall they honor also with
all humilite, submission and obedience. They shall kill no man, but defend
every man in his right, love all me^ wysshe well unto them, do for them what so
ever they are able.

As for fornicacio^, adultry, whor i. Cor. vii.
dome or any other uncleanness, they shall commyt none, but every man shall
freelye be suffered to have his own wife, and every woman her own husbonde,
and so godly live together in chaste and pure matrimony.

And as for stealinge, bearyng of false witness, or coveting of their
neighbors goods, David like a true king has vowed and promised so to order
and rule his subjects that none of the^ all shall faull into those vices and
enormities If they do and will not amend, David bearethe not ye sweard in
vain, he will surely pu Romans xiii.
nysh the tra^sgressours. For David has made a vow and he is earnestly be^te
to keep it, yt both he and his people shall unfeignedly observe the most holy
commandments of God. Oh that all kings, Princes, Dukes, and rulers would
follow this most ho ly and virtuous king, and streyghtely look unto the
obseruaunce and true keeping of these vows. For these are the vows that are
accepted be fore God These are the vows that cast no man's soul into the
danger of everlasting damnacion, but rather healpeth forward unto the
enheritaunce of life eternal. These are no popysh, monkysh, supersticious and
pharisaicall vows, invented of the idle brains of me^, but pure godly,
wholesome and christen vows which so many as hope to be saved, ought
streyghtly to observe and keep, yea to perform them unto the vttermoost of
their power.

Thus se we what the vows are that David will pay unto ye Lord before all his
people, for his benefytes, even the fulfyllyng of Gods commandments, and
doing his office, as it becomes a true king So likewise must we do, and
pay our vows, also to ye LORD that is to say, keep his holy
commandments, forsake the world, the dyuell and the flessh with all their
pompes and pleasures, as we professed at our baptism, and every man live
according to his vocacion and calling, as for an example.

Let the^ that bear office, authorite, Rulars Romans xiii. i. Pet. ii. Exo.
xxiii. Deuteronomy. i.
rule and power in the common weal, punysh the euel, maintain the good,
accept no parson in judge mente, allow no false accusacion, shed no innocente
blood, hear the small so well as the great, set forth gods glory, promote his
holy word and in all things seake the profyt of of the common weal.

Let the subjects be faythefull, Subjects. Romans xiii.
true and obedient to their Princes and higher powers.

Let the Bysshoppes and Prestes that be called unto the office of prechynge,
(...). Petre. ii. Tit. ii Bishops (...) Prestes
take heed to their selves, and to all the flock, in the which ye holy Ghost
has appointed the^ overseers to feed the congregation of God. Let them feed
Christ's flock so much as lygheth in their power, and take the ouersighte of
them, not as though they were compelled, but wyllyngly, not for the desire of
fylthy lucre, but of a good mind, not as Lords over the Parysshes, but Act.
xx. i. Pet. v. i. Tim. iiii.
to be an example unto the flock.

Let them cast away ungodly and old wyuysh fables, and be unto them that
believe an example in ye word, in conversation, in love, in spirit, in faith,
in pureness. Let them give ii. Tim. iiii
attendaunce unto reading, to exhortacion, to doctrine. Let the^ study to show
the^ selves to God lauda ble, which need not to be ashamed.

Let the husbo^des love their wy ues, as their own bodies, and be Husbondes.
not bitter, churlysh or unkind unto them, but give honor unto the^ as unto
the weaker vessels and as unto them that are fellow heirs with them of the
grace of life. Wives. i. Cor. xi. Ephe. v. Collos. iii. i. Tim. ii. i. Pet. iii.


Likewise let ye wives be in sub ieccio^ to their husbondes, as unto the LORD
in all things, and so behave themselves as it becommethe women of an honest
and godly conuer sacion. Let them array them selves in comely apparel with
shame fastnes and discrete behauour, not with brayded here, or gold, or
pearl, or costely array, but with such as it becomes women that profess
godlynes through good works. Let ye inward man of the heart be incorrupt,
with a meke and quiet spirit, which before God is much set by. For after
this manner in the old time, did the holy women, which trusted in God, tyer
them selves, and were obedient to their husbondes: even as Sara obeyed Abraham
and Genesis xvi.
called him Lord, whose daughters the wives are, so long as they do well, nor
being afraid for any trou ble.

Let fathers not rate their children, Fathers.
lest they be of a desperate mind but bring the^ up in the nourtour and
informacion of the LORD.

Let the children also obey their pa rentes in all things, for ye is well
Children.
pleasynge unto the LORD.

Let masters do unto their servants that which is just and equal Masters.
put tynge away threatenynges, and know that they also have a master in
heaven, with whom there is no respect of parsons. Act. xx. Romans ii.
Servants.


Let the servants again be obedient unto their bodily masters in all things
with fear and tremblyng in siglenes of heart as unto Christ, not with service only
in the eye sight Colos. iii. Ep^. vi.
as men pleasers, but as the seruau^ tes of Christ, doing the will of god Tit.
ii. i. Pet. ii.
from the heart with good will.

Let them thyncke, that they serve the LORD and not men, and let them be sure,
yt what so ever good a man does, he shall receive it again of ye LORD,
whether he be bond or free.

To conclude, let every one among us do our duty, and live according to the
vocacion, whereunto God has called us. So shall it come to pass, yt we shall
not walk unworthy the kyndenes of God. So shall we truly pay our vows unto
the LORD. So shall we faithfully per form yt, which we heretofore promt sed
in baptism. So shall we daily more and more increase in the love of God, and
taste more ple^teously of his bounteous gifts.

But it is to be noted, that David says, Before all his people.

This is none other thing, but ye which Christ commands in the in as much
as Christ has chosen them from the world, therefore the world hates them.
What is than to be said? Uerely whither we live or dye, we are the LORDS, and
precious is the death of Saints in y^ sight of ye LORD, as it followethe.

The eight string. Precious in the syghte of the Lord is the death of his
Saints.
This song of our Mynstrel Da uid must needs be very plesau^t and delectable to
the hearers, seeing yt he syngethe all things in such a godly and goodly
order, and sets every thing in his right place. For after that he has made
mention of payenge his vows unto the Lord, which is to do all things
according to the commandment of God, and not after the fansy of carnal
reason, nor the judgment of the wise worldlynges; whereof is like to ensew, as
we have heard before, much trouble, yea very death (for ye world can not abide
to be rebuked nor to have his pomp, pride, pleasures, glory, honor,
hypocrisy, supersticion, feigned holiness, pharisaical justice, glysteryng
righteousness, dotynge inuencion, fleshly imaginacions, good ententes. etc. to
be reproved yea and condemned by y^ word of God) he now declarethe what a
dear and precious a thing the death of Saints, that is to say, of the
faithful is in the sight of ye LORD, be it recounted before the world of
never so great ignominy, despyte, reproach and shame. And this does he to
encourage men to pay their vows unto the Lord, that is to say, to be earnest
in ye word of God, to seake the promocion of his glory and to walk innocently
before ye eyes of his divine majesty, though all the world, yea very hell should
be wood and rise up against us. Precious, says he, in the syghte of the Lord
is the death of his Saints.

It is to be noted, that he calls not the death of the wicked, precious in
the sight of the Lord, but y^ death of Saynctes, yea and that not popysh but
Gods Saints Precious, The wyc ked in this world have all things more at there
pleasure tha^ y^ true Chri stians
says he, in the sight of y^ Lord is the death of his Saints. As for the
wicked, so long as they live in this world, they live more at their hearts
ease, and have all thiges more plenteously at their own pleasure concerning
te^porall matters, tha^ the true christen men and faithful Saints of God have,
in as much that as we read in diverse places of the holy scriptures, the godly
many times complain unto God of the prosperous estate of y^ wicked, and seem
almoost to accuse God of un righteousness, seeing the enemies of God prosper so
well, and have good luck in all things, and they again which most intierly
favor Gods word and seek his glory, are most miserably oppressed,
slau^dered, persecuted, Psalm. x^iii. Romans viii.
empresonned, and redye to be slain at all hours. For as y^ Psalmograph
says: The ungodly has the ouerhande, and the poor is bre^t. The siner is
praised in followyng Psalm. ix.
the lusts of his heart, and the wicked is blyssed and made much of. My feet
were almoost gone, says David, my treadynges had nygh slypt For I was sore
greaued at the wic ked to se the ungodly in such prospe rite. For they are i no
parel of death, but stand fast like a palace. They come in no misfortune like
other folk, another are they plaged like other men. And this is the cause yt
they are so puffed in Pride, and overwhelmed with cruelte and unrighteousness.
Their eyes swel for fatnes they do even what they list. Corrupt are they and
speak blasphemies maliciously, proud and presumpteous are their words They
^retch forth their mouth unto heaven, and their tongue goes through ye world.
Therefore fall ye people unto them, and therout such they no small aua^ tage.
Tush, say they, how shall God perceive it. Is their knowledge in the most
highest? Lo these are the ungodly, these prosper in the world These have
rytches in possession. These have sons ye grow up as Psalm. cxliii.
young plants. These have mynyo^ and trymme daughters, garnysshed round about
even like unto a gorgious temple. These have their garners full and plenteous
with all manner of stoar. These have sheep that bring forth thousands and
hundred thousands in their pastures and feldes. These have fat oxen, y^ are
strong to labor. To be short, these have no mischaunse, no decay no
trouble, no noise, no complaining in their streets that should grieve them.
Jeremy also says, O Iere. xii.
LORD thou art more ryghteous, than that I should dispute with the,
nevertheless let me talk with the in things reasonable. How happens it,
that the way of the ungodly is so prosperous, and that it goes so well with
them, which ^out any shame offend and live in wickedness? Thou planteste them,
they take root, they grow, and bring forth fruit. They boste much of the,
yet doste thou not ponyshe the^.

Thus se we how the ungodly like fat beasts wallowe and tomble the^ selves
in all kind of pleasures, neither want they any thing in this world, that
their hearts can desire, yea they have more prosperi Luke. xii.
te, than they can away with all, yet are the godly and Saints of the Lord
oppressed with all misery leadynge a life in great calamite and wretchedness,
tha^ any creatures in the world. But yet behold ye end of the wicked. For
suddenly they do consume, perysh and come to naught. The Psalmographe says: ye
death Psalm. xxxiii
of the wicked sinners is very euel. Again, The unrighteous man shall receive
his plages and ponyshme^tes when he dies. But let us behold these things as
i a pure myrrour by rehearsyng certain Hystories. How triumphed the wicked
king Pharao upon the Israelites Gods people? How lysle regarded he the sermons
spoken, and the miracles wroughte by the servants of God Moses and Aaron
through the divine spirit? How continued he to persecute the people of God
even unto Exo. viii. ix x. xiiii.
the very hour of his death. But be hold the end. When he was most puffed up
in his pride, and most bent to do mischefe, how did God trap him in his own
wylynesse, and even brought that upon his own head, that he ente^ded to
bring up on other? Did not God meruaylously drown him with all his wic ked
army, and preserve his people by that means? But what was that temporal
death in comparison to the death eternal, and the most grievous and
intolerable pains that he now suffers in hell fire without mercy.

Again, how did Sennacherib y^ iiii. Re. viii. and. ix. ii. Pa. xxxii Eccl.
xiviii. Esa. xxxvi. and. xxxvii.
proud king of the Assirians bost hi^ self not only agenst the good king
Ezechias, but also y^ living God, yea and blasphemed him, sayng, as ye most
cruel and lyonlyke tyrant the great Turk does now a days, yt he would
utterly subdue both hi^ and his company, yea and yt their God should ^e no more
able to deliver the^, than (...) broken staff of read. He leaned much to his
own poletyke wit and martial valeaunce, thynkyng yt in as much as heretofore
he had sub dued all kyngdoms, which he inua ded, he also should have overcome
y^ people of God. But God, which is the living and almyghtye God able in a
twyncklyng of an eye to make frustrate and vain all the fleshly ima ginacions
of the worldly tyrauntes, yea and to bring to naught all their power, sent
his Angel the very same night, that all the mischefe was ente^ded against
his peo ple, which smote in the host of the Assirians an hundred four score
and five thousand men. So that Sen iiii. Reg. xix ii. Pa. xxxii
nacherib brake up and departed, and was shortly after slain with sword of his
own sons. An end worthy such a proud and blasphemous Tyraunte. But what
is this unto the infernal pains, y^ be endeles, which he now remediles
suffers?

What proud crakes also did y^ ar rogant Tyrasite Holofernes make Iudit. xii^.
against the people of Israel, thynkyng that there was no kingdom so
invincible, strong and fortressed, but that he with his martial puissaunce
and feats of war was able easly to overcome. So that he took no thought,
lived all in pleasure, like a careless swyne, gyuyng him self to all kind of
beastelyke pleasures. But how valeauntly even by one woman God did overcome
him, and put all his army to flight, the Hystory makes mention.

What shall I speak of ye two Hero des, whereof the one in the mids Math. ii.
of his fury when he was most whot and fyry in sekyng the death of Christ, and
for his sake sleynge innumerable infantes, miserably dyed, bringing nothing
less than his cruel and blou die purpose to effect, so valeaunt and mighty is
our lord god to extiguish and quench the tyranny of these bloudsowpers, wha^
it is his most godly pleasure, and to preserve those, whom he will have kept
fre from their crudelite and furious madness.

The other Herod eue^ in ye mids of his pomp, honor and glory, Act. xii.
being clad in his kyngly apparel, and set Luciferlike on his judgment seat,
after that he had most Tyrauntelyke persecuted certain of Christ's church,
yea and slain with swerd James the brother of John^, was smote of the Au^gel
of ye Lord, because he gave not ye glory to god. So that he was eaten up of
worms. But what need I rehearse so many Histories out of the divine letters,
seeing that this one, which I shall now recite, may seem abu^dantly to satisfy
for to show, how precious in the sight of the Lord, the death of his
saynctes is, seem their life in this world never so mi serable, wretched,
pitiful, poor, ne die, beggarly, and full of all trouble, so row, dolor and
camalite. Again, how vile and detestable the death of ye wyc ked is in the
Lords sight, be their life here never so pompous, gala^t, easy, volupteous,
joyful, quiet, care les and popelyke.

S. Luke in his Gospel declares, Luke. xvi.
how there was a certain ritche man, which was apparelled with pur ple and costely
lynnen, and fared deliciouslye every day. In these words the Evangelist
shows manifestly how this rytche man lived all in pleasure, and had al
things according to his hearts desire. But behold y^ end. He was cruel,
merciles and vnpiteful to the poor. Therefore when he dyed, the Scripture
says, that he was carried down ito hell, where he was tormented with such
grievous flames of fire, and intolerable burnynges, that he desired Abraham to
send down Lazarus unto him, that he might dyp the typpe of his finger in the
water, and cool his tongue, for he was grievously tor mented in that flame. But
Abraham said, remember son, that you haste received thy pleasures in thy life,
and contrary wise Lazarus received pains and troubles. Therefore is he now
comforted, and thou art tor mented.

As for y^ poor man, his life was so wretched beggarly and miserable, y^ no
man would scasely wonchesafe once to cast their eye and to look toward him,
he was such an abiecte so vile, so re^t, so torn, so Lazarlyke and full of
grievous sores. Only ye dog ges lycked his sores. But behold ye end. This
poor man dyed, and was carried of the Angels into Abraha^s bosom.

This Hystory declares plainly, how precious the death of the Saynctes,
that is, of the faithful is in the sight of the Lord, appear their life never
so miserable before the deynty worldlynges. Again, how vile and detestable
the death of the wicked is in Gods sight, have they spent their life i^ never
so much joy, pleasure and felicite, and were they recounted before the world
never so blyssed, happy and fortunate, and brought to the ground with never
Amos. vi. Luke. vi. Math. v. Eccl. xxxi
so great pomp and solemnite. And here se we that to be true, which is
written, Woe be to you rytche men, which have your^ consolacion. Woe be to you
that are filled, for ye shall honger. Woe be to you that laughe now, for ye
shall lament and weep Woe be to you, when all men shall praise you, for
according to these things did their fathers to the false Prophets. But
blyssed are ye that honger now, for ye shall be filled. Blyssed are ye y^ weep
now, for ye shall laugh. The deynte worldeliges Mark well.
receive pain after this life, but the faithful in ye Lord, which be
oppressed with miserye and troubled for Gods truth, shall receive joy and
glory. So that as David says, Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death
of his Saints. Hereto agrees the saying of S. John^ in his reuelacion.
Blyssed are the Apoc. xiiii.
dead, which dye in the Lord. The death of Saynctes must needs be precious
in the sight of the Lord, and they which dye in the Lord must needs be
blyssed, seeing that both y^ glory of God is set forth by their death, and
the Saynctes them selves set in a perpetual joy and euerlastig Sap. iii. Deu.
xxxiii
quietness without any more care or trouble. For after yt they have offered up
this their life unto god, the souls of the righteous are straight ways in the
hand of God, and the pain of death shall not towche the^. In the sight of the
unwise they ap Sap. v. Heb. ^i. Romans viii. ii. Cor. v. i. Pet. i.
pear to dye, and their end is taken for very destruction. The way of y^
righteous is judged to be utter destruction, but they are in rest. And though
they suffer pain before me^, yet is their hope full of immortalite. They are
ponysshed but in few things, nevertheless in many thin ges shall they be well
rewarded. For God proves them, and lyndeth them mete for himself, yea as
gold in ye furnace does he try them, and receaueth them as a burnte
offering, and when the time comes, they shall be looked upon. They ryghteous
shall shine as the sparks, that run Math. xiii. i. Cor. xv. Math. xix i. Cor.
vi.
through the read bushe. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over
the people, and their Lord shall reygne for ever. They yt put their trust in
him, shall understand the truth, and such as be faythefull will agree unto him
in love, for his chosen shall have gifts and peace. But the ungodly shall be
punyshed according to their own imaginacions, for they have despised ye righ
teous, and forsaken the Lord.

Moreover the ryghteous shall stand in great stedfastnes against Sap. v. Math.
ix.
such, as have dealte extremely with them, and taken away their labors, When
they se it, they shall be vexed with horrible fear, and shall wonder at the
hastines of their soden health gronyng for very distress of mind and shall say
within them selves, having inward sorrow and mournyng for very anguyshe of
mind: These are they, whom we sometime had in derision, and iested upon. We
fools thought their lives very madness, Sap. iii.
and their end to be without honor But ^o, how they are counted among the
children of God, and their porcio^ is among the Saints. Therefore have we
erred from y^ way of truth. The light of ryghteousnes has not shyned unto
us, and the son of understanding rose not upon us. we have weryed our selves
i^ ye way of wickedness and destruccio^ Tedious ways have we gone, but as for
the way of ye Lord we have not known it. What good has our pride Jacob. v.
i. Pa. xxx. Sap. ii.
done unto us? or what profyt has the pomp of rytches brought us? All these
things are passed away as a shadow. etc. These and such other words, shall
they that have sinned speak in hell. But ye ryghteous Pfal. xxxix
shall live for evermore. Their reward also is with ye Lord, and their re
membraunce with the highest.

Therefore shall they receive a glory ous kyngedome, and a beautyfull crown of
the Lords hand. For with his right hand shall he cover the^, and with his own
arm shall he de fend them. etc.

Thus se we how dear and precious in the sight of the Lord the death of his
Saynctesis. S. Paul having Phil. i.
experience of this thing, when he was yet alive, said on this man ner: I
desire to be dissolved and losoned out of this mortal body, and to be with
Christ. Also king David: Woe is me, that I tarry i^ this world Psalm. cxix.
so long.

Therefore how so ever the wicked worldlynges recount the death of the Saints,
whyther it chaun ceth to the^ by famyn, ho^ger, sword water, fire halter or
any otherwise undoubtedly it is precious in the sight of the Lord, appear it
before the world of never so great ignomi ny, reproach, infamy, shame, and re
buke. Happy therefore is he, that die eth this death, how so ever it chau^seth
unto him. Blyssed is ye Cross, which brings this glory. But let us se how it
comes to pass, that the death of Saints is so precious in the sight of the
Lord. It follows.

The syxte verse.
O Lord I am thy servant / yea thy servant i^ deed / and the son of thy
handmayde thou have broken my bon / des.
The nynte string.
BEcause no man, be he never so holy, good and perfect, should thyncke that
through his own holiness, goodness and perfeccion, he had deserved that his
death should be dear, precious, and of great valor in the Lords sight, or
else because that he had suffered many great tor mentes for the glory of God,
yea and perchaunse very death, and so by that means recounte himself worthy
by his own deserts of the life eternal: our Mynstrell David in this verse
of his song, not unto the derogacion of the saints honor, which are not to
be defrauded of their praise, but unto the promocion and setting forth of Gods
glory, syngeth here, how it commethe to pass, that the death of Saynctes,
that is, of the faithful, is so precious i the sight of ye Lord. The cause is
this, says he, because God has broken their bonds. For what is man, that he
may appear righteous Job. ix.
in ye sight of God, before whom a child of one day old is not pure, nor the
stars in the Eliment, nor nor yet the Aungelles in heaven. Math. xix. Esa.
ixiiii. Pro. xx. i. Joan. i. Psalm. cxiiii.
There is no man good, but God alone. All our righteousnesses are as a clothe
polluted with menstrue. Who is able to say, my heart is pure and I am clean
without sin? The most ryghteous man in the world may pray on this manner
with David, Lord enter not into judge meant with thy servant, for none y^
lives, shallbe found ryghteous in ii. Cor. iii. Joan. iii. Romans viii.
thy sight. Is it any maruayle, when of our selves we are not able to thike a
good thought, much less to work any good deed by our own power, before we
be rege^erate, bor ne a new, and made other men by Christ's Spirit.

And as towchyng the affliccion and trouble, that we suffer in this world,
seem it to the flesh never so great, paynefull and intolerable, yet can it
not be compared to ye glo ry, that shall be showed to us, as S. Paul says.
Notwitstandynge if Romans viii. i. Cor. xii. ii. Tim. ii. Heb. iiii. Tit. i.
Psalm. cxiiiii
we suffer with Christ, we shall also reygne with Christ, yea and be glorifi ed
with him, not that we of our selves have deserved so great glory, but because
God has so promised which can not lie, but is faithful in all his words, and
leaves no good deed unrewarded, that is done in Christ, yea and that for his
promise sake through his unmeasurable mercy Math. x. i. Pet. i.
poured forth plenteously in the most precious blood of Christ Jesus. Now
seeing ye not we only but also Joan. iii. Romans xiiii.
al ye ever we do of our selves is un pure and unclean in the sight of god,
until both we and al our deeds be pu rified by the divine spirit, therefore
before we can bring forth any thing that may be approved and accepted
before God, we must be de lyuered from that most miserable Genesis iii. Romans v.
vi. vii. viii.
captivity, whereunto we ware cast of Satan through the sin of Adam. Our
bonds must be broken, we must be set at liberte from the power of Satan, syn,
death, hell. etc. This thing once done, tha^ what Mark well.
so ever we do in Christ and in our new regeneracion, must needs be allowed
before God, and received as an acceptable Sacrifice. Yea whyther we live or
dye, both our life and our death is right dear and precious in y^ syghte of
the Lord. But let us return unto our song.

Although it be true, and nothing more true, yt God of his own mere The good
nes of God toward us.
mercy and fre goodness and undeserved benignite saved us when we ware so
utterly lost, that by no means we could seek any part of our own salvation,
nor recover by our own strength and power any thing at all that we before had
lost in Adam, so that both our crea^cion, eleccion, re demcion, salvation,
iustificacion, and glorificacion comes only of him Romans viii.
through his most entierly beloved son, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Yet do these his benefits only belong unto the^, that are his faithful
servants, and the sons of his handemayd, as David says here: O Lord
because I am thy ser uaunte, yea thy servant in deed, and the son of thy
handmayde, thou have broken my bonds. We se here that David confessethe, that
God Note to whom the benefytes of God in Christbelo^g
brake his bonds, but he adds also, that he therefore is his servant, yea
his unfeigned seruau^te and y^ son of his handmayd. Whereby we may easly
learn that the merciful been fites of God the father, which lyghe poured out
in Christ's blood, pertayne not unto all persons universally, but only unto
those, that are his servants, yea and that not feigned, but true, hartye,
loving and faithful, and the sons of his hand maid. God has performed ye
oath, says y^ good priest Zachary father to S. John^ baptist, which he swear
Luke. i. Gene. xxii.
unto Abraham our father, to give us, that we being without fear and delivered
from the power of our enemies, should serve him with holiness and righteousness
before him all the days of our life. We are delivered says this good priest,
from the power of our enemiesnot y^ we should live wickedly and ungodly, but
that we should serve our LORD God, not in our own fleshly ymaginacions and
blind good ententes, but in holiness and righteousness, yea and that not a day
or two, but all the days of our life. God has not called us, says S. Paul,
unto uncleanness, 1. These. i. Act. iii.
but unto sanctificacion. God has blyssed you, says the scripture, by his
son Jesus, that every one of you should turn from his wicked nes. God has
broken our bonds, that we should be his faithful ser uauntes and the sons
of his hand maid, as David says. Now what What it is to be the ser uaunte of
God.
is it to be the servant of God? Ue rely to do those things that we be
commanded of God. In considera cion whereof S. Paul and the other Apostles i^
al their Epistles call the^ selves the servants of God, because unto the
vttermoost of their power they ever fulfilled those thi^ ges that were enjoined
the^ of god. For it becomes a servant to fulfill his masters commandment,
and not to work after his own fansy, so may he be bold to appear in his
masters syghte, when so ever he be called, and to ask that which his master
has promised him. In like man ner if we will be counted and so proved the
servants of God unfeignedly, we must earnestelye consider every man
according to his call lynge, what God has commanded us in his holy law, and
that we must labor unto the vttermoost of our power for to fulfill, or else we
are no true servants of God. For by no means may we leave ye will of God
vnfylled, and practice things of our own imaginacion. If any Io. viii.
xiiii. xv.
man loves me, says Christ, he will keep my word and my father shall love him,
and we will come unto him and dwell with him. He that has my co^ maundeme^tes
and keeps them, he it is that louethe me. For not every Math. vi^
one that says unto me, Lord Lord shall enter into the kingdom of he ue^, but
he that does the will of my father, which is in heaven.

But it is to be noted, that David does not only name himself y^ servant of
god, but he doubleth it and says, yea the servant of God in deed. As though
he should say, god has done much for me, he has bro ken my bonds, he has
delivered me out of captivity, and set me again at liberte, therefore will I be
his ser uau^t, yea and that not fayn^dly, but his seruauut in deed, doing what
so ever he commaundethe me, yea though it should cost me my life. So it
becomes us not only to pro Math. vii. Romans viii. Jacob. i.
fesse our selves to be the servants of God and christen men by mouth, but
also to express it in very deed, seeing that not the hearers but the doers of
the law shall be justified be fore God.

O LORD GOD be merciful to us, how many be there now a days, that caull
themselves ye ser Agenst the gross Gospellers and vain talkers of the
scripture.
uauntes of God and gospellers, and yet are nothing less in their deeds? They
crake much of faith, but they bring not forth y^ fruytes of faith They talk
much of the gospel, but they live no part of ye gospel. They read the holy
scriptures, but they fashon their lives nothing theraf ter. They call Christ
their savior, yet walk they nothing worthy his kyndenes. They think the^
selves the sons of light, but they exercise the works of darkness. Oh that
they were Gods servants in deed, fervent gospellers, earneste practisers of
faith, true followers of the holy Scriptures, to conclude, both lovers and
lyuers of Christ's gospel, than well were it with Chri stes church. But alas
their living is so dissolute, and their manners so wicked and ungodly, that we
may well say, as S. Paul wrytethe: They profess that they know god, Tit. i.
but they deny hi with their acts, seeing they are abominable, disobedient
and unapt to al good worcester kes.

Moreover David callethe him self here not only the true and faith full
servant of God, but also the son of Gods handmayd. Who is this handmayd of
God? Uerely the universal congregation of Christ, Who is the handmayde of God.
which from the beginning of the world has served God and believed in him,
whose son every one is, yt believes in God. For he is begotten of God, the
son of god by faith to that congregation, whose member he is made, and that
congregation by preaching begets him to God, that believes the word of god.
So that as the congregation is a mother by begettynge and wynnyng other to the
faith, so is he that believes, and is begotten unto the faith, the son of the
congregation, as s. Paul writes to the Galathians, Gala. iiii
My little children, of whom I tra uayle in birth again, or with whom I am
again with child, until Christ be fasshyoned in you.

Also to the Corinthians, althoghe (...). Cor. iiii.
ye have many masters i^ Christ, yet have ye not many fathers. For I begat you
in Christ Jesus by the gos pell. He also writing to Timothe, (...). Tim. i.
calls him his natural son in (...) faith. Again Syon signifyeng y^ Church
of Christ, says by the Pro phet, who has begotten me these? Al so i^ another
place: the desolate has Esa. xlix. and. iiiii.
mo children, than y^ married wife.

Thus se we, that we must both be the true servants of God, and also the
sons of the handmayd of god, Christ's church, if we will en joy the
benefits, that ly bent out in Christ. And verily it is not with out a cause
required of us, not only that we should be the faithful servants of god, but
also the sons of his handemayd For many in times past, nether want there at
this day, have bosted valeauntly that they were the servants of God, yea and
would seem of a fervent zele to dye for the glory of god, yet in as much as
they were not the sons also of gods handmayde, they were not the servants
of god in deed, but dissemblers and Hypocrites. Of this sort were all the old
Heretics, Scismatikes, and false Christians in times past, which sowed
dissensi on in Christ's church, and divided them selves from the holy
catholic church, which is the fellowshyp of saints, by teaching strange
doctrine, and mayntenynge erroneous opinions contrary to the doctrine of the
holy scripture, and the teaching of the true godly fathers. Of this sort also
at this time are the An^ baptistes, Sacrame^taries and other Phanaticall and
frentyke Spirits which have vain visions inverted Math. xiii Mar. iiii. Tit.
iii. Heb. xiii.
of their own brains, sow cockel among the good wheat, in the Lords field,
bring in strange sects inuente new opinions, make disse^cion in Christ's
church, allure me^ from the old and true christen faith, corrupt the
scriptures, teach doctrine contrary to the vain of god des word, trouble the
common weal of Christendom. etc. All these in as much as they have divided
and cut of them selves from the church of Christ, which is the hand maid of
god, pertayne not unto god, nether have they any part of gods mercy though
they boste and crake never so much, that they be the servants of god, yea
though they give their bodies to be plucked asunder with Mark.
wild horses for ye glory of god For with out the church of Christ, there is no
health nor salvation, but altogyther death and damnacion. But I would An
ad^oni cion for the true and falls church.
have men wise in knowing this church of Christ, unless they err and
maintain an whore in stead of a spouse, an unchaste harlotte for a true wife,
a fylthy strompette for a faithful yokefellow, a disobedient Synagoge for a
christen congregation. We have in times past taken the Bishop of Rome, and his
painted carnal Idolles, I would have Errors about the Church.
said, his sayncted Cardinals, Pa triarches, Legates, Archbysshops, Bishops,
Prestes, Monckes, Friars, Chanons, Heremites, Anacho rites, and other of the
spiritualte, as they call the^, only to be the church and have thought that by
no means we might depart from them and their doctrine, except they would be
damned, in what so ever case they O abhominacion.
stood, were they on Gods side, or contrary, taught they according to gods
word or otherwise. For once to hyske agenst them, was co^ Joan. ix.
ted to cut the cote of Christ y^ had never a seem, to subvert and tople down
the chair of Peter and Paul the chief Apostles, to defyle, to tear and to
tread under foot the authorite of the church Christ's spouse, yea Apoc. xxi.
and to make short tale, to caull out of hell the heresies that were buried
and laid to sleep.

By this means have they these many hundred years not only seduced the
simple and unlearned peo ple, butte also falselye vsurpedde the name of the
Church, calling them selves the mother holy chur che, being so rather in
name tha^ in very deed. If they were faith full, and did continewe in ye
doctrine of the holy Scripture so were they

members of this church of Christ, if contrarywyse, than pertayned they not
unto this holy catholyke church, but were corrupt and rotten members, h^ynge
nothing less the^ pertakers of this health and salvation, that is in this most
pure and undefiled church.

This church of Christ, whom David calls here, the handmayd of the LORD,
is the universal What the Church is Joan. iii. vi. Collos. i. Matthew. xvi. i.
Joan. iiii. Joan. x.
congregation of the faithful, which with a sure and undoubted faith believe in
Christ, acknoweledge him to be their head, confess him to be the son of
the living God, grant unfeignedly that he came in ye flesh, hear the voice of
their Sheppard cleave only to his word, fly ye voices of strangers, stycke
unto him us to their alone treasure, and look for all good things at his
hand only.

Unto this church pertayne so many as from the beginning of the world until
this time have un ^at. ^vi. xxi Esa. xxviii. Dan. ii. i. Cor. x. Matxx. viii
faynedly believed in Christ, or shall believe unto ye very end of ye world.
Against this church the gates of hell shall not prevail, seeing it is bylte
on the rocks Christ For Chri^ himself has promised, yt he will be with it by
his holy spirit even unto the very co^summacio^ and end of the world.

Moreover Christ loved this chirch so well, that he gave himself for it Ephe.
v. Gala. i. Cit. iii. i. Pet. iii. Apoc. xxi. i. Tim. iii.
to sanctify it, and cleansed it in the for tayne of water, by ye word, to make
it unto him self a glorious congre cio^ having no spot or wryncle, nor any
such thing, but that it should be holy and without blame. This chir che is the
spouse of Christ, and matrone of heaven, the house of God, which is the
congregation of the li uynge God, the pyller and ground of truth. This church
is the mount Syo^, the City of the living god, the celestial Jerusalem, the
company Heb. xii.
of innumerable aungelles, and the congregation of the first begotten, which
are written in heaven. This church is the holy city, that new Apo. xxi.
Jerusalem, which came down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bryde
garnysshed for her husbonde. This church is that love, that dear Cant. i. ii.
iii. iiii.
dearlynge, that dove, that fayreste among all women without spotte or
deformite, of whom we read in y^ Balades of Salomo^. This church ca^ never
err, saying that it is ever Joan. xiiii. xv. xvi. Mat. xxviii Joan. x.
governed with the spirit of Christ seeing also that it cleaves only to the
word of God, neither does it hear ye voice of any stranger, but only hear
and follow the voice of her Sheppard, which is Christ. To know therefore this
church of Christ from the Synagoge of Antichriste it is very easy, For the
Church of Christ leans with a sure faith to A comparison between y^ Church
of Christ, and the Synagoge of antechrist
Christ alone the son of the living God, as an omnisufficient savior. The
Synagoge of Antechriste although it confessethe Christ after a certain manner,
yet it sekethe salvation also at the hands of other. The church of Christ
follows only the word of God, and according to that works in all things.
The Synagoge of Antechrist follows the voices of strangers, deuyseth new
decrees, constitucions, laws ordinances etc. and unto them it stic keth
maynly. The church of Christ practysethe those works, that ar^ commanded in
the holy Scripture. The Synagoge of Antechrist works things of her own yma
ginacion, not prescribed in the law of God. The church of Christ seeks above
all things the glory of god, and the health of her neighbor. The Synagoge of
Antechrist seeks her own po^pe, honor, glory and praise. The church of
Christ is ready at all times to suffer persecucio^ for Gods truethes sake. The
Synagoge of Antechrist hates y^ cross, seeks to live all in pleasure, to
persecute so many as love god and his word. The church of Christ seaketh ever
after heavenly things. The Synagoge of Antechrist hu^tethe after temporal
promocions, worldly honors, fleshly dignities, easy lyuin ges, carnal
pleasures, galant pasti mes, sumptuous fare, gorgious apparel. etc. The
church of Christ spe^ death her goods upon the poor me^ bers of Christ. The
Synagoge of Antechrist bestows her goods af ter her own fansye, and not
after the commandment of God. To conclude, The church of Christ is alto
gyther godly and celestial. The syna goge of antechrist is altogether wic ked
and earthly. Hereby do we learn which is the true church, and which is ye
false, which is ye church of Christ and which is ye sinagoge of Antechrist

But it is not to be gone over with Why the church is call an hand maid.
a light foot, as they use to say, that David calls this church of Christ the
handemayde of God, neither is it without a cause. For as a true, faithful and
diligent handmayde have her eyes always fyxed upon her mastres for to wait
and se, what Psalm. cxxii. Mark well.
shall be her pleasure to command her to do, that she may do it with all
redines and speed, eue^ so becomes it them of Christ's church diligent lyto
wait upon their Lord God, and to mark what his most godly Esa. viii. Psalm.
cxviii. Luc. xvi.
will, pleasure and commandment is that they should do. And this shall they
assuredly know by searchynge the holy Scriptures. And as it becomes not an
honest hand maid to leave the commandment of her mastres undone, and to busy
herself about such things, as she
her self thinks best to be done of her own brain, eue^ so does it not
become them that profess them selves members of Christ's church to leave the
commandments of God undone, and to fall in hand with doing things of
their own fansy and ymaginacion. For they that do so show them selves no
handmaydes, but mastresses, nether are they obedient subjects unto God, but
rather take upon them to be arroga^t superiors, and presumteous checkemates.
Let them therefore that will
be of Christ's church learn to be handmaydes and no mastresses, to be
obedient subjects, and not arrogant superiors and presumpteous check mates,
unless, while they follow their own fantasyes and dreams they fall from the
church of Christ unto Antichrists Synagoge, as we may se in the Papists,
Anabap tistes, Sacramentaries. etc.

Moreover we read that this The true Church is the spouse of Christ.
church is not only called the hand maid of the LORD, but also the spowse of
Christ, yea and that not un worthy. For as a good, honest, and faithful wife
is obedient to her hus bond in all things, loves hi^ pure ly, cleaves unto
him only, has no pleasure to run after other men, delyghteth her self with her
husbo^des company alone, is glad to please him Cant. iiii. (...). Cor. xi Apoc.
xxi.
always, seeks the accomplyshment of his will, and by no means will at tempte
any thing that should be displeasaunt to him: So likewise this church, which
is the spouse of Christ, is obedient to her husbonde Christ in all things,
loves him with an ernest, pure and unfeigned love, cle ueth to him only, has no
pleasure to Mark well.
run after other men, whereby she may be entised from the love of her
husbonde, delyghtethe only in him and in his word, sea^eth the acco^plyshment
of his will, and shows her self in all points conformable to his most
divine will, being loathe that any thing should be commit ted on her behalf,
that should be displeasaunt to him in any point.

Let them therefore now take heed, that recou^te the^ selves to be of this
church, and will be called the spouse of Christ, that they cleave only to
their husbonde Christ and his word, Joan. viii. x.
hear him alone, follow his voice delyght only in his most holy law, seek
the accomplysshment of his divine will, and by no means admytte nor hear the
voice of any stranger For as ye woman is an whore, though she bears ye name of
an honest wife Note
never so much, ye is not contented with her own husbonde, but follows
other men, ronnethe a whore hunting after straung lovers, castyng away the
sincere and true love, that she ought to bear toward her husbonde: So
likewise, if such as call the^ selves the church and spouse of Christ,
forsake their husbonde Christ, be not contented with him and his word alone, but
follow strau^g doctrines, and run a whorehu^tinge ^eb. xiii.
after new lawmakers, which teach things contrary to the will of this
bridegroom, yea or else they themsel ues make laws, decrees, acts, con
stitucions. etc. that fight with the voice of this heavenly shepparde,
Brydegrome and husbonde Christ Jesus, surely, surely let them believe me, they
are not y^ spouse of Christ, but fylthy whores, unclean harlottes, stynckynge
strompettes, abominable adultresses, and stulyke Goshyppes, though they wear
never so many triple crowns, carnal hat tes, glysterynge myters, forked cap
pes. etc. upon their heads, and have never so many pilers, pollaxes, cross ses,
crosser staves, and silver rods Joan. x. Cant. iiii.
borne before them. For ye spouse of Christ only hereth the voice of her
husbonde, follows that, cleaves to that, and by no means ronneth a
whorehuntynge after strange lovers, neither carethe she for their voice, fair
words, and flattering promyses, seeing she knowethe full well, that no man
can show things more necessary and profitable un to her health and salvation,
than her husbonde has already done. There fore recounteth it she a very vain
and mad thing to forsake this her true and alone husbond Jesus christ, and
to follow strangers. I am gelous over you, says S. Paul, with a godly
ielosye. For I have married ii. Cor. xi.
you to one man, to bring a chaste virgin unto Christ.

This much have I spoken by the way concerning the church, y^ all men may
know the church of Christ, which is the handmayde of Ephe. v.
God, and the spouse of Christ, having another spor nor wryncle, but altogether
glorious, pure and undefiled, from the Synagoge of Antichrist, and be no more
deceived with outward appearaunces, glysterynge visars, and painted clokes,
unless they go forth to worship, reverence and have in honor certain
deceatfull shadows for ye self truth, as we have done in times paste. God
make us all the servants of ye Lords hand maid, and grant that we may so
abide in the old catholyke faith and in the doctrine of Christ's church, y^
we may be blissed, and have our bonds Search the News out of heaven.
broken, as it follows.

O LORD because I am thy servant, yea thy servant in deed, says David,
and the son of thy handemayde, thou haste broken my bonds. What bo^des are
these, that The bo^des
God has broken, and made us fre from them through Christ, setting us again
at liberte? Uerely the bonds of Satan, sin, death, hell, desperacion, and
the curse of the law.

First as concerning Satan, eve Satan. Genesis iii. Romans v. Ephi. ii.
ry man knows, how we were in captivity and bondage to him by the sin of
our first father Ada^ which through his disobedience did cast us into the
bonds of that infernal Prince, made us captive and thraull, so that by our
own strength, power wit, polecy, and free will we could never have set our
selves again at liberte. But God of his tender mercy and fre goodness, when we
had cast our selves into this bondage, promised us deliverance, when he spoke
these words unto y^ serpent: I will set emnite between the and an woman,
between her seed and thy seed That self seed shall trede down G^e. iii.
thy head. And so many as believed them, were at that very instant de lyuered
from the bonds of Satan. What it is to tread down the head of the Serpente
For what other thig is it to tread down the head of the serpent, tha^ to
vanquish and subdue him, to make his power frustrate and of no strength yea and
to set those again at liberte, which before were his bond preso ners. Now
although this promise were not streyghtwayes fulfilled, yet stood it in effect
with y^ faithful, and they so sone as they believed, were Mark well. Joan. i.
Galathi. iii mat. iii. xvii Marc. xix. Luke. iii. ix. (...). Joan. iii.
delivered out of captivity, set at liberte again, and made the sons of God,
through the faith that they had i Gods promise, which he made unto the^ in his
derely beloved son Christ Jesus. But when christ was once come, and had
fulfilled this promise of his celestial father, than was Satan's power utterly
adnihilated and made of no strength. His bo^des were broken, wherwithe so
miserably he did detayne and hold us, as S. John^ testifies, The son of god
did appear for this purpose, even to dissolve, losen and break the works of
the dyuell. So that now Satan has no more power over us, except wyllyngly we
cast our selves again into his bonds, as S. James says, resist the dyuell,
and Iaco. iiii. i. Pet. v
he shall fly from you. For although he goes about like a roryng lion, seakyng
whom he may devour, yet can not he devour, no nor yet so much as once byte
or towche any faithful man, except he will of a set purpose cast himself
into that Dragons rauenyng teth to be rent and torn, the son of God has set
us at such liberty, and given us our ma numission so freely and plenteously.

Now seeing that Satan, which is our most utter enemy, is so va^ quisshed and
subdued, and we utterly de liuered from his captivity, that our bonds are
broken, wherewith he had us bound, it is to be thought that sin, death, hell,
desperacion, and the curse of the law can work us any evil, or that their
power is so great, that they are able to make us still captive and bond
presoners?

As towchynge sin, to whom is it unknown, that as the power Sin.
of Satan is va^quisshed by Christ, so in like manner is sin through him put
to flyghte. He is that lamb of God, which takes away the sin Joan. i. Math.
i. Esa. xiiii. (...). Tim. i. (...). Cor. v. i. Pet. ii. Ephe. v. Esa. iiii.
of the world. He is that savior, which saves his people from their sins.
He is, yea he is that Lord in deed, which puts away our iniquities, yea
and that for his own sake, and will remember them no more. He came into y^
world to save sinners. He being without all sin offered him self upon the
altar of the cross, a swetesmellynge Sacri fice to God y^ father for us, and
made a sufficient satisfaccio^ for all our syn nes. Through his name all the Pro
phetes bear witness, that so many i. Joan. ii. Act. x. Act. iiii Heb. vii. viii
ix. x. i. Joan. i.
as belue in him, shall receive remis sion of their sins. For there is no
health in any other, nether is there any other name given unto men, whereby they
might be saved, but only the name of Jesus Christ. He is that Bishop, which
with one oblacion yea and that once for all, has made them perfect for ever
more yt are sanctified. To be short, ye blood of Jesus Christ Gods son
makes us clean from all sin. Thus se we yt by Christ, by Christ's death
passion and blood the bonds of sin are broken, and we set again at
liberte. Death, hell, desperacion


As for death, hell, and desperacion, what can they do? Are not they also
overcome? Let us hear what ye Scripture says, out of the power of death,
says the LORD will I Oze. xiii.
deliver them, and from death will I redeem the^. O death I will be thy death.
O hell I will swallowe the up. S. Paul also says, Death is i. Cor. xv.
swallowed up into victory. Where is thy stynge O death? Where is thy
victory O hell? The stynge of death is sin, and the power of syn i. Joan. v.
is the law. But thanks be to god which has given us the victory through
our LORD Jesus Christ. Again, By death has Christ put hi^ Heb. ii.
to flight, that had lordshyppe over death, that is to say, the dyuel, that he
might deliver them, which through the fere of death, were al their life time in
danger of bondage. O sweet and confortable sayenges. O thalone true and
christen pleasu res. The law


As touching our last enemy, which is the curse of the law, are not we also
made free from that by Christ? What says the scripture? Gala. iii.
Christ has redeemed us from y^ curse of the law, while he was made accursed
for our sake. Again, Christ Romans (...)
is ye perfect fulfyllyng of ye law to iustificacion for every one that
beleuethe Also in another place, be it known unto you, ye men and brethren
Act. xiii.
that through this man Christ is pre ched to you the forgyuenesse of sins, and
from all the things, whereby ye could not be justified by ye law of Moses,
through him every one that believes is justified.

Thus se we, that our bo^des are broken through Christ, and we also set at
liberte from the danger of all our enemies, so that now there is no co^ Romans
viii. Joan. viii. Gala. iiii. Heb. vii Romans viii.
demnacion for the^ that are engraffed in christ Jesus, which walk not after
the flesh, but after the spirit. For the law of the Spirit of life through
Christ Jesus has made them fre from the law of sin and death. Who will now
lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that iustifyeth, who can
than condemn? Hereof comes it to pass, Luke. i. Psalm. cxv i. Joan. iii.
Math. i. Oze. xiii. i. Cor. xv. Romans x.
that after we be once delivered from ye power of our enemies, have our bonds
broken, and set at liberte through christ and christ's passion, death and
blood, by whom Satan is vanquisshed, sin put to flight, death overcome, hell
swallowed up, desperacion driven out of place, the curse of the law utterly
taken away, yea the law fulfilled, and heaven gates open for the faithful,
all that ever A good lesson.
we do in christ, is acceptable in the sight of God, taken to good worth, and
much made of, not for the dignite of the work it self, but because it is
salted with ye dignite, holiness, i. Cor. x. Colos. iii.
ryghteousnes, purite, and innocence of Christ, in whose name what so ever is
done, smells swetely before GOD, so that both the thoghtes, words, deeds,
life and death of ye Saints, that is, of the faithful, yea and all ye ever we
do, is precious in the sight of y^ Lord, as we herd before. For sure we are
that all thin ges work to the best for them that love God, which are called
of purpose. For those whom he knew before, Romans v^.
has he ordened also before, yt they should be like fashoned unto y^ shape of
his son, that he might be the first begotten among many bro thren. As for
those, whom he has ordyned before, them has he called also, and who^e he
has called the^ has he also made ryghteous, and who^e he has made ryghteous,
them has he glorified also. What shall we say than unto these things? If
God be on our side, who can be against us? But let us se, what is to be ren
dred, and given again unto God for these his inestimable benefytes toward us
miserable sinners?

The seventh verse.
I will offer to the / the sacrifyce of praise / and on the name of the Lord
will I call.
The tente string.
OUr Mynstrell David goethe David is like him self.
forth to be like himself, y^ is to say, to show that he is one of a very
gentle and thankful nature, ready at all times unto the vttermoost of his
power to recompense and make amends for any point of kyndenes that is showed
to hi^, as we may se here. For after y^ he has song of the singular and
incomparable benefi tes of god, which are showed not on ly to him, but also to
all mankind, I mean so many, as are the faithful people of God, believe in
him, and live according to his divine will, and has considered how greatly
Ephe. (...).
both he and all the faithful are blyssed of God through them in Christ Jesus,
he now takes an occasion to ponder with him self how he may show him self
thankful again to God, as he did before in y^ ^ourth and fyfte verse of this
his song. For he desires nothing to be more estraunged from his manners,
than ingratitude and unthankfulness. He Note
thyncketh it no point of humanite to leave the beneficence and gentle
liberalite of a mortal man vnrecompensed to neglecte therefore and nothing to
regard the inestimable goodness and the infinite benefits of God, he
recou^teth it an act highly to be detested and abhored of any christen heart.
To show himself therefore thankful to God for his benignite, he is now full
bent. But what will he give God again? What amends will he make him? In what
things will he show (...) self thanckefull again unto the LORD* Will he
give him mountains of gold? Will he bring him heaps of precious stones? Will
he fetch him frankensence, and other sweet savors out of Araby? Will he offer
unto him fat oxen, lusty hayffers, well liking sheep. etc. Na verily, for he
knows full well, that Esa. (...). Iere. vii. Psalm. xxiii. xlix. Agge. ii.
(...). Cor. x. Math. xxv.
GOD reiectethe all these things in many places of the holy Scripture, neither
has he any need of David's goods, which has both heaven and earth at his
own plea sure, and all that is contained in them. David knowethe full well, y^
his goods were given him of god that he should help his poor neigh bours with
the^. What will he give God than? Uerely the sacrifyce of The Sacri fice of
praise Psalm. xlix.
praise and of thanckes gyuynge. For this is that thing, which God de syreth
so greatly, as he himself testifyethe, The Sacrifyce of praise, says he,
shall honor me. Again, offer to God the sacrifyce of praise Co^oss. iii.
What so ever ye do, says s. Paul, in word and deed, do all things in y^
name of the LORD Jesus, gyuynge thanckes to God and the father by him. Again,
he merciful. Also in Ephe. (...)*
another place, Give thanks always for all things in the name of our LORD
Jesus Christ to God and the fa there. To the Hebrews also he wry teth on this
manner: By him, he me Heb. (...)
neth Christ, do we offer the Sacrifice of praise always to god, that is to
say, the fruit of y^ lyppes, that give glory to his name.

Thus se we how acceptable a What it is to offer y^ sacrifice of praise.
thing to god, the sacrifice of praise ^s. But what is it to offer the
Sacrifyce of praise unto god? Uerely to confess and vnsaynedly to grant that
what so ever is naught, comes of our selves, again y^ all that ever good is,
comes of God only as he says by the Prophet, O Israel thy destruction
commethe of (...). xiii
thy self, but thy health and salvation comes only of me. For this is the
greatest praise y^ we can give
to God, for to knowledge him alone the author and gyuer of all goodness, and
that all our ryghteousnes, wisdom, holiness, sanctificacion, rede^cion, (...).
Cor. iiii. Jacob. i.
virtue, devotion, and all that ever good is, comes of him alone, and not of
our selves. This is that sa crifyce wherewith God is hyghly de lyghted. This is
that oblacio^, that gives so godly an odoure before god. This is that
offryng, that ma keth God well pleased with him, y^ does offer it, in as much
as by the oblacion hereof he confessethe him self to be able to do no thing,
that of the own dignite and righteousness (...)
thereof, may seem worthy to be accepted in the sight of god, and there fore
gives he all the glory, honor encomy, laud, praise and magnifice^ce to god
alone, as the Prophet says (...). i.
O Lord all glory be unto the, and to us shame and confusion. The saints
themselves also pray on this man Psalm. ^xi.
ner, Not to us, O Lord, not to us, but to thy name give all the glory for thy
mercy and truethes sake. God himself also says, I am the Esa. xiii.
Lord, this is my name, I will give my glory to no other, nor my praise to
graven Images. If God him self will not give away his glory and praise to
other, certes we do him tha^ much injury, yfwe steal it from him, and give it
to any other crea ture either in heaven or in earth. If we depely consider
with our sell ues at al times the great kyndnes of God toward us, we shall vndoub
tedly be moved to sing perpetual praises to his most blyssed name, and
continuallye to offer the sacrifice of thanks gyuyng unto him.

But in as much as I have enter ted abunda^tly of thanks gyuing, and of the
sacrifice of praise in my Pathway unto prayer, I will now cease to speak any
more of it at this time. Read from the li^. unto the ^v. Chapter.

As towchynge the inuocacion of the Lords name, whereof David again makes
me^cio^ in this place, I have spoken sufficiently of it in the fourth verse of
this Psalm. Thou may therefore (most gentle Reader) if thou will, resort
thither for this matter. I am loathe to be te dious unto the. I will go forth and
make an end, although that which follows, may also seem abunda^t ly to be
entreated of heretofore.

The eight verse.
I will pay my vows un to the Lord in the syghte of all his people i^ the
courts of the Lords house / yea even in the mids of the / O Jerusalem.
David is ever one man. He had David is ever one man.
rather sing one song a thousand times, than he would once at tempte any
thing without the au thorite of Gods word. He is at this point, that he will
do nothing, ex cepte Gods word bearethe him in it. He will not cleave to his
own good intentes, minds and zeles. He will worship God according to his
word. He sets before his eyes this commandment. That I command the, do
that only to the Lord, neither put thou any thing to it, nor yet pluck ought
therfro^. Again, I command the to do y^, which is pleasant in the sight of
the Lord thy God. Also in another place, Ye shall not do every one of you,
that which ye yourselfe think Deu^ro. xii xiii.
right and good. He can make no shyft to be diverse in the worshippyng of God.
He can inuente no new and strange honorynges of god, as the old Phareses did
in times paste, Esa. xrix ^ath cv. (...). vii.
and the Papists and Monckes have done syns y^ time, but all in vain, as the
Scriptures testifye. He kepethe him self within the bonds of Gods word, and
as he said before that he would pay his vows, that is to say, do those
things y^ he had promised to his LORD God, keep his Commandments, follow
and accomplysh his most godly will in all points unto the vttermooste of his
power, and do the office of a true king, seake Gods glory, promote his holy
word, tenderly The office of a true king.
love his subjects, mayntayn virtue, and suppress vice: even so does he now
again. So that David knows not how to reco^pense in any part the goodness
of GOD, but only by keeping his most holy commandments, and in gyuynge him
hattye and contiall thanckes, which he also promisethe to do in this verse.

But seeing that I have entreated of the whole matter, that this very
contains, in the fyfte verse and seuenhte string heretofore, I will speak no
more of it at this present, but only note this one thing that our Mynstrell
says, He will pay his vows in the courts of y^ Lords house, and in the
mids of Jerusalem. By the courts of y^ Lords house, and by Jerusalem is
none What is signified by the courts of y^ Lords house, and by Ieru salem. i.
Cor. iii. v^ ii. Cor. v^.
other thing signified, tha^ y^ chirch of Christ, I mean the congregation of
Saync^es, that is to say, of the faithful, in whom God dwells by his holy
Spirit, as S. Paul says. The Temple of God is holy, which ye are. His
meaning is this, look where so ever the people of god is most gathered
together, even there in the thyckest of them will he set forth the glory of
God, as we read of the good King Josias. He will seake all means possible,
that ^iii. ^e. xxiii ^i. pa. xxxiiii Would god that all kyn ges would^ ^o this.
all things in his Realm shall be or dered according to y^ law of God, and that
no vice shall reygne among his people, nether I dolatry, nor swearynge, nor
disobedience, nor whoredom, nor manslaughter, nor stealing, nor bearing
false wytnes, nor any other vice, that is prohibited by the holy scripture. And
that this thing may the more fortunately come to pass, David him self, in
as much as he is king and excels all other in dignite, will al so far
excel and pass all his subjects in virtue and godlynes. He will be unto them
an example and spectacle of all goodness. He will like unto Phil. ii. Math. v.
Iosue. i. Psalm. i.
as great light shine before his people in godly conversation. The book of the
law of the Lord shall never depart from him. He will read and meditate in it
day and night. He will not steake to the corrupt judgments of other, nor be
led with the dotyng fansys of those pestilent flatterers, Truth will we, but he
himself will look upon the scriptures Man we^
of God with all diligence, and and evermore caull unto God for the assistence
of his most holy spirit, Ioa^. xiiii. xv
that that sweet confortoure may both assist and conforte him in all his godly
and virtuous enterpryses, and also lead him into all truth, and kno ledge of
Gods most holy will. To make an end, come there life, or comes there death,
David is fully determned to stycke by Gods word, and Math. x. Mar. iiii. Luke.
viii.
to seek his glory above all things yea and that not in corners and secret
places, but openly, that all the world may evidently se that David is an
earneste setter forth and an unfeigned promotoure of Gods glory, and by that
means be occasioned also with David to honor, worship, magnify, laud, and
praise GOD with one mind and voice for evermore, as Christ Math. v.
says: Let your light so shine before men, that they may se your good
works, and glorifye your father, which is in heaven, to whom with his only
begotten s^nne our LORD and omnisufficient savior Jesus Christ, and the holy
Ghost that most sweet confor toure, be all honor, praise and glory for ever
and ever.

Am^.
Give the glory to God alone.
The. Cxlv. Psalm.


I Will magnifye the, O God my king, I will praise thy name for ever and ever.

Every day will I give thanks unto the, and praise thy name for ever and ever.

Great is y^ Lord, and marvelous worthy to be praised, there is no end of his
greatness.

One generation shall praise thy works unto another, and declare thy power.

As for me I will be talking of thy worship, thy glory, thy praise, and
wondrous works.

So that men shall speak of the might of thy marvelous acts, and tell of thy
greatness.

The memorial of thine abundant kyndenes shall be showed, and me^ shall sing
of thy righteousness.

The LORD is gracious and merciful, long sufferynge, and of great goodness.

The LORD is loving to every man, and his mercy is over all his worckes.

All thy worckes praise the (O LORD) and all thy Saynctesgyue thanckes unto the.

They show the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power.

That thy power, thy glory and myghtynes of thy kingdom might be known unto
men.

Thy kingdom is an everlasting kyngedome, and thy dominion endures through
out all ages.

The LORD vpholdethe all such as should fall, and lyfteth up all those
that be down.

The eyes of all wait upon the, and thou gyuest them their meat in due season.

Thou openest thine hand, and fyllest all things living with ple^ teousnes.

The LORD is ryghteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.

The LORD is nigh unto them y^ call upon him, yea all such as call upon him
faithfully.

He fulfylleth the desire of them that fear him, he hears their cry and
helps them.

The LORD preserves all them y^ love him, but scatterethe abroad all the
ungodly.

My mouth shall speak y^ prays^ of the LORD, and let all flesh give thanckes
unto his holy name for ever and ever.

Praise the everlasting.

Imprynted at London in Botulph lane at the sign of the white Bear, by John^
Mayler for John^ Gough. Anno Dn^i. 1542.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. Per Septenn^m.



