A TREATISE OF THE CANKER OF ENGLANDS COMmon wealth.

Divided into three parts: Wherein the Author imitating the rule of good
Physicians, First, declares the disease. Secondarily, shows the efficient
cause thereof. Lastly, a remedy for the same.


By GERRARD DE MALYNES Merchant.

Sublata causa, tollitur effectus.

Imprinted at London by Richard Field for William Iohnes printer, dwelling in
Red-crosse-streete in ship Allie. 1601.

THE FIRST PART, CONCERNING THE DISEASE OF THE English Common- wealth.
PLato the Philosopher perceiving that equality would be the cause that every
man should have enough, was of opinion and willed all things in a common wealth
to be common, whom sir Thomas Moore in his Vtopian common weal seems to
imitate, to the end that an infinite number of laws already made, and the
making of so many new laws as daily are made, might be abolished: whereas all
of them are not sufficient, for every man to enjoy, defend and know from
another man's that which he calls his own proper and private goods. But this
equality cannot be established, neither was there any such ever used in any
age, or commanded by the word of God, but that possessing these worldly goods,
we should so use them with charity toward others, as though we did not
possess them at all: Nevertheless (as a commonwealth is nothing else but a
great household or family:) yet the Prince (being as it were the father of the
family) ought to keep a certain equality in the trade or traffic betwixt his
realm and other countries, not suffering an ouerballancing of foreign
commodities with his home commodities, or in buying more then he sells. For
thereby his treasure and the wealth of the realm does decrease, and as it were
his expenses become greater, or do surmount his incomes or revenues.

This is the unknown disease of the politic body of our weal public
before mentioned: the efficient cause whereof must be found out, before any
remedy can be applied or devised.

Sublata causa, Tollitur effectus: says the Philosopher: which is graffed in
every man's judgment, that the cause of any thing being taken away, the effect
is taken away withal. Hereuppon let us note, that properly the wealth of the
realm cannot decrease but three manner of ways, which is by the
transportation of ready money, or bullion out of the same: by selling our home
commodities too good cheap: or by buying the foreign commodities too dear,
wherein chiefly consists the aforesaid ouerballancing, which is the cause of
inequality, we giving in effect both money and commodities, to have foreign
commodities for them.

To prove our assertion, we can hardly make this inequality appear in the
application thereof to every member of our commonweal: albeit we do find the
want of treasure and moneys exported for the same. For it be falls unto us
concerning moneys and wealth, as it does unto a General of a camp of ten
thousand supposed armed men, whereof muster being taken at several times, and
upon several days, yet all of them generally are found to be armed, because
one lends his armor unto another, whereas if they were all mustered in a
day, and at one instant, a great part of them would be found to want armor, the
like want of moneys and wealth should we find: if the matter were duly
examined. Yet for an instance, let us consider how much the price of lands is
risen with us of late years, even within the memory of man, and that this
their estimation or value is in regard of money, or other things mony-worth;
and compare the same thereunto, and we shall very well perceive, that we ought
to balance the value of things upon this beam, laying the lands on the one
side, and the money or things mony-worth in value on the other side, to find
out this inequality.

Aristotle says, that riches is either natural or artificial.

The natural riches as lands, vines, forests, meddowes, and such like.

The artificial, as money, gold, silver, wooles, cloth, and all other
moueables and household stuff. Now as this artificial riches is proceeding of
the natural riches, and that both these do receive their price and estimation
by money (which is the measure and rule to set a price to every thing:) so
reason requires a certain equality between the natural riches of lands,
and the artificial riches of commodities proceeding of the same.

Hereupon let us note further, that all the trade and traffic of the realm
is performed under three simples; namely commodities, money and exchange, and
examine the original beginnings of them, and their present course, seeing that
God caused nature to distribute her benefits, or his blessings to several
climates, supplying the barennesse of some things in our country, with the
fruitfulness and store of other countries, to the end that enterchangeably
one commonweal should live with another.

First we find that when commodities began much to abound in the world, all
manner of metal, as gold, silver, copper, tin, lead and iron, grew into
greater estimation, as being fit and more durable to preservation, and so the
purest and finest metal most esteemed: at which time the riches of men was
notwithstanding described to consist of cattle, commodities and other
moueables: and there was a permutation of things which was very combersome, and
did require much carriage of wares up and down, and from one country into
another. By reason whereof money was devised to be coined of the finest and
purest metals, to be the rule or square, whereby all other things should
receive estimation and price, and as a measure whereby the price of all things
might be set. And to maintain a certain euenhood or equality in buying and
selling, and the same to have his standing valuation only by public
authority: to the end that all things might equally pass by trade from one man
to another.

The Standard of the starling money of England, was first coined at a place so
called, by Osbright a Saxon king of England, above seven hundredth years past,
at which time an ounce of that silver was divided into twenty pieces, and so
esteemed twenty pence, which so continued until King Edward the first his
time, and until King Henry the sixth, and then by the kings public authority
was valued at thirty pence, and continued until king Edward the fourth, and
then at forty pence, until King Henry the eight, and then at forty five
pence, until King Edward the sixth, and so until her Majesty's most happy
reign, at five shillings the said ounce of twelve ounces to the pound Troy
weight, and twenty penny weight to every ounce, and twenty four grains to
every penny weight.

Now as the finenesse of silver is twelve ounces, and every ounce also twenty
penny weight in finenesse: And the finenesse of gold is twenty four carats, and
every carat four grains likewise in finenesse: so all moneys of gold and
silver do participate of this finenesse according to their substance: and the
standard starling money of this realm is eleven ounces, two penny weight fine
silver, and eighteen penny weight of copper or allay. And our Angel gold is
twenty three carats, three grains, and one half, and half a grain of allay.
And the Crown gold is twenty two carats of fine gold, and two carats of allay:
and the proportion between the gold and silver, is eleven of fine silver to
one of fine gold, or eleven of starling silver, to one of crown gold.

Omitting now to speak of the finenesse, weight and proportion of the money of
other countries, let us consider the property of the money, or the effects
thereof; which is, that plenty of money makes generally things dear, and
scarcity of money makes likewise generally things good cheap. Whereas things
particularly are also dear or good cheap, according to plenty or scarcity
of the things themselves, or the use of them.

According to the plenty or scarcity of the money then, generally things
became dearer or good cheap, whereunto the great store or abundance of money
and bullion, which of late years is come from the west Indies into Christendom,
has made every thing dearer according to the increase of money, which like
unto an Ocean dividing her course into several branches in diverse countries,
has caused a great alteration and inhauncing of the price of every thing, and
most especially because the money itself was altered in valuation in some
countries: so that the measure being altered and made lesser, there went more
number to make up the tale, and of necessity other things went accordingly.
For money must always remain to be the rule, and therefore is called Publica
mensura.

Some perceiving the foreign commodities of late years to be more risen in
price then our home commodities, did attribute the same to the under valuation
of our money in regard of the moneys of other countries, and would have had our
moneys inhaunced, wherein they were so far from the mark, that if our coins
were inhaunced: all the foreign commodities and our home commodities would be
inhaunced in price accordingly: and the foreign commodities most of all by the
course of things as they are now used. The like would happen if the money were
embased by allay, as we have seen by the sequel of things yet fresh in
memory, during the most victorious reign of king Henry the 8. Yet hereby we
may perceive that in substance of the matter, they seemed to aim at the maine
point of this ouerballancing of inequality. And that the Proverb is true:
That the unknown disease puts out the Physicians eye. This ouerballancing
consists properly in the price of commodities, and not in the quantity or
quality: and to counteruaile the same, our treasure must of necessity be
exhausted and spent, to the great impouerishing of the Realm, and the
transportation of our moneys. Whereby it comes to pass, that we find the
contrary of our former observation: for as in countries where scarcity of
money is, things are good cheap: so on the contrary, in countries where
things are dear (as the foreign commodities are with us) money should be
^^^^tifull; which plenty we must consider, not in comparison of a lesser
quantity which was in times past: but according to the present abundance now
found in all countries, which do duly participate by the ^^urse of trafique a
competent share ^^ the whole, far otherwise then we ^^e.

Neither was money more plenty ^^retofore, when an ounce of silver was worth
but 20. pence, judging of money (...) we do of commodities, either dear (...)
good cheap according to the ^^ice. Whereas money must be still ^^e measure,
and is valued by public authority at a certainty: whereby it does not only
give or set a price unto all other metals: but received (as it were) by
repercussion a price in it ^^^fe, and ruled at all times the course (...)
commodities. For albeit that plenteousnesse or scarcity of commodities in
particular does alter the price (...) commodities, yet with money it is
otherwise, notwithstanding the course (...) usury or exchange devised thereupon:
whose operation falls in effect upon the commodities. And the valuation or
alteration of money, concerns only the sovereignty and dignity of the Prince
or governor of every country, as a thing peculiar unto the^.

To avoid the carriage of money, a certain exchange was devised, grounded upon
the weight, finenesse and valuation of the money of each country, according to
value for value. And so is our exchange of England grounded upon the weight
and finenesse of our money aforesaid, and the weight and finenes of the money of
each other country. And thereupon the valuation of money makes the price of
exchange for every place, according to the denomination of the money, whereby
we ought to examine and compare our weight aforesaid, with the weight of other
countries, and the finenesse of our standard aforesaid, with the finenesse of
the standards of the moneys (...) other countries. And if we differ not with
them in the proportion between the gold and silver, then may our exchange
run at one price both for the gold and silver, taking the denomination
according to the valuation of the moneys of each country. And hereby shall we
find how much fine silver or gold our pound starling contains, and what
quantity of other moneys of Germany, France, the low countries, the East
countries, or elsewhere, we are to have to counterualue the same in the like
weight and finenesse answerable unto ours, whether it be by the pound, crown,
ducket or dol^r, giving always value for value, which therefore was called
Par. This course of exchange being abused, and of late years become as it were
a trade (...) rising and falling in price, according to plenty or scarcity of
money, and in regard of discrepance and distance of time and place, is become
predominant or does overrule the course of commodities and money, and is the
very efficient cause of this ouerballancing of commodities before spoken of,
and consequently of the decrease of our wealth, and exportation of our moneys,
as by demonstratiue reasons shall be proved hereafter: which efficient cause
being taken away by the remedy hereafter declared, will make the effects to
cease, and these general benefits will ensue.

Losses of at the least five hundredth thousand pounds, which the Realm
sustaineth yearly, shall be avoided.

Transportation of ready money shall be prevented.

The commodities of the Realm shall be advanced in sale and price.

The foreign commodities shall be brought into the Realm better cheap.

The Queens Customs shall much increase yearly.

Money will be imported again unto us in ample manner.

The Queen shall have a great gain by the Mint, and not only poor monyers,
but also all other artificers and workmen shall be set on work, to avoid
idleness which is the root of all mischief: when through plenty of money and
gains, merchants shall be encouraged to seek out new trades, whereby the
Realm will more flourish through Gods blessings.

Wherefore concluding with this first part of our treatise, let us note, that
the right course of exchange being abused, does overrule the course of
commodities and money. And causes an ouerballancing offorrain commodities with
our home commodities, which consists in the price of commodities, and not in
the quantity or quality of them; to the discourse whereof we are now to
proceed.

THE SECOND PART, OF THE EFFICIENT cause of the disease of the body Politic
of Englands commonweal.
WE have already said, the abuse of the exchange for money to be the very
efficient cause of this disease: wherewith as with a Canker the politic body
of our weal public is overtaken; the cause thereof being predominant and
ouerruling the course both of commodities and money. Now we must proceed to the
application thereof: first for the money, and then for commodities with their
coherence in the course of traffic.

This exchange is made properly by Bills, when money is delivered simply here in
England, and bills delivered or received again for the payment thereof in some
other country beyond the seas: or when the like is done beyond the seas, and
the money received here in England: and that upon a certain price agreed upon
between party and party, which is termed the price of exchange, whereof the
merchants have the only and whole disposing, and buy and sell their commodities
beyond the seas accordingly, without that few or none of them do look into the
nature of the exchange, but only to the present object, which is, to know how
the price thereof goes at the time when they have occasion to deal therewith,
either in taking up or in delivering out money by exchange. Whereas if they will
be exchangers indeed, they must know perfectly the weight, finenesse and value
of our English coin, and compare the same with other foreign coin. And as they
bargain with others abroad, so they must be assured to have somewhat more
(besides their gains. and charges) then the value of our current money for
things which they sell upon a price: or else the Realm and they both shall
lose in the end a matter incredible in process of time, as hereafter we will
make manifest. But first it behooves us to speak somewhat of the commanders
or rulers of this exchange through all Christendom, which in effect are the
Bankers: and therefore shall we declare, what the nature of a Bank is, from
whence the name Ba^ker is derived.

A Bank is properly a collection of all the ready moneys of some Province,
City, or commonwealth, into the hands of some persons licenced and
established thereunto by public authority of some Prince, erected with great
solemnity in the view of all the people and inhabitants; and with an
ostentatio^ in the open market place upon a scaffold, of great store of money,
of gold and silver (as belonging unto the persons so established) which is unto
them an attractiue matter to persuade and allure the common people to bring
their moneys into these Bankers hands, where at all times they may command it
and have it again at their own pleasure, with allowing them only a small
matter of five upon every thousand ducats or crowns, when any man will retire
or draw his money into his own hands again: which although it be once but in
twenty years, yet during all that time they are to have no more: so that
these persons or Bankers do become (as it were) the general servant or
Cassyers of that Province, City, or commonwealth.

These Bankers, as they have their companies, factors, or correspo^dency in the
chief places of trade in Christendom: so must they also keep account with
every man, of whom they have received any money into their Bank, out of which
number no man of that jurisdiction is almost exempted. But generally all men
are desirous to please them, and to bring their ready money into their Bank,
as also such money as they have in foreign parts: in regard whereof these
Bankers do give them great credit: for if any man have occasion to bestow in
merchandise or to pay in money three or four thousand ducats, and have but one
thousand ducats in the Bank, the Bankers will pay it for him more or less, as
the party is well known or credited, without taking any gain for it, although
it be for three, four, six, or more months.

This seems to be a great commodity (as no doubt it is to men in
particular:) but being well considered of, it will be found a small friendship,
and no more in effect then if a man did participate the light of his candle
unto an other man's candle: for what is this credit? or what are the payments of
the Banks: but almost or rather altogether imaginatiue or figurative? As for
example: Peter has two thousand ducats in the Bank, John has three thousand,
and William four thousand, and so consequently others more or less. Peter
has occasion to pay unto John one thousand ducats, he goes to the Bankers at
the hours appointed (which are certain both in the forenoone and afternoon)
and requires them to pay one thousand ducats unto John, whereupon they
presently make Peter debtor for one thousand ducats, and John creditour for the
same sum. So that Peter having assigned unto John one thousand ducats, has
now no more but one thousand ducats in Bank, where he had two thousand before.
And John has four thousand ducats in the same Bank, where he had but three
thousand before. And so in the same manner of assignation. John does pay unto
William and William unto others, without that any money is touched, but
remains still in the Bankers hands, which within a short time after the
erection of the Bank, comes to amount unto many millions. And by their
industry they do incorporate the same, which may easily be understood, if we do
but consider what the ready money and wealth of London would come unto, if it
were gathered in some one man's hands, much more if a great deal of riches of
other countries were added thereunto, as these Bankers can cunningly compass
by the course of the exchange for moneys: the ebbing and flowing whereof, is
caused by their motion from time to time, as shall be declared.

But some will say or demand, Can not a man have any ready money out of the
Bankers hands, if he have occasion to use it?

Yes that he can: But before he have the same, they will be so bold, as to
know for what purpose he demands the same, or what he will do with it.

If it be to pay any man withal, they will always do that for him, as having
account almost with all men, for he is accounted to be of no credit, that has
not any money in bank.

If he do demand it for to make over by exchange in some other country, they
will also serve his turn in giving him bills of exchange, for any place
wheresoever, because they have their companies or correspondency in every place.

If he do demand it for his charges and expenses, it will be paid him
forthwith, because it is but a small sum, and in the end the money comes
into their hands again.

If they pay out money to any man, that having money in bank, will bestow the
same in purchase of lands, they will still have an eye to have it again in
bank one way or another, at the second and third hand. So that they once being
possessed of moneys, will hardly be dispossessed. And their payments are in
effect all by assignation and imaginatiue.

And if they have any money in bank, belonging unto orphans or widows, or
any other person, that has no occasion to use the same, they will allow them
interest after four or five upon the hundredth in the year at the most, and
upon especial favor; for every man seeks to please them, as in matters
where Commodum priuatum bears the rule: for they can easily please men in
particular, in giving them some credit, of that great credit which they have
obtained in general.

The money then remaining in the bankers hands, is employed by them to other
uses and purposes.

First, they do deal with great Princes and Potentates, that have need of
money, for the maintenance of the wars, as the Geneuoises and Germans did
with the Emperor Charles the fifth during the wars in Germany, taking an
exceeding gain for it. And as of late years the Florentines and others have
done with Philip the second king of Spain, during his wars with France and
the Low Countries, causing him to engage the revenues of his dominions, and
territories, and of the customs, and notwithstanding to pay them exchange,
rechange, and interest of 25. 30. yea, 50. upon the hundredth, devouring a great
part of his Indian treasure, as might at large be declared.

Secondarily, they do ingrosse the commodities and marchandises of their own
country, and of other countries many times also: so that none can be had but
at the second hand, and at such prises as they think fit to sell them: and
that to Englands great prejudice, as shall be declared.

Thirdly, whereas it is a maxim in matters of exchange, that plenty of money
beyond the seas, makes the price of the exchange to rise, and scarcity of
money likewise beyond the seas, makes the price to fall: And so on the
contrary with us here in England, plenty of money makes the price to fall, and
scarcity of money makes the price to rise. And that for places for the which
the head of the exchange rests with us, and on the contrary, for places where
the head rests with other nations; hereupon I say it is an easy matter for
these bankers with the money to rule the same at their pleasure, from place to
place, causing (as it were) ebbings and flowings, as shall be declared.

For the better understanding hereof we must note, that the head of the
exchange is taken to be at such a place or places where the price does not
alter, as for example: We have the head of the exchanges for Hamborow,
Middleborough, Embden, Amsterdam, and other places, for the which we do
exchange for our pound or twenty shillings sterling, as well beyond the seas,
as here in England, the mutability of the price being with them of beyond the
seas, in giving or taking still more or less of their money from time to time
for our pound sterling.

And on the contrary, for as much that the price of exchange for Roan, Paris,
and other places in France, and for Venice, and other places in Italy or
elsewhere, does from time to time alter with us according to their Crown or
Ducat, therefore does the head of those exchanges rest with them: And so by a
common use according to the alteration of the price, we say the exchange is
high or low.

High, when there is more money given of the moneis of other countries for our
money, then the right exchange is of value for value, which is called Par, as
before is mentioned. And that according to the discrepance of time, for places
whereof we have the head of the exchange.

Low, when there is less money given for our money, then the right exchange of
value for value, according to the discrepance of time (which is reckened
according unto interest after ten upon the hundredth.) And that also for the
places whereof the head of the exchange rests with us.

And for places whereof we have not the head of the exchange, it is directly
the contrary: as when we do give more or less for their crown or ducat, then
the same is worth in substance, as before, according also to the discrepance of
time. But as in all traffickes the general does always govern the
particular: So the trade of cloth and kersies does with us command the course
of all the other trades or France and other places. And the places where this
trade is used, are in the course of the exchange to be ruled by us, who have
the head thereof, which may command and direct all the other parts and members
of the body, as hereafter shall be declared.

The bankers having the general course of exchanges, do therefore also command
our particular exchanges of England. They deliver at Middleborough 165. pound
Flemish, for to have at London 100. pounds sterling, which (...) at 33.
shillings of their money, for our pound sterling of 20. shillings payable at
vsance which is one month. The hundredth pounds being here received, is made
over again at 35. shillings 6. pence, or 36. shillings Flemish the pound,
payable also at vsance, and then there is received at Middleborough again 177.
pounds 10. shillings, or 180. pounds Flemish, here is now differing 3.
shillings Flemish in 33. shillings, which is above 9. upon the hundredth for 2.
months, and above 50. upon the hundredth by the year: and in the like manner
for Hamborough, Embden and other places; and many times more, if upon some
occasion moneys are made over, or taken up, either for the payments of soldiers
or other employments, especially if the exchange return not to the place from
whence it came, as from London to Hamborough, when it came first from
Midleborough: and so for Roan, Venice, Lions and other places, according as it
is delivered out payable at sight, vsance or double vsance. And taking occasion
upon discrepances and distances of time and place, they make through plenty or
scarcity of money, the same dearer or cheaper as it pleased them. For whereas
the standing banks are kept at Madril, Lions, Civil, Bizanson, Florence, and
other places, there the heads of every bank do set a price and agree upon it
by common consent, at the time of the general payments of exchanges, which are
either three or four times a year, and are called by the name of ferias, or
faires only for moneys. So that according as the price of exchange is there by
them concluded for any place at the ending of the old fair, presently the
price of the new exchange will be accordingly; and so with other places: in
which maine sea of exchanges, our exchange of England running as a river or
branch, must needs be governed by the former current, which is not perceived of
our merchants, that commonly follow this rule, if the exchange do come high
from beyond the seas, presently they will make it higher here, in regard of
discrepance and distance of time and place before mentioned: I say and entreat
still of the general exchange for those places whereof we have the head, and
thereby might command, if the course thereof were not abused by the bankers,
and those that have made it become as a trade to Englands great prejudice. As
by the application thereof (either here or beyond the seas) to the course of
traffic, may be manifested, both concerning moneys and commodities.

If the exchange with us here be low, so that more will be given for our money
being carried in specie, then by bill of exchange can be had, then our money is
transported, whereas otherwise no man would adventure the money, and stand in
danger of the law to loose treble the value, if by a simple bill of exchange he
might have as much paid him beyond the seas: for in truth gain is the cause
of exportation of our moneys, which gain does not consist in the substance of
the money; for as the right exchange is grounded upon the weight and finenesse
of our money, and the weight and finenesse of the money of each other country,
and thereupon the valuation of the money makes the price of exchange: it
follows that neither difference of weight, finenesse of standard, or
valuation of moneys, can be any true cause of transportation of our money: so
long as a due course is holden in the exchange. But this due course being
abused, causes (as before) our moneys to be transported, and makes scarsitie
thereof, which abated the price of our home commodities: and on the contrary
aduanceth the price of the foreign commodities beyond the seas, where our money
concurring with the moneys of other countries causes plenty, whereby the price
of foreign commodities is advanced and so might it fare with the price of our
home commodities, being transported to those places, were we not hindered by the
tolleration of their moneys to go current far above their value with them, and
to the greater tra^sportation of ours, and hinderance of importation of any
unto us.

This tolleration of the price of money beyond the seas, must be distinguished
from the valuation which is done by public authority of the Prince or
governor of every country, whereas the tolleration is brought in by
particular men, as the merchants are, that contrary to the commandment of
Princes or states, do receive and pay the money at a higher rate, advancing the
price of their commodities. But if we will look unto the proportionable course
of this tolleration, we shall easily perceive, that men of understanding have
the handling thereof, and that superiors will wink at private men's faults for
their own benefit.

First, those that hold with us in proportion between the gold and silver 11.
to 1. by valuation, suffer all the gold to go current after 12. to 1. whereby
our angel is worth above 18. sh. flemish with the^, not being otherwise worth
17. shillings. So the 2. angels making our pound sterling, will make by exchange
at the most but 34. shil. and being carried in specie, do make above 36.
shillings, our exchange still holding his course according to the silver, which
by the par is esteemed at 33. shillings 4. pence, albeit therein is also an
error, and so for Hamborough at 24. shillings eight pence, or twenty five
shillings either, or for France at six shillings the crown: all which
calculations are uncertain, and prejudicial to the realm. And yet my meaning
is not to enter into these particulars, as not being the efficeint cause, but
only accidentally may be mean causes, the due course of the exchange not
being observed.

Secondly, for the silver moneys we shall also find a great difference, if we
compare our money of 11. ounces two penny weight fine, to their Ricx dolor,
esteemed at 10. ounces 12. penny weight, or the Philip dolor of 10. ounces fine,
or rather 9. ounces 18. penny weight as we find the same. Much more if we do
consider that our silver money yielded the greatest profit, being carried to the
mints beyond the seas, where of late since the East Indies trade, it has been
made equal with the valuation of gold, and rather more, whereby in effect they
held the proportion of 11. to 1. with us. But then the par of exchange ought to
be above 36. shillings with the Lowcountries, or above 25. shillings with the
East countries, or else the realm and every subject thereof loses a great
matter, and our moneys both of gold and silver, are continually exported by the
means of a low exchange.

If the exchange with us here be high, so that more money will be received
beyond the seas by bill of exchange for our moneys, then the same would yield
if it were carried in specie: then every man is desirous to make over money by
exchange, and that money which should be employed upon the commodities of the
realm, is delivered by exchange to the great hinderance of the vent and
advancement of our home commodities: and yet the foreign commodities not any
way therefore sold the better cheap.

And herein we must consider two especial points, first that both here and
beyond the seas, all commodities generally are sold payable at some short time,
unless it be some small part for ready money. Secondly, that generally our
mercha^ts are here the takers up of money, and the merchants strangers are the
deliuerers of money: and the contrary is in some sort beyond the seas. So that
the course of exchange has an easy command, still to Englands great
prejudice. For the scope of our merchants to make return homewards, implies
at all times a necessity, and so it does not with the other: for they do take
their advantage either by exportation of our moneys, or by making of it over at
a high exchange. And albeit that the transportation of money is prohibited very
straightly, yet there is always 3. ways of exportation: namely, by commodities,
money, and exchange. But there is but two ways of importation: namely,
commodities and exchange, whereby comes a notable ouerballancing of foreign
commodities with our home commodities. And whereas it might be thought that
those moneys taken up by exchange at a high price, should be employed by
English merchants upon our home commodities, or that the foreign commodities are
sold accordingly, it is altogether contrary; for he that takes up money at a
high exchange, does it upon necessity, and must pay the same again of the
prouenue of his cloth or commodities already sold, or to be sold, or must
maintain that money running upon exchange, wherein he shall be a notable
loser, and pay treble interest. If it be paid by the prouenue of commodities
sold before and which is owing in debts, then is he a loser, because his
commodities were not sold accordingly: and if it be paid by the prouenue of
goods which are sold for the purpose, then is not he only a small gainer or a
great loser, but by his rash sale he overthrows another man's market, to the
general loss. And in conclusion, the gain sought upon money does impeach the
gains to be sought upon our home commodities.

And albeit that in regard thereof one might infer, that the greater gain
would also be sought by our merchants upon the foreign commodities, which
should turn to the prejudice of the Realm: yet that is not so, for the
foreign commodities are generally sold payable at some short time without any
regard hereof: and if they be sold for ready money upon such an occasion the
better cheap by merchants strangers, for to enjoy the benefit of exchange,
it falls still upon our merchants necks that are the takers up of money
generally with us.

If the price of exchange be high beyond the seas, where generally our
merchants are the deliuerers of money: then must they give much to have their
moneys made over, whereby the gain of their commodities being sold formerly,
is clipped. And yet they give no more most commonly then the value of our money
is, for the money which they deliver there, is according to the tolleratio^ by
them received at a higher rate far above the value, and in the same manner
paid out. But when the exchange goes high, our merchants are inclined to buy
foreign commodities, or to barter their commodities for the same, which
opportunity is not only observed by the Bankers, but also procured. To which
end they follow by the means of their factors, our merchants at all places,
even as the Eagle follows her pray, be it at Stoade, Hamborough, Embden,
Middelborough, or elsewhere: where they will have an especial care to be
furnished with the commodities wherein they deal: as Veluets, Satine, Silks,
Fustians, Venice gold, or such like, and that against the arrival of any
quantity of cloth and kerseis out of England. For albeit that they do not buy
the greatest quantity of our English commodities, yet they know, that when our
merchants have made sale of their commodities payable at some short time, and
received bills for the same, and that the buyers of clothes do pay the old
debts and make new debts again: then the exchange rises, whereby our merchants
rather then to make over moneys by exchange at a high rate (the rising whereof
they will also increase by plenty of money delivered by them,) will make their
return both for the money and bills of debts in foreign commodities, the
price whereof is rated by them at their own pleasure. So that our merchants
buying dear, must sell dear, which brings a wonderful ouerballancing, and
causes us to feed upon our native soil, giving the benefit thereof unto
other Nations. Whereas we should live by the gains of our home commodities
being sold unto other nations, and now we are driven to seek a gain upon
foreign commodities, to the great prejudice of our own country: and that is
also a cause that many of our merchants perceiving a small gain, and sometimes
none at all to be had upon our home commodities, do buy and seek their gains
upon foreign commodities, making over money from hence at a high exchange for
that purpose, or causing at a high exchange beyond the seas, money to be taken
up, wherein although they may be gainers, yet the Realm generally bears the
loss, and they feed still upon their mothers belly: wherein they are the more
instigated through the immoderate use of foreign commodities. Albeit that we
do not find so great an inconvenience in the wearing of the foreign
commodities, as we do in the price of the^, being within this fifty years
risen far otherwise then our home commodities are, the money still being with
us the self same: and herein consists the ouerballancing aforesaid: for if
the foreign commodities, which are consumed and brought as it were unto doung,
shall amount in value or cost more, then the commodities or fruit of the
land, certes that land is unprofitable in every man's judgment, much more if
we do consider that the people of other countries do very much enrich
themselves by their industry and handiwork upon the stuff of other countries.
And it were to be wished, that our cloth were sold at so dear a rate, and
according to the price of foreign commodities, that thereby other nations
would take upon them to make our clothes themselves: which might easily be
remedied, by selling our woolles the dearer whereof they must make them.

Now returning to our Bankers, let us note again, that upon the sale and
expedition of the greatest part of our commodities beyond the seas, and most
moneys being made over, and commodities returned, then the exchange begins
with them to fall; which falling, they can also help by withdrawing their
money for a time. And heretofore they would make over money as a low exchange
for England, to be entertained here at interest after ten pro cento, until
they could have it made over again at a high exchange. And likewise such
commodities as they could not conveniently sell, they send into England where
they can afford the same better cheap then our merchants, which turns still
to the loss of the Realm. And most especially if the exchange come low from
beyond the seas, then is it made presently here accordingly, and then upon the
low exchange our money is transported in specie, as before is declared.

If any man will object, that if a low exchange is the cause of transportation
of our moneys in nature of trade: then on the contrary a high exchange beyond
the seas must have the like operation, whereby money might be imported: for if
(for example) in four Philip dollers, or two hundred stiuers, I shall have as
much fine silver as in 20. shil. starling, and whereas the exchange (though
erroniously) is taken thereupon at 33. shillings 4. pence to be Par or value
for value, should be but at 32. shillings six pence, which is low, and
therefore the money carried in specie will yield more: so when the exchange is
beyond the seas at 34. shillings six pence, or 35. shillings, as being high,
should cause money to be brought over. Hereunto we answer, that it would be so,
were it not for the tolleration of the moneys to go current far above their
value beyond the seas: for if this Philip doller (which in valuation according
to this rate, is at 50. stiuers) be received by you in payment for 52. stiuers,
who sees not that herein you are abused? And so consequently in other kinds of
coins.

What shall we say to these Bankers which commonly are in league with the
financiers of the low countries, and others that are as it were belonging to
their exchequer and mints, and have all the dealings for the coyns, with whose
advice they can hoord up moneys, when by public authority the coins are
advanced by proclamation: and on the contrary, to pay out moneys when money is
proclaimed down: and then also the price of exchange is made accordingly,
whereby the realm still loses, and every man in particular, not knowing the
weight and finenesse of the money, but following the course of exchange, as
being carried away with the stream?

Another will say, that when the exchange is low beyond the seas, where our
merchants are generally the deliuerers of money, that then the less of that
money they give, the greater is their gain, enjoying the benefit of the
exchange. But he does not consider that at a low exchange there be few or no
takers at all, unless it be English merchants, that have money to pay by
exchange which was here taken up, and so still some of them and the Realm
loses. Whereas other Nations will rather transport our moneys, then to cause
their friends to take up money at a low exchange, or to make over money at a
low exchange: which otherwise might turn to our good, our merchants being here
the takers up of money, as they are generally the deliuerers beyond the seas,
as is aforesaid. And on the contrary (as I said before) here is always a
necessity which enforces our merchants to buy foreign commodities to make
return into the Realm, either when the exchange is high, when they see a
loss evidently, which is not so to be seen in the commodities, whereof they
may expect some gain: or else when the exchange is low, and when there is no
takers up of the money, and when they cannot bring it over, neither at a high
exchange or low exchange, which of course enforces a wonderful ouerballancing
of commodities in nature before alleged; and is a cause of many superfluous
commodities which are brought into the Realm. Some that are continual takers
up of money with us, do seem to point at the course of the exchange, as though
the same were most commonly indifferent, neither too high or too low; and
herein are they mightily deceived, seeing the very ground of the exchange
called Par, is false both according to the valuation and tolleration of moneys
in all countries. And if they think that money at interest is hard to come by,
and that the due course of exchange would be an interruption to the traffiique,
they are therein also in an error; for money would not only be kept within the
Realm for the general good, but also more plentifully delivered at interest:
and albeit this were not, it were better one should sit still without trade,
then to become a looser. Some others having observed that plenty or scarcity
of money does alter the price of commodities, do think that our merchants
should enjoy the benefit of plenty of money which generally makes things
dear. But first they do not consider, that our merchants most commonly do sell
their commodities payable at some short time: next that the bankers keep their
commodities upon a certain price at their pleasure, and that although money by
their means does abound one way for one place, it will be scarce again for
another place: and he that takes up the same shall pay dearly for it: whereby
the commodities he buieth become charged ipso facto into his hands, and must
sell them accordingly: and for the commodities which our merchants upon such an
occasion of plenty of money do sell, their benefit cannot counteruaile the
loss which they receive in making their return, either by a high exchange
which is caused by plenty of money beyond the seas, or by foreign commodities
which are risen accordingly and much more. So that in conclusion, our home
commodities are abated by the abuse of the exchange four manner of ways.

1. By scarcity of money (which makes things good cheap) caused by the
exchange. 2. By the gain sought upon money, which otherwise would be sought
upon the commodities. 3. By a high excha^ge with us, which causes men to
deliver that money by exchange in nature of trade, which otherwise by some might
be employed upon the commodities: likewise by a low exchange, which causes
exportation of our money. 4. By the rash sale of our commodities by young
merchants and others that are driven to pay money taken up by exchange here in
England, thereby spoiling the market of others.
Foreign commodities on the contrary are advanced 4. manner of ways.

1. Through plenty of money in other countries, which makes generally things
dear; which plenty is increased by our own moneys transported to our own
hurt every way. 2. By a high exchange beyond the seas, whereby men are inclined
to buy foreign commodities, and by a low exchange, when there are no takers up
of money; and herin our excessive use of the said commodities does encourage
the^. 3. By the tolleration of moneys beyond the seas, to go current far above
their value: for by the alteration of the valuation of money, the price of
commodities does alter also; and this tolleration being a hinderance for the
importatio^ of money, causes the greater quantity of foreign commodities to
be bought and brought over at a dearer rate. 4. For that the principal
commodities of silks, veluets, fustia^s, and such like, are engrossed by the
Bankers that sell the^ at their pleasure, our immoderate use giving them the
greater cause.
Hereby comes an ouerballancing of foreign commodities with our home
commodities, which to supply or counteruaile, draws away our treasure and
ready money, to the great loss of the commonweal: for let us suppose with
the least of 10. in the 100. loss upon al our commodities going out, and the
foreign commodities coming into the Realm, and we shall find it to be above
500000. pounds every year. So that in sum, we do give daily both treasure and
our home commodities to have foreign commodities at a dear rate. Thus we may
consider how these Bankers and every one of us do use, or rather abuse the
exchange, and make of it a trade for moneys, and therefore may aptly be called a
merchandising exchange: whereas otherwise the right use of exchange is very
needful and convenient for the maintenance and traffic of intercourse betwixt
merchant and merchant, or country and countries. But the mercha^dizing exchange
which thus ouer-ruleth the course of commodities and money, is intolerable: for
we shall find in effect, that one sum of money, of one sort and kind of coin,
has two prices, and two valuations, at one time, exchanged for one distance of
time; differing only by the diversity of place and country: whereby private
men alter as it were the valuation of coins, which is rated and valued in all
countries by the Prince or governor of the same, as a matter concerning their
dignity and sovereignty: and so consequently of too high presumption for
subjects to step into'. And it is also against reason, to change the course of
nature in the coin, as though a pound weight should be more weighty the^ a
pound, or a pound tale, more then a pound tale: wherefore our mercha^ts ought to
have a singular regard thereof, and always look rather to have somewhat more
then the value of our current money: as for example;

One buyeth a pack of clothes, which cost him 50. pound, or one hundredth
angels the pack, to be paid in angels, which hold 24. carats fine, save half
a grain of allay, or 11. ounces 2. penny weight in silver money. The same pack
of clothes is to be sold beyond the seas, and to be rated at so many pieces of
plate of 8. rials or dollers, pistolets, ducats, or french crowns, as hold the
same carrats and ounces in gold or silver aforesaid. And in making sale of
these clothes, moreover to take so much over and above these carrats and
ounces, as both may bear the charges and a reasonable gain.

And whereas the finenesse of gold is 24. carrats, and the finenesse of silver
12. ounces, if our merchants after the rate of 4. ounces fine silver, and 8.
carrats fine gold, for twenty shillings sterling, did compare the value of the
foreign coin, and thus take somewhat more over and above, keeping this
proportion, the realm should more flourish, and both it and they be stored
with money abundantly.

This may be understood the better, if we do suppose that some merchants
strangers do come over into the realm, to buy such a pack of clothes, for
the which we have paid one hundredth Angels, holding 23. carrats 3. grains and
one half: and these merchants do bring some strange coin of gold or silver,
not known in the realm, and do tell us that the same is worth so much in
their country, or holds so many carrats or ounces in finenesse, and will
give the same in payment unto us: we neither believing them, nor knowing the
value of their coin, are not contented therewith, but we will go unto the mint
to have an assay made thereof, and accou^ting what our moneys do hold, together
with a reasonable gain, will be contented to accept of the merchants strangers
money, as it shall be found worth in substance. And then if we do compare the
same to the price of the exchange, for the place whence these merchants came,
we shall find whether it goes current, and according to the valuation thereof,
or whether the valuation be more or less then the exchange is, especially then
the marchandizing exchange, which is the cause of the unnatural alteration of
the coin.

In the like manner will other nations deal with us, if we do buy any
commodities of them beyond the seas; and which is more, have already done even
within the realm, as experience has taught us: for albeit that with us it was
never convenient or expedient that our moneys should be exported, and therefore
one would think it made no matter of what metal our money were made of, so
long as for the same all commodities might be had within the realm: yet men
will have such stuff as is worth so much in substance in other places
elsewhere, or else they will sell their commodities accordingly: howbeit that
if having sold their commodities, and not being desirous to export any
commodities of the realm for their return homewards, they will not greatly
weigh what the moneys are made of, if they may be sure to have the value
thereof paid them by bills of exchange into their own country. And then in a
manner there might be dealing and negotiation without money: and the exchange
will qualify the same, for the operation thereof is wonderful. But what is a
kingdom without money, being (since the invention thereof) rightly called Nerui
bellorum? And if any Prince would call in all the good money, and deliver base
money for it, which by his authority should be valued and proclaimed at such
rates as the good money was, the matter would be of small importance, for so much
as concerns the course of things amongst his subjects: so as by way of
exchange, as aforesaid, the merchant stranger had his turn served, and that
the Prince were sure that other nations should not draw that good money from
him, or deceive him with the like base money, and that those that had the
managing thereof did execute their charge for his benefit. But every thing
considered, we shall find that the richer the coin of a kingdom is, the
better is the estate and government thereof, so long as it is not bereaved of
the money.

Thus much Obiter: Now to answer unto those that say, what needs a man to
make so near a calculation, I can give a guess at the matter, reckening the
exchange, charges, and a reasonable gain in a Summa totalis, and make sale of
my commodities accordingly: what loss is there in this, or wherereunto serves
this distinction?

First, we have already showed you, that generally this merchandising exchange,
either being high or low, here or beyond the seas, is prejudicial to the
realm in the transportation of our money. And next in the abating of the price
of our home commodities, and advancing of the price of the foreign commodities.
And now to answer this particularly; we say that in process of time, there is
a great and incredible loss, both to the realm and your self: for whereas
you say, to have a regard to the exchange, it is not such a regard as you ought
to have; but you do mark the exchange only, according as the price thereof is
at the time when you sell your commodities or do deal therewith, or sometimes
according as you imagine the price thereof will be, whereas you have a secret
loss, or might gain more if you go near to the reckning, as aforesaid:
whereby though at that instant you loose but little, which you might have
gotten, the realm will feel the smart of it in the end. You might as well
say, the matter of exchange is but by bills, which are but paper and ink, there
can be no hurt done by them, whereas if you consider how the selling and buying
of commodities is ruled according to the price of exchanges contained in the
bills, you shall find the matter before spoken of; nay therealm generally does
feel it: for this canker of marchandising exchange, is like to the cruelty of
the Planet Saturn, which makes his sphericall course in thirty years with
great operation, although we do not so sensibly perceive his motion.

This may be illustrated by a similitude, for concerning the sale of our
commodities, we do as much in effect as if some draper did sell his cloth at a
certain price the yeard, and suffered the buyer to measure out the same by the
buyers own false yeard. Or like a grocer that sells out his pepper by the
pound, at a price agreed upon, and is contented that the buyer shall weigh it
out by a weight, which (unknown unto him) is false, and so loses unawares,
or gets less then he made account of, because the fraud used in the weight
and measure is unknown unto him. Even so is the cunning course of the exchange
unknown unto us.

Having thus briefly and substancially set down the course of money generally,
and the operation of the marchandizing exchange, and omitting to speak of the
diversity of exchanges of the like nature used in other countries, because in
handling them we should exceed the bounds of a treatise, and but rehearse that
which by other men's writings may be seen: we must now a little consider the
course of commodities in regard of bartering or permutation before money was
devised, the rather for that our merchantes beyond the seas, are much inclined
thereunto, howbeit in an other manner, for it is according to the rule of
money, considering that thereby every man does rate or value his commodities in
bartering of the same, and that money being differing in weight, finenesse and
valuation according to the denomination, is again ruled by the exchange
founded thereupon, and comes in effect all to the former matter, which (to
avoid prolixitie) we do not reiterate, but do leave to the consideration of
the wise, as every man is taken to be in his profession. And as we find other
nations to be, which by the way, for the better understanding of our subject,
shall be declared.

We have already described riches to be either natural or artificial, and
that both these are valued by money; and that for as much as the artificial
riches does proceed of the natural, therefore reason requires a certain
equality in the estimation thereof. Hereupon this consideration is incident,
that as there are three temporal things for the behoof of man: namely, food,
houses, and apparel; so must we account all the things serving thereunto
according to the use of them, and the scarcity or plenty of those things,
according to the same use, having always a regard and care, not to pay too
much for the things serving for the belly; especially, such as in some sort may
be spared or forborne: and not to sell too good cheap, the things serving for
the back, or in effect to barter them for superfluous things, always
admitting ciuility, which (albeit that men account that civil which is accorto
the manner of every country, as the Proverb is: (Countries fashion, countries
honor,) yet reason must rule herein, with a due consideration of Gods good
creatures and gifts, which cannot be done without an vnfatigable industry,
both in discerning the variety of them, and in observing their infinite number
and pure creation, in which regard precious things have their estimation. So
that the same ciuility must be reduced to the good of the commonweal, and for
the upholding thereof, living together in Christian society, giving so far
place unto reason, that every man may endeavor himself to the preservation of
the weal public, and conceive generally that other nations not endued with
so much reason, are always inferior unto us in that regard, even considering
all men alike in an estate of politic government. Who sees not then, that
without any cause of admiration, some men do wonder as it were at the
simplicity of the West Indians, Brasilians and other nations, in giving the
good commodities of their countries, yea, gold, silver, and precious things,
for beads, bells, knives, looking-glasses, and such toys and trifles? Nay,
that we our selves are guilty of the like simplicity, if herein (the premises
considered) yet an error were committed? For giving our good commodities, or
the treasure which chiefly from the West Indies is received for our said
commodities, unto them of the East Indies, and paying ten or twelve for that
which heretofore did not cost in the said Indies above one, as it did in the
beginning of the reign of Philip the second king of Spain, when pepper was
sold for 120. fanans, or ten French crowns the bahar, which is four hundredth
London weight, and is not much more then three half pence the pound; cloves
accordingly at six pence the pound, cinnamon three pence, and so forth: we
shall not need to speak of other dainties and delicacies of superfluous
things, so long as a moderation is used; neither is our meaning that the money
or treasure in every country should be buried: but if we will not prevent the
general transportation thereof, that at the least we should seek to enjoy by
the course of traffic the benefit thereof as other nations do, and to have
the same also imputed unto us.

In Poland, Lituania, Prussia, and other countries adjacent, when they abound
with corn, money is very scarce, and the price of corn thereby much abated,
at which time they will either tolerate or proclaim the moneys to be
inhaunced in price, and moreover the same to be delivered at interest after 15.
20. and sometimes 25. upon the hundredth for a time, presently great store of
ready money comes from all places thither, which makes the price of corn to
rise, the money also being risen to a great value: and yet our English
commodities do rather fall with them in price, or remain unsold, the moneys
being transported thither only for the employment of corn. And although we
have not an ordinary exchange with any of those countries, which sometimes is
made according to the Florin of thirty grosses: and therefore some ready money
(one would think) might be brought over in return of our commodities: yet the
same is not done, for that the tolleration of moneys to go current with them
far above their value, hinders the same; in regard whereof our commodities
might be sold accordingly, and then shall we not only with adventure make
return in very needful and necessary commodities of pitch, tar, deals,
clapboords, cables, ropes, and such like: but also in ready money, if occasion
shall so serve, more profitably for the general good then to make over moneys
by exchange, by the way of Amsterdam, Hamborough, or other places, as upon the
reformation of the excha^ge might effectually be found. And I dare undertake,
that in times of scarcity, when we shall or might have need of corn, the
same may be provided unto us far better cheap, and more commodiously then
heretofore in the like occasions has been used.

In Russia, because their moneys are not only inhaunced, but also embased by
allay, therefore are our moneys by way of trade in nature of bullion carried
thither sometimes, and our commodities sold accordingly, and their necessary
commodities brought unto us in return thereof, as are the above named. There
is no ordinary exchange between us and them, but sometimes according to the
Roble exchanges are made to our loss, when we pay above 13. sh. 4. pence for
the roble, with consideration of the time after 10. upon the hundredth, their
principal money being both small and base, as their Nouogroatcos or Copecos,
whereof 20. make some 8. pence sterling. The trade being otherwise very
necessary, and profitable for the utterance of our home commodities, and
maintenance of navigations; diverse of their commodities, as tallow and hides,
being by us vented again into France and other countries.

In Turkey, where great store of foreign coin is current at a high rate,
commodities are sold accordingly, in so much that their base money of Aspers
and Shahes cannot go current in any quantity, but that the commodities will
rise to double the price in value, in regard of their price, being sold by the
ducat of 40. Medines, and paid in Checknis or Sultaneus, as also dolors of al
sorts, or roials of 8. for of late years they know perfectly the finenes of
moneys, and can discern the good from the counterfeit, and make their
advantage accordingly, in the sale of their commodities: so that the
transporting of any thither, is not so much used as heretofore; much less does
any come from thence back again, because of their tolleration also. And we
have no ordinary exchange with the^, especially our ships requiring still their
lading homewards, whereby their commodities do stand us in more then otherwise
they should: and so much are the gains the greater, which are procured upon
the said commodities, by how much our home commodities are sold too good
cheap, which partly are abated in price by such kersies, cloth, and other
commodities, as some of our merchants adventurers sell with a small gain into
other places, from whence they are carried into Turkey by the way of Venice,
which is prejudicial to the realm.

In Barbary, the money being also much inhanced, and we having no ordinary
exchange with them, albeit our merchants did sell their commodities somewhat
accordingly, yet they have made a nearer calculation, when they wanted sugars
to make their return, and have been constrained to their loss to bring over
gold; in regard of which loss, they had more then reason to sell their
commodities the dearer, to the good of the realm: whereas otherwise if they
had found sugars to make their return by, they would have brought them, were
it at never so dear a rate, to the prejudice of the same. And surely not only
these Barbarians have a due regard of the goodness and course of moneys, but
even that barbarous people of Guinea and thereabouts, have of late years
learned to esteem their gold at a far higher rate then they were wont to do,
observing the course of traffic. And to conclude with such places where we
have no ordinary exchange, let us remember Spain and Portugal, seeing that
since these troubles and interruption of trade, we are not only barred from
the greatest importation of money, of rials of plate, and pistolets, which in a
manner did supply our exportation, and were daily brought over from thence; but
also that by the means of other nations all Spanish wares are bought so dear,
and accordingly sold unto us, that the small gains of our clothes cannot
counteruaile the same: whereas heretofore all our gains were procured upon our
home commodities, being thither transported, and we were very well contented,
if of their commodities we could make our principal as they costed us, with
some small gain toward the adventure and charges.

The sum of all is concerning all the aforesaid countries where we have no
ordinary exchanges, that neither the exportatio^ of our moneys is prejudicial
to the realm, if we bring for it again needful and necessary commodities
into the same: neither is the importion of money beneficial to the realm to
any great purpose, if we do give our good and necessary commodities for the
same, being both ways but a kind of permutation or barter: and those countries
that by inhancing the coin, do draw money unto them, gather but an imaginatiue
wealth, consisting in the denomination and not in substance, whereas the abuse
of the excha^ge causes us, for such places where it is usual and ordinary to
loose and give our treasure with our home commodities, to obtain only foreign
commodities for it, as we have already showed, and will yet make more apparent.

But first, least any man should find fault that we do not declare what the
finenesse of the standard of the moneys is, which are used in the aforesaid
countries, neither their weight or proportion which they do hold between the
gold and silver, we must desire him to note that we endeavor to be in all this
treatise co^pendious and substa^tial, and that having no ordinary exchange for
these places, the matter is of no great moment, especially also for that the
most part of the coins curra^t with the^, are incidently to be handled in their
proper places following. The rather when the proportion beweene the gold and
silver (albeit the sa^e do differ in some countries) brings not any
inconvenience at all, if there be no quantity of commodities in those countries
to establish any traffic between the^, as betwixt Spain and Portugal, Spain
holding 12. to 1. and Portugal but 10. to. 1.

In Scotland, where they hold 12. to 1. in proportion between the gold and
silver, there is small store of commodities to be had to make any return by,
which is the cause that although we hold but eleven to one, yet it breeds no
inconvenience unto us, that therefore our moneys should be transported thither
in any quantity, for all the advancing of the price of their coin, and their
standard of silver being but 11. ounces fine, which is inferior unto ours, and
likewise their weight lesser then ours by four penny weight fully upon the
pound troy, which otherwise would be of importance, considering that we have
not with them any ordinary exchange, which should qualify the same, the rather
for their copper moneys used in abundant manner, as their Hardheads, Bodwels,
Plackx, Atchisons, Nonsunts, and Turnouers, the course of such moneys and the
like being by diverse taken preposterously, as though the silver moneys should
take their beginning in valuation from these copper moneys; which makes them
to incline to the imbasing of moneys, whereas by the authority of Princes,
these kind of coins do receive their valuation, answerable unto the good
silver money: as experience makes manifest in Turkey, with their Aspers and
Shahes. Neither is there any proportion observed between the copper moneys and
the silver, as there is between the silver and gold, as Numa Pompilius the
king of the Romans did, by observing ten of copper for one of silver, and ten
of silver for one of gold: but we shall find, that since that time it has been
diversely taken in diverse countries, according to the use and quantity of the
one or other metal, upon all ocasions. For places where we have ordinary
and continual exchanges, it is of great importance, for either we must make 2.
prises of exchanges, the one for the gold, and the other for the silver, or
else our gold is continually tra^sported, our exchanges commonly having their
course according to the silver. Now if any ma^shal receive beyond the seas for
our gold after 12. of silver for one of gold, we holding but 11. to one in
proportion, who sees not an evident gain of one in eleven, if the silver
moneys do not counteruaile the same by way of tolleration, being received for
above their value beyond the seas: but those that will take this benefit of our
gold, need not to bring silver for that purpose, having foreign commodities
ready at hand, in return whereof the gold is very commodious and profitable,
which is the cause of buying up of the same, when the price of the exchange is
low, as before is declared. We have already declared the general course of
excha^ges, now let us yet enter into some particulars concerning exchanges and
moneys, and of foreign commodities coming from the places with who^ we have
ordinary exchanges. For Roane, Paris, Lions, Bourdeaux, and other places in
France, we have an ordinary exchange made according to their crown of 60.
soulz. The standard of their silver moneys being 11. ounces fine: albeit their
base money, as their soulz, and other is but three ounces and a half or
somewhat better. Their crown gold 22. carrats, and the proportion between the
gold and silver is by valuation 11. to one, but by tolleration 12. to one, and
many times more: the crown of exchange being at 60. soulz, and in specie 63.
64. and 65. soulz. And here let us note the wonderful operation of the course
of exchange; and that whereas the tolleration of moneys in other countries is a
hinderance of the importation of money unto us, yet it is not so with France,
because money is brought over sometimes from thence. Albeit the same be
received above the value, as the French crowns and pistolets, because the
course of exchange is contrary. For plenty of money with them makes a low
exchange, and scarcity of money makes a high exchange with them, and on the
contrary, a low exchange with us: whereas for other places plenty of money
makes a low exchange with us. So that the one being a cause of importation of
money: the other is a cause of exportation, yet the Realm by the course of
moneys receives not any benefit at all in the vent of our commodities as
other countries do. For this French crown being valued at 10. shillings 10.
pence flemish, makes the right exchange to be above 36. shillings for the low
countries, where in specie the same is carried, and in the like manner for other
places. The observation whereof may be applied to the good of the Realm, and
the merchandising exchange being taken away will advance the price of our home
commodities. The rather for that we find that by our French merchants there is
as great a quantity of our home commodities, and such as are brought unto us
from Russia and elsewhere, sold into France, as does counteruaile the
employment of wines and other commodities from thence, the freight and impost
of wines (redounding to her Majesty's benefit and of her subjects) not being
reckened.

The like may be said concerning our exchange for Venice and other places in
Italy, which particular exchanges are (as in all traffiques) governed by the
universal, even in places where little or no trade of commodities is used, as
at Madrill, Lions, and Bizanson, where money is made a merchandise and bereaved
of the natural course whereunto it was first devised. This universal or
general exchange made according unto our 20. shillings sterling as is
supposed, has his course in manner aforesaid, for all such places where most
of our home commodities are sold by the merchants adventurers, be it at Embden,
Middleborough, Amstelredam, Stoade, or Hamborough, where our commodities of
Clothes, Kerseis, Bays, Tin, Lead, or such like, are sold and bartered for
such foreign commodities as are Veluets, Satine, Silks, Venice gold, Fustians,
and such like, purposely engrossed and brought to the aforesaid places, and
sold by the factors of the Bankers to our merchants, at so dear a rate, that
even other nations must buy the like commodities the dearer for our sake, which
is the cause that our merchants selling the said commodities dear accordingly
unto us, are notwithstanding small gainers, although generally the realm loses
greatly. All which comes to pass by the means of the exchange being abused
as before is showed, both for the transportation of our moneys, which for a
long time we have given to contervalue the price of the foreign commodities
with the price of our home commodities according to the ouerballancing before
spoken of, which during the trade with Spain from whence money was continually
brought over, could not so sensibly be felt as it is now, notwithstanding the
great purchasses of reprisall goods. So that the effect of it is like unto the
barter of two merchants, the one delivering commodity and money, and the other
commodities only: he that delivers commodities only, does ouerset the same
in price, and the other that delivers commodities and money does ouerset his
commodities also somewhat accordingly: but does not consider that he cannot
ouerset his money: whereby it comes to pass, that he has foreign
commodities at a dear rate for his home commodities and money: yet because he
finds through the excessive use of those foreign commodities present sale
with a reasonable gain, he thinks to have made a very good match: whereas by
his means the Realm is not only deprived of the ready money, but sustained a
great loss besides, in paying too dear for those commodities, as we may
easily perceive, if we do consider both the prices of the above named foreign
commodities, and our home commodities altered within these fifty years.

We are like unto him that did not ouerset his money as aforesaid, because we do
esteem our moneys by way of exchange less in value then they be, and do
receive the money of other countries far above their value, according to
their tolleration, especially they holding the proportion between the gold and
silver thereby continually twelve to one.

At Hamborough and Stoade the ordinary reckening is taken to be 9. marks 4.
shillings, for our 20. shillings sterling, every of their marks being sixteen
shillings Lups, making 148. shillings, which is 24. shillings 8. pence of their
money for our pound. The Rickx doller is 33. shillings: so that 4. Rickx dollers
and one half make 148. shillings or 24. shillings 9 pence, without reckening
the discrepance of the time of 2. months for their vsance, the consideration
is at the least taken after ten upon the hundredth for the year.

At Embden this Rickx doller being current in payment after Flemish money at
47. or 48. stiuers: and the Angel at 11. gilderen and one half, what merchant
is he that cannot calculate this exchange to be abused, and that 36. shillings
flemish cannot answer our money?

If any man would think, that upon admonition given to the States of the low
countries this might be reformed, and the like reformation would follow in
other countries, especially those of Hamborough and other places adjoining,
holding their moneys always as it were at a stand: yet all would be to small
purpose if it were by a general consent reformed and established, so long as
the exchange shall be suffered to rise and fall from time to time upon all
occasions.

The States of the united low Provinces having made it felony by the law,
and devised all the courses and means to effect the same, could never do it.
Albeit that in Anno 1594. they kept their mintes without work for the space of
a veare and more. For they are not only interrupted by the several mintes of
other Princes adjoining unto their country, but also for not having so
absolute a government, the body thereof being compounded of equal parts, every
one claiming as absolute power as the other. Howbeit we shall find, that
generally by them all there is a kind of proportion kept both between the gold
and silver, and in the valuation of them. Neither were it convenient for the
States to cry down their moneys, whilst the 17. low Provinces are separated,
albeit they have suffered of late, and still do without any alteration of their
moneys, that the Archduke Albertus of Austria does value certain ducats (which
he caused to be coined) at a higher rate then they be worth: as having occasion
to use silver for the East Indies, which they obtained for the gold which they
had from us and elsewhere. But omitting many other particular matters, let us
conclude with the second part of our treatise, wherein we have showed how the
course of exchange being abused, does overrule the course of commodities and
money. Also that the transportation of money for places from whence we have
necessary commodities by way of permutation for our money, can not be
prejudicial to the Realm, as the abuse of the exchange is, for those places
where our merchants have the utterance of our chief and principal
commodities, which exchange both of course and by practice is ruled by other
nations, the Realm receiving thereby an incredible loss, through the
ouerballancing of the foreign commodities with our home commodities in nature
before alleged: which to supply, draws away our money and treasure; and
brings such inequality between the natural riches and the artificial
riches, that husbandme^ are many times, when the harvest fails, unable to pay
their rents, and poor artificers to live by their handy work, as having
nothing but from hand to mouth. For the course of foreign commodities upon the
alteration of money, brings withal an alteration in the government of a
commonweal.

Every man knows, that by reason of the base money coined in the end of the
most victorious reign of king Henry the eight, all the foreign commodities
were sold dearer, which made afterward the commodities of the Realm to rise
at the farmers and tenants hands: and thereupon gentlemen did raise the rents
of their lands, and take farms to themselves, and made enclosures of grounds:
and the price of every thing being dear, was made dearer through plenty of
money and bullion coming daily from the West Indies: by reason whereof, and
especially for that the ounce of silver was advanced by the said king Henry
the 8. from 40. pence unto 45. pence, and afterward in process of time came
to be advanced to 60. pence the price thereof could no manner of ways abate,
albeit the money was afterward restored to her former purity and finenesse:
and so would it be to small purpose, if (according to some men's opinions that
would have things good cheap as heretofore) the valuation of anounce of silver
were reduced again at 20. pence. For let us consider how all these things have
driven one another, as in a press going in at a straight, and examine them by
a retrogradation: if we require gentlemen to abate their rents, give over
farms, and break up enclosures, it may be they would do so, if they might
have all their provisions at the price heretofore: whereunto the farmers and
tenants (as I suppose) would easily condescend if they might have all things
else at the merchant strangers hands or others, at the same rate as they were
wo^t to have heretofore. And the merchant might say again, that he will sell
his wares as he was wont to do, if he may have the like money answerable in
value and finenesse, as he was wont to have heretofore: and that with great
reason, seeing that permutation of commodities did cease with us, and that
money was now to measure or value things, and that the same must have his value
according to weight and finenesse as may go current in most places.

Now the money being reduced to her former purity and finenesse, had not that
effect, because the valuation was altered and advanced to sixty pence; which
if it had been abated to twenty pence, would only have altered the price of
things by denomination, and not in effect, so long as we give still the
quantity in weight and goodness in finenesse of our moneys. But I pray you to
what purpose would this be, and that your exchange grounded thereupon should be
made accordingly, if you would suffer the price thereof to rise and fall, to
the great prejudice of the realm, as before is alleged: which being reformed,
will be the only way of preservation and augmentation of the wealth of the
realm, and a great qualification of the things above mentioned, by bringing
plenty of money within the realm, and staying that which will further pass,
whereby our home commodities will be advanced in price, which will increase the
quantity of them, and set not only more people on work to make our home
commodities, but also other commodities now imported, having within the realm
fit matter or stuff thereunto. The due consideration of all which, will make
us to imitate the custom of good citizens, which seeing their city on fire,
loose no time to enquire how and when the fire began, but endeavor themselves
with engines, buckets of water, and other necessaries to quench the flame
thereof: wherefore let us without loosing any more time, run to the remedy
following.

THE THIRD PART: A REMEDY AGAINST the Canker of Englands Common wealth.
BY that which has been declared, we see how one thing drives or enforces
another, like as in a clock where there be many wheels, the first wheel being
stirred, drives the next, and that the third, and so forth, till the last
that moves the instrument that strikes the the clock. Or like as in a press
going in at a straight (as we have said) where the foremost is driven by him
that is next him, and the next by him that follows him, and the third by some
violent and strong thing, that drives him forward, which is the first and
principal cause of putting forward all the rest before him: if we were kept
back and stayed, all they that go before would stay withal: this is therefore
called Causa efficiens, which not being rightly discerned from the mean
causes, made that many men were never the near to remedy the thing they went
about.

The Chronicles do record, that to prevent the transportation of money, king
Henry the eight like a politic Prince, in the eighteenth year of his reign,
perceiving the price of money continually to rise beyond the seas, caused the
angel noble, being the sixth part of an ounce, and taken for two ounces of
silver, to be valued from six shillings eight pence unto seven shillings four
pence, and presently after unto seven shillings six pence; whereby every ounce
of silver was worth forty five pence: and yet there was nothing effected
thereby, the money still altering beyond the seas: whereupon Cardinal Wolsey
had a patent granted him by the king, to alter the valuation of money from
time to time, as he should see cause. Afterward the said king in the two and
twentieth year of his reign, perceiving that diverse nations brought abundance
of foreign commodities into his realm, and received therefore ready money,
which money they ever delivered to other merchants by exchange, and never
employed the same on the commodities of the realm, whereby his Majesty was
hindered in his customs, and the commodities of the realm were not uttered, to
the great hinderance of his subjects, as it is there alleged: his Majesty
caused a proclamation to be made, according to an old Statute made in the time
of king Richard the second: That no person should make any exchange contrary to
the true meaning of the same Act and Statute, upon pain to be taken the kings
mortal enemy, and to forfeit all that he might forfeit: which took effect but
for a short time, and no other was to be expected, it not being of that moment
nor the principal cause, as hereafter shall be declared.

After all this followed the embasing of money: and what happened then, we have
already declared so much as is thought convenient.

All which notwithstanding, and as it were in derogation of the credit of
experience: yet some men will attribute the cause of transportation to the
finenesse or under valuation of our moneys, and would have our moneys inhaunced
in price, or embaced by allay, without that they have any consideration, that
in some sort our exchange shall be made accordingly, and that the matter would
remain still in substance, although it were altered in name, whereof the base
moneys daily exported out of France, and the inhancing of moneys in Turkey, and
Barbary, do give us an instance. And it follows that neither difference of
weight, finenesse of standard, proportion between the moneys or valuatio^
thereof, can be any true causes of exportation of our moneys, so long as a due
course is holden in the exchange, which is founded thereupon, as before has
been showed.

Having found out the efficient cause, the remedy is easy, and most commonly
great matters are cured by easy remedies: And by that which has been said,
every man of judgment may easily gather, that the exchange for all places
ought to be kept at a certainty in price, according to value for value; and
that according to the value of our money, and the tolleration of the price of
the money in each country, where we find that a certain proportion is observed
from time to time, to which end there must be a vigilant eye for the
observation thereof upon all alterations, and to make our price of exchange
accordingly, both for the gold and silver, either in advancing our gold and
making the porportion to be between the gold and silver 12. to 1. or else
making the price of exchange according to the gold.

If we do make our gold to be worth twelve of silver, as is used in most
places, then must our angels and other gold be called in, if so be that we will
not think convenient that the weight and price should be altered, and new
angels may be coined of crown gold, holding still their price and weight: or
else if we will alter the valuation, then our angels should be at ten
shillings ten pence, and the French crown six shillings six pence: for there
is as much difference between the proportion of eleven to one, and twelve to
one, as there is difference in the price of angel gold and crown gold. But
altering neither of these, the exchange might qualify the same, the rather
because that for places where we have no ordinary exchange, our gold and silver
moneys are transported in nature of bullion, especially the silver, being more
worth in some mintes beyond the seas, then by valuation, as we have noted
before.

For the keeping of the price of exchange at a certainty, according to value
for value, some are of opinion, whereas these exchanges are most commonly made
by certain persons sworn to deal honestly between party and party,
commonly called brokers, that every merchant exchanging should be bound upon a
penalty, not to make any exchanges without them, and according to their
direction: to which end they should have a certain prescription specified in a
pair of tables, how to make these exchanges, and should become bound with
sureties to make them accordingly: in the course whereof there should be no
other difference between the deliverer and taker up of moneys, but after ten
upon the hundredth for the year, and to make them payable at some short time,
to cut off the merchandising of the same, both here and beyond the seas.

Others that do not like to enter into bonds, do allow of the opinion of those
that do affirm the same would be more exactly done by certain skillful and
substantial men, thereunto authorized by her most excellent Majesty, to be
the general exchangers with whom all men should be commanded to make their
exchanges here in England; and in the like manner our merchants only in the
chief places of traffic beyond the seas, with these Exchangers deputies also
in manner aforesaid, wherein would be little restraint: for he that would not
deliver his money here by exchange, might (if he would) employ the same upon
our commodities, and rather then to transport any in specie, he would deliver
it by exchange, when upon a simple bill he might have as much given him by the
means of the exchange, as the same would yield him beyond the seas, being
carried in specie with great adventure, and in danger of the loss with treble
the value, according to the statute. On the contrary, he that would not deliver
his money beyond the seas by exchange, he might bring over foreign commodities
being at a reasonable rate, or else the money in specie: provided always that
in bringing moneys there be no permission any other to be current, but such as
are already proclaimed; and all other to be brought into the mint, or to these
exchangers deputies, which should give presently other ready money for it,
according to the statute 20. E. 3. whereby of course also that might be
effected, which heretofore was commanded by the statute of 8. H. 5. 2. whereby
the Staplers were to bring a good part of the return of their woolles in
bullion.

The most noble kings of this realm Edward the third, Richard the second,
Henry the fourth, Henry the fifth, Henry the sixth, and especially Henry the
seventh, made most noble statutes against the abuses of exchange, and for the
increase of their customs; and then the right exchange (as doctor Wilson
says) was only used by the king or his exchanger, albeit there was not any
such urgent cause: so that the merchant stranger bringing his wares into the
realm, did first pay his custom, and having made sale of his commodities, and
employing the money that he received here, upon the commodities of the Realm,
according to the Statute 14. R. 2. and so paying custom again, departed home
to his country, without carrying any money at all by exchange: for if there
were not sufficient commodity here in wares, he made his exchange then with
the Kings exchanger, and none other: so that it was known unto the exchanger
what exchange he made, and upon what cause. But if this matter be now a days
duly considered of, it will not be found of such importance as it is taken to
be, neither for the increase of the customs of the Prince, or advancement of
the sale and price of our home commodities, the trade whereof would best become
our English merchants, as the trade of the foreign commodities is fittest for
the merchant strangers, leaving the due course of exchange in manner aforesaid
free for both parties to make their return by, upon all occasions, which would
prove very profitable to the realm and her majesty's customs, considering the
said statute does only command the mere merchant stranger, and not the
denisons which are the principal dealers. Our home commodities being also so
needful, and of continual request, that at al times they are most vendible,
notwithstanding some small interruptions, which now and then by reason of the
wars and other controversies do happen.

If the foreign commodities were for the most part imported by merchants
strangers, which pay more custom then the native subject does, her Majesty's
customs would very much increase. Again if they were bought better cheap,
more would be vented with us, and likewise greater quantity of our home
commodities transported, especially when money does abound. Lastly, the trade
of our commodities would increase, if the trade of the marchandizing exchange
did cease. And were it not that the foreign commodities are consumed within the
realm, it were great reason that as the price thereof is risen, so likewise
the custom should be paid somewhat accordingly.

The Portugals which do engrosse the spices of the East Indies, cause a great
custom to be taken of twenty upon the hundredth, upon the arrival of the
carrickes at Lisbone, for the coming in of the spices and other commodities,
and cause other nations to pay the same, making the price accordingly, pleasing
them again in the custom outward, in taking but one upon the hundredth for
the same, making in this manner their country as it were a storehouse for
spices, as the Hollanders do theirs for corn coming from the East countries.
And the like plenty is used by other nations, which would require a larger
description, as also how they enrich themselves by their industry and
handiworke of the stuff of other countries; and again what commodities might
be made within the realm, we having fit matter or stuff thereunto; and how
artificers and other workemens wages should be considered: and yet to this
purpose we cannot omit to commend the singular good Statutes, made by King
Henry the third, and could wish that the wages given in those days with so
great aduisement, were now trebled according to the alteration of the valuation
of money, then an ounce of silver being valued at twenty pence, which is now
rated at 5. shillings. This is duly observed in the city of London, for the
allowance of the baking of a quarter of corn, the baker having now six
shillings for the same, whereas he had in those days two shillings.

But returning to the matter in hand, we say that the course of traffic
before mentioned, would be effected by the reformation of the exchange: for
when our merchants should have ability given them to import money, then would
they bring the lesser quantity of foreign commodities, and the merchant
stranger would bring the more. And again on the contrary, the more ready
money either in specie or by exchange, that our merchants should make their
return by, the more employment would they make upon our home commodities,
advancing the price thereof, which price would augment the quantity by setting
more people on work: and would also increase her majesty's customs outward.
All which is tending to the general good of her Majesty, the whole realm, and
every inhabitant thereof: and this reformation is in effect no more, but as it
were the keeping of our own weight and measure, namely our money and exchange,
to sell our commodities by: seeing that trusting other nations therewith, we
have been hitherto deceived. Neither can any nation take hereby any offense at
all, we receiving value for value, as they with reason do also one of another.

The remedy is easy, and yet of such moment, that as the course of things does
carry always a great command: so should we find that of course diverse
statutes should be observed or executed, viz. the statutes of 9. E. 3. 25. E.
3. 5. R. 2. 2. H. 4. 2. H. 6. 4. H. 7. 5. E. 6. prohibiting the transportation
of money and bullion, etc. The statutes of 9. E. 3. 15. E. 3. 14. R. 2. 3. H.
7. and other concerning exchanges, to have their due course, both within the
realm, and for foreign parts, having according to the tenor thereof, exchangers
for the moneys of silver and gold, and for the moneys or bullion brought over,
in buying the same and delivering it into her majesty's mint, as may be seen
by the statutes of 8. H. 5. and 20. E. 3. before mentioned, whereby her
Majesty should have the due gains of her mint, and poor moniers should
continually work. For the execution whereof, moneys were coined in those days
in several places of the realm: howbeit all by the direction of the master
of the kings mint at London: Namely at Canterbury, at Kingston upon Hull,
Newcastle upon Tine, at Bristow and Excester: And the exchanger for the king at
London, did also depute exchangers in the most places, saving that certain
merchants of Florence called Friscobaldi, were the kings exchangers at
Kingston, Newcastle, and Excester, whereby appears the great care had
thereof. It will not be amiss to remember such benefits as will redound to the
merchants adventurers by the reformation hereof, when at all times they may
make a sure calculatio^ of their gains and accounts according to the known
price of the exchange, or in setting over the bills obligatorie which they
receive of their commodities for foreign commodities, or in making over their
moneys by exchange at all times, whereby they shall not be driven to buy
foreign commodities, or stand in danger to become losers by the exchange, upon
the alteration of the price thereof, after the sale made of their commodities,
and before they do receive their money to be made over by exchange; and they
may then altogether seek the gain upon their home commodities, selling them
with more reputation. When young merchants having small stocks and running for
moneys upon the exchange, shall not through their rash sale abate the price of
commodities, especially when more money shall be had at interest, the
merchandising exchange ceassing: whereby young merchants may be supplied in
their need or occasions, and with smaller stocks and less adventure have
greater gains: for the Canker of this exchange shall not consume them, as it
has done many of them and others, and that unawares: for the same is like unto
the Serpent Aspis, which stingeth men in such sort, that they fall into a
pleasant sleep until they dye.

If any man shall make doubt of the execution hereof, let him but have a due
consideration of the course of the right exchange, both here and beyond the
seas, and he will wonder that so great matters can be brought to pass by so
easy means, especially whereas it might be thought difficult, in regard of
other nations.

First, the gain had upon the money delivered by exchange here in England
(either really or imaginatiuely) being taken away, will cause the mercha^dizing
thereof to cease. We call that really, when in specie the money is paid, and
imaginatiuely, when in regard of the general want of moneys, it is in effect
but paid as it were by assignation. And then all such merchants, either
strangers or native subjects, which deliver their money by exchange for gain, sh
all deliver the same at interest, causing plenty of money within the realm for
the general good.

Secondly, for the course of the exchange beyond the seas, every man can easily
understand, that as the gain of the exchange appears only by the return
thereof: that no merchant stranger will deliver any money unto our merchants,
when he shall know the certainty of the price of exchange which does exclude
the gain, considering that all men within the Realm shall make their
exchanges at a certainty, either by the means of Brokers or the general
exchangers, especially our merchants beyond the seas being generally the
deliuerers of money and few of them takers up. So that this course of exchange
shall command other nations, we having moreover the head of this principal
exchange of our 20. shillings sterling: whereupon exchanges are made, and so
the head will command and direct the other members of the body. Neither will
merchants strangers take up money by exchange at a lower price to their loss
of any of our merchants, then our exchangers deputy will give, but will rather
cause their money to be made over from hence: for gain bears still the sway
in the course oftrade.

Thirdly, the general course of this exchange in the chief places of trade
will govern the particular, as it is in all traffiques. So that any exchanges
made in any places of small traffic, where the exchangers shall have no
deputies, will be of small moment. For if our merchants that do deliver the
money, must give much to have their money paid here in England, it will be for
the good of the Realm, for they will sell their commodities accordingly upon
this occasion. And if they do deliver it at a low rate under our exchangers
price, the matter cannot be great: for those also which are the takers thereof,
will rather take it of our exchangers deputies at a better rate, by the means
of their friends or factors dwelling in the chief places of traffic, where
our merchants shall deliver their moneys to the exchangers deputies, even as
merchants strangers shall do here in England. And the merchandising exchange
(which causes one sum of money to be exchanged (for the most places) 6.
times in a year) being taken away, the ordinary exchange is not of any such
moment, that we should doubt of the sufficiency of such substantial men as
might execute the same; considering also that they shall serve every man's turn
that will take up money by exchange here of them: and that there shall be no
constraint for any man to deliver his money here or beyond the seas, but may
employ the same upon commodities at his pleasure.

Lastly, let us answer to some objections, notwithstanding that the due
consideration of the premises and the waightinesse of the matter might satisfy
us.

To the general objection, that selling our commodities dearer, would be an
interruption to the traffic, we have already showed how necessary our
commodities are, and what request thereof is in all places: so that such
controversies as sometimes arise, are always qualified or ended by the
procurement of the adverse parties themselves; as it happened in the ninth year
of king Henry the 7. upon a contention betwixt the said king and the king of
Romans, and a displeasure taken against the Flemings, and especially against
the Lady Margaret Duchess of Burgundy and sister to king Edward the fourth, in
causing to be banished out of his dominions all Flemish wares and merchandises,
and restraining all English merchants from repairing and trafficking into any
of the territories of the king of Romans or the Archduke his son, and the
Mart to be kept at Calis for wools and cloth: whereupon the king of the Romans
and the Archduke banished all English commodities out of their dominions, which
continued almost three years, until the Archduke sent ambassadors unto the
king to conclude a peace, and therewithal was the contract of intercourse also
concluded betwixt the said king and the house of Austria and Burgundy: the like
examples we have more.

Again, that young merchants or others shall not have so much credit at the
hands of the exchangers, as they have now at diverse men's hands, and that
therefore it were better to enter into bond as aforesaid, which would be duly
observed, because the bills of exchanges should bear witness aagainst them.
Let us consider that they should not have such great occasions to take up
money, when money should be plentifully here delivered at interest, which is now
delivered by exchange, whereas also they may bring over moneys for their
return when they see cause, and the exchangers receiving here much money at
the merchants strangers hand by exchange, would be glad to give a greater
credit to have the better means to repay the money beyond the seas to the
merchant stranger.

The difference betwixt those that deliver their money at interest or by
exchange, in regard of usury, consists only in the name, for they have both
an intention of gain upon money, and do bear an adventure for the loss of
their moneys, whereas the one is certain to have no more but ten upon the
hundred at the most, and the other does expect at the least 15. or 20. upon the
hundredth, in regard whereof he is contented to stand in adventure to lose
sometimes (and that seldom) by exchange, but still the intention remains,
which should be the surest guide of conscience to take away false or
counterfeit pretenses.

Exchanges will be made underhand or secretly, notwithstanding their bonds or
prescriptions: as how I pray you? Surely he that is the deliverer of money will
take no less for our 20. shillings sterling then the rate of the exchange
shall be: and if the taker will give him more, and he will take it without
regarding his bond, the Realm loses nothing thereby, albeit the party does
lose, if he do not sell his commodities beyond the seas accordingly. Again,
beyond the seas will any merchant stranger take up money at a lesser rate then
the exchange, our merchants being there the deliuerers, what loss have our
merchants thereby or the Realm either? Whereas also to the general exchanger
every merchant shall be a surueyor: so that the matter is so easily to be
remedied, that unless we do enter into due consideration, that (as we have
said in the first part of our treatise) all the trade is performed by
commodities, money and exchange, we will think it to be impossible until we
find out, that the abuse of exchange has made the course thereof to be
predominant over the commodities and moneys, which being found out as an
efficient cause, makes us to find an easy remedy: and according to the rules
of al Politicians, co^paring and reducing things to their original beginnings,
we shall find how far they are digressed or decayed, which also oppositly makes
me to write in commendation of the good order of the Venetians in ruling the
market for their corn and victuals, imposing a certain price, upon due
knowledge had of the quantity of corn monthly in any of their dominions:
whereupon they appoint some grave and honest men in every principal city, who
on every Monday of the week, are authorized (according to the quantity of
corn) to set a price thereof: according to the which also, the Baker is to
make the bread of such weight as they shall and do declare that day under their
hand writing in several public places: whereby eue^ the poorest man (who has
greater reason of care) may know what he is to have for his penny, for the
which calling at the Bakers house, and finding any fault, he may take with the
assistance (as it were) of the Constable, all the bread then exstant at the
Bakers house as forfeited, the one half unto him, and the other half to the
poor. By which means all engrossers and forestallers are cut off, because
they are uncertain what the price of the market will be from time to time,
which makes them not desirous to buy. And again, the magistrate is not
troubled to see this good order executed: for every man has an especial care
to have his own. How many statutes would be executed hereby also if the like
order were established in England, let the learned in the law judge, not only
for engrossers and forstallers, but also of enclosures of grounds,
incorporating of farms, decay of husbandry, converting arable grounds into
pasture, and all good orders concerning corn, which being duly provided for
within the Realm, or from elsewhere, upon occasion of scarcity thereof, and
withal having plenty of money, who sees not that these are two pillars and
props for the maintenance of a commonwealth, even as sincerity of religion,
and the love of the people are the two especial props or pillars of the state
of a Prince?

No man would be angry with him that were in a house, and espied some fault in
the beams or rafters of the same, and would insearch the default, and then
certify the goodman of the house thereof, or some other dwelling therein,
as well for his own safeguard, as for others, for it is hard to heal a sore
that a man would not have opened to his Physician, though he be never so
skillful, and of great experience. How weighty and important the study hereof
is, let all statesmen and Politicians be judges: for like as experience does
beget wisdom as a father: so memory nourishes it as a mother, which both
are helped and furthered by learning: and as he cannot attain to learning who
is without the knowledge of the seven liberal sciences: no more can he be a
right statesman, in seeking the increase of the Princes customs and revenues,
to have the Princes coffers well furnished: unless he do first study the way
of preservation and augmentation of the wealth of the Realm: for the welfare
whereof, jointly with the preservation of her Majesty's royal person, the
Author daily prays unto the Almighty, by whom al Princes do rule and states
do subsist. Qui plus expendit
Quam rerum copia tendit,
Non admiretur
Si paupertate grauetur.


FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 69. line 15. read imported for imputed, page 70. lin. 5. great read
greater, page 73. lin. 1. Checlmis read Checkins, page 108. lin. 4. plenty read
policy, page 110. lin. 12. receiving read requiring.

BEcause of the intended trade for the East Indies, we have added hereunto for
the better observation of the contents of our treatise, the prices of precious
stones, spices, and other commodities as they were bought in the said Indies,
upon the lading of the last carrickes, laden by the Portugals, before the
Hollanders came to trade thither, to which end we do use many words of the
Portugal tongue, for the better understanding of the commodities, and places
from whence they are brought, together with their weight and goodness, and
first for precious stones.

Diamonds the most perfect called nayfe, are found in the kingdom of Deca^,
and other sorts in the kingdom of Narsinga, and the Island of Zeilan which are
sold by the Mangelin at so many Pardaos of gold, as it were ducats of 360.
rries or Maruedis every Pardoa, whereas at Lisbone a ducat is 400. rreis or
Maruedis, accounting 10. Fanans for their ducat, so that one Fanan is a riall,
or 6. pence starling with us.

Diamonds of one Mangelin. 26 Of 1 30 Of 2 40 Of of one Mangelin. 22 Of 2
pieces or stons the Ma^gelin 20 Of 3 16 Of 4 13 Of 5 11 Of 6 8. Of 7 7 Of 8 5
Of 9 5 Of 10 4

Al other diamonds not being nayfe or pointed on both sides, as flat diamonds,
triangles, or other fashions, and not of perfect color, are to be bought
accordingly.

Rubies are found for the most part in a river called Pegu, being of the best
kind and finest, and are called Nuncuplo, of a high color, without any spots
and clean, also the hardest and coldest upon the tongue, as the Indians do say.

They are sold by the Coreya of twenty pieces, and by a weight called Fanan.

The Ruby of one Fanan for ten Pardaos.

Of 2 the Fanan every Coreya 50 Of 3 30 Of 4 18 Of 5 12 Of 6 9 Of 7 6 Of 8 5 Of
9 4 Of 10 3

If they be not perfect, the price must be considered, as in the Island of
Zeilan, where great quantities are found of a fleshly color, esteemed but for
in value, called by the Indians Manecas, which being mundified by the fire, are
made Carbuncles.

There is also found in Pegu another kind called Spinelle with us, and Caropus
in the Indian tongue, which they were wont to esteem for half the price of
the good Ruby: and in the like estimation were another kind found in Balassia
and so called, much like unto the color of a rose.

The weight of precious stones.
One Fanan is somewhat more then two of our carrats, and every carrat is 4.
greines.

11 Fanans is one mitigal, and 6 of them make an ounce.

Mangelin or Mangear, whereby diamons are sold, weyeth 2 tar and, which is of
a carrat, for 4 tarres weigh one Fanan, which is above 2 carrats.

Saphires in the yland of Zeilan, the hardest are best, and of color azure.

Topasies in the same yland of color like beaten gold; the hardest best, and
were sold for their weight in gold in times past.

Turqueses found in Malabar, being of Turqueys color by the day time, and by
night by the light green; they grow upon a black stone, where of retaining
some little black veins, is the better.

Iacinths in the yland of Zeilan, which are tender yellow stones, commonly
having pimples or burbuls in them.

Emeralds or Smaragds, being hard and green stones, found in the country of
Babylon and other places of India, were of great estimation before the quantity
discovered in the West Indies, many of them are counterfeit. But looking on
the^ curiously toward the light, the counterfeitnes appears by certain
burbuls, like as the glass does, which is not in the true stones, although
certain beams appear; which true stones being rubbed on the touchstone
leave the color of copper.

All these stones being out of request with us, must be bought as the buyer
sees cause for other countries.

The pearls of the East Indies are not of that color, which preposterously are
called Oriental, as the pearls of the West Indies, yet let us set down their
price.

Pearls sold by the carrat.
Of one carrat pardaos 1 Of 1 3 Of 2 6 Of 2 8 Of 3 12 Of 3 16 Of 4 20 Of 4 25
Of 5 30 Of 5 35 Of 6 40 Of 6 45 Of 7 50 Of 7 60 Of 8 70

Aliofar, which is small pearl, sold by the Iuera, or sorts which comes from
the fishing about Comorin.
The first Iuera 330. rreis The second 180 The third 80 The fourth 18 The fifth
and sixth. 8

Calico cloth coming fram diverse places in the Indies, is sold by the Coreia
of 20 pieces, according to the sorts following.
De Cambaya.
Canequins finos 60 Canequins arezoados 40 Teadas 20 Dotins 25 Bancais 10
Cotonias de frades 24 Cotonias comun. 20

Do Sinde.
Iourins finos 70 Iourins de caregacaon 45

Da Costa, de Canera.
Beatilhas finas 26 Beatilhas de caregacaon 20 Pacherins 25 Berames. 32

De vengala de porto grande.
Cassas finas 100 Cassas de caregacaon 70 Socopases 25 Beatilhas. 100

De porto pequen^o.
Cassas finas 60 Cassas de caregacaon 50 Chantares finos 40 Beatilhas 40 Ambre
grise the ounce 13 Ambre black 3 Musk in code. 2 Seed pearl to stamp 20,
rreis

The price of spices sold by the quintall.
Cloves clean of stalks from the Moluccos. 50 Cloves of Bastao unclean 29
Mace coming from the yland of Bandan being clean and fair colored 74
Nutmegs of the said yland 14 Ginger of Beledin in Calicut 9 Ginger of Mechino 7
Ginger in conserve 13 Cinnamon of Zeilan 35 Cinnamon de mato 10 Long pepper 25
Benjamin de Boninas 55 Benjamin de caregacaon 48 Alume 9 Camphir of China. 40

The pepper is sold by the Baher of 15 roues being 4. quintals of 112. pound
Lisbone weight, and is found in diverse places, as in the kingdom of Malabar,
Calicut, and the yland of Sumatra: and because the same is always the kings of
Portugal by contract, the price is not known, and is otherwise risen to a
great price, being first esteemed about the third part of the price of cloves.

By this weight are sold also these wares.
Sandalo branquo de 20 paos 160 Sandalo vermelho 50 Pao da China bon. 180

Goods sold by the case or fardle, weighing ^^le more or less then a quintall.
Indico carques 40 Indico called Aldeas 70 Indico comun called Aldeas. 35 Sugar
de China 35 Sugar of Vengala. 12

Goods sold by the Man of 24 pound.
Silk of China corrent 76 Silk in pieces made up 86 Silk retros called de
Lancaon 40 Aquila boa 35 Aquila comun 26 Tartaruga de Malaca 38 Lacre or
hard-waxe 16 Wax of Vengala. 4

All kinds of drugs are to be bought with great aduisement, according to their
goodness.

Of the weights of Portugal and India, and some other places.
The pound of the old weight contains 14. ounces.

The pound of the new weight 16. ounces.

Every Cantare or quintall (...) new weight, is 128 pound of 16. (...)

Every quintall of the old weight (...) 3. quarters and one half of the new
weight, or 128. pound of 14. ounces, which makes 112. pound of Portugal
weight of 16. ounces: so that every 8. quintals of the old weight makes 7.
quintals of the new weight.

One Bahar is 4. quintals of the old weight of Portugal, being 112. pound of
16. ounces, and is in all 448. pound, which make that London 452. pound, at
Antwerpe 438. pound, at Venice alla sotile 712. pound, and alla grossa 448.
pound. One Bahar makes 20. Farazuelos, every Farazuelo 22. pound, 6. ounces of
14. ounces to the pound.

The other weight as before mentioned.

FINIS.

