ADAMS Tragedy.

Declaring Satan's malice and subtlety, man's weakness and misery; and his
deliverance from eternal captivity.

Serpens Diabolus, Salus Christus. LONDON, Printed by W.W. for Thomas Down and
Ephraim Dawson, and are to be sold at their shop at the inner Temple gate.
1608.

TO THE HONORABLE AND very good Knight Sir John Egerton.
THe least Fish in the Waters, the least Seed in the Earth, the least Fly in
the Air, and the least Star in the Firmament. (Honorable and worthy
Knight) do show the glory of GOD, in their several kinds; although not so
great in quantity as do the Whale, the Cedar, the Eagle, and the Sun: And the
meanest member in the body, the Foot, may perform a profitable service to the
Head; although not so lawdable and worthy as the Hand. The consideration
whereof, and the happy experience of your heroical and most virtuous
disposition, who ever have encouraged a well meaning mind in every good and
laudable action; makes me, although the meanest member in the Civil body,
both venterous and hardy (in my duetifull love) to offer a little Gift, as the
Widows mite, to your Christian view, and Honorable accept: by whose good
approouement, the reproach of presumption will not be imputed to a well meaning
mind, when as a Christian man being compared to a Tree, whose root is Faith,
the body Holiness, the branches Charity, the blossoms Peace, and the fruit
Obedience; is not esteemed in the sight of God, or good men, by the quantity
of the substance, but by the quality of the fruit. Wherefore, if your Honor
shall vouchsafe by the sun rising of your gracious favor, to nourish a
tender Grift, now yielding a small fruit unto your taste; and to cover it with
your merciful wing, from the biting and nipping storms of uncharitable
blastes: your most humble and devoted protect, shall rest ever bound to offer up
prayers night and day to Almighty God for your Honors eternal felicity, and
for the prosperous and honorable continuance of your noble posterity in this
world, and their happy enjoying of the heavenly blessings in the world to come.

Your Ho. in all reverent duty and service, I. M.

TO THE READER.
GEntle Reader, the loss of a Blessing, made Esau weep; and the loss of
Children, made Rachell mourn: But now behold, not only a Blessing and
Children, but also Parents and Paradise lost together. Genesis 50.10.
It is true that Joseph and the Egiptians made a great mourning for Iaakob; but
the lamentation both of Jew and Gentile should be greater, for the death of
Adam; who by creation was holy and righteous, the image of God: by deputation,
Lord and Commander over the whole World, the vicegerent of God: by
benediction, the Father of all Mankind, the inheritance of God: and by
institution he was placed in Eden, the Garden of God: and yet the Garden,
Inheritance, Dignity, and Sanctity, all forfeited and lost together. Here
then is the stratageme and instrument that effects this Tragedy: Ioh. 8.44.
Satan that liar, that murderer from the beginning, maligning Adam, and in
Adam all mankind, devised and practiced how to draw Adam to rebel against
God. Adam was deceived by the subtlety of the Devil, and he did rebel. God
was displeased by the breaking of the Commandment; Romans 5.12.
Sin entered, Death prevailed. Wherefore I entreat thee (christian Reader)
which art the Child of Adam, to peruse this Treatise with regard; not curiously
excepting against, but graciously accepting what a free and well meaning mind
offers unto thee, whereby thou shall see thy Fathers and thine own estate,
by what means ye were lost; how worthily condemned, how graciously redeemed,
and how joyfully received. Luke. 10.4.
That so at all times, and in all places, thou may tremble, and fear, and
love, and honor, and praise the Lord thy God. To whose infinite mercy,
heavenly direction, and fatherly protection, I heartily commit thee, for ever.

Thine in the Lord, I. M.

Psalm. 119 52.39,. I remembered thy judgments of old, o Lord, and have been
comforted: for thy judgments are good.
ADAMS Tragedy.
ALthough GOD may be known in his glorious Works, to remove man's excuse by
ignorance for not serving him, yet he has revealed his will unto man by his
Word; that man might learn to obey, and not to sin against him: And
notwithstanding that God has such care for man, yet man has little fear of
God. As we may see and behold in the third Chapter of Genesis (being the
subject and matter of this Book) wherein is handled and described, The nature
of the Serpent, and his question unto Eve, verse. 1. Eues answer unto it, verse.
2.3. The Serpents replication unto Eve, verse. 4.5. Eues consent to the Serpents
persuasion, verse. 6. Her gift unto her Husband of the Fruit, and his
acceptance, verse. 6. The effect of eating the Fruit, verse. 7. The inquisition
of God after Adam and Eve for their transgression, ver. 8.9. Their
apprehension, verse. 10, 11, 12. Their arreignement, ver. 13. Their answers,
ve. 10. unto 13. Their judgment, verse. 14. to the 20. And their expulsion out
of Paradise, verse. 22, 23, 24. A History registered by the Holy Ghost, that it
might be an instruction to all ages to fear to sin, and to learn to do
well: the wages of sin, being death; Romans 6.23.
but Life and Grace, the gift of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

SECT. 1.
AS touching the nature of the Serpent, and his question unto Eve. Genesis 1.31.
GOD (in the beginning) saw all that he had made, and lo, it was very good:
and therefore the Serpent being a creature of God, in his first being and
nature, was good: and in reasonable construction, it may seem that it was a
creature very pleasing unto Adam, because it was more subtle or wise, then any
beast of the field. And therefore the Devil cunningly to cover his malicious
and wicked intent, uses the Serpent as his instrument, to persuade Adam and
Eve unto sin. Such is the craftiness and wiliness of Satan in tempting the
children of God, that he daunceth under a Hood, as ashamed of his face;
seeming to be an Angel of light, when he is an Angel of darkness, 2. Cor.
11.14
and deuiseth how to bting men unto everlasting destruction: For, both he, and
all the evil Angels that fell with him from heaven, (which by the sufferance
of God, do dispearse and spread themselves in the Air, Revel. 20.7, 8, 9, 10.
Ephe. 2.2.
and upon the Earth, and under the Earth, being continually tormented by the
wrath of God) do in their malice watch and devise to tempt, hurt, and afflict
the Saints of God; and to draw them away from God, that they might be
partakers of their punishments; so great is the envy of Satan and his
members, against the felicity of Gods chosen. But God in his infinite wisdom
and justice, does turn the burden and bitterness of their malice upon them
selves: and by how much the more they strive against God and his members, by so
much the more their curse is increased, and God the more glorified by his
Children in their preservation. For he can slay Goliath with his own Sword,
and destroy Death by death, 1. Sam 17.51 Hose. 13.14. Judge. 14.14. Genesis 3.15.
sending Meat out of the Eater, and Sweetness out of the Strong: for Satan
bruised Christ Jesus heel; but behold, he has broken the Serpents head.

And in the question which the Serpent made unto Eve, two things are to be
considered. First, whether from the beginning, any earthly Creature, excepting
Man, had the reason of speaking; which is the powerful messenger of the Mind,
diversely to deliver, distinguish, divide, and apply to the outward sense, and
inward understanding of an other reasonable creature, by the instrument of the
tongue, whatsoever the mind purposes to do, or obtain. Secondly, whether the
Serpent was the Devil, or whether the Devil was in the Serpent? For the
first, it is most true, that no earthly Creature, excepting Man, had ever
knowledge or reason of speaking: Genesis 1, 25.
For God, who made Man in his own image, Exo. 4.11.12 Romans 10.10. 1. These.
5.11 Jam. 4.13.
gave unto Man only a tongue to speak, and that in three respects: The one, to
confess him to salvation: The other, to bring men to the knowledge of God by
edification one of another: And the last, to keep mutual intercourse,
commerce, and civil society amongst men; which God has ordained for our
help and comfort, even in temporal and earthly things. As for the Creatures,
Genesis 1.24.2.19.20.
God gave them life, motion, and sense, in their several kinds, for the
service of Man; but never gave them Divine knowledge or reason, to judge
between good and evil; because he made them for Man, and to be at his
command and pleasure: But Man, GOD made for him self, in whom he took most
delight; and therefore gave him a reasonable Soul to think, Genesis 2.7, 8.
study, and speak of his glory; which no other creature upon the earth can
do: And as Man confesses and prayseth God here upon the Earth, Mat. 10.32.
so will God confess him in Heaven; where he shall dwell with him, and his
holy Angels for ever.

But it may be objected by some, Number. 22.28
that Baalams Ass did speak: which is true. But it is to be understood, that
that was miraculously to show the power of God unto Baalam, to stay him in his
journey going to Balack to curse the people of God. For nothing is impossible
unto God, Mat. 19.26.15.31.
either to make the dumme to speak, the halt to go, the blind to see, the
dead to rise: yea, he is able of Stones and Dust, Mat. 3.9.
to raise up Children unto Abraham. But from the beginning, in the nature and
creation of Beasts, Psalm. 32.9.
God gave them a voice only, no speech, and sense, but no understanding or
wisdom: for that only is proper unto Man. So then it was not the Serpent
that spoke, but the Devil in the Serpent: and so was he in the man that was
possessed, Mat. 5.2. Mar. 16.9 Math. 5.12.13.
and in Marie Magdalen, and in the heard of Swine.

And further, in the question of the Serpent, two other things are to be
considered: Satan's boldness to tempt, and his subtlety in tempting. Certain
and sure it is, that there is no time, place, nor person; when, where, and whom
the Devil will not most boldly seek to tempt and to overthrow: for as he is
without truth, Ioh. 8.44.
so he is without shame. Mat. 13.25.
He will be sowing of Tares amongst the good Seed, whilst the Husbandman
sleeps. He will offer himself to be a lying Spirit in the mouth of Ahabs
Prophets. 1. Kin. 22.20.21. Job. 1.11. Mat. 4.1.
He will stand up to accuse Job: and most boldly assay to tempt Christ. For the
Battle is ended in Heaven between Michaell and the Dragon: Revel. 12.7, unto
13.
Michaell and his Angels have prevailed, and there is joy and salvation in
Heaven: but the Devil and his Angels are cast out, and come down unto men
upon the Earth, with great fury and wrath, knowing that he has but a short
time. His Army is great, his Stratagems subtle, his Malice fierce, his Weapon
death. We must therefore awake out of sleep, Ephesians. 5.14.
and stand up from the dead, and not to spend time, and listen unto, or parley
with Satan, as Eve did; but speedily to take the whole Armor of God unto us,
6.11.
and enter into fight with Satan, shouting and lifting up our voices loud and
courageously against him, Ioshu. 6.5.
as Joshua did his Trumpets before the walls of Ierico; that so by our Faith
in Christ, the Devil and his forces might fall, lie flat, and be trodden under
our feet for ever.

And touching his subtlety in tempting, 2. Sam. 20.9.10.
he is like unto Ioab in his treacherous killing of Amasa: like unto Iaell,
Judge. 4.18.
who in one hand carried Milk, and in the other, a Mallet: and like unto Judas,
Mat. 26.47.
who gave a Kiss unto Christ, saying; All Hail; and made a hiss unto the
Jews, beckning unto the^, Come, take him; this is he. For the Devil never
reuealeth himself at the first, as he is, for fear of discovery; but
creeps and windeth in, by little and little, into the hearts of men: Math.
15.19 Ephe. 5.4. Iam. 1.15.
as first, by idle and vain thoughts; then by foolish, idle, and vain
words: and lastly, he draws them to vile and wicked works, being rocked
asleep in the cradle of Security: and then, Satan having gotten full
possession of their hearts and minds, he discovers himself unto them as he
is. 1. Pet. 5 8. Reu. 12.9.
To the fearful and unbelieving a Lion, ready to devour: to the simple, a
Serpent to deceive: 9.
to the cruel, a Dragon to set them on fire: to the malicious, 9.3.
a Scorpion to teach them to bite: to the proud, a Lucifer, Esaias. 14.12, 13.
to teach them to disdain: to the covetous, Psalm. 104.26.
a Leuiathan to teach them to oppress: to the licentious, Jere. 5.8.
a Pampered Horse to make them neigh after wanton flesh: and to those that be
blasphemous and reprobate, a Basan Bull, Psalm. 22.12.
to teach them to bellow and roar out blasphemies and fearful oaths against
the Majesty of God.

Thus does the Devil both secretly tempt, and openly animate man to sin and
rebel against God: But to avoid his snares, and escape his tyranny, we must
continually pray unto the Lord for strength, and grace, Romans 12.12. Mat. 14.30,
31.10.16.
that we may not be fearful, but faithful; not ignorant, but wise; Reave.
3.16.
not cold and without spiritual affection, but zealous to learn his law, and
obey his will; that we may be able (through his power) to withstand, Ephe.
6, 16.
and quench the fiery darts of our enemy the Devil.

SECT. 2.
AS touching the answer of Eve unto the Serpent, two things therein are to be
considered: The Simplicity of Eve, and her Sincerity. Her Simplicity,
because she did not discern not suspect the Serpents subtlety: For in the 1.
verse. of the 3. of Genesis, you may read, that the Serpent the Devil, did not
openly show his purpose unto Eve, by persuading her in plain terms, You may
eat of the Fruit; but made as it were a careless question unto her, saying:
Yea, Genesis 3.1.
has God indeed said, Ye shall not eat of every Tree of the Garden? Wherein
we may still see the subtlety of Satan, how he compasses and overcomes
those that are simple and think no ill. For, first he insinuates and draws
Eve to make a confession of God, and of his Commandment; and afterward
persuades her to break the Commandment, and to disobey God; to the end her
punishment and condempnation might be the greater: For by how much the more it
is for Gods glory, and man's consolation, steadfastly in his heart to believe in
God, Romans 10.9.
and boldly with his mouth to confess him unto salvation, and never to deny
him: By so much the more it is to Man's shame and condempnation, when he has
once believed God, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.
and confessed him; then after, to deny him, and forsake him. And therefore
we must be wise, as well as simple and innocent, and pray for Grace, John. 4.1.
that we may be able to judge between the spirits, and try whether they be of
God or not; that so we might not yield unto the least temptation, but shut our
hearts, and stop our ears thereat; for the Devils motions never tend unto
the good of Man, unless through true obedience and faith in God, we joyfully and
constantly resist and overcome them; Jam. 4.7.
and so shall God have the glory, and we the victory. For as the Thistle or
Thorn in the filde, will not sting or prick us, unless we wrappe or close
them in our hands: no more can the questions or temptations of Satan hurt our
souls, unless we are willing to harken thereunto, and embrace it in our
hearts. And therefore we must follow the example of Joseph, Genesis 39.10.
to fly from temptations and worldly lusts, which fight against the soul:
for they are but as a Harlot to entice us, and as a Snake to stinge us unto
death.

And as touching the Sincerity of Eve, it plainly appears in her true
answer unto the Serpent, for she neither concealed her own action, which in
obedience she did perform toward God, in eating only but of the permitted
Fruit: neither did she keep secret Gods especial Commandment, which was
his prohibition, that they should not eat of the tree in the midst of the
Garden. Genesis 2.17.9.
Whereby we may note, that we must not conceal the truth, but confess it,
even to the most wicked, being asked thereof, when as by our answer, God is
magnified, by confessing of him, and declaring his commandment which he has
willed and delivered unto us. And in this Eve was to be commended, in which all
other the children of God ought to follow her example. But notwithstanding, in
the end, she was more blameable, because after she had confessed God, and his
commandment, yet she disobeyed God in breaking of his Commandment. Mat.
16.16.
It was Peter's case, he made a good confession; there was his sincerity: but
after he made a wicked denial: Mat. 26.7.
there was his apostacy. It is therefore better to be constant and end well,
then in the beginning to confess well, and end ill: for we must not begin in
the spirit, Gal. 3.3.
and end in the flesh. It is better to be a Convert with Paul, Act. 9.6.
and so to continue, then to be an Apostle with Judas, Mat. 26.48.
and after to fall away for ever: But Eve and Peter, as they fell away by
weakness and disobedience, so upon their true repentance and faith in God,
they were restored by the obedience of Christ; Romans 3.22.
which was imputed unto them, and also unto us, in the love of GOD the Father
through him, Ephesians. 1.4.
from before the foundation of the world.

SECT. 3.
AS touching the Serpents Replication unto Eve, two things therein are to be
considered: The direct opposition of Satan against Gods word, in saying, Ye
shall not die at all. And his colorable argument to approve his opposition,
in these words, But God does know, that you shall be as Gods. In the
Opposition, is also to be considered two things; the Impudency of Satan, and
his Malice. His Impudency, that he dares oppose against Gods word. His
Malice, that he seeks in as much as in him lies, to dishonor God, by
falsefying of his truth. In the colorable argument, is also to be considered
two things: Satan's fiction, or feigning of a fear in God, in these words:
But God does know etc. And his fiction of man's high felicity, above their
created estate, in these words: Ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil.

As touching the Opposition, Satan deals against God as a fugitive Traitor
does against his Prince; who when he sees that he can not hurt or annoy his
Prince by open force, then he works by malice in secret places, to defame the
Prince, discredit his laws, and draw away his Subjects from their obedience.
So, Mat. 8.29
the Devil being not able to withstand the Lord, nor daring to appear in his
sight, yet secretly dishonors God, scandalizeth or slaundereth his word, and
seeks to entice and draw away man from his obedience unto God, impudently
sending forth blasphemies against God and Heaven, and deceiving and deluding
men with lies; bewitching them with sorceries, and blinding them with vanities,
that they might fall with him into the pit of everlasting destruction.

And whom soever the vice of Impudency does possess, let them tremble and
fear, least it make them, like unto Satan, disobedient unto God, and
outrageous unto men: For in the Impudent man's heart, Malice lurketh secretly,
Blasphemy is in his mouth, Pride appears in his eyes, Unrighteousness
preuayleth in his hands; and he walks and vaunteth himself in every wicked
and ungodly way: as did Lamech, Genesis 4.23.
who would slay a man in his wound, and a young man in his hurt.

And as concerning Satan's Malice, it has a respect, and eye, Satan's malice
against God and man
to two several persons: God, and Man. To God, against his dignity: To Man,
against his felicity. He ever envied the one, and continually maligned the
other; because his pride before his fall, could brook no superior; and his
misery since his fall, makes him repine at the prosperity of an other. But
the fruit and end of his Malice, was utter destruction to him self for ever.
Psalm. 7.16.
And so shall it befall unto all them that either feeke of self-will and
purpose to dishonor God; or to hurt and ouertrow their breathren. And touching
the colorable argument wherein Satan fayneth a fear in God, how impudent was
the Devil to allege it, and Eve simple to believe it? that God, the Lord of
Heaven and of Earth, Read Job from the 37. chap. to the 42.
who by his power has made, binds and loses all things: by his glory,
lightneth, fills, and beautifieth all things: by his Wisdom orders,
guydeth, and inricheth all things: by his Justice searches, waigheth, and
judges all things: and by his Mercy continues, preserves, and saves all
things: that he this Almighty GOD I say, should stand in fear of any, Read
Psalm. 104. and the 107.
when as the Angels are his Messengers, the Heavens are his Throne, the Earth
is his footstool, the Sea is his Servant, all Creatures wait upon him; the
bright shyning Sun is his Hearauld, the Thunder is his Trumpet, the Lightning
is his Dart, the Stars are his Host, the Clouds are his Chariots, and the
Night is his Tent. But woe be to Satan, for he lies now trembling, and flat
before the Lord; and the wicked fly from before his presence, Revel. 6, 15.16.
desiring to have their habitation amongst the Rocks, crying out unto the
Mountains and Hills that they would fall upon them, and cover them and hide
them, (if it were possible) from the sight of God, that they might never come
to judgment for their sins: but as they have contemned God in their life, so
he will condemn them in their death, never to be redeemed, but tormented with
the Devil and his Angels, in Hell fire for evermore:

And as touching Satan's fiction, or feigning of man's high Felicity above their
created estate, he much deceived, and abused Eve: Man's estate before his fall.
For it is plain and evident, of what matter man was made of; Genesis 1.7.
Of the Dust: By whom he was made; by God: in what manner he was made; God
breathed in his face breath of life: and the Man was a living soul; that is,
an Eternal creature, not subject to death by Creation, but by his disobedient
action against God: in what place he was put; verse. 8.
not in the wide Field, but in a pleasant Paradise, the Garden of Eden: what
Companion he had; verse. 18.
not any creature inferior to himself, but one whom God made and took out of
Man, Genesis 2.21.23.
and therefore called Woman, bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, that
there might be a continual harmony, and simphathy in perfect love and unity
between them, to their endless comfortes: and so God called them Man and
Wife. verse. 24.
This was the estate of Man and Woman, happy and most excellent: But after
their fall, Man's estate after his fall.
their condition was changed, from peace and glory, Genesis 3.7.
to fear and shame: from joy and pleasure, 16.17.19.
to sorrow and labor: and instead of comfort in each other, they greiued and
accused one an other. verse. 12.
Adam indeed in his first estate, was like a green Olive tree, fat and
fruitful; Judge. 9.9.
but when Sin and Pride entered into his heart, he was like a Bramble,
envious and aspyring: verse. 15.
the Water of life did nourish the one, and the Fire of Gods wrath (had not
Christ quenched it by his Blood) had consumed the other. 1. Kin. 13.11 unto
ver. 25.
For as the man of God believed the old lying Prophet, so Adam and Eve
believed the old lying Serpent; for the which, they were slain by a Lion, but
not torn in pieces, but in mercy preserved for a glorious resurrection. Thus
was Man happy, unhappy, and again happy: only made happy through Jesus
Christ our Lord. 2. Kin. 13.20.21.
For as the body of the dead man which was cast into the Sepulcher of Elisha,
by touching the bones of Elisha, was revived and stood upon his feet: So Adam
being dead, and slain by that roaring Lion Satan, he was made alive in
Christ; 1. Cor. 15.22
whom by Faith in the Promise he apprehended and applied to himself, as his
only Savior, Ephesians. 1.7.
by whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins
according to his rich grace and love, and 2.4, 5, 6.
whereby he has quickened us, and raised us up unto eternal life. And
therefore let every one, by the example of our Parents Adam and Eve,
Selfe-liking dangerous.
beware of selfe-liking and flattering conceit, which is the wildfire of
Satan, to blow us up on hie, that we might fall down into the bottomless pit
beneath: Luke 14.11.
for every one that will exalt himself, shall be brought low; and he that
humbles him self, shall be exalted.

SECT. 4.
ANd as touching the Woman's Consent to the Serpents Persuasion, in it are to be
considered, four principal things. Her Revolution or pondering upon the
temptation. Her outward Perspection of the beauty of the Fruit. Her inward
Inspection of the quality thereof: And her settled Resolution, to take and eat
thereof.

Concerning the Revolution: As in all natural and vital things, no thing is
suddenly perfected, but there must be first, Conception, then Nutritio^, then
Concrescion, No man suddenly vicious.
and then Perfection: So in the Spiritual consent of the mind to act and
perform any thing, there is required, first; a Motion, then Attention, then
Persuasion, then Deliberation, then Consent, then Action. And this course was
observed by the tempter the Devil, and by Eve the tempted: For Satan made the
Motion unto her, saying, Genesis 3.1.
Has God in deed said, ye shall not eat? Eve listened and gave ear,
aunswering: If we eat, we die. verse. 3.
He replied, and persuaded: 4.
Ye shall not die; but if you eat, 5.
Your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil.
Hereupon she deliberated; and so she seeing that the Tree was good for meat,
6.
then she Consented, and Approved what was Persuaded, and after Effected and
Acted what she had Consented unto; for she Took of the fruit, Great danger
to listen to temptations.
and did eat. Whereby we may see the readiness of Satan to corrupt the mind
of Man; and Man's simplicity, to give attention, his weakness to be persuaded,
his idleness to deliberate, his foolishness to consent, and his wickedness
to perform. Wherefore let every one that is desirous to serve the Lord, and
obey his voice, give no attention to Satan's motion, but stop the ear, though
he charm never so subtly: For if thou will hear his motion, yet hear not
his persuasion: If he will persuade, yet keep it not in mind to deliberate
upon it, least it ouersway thy Judgment, and corrupt thy Understanding. If
thou should deliberate, yet consent not: for concupiscence with consent,
Jam. 1.14.15
in the end, brings forth the action of sin, and sin brings forth
death. And therefore, A similitude of watchfulness against temptations.
as in a Town of war, all Ports and Passages must be stopped, not only to
resist and keep out the troops and strength of the Enemy, but also the
Scoutes and Spies of the Army: So every Christian man, who is in this world at
warfare with Satan, Sin, and Death, must not only give an eye and watch to
the apparent and gross Sins, which are like the Anakims, Numb. 13.33.34.
strong and tall, easily and a far off to be discerned, but we must also stop
the passages of Satan's spies and scouts; which are, idle Motions, vain
Persuasions, carnal Deliberations, and fleshly Consent: which if we discern
not, and in time prevent, they will sease upon, and catch us, and lead us away
captives unto Satan, chayned with the strong fetters of sin, to be led unto
eternal death: And therefore so soon as we feel and perceive in our selves
any idle Motions, rebelling against Gods Spirit and Word, let us not by any
means consult and deliberate thereupon, without calling to God, for his
espepeciall grace to give us strength and judgment, that we may be able to
confute, repel, and resist the same.

And concerning Eues perspection, or beholding of the outward beauty of the
Fruit, two things therein are to be considered: the Precurrencie or Forming
of the outward sense to like, and the Concurrencie or Consent of the inward
affection to embrace. Genesis 1.31.
God in the finishing of his works, Saw all that he had made, and lo, it was
very good: And in the disposing of his Creatures, when he presented them unto
man, man did see that they were very glorious. Psalm. 8.1.
And as God made the Ear an instrument to conueigh Faith into the Heart, Romans
10.14, 17.
so he made the Eye an instrument to conueigh praises into the Mouth. Psalm. 8.3.
1. Sam. 11.2.
But as Nahash the Ammonite did aim at the right eyes of the men of Iabesh
Gilead to thrust them out, thereby to bring a shame upon Israel; So Satan
picketh at this excellent instrument the Eye of man, Satan aymeth at the
principal part, the eye, to destroy it.
to blind and corrupt the sight thereof, to make it to dishonor God, by
conueighing an unlawful desire into the heart of Eve, to bring a shame upon
her, and her posterity. The outward senses are the vshers unto sin.
Wherefore the outward senses are as Vshers and forerunners to make way unto
the mind, that it might embrace and give consent unto what the sense and body
likes: Genesis 3.6.
For the Eye took delight in the beauty of the fruit, and the Heart gave
consent, that the Hand as servant to the Eye might take it; the Mouth as taster
to the Stomach, might eat it; and the Feet as Pages to the Belly, might fetch
it: So that it seems, the Feet will run, the Hand will reach, the Mouth will
taste, the Stomach will receive, and all what the Eye likes. The Eye a
predominant sense.
Such a predominant sense and part is the Eye, that it commands all the
parts of the body: yea, it corrupts and dulleth the faculties of the Soul;
for the wandering of the Eye, carries away the Ear from hearing of the word
of God; which is the food of the Soul. Deuteronomy. 7.25.26.
The Eye beholding the Beauty of an Idol, persuades the Mind to commit
Idolatry. Mat. 5.28.
The Eye looking upon a Woman, causes the Heart to lust, and to commit
Adultery. The Sons of God seeing the Daughters of Men that they were fair,
Genesis 6. 2.
took them Wives of all that they liked. Ioshu. 7.21.
Achan seeing the Babilonish garment, the Silver and the Gold, lie glittering
amongst the spoil, coueted it, and hid them in his Tent. Mat. 14.6.
Herod gazing upon the dancing Damsel, made him vow John Baptists death.
Therefore we ought to remember the lesson of our Savior Christ, who teaches
us, If thine Eye causes thee to offend, Mat. 5.29.
pluck it out, and cast it from thee; for, Math. 6.22.23.
the light of the body is the eye: If the light then that is in thee be
darkness, how great is that darkness? It is better for thee to go with one
eye into the kingdom of Heaven, then having two eyes, to be cast into Hell
fire for evermore. But if the eye be holy and upright, then is it compared unto
Judgment, Prou. 4.25. Psalm. 123.2. and 131.1. Job. 31.1. and 19.20. Heb. 12.1,
2, 3.
to Obedience, Humility, Chastity, Pity, Faith, Hope, and Love. And Eve
abusing her Eye, yielded unto sin, and coueted the forbidden Fruit.

And concerning Eues Inspection, or Consideration of the inward quality of
the Fruit. Certain it is, after the Eye was delighted with the Beauty, and
the Stomach longed after the meat of the Fruit; then was the Mind upon
Fleshly counsel, and Debate persuaded, that it was to be desired to get
knowledge and dignity. Every sin will have a color of some good in it.
Such is the policy and subtlety of Satan to deceive the Mind, to draw it to
consent and agree to sin, under color and show of some good, moved and
proposed unto it: And therefore the Adulterer continues in his sin, saying,
It is Physical: the Covetous in his sin, saying, It is Frugall: the
Ambitious in his sin, saying, It is Honorable: the Proud fashioned in his
sin, saying, It is comely: the Drunkard in his sin, saying, It is brotherly
Fellowship: and the Swearer in his sin, saying, It is Truth. But, Esa. 5.20.
Woe be unto them that speak good of evil, and evil of good; which put
darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter: for sin, may make an excuse to the sinner, and blind his
eyes with some show of goodness in the sin, that he shall not see his
fault; but it can not so excuse him before God, and blind his fight, who will
judge and condemn him for his sin. A similitude against fleshly and carnal
defense of sin.
For as the Bird that is taken in the Snare, or the Fish in the Net, the more
they strive to get forth by their own strength, the more they are fettered
and entangled: So Man, when his outward senses and parts are taken and snared
by sin, the more he strives to make passage from sin by the strength of
reason, and persuasion of his own heart, the more he is entangled in the snare
of sin, and in danger never to get forth. For think thou, (o foolish man)
that thy Reason shall ouerrule and defeat Gods Law? Or shall thy flattering and
smooth Interpretation of sin, free thee from Gods Judgments denounced against
sin? Nay, it shall not help thee: for could this have served the turn, our
Parents had not been cast out of Paradise: For what better color or excuse to
cover their sin, then, Desire of knowledge? Genesis 3.6.
the only joy and felicity of the Mind. 1. Sam. 15.9 unto ver. 29.
Saul had not been removed from his Kingdom; for what better color or
excuse, then Pity and Mercy toward Agag, a distressed and captive King, and
Saul's pretended care to preserve the best Cattle for Sacrifice; What better
color could it have, then Religion? and yet for all this, Saul's sin was not
done away. 2. Sam. 6.6.7
Vzzahs Zeal, could not excuse his Presumption: nor the Simplicity of the Man
of God, 1. king. 13.8.
excuse his Disobedience. Luke 12.18.9
The Rich man's Content, could not exempt his life from Grave: Act. 5.1. unto
verse. 12.
nor Ananias and his wives Care, to save somewhat for their Family, excuse
their Impiety, who lied not unto Men, but unto God. For so pure, so just, so
holy, so righteous, so mighty, so powerful is the Law, and Word of GOD, that
the breakers and contemners thereof, shall not go unpunished; no, not the dear
Children of God: 1. Pet. 4.17.18.
And therefore, If judgment (for sin) begin at the house of God, where shall
the wicked and ungodly appear? Gal. 6.7.
Be not deceived: God is not mocked. His word is Truth and Amen, 2. Cor. 1.20.
for ever. Be not overcome of evil, Romans 12.21.
but overcome evil with goodness: for, Blessed are they, Reave. 22.14.
that keep and do the Commandments of the Lord, that their right may be in
the tree of Life, and may enter in through the gates into the holy City
(heavenly Jerusalem: verse. 15.
) for without shall be Dogs (such as are envious) and enchaunters, (such as
are deceivers,) and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever
loves and makes lies.

And concerning Eues settled Resolution or Determination to Take and eat the
Fruit: It may be said, Judge. 7.5.
that as Gideons Soldiers when he went against the Midianites, were known to
be resolute and not fearful, by lapping of water with their tongues: So Eve
was known to be resolute and not fearful, to break the Commandment of God,
by taking with the hand, and tasting with the mouth, of the forbidden Fruit. A
similitude that sin is dead and of no force, unless the heart consent,
And as the plentiful store of Weapons for War, pleasure not the Captain,
without men to wear them: so the readiness of the Senses unto sin pleasure
not Satan, without the Heart to embrace them. And like as the Body is dead
without the Soul, so Sin is dead without the Heart: for the Senses may be
entised, and Lust may be conceived; but it is the Consent and Resolution of the
Heart, that brings forth Sin, and gives strength and courage to the
members of the body, to finish and perform it, to bring forth death. Jam. 1.15.
Therefore in this resolution of Eve, both the Captain and the Soldiers, the
soul and the members of the Body did all march forward with one consent, and
resolved without all fear, to take and eat of the fruit of the Tree: 1. Sam.
26.6, 7.
Even as David and Abishaj went boldly without all fear into the Host of
Saul, and took away his Spear and Pot of water which were standing by his
head: for it is most certain, if once the Soul longs and thirsts for
sin, the members of the body are set on fire, and without al fear will
aduenter to satisfy her desire; even as the Servants of David when he longed
for Water out of the Well of Bethlem, they presently ran and brake into the
Host of the Philistims, and drew, and took, and brought it unto him.
Wherefore, although the Senses being drawn and entised unto sin, are strong
allurers and flatterers of the Soul, to give and grant her consent; because
without it they can do nothing, no more then the Members without the Head: yet
the Soul embracing Sin, she can without the consent of the Senses, command
the Body: For she is (being once wicked, and resolved unto sin) strong and
tyranous, like the Legion, Mark. 5.2. unto 14.
which will not suffer the body to rest neither night nor day, but will
distract, trouble, and torment it, and all the parts thereof, until it obey
her will, to run headlong with her into the lake of eternal destruction.

Thus we see the Resolution of Eve, and the cause thereof: her Senses entising,
and her Soul consenting, to take and eat of the forbidden Fruit. But let us
beware by her example, not to be so forward in evil; but to be only resolute
in that which is good: and in it, to Stand fast; 1. Cor. 16.13.
and for it, to fight a good fight: and so to continue steadfast and faithful
unto the end, that we may be saved.

SECT. 5.
AS touching the Woman's Gift to her Husband; and his Acceptance: Two things
therein are to be considered; Eues simple Intent, and Adams simple Consent: the
one in offering, the other in taking the Fruit. Eues love in true simplicity
unto her husband.
Eve in deed persuaded her Husband to take and eat the Fruit, and that for
love to him; because she thought, that Adam should have been made more happy,
and not unhappy, by it. And although her sin in yielding to the persuasion of
the Serpent, can not be excused; yet in giving it to her husband, out of the
abundance of her love to him, she can not so greatly be condemned: for she so
loved him, as she loved her self; and therefore would not receive a benefit
by her self alone (had it been a benefit) but she would make Adam her husband
partaker of it. And the Devil in his malice, sought the destruction both of
Eve and Adam, because they were both the good creatures and image of God, and
beloved of God: but he came first unto Eve to tempt her, both because he knew
that she was inferior unto Adam, in judgment and knowledge, and therefore not
so well able to resist and confute his temptations; as also because Eve was
most amiable and lovely in the heart and eyes of Adam, because of the joy and
comfort that he received from her: and therefore the Devil thought that if he
could persuade Eve, so great was the affection and love from Eve to Adam, and
from Adam to her, that it were impossible that either of them should contradict
one another, in any request or offer that they made, they were so simple,
loving, and faithful in each others sight. And therefore under color of good,
how easily might Eve, nay Adam him self be deceived with evil? But neither
this simple intent, Simplicity is no excuse for sin.
nor simple consent of our foreparents, can remove and abolish the curse for
their sin. For to every man and woman, be they either wise or simple, learned
or ignorant, rich or poor, young or old: Romans 6.23.
the Wages and reward of sin, is death. For not only Man, but every sensible
Creature, by instinct of nature, have a sense of things which are good or
hurtful unto them; for the one, they embrace as their apparent good; and the
other, they fly from, as their apparent evil. How then can Man, who is the
image of God, having a reasonable soul, endued with knowledge in general, and
a commandment given unto him in particular, be excused by simplicity, when
he breaks the Commandment and Law of God; the proclamation whereof, Exodus
19.16.
is declared with a shrill Trumpet, that the deaf may hear it? For, Romans
10.18.
The sound thereof is gone out to the uttermost parts of the earth: the
contents whereof are written in great Characters, that the simple sighted may
run and read it: and the knowledge whereof, is as clear as the light; for,
Psalm. 119.105. Heb. 5.12.
It gives Light and Understanding to the Simple: and, It is Milk to the
weak, and Meat to the strong: and therefore Simplicity can be no excuse for
Sin. For as the Law and Commandment of God is given to all, without respect
of persons; so it takes vengeance against all, without respect of excuses. And
as the fire will burn the child, A similitude that all are under the curse of
the Law.
if it fall into it, as well as the aged, and the parents which should have
looked after the Child, and not the fire is to be blamed; because it keeps
the natural working and effect wherefore it was ordained: even so the Law
takes hold upon every one that breaks it, for both young and old, ignorant
and learned, shall be judged and condemned by it: But the Parents shall
answer for the sins of their Children, the Masters for the sins of their
Servants, the Princes for the sins of their People, and the Pastors and
Ministers for the sins of their Flock; Ezekiel. 3.17.
for they are as the Lords Watchmen, to look over their Family, Flock, and
People: If therefore they regard not to give warning, nor admonish the wicked
of their wicked ways, that they might live and be saved; yet, Ezekiel. 3.18.
The Wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thy
hand, says the Lord.

SECT. 6.
AS touching the Effect of eating the forbidden fruit; Two things therein are
to be considered: The Misery of Man by Transgressing, and the Justice of God
by Punishing.

To disobey Gods Word, Disobeydience the cause of the loss of Gods love.
is to disinherite our selves of Gods love: But our Parents did disobey Gods
word, therefore as much as in them lay, they disinherited themselves of Gods
love; and to be disinherited of Gods love, is to be bound over to a perpetual
separation from the comfortable presence of God, to remain howling in Hell
with the Devil and his Angels for evermore: Romans 6.23.
This is The reward of sin, even eternal Death; which our Parents purchased
to them selves, and their posterity, by eating the forbidden Fruit, had not
God in his mercy spared and redeemed them in the love of his Son Jesus
Christ. Sin embraced by the soul, and practiced by the body: both soul and
body shall suffer for it.
For as Sin is first embraced by the Soul, (which is immortal) and
afterward practiced by the body, which by sin is made mortal; yet at the
general resurrection, the body shall be made immortal, to suffer with the
soul, and that most justly: For as it sinned with the soul, so also must it
be condemned, and suffer with the soul: and as the soul and body makes one
Man, so the condemnation of them both, makes but one perfect execution of Gods
justice against them. For as Sin is sweet and pleasant unto Man in his
life; so the punishment of Man for Sin, shall be greiuous in his death: the
pains and torments whereof, can no more be declared, 1. Cor. 2.9.
then The joys of heaven can be expressed: which neither Eye has seen, nor
Ear has heard, nor the Heart of man can not conceive. I might also speak of
the punishments in this life, wherewith God does punish the wicked for their
sins: but of this, we may read at large in the 28. chapter of Deutronomie: to
the which I do refer you: wherein as in a perfect Mirror and Glass, you may
behold and see the misery of Man, even in this life, for breaking and
disobeying the Commandments of God.

Gods justice is most upright, and necessary.
And touching the Justice of God, in punishing of sin, it necessarily agrees
both with his Nature, and with his Word. By his Nature he is most holy; and
therefore can not but punish iniquity. By his Word he has threatened
punishment for sin, and therefore sinners must look for punishment; because
he is most true. For who can charge the Lord, that he has spoken, and not
performed what he has spoken at all times, and in all ages? Or whether any
Tittle of the word of God has failed and not taken effect, Math. 5.18.
at his appointed time against the workers of iniquity, as well high as low,
rich or poor? and 24.35.
For heaven and earth shall pass away: but my words shall not pass away,
says the Lord. Are not all men, All men are sinners.
as well peasants as Princes, proceeded from the loins of Adam? He sinned; we
as children and members of him, have also sinned with him: he repented, and
was saved by believing the Promise: but whosoever, and of what estate soever
they be, that do not Repent, Math. 3.2. John. 3.18.
and Believe in Jesus Christ the promised Seed, can not be saved. So sincere
and pure is the Justice of God, There is no respect of persons with God. Deuteronomy.
10.17. Romans 2.11. Exodus 14.28.
that there is no Respect of persons with him: For he Drowned and destroyed
as well Pharaoh the King, as his meanest Subject that did drive his Chariot.
Coran, Number. 16.32.
Dathan, and Abiram, were swallowed up of the earth, as the meanest of their
Famulie. It is not the potencie, majesty, dignity, honor, riches, strength,
or worldly wisdom, that can stop the sentence of Gods justice, or stay the
stroke of Gods hand: for he is pure in his justice, and will not be overcome
with Bribes: for the round World is his, and the riches thereof: And far
dearer is innocent Lazarus in the sight of God, Luke 16.22.23.
then wicked Dives, clothed in Purple, and abounding in wealth: For, Psalm.
33.18.
The eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and put their trust in his
mercy.

SECT. 7.
AS touching the Inquisition of God after Adam and Eve; therein Three things
are to be considered. The Time of the Inquisition: the Cause of the
Inquisition: and the Inquisition it self.

God made Inquiry after Adam and Eve, when as they departed from him, and had
eaten of the forbidden Fruit; as Solomon did after Shimei, 1. king. 2.36. unto
the end of the chap.
when he departed from Jerusalem, and had broken his Commandment: for the
Lord never punishes, but when man offends. The cry of sin,
For our sins have Voices and Wings, to cry, and fly up before the throne
of God, for revenge and judgment, as did the sins of Sodom and Gomorrah.
Genesis 18.20.
They are the Herauldes of Satan, which proclayme war against God; and
therefore he must come down in the fierceness of his wrath, to destroy his
enemies, when they would march up to heaven against him, to pluck him from his
throane, and sit in his seat; to be as Gods, knowing good and evil:
forgetting their created estate, that they were but Dust and Clay, Genesis 2.7.
and therefore how unable to resist their Creator; who being offended, is able
to Break them in pieces like a Potters vessel? Psalm. 2.9.
The fruit of sin, is fear and shame.
For now the Lord calls, but Adam flies: the Lord examineth, but Adam
trembles: Satan's words were not so sweet, but the Lords voice is as bitter.
The possession of the Fruit, dispossessed Adam of the Garden: The hope of
vainglory, has brought a heap of shame: and the Devils dissembled roabe of
Majesty, is turned into a Fig leaf of Misery. Thus sin is no sooner
wrought, but God is wroth he comes in judgment to punish, and the sinner can
not fly nor hide him self from his presence. Exodus 20.5.
He is a jealous God; he will have his word to be obeyed, and the contemners
and breakers thereof, shall die the death: for as sin is begotten by Pride in
rebellion, so it is punished by Gods justice in confusion.

And touching the Cause of the Inquisition: Sin causes God as a judge to
inquire after man.
It was Adams breaking of the Commandment of God: the which God gave unto him
in two respects: The one, to make him to know him self, that he was a
Creature, because he was bound to a Law by his Creator: The other, to
acknowledge the wisdom and glory of his Creator, in looking for love and
obedience from his Creature, by performance of the Law,; the which obeying, God
made to man, the promise of life: and in disobeying, he threatened punishment by
death. God rewards the good, and punishes the wicked.
The which course of love and justice, in rewarding and punishing, the Lord
has ever kept both with Men and Angels; and will so do unto the end of the
world: And They that have done good, Mat. 25.46.
shall enter into eternal life: and they that have done evil, into eternal
death. Genesis 7.19.20 Dan. 2.37. unto 45.
The Old world had not been drowned: the Monarchies and great Kingdoms of the
earth confounded: Romans 11.19. unto 23. Amos. 8.11.12.
the Chosen people of God (the Jews) rejected: the Gospel removed from the
East unto the West: and Fire reserved until the last day, to consume this
Earth, 2. Pet. 3.7.
and these Heavens; but for the sin of Man. Sin, Sin is deceitful, and
monstrous.
it has a Iesabels face, but a Scorpions tail: It is a Monster in the sight
of God, begotten by an evil Spirit, and nourished in rebellious Flesh: And
therefore God, the only good and glorious Creator of all things, Genesis 1.31.
who Saw all things that he had made, and lo, they were exceeding good; he
in the purity of his glory, must purge Paradise of this odious monster; and in
the sincerity of his justice, detest Man, which has coupled him self with
this monster Sin, and thereby disfigured and defaced the gracious image of
God in him. This was the cause of Gods Inquisition after Adam: for he could not
behold his rebellion and sin, and suffer them to go unpunished-

An Inquisition upon what cause it is grounded.
And as touching the Inquisition it self, it declares by the action of the
inquiry, an offense offered to the Inquisitor: for the which, God makes fresh
pursuit against Man: And in this Inquisition, God him self alone inquireth
after sin
God uses no help or attendance of any of his Angels, but by him self he
finds it out; because he only knows the thoughts of men, Psalm. 50.6.
and is judge him self: But for the execution of his will and pleasure,
whether it be for the protection of the good, or destuction of the wicked,
there he uses for the honor and glory of his Majesty, Reave. 8.2.3.
His Angels as his Servants and Ministers, to perform the same; and that also
by his especial leave and commission, and not otherwise: Without Gods
especial commission, the Angels neither hear the words, nor see the works of
men.
For without this especial Commission, they neither see nor hear the words
nor actions of men upon the earth; but only attend about the Lords Throne
in Heaven, continually worshipping him, and praising him, and rejoicing only
in him for ever; whose love and glory, takes away from them all thought of
other inferior things, or of any persons upon the earth. And therefore seeing
God him self is the Inquisitor and finder out of sin, what manner of persons
ought we to be in holiness, and innocence of life: for his Eyes and Ears, Jer.
23.24, 25.
do behold and hear a far off. His knowledge is infinite, his power
irresistable, his presence fearful, his voice terrible, his sentence death,
against all impenitent sinners, even eternal death, to suffer and continue In
that Lake, Reave. 20.10.
which burns with fire and brimstone for evermore.

SECT. 8.
AS touching the Apprehension of Adam and Eve, to answer for their fault, Two
things therein are to be considered: The Power of God, to apprehend: and the
Weakness of Man, to resist.

If so God should enquire and know all things that Man does, and yet not able
to apprehende Man for his fault, what care of obedience, or what fear would
Man have of God? Nay, what blasphemies, what rowtes and rebellion (as I may so
speak) would he not commit against God? For then Man would heap sin upon
sin, The scornful and blasphemous thought of the wicked against God.
and say in his heart; Tush, although God does know my actions, and wicked
course, and the thoughts of my heart, yet he is not able to attach and
apprehende me for it; and therefore I am still at liberty, and false: I weigh
not, and respect him no more, then Shemei did David; 2. Sam. 16.5.6.
for his force is weak, and his hand unable to take hold upon me. Thus the
wicked would say within them selves: nay more, they would conclude and affirm,
saying; God indeed threatens much, but he can perform little. And it is
true, if so God were not able to apprehend the offendour for sin, as well as
to inquire and find out sin, the wicked might ruffinelike thus triumph
against God. But Almighty GOD, the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, Psalm.
2.4.
Which sits in Heaven, shall laugh them to scorn, and have them in
derision: their destruction shall come suddenly, and none shall be able to
deliver them out of his hand. Gods power to apprehend sinners. Genesis 4.9, 10.
Adam hid him self, but he was found. Cain would have concealed his brothers
blood, but it was known. Ioshu. 7.21.
Achan privily conveyed the Garment, the Silver, and the Gold into his Tent,
but he was discovered by the lot. Ioshu. 10.16.17.
The five Kings that fled before Joshua, were espied, and brought out of the
Cave. Act. 5.3.
Ananias and Saphira dissembled, but they were slain. No sin so close, no
place so secret, but God can find it out, and apprehende the offendour for his
fault: God can destroy the mighty by small means, and diverse ways.
And the Lords means and instruments are both many, and very easy, whereby
he can overthrow his enemies, to their utter shame and confusion: for his
Finger is stronger then their Loins; and his meanest Servants, able to
destroy the greatest Princes: One Angel can kill a hundred fourscore and five
thousand Assirians, in a night. One little Stone, 2. kin. 19.35.
1. Sam. 17.50
can strike Goliath to the ground. 2. Sam. 18.9.10.
A Bough can stay and hang up Absalon by the Hair, and small little Worms can
eat up Herod to the bones. Act. 12 23.
What shall I speak more of Gods power to apprehend offenders, daily
experience teaches us, that sin escapes not unpunished? for, does not the
sword of Gods Justice, continually cut off Traitors, Thieves, and Murderers?
Does not the power of Gods Curse, impouerish Drunkards, Gamesters, and
Whoremongers? Does not the plague of his hand send Diseases, Rottenness, and
Burninges into the bones and bowels of Harlots, and licentious Wantons? Psalm.
37.35, 36. and 9.6.
Is not the Name of the ungodly (after their death) quickly forgotten, and
their memorial perishes with them? Do not their riches take them wings,
Pro. 23 5.
and speedily fly away, and lo their place is no where to be found: This
their way, Psalm. 37.36.
Psalm. 49.13.
utters their foolishness; for the way of peace and godliness, they have not
known: Iere. 17.11.
They have spunne the Spiders web: And, Math. 7.26.
Built their house upon the Sand.

And as touching the Weakness of man to resist Gods power; How can Man, being a
creature, Man not able to resist God.
be able to resist and withstand his Creator? and being overcome of sin, and
subject unto death, How is he able to resist the Judge, who has both seen his
sin, and apprehended him to bring him unto judgment, that he might receive
the reward of sin, which is death; from the which, none that lives, can fly
or escape? Psalm. 89.48.
For what man lives, and shall not see death? or, shall any deliver his soul
from the hand of the Grave? Therefore if we can not resist Gods Sargeant, or
Messenger to apprehende us: how much less are we able to resist God, 2. Tim.
4.1.
the Judge both of quick and dead? Again, let us further consider man's
strength, and he is but weakness it self, respecting either the outward parts
of his body, or the inward parts of his mind: for in his birth, his feet are
not able to bear him: 1. kin. 12.10.
In his youth he has no wisdom to direct him: in his man's estate, and in his
greatest strength, Esa. 46.6. unto 9.
He is but a Flower, growing, flourishing, and withered in a day. 2. Tim. 2.22.
His Lusts are unbridled, his Affections infected, his Actions perverted, his
Body and Soul by Satan overcome and subdued. Romans 7.24.
Poor wretch, and miserable man, whosoever thou art; Is thy sight and light,
that is in thee, so darkened? and art thou become so blind, that with the Fly
in the night, thou will flutter and fall into thine own destruction? Do
thou think thy self so strong, Gods power and might.
that thou can either wrestle with, or resist thy Creator, Reave. 6.18.
Whose eyes are like a burning flame, that his enemies dare not behold him?
Psalm. 45.5.
Whose arms do draw a Bow of Steel, to shoot out sharp and deadly Arrows
to pierce the heart of those that hate him: Reave. 1.15.
and whose Feet are as Brass, strong to crush the whole nations of the earth
in pieces, that shall arise up against him. If thou flyest from him, he is
Swifter then the Wind, Psalm. 104.3.
to overtake thee, if thou resist him: and 58.9.
as the Raw flesh before the pottes feel the fire of Thorns: so will he carry
thee away in the whirlewind of his wrath. And then shall it be said of thee,
Behold the man, Psalm. 52.7.
that took not God for his strength, but trusted in the multitude of his
Riches, and put his confidence in his malice; and thought to fly and escape
from the presence of the Lord: But alas how was he deceived? his portion is
with the Wicked, and his sin shall never be done away.

SECT. 9.
AS touching the Arraignement, Two things therein are to be considered: The
Person of the Judge: and, the Prisoners at the Bar.

The Judge is, The Lord GOD; whose wisdom, equity, and order, in proceeding
to trial against the Prisoners, is to be observed: And first concerning the
Person of the Judge. It is, The dignity of God.
The Lord God: not a Lord, which has his authority from an other; but he is
the Lord God of all things: For of him, Romans 11.36.
and through him, and for him, are all things: to him therefore be glory for
ever and ever, Amen: as says the Apostle. And as he is the Lord, so he
governs all things, and judges all men. And as he is God, so he has
created all things, and restored all things: John. 1.1.
For he is that Eternal word, by which all things were made: 4.
that Eternal light, by which all things are comforted: and 14.6.
and that Eternal life, by which all things are continued: And therefore for
to say that he is the Lord, and not God; that were to take away his wisdom
and power in creating: and to say that he were God, and not the Lord; that were
to take away his Majesty, Justice, and Dignity; admitting that he had power
to create, but not able to rule, or govern that which he had created. Satan's
subtlety to abridge and lessen the dignity of God.
And that was the blasphemy and subtlety of Satan, to persuade Eve, that
although God had created them, and all things; yet he was not absolute Lord
over them, but that they, whether he would or no, might be partners and
pertakers of his glory with him: which to believe or think, is a most
greiuous sin; yet to attempt it, is the sin of sins, even Lucifers sin.
But GOD in his jealousy and justice, with the breath of his nostrils, and
Power of his word, Joh. 18.6.
is able to cast his Enemies down headlong, and bring them to confusion: for
he has Fire from Heaven to consume them, Josh. 10.11.
Haylestones to brain them, Pestilence to devour them, the Sword to kill
them, Famine to destroy them, Beasts to tear them, 2. kin. 6.25.
the Sea to drown the^, the Earth to swallow them, Hell to receive them,
Pains to torment them, Luke 16.23.24.
Darkness to enclose them, and everlasting Condemnation to retain them in
that Lake which burns with fire and brimstone for ever more. Reul. 20.10.
And therefore Satan in tempting, and our parents by attempting soueraignetie
with God, denied him to be the Lord, although they confessed him to be God. To
confess God wholly, not in part.
Whereby we are to learn to beware, that we do not confess God in part, and
deny him in part; which the Devil did: but to hold fast the analogy of our
Faith, and ever with a pure heart to confess GOD to be the Lord, and the Lord
God.

Adam and Eues arraignement.
And concerning the order and equity of God in the Arraignement, Genesis 2.8. unto
verse. 19.
he proceeds first against Adam; because he was created before Eve, and to
him was given the possession of the Garden, and the precept and commandment
touching the fruit, before Eve was formed and made. Then next he calls Eve,
being bone of Adams bone, and flesh of his flesh, inferior unto him in order
of nature, though first before him in degree of sin: and yet the order of the
arraignement is just, though Adam sinned after Eve: Genesis 4.9.
for although Cain was not his Brothers keeper; yet the Husband is the Wives
head, Ephesians. 5.23.
and ought to be her Instructor in all the commandments of God, The Husbands
care which he ought to have over his wife.
that she might live in his fear, and be obedient unto him: For as no
reasonable man will hurt his own flesh; so no godly man ought (through his
negligence) to suffer his own flesh to sin, but still to have an eye and
care for her preservation, as much as in him lies. And lastly, God speaks
unto the Serpent, as being the Devils instrument unto sin, and makes no
further expostulation with him, because the Devil, The Devil was a convict and
reprobate before Adams fall.
who was in the Serpent, was a convict, and condemned creature before, and
attainted before Gods judgment seat in heaven, and cast down from thence
with the rest of the disobedient Angels; and therefore he comes to no new
arraignement: The Serpent being the instrument of sin, is punished.
but the person of the creature being an instrument which the Devil used to
draw our Parents unto sin, is accursed: which shows unto us, that not only
the perswaders and consenters unto sin, but the dumme creatures also, which
are means and instruments made by the wicked, for the inticement unto sin,
are accursed before the sight of God; so holy, so just and righteous is the
Lord: Deuteronomy. 28.17.18.
and therefore the Earth, and creatures thereof are accursed, for Man's sake,
when as by the instigation of Satan, Man is allured by the pleasures thereof,
to love and embrace the world more then God: And so in the justice of God, the
glorious Houses, and stately dwellinges of the mighty upon the earth, are
accursed, and made desolate, Mich. 7.13.
for the sins of the owners and buylders thereof, who have raised up the
Walls by Oppression, tempered the Mortar with Blood, adorned them with
Vanity, possessed them with Pride, Psalm. 49.11.
and called them (and their lands) by their own names, that they might be as
Gods, to live for ever: But behold, as Adam was cast out of Paradise, so are
they out of their dwellinges; verse 14.
They lie like Sheep in Grave, and Death deuoureth them, and their name is
perished from of the earth.

SECT. 10.
AS touching their answers. Adams Indictment consisting of Two parts: the
Offense committed; and the Flying upon the offense.

Adams pleading to the indictment.
He confesses it, and would avoid it, by way of extenuatio^, in alleging
the principal cause to be the Woman. And as touching his Flight, he does also
extenuat it by the presence of God in following him; for he says, he was
afraid, and that in two respects: the one because he heard Gods fearful
voice: the other, because he Saw himself to be naked: whereas upon the
committing of the sin, he feared neither the presence of God, nor his own
misery to come, for he thought to have been equal with God. Satan's subtlety
to cover sin.
It is the subtlety of Satan in drawing men forward to sin, to hide the
hook of Misery, under the bayte of flattering felicity, their eyes being
blinded, not to see the one; and their hands and feet too swift and forward
to run, and reach unto the other. Gehazi got Money and Apparel of Naaman:
2. king. 5.21.22.
but it infected him with Leprosy. Adam eat the Apple; but it poisoned him
even unto death, had not Jesus Christ, his, and our heavenly Physician, purged
him from his sin, which is the venom, and mother and sting of death. 1. Cor.
15.5.6. Eues her pleading.
And Eve in her answer, follows her husbands president, pleading as he did;
confessing, and avoiding the offense alleged in her indictment, affirming the
Serpent to be the cause of her offense. Such is the course and practice of
Satan in his malice toward man, that when man has offended, he hardneth and
shuts up his heart from repentance, Offenders will excuse, but not confess
their fault.
making him bold and impudent to excuse his fault, either by posting it over
unto some other, or dawbing and covering it with untempered mortar, falsehood,
and untruth; thinking thereby to blind the eyes of God their Judge: But they
are deceived; for nothing is hid from his sight; Psalm. 7.9.
he Searches the hearts and the reins, and the night is as clear as the day
before him: and psa. 139.1. unto. 18.
He knows man's going forth, and his coming in; their words and their
works are registered before him: yea he is in the closets and privy chambers
of men, to hear their counsels, and to see their ways: So that when they
shall come unto judgment before him, the Book of their offenses shall be
opened and read unto them; their Consciences shall tremble, their Hearts shall
melt, and they shall not be able to answer one sin of a thousand. In
temptations, to think upon God, is the preventing of sin.
Therefore in the committing of sin, if men would but remember who sees
them, it would be a curb and bridle to bring them back: or if after the sin
committed, they would remember who shall judge them, it would be a means to
make them humble them selves before the throne of God, and to confess their
sins, and crave pardone for the same through the merits of Jesus Christ; who
is a Savior unto all them that put their trust in him. Equivocate lying and
shifting, is most abominable before God.
For all coulorable shifts and lies, and subtle equivocation, highly
offends God, and makes the sin double, and more heinous in his sight. It
had been better for our Parents Adam and Eve, plainly to have confessed and
acknowledged their disobedience, then to have posted it, and shouelled it from
one to another: for the Devils subtlety and malice, could not excuse their
sin and wickedness: for as he is the root of sin, so we are his branches,
if we remain and continue in sin; and therefore of our selves being
unfruitful, Math. 2.10.
dead, and withered, we are worthy to be cut down and cast into the fire of
Gods eternal and most heavy wrath, because we have rebelled against him, and
have not harkened unto his voice, to bring forth fruit worthy of amendment
of life. The Serpent is silent, and pleades not at all.


And as touching the Serpent, or the Devil in the Serpent, he makes no
answer at all unto God; neither had he any color to excuse his fault by any
means, or to lay it upon any person: for he is the Author of sin, and the
Father of lies; and therefore he is convicted by his silence, and stands mute
and dumme, trembling and quaking before the presence and throne of Almighty
God, who is a most just Judge, and fearful Lord, unto all those that hate him.

SECT. 11.
AS touching their Judgment, it is several and contrary to the course that
God observed in their Arraignement: for he first gives sentence against the
Serpent; because he was the principal actor to persuade to sin: Then against
Eve; because she first consented to sin: Lastly, against Adam; because he
agreed to his wives persuasion to sin.

In the Judgment of the Serpent, are to be considered three things: his
exceeding Misery; Thou art cursed above all creatures: his Malice to Christ;
for Enmity shall be between thee and the Woman, between thy seed and her
seed: his Weakness to resist Christ; Thou shall bruise his heel, but be shall
break thy head.

In the first, we see what is the reward of sin: a Curse. In the second,
Satan is enemy to God and man.
we must consider that Satan is Enemy to God and us; and therefore we must
be Enemies unto him: for otherwise, we can not be friends unto our selves, nor
unto God, when we shall make peace, and be at league with Gods enemies. In the
third, we see a comfortable Victory promised, which Christ has gotten for us,
and his mercy in saving us; who if Satan could have prevailed, should never
have been restored unto life, but condemned unto death for evermore. Adams and
Eues judgment from God is merciful.
And the Judgment of Adam and Eve, (in the love of Christ) is most merciful
and gracious; for it is but temporal, not eternal death: And as in the pride
of their hearts they forgate God, and committed sin: so by their pain and
misery in this world, they shall remember God, and it shall be a means to
keep them from sin, that they may have joy and peace for evermore in the
world to come.

SECT. 12.
AS touching their Expulsion out of Paradise: in it there are to be considered
two things: The Care which God had of Adam: And, his Mild reprehension of him.

His Care: he made them Coats, and clothed them. Satan dealt with our
Parents, A similitude of Satan's contempt to God, and malice to man. 2. Sam.
10.3.4.
as Hanun King of the Ammonits did with David's servants, who in contempt of
David, and hatred unto them, shaued off the half of their Beard, and cut off
their Garments in the middle, even to their buttocks, and sent them away. So
the Devil, in contempt of God, and malice to Man, devised how to shave off with
the knife of Sin, from the hearts of our Parents; not the half, but the
whole ornament and beauty of grace: and to cut off not only their Garments
of Innocence and Righteousness in the middle, but wholly to spoil and to
rob them thereof, and to leave them all naked, and ashamed in the sight of
God and Angels: Adams shame.
Which God beholding, and also perceiving Adam to be exceedingly ashamed, by
hiding himself in the Garden, as bewayling his sin, in disobeying of his
gracious God and Lord; and blaming his folly, so to be beceiued, deluded, and
spoiled by Satan: Gods pity.
God, as a merciful Father, pitied Adam, and in his love, and promise in his
son Jesus Christ, comforted the inward man by faith, and hope: and renewed
the outward man, by Sanctification, and Preservation. And as the Servant of
David were appointed to tarry in Jericho until their Beardes were grown, 1.
Sam. 10.5. A similitude of man's corruption in earth, and of his glorious
resurrection to heaven.
and then to come unto the Kings Court at Jerusalem; so God has appointed
Adam, and all flesh the sons of Adam, to dwell upon the earth, and to rest in
the Grave, until their mortality shall put on immortality, and then to come
unto the heavenly Court of God in his holy and celestial Jerusalem, there to
remain and dwell with him for ever. And also, Gods revenge against Satan, for
his malice to man.
as David revenged himself of Hanun for the dishonor offered unto his
Servant, so God has revenged himself upon Satan for his malice unto Adam. O
the loving kindness, and great mercy of God, thus to regard and to take
pity upon man, to comfort and to preserve him both in body and soul: A good
thing to remember our misery and nakedness.
And therefore when we feel the inward grace of Gods spirit working sorrow
in our hearts for sin, then let us remember the nakedness of our souls,
which once were robbed and spoiled by Satan, that wicked and envious Serpent.
And when we put on our Clothes to cover our bodies, then let us also remember
that they are but as vayles and shadows, to hide away our shame, being spotted
with sin; and to shield and defend our corrupt and weak bodies from heat
and cold, which are daily subject to sickness, and unto death, by reason of
our sin.

And as concerning the Mild reprehension of God to Adam, although it may seem
ironicall, and in some sort spoken by way of disgrace, yet it is most mild, in
respect of Adams sin; who deserved no favor, to hear Gods merciful voice,
sparing, and not destroying him in the fiercenes of his wrath. Gods love to
Adam.
But God here shows his love to Adam, as David did unto Absalon; 2. Sa^.
14.21.
for he pardoned his disobedient Son, who returned home from Geshur to
Jerusalem: but he must turn into his own House, verse 24.
and not see the King his fathers face, until he be called: So God pardons
Adam, and he is returned from the bondage of Satan, and admitted into the
liberty of the Sons of God: but he must turn into his own House, being
Earth and Dust, Genesis 3.19.
and not see the glorious face of God his merciful Father in Paradise with
these eyes, until he be called: which shall be in the day of the Resurrection,
when God will receive his children with the kisses of his love.

But some peradventure will say: Has Adam sinned, An objection to Gods justice
who did not destroy Adam for his sin.
and deserved death, and now does God pardone and pity him? how can this
stand in the course of Gods justice, when as at the delivery of his
Commandment, he threatened death unto Adam, saying: In the day that thou eatest
thereof, thou shall die the death? To answer this Objection; The answer to
the objection.
The Justice of God is perfectly satisfied according to his word: for as Man
sinned, so Man for his sin had the sentence and judgment of death: but the
execution of death for sin, was spared in Adam, and laid upon Christ; Esa.
53.10. Ephe. 5.2.
who was made an Offering for sin, and appointed by God him self, before the
foundation of the world, even for all the^ that put their trust in him: so that
the justice of God takes effect in man; but Chrst, perfect God and perfect
man, has overcome death, although his humanity for a time, was seized upon,
and kept in the grave by death, to satisfy the sentence of his Fathers
justice, pronounced against Adam, yet by his Deity he raised up his Humanity
from death, 1. Cor. 15.20 Joh. 17.4.5.
and glorified it with Immortality in heaven; and he will also glorify all the
faithful that trust in him, Romans 6.5. Gal. 4.6.
being ingrafted into his body, and Sanctified by his spirit, whereby they cry
Abba Father. Gods provident care over Adam even in this world.
And notwithstanding that Adam was cast out of Paradise, (whereby he had a daily
and continual feeling of his misery, purchased by his sin) yet God left him
not forlorn, but by his gracious providence, and loving eye, which he had over
him, he kept him safe not only from the rage and fury of cruel beasts,
which became rebellious unto Adam; but also from the cruelty of that roaring
Lion Satan, 1. Pet. 5.8.
which gaped and ever looked for the eternal fall and destruction of Adam. And
God also blessed his labor, that the Earth thereby should bring forth fruit
and meat unto him, for the preservation of this life: and likewise he
continued the love between Adam and his wife, that neither of the^ should take
exception one against the other for their eiection and casting out of Paradise,
but rather make much of, and comfort one another in the time of their
pilgrimage and misery of this world: The mutual love which should he between
man and wife
Which teaches us, that man and wife should never fall out, or be offended
with each other for the losses of the riches and possessions of this world,
when as our Parents twitted not each other in the teeth when they lost the
possession of that joyful Paradise. O happy man, The happy translation of man
to a heavenly paradise
who has so merciful a God, that sinning, yet thou art pardoned: being lost,
art found: rejected, yet received: dead, yet lives: and living, shall be
glorified with him, not in the earthly, but in the heavenly Paradise for
evermore. The glory of heaven.
The glory whereof is infinite; for the riches therein, are without measure:
there is plenty without want, comfort without grief, light without
darkness, life without death: The joy of Gods presence with his saint.
Gods presence is as a bright shining Temple in the midst thereof; before
whose throne, do stand the holy Angels and Saints, whose eyes are never
satisfied with beholding him, their ears never glutted with hearing him, their
tongues never silent from praising him, their hands never weary with lifting
up unto him, their hearts never filled with the sweetness of his love, and their
feet never tired with walking in his ways. Reu. 22.1.2.
There is the Water of Life, ever running: the Tree of life, ever growing, and
the fruit of Love and peace, never fading: To which place, and Paradise, God
of his infinite mercy, bring us, for Christ Jesus sake, our only Lord and
Savior. Amen.

FINIS.

