A TRVE PERPETVALL PROGNOSTICATION for the Year 1632.

Being Leap year, and for all years to come. Declaring what shall fall out
in time coming, with a rule to teach every one the airt of memory.

Every year is like to be Leap year, if Div^rs and Bankcrupts, may have
money on band or trust.

By Allan Makcouldy lover of the Mathematics.

Tempore patet occulta veritas. In time appears hidden truth. DVBLINE Printed
for my comerauds. 1632.

To the Printer.
GOOD PRINTER, I have taken occasion to set forth the Treatise following,
under the title of a perpetual Prognostication; I have offered the same to you
to be put to the Press, and thereafter publish it to all such as will desire
the same for money, if thy benefit be great, it shall breed me much
contentment: Take pains that the faults therein be corrected, and the same
rightly printed: so shall you enable me to endeavor my self to put a more
profitable work in thine hands, I rest.

Allan Makcouldy.

A brief computation of such things as are past and what would be prevented
this year 1632. and all years hereafter.
Every one may know their own age by the Ministers record who baptized them,
except there be no register thereof.

Howsoever every one may know their own offenses both against God and thy
neighbor.

Repent and turn, thou know not if you shall live an hour which is less
then a year.

Remember thy mortality.

Remember Christ's death.

Remember the deceitfulness of the world.

Remember the joys of Heaven.

Remember the pains of Hell.

Fly vice, inquyre for peace, and follow after it, without the which, none can
please God.

The mooveable Feasts.
Every mooveable Feast is when each neighbor dynes and suppes with others in
their houses,

^
THis double heart which to our view appear,
Intends to practice mischief all this year
One thing to think and yet to do another,
For worldly gain to murder friend or brother:
God knows thy thoughts, and will thy deeds resent,
Hels be thy portion, except thou soon repent.
Nimis delicatus es frater, si vis gaudere cum mundo, and laetari cum Christo,
Ye are nyce brother if ye look to enjoy Christ and the World.
The year has four Quarters.
Of Winter.
THis Quarter begins at the accustomed time, and ends when the Spring
begins. This season is cold, and more will resort to Taverns, and Wine
sellers, to enjoy the juce of the Wine, Beire, and spirit of Malt: then to
seek salt Peter for the resisting of the enemy: It may fall out that such as
be hot blooded and young, may assay their skill to be minders in these
sellers, but if the tool be blunt and fail them, their labor will be
naught, and such Powder will give no fire.

This season, old men shall be unable of the joints, and shall be more fit to
be in the court of Bacchus, then Venus: Aries is likely to govern their
heads, specially of such as have young wives: Most men shall marry wives to be
their helpers, but their wives shall overruled them, and rather become their
halters to lead them to do what they please: And he that wants a good wife
may be monstrous angry, and avail himself nothing at all.

Young women and such as are of a mid age, shall be desirous to be governed
by Scorpio, in the court of Sagitarius: For the help of all men to make them
the more able to pleasure the wives: let them eat good meat, and drink
strong drink: and to intertaine chastity, let the wives eat barley bread and
drink water.

Of the Spring.
THE Spring begins when the Musician tuneth his instruments and begins to
play, and ends when they are weary and receaues their wages: This season
will be windy, specially at the sounding of bagepipes, whistles, and Trumpets.

Skippers and mariners will do well not to procrastinate their home coming if
occasion serve them, but to louse their ankers, and taikels, and heife their
sails, otherwise it may fall out that if their wives be frustrat of their
company they will

contention of the people; they shall be counted most happy that can eshew
both and live in peace, and who delytes to do in the contrare, shall be so
troubled in their mind, that they shall think that all things seems to their
intemperate brain, like the noise of many waters. Aquae multae, tribulationes
multa, Many waters, many troubles.

Curtizens, punckes, and panders shall abound, and to cover their evil deeds,
they shall take other names and surnames to them, and deny their true names,
and so imitate the Witchest they that are intised with them are like them, and
shall be partakers of their punishments, they shall bring a man to a morsel of
bread says Solomon: I think they shall forsake such trade of life, when
Tailors, Websters, and Millers become leil and steals none.

Some men for worldly gain, shall not be ashamed to know that their wives
does make them Cuckolds, and shall consent thereto, but honest people shall
say to them, woe be to you Cuckolds that ever you were borne, your wives has
made you monsters, and makes you bear Horns.

They shall reply, That is no great matter, what am I the worse:
She makes me live a gentleman, and puts money in my purse.


Omnes leges bonae definitionis, verae penitentiae. men used to wear upon
their feet.

Sturdie Beggars, and Tiuklers, bands and promises, may be as well trusted as
the Popes pardons.

Papists, Iesiuts, and Mass Priests may abound in all vices, because the Pope
will give them as many pardons for every sin as may be packed in a pare of
Muck-creils: Ille de Creatore desperate quiru creaturam spem ponit, He dispares
of the Creator that puts his trust in a creature.

Of Harvest.
IT is the best Harvest for thieves, when they cut many purses, Mutton is in
greater request with them then Beef, because they can steal 40. sheep out of
a fold, before they can steal an ox out of a stall Mirmidonum, Dolopumve aut
duri miles Vlissis
Temperet a lachrymis. --
Who can pity or po^der those things but with tears


Witches and Sorcerers shall abound this season, for gain many shall favor
them, these Witches by spells and charms, will use many cures prejudicial to
Physicians, but more prejudicall to their patients who believes in them for
preve^ting of such wickedness: Judges should obey Gods word, not to suffer a
Witch to live, and but respect of persons, should try all suspect Witches, and
who are found guilty should be delivered to the executioners to be bound up to
the Kings peace in a Sanct Iohnstoun ribband, and thereafter to be purged by
the element of fire coals and tarbarels.

(...)and to save thy money better in time coming, if thou be wise.

If thy horse want meat in thy default, when thou rydes a journey, his
weakness, and sweatnesse, and hinderance of thy journey, will put thee in
remembrance to feed him better in time coming or else resolve to go on thy
foot in time coming.

If the season be cold it will remember thee to put on more clothes, provyding
thou have them.

He that remembers not to be thy friend in thy just adoes, neither for
prayer, blood, alyance, or others obligations of love; give him gold or silver
and that will make him remember thee.

A man that will not cherish his wife, and keep at home with her but forgets
these duties, it may be she can make moyen for her self, to supply thy
neglects, while thou remember to do these things thy self.

He or she that lends their clothes, money, or household stuff to their
neighbor, and has not the like themselves to put on or use, necessity shall
remember them to seek back their own and happily cannot have it.

Let Gods benefits in this life, and the joys of Heaven in the life to come,
make thee repent thee of thy sinful life: flee sin in time coming, resist
the Devil, fear GOD, and keep his commandments: So shall thy life be
happy, thy death more happy, and thy peace in heaven happiest of all.

FINIS.

